THE FRENCH KINGS DECLARATION MADE IN FAVOR OF THE PRINCES, Dukes, Peers,
Officers of the Crown, Lords, Gentlemen, and others, who had withdrawn
themselves from his Majesty.

PVBLISHED IN PARLIAMENT the twelfth of May, 1617.

Translated out of the French Copy.

BY WISDOM PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY

LONDON Printed by Felix Kyngston for William Arondell, at the Angel in Paul's
Churchyard. 1617.

THE FRENCH KINGS DECLARATION MADE IN FAVOR OF the Princes, Dukes, Peers,
Officers of the Crown, Lords, Gentlemen, and others who had withdrawn
themselves from his Majesty.
Published in Parliament the 12. of May* 1617.
LEWIS, By the grace of God, King of France and Navarre, to all present, and
to come, greeting. Our commandment (since the death of the Marshall d' Ancre)
having been so readily obeyed, by the Princes, Dukes, Peers, Officers of our
Crown, Lords, Gentlemen, Officers of our sovereign Courts, and all such as
were their followers, against whom we had decreed our Letters Patents, of the
months of January, and February last, does sufficiently testify unto us,
that the only desire of their conservation, and to withstand their apparent
ruin, which was plotted by the insolent, violent, and pernicious designs of
the said Marshall d' Ancre, had constrained them to withdraw themselves from
us, and to purchase their security by Arms, though unlawful; for as much as
the said Marshall made use of my forces to oppress them, contrary to my
intention. But as it concerned our Dignity, to decree our letters of
declaration against them, when as they exploited actions contrary to their
duty, where they should have expected our justice. Now that we are assured of
their fidelity, and that they have declared unto us, that the mere necessity
of their conservation, was the motive to associate themselves, only to oppose
against the violences of the said Marshall; and that we have been by them
sufficiently informed of their good intentions toward us, and our Kingdoms;
and of the desire which they have to spend their lives to augment the
greatness thereof, and to maintain us and our authority, and that they are
very sorry and displeased with themselves, for having levied men of war,
taken and detained our moneys, imposed contributions on our people, and caused
our subjects (like toylesome drudges) to fortify such places as were by them
held, which they have protested unto us they never would have undertaken, much
less have caused strangers to enter our Realms, if they had not been
thereunto constrained, to avoid the utter ruin and desolation of them and
their families. We, of our clemency and Royal bounty, are moved to deal
favorably with them; to pardon such defaults and ouersights, which might have
bin committed in the premises, and to reestablish them in the charges,
honors, and dignities, which they heretofore possessed; seeing withal, this
may be a means to fortify our Kingdoms, with a necessary peace, of good men
so much desired. Having therefore deliberated of these affairs in our Counsel,
some of the Princes of our blood being present, with other Princes, Dukes,
Peers, Officers of our Crown, and the chiefest of our said Counsel; we give
all men to understand, that by the advice of our Counsel aforesaid, and our own
certain knowledge, full power, and Royal authority, we have pronounced and
declared; and by these presents signed with our hand, do pronounce and
declare, that we hold the said Princes, Dukes, Peers, Officers of our Crown,
and all those which have assisted them, for our good and loyal subjects and
servants: we will and ordain, that the memory of all that has passed in
these last troubles for the causes before specified, and also concerning the
said leauie of Arms, and acts of Hostility, to remain utterly extinct and
abolished, as we do by these presents aforesaid extinguish and abolish them;
provided always, that they do hereafter contain themselves within the limits
of the respect and duty which they owe unto us, and shall yield that obedience
unto our commandments which they are bound unto. And that from this present
time they renounce all leagues and associations, which might by them be made,
between themselves, and other of our subjects, or strangers, as well within
the Realm, as without, and of what condition soever they be; and shall
generally perform the duties of good and faithful subjects and servants,
whereunto they are obliged by their births: the premises considered, we have
reestablished, and do reestablish them into all and singular their goods,
moueables, and immouables, honors, dignities, charges, estates, offices and
pensions, whereof we give them full and entire repossession; and to this end
have we revoked and taken away all attachments thereupon made. We will and
ordain, that they enjoy our favors, graces, benifices, honors, and
governments, and that they exercise their charges and offices, even as they
formerly did, so that hereafter they may not be molested nor troubled in any
form or fashion whatsoever. Thereupon imposing silence on all our Atturneys
General, their substitutes present and to come, and to all others: All
declarations, interdictions, and other Letters Patents, which have been by us
heretofore decreed and published in our Courts of Parliament, to the contrary
in any wise notwithstanding; which we have revoked, and do revoke, have
declared, and do declare void and of no effect and value, as also all which
has been done in the execution thereof; the which to that effect, of our
especial grace, we will cause to be taken away, and put out of the Registers
of our Courts of Parliament. Moreover, we hold those released and discharged,
whom they had appointed for the managing of our treasure, with others from whom
they might have exacted, and suddenly compelled to bring in their moneys:
provided that within six weeks after the Publication of these presents, they
deliver into our Chamber of Accounts, the copy of their bills of receipts,
sealed and signed by one of the said Princes and Dukes; likewise of the woods
which they might have felled, and carried out of our forests. We will also,
that our edicts and declarations heretofore made, for the pacification of the
troubles of our Realm; namely, that of Blois, at the issue and sequel of the
treaty of Lodune, be inuiolably executed, kept, and justly observed, according
to their form and tenure. And that under the authority and benefit of the
same, all our subjects, as well Catholic, as those of the pretended reformed
Religion, may hereafter live in good peace, union, and correspondence, under
our obedience, without vpbraiding one the other with any imputation of those
things that are done and past. Also we give commission to our trusty and
beloved Counselors, holding our Courts of Parliament, Chambers of our
accounts, Bayliffes, Seneschalles, Judges, or their substitutes, and to all our
other Justices and Officers, to whom it may, or shall appertain, each one for
himself to give credit to these presents, and cause them to be read,
published, kept and observed, according to their form and tenure: And to the
end they may be for ever firm and stable, we have caused to these presents to
be set our seal; for such is our pleasure. Given at Bois de Vincennes, in the
month of May, in the year of grace, 1617. and of our Reign the seventh.

Signed, LEWIS. And on the fold in the bottom by the King, DE LOMENIE. And on
the side is written, VISA. And sealed with the great Seal of green wax, on
labels of red and green silk.

Read, published, registered, and heard, and that at the request of the Kings
Attorney general, who ordains, that colationed copies shall be sent to the
Bayliwiks and Seneschallships, to be there read, published, and registered,
through the diligence of the said Attorney general, his Substitutes, who shall
certify the doing hereof within the month, on pain to answer it at their
peril. At Paris in the Court of Parliament, the twelfth of May, one thousand,
six hundred and seventeen.

Signed, DV TILLET.

FINIS.

