royal Scottish blazon
Act of Parliament anent registration of Seasings.
IN the Parliament haldin at Edinburgh the fifthtene day of November, the eir
of God, Ane thousand sex hundredth eiris. OUR SOVERANE LORD and Estatis of
Parliament, for eschewing of falsets, and for security of all the Lieges,
Statutis and ordaines that in all time coming, All instruments of Seasing,
Reversions, Regres, Bands or promises for giving of Reversions or regres,
Discharges of Reversions, Assignations to Reversions, Intimations of the samin,
Renunciations of wodsettis, and graunts of Redemption, quhilks sall not be
registrate in the buikes of Council and Session, within forty days next
after the making and perfiting of the samin, (except and always Seasings of
Burrow land, halden in fry burgage, given upon Resignation made in the Bailies
hands, conform to the act of Parliament.) Be insert and registrate in the
registers presently appointed to that effect, within the foresaid space of
forty days after they be perfited, vtherwaies to be null, and to make no
faith in judgment, nor out-with. And the said nullitie to be received by way
of exception. And the said Registers for the greater ease of the Lieges, to be
established in particular places following. That is to say, ane in the town of
Kirkwall in Orknay, for the haill inhabitants and landly and within the
shirefdome of Orknay and Shetland. Ane in the burgh of Innernes, for the
shirefdome of Innernes and Cromartie Ane in the burgh of Elgin, for the
shirefdome of Elgin, Forres and Narne Ane in the burgh of Aberdein, for the
shirefdomes of Aberdein; Baumf, and Kinkardin. Ane in the burgh of Dundie, for
the shirefdome of Forfare Ane in the burgh of Perth, for the shirefdome of
Perth, and stewartrie of Stratherne (except and the stewartry of Menteith.) Ane
in the burgh of Striuiling, for the shirefdome of Striuiling, Clakmannan, and
stewartry of Menteith. Ane in the burgh of Cowper in Fyfe, for the shirefdome
of Fyfe and Kinrosher. Ane in the burgh of Edinburgh, for the shirefdome of
Edinburgh principal, and Constabularie of Hadingtoun. Ane in the burgh of
Linlithgow, for the shirefdomes of Linlithgow and Bathcat. Ane in the burgh of
Lawder, for the shirefdomes of Berwick, Roxburgh, Selkirk, Peibles, and
bailerie of Lawderdaill. Ane in the town of Hammiltoun, for the shirefdome of
Lanrick, (except and the burgh and barronie of Glasgow.) Ane in the city of
Glasgow, for the barronies of Glasgow and Renfrew. Ane in the burgh of
Dumbertane; for the shirefdomes of Dumbertane, Bute, Argyle, Arrane, and
Tarbet. Ane in the burgh of Air, for the shirefdome of Air, and baileries of
Kyle, Karrick, and Cuninghame Ane in the burgh of Wigtoun, for the shirefdome
of Wigtoun. Ane in the burgh of Dumfreis, for the shirefdome of Dumfreis, and
stewartries of Kirkcuthbright, and Annandaill. Or any other place or places
mair convenient, as the keipers of the said Registers sall think may
expedient, dew intimation being made to the lieges of the samin: and the said
evidents to be registrate in the particular buikes appointed for ilk
shirefdome, as said is. And to the effect the said office may presently and in
all time coming be the mair faithfully administrate, STATVTES and ordaynes the
samin to be annexed and incorporate with the office of Secretary: and the
foresaids registers to be called the registers of the Secretary in all time
coming. And that the Secretare present, and to come, have the said office as
ane proper part and pertinent of the said secretary: make and constitute
particular deputies, ane, or mae, for all the days of their lifetime, or
vtherwayes as he sall think expedient, in every ane of the places foresaides,
of good fame, literature, and conversation, for quhome he sall be answerable,
and quha sall be resident within the said towns and burghes: ready at all
times to receive from the pairties their euidents, and to registrate the samin
within the space of twenty four hours, next after the receipt thereof. And
deliver to the presenter of the samin, their evidents marked by him, with the
day, month, and eir of the registration, and in what leaf of the book the
samin is registrate: and sal take allanerlie for his pains, the sowme of
threttein shilings and four pennies, as for the price of ilk leaf of his
register, written on both the sides. And according thereto, sall take
proportionally for registring of every ane of the said euidents. And the said
registers to be filled by the said deputes, to be marked by the Secretare or
his deputes to be appointed by him for that effect, with ane note of the
particular number of the leafes that the samin sall contain. And the said
registers after the filling of the samin, to be reported to the said Secretare,
to remain with him, and to be patent to all our Souerane Lords lieges that
sall have ado with the samin. The extract of the quhilk register sall have as
great faith and strength, as gif the original were shawin, except the pairties
having entres to oppone against the said wrytis, offer to improve the samin by
way of action or exception. In the quhilk case the pairty purchaser of the
said evidents, and vthers hauand entres to defend the samin, sall be holden to
produce the principal and original, notwithstanding that they be registrate,
as said is: and that nane of the said euidents be of force, strength, or
effect to any intention, but to be null, and of nane auaill, except the samin
be registrate, as said is. It is always provided by the tenor of this present
act for remedy of the negligence of pairties, that if the principal wrytes
marked and registrate as is above written, be not lifted by the producers,
within the space of thrie months after they be marked and registrate, as said
is, that the said Clarks sall be na mair countabill for them, nor the wrytes
produced repute as registrat, except it may be sufficiently verefied by
authentic instruments, the non-deliuering of them to have been in the Clarks
default. And that letters of publication be direct heirupon in form as effeirs.

Extractum de libro actorum Parliamenti, S.D.N. Regis, per me Magistrum Ioannem
Skene, Clericum rotulorum Registri, ac Consilij S.D.N. Regis, sub meis signo
and subscriptione manualibus. Sic subscribitur, Ioannes Skene Cler. Regist.

Printed by Robert W(...)grave, Printer to the Kings majesty


