The CASE of the Woollen-Drapers of London and Westminster.
IN the Eighth and Ninth Year of His present Majesty's Reign, an Act was
passed, entitled, An Act to Restore the Market of Blackwell-Hall to the
Clothiers, and Regulating the Factors there. Which Act, the Woollen-Drapers not
looking upon themselves to be concerned in, did not then make their Application
to the (...) Honorable House of Commons; but finding (to their great Grief)
that Act to extend to the Destruction of the Woollen Manufacture in general
(the Encouragement of which, the House of Commons has always intended) and to
the great Damage of the Woollen-Drapers of London and Westminster in
particular; have therefore humbly Petitioned to be heard against a New Bill
brought in for Enforcing the said Act, and laying fresh Grievances upon the
Woollen-Drapers, etc.

Reasons why the Drapers look upon themselves to be Sufferers are,
First. By the making a New Law, obliging them to give Notes for Goods bought
(otherwise than with ready Money) upon a severe Penalty; whereas it has been
always in the Power of every Man in Business, to dispose of his Goods as he
thought fit himself, either for ready Money (with which alone very little Trade
can be carried on) Bond or Note; so that there seems to be no Necessity for the
extraordinary Interposition of the Legislative Power, in making an Act for that
purpose.

Secondly. The drapers cannot but think their Case to be very severe, by being
very particular; for if other Traders, and the Gentlemen with whom they Deal,
were obliged either to pay ready Money, or give their Notes (as the Drapers are
by the late Act constrained to do) that then they would have no Reason to offer
their Complaints to the Honorable House of Commons, but do their Duty in a
cheerful Submission.

Thirdly. What will be extremely grievous to them, is the design of the New
Bill, which obliges them to pay Interest at Six per Cent. for all Sums
contracted for, and not paid at the Day, whether occasioned by a Neglect in
having it called for, or a present Incapacity in the Merchant or Draper in
complying with it.

Objection. The Reason why the former Act past, was purely in Consultation to
the Ease of Clothiers, that they (Living at a great Distance) might (at their
coming to London) know who were their Debtors, and where to make their Demands;
which Accounts, some Factors perhaps, have sometimes refused to give them.

Answer. There is no Trade, where every Man is Honest, and if it has ever been
a Clothier's ill Fortune to meet with a Factor that has not been so, he has no
more than the common Fate that all Men in Business are exposed to, and has the
same Right (that other People have) to the Laws of the Land (with which, thank
God, we are well provided) for the doing himself Justice.

It is very plain that where the Retailer is discouraged, that the Trade must
sink, besides, the ill Consequences that must attend Trade in general, by
passing such Bills, are pretty visible, by reducing Credit to so narrow a
compass, and giving occasion to many vexatious and litigious Suits of Law, by
these Notes being put into Strangers Hands, who will not look upon themselves
to be tied up by any common Rules of Decency, but consult perhaps their own
Necessities, and as frequently, a Spirit of Malice and Contention.

In Order therefore to the better Establishing the Trade between Clothiers and
Drapers, it is hoped that it may not be thought inconsistent with the Wisdom of
the Honorable House of Commons, to permit a Bill to be brought in, Excluding
all People from Retailing of Cloth, within the Liberties of the Cities of
London and Westminster, who have not served an Apprentiship to the Trade of a
Woollen-Draper, which Encouragement of the Draper, will absolutely redound to
the Benefit of the Clothier, whose Interest the Drapers are very ready to
promote upon any other Terms than the being uneasy in their own Employ, to
which the giving of Notes, very much contributes; for a Relief from which, they
have recourse to the Wisdom of the Honorable House of Commons, who they are
assured, are not less Ready, than Capable to Redress them.

THE CASE OF THE Woollen-Drapers.


