The CASE of John Lemott Honywood, Esquire RELATING To the Election for the County
of Essex.
THAT upon the Death of Henry Mildmay, Esquire a Writ issued for electing a Knight
of of the Shire, to serve in his place, for the County of Essex.

That the Writ was delivered to the Sheriff the latter end of December last,
and the next County Court was the 10th of January last.

That about 10 Days before the Election the Sheriff, to avoid any pretense of
Surprise, and for the ease of the Country, caused public Proclamation to be
made in all the considerable Market Towns in the County, That the Election
would be the 10th of January, at Chelmsford; and that the Election would be
ended that day, if possible: And the Sheriff set up that Proclamation, in
Writing, at the most public Place in the said Market Towns.

That on the day of the Election, the Writ was read between 10 and 11 a Clock,
a Poll was demanded and granted, and the Court was adjourned for an Hour, to
settle the method of taking the Poll.

That the Sheriff, during that Adjournment, acquainted the Candidates (who were
Sir Eliab Harvey and Mr. Honywood) he intended to proceed, in the Poll, in this
manner, viz.

That he had caused a Booth to be erected adjoining to the Shire-house, in the
Marketplace in Chelmsford, and Conveniences there for 12 Clerks to take the
Poll; That he had prepared 12 Books which he had signed and sealed, and put
each Clerk's Name thereto, who he had appointed to take the Poll, and showed
the said Books to the Candidates; That he had directed 12 Persons to attend the
Clerks, and administer the Oath to the Freeholders; That the Clerks should be
Sworn, truly to enter the Votes of all the Persons that should be polled; and
the other Persons should be Sworn, duly to Swear all the Freeholders before
they were polled; and that the Candidates might have Supervisors at each Book.

But it being then objected, That the Freeholders ought to be Sworn in the
Sheriff's Presence, and the Booth being divided by a Partition, he could not
see them on each (...) the Sheriff, thereupon directed the said Partition to be
taken down; which was accordingly done.

Then the Sheriff went to the Court, according to his Adjournment, and from
thence immediately adjourned to the Booth, and proceeded to take the Poll;
where the Clerks, appointed to take the Poll, were first Sworn; then the
Persons appointed to Swear the Freeholders, and every Person that was polled,
were likewise Sworn in the Sheriff's Presence; and none admitted to Poll, but
such as were first Sworn.

That the Candidates had each of them Supervisors at each Book; and the Sheriff
continued in the Booth, from the beginning to the end of the Poll.

That before 4 of the Clock in the Afternoon, several of the Clerks sitting
still for want of Pollers, the Sheriff sent into all the public Houses to call
the Freeholders to the Poll; and for two Hours together, caused several
Proclamations to be made on each side of the Booth, and at the Shire-house; in
which time there were not above forty or fifty Persons polled.

That about six of the Clock, the Sheriff began to take up the Books, and went
from Table to Table and took and sealed them up himself, but left one Book open
till about 7 a Clock; and then caused several Proclamations to be again made,
both at the Booth and Shire house, and finding no more Persons come in to be
polled, closed the Poll, and adjourned the Court for an Hour, to cast up the
Poll.

That at the casting up the Poll, Mr. Honywood being present, and not Sir Eliab
Harvey, the Sheriff sent to him to come, who refused; but several of his
Friends were there, in whose Presence the Books were opened, and they assisted
in casting up the Poll, upon which the Numbers appeared to be, for Mr.
Honywood, 1806. Sir Eliab Harvey, 1658. Mr. Honywood the Majority by 148.

Then the Sheriff returned to the Court again, acording to his Adjournment,
declared the Numbers of the Poll, and that the Election was fallen on Mr.
Honywood, and adjourned the County Court till 8 a Clock the next day; when the
Freeholders met, and sealed the Indenture.

This Cause is to be heard before the Committee of Elections, on Wednesday the
first of February, 1692.

Mr. Honywood's CASE.


