THE AMOROUS TRAVELERS, OR, The Night-Adventures.

Written Originally in Spanish By a Person of Honor.

Translated into French By the Exquisite Pen of the Sieur DEGANES: And into
English by J. B.

Voluptas non est voluptas, quae cum mala fama, malaque conscientia conjuncta
est.

Erasm. Noctu latent Mendae.
Amor and melle and fell est foecundissimus.
Plaut. LONDON, Printed by A. C. for Ambrose Isted at the Golden Anchor against
S. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet 1^^^.

TO THE READER.
READER,
IN this Fertile Age of Learning, it happens as in War, where great Armies are
in the Field, many Robbers pester the Highways, where those that are not
valiant enough to purchase a Prey by storming a Fortified Town, or beating an
Armed Enemy, can easily plunder a small Countrey-Village, or rob a naked
Traveller: So now adays those who either are fearful or unable to try their
Fortune in the World with their own Composures, dare boldly do it with those of
others. Hence it comes that our Stages are so crowded with private Thefts, or
owned Translations out of Molier and the Corneilles, and our Presses with
French and Spanish Novels: the last of which (I mean Novels) being nearer our
Phrase, are less subject to spoiling; but the former, whose Elegance consists
more in the Language, are for the most part brought over in such shallow or
leakie Vessels, that they are so damaged by the way, that we may say
emphatically, Le Jeu ne vaut pas la Chandelle, The Play's not worth the Candle,
much less a three Hours Attendance, unless of those that have more time than
they know how to dispose of better. And our Translating Poets, blind to
themselves, can stretch their Spleens, as well as Throats, at the ridiculous
French Dress with which they disguise an English Player; but in the mean time
admire for a Magnificent Habit that notoriously Mimick one with which they
clothe a French Play. In this Vanity our witty Emperors of Parnassus imitate
the persecuting ones of Rome, that first wrapped the Primitive Christians in
Skins of Beasts, and then worried them, exploding a Religion which they thought
Heterodox, and maintaining one which any Rational Man would blush to own.

Now after a Reflection upon others Faults, thou may chance expect from me an
Apology for my own; but to deal plainly with thee, Reader, I must acquaint
thee, that I am so far from fearing thy Frowns, that it were a folly for me to
court thy Smiles: For to what purpose should I beg Applause from them whom I
never intend to trouble any more, no more than I had done now, if I had not
thought what was so extremely diverting to me might be so to another? For this
is only the Offspring of some leisure-Hours, and therefore can scarce be
expected to be good, since it sprung from so bad a Root as Idleness; in which
vacant time, having been wearied with better Studies, I was tumbling over some
of this kind, to find one the most divertive: I light on this, the Subject and
Composure of which has been by better Judgments than mine accounted not much
inferior to most of that kind. It was written Originally in Spanish by an
Honorable Personage, who though he yielded to the importunity of some Friends
(as the Publisher tell^) to let it be made Public, yet however excellent in
its kind, he thought it unworthy of bearing his Name. It was no sooner
published, but it was received with so general an applause in Spanish, that an
ingenious Frenchman thought it worthy not only of his Translation, but also
many Learned Annotations upon several Particulars of it, with Collections from
many of the best Authors both Ancient and Modern, which I have here omitted, as
(I think) too serious for the Subject. I am confident thou will find it very
perfectly pleasant as to the substance, however thou dislikest the meanness of
my Style. But if thou find it not ingenious enough to please thee, I hope
thou may find cause to laugh at me for spending my time so badly; and so
either way I have my end.

Farewell.
THE AMOROUS TRAVELERS, OR THE Night-Adventures.
PART I.
CHAP. I.
THe pleasant Month of April had already enriched the spacious Plains with so
flourishing a Tapestry, that the Earth (like a half-starved Beggar, grown proud
by new Preferment) being now freed from a rigorous Winter, seemed to vie Glory
with the Heavens themselves, whether the multitudes of Stars of the one, or the
abundance of Violets, Cowslips, and Jessamins, and other various-coloured
Flowers of the Season, of the other, should cast the more delightful luster:
And however the Stars might challenge a greater glory by night, yet in this the
Earth had by day a greater advantage over their nocturnal beauty, that to her
other Rarities, she had usually though not so many Stars as the Heavens, yet to
mortal eyes those that were far more fair; I mean the sparkling Eyes of those
Troops of Ladies that daily frequented the Fields, attended by their Lovers,
for the pleasure of the Walks. The Crystal Rivulets (enamelled with thousands
of delightful Flowers that overspread the Banks) seemed to stop their courses
to enjoy the delightful Music of the Nightingal, and the agreeable Harmony of
other little Birds. Already Flora, and she to whom the Romans attributed the
Cornucopia, had gilded and painted with admirable industry the Plains and
Gardens, the Fruit Trees and Orchards, and that with a greater variety of
Colors than ever adorned the Landschape of the skilfullest Painter; When one
day as the dawning begun to advise the sluggish Traveller that the Light which
entered his Chamber proceeded from the approaching Sun, and not from the
declining Moon, there parted from Vbeda, a Town of that part of the so fertile
and renowned Province of Betica which is now called Andaluzia, a Cavalier, the
most signal of that Town, to go to the Court of Philip the Second at Madrid, to
receive the Order of the Golden Fleece, to which the Merits and Services of his
Ancestors had entitled him, resolving not to leave the Court without that
honorable Badge: And knowing that Court-pretensions are usually accompanied
with tedious delays, he thought it would conduce to the passing more pleasantly
the time which he must needs bestow on that pursuit, to carry along his Wife
and Family with him.

Don Sebastian (so was this Cavalier called) had not yet attained the 25 year
of his age; a man of so excellent a Mien, and every way so complete in all the
Accomplishments that render a Cavalier commendable, that had he not been too
much inclined to the Cyprian sports, his severest Enemies could scarce have
found in him one sole default, or the least defect.

All these Graces and rare Perfections, joined to an ample Revenue, which his
Parents (lately deceased) had left him, quickly put him in possession of a
Wife, for Accomplishments, Riches, and Noble Descent every way his equal.
Besides, Donna Margareta (so was she called) was Mistress of an incomparable
Beauty, compounded of all the most admired graces and sweet atractions, which
placed her in the chief rank of all the Ladies of Andaluzia; and so young, that
she had not yet seen the 17 year of her age, nor the second of her marriage.
Yet could not all these sweets and rarities confine Don Sebastian's ranging
humor, whose depraved appetite often quitted his own pure White-bread, to feed
on that whose course outside and unsavory taste would offend the most hungry
Beggar; which caused this poor Lady to pass her time very discontentedly,
wanting those Contentments which her Youth desired, and Beauty deserved, since
her unjust and disoyal Husband unworthily bestowed on others what was justly
due to none but her, leaving her alone to deplore in her own Bed the want of
those Satisfactions which he enjoyed in another.

This young Couple in their Journey had already passed the high and rugged
Mountains of Sierra Morena, when the Horses finding themselves in an even
Plain, began to go so cheerfully, and draw the Coach so swiftly, though heavy
laden, that they arrived at Viso before Sunset. The Coachmen were desirous to
pass further, but Donna Margareta's delicate Body, wearied with Travel, and
disordered by the jogging of the Coach, made her desirous to stay there. They
therefore alighted from the Coach, and the Coachmen and Attendants having
disposed of their Carriages, and given Meat to their Horses (being acquainted
with the Host by often traveling that way) saw the Chambers made ready, and
gave order for Supper, which was quickly prepared for the Table, because all
that was necessary they brought along with them (as is the custom in Spain (or
ought to be so) amongst those that are not ambitious to be famished.)

Whilst the Spit was turning, and the Cloth laying, Donna Margareta was
entertaining her self with her Waiting-maids about the excessive height of the
Mountains of that Country, painting them out more prodigious than those of
Armenia. Her Husband, on the other side, was discoursing with a wondrous fair
Niece of the Host, not, as some may imagine of Affairs of State, or the Siege
of Ostend, but only of some stratagem how to pass the ensuing night together in
less dangerous Encounters. The young Girl defended her self against his
Assaults, by telling him, That she was but newly married, and that her Husband,
who was then in the Country, might, for ought she knew, return that night.
These words, though seeming obstacles, so inflamed our Cavalier, that he was
absolutely determined, or rather transpotted by his passion, to a resolution
never to give over the Assault till he had won the Fort, and brought the
Maintainer of it to yield at discretion. Finally, it was appointed by our two
Warriors to meet at the Field of Battle, the Bed of the absent Husband, at
eleven a clock at night, which would be the time when all others in the House
would be retired to their Lodgings.

The appointment thus made, Don Sebastian went to his Wifes Chamber, who seeing
him enter with so pleasant a look, asked him whence he came. He, who in such
occasions never wanted Excuses to conceal his Vices, answered (as confidently
as a Comedian that is perfect in his Part) I was hearing some News which a
Gentleman newly come from Court was talking of below; and really he did it with
so good a grace, that if a Cavalier which came to see him had not interrupted
him, I would not for any thing in the World have lost the end of the Narration,
I took such delight to hear him discourse. Prithee, my Dear (said Donna
Margareta) tell me what he talked of, whilst Supper is making ready. There Is no
time for that, answered a Page (as opportunely as if he had been expressly
called for that purpose) for it is just ready; and, if you please, we will serve
it up presently. Well, let us go to Supper, said Don Sebastian; we shall have
time enough for this Story to morrow.

They sat down, and fell to. Catalina (for so for the future we shall call the
Hosts fair Niece) waited at the Table, and the better to conceal her passion,
had her eyes for the most part fixed on the earth, lest their motion should
betray her affection; and the force of imagination of her intended delights
struck such an impression upon her spirit, that she even melted like the Snow
by the heat of the Sun; and sometimes casting her eyes upon Donna Margareta,
and seeing her endowed with so charming a Beauty, she could not but say within
her self, Alas! my dearest Friend, I fear I shall miss the enjoyment of thee
this night; for vanquished with the sweet Caresses of so sovereign a Beauty,
how can thou choose but pass it (like the Elm embraced by the amorous Vine)
clasped in those lovely Arms?

Don Sebastian was in like distress, sometimes by stealth casting amorous
glances at Catalina; and sometimes he forgot himself so far, that he could not
possibly withdraw his eyes from so charming an object: And indeed there is no
cause to wonder at his astonishment; for Catalina was for Beauty an invaluable
Pearl, and her black Eyes so lively and sparkling, that the reflection cast by
a Looking-glass swiftly moved against the Sun, had not a quicker motion than
they, when she sometimes moved them. Finally, she was completely proper for the
purpose for which Don Sebastian designed her.

The Table-discourse ended with the Supper; for Don Sebastian counterfeiting
the false Sentinel, nodded, and several times let fall a Book he held in his
hand, Naturallists observe, that when a Flock of Cranes would sleep securely,
one of them is set Sentinel, which lest she should be su^prized by sleep, ho^ds
up a stone as high as she can with her foot.
like a Crane overcome by sleep. Donna Margareta taking notice of Don
Sebastian's drowsiness, and remembering that he had told her he intended to be
early up in the morning, thought fit to mind him of going to bed. Don Sebastian
no sooner heard that, but he answered her, rising from his Chair, Go thou to
bed, my Dear, and I Will but go down to my Coachmen and Grooms, to bid them
retire presently, because we must be stirring very early in the morning, that
we may be at Cividad Real betimes to morrow; and I Will be with thee presently.
Having spoke to his Servants, he found means to speak with Catalina, and
entertain himself with her a while: Which done, having appointed an Hour, and
she shown him her Chamber, he returned to his own, where he found his Wife
already laid. Being unclothed, he dismissed the Attendants, shut the Door, and
went to bed, where he was no sooner laid, but he feigned as profound a sleep,
as if he had watched a fortnight together with a sick person. This sudden
surrender to Sleeps assaults was not very pleasing to his Wife, who perhaps
expected a more solemn Goodnight; but she knew his humor so well, that to
approach nearer him would rather offend him than advantage her; so that the
fear of displeasing him accommodating her present desire to her future hopes,
that the morning would restore her what the evenings drowsiness had deprived
her of, in this agreeable imagination sleep slided so gently into her fair
eyes, that it kept her as fast bound, (though in gentler chains) as if she had
been captive to his younger Brother Death. There were no other Strangers this
Night in the Inn (though one of the best in the Country) but Don Sebastian and
his Train, which caused all the Family to be in bed before eleven, there in a
pleasant repose paying the Tribute due to Nature. The beauteous Catalina lay
listening more attentively, to hear if her beloved Don Sebastian knocked at her
Door, than a sick Person when the Physician near his Beds head pronounces to
some of his Friends or Kindred the Sentence of his Life or Death: Nor would a
benighted Traveller undergo a greater inquietude in a tedious expectation of
Day, in which only he could be delivered from an abyss of dangers with which he
sees himself environed, than she suffered in her languishing expectation. But
she had no cause to despair, having so diligent a Servant as Don Sebastian, who
leaving his Wife, with a face more serene and lovely than Aurora, opened the
Door with as little noise as was possible, and (like a certain Thief, who going
one night to rob his Neighbor's House, left open the Door of his own, through
which some of his own Profession entered, and stole away all he had worth
carrying) leaving it open, marched away so gently, that the Floor could
scarcely feel him. Being arrived at his Mistrisses Chamber Door, he called her
as low as was possible, and instantly felt it opened and himself embraced by
her. He staid not long to recount the customary amorous follies of Lovers, for
the exquisite pleasure he felt prevented him; nor could he have done it if he
had gone about it, for the multitude of ravishing kisses and embraces which our
new-married Catalina gave him: Therefore taking her in his arms, without ever
removing his lips from hers, they both went to bed together. But let us leave
them here, to speak of that which my Pen has been a great while desirous to
write.

About half an hour after our Cavalier had left his Wife for another Man's, one
of his Pages, about 18 years old, and as beauteous as Narcissus, rose from his
Bed to make water; but wanting a Pot, and being half asleep, and not knowing
where to do it without leaving a mark of his unmannerliness, to contradict the
common opinion of the World, which without respect of any, though of the most
civilized sort, will not allow any of them to have the least share either of
civility or good manners, he went down to the Courtyard, and there satisfying
Nature's necessity, made it appear, that he surpassed his Camerades in good
Breeding.

Don Sebastian had his Appartment in a great Gallery of the House, into which
three Chambers opened: In the third, as being the best, he lay himself, and his
Wife; in the second, the Pages; and in the first, the Waiting-maids; and in the
other Chambers in the Inn, being of less consequence, lay the ordinary
Servants. The Page having dispatched his affairs, and returning to his Bed,
being scarce fully awake, mistook his Mistrisses Chamber for his own, and after
he had groped by the Walls a good while for the Bed, he at last found it, and
lay down. He had not been long there, but Donna Margareta awaked at the
rustling he had made amongst the Clothes as he lay down; and thinking it had
been her Husband, she embraced him closely, saying, Lord, my Dear, how cold
thou art! And then putting her Feet betwixt his to warm them, made him a
thousand Caresses. The Page thought his Camerade had been in a Dream, and had
done and said these extravagances fancying himself in bed with a Girl; but
feeling her hands by degrees approaching the most sensible parts of his Body,
with more pleasant enticements than that Goddess (of whom the Cytherean Isle
has taken its name) used to her Adonis, and hearing these words, Turn thee to
me, Dearest, and be not so cruel to me as to refuse me thy embraces: Will thou
not, my Love? Alas! what is the reason? At this Discourse the Page found he was
deceived, and that she that made him those tender caresses, and close embraces,
was his Mistress.

He remained at first almost dead with fear; but having recollected his
spirits, he imagined how the case stood, having seen the night before the
amorous and wanton caresses which passed betwixt his Master and Catalina. She
asked him whence he came; but he held his peace, hoping that when she perceived
he made no answer, she would fall asleep again, and give him an opportunity to
steal out of the Chamber. But her mind being wholly bent upon pleasure, in
stead of moderating the excess of her amorous passion, gave her fresh torments,
and those so piquant, that being not able to resist the violence of their
ardour, she redoubled her amorous enticements to our supposed Don Sebastian;
who being heated with these delicious temptations, began to move, like a frozen
Snake laid to a Fire: And indeed had it been a Marble Statue, or a Timon
Misanthropos, sworn Enemy to all Man and Womankind, being embraced by those
lovely Arms more white than Alabaster, kissed by Lips more fresh and ruddy than
the Rose or Lily, and enticed by Words sweeter than Honey, it had been enought
to infuse Life into the former, and make the later for the present suspend his
hatred, and be reconciled to so fair an Enemy.

So this young man, who had so often admired his Mistrisses Beauty, finding
himself now so near her, that a Lynx his eyes would have been puzzled to
distinguish whether they were one sole Body or two conjoined, without any more
delay shut his eyes to the injury he did his Master, in enriching himself with
the richest Jewel he possessed, turning to her, kissed sometimes her Alabaster
Neck, sometimes her snowie Breasts, and sometimes her Lips more red than Coral,
without being able to distinguish which of them gave him the more delightful
taste, and ravishing content: upon which she whispered him, If thou desire to
give me life, and all sorts of contentments with it, let us proceed to the
consummation of our Loves. Who now could be so far insensible, even beyond the
dullness of Lead or Stone, who seeing so extraordinary and ravishing a Beauty
become his Suppliant, would not have imitated this our Fresh-water-Soldier, in
doing what she desired. The more than ordinary strict embraces, somewhat beyond
those of her Husband; the reiterated kisses, and wanton gestures, which of a
long time past he had given over in those affairs, wrought some confusion in
our Donna Margareta, and a violent suspicion of her mistake. The Page at that
present, after the act, found himself so afflicted with apprehensions of what
might ensue, that he could not but fancy his Master's Poniard in his Throat,
for a reward of his good Service. To discover himself to his Mistress, and beg
her pardon, he durst not; and to steal away without her knowledge, he was
afraid she might discover it in the morning by some innocent raillery with her
Husband upon the passages of that night, and by that means unwittingly discover
that, which could not come into open air without his Life to accompany it.
These fearful apprehensions did so perplex his soul, that it was an even wager
whether his past pleasure or present fear were greater, till the former found
means to dissipate the later by the invention of this following Stratagem.

Donna Margareta had a Waiting Woman for Beauty and Parts much exceeding most
of her rank, who had a most signal love for this Page, whose gratitude joined
with her merits, wrought in him a reciprocal affection, testified by his
caresses to her, the most endearing his fancy or affection could afford. Their
Master had had intelligence of these Amors, who being desirous to keep his
Family clear of such Vices (though you cannot but find how negligent he was to
begin with himself) had under the strictest penalties forbidden the continuance
of this familiarity, or a further privity in their Amors, suspecting their
designs in those affairs to tend to the same end with his. Valerio (so was our
Page called) endeavoring to cloak this present fault by one which was already
but too well known, would undeceive his Mistress in that affair, which would be
the ruin of them both if discovered to his Master by her ignorance; and
finding her more than ordinarily astonished, and altogether silent, embracing
her more straightly than before, he first broke silence, speaking to her as if he
had meant it to another.

I durst never hope, dearest Chimena, (this was the Girl's name) so happy a
reception from thee, searing that our Master's threats had ere this rooted out
of thy heart all the affection there planted for me: But since I see thy
affection so immovable (said he, and sealed it with a kiss) believe me, my dear
Soul, that if nothing less could purchase thy embraces than the passing a more
dangerous Straight than that which Leander stemmed to enjoy his beloved Hero,
the reward I receive in possessing thee, would make the attempt the most
inconsiderable thing imaginable. But what is the matter (said he again,
reiterating his kisses) my dearest Life? Why art thou silent? Or whence
proceeds this astonishment? Know thou not that thy Companion, though she may
perhaps have espied our secrets, is the faithful Secretary of our Amors, and
would as soon die as discover them. On the other side, our Master, altogether
ignorant of what has passed, now finds himself happy in the enjoyment of that
lovely Girl thou saw wait at Table the last night. As for our Mistress, there
is no fear of her, who, poor Lady, is at present fast asleep, little suspecting
the Treason of her ungrateful Husband. With these and such like words, often
interrupted by the kisses and embraces he gave her, without leaving any part of
her lovely face untouched by his lips, she easily found this was not her
Husband. At these last words the poor Lady remained more astonished at her
Husbands miscarriage and her own misfortune, than Alcmena of old, when Jupiter
had enjoyed her under the form of Amphitryo.

But seeing there was no remedy, and that if by so strange an accident she had
broken her faith and bonds of Marriage, the fault lay not on her side, but that
all ought to be imputed to her Husband, to whom God would give the just
chastisement of his sin by the same means by which he offended others; she then
taking a Pendant from her ear, which she had forgot to lay by at her going to
bed, put it in his hand, saying as low as she could, Take this Pendant, bold
young man, by which to morrow morning thou will perceive the Treason thou have
acted against thy Master. Upon this the Page, without reply, left her Chamber
to hasten to his own, where arriving, without being seen by any one, he shut
the door after him, and (void of those joys or fears he found with his former
Bedfellow) laid down by his Camerade, who had slept all the while like a
Dormouse; his joy being thus doubly augmented, by the thoughts of having
enjoyed so eminent a Beauty, and avoided so evident a danger, like a Slave, who
in stead of undergoing a miserable Captivity till the payment of his Ransom,
finds his Liberty advantageously restored, by the augmentation of a mass of
Treasure. And what more immense riches, or more grand felicity could one
imagine, to give so complete a satisfaction to a Youth of the age of our
fortunate Valerio, than the sweet embraces of so complete a Beauty as our Donna
Margareta? Also this spruce young Blade, being of an excellent humor, did
acknowledge the incomparable engagement he had to Fortune for so signal a
favor, and forgetting the peril he before endured, he would willingly have
dared the Rocks and Waves in the same Vessel in which his Heart was now
embarked, if he could but promise himself to find another so favorable
reception.

Donna Margareta considering Valerio's ready wit and comely stature, his
beauteous complexion and admirable discretion, was so far from being displeased
at what was past, that she preferred her Revenge far before her Honor,
rejoicing that she had thus quitted scores with her faithless Husband, whom she
attended every moment: But seeing the Captain of her Fort came not, she accused
her own indiscretion for having dismissed so valiant a Lieutenant, who was now
endeavoring to recruit by a profound sleep the strength he had lost in his
former service.

Let us leave him sleeping, and her also to vail her sparkling eyes with her
lovely eyelids; and let us return to our Don Sebastian, who in the mean time
suffers under a Bed miseries enough to balance the pleasures he had enjoyed
upon it, for the reasons you shall understand in the ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. II.
DOn Sebastian had not yet passed two hours with his beauteous Catalina, but
her Husband came knocking at the further Gaie of the Inn, close by the Stables,
which was too far from his Wifes Bedchamber for the noise to approach her ears.
He did not knock there long; for the Ostler who lay over the Stable heard him
the first stroke, and had let him in before he needed to make a second. Being
entered, he only took off his Portmanteau, and recommended his Horse to the
Ostlers care, and taking a Candle, went directly to his Wifes Chamber, where
our two Lovers were bound in stronger chains than those that ensnated Mars and
the Queen of Love. He knocked twice or thrice at the door; but the Wife, who
was just then in the height of her speed at her delicious exercise, was not at
leisure to answer him, but, like a Woman of good forecast in affairs, resolved
not to begin another, till she had finished what she was about: At last hearing
the Open the door, and knockings against it shower like Hail, making as if she
had been newly awaked from a sound sleep, she answered, in words pronounced
like one half asleep, half waking, Who is there? It Is I, said the Husband. Who
are you, quoth Catalina? It Is I, I tell thee, replied Roderigo (that was his
name) have thou forgot me? These last words rendered her more certain who was at
the door, than able to open it, every syllable being a Dagger which seemed to
pierce as deep into her heart as her ears; and all she could then think on to
save her self and Don Sebastian, was to make him seek his safety under that Bed
upon which he had so lately enjoyed so much delight: And then seeming to be
thoroughly awake, she answered, O Roderigo, my dear heart, thou art happily
arrived; stay but a while, till I rise. This while Don Sebastian had time to
get under the Bed; but with such surprise and astonishment, that he forgot his
Cloak that lay upon the Table.

She opening the door, her Husband entered, who intending to show her some Toys
he had bought her, laid his Portmanteau upon the Table, which he seeing
furnished with other things, went to clear it, that he might have more room to
display his Ware, where, by misfortune, the first thing he laid hands on was
the Cloak.

The Wise considering the extreme danger which her Friends negligence had
brought upon them both, if not remedied by her, her ingenuity quickly infused
into her this sudden effort of female subtilty: I dare wager, said she, I have
left something there; and coming nearer, and taking the Cloak, she begun to
cross her self infinitely, saying Lord, Lord! was there ever such a Sot as I,
to leave that there so openly! If any one but you had entered, I had paid dear
for my negligence. The Husband amazed at his Wifes astonishment, and crossing
her self in that manner, (as if his Horns had made her take him for a Devil)
said to her, What means this Cloak, and all this ado? I Will tell thee (said the
subtle Gypsy): But stay, continued she, opening the door and looking out, let
us be ware that none hears us; and shutting it again she began as follows.

Do thou not remember a Cavalier that lay here a while ago on his way to
Sevil? What Cavalier, said he? A young Gentleman, said she, which was here
about a Month ago, in a Tawney Cloth Sure embroidered with Gold, mounted upon a
Bay Horse, with a laced Saddle, with gilded Bit and Stirrops. I have forgot,
said he. Lord, said she, what a memory have thou! I Will lay thee a Wager I Will
make thee call him to mind. And thereupon opening her Trunk, she took out a
Silver Cup which her Husband had stole from that Cavaliers Butler which she
spoke of, and showing it him, said, The Master of this Cup is he I mean of. Oh,
oh, said he, I remember him now. This same Cavalier, said she, passed this way
again about eight days ago, with all his Train; and because it grew late, and
the weather was very rainy, he was constrained to take up here: and as soon as
they were lighted, every one fell to untrussing their Baggage: But one of the
Cavaliers being troubled to get off his Portmanteau, by reason of a hard knot
on the Cord that tied it, laid by his Cloak upon a Bench in the Yard, that he
might the better undo the knot: So having untied and taken it off, he gave his
Horse to an Ostler, and went in with his Portmanteau, forgetting his Cloak. I,
who watched him carefully hard by, espying his negligence, seeing the Coast
clear, went and snatched up the Cloak, and locked it up so close that none has
seen it since. There came in immediately after a Parcel of Carriers, and so
many others with them, that the House was filled in an instant.

About an hour after, this Cavalier remembering the Cloak, returned to seek it
at the place where he had left it; but to no more purpose than to seek a grain
of Mustard Seed in a great heap of Stones at midnight, or a Bird after she has
left her Nest. It was to no purpose to curse or complain; for I had laid it up
safe enough, and hearing him inquire for it, told him, it was to small purpose
to look for it now, for if he had left it there, he might be sure it was stole
before this time, And he considering how hard it was now to retrive it, there
having been so many People there passing to and again, returned to his Chamber,
and confessed by his silence that he could blame none but himself, and so
abandoned it to the Thieve's mercy. In fine, I have kept it here close locked
up ever since, till this evening, that, as I was going to bed, I took it out,
the better to come at thy clean Linen and best Clothes, which I have laid thee
there ready against to morrow, thinking thou would not fail to return to
night, and I was so heedless to forget to put it up again; and now I warrant
thou wilt go sell it, as thou have done other things, without giving me a share
(said she, somewhat frowning) and so concluded her well-framed Lie.

Roderigo fell a laughing heartily at these words, and as one that would not
have spared it at such an opportunity, though the Bench had been an Altar, said
to her very jocundly, There Is no need to take care to provide for thee, that
have such tricks to shift for thy self. By my faith, this Cloak might become S.
George himself: We'll sell it, and part the money betwixt us. And turning about
to see that none heard him, Upon my soul, said he, the Cloke's as well worth
twenty Crowns, as a Thief's worth a Rope: But tell me one thing, for God's
sake, Does thy Uncle know nothing of this? My Uncle, said she, with a Pox to
him, did thou think me such a fool? If he had known of it, he would not have
been contented under half share. That Is well, said Roderigo; for I do not
intend him a Penny of it, by my good will: And to morrow I intend to go sell it
either at Sante Cruz or Almagro.

Don Sebastian hearing Catalina's subtily, than which nothing else could have
averted the present danger, was well contented with the loss of his Cloak, and
would willingly it were worth thrice as much, and the Husband gone to sell it,
as he said, upon condition he were delivered from the present danger, which had
not put him into so great a heat at first, but he found himself now
sufficiently cold, by lying all along in his Shirt upon the ground, which,
though not much his friend, yet made him almost think he should scarce ever
part from it alive.

See here to what perils they expose themselves, who forsaking God, and
despising his Commandments, launch out from that safe Harbor, into the
tempestuous Sea of unchaste Love. What Damon guided this Cavalier to neglect
the enjoyment of a Lady that might vie Beauty with Venus, Wit with Minerva, and
Chastity (had not he been Bawd to his own dishonor) with Diana, which added to
his other enjoyments were enough to complete all worldly felicity, infringing
the sacred Law of Marriage made by the great Lawgiver in Eden, and whose bounty
had so amply rewarded him with such pleasure in the performance, to follow with
the hazard of Soul, Body, and Reputation, these unclean pleasures, which were
by God forbidden upon pain of damnation. Vain man! As if the displeasure of God
that precedes, the dangers that accompany, and that repentance that succeeds
this forbidden fruit, were the only advantage for which thou preferr'st it
above the lawful. But to proceed.

Roderigo having done talking with his Wife, was going to uncloath himself for
bed, there to pass the five Hours yet remaining betwixt then and morning; but
she foreseeing how hard it would be for her to open the door, or the poor
Cavalier to pass out through it undiscovered, was forced to bethink her self of
another shift, to give him a more certain Passport from his present Purgatory,
which was as follows.

O, my dear, (said the subtle Catalina) I had forgot to tell thee I could have
given thee a taste of the most excellent Rabadabia. Wine that ever thou have
seen or tasted; and that thou may judge whether I give it too large an
Eulogy, before thou put off thy Clothes go down into the Kitchen, where
thou wilt find a Bottle of it, and a Partridge Leg upon a Pewter Plate. And
whence comes all this Good Cheer, said he? A Cavaliers Lady, said she, that
lies in the House sent it me last night at Supper. And is there no body come
with her, said he? Why do thou ask, replied the Wife? Why? because (said he)
thou speak of her only, as though she were come by her self. Why, said she,
what occasion had I to speak of him, since I had nothing to do with him, but
the Wife, in this Discourse? But what need all these words about nothing? It Is
because I considered with my self (said the Husband) that if she had been
alone, it might be worth my time to try my fortune with her. What fortune
should thou think to find there, Blockhead, said Catalina, but at the first
extravagance thou should begin to utter to her, her Nails should make thy
Eyes pay for thy Tongues impertinence; and to make up the full payment of thy
impudence, make her Servants reward thee with a Bastinado? Fair and softly,
good Catalina (replied Roderigo) if the Cuckold her Husband were by, he durst
not take this privilege. Good Lord, (said the Wife) I am afraid that ill Tongue
of thine will some time give the rest of thy Body cause to curse it: But hold,
what noise is that? Pox take him (said Roderigo) it is an Oyl-seller; the
wide-throated Dog makes such a noise, that I fancy his very words spoil all my
Clothes: As God judge me, if I catch him again in the Street disturbing the
people at this time of night, I Will -- but I Will say no more; for this long
Discourse, and the remembrance of this Divine Liquor have wrought such an
alteration in my Throat, that if the Bottle come not quickly, it had as good
stay away till Doomsday. Thou were best go take it presently then, said she;
but I wish it be escaped from the roguish Boy that helped to wait last night,
for he loves Wine as he does his Life, and is as ravenous as a Wolf; and if it
be there now, and remain till morning, he will be as sure to be at it then, as I
shall be to go to Mass on Sunday. But I Will prevent him, if it be possible (said
the Husband) for before God I have more need on it my self; for besides my
thirst, it is above six months since I have tasted any of it, which does justly
bear a greater price than any other in Spain. And as he was talking on in this
manner, he was stooping down to look for a Slipper which was stided under the
Beds-feet amongst some Implements that lay there; but he could not find it
without a Candle, and was therefore going to take one off from the Table.
Catalina seeing her self upon the brink of Perdition, without a sudden
invention, leaped quickly out of the Bed, and snatching hastily the Candle out
of his hand, said, Is It possible thou can not find a Slipper under half an
hours time? and looking about the Table, removed the things that lay there, to
see if she could find it. Roderigo vexed to see his Wife run barefoot round
the Room, said to her in a fury, God's my life, I think you are besides thy
self; what need thou to come out of the Bed, and then to run about barefoot
thus? Thou have a mind to get a Distemper that will cost us all we have to
cure. Get thee to Bed, and trouble thy self no further; I hope in God my eyes
are good enough yet to find a Slipper without the help of thine.

What case Don Sebastian was then in, he that has ever been in like dangerous
exigents may easily imagine; for undoubtedly, if Catalina as she went had not
pretended to stumble at the Portmanteau, and thrown down the Candle at the
instant her Husband demanded it to look under the Bed, all had been irreparably
lost, beyond the help of her crafts and subtilties.

Whilst the Husband in a rage was taking up the Candlestick and Candle,
Catalina coming to the Bed, put her Arm under to grope for the Slipper, and
caught Don Sebastian by the Foot, who thinking it had been her Husband, was
ready to betake himself to his last remedy, and with a Poniard he had brought
along with him force his passage from that danger through the Heart of
Roderigo; but hearing no words from them that touched him, it wrought a calmer
resolve in him: so that Catalina having found the Slipper, gave it to her
Husband with a thousand Curses, which were not all capable to do it so much
mischief as it had like to have done her. Roderigo had by this time taken up
the Candle and Candlestick, and proffered them several times to the Devil (if
he had had the manners to accept them) for leaving him in the dark. The Wife
too, being laid down again, asked him whether he was a fool or bewitched, that
had not the wit to go light it again. He then asked her if there were any Fire
in the Kitchen. What an impertinent question is that (said she?) Did thou
ever know it without? So Roderigo went straight thither to light his Candle. He
was no sooner gone, but Catalina leaped out of the Bed, to conduct her Lover
from under it; who being delivered, staid there no longer but to take his last
leave of her: And though the cold had almost taken away his senses, he found
himself the most overjoyed man in the world, being delivered from so straight
and nasty a Prison, though carrying along with him more Gnats and Fleas on his
Body, than Hairs on his Head, enough to stock an Hospital; and carrying along a
stink of Piss sufficient to infect the Air about him; and withal so pale and
shivering, that he was more like a dismal Apparition than a Man, so intolerable
was the torture he had undergone for the space of two Hours or thereabouts: But
all these mischiefs were easily amended by the help of a little repose, and
therefore nothing comparable to that of the Page, which was for ever
irreparable. Finding himself in this estate, it went against his conscience to
approach his Wife in so nasty a pickle; he thought it fitter to go to the Pages
Chamber, where knocking once or twice, he that had robbed him of his Honor in
his Wifes Chastity, whose thoughts of what had passed had kept him waking,
answered, Who is there? But hearing by the answer that it was his Master, he
was quite astonished; and the guilt of his fault trightning him with a fear of
punishment, infused into his Brain, that his Mistress had discovered all to his
Master, who was now come to wash off the Offense with his Blood: His Fear
therein blinding his Reason, to think that Donna Margareta, whom he knew to be
so wise and discreet, would discover so great an infamy to him, from whom of
all Persons she had the most cause to hide it, who being the most interessed in
it, was most likely to make them both feel the effects of his vengeance; or
that she who would rather have suffered the bitterest torments, than reveal the
least tittle, should unconstrained discover all. But this young sinner was so
troubled in spirit, and his Courage had so left him, that he was quickly
covered over with a cold sweat, fearfully trembling, like one half dying of a
Fever, whose cold sweats denote the desperate state of the Patient. Having none
but that Door to the Chamber, nor no Window big enough to leap out at, he went
and opened it, and at the same time was ready to kneel down to his Master to
beg pardon for his Infidelity; but by the light of the Moon, which was then in
the increase, seeing his Visage so mortified and meager, that he seemed more
like a half-starved Beggar, than a man puft'd up with Passion, or transported
with Jealousy, recovering his breath, and recollecting his Courage, he framed
himself the best he could to answer his Master, who perceiving his disorder,
demanded the reason. Sir, (answered the Page, with a trembling voice, and
suitable gesture) the seeing of you in this condition put me into such a
disorder, that I fear the remaining part of the night will hardly settle me;
for at first not knowing you, I thought it had been some evil Spirit come from
the other World to chastize me for my Sins.

Don Sebastian, though almost dead with cold, could hardly restrain his
laughter at the words of the subtle Page; and after a charge of secrecy, under
the strictest pains, he recounted to him his late dangerous Adventure (who had
not yet the manners or ingenuity to keep the Laws of Romance, in requiting him
with a Narration of his) and bid him light a Fire to warm him a clean Shirt.
There was, by good hap, some Sparks yet alive of the last nights Fire, with
which (for want of other Fuel) the Page lighted some Straw which he pulled from
under his Bed, wherewith his half-starved Master warmed himself the best he
could. Having at once cast off his foul Shirt, and therewithal his numerous
unwelcom Guests, and having smugged himself up the best he could, he went into
his Chamber, slipping as silently into bed to his Wife, as the Snake that
slides with his speckled skin over the polished Marble; where we will for the
present leave him, and return to Catalina's Husband Roderigo, who had beed a
long time puffing and blowing at a Cole, with Cheeks swelling out like a pair
of Bagpipes (only now and then taking breath to curse) before he could light
his Candle; but at last, with much ado, having lighted it, and his thirst for
the rare Bottle of Wine being highly inflamed by this toiling amongst Ashes and
Fire, he leaped like Lightning to the Cupboard, his mouth watering extremely
(which perhaps had been the cause he had been so long a lighting his Candle) in
expectation of the Dainties; when, alas! like the Alchymist, in stead of the
longed for Stone, after all his blowing the Coals, he found nothing but empty
Alymbecks, the Bottle and Plate as empty as his Head or Belly, which made him
presently think the Boy had deceived him, as his Wife feared; for which cause,
without second thoughts, he marched straight to the Bed, where finding the Boy
sleeping, as innocent of the fact, as ignorant of the danger that attended him,
he (without waking him in order to a Trial) fell straight to Execution, which
he performed unmeasurably, with a Cudgel he had found in the corner of the
Kitchen. The Boy feeling the blows shower down so thick upon him, thought it had
been some of those roguish Spirits which he had often heard talk of, that
haunted Countrey-houses in the night; and (knowing no better remedy for the
present danger) fell to making as many Crosses, and invoking as many Saints as
his Master gave him blows. The fear at first astonished him more than the
blows; but the former vanished as the later increased: so that seeling the hail
increase so fast, that it had almost broken his Ribs, and beaten his Flesh to a
Mummy, which being no longer able to sustain, he leaped suddenly out of the
Bed, and presently knew his Master, who uttered these words, How did you like
your Rabadabia, pray Sir, was it good? Was the Partridge leg well roasted and
tender? I am sorry I could provide you no better Sauce than this. But the Boy,
who neither understood this Heathen-Greek, nor the Riddle of the Bottle which
his Master held in his left hand, still repeating these words, and other such
like, turned his back to his Master, and his face toward the Stairs, and
endangering his Neck to save his Shoulders, at two or three jumps was got down
Stairs, still (like a fearful Hind) thinking his Tormenter at his heels, whom
he could not well tell whether he was mad or drunk, but judged the later by the
empty Bottle. Having performed this unjust chastisement at the instigation of
his Wife, who had made a Supper of that for which the Boy was so severely
punished, and (as we said) used this trick to make way for her Gallant to
escape; for she knew that the purchase of such Wine as she had described this
to her Husband, and such Dainties, would encourage him to venture as far as the
Argonauts for the Golden Fleece: After this (I say) Roderigo returned to Bed to
his Wife, recounting to her what a Supper he had given the Boy for robbing him
of his, which she approved of, saying, He well deserved it for his sawciness;
assuring him, there was above a Quart in the Bottle: and for the Partridge,
there was but a Leg; but it was not so valuable for the quantity as the
quality, it being the best she ever saw. With these Discourses, and such like,
followed by their Conjugal Caresses and ordinary Embraces, we will leave them
to themselves (it being unfitting to be present at what passed betwixt them)
and return to our Page Valerio, who being come to himself again, and his Master
gone from him, went to Bed, there to expect the approaching day, without
sleeping; finding it better refreshing to him to ruminate on the delightful
passages of that Night.

The End of the First Part.
THE AMOROUS TRAVELERS, OR THE Night-Adventures.
PART II.
CHAP. I.
THe lovely Aurora had already by the clarity of her Beams discovered the tops
of the Mountains of Sierra Morena, when Don Sebastian's Coachmen, willing that
their Master should see their diligence to obey his commands by their timely
rising, went to knock at their Masters Chamber Door, to let him know they were
ready, not doubting but he was so too, that had given them such charge
overnight; but the obscurity which through the Keyhole they perceived to be in
the Room, answerered them that they that were within were asleep still. They
therefore returned back, and a while after came again, and were forced to
return as at first. So that seeing they made no more haste to rise, they
thought of no way better to pass that time, whilst our last-nights valiant
Warriors continued Captives to Sleep, than in a good Breakfast and plentiful
Mornings-draught.

Donna Margareta was the first that awaked, and remembering the passages of the
night past, could scarce think them any other than a Dream: But the Pendant,
and some other marks she found about her, certified her of the contrary. She
would not awake her Husband (who slept like a man thoroughly wearied and spent
with labor; and the noise he made in snoring testified to her the pleasure he
took in his rest, and the pains he had taken that night to be as great as hers)
but resolving to tell him that she never waked all night, but slept till six in
the morning, she went to open the Door to her Chamber-maids, who were not far
thence attending her call; and having let them in, they brought her her
Clothes, and she begun to dress her self, and comb her lovely Hair, which
hanging in curious Rings, as so many Snares, displayed more enticements than
ever the most ingenious Painter could draw for the Picture of Venus.

Chimena being dressing her Locks, missed the Pendant, and told her it was
lost. No (said Donna Margareta) for when it fell I took it up, and gave it to
Valerio to keep for me; call him hither, and bid him bring it me. Chimena went
to him presently, bidding him bring the Pendant his Mistress gave him to keep.
Valerio, who understood his Ladys meaning, who used this trick, fearing that
the opinion he might have of having laid with Chimena, might occasion his
discovery to her what had passed, and so reveal that secret which if not kept
close might ruin them both, went instantly to her Chamber, and gave it to her;
which she taking with her delicate white Hand, the remembrances of what had
passed the night before dyed her Rosy Cheeks into a deep Scarlet. Valerio's
confusion also being no less than hers, made him not dare to look her in the
face.

By this time Don Sebastian awaking, said to his Wife, My dear, prithee send
word to the Coachmen and Grooms that they make not too much haste; for I find
my self so indisposed, that it is impossible to rise yet, and I fear we shall
hardly go hence till after Dinner. Alas! what is the matter with thee, Dearest,
said Donna Margareta? Nothing but a little Headache, said Don Sebastian; but I
hope it will quickly be well with a little rest: Only prithee let all go out
of the Chamber, or make the least noise they can in it, that I may rest
quietly. Well, dearest, (said Donna Margareta, ordering the Maids to draw the
Curtains and depart) I will go to Mass whilst you sleep: And without further
stay, she and her Maids avoided the Room.

Having done her Devotion, as she rerurned toward her Lodging she saw a
Cavalier, followed by three or four Horsemen, come riding toward her; and near
the Cavalier she espied a Lady, the splendor of whose Habit bespake her of
some Illustrious Family. She was mounted on a white Horse, with a Saddle of
Brazile-wood as red as Coral, and richly gilded, the Seat being of
Crimson-Taffeta, laid thick with Gold and Silver Lace. She had a loose
Riding-garment of Damask, all inchas'd with Silver, and laced; her Gownskirts
of the same, and the Body of her Gown of Cloth of Gold, with a Hat all covered
over with a gallant Plume, which astonished Donna Margareta, to see a Lady so
advantageously habited and richly accoutred.

They passed near her; and though she was curiously regarding our fair
Stranger, she could not discover her face, because it was most part covered
with a white Taffeta Hood: but her gallant Mien, and graceful Carriage did
evidently declare, that this Vail concealed as rare a Beauty. They saluted her
very courteously, and the Cavalier said to the Lady he conducted, which we now
spoke of, as she passed close by Donna Margareta, Madam, this Country, though
rough and mountainous, and fruitful in little else, does produce as beauteous
Ladies as the richest, as you may perceive by this Lady behind us. By what I
perceive (replied the Lady) she is not of this Country; or though she were, it
is not the first time we have heard of lovely Nymphs (as without vanity we may
term this) amongst rugged Mountains. I leave you to judge whether Donna
Margareta were not well pleased with these words; but much more when she saw
them stop before her Inn, because she was extremely desirous to see if this
Ladies face were suitable to her other excellencies. The Cavalier was no sooner
arrived at the Inngate, but he alighted from his Horse to help the Lady from
hers, who at the same time asked the Host what a Clock it was, and taking off
her Hood, discovered so beauteous a Face, and imbellished with so many Graces,
that the splendor was enough to dazzle the beholders eyes. The Cavalier asked
her if she would eat any thing; but she answered, she had more mind to repose
her self, being somewhat weary with Travel.

The Host conducted them into a large Ground-room, where they were no sooner
entered with all their Equipage, but the Cavalier went out, to enquire if a
Cavalier and his Lady, and all their Train, that were going to Court, had not
lain in the House the night before, because they heard at the foot of the
Mountain that they were parted from Vbeda the day before, and he should be glad
to wait on them, because his Niece was desirous of the Ladies company, having
heard of her Beauty and Civility. The Host answered him, smiling, I wonder,
Sir, your eyes should be so dim, as not to see the Sovereign Beauty you speak
of, having her so near you; that is she that is just now entering the Yard, whom
you are so desirous should accompany your Niece, which I suppose may easily be
compassed, for I guess you go all one way. I know not, answered the Cavalier,
whethe Lady will agree to it. Donna Margareta, who had overheard their
Discourse, answered, Yes, Sir; and I shall take it for a great honor. At
least, Madam, replied the Cavalier, you will find in the Lady that comes along
with me a Sister not only in Beauty and good Grace, but also in her desire to
serve you, and in me an humble Servant. On the contrary, Sir, replied Donna
Margareta, you and she shall find me ready to serve you upon all occasions: And
if my Beauty do not equal that of the young Lady your Niece, yet I will so far
endeavor to make amends in the conformity of my will to hers, that her desires
and mine shall be the same. For me and my Niece, said the Cavalier, I promise
you that we will strive by our behavior in this Journey, to let you see that
our chiefest study shall be to please you. Upon this Donna Margareta took leave
of him, to go see if her Husband were awake, without giving leave to the
Cavalier to renew his obliging language, only making him the civillest
obeisance she could.

Donna Margareta entering her Chamber, found her Husband awake, and ready to
arise; whereupon she told him all she had seen, and the good Company she had
met with to ease the troubles of the remaining Journey. Don Sebastian was
hugely pleased at his Wifes Discourse, principally when she exagerated the
Beauty of her that was so desirous of her company; and wished that Time's Wings
were a little swifter, he longed so to see this Lady, whom his Wife had painted
to him with so advantageous a Discourse. He arose very joyful of the
contentment which he hoped for from this new Company, which put Wings to his
haste in making himself ready, telling his Wife that his Headache had left him,
and that he found himself so lively, that he should think himself unworthy of
that blessing, if he did not testify his gratitude and satisfaction, by
putting on the most sumptuous of his Apparel; and that besides, it was fit he
should appear something extraordinary in such noble Company, to make himself
appear in the luster his Condition required. It this design of changing his
Suit occasioned this Discourse, the loss of his Cloak (as you have heard) made
him desirous to accomplish it, the better to conceal his lastnights debauche:
So that leaving his former Habit, he took another very gentile one, and asked
his Wife how it became him; who told him very well, which pleased him
extremely: So taking leave of her for half an hour, he went to Mass.

CHAP. II.
DOn Sebastian was no sooner gone out of the Chamber to hear Mass, but Don
Sancho and Donna Leonora (for so were our new Guests named) came in to visit
Donna Margareta, who was then discoursing with Chimena her Maid, about what
they had seen in the Church. After Complements passed on the one part and the
other, they sat down, and passed betwixt themselves all the time till Don
Sebastian returned from Mass, entertaining one another with words so charming,
that none but those two could have made such Complements with so good a grace,
and with such gentile reparties as passed betwixt them in this first encounter,
and those expressed with so brave an air, that one would have thought that Love
had given them his Artifice, to ravish the hearts of all the Hearers. These
Entertainments lasted pretty long, till Donna Margareta calling to mind a
Person whom she had formerly loved as dearly as her life, and whose
Portraicture she fancied she saw drawn to the life in the Face of Donna
Leonora, could not speak so discreetly as before, nor give such sharp or subtle
replies to Donna Leonora, who asked her a thousand questions; for her fancy was
so fixed on that dear object, that it had no room left for other concerns.
Donna Leonora knew, but dissembled her knowledge of the disorder of her spirit,
and not seeming to take notice of it, rising up, and taking her by the hand,
she said,

Madam, it is a general Rule, That to Persons who enjoy a great contentment, the
time seems so speedy, that though they continued a whole Age in that felicity,
it would all seem to have slipped away in a moment. At this time I have had a
full Experiment of the verity of this Assertion; for though effectually I have
had a large enjoyment of your sweet Conversation, yet methinks I am but just
entering upon the brinks of that delight: Wherefore, Madam, (said she, with a
low obeisance) I hope you will pardon me if I have been troublesome in this my
first Visit, which is the first and greatest happiness I have received of
Fortune, in making me happy in the knowledge of so deserving a Lady. And as
Donna Margareta was desiring her to sit down again, and with a thousand
caresses to let her know the content and honor she took it for, to be visited
by a Lady of her quality, upon this Don Sebastian entered, who seeing his Wife
in so good company, he (being a complete Courtier) accosted them the best he
could, and with very great civility. Donna Leonora returned him hers very
gracefully, with whose Beauty he was infinitely charmed, and fancied to himself
he never saw a more complete one. They began anew their Entertainment, and in
less than an hour all their four humors were so exactly conformable, and in so
much pleasure and contentment, that after the communicating of one another
Affairs, and the causes of their Journeys, they contracted amongst themselves
an inviolable Friendship, as you may remark in the Sequel of this History.

And for this happy encounter which every one of them had made, they resolved
to stay there that day, which they intended to spend in Sports and Pastimes.
The pretty Catalina did not fail in employing her utmost dexterity amongst them
in their Plays and Dances; but Don Sebastian had his mind so firmly fixed upon
a more worthy Subject, that he had no room for admiring her excellencies,
though all the rest did highly esteem them. Donna Margareta, who fancied that
she saw in Donna Leonora the lively Image of one who had formerly captivated
her Affections, revolved in her mind the continual thoughts of their former
Amors, and the contentments which she and her Lover had formerly enjoyed.

The heaviness and trouble which feised her at the remembrance of so sweet
forepast joys, wrought in her the secret Discourses following.

O happy time, in which I enjoyed the sight of my adored Don Carlos! O
fortunate season! Would God that losing the enjoyment of so delicious a
pleasure as I was blessed with during thy short hours, in the company of so
dear a Person, I had therewith lost the remembrance of the good which I see my
self deprived of in losing thee. And thou, Angel or Phantasm, which
representest in different Habits the self-same Lineaments and sweet Behavior,
tell me, I say, dear Spirit, if he thou representest do still continue his
affection for me, and for whom I now feel revived in me the torments I formerly
suffered for him.

These Complaints, and others suchlike, were forging in the Breast of Donna
Margareta, whilst Donna Leonora was making her a thousand caresses. On the
other side, Don Sebastian and Don Sancho, who with diverse sorts of Recreations
diverted the Company, obliged Donna Margareta to keep time with the rest, and
by imitating them, strive the best she could to allay the torment which was
caused in her by those piercing eyes, which opened afresh those wounds which
Love had made when she was in her Father's House.

Our beauteous and complaisant Company passed all the day, as you have heard,
in all sorts of Sports and Recreations; and after Supper they resolved to
depart the next day early in the morning, which made them go to bed the sooner,
but every one with different thoughts. Some of them slept soundly, the others
still discoursing to themselves upon that which their Imaginations propounded
to their Judgments, while seeking the means to give satisfaction to their
desires, they found a deprivation of the sweetness of sleep, which finding the
doors of their Senses shut against his assaults, went nimbly from one of them
to the other to seek a retreat, till the weariness of their Bodies abating the
forces of their Spirits, constrained them by his hands to pay the Tribute due
to Nature.

They all awaked with the dawning of the morning, and made themselves ready
with all expedition, suitable to their desires of making a good large Journey
that day, bidding the Coachmen make ready the Coach presently, whilst the
others trussed up the Baggage, and they paid their Reckoning. Don Sebastian,
Don Sancho, and the two Ladies, with Chimena and Scintilla their Maids, went
into the Coach; and the rest of their Servants, mounted upon Mules, rode before
them. Whilst the Coach went smoothly along, the Cavaliers and Ladies
entertained the time with such agreeable Discourses and amorous Conceits,
expressed in such charming Language, that it would have ravished the best Wits
to have heard the politeness of their Talk, and the union of their Minds.

They so diverted themselves with this agreeable conversation, that the way did
not at all seem long to them; so that they arrived at Almagro, when they
thought they had scarce been clear of the Suburbs of Viso: and joyful of having
cleared so much ground in so short a time, they dined with a good appetite, and
passed the rest of the day in viewing the Town, which is a very pretty one. The
night being come, they went to bed, and so soon as the day begun to appear, and
the Rays of the Sun to gild the tops of the Mountains, they pursued their
Journey, without letting slip any moment which was not employed in most
agreeable divertisements. They dined that day at Malagon, and after continued
their Journey with their wonted Pastime: But whilst the rest of the Company
thought on nothing but these pleasures, Donna Leonora began to complain of the
Headache, which in the instant changed all their contentments into plaints and
regrets. Donna Margareta was the first that came to help her, and bound a
Handkerchief fast about her Head, which notwithstanding, she still continued
the complaint of her afflicting malady. Her sighs and groans were so many
thunderclaps to Don Sebastian, each of which split his Heart asunder: His
passion he had for her at first sight, was now changed from love to pity,
joined with extreme sorrow, fearing that death like a sudden inundation, should
drown this new-discovered pleasant Country, ere he had time to take possession.

Donna Margareta supported this disaster with no less Commotion of spirt; her
outward behavior witnessing to the Beholders, that her inward malady was
nothing inferior to hers whom she bewailed. Don Sancho too seemed very much
afflicted by his Nieces disaster, seeming no less concerned lest some further
mischief might come to her before they could get her to the Inn of the
Carcuela, which made him earnest to know of the Coachmen how far it was
thither, by whom he was informed, that it was not above a Bow-shoot or two at
the most, which much alleviated their sorrows. Donna Leonora desired her Uncle
to take her out of the Coach, that she might take the benefit of the Air, which
he did, and at the same time all the rest of the Company did the same. Don
Sebastian and Don Sancho took her by the Arms, and conducted her to the Inn,
where they were no sooner arrived, but a great swooning so dissipated her
Spirits, that they feared she had breathed out her soul in a sigh she gave,
sinking down upon their Arms. This so afflicted all the Company, that they were
in little better case than she, having scarce power left to run to aid her.
Donna Margareta was the first, who seeing her dear Companion, the lovely
Pourtraicture of her beloved Don Carlos, in that condition, presently sprinkled
her face with cold water, mixed with the warm tears which this sorrowful
spectacle extracted from her fair eyes, which in a little time reduced her
Spirits to their former function.

He that should dream of being condemned to a cruel and ignominious death by a
Sovereign Tribunal, from whence lay no Appeal, and from whence no Mercy could
be hoped for, could not be more joyful when with his sleep he finds himself
delivered from these black and dismal apprehensions, the terror of which had
dissolved him into sweat, than our Company, seeing their spirits revived
together with those of Donna Leonora. One was so transported with this sudden
joy, that he had almost lost the sense of it: The others beholding in the sweet
(though languishing) eyes of our sick Lady two glistering Stars, with which
Love, drawing the curtains, and dissipating the clouds of her eyelids,
astonished the beholders, were more amazed than the solitary Shepherd, who
having never been out of the sight of his own homely Cottage, comes to view the
proud and sumptuous Buildings of stately Courts and opulent Cities.

Having laid her upon a Bed, they went to fetch her some refreshments, the
fittest for one in her condition to take. Donna Margareta's sollicitous care
would not permit her to leave the Beds side, but, like the Mother that has lost
her only Infant, the repository of all her worldly comfort, and finding
another the exact Picture of it, does kiss and cherish it with her tenderest
affections, still supposing to hold in her Arms the true one, which Death had
cruelly deprived her of: So this afflicted Lady, seeing her dear Don Carlos his
Picture in the face of Donna Leonora, testified her satisfaction in tender
kisses and gentle embraces, the sick Lady not moving her head the while; only
to witness to Donna Margareta the content she took in her Caresses, she joined
her Lips to hers, and kissed her with such tender sighs, that she seemed even
to swoon betwixt her Arms.

But though it is fit my Pen should take a little scope to ramble in this
Narrative, it is convenient it therein take the shortest path to arrive at the
mark at which it aims, and the Reader impatiently expects: And my opinion is
clearly this, That to recount Adventures of this nature, it is improper to
amuse the Reader with unprofitable Circumlocutions, who for the most part
troubled with a tedious and superfluous Discourse, casts it carelessly in a
corner of the Room, there to lie contemned for an impertinent Prater. This for
the future I intend diligently to observe, though hitherto I may seem to have
been somewhat peccant. Therefore, Reader, take a little breath, and prepare thy
attention, if thou be curious to know what is contained in the ensuing
Chapter, whose pleasure may chance deserve thy attention in the reading, if
their novelty do not cause thy admiration when read.

CHAP. III.
THe Sun already wearied with having run so long a course through the tedious
Circle of the spacious Zodiac, was disharnessing his Horses, to plunge with
them into the Ocean, his ordinary nocturnal Retreat; and the serene unclouded,
though somewhat darkened Sky, was already expecting the approach of beauteous
Cynthia, when Don Sebastian and Don Sancho came to present Donna Leonora with
their Conserves and Sweetmeats; but her cheerful Countenance had already
displayed the Flag of Health, and her pleasant Words discovered the lightness
of her Heart. This (says she) was nothing but a sudden qualm; but now, I thank
God, I find that quite vanished, and my perfect Health taken possession of its
former habitation: In the mean time, like sick persons let us eat these
Confectures, and as healthy take care for Supper to be made ready; and to make
it appear that I am now so perfectly well, that your further care of me is
needless, I intend to sup amongst you, and with my wonted contentment re-enjoy
our former diversions.

She had no sooner said this, but all, to testify the interest they had in her
recovery, studied who should invent the most pleasant Stories and new
Divertisments to please her, till a Page interrupted them, by telling them
Supper was already upon the Table. After Supper, for their better digestion,
they took a turn in the Fields near the Inn, and after returned to the House,
with a design to go to Bed betime, and ordered the Hostess to lay clean Sheets
upon the Bed. But she whose Head was little troubled with that care, as one
that had seldom been used to make more Beds in the House than her own, answered
them admiringly, saying, I wonder, Gentlemen, that you, who, I am sure, have
traveled not only this Road, but through all Spain, should be ignorant that
many Inns, especially in such a Desert place as you may know this to be by the
very name of it (which is called The Spanish word carcas, ssgnifies thorns and
briers.
Carcuela) have no more Beds but for their own Families; which is the reason
that all Travelers strive to stretch on to the next great Town, and never stay
to lie there, no more than you, I suppose, would have done here, had it not
been for this Ladies Distemper: But all that I can do for you, is to give these
Ladies my Bed: And for you, Gentlemen, the inconvenience you will suffer this
night for want of a Bed, will serve to moderate your joy for the Ladies sudden
recovery, and you may pass your time the best you can by saying your Prayers in
this Book (throwing a Pack of Cards upon the Table) for there is no other
remedy, if you dispute till to morrow.

We must be contented then, said Don Sancho, and let us shuffle the Cards; for
Caesar himself has suffered a great deal more hardship, when he traveled
through Germany in the midst of Winter amongst Ice and Snow. I wish (said Don
Sebastian) this may be the greatest mischief that I shell ever be forced to
undergo; for it is not long since, in a Night-adventure (meaning that at Viso)
I would gladly have bought this safe divertisement at a good many Ducats: But
go you to Bed, Ladies (said he) if you please; for for our parts, we will
endeavor to divert our selves at Picquet, or some other Game, and pass the
night as merrily as we can: And you, Madam Leonora, be sure you do nothing to
my Wife; for if you do, you and I must quarrel to morrow morning, if I know it.
They all laughed at these words of Don Sebastian; and the Ladies would have
excused themselves from going to Bed, because they thought it uncivil to lie at
their ease, whilst the two Cavaliers suffered the incommodity of sitting up.
Upon this, the Host arriving, said to them, Pray Ladies go to Bed; for I intend
to play this Purse of Reals with my Masters here, and I should not be well
content to have you by, for the sight of a suspected person is not more
offensive to a jealous man, than the presence of a Wife to him that plays with
her Husband. These, and some such other Discourses, took up a certain space of
time, till the Ladies, vanquished by the importunity of the Company, went to
Bed, and left the Cavaliers to their Gaming.

The End of the Second Part.
THE AMOROUS TRAVELERS, OR THE Night-Adventures.
PART III.
CHAP. I.
NOT to hold you long in in suspense about what I have to say in the ensuing
Discourse, I will imitate the Painter, who having completed the Picture of a
beauteous Woman, does with two strokes of his Pencil upon her Face, two upon
her Breast, and two betwixt her Thighs, change her instantly into a Man: So I
at present will in less than six words endeavor to change Donna Leonora into
Don Carlos; not with prodigious Stories, and alleging things that never were,
but only let you know in short, that Don Carlos was the Son of a certain Duke,
whose name we shall for certain reasons conceal, as being unnecessary to this
Narrative: It may suffice to say, that his House was not far from that of Donna
Margareta's Father. For his Beauty I refer to what is said already, I having
before exaggerated it to so high a perfection under the Habit of a Woman, that
the fairest of this time might have just cause to envy it. It may yet seem
miraculous to find in Don Carlos so rare a Beauty as we have described, who
though never so complete and handsome a Cavalier, should in this disguise seem
but foul and deformed, compared to the excellency of Female Beauty; or that he,
in so different a Habit from his own, should so dexterously behave himself
after the Customs and Gallantries of a Lady. I must only say, to remove this
difficulty, that Don Carlos was a man of a Beauty far beyond the ordinary
Masculine one, and so always esteemed by those that saw him; and his wit and
address, joined to the boldness which Love infused into him, made him every way
so complete, that I question whether Achilles made a better Girl when he
courted King Lycomedes his Daughter in that Habit; or whether Jupiter took a
better shape, when he enjoyed his Calisto in that of Diana. Don Carlos was sent
by the Duke his Father at the age of sixteen to study at Osmus, an University
whose Learning, that flourishes there, has made it sufficiently known
throughout Spain. In this place lived Donna Margareta's Father, whose House was
directly opposite to Don Carlos his Lodgings, who the first time he saw her
appear through the Window, more beauteous than the Sun rising from the East,
quickly became amorous of her; and it was needless for Love to represent the
charms of her Beauty a second time, because at this first view he became so
smitten, that he yielded up his Liberty to her disposal, sacrificing his Heart
to his fair Deity. Time, and Necessity the mother of Diligence, and Love the
Mistress of Invention, gave means to our new Lover to discover his Affections
to Donna Margareta, who no less sensible than he of the wounds of Love,
accepted the tender of his Service, and gave him her Heart in exchange. These
Amors continued still increasing by degrees, whilst none perceived them; but
at last their passion so far augmented, that it was impossible to conceal it
any longer; and they having no other remedy but a free enjoyment, for those
pleasing Flames that consumed their Hearts, resolved to come to the point to
which all Lovers tend; which they had accordingly done, had they not been
interrupted by the following misfortune.

Don Carlos his Tutor perceiving, amongst others, his new Affection, thought
fit to reveal it to his Father, to avoid bearing the blame of his Pupil's
fault; for so now a days we term the Love of the Rich to their Inferiors in
Estate, which with the Ancients was the least thing considered amongst Treaties
of Marriage, who set a far higher value upon Virtue than Money: For what
greater happiness can a man enjoy, however highly he be advanced in Fortunes
favor, than in stead of the dross of temporal Riches, to enjoy a Woman rich in
the more pure ones of Wit and Virtue, which has been the chief accomplishment
desired in a Wife even by the most Barbarous Nations.

Don Carlos his Father violently startled at the news of these Amors, took
Post immediately to break them, and in a short time arrived at Osmus, just time
enough to prevent the Marriage, which was then upon point of celebration. This
was to them as it happens to a Pilot, who being come even in view of the
Harbor desired, and thereby free from suspecting a stop or mishap, finds
himself suddenly, by the violence of Winds, and fury and impetuosity of the
Waves, driven to a Haven which of all others he would have avoided: Even so our
Lovers sped; for the Duke coming, after he had sharply chid his Sons offense in
the neglect of his Duty, and contracting Marriage without his Fathers consent,
for his Penance he enjoined him two years Exile in Flanders, judging (and
indeed rightly) that nothing but absence was able to cure his Sons distemper:
After which he reproached the Father of Donna Margareta, for going about to
make a Match so unequal and injurious to him, as that of his Daughter with the
Dukes Son. Don Pedro (that was the name of Donna Margareta's Father) excused
himself, saying, that this was the first time he ever heard of it; and that he
was infinitely sorry his Children should be the occasion either of displeasing
or incommoding him, since none was more his Servant than he: But, Sir,
(continued he) be pleased somewhat to undeceive your self; for there is perhaps
no such inequality in it as you suppose: for though you be Duke, I am a
Gentleman of so good a House, that my Ancestors have no reason to give place to
yours, either in Nobility, Virtue, or Merits, but rather in some things have
much the advantage; for some of them have governed the Kingdom of Castile with
Name and Dignity of Viceroys, which, under favor Sir, is more than I suppose
yours could boast of.

These words so provoked the Duke, that he laid hold on his sword to revenge
the injury upon Don Pedro, who likewise drew his to defend himself; and if some
Cavaliers their Friends had not opportunely arrived to part them, there had
undoubtedly some mischief ensued: But all things being appeased, they
separated, the one home, and the other with his Son Don Carlos to conduct him
into Flanders.

Don Pedro, to stop the mouth of the ignorant Vulgar (which is always readier
to defame than to praise any one) from uttering words to his Daughters
disadvantage, resolved to marry her, which he did snottly after, through a
Friends means, with Don Sebastian, who is at present the Subject of this
Narration.

Don Carlos had not yet finished the first year of his Exile, when a Courrier
from his Mother brought him news of his Fathers death, ordering him upon receipt
of that Letter to take Post and return speedily for Spain. Whether he received
this news joyfully or no, I am not certain, and am as unwilling to discover my
Conjectures in these lines, because a natural shame, proper to all good
Christians, restrains my Hand, and stops my Pen, and makes me confess that
nothing ought to be put in parallel with the Love of our Parents; though Love
has so absolute and puissant an Empire over the Soul, that in former Ages we
may read, and in our own see many horrid Examples of the most inhumane and
bloody faults that Humane Nature is capable to invent, exercised with the
greatest Barbarity imaginable upon their own Blood, to satisfy the brutish
appetite which this furious passion excites in them which are possessed with
it, and yield up themselves to the rule of its Tyranny.

Though Don Carlos (suitable to Cavaliers of his Age and Constitution) had
contracted new Amors since his being in Flanders, yet now seeing his way so
plain, and all the difficulties removed which not long before combated his
designs, all obstacles now being buried in the Grave of his Father, however
engaged in other promises of Love in Flanders, his inconstant humor
continually brought into his fancy the memory of Donna Margareta, which
represented her to him with the same perfections she before possessed, which so
redoubled his ardent desire for her, (backed with the consideration of the
delights and joys they had formerly interchanged) that he resolved to marry
her, and to quit his interest in any that could claim a title to his Affections
in Flanders.

Thus resolved, he left Bruxells, without taking leave of any one; and
transported with the hopes of seeing Donna Margareta, he made such a quick
dispatch of his Journey, that he arrived at his own home in less than fifteen
days, where he staid only to refresh himself after his wearisom Journey, and to
pay his last duty to the memory of his dead Father; which done, he went for
Osmus, there to consummate his intended Marriage: But arriving there, he
understood from his ancient Host that his Mistress was already married, which so
afflicted him, and reduced him to so pitiful a condition, that his Physicians
almost concluded his state to be desparate: At last considering with himself
that all his grief and melancholy were unprofitable to the cure of his
Distemper, and seeing the impossibility of enjoying her as a Wife, he resolved
at least to make her his Mistress. With this resolution he left Osmus as
secretly as he could, to go for Vbeda, Don Sebastian's ordinary abode, where he
was no sooner arrived, but he heard that Don Sebastian in few days intended to
go to Court with his Wife.

Don Carlos hereby seeing his hopes frustrated, and that this sudden departure
would hinder him from seeing her for whom his heart daily consumed in such
ardent Flames, began so to afflict himself with his misfortune, that his
Domestics could not hope for a long continuance of his life. Don Sancho, one
of his Gentlemen, seeing his Master in so miserable a condition, his compassion
made him assume the boldness to ask the cause. Don Carlos having often
experimented Don Sancho's ability and dexterity in most Affairs, and that he
was of a most subtle and inventive wit, made no difficulty of revealing his
distemper to him, upon hopes of receiving from him some ease and consolation
for his Passion, which the other, without long consulting about the Cure, after
his Master's discovering his Wounds to him, told him in few words as follows:
The best advice, Sir, I can at present think on, is, that disguising your self
in a Woman's Habit, you overtake them at some Inn upon the Road, pretending you
are to go the same Journey with them: and for the rest, trust it to me; for I
engage within two or three days Journey to bring you to Bed together, without
the least suspicion from the Husband: For being attired in Woman's Habit, the
clearest eye or the subtilest wit will never be able to distinguish your Sex
through the beauty and delicate complexion of your Face.

Don (...) would never have consented to this D^g^se, had not Don Sancho made
him comprehend that it was the only means possible to compass his designs
without either difficulty or danger. Finally, his Reasons made our young Duke
resolve to follow his advice, and therefore gave order for the making of Women's
Habits, the richest imaginable, and another Woman's Habit (not so rich as his)
for his Page, whom he intended to turn into a Chambermaid. They parted from
Vbeda the same day that Don Sebastian set out with Donna Margareta; but it was
pretty late in the evening first, to prevent his being seen in that Habit by
some that might know him, which was the reason that he reached not Viso till
the next morning at nine of the clock, where they found Don Sebastian and his
Wife, as you have heard.

You know now the substance and reasons of all that is past, as well as my
self: Read now what the next Chapter contains, and you will find in it as much
content and satisfaction as in the former.

CHAP. II
WE broke off the Thread of our Discourse where Don Sebastian and Don Sancho bid
Goodnight to Donna Margareta and Donna Leonora, who were then going to Bed,
and having taken leave of all the Company, the Hostess conducted them to their
Chamber, which was well furnished the. Host being a rich Fellow. Being entered,
their Waiting-maids undressed them, and they went to bed together. The Maids
having drawn the Curtains, departed the Room, locking the Door after them, as
Donna Leonora had ordered, that none might enter to disturb them. After this,
the Maids and the Hostess, for want of a Bed, went and sat down by the Fires
side, where they passed the night as merrily as they could, with the old
Stories which the Hostess had heaped up together in her youth.

Don Carlos finding himself so near that object which of all others in the
World he loved the best, feared to discover himself presently, lest the sudden
excess of so great and unexpected contentment should cause some finister and
dangerous accident, as it once happened to two Lovers at Madrid, whose sudden and
unexpected happiness caused them to expire in one another Arms: But Don
Carlos, sometimes kissing her snowie Breasts, sometimes her Lips, more pleasant
and sweet than the richest Spices of Arabia, made her all the time all the
amorous Caresses that he could invent. Donna Margareta returned him the like,
adding a hundred sorts of Miguardizes and delights, and with so much liberty,
that Don Carlos no longer holding out against so many Assaults without, and
Traitors within, discovered to her by little and little (with many gentle
Love-sighs intermixed) who he was, and all the Discourse that you have already
heard.

A Father that has already given over his dear and only Son for lost, has not
more contentment to find him safe, and embraced in his aged Arms, than our
Donna Margareta when she heard these words from her dearest Friend: but the
strangeness of it so fastened her Tongue to the Roof of her Mouth, that she
could not express her amazement in one sole word: Yet at length rallying her
spirits, and the disloyalty of her Husband working as great a compliance in her
as the tenderness of the others affection, these two passions at once so firmly
assaulted her, that she embraced him with all imaginable affection. O Lovers
infinitely happy! What Pen, though guided by the most ingenious Poet in the
World, could describe those ravishing joys and incomparable delights in which
your souls so straightly intwined, do now so amply bathe themselves? What
understanding can be so fruitful as to attain to a Style sufficient to express
the happy state in which you now find your selves? For my part, I freely
confess, that the fluency of my Pen, or strength of my Wit are not able to
attain to the accomplishment of that design. Let it suffice then, friendly
Reader, to tell thee, That the Cock had already often cheerfully saluted the
approaching day, when our Lovers were still Captives to Sleeps irresistible
Power.

Let us leave them amongst their Miguardizes, and return to Don Sebastian and
Don Sancho, who, though the Sun was pretty well advanced on his way to our
Hemisphere, and their Host had left them with thirty Crowns gains, yet
continued their Gaming as hard as ever, the one to endeavor the recovery of a
hundred Pistols which he had lost, and the other to prolong the joy his Master
then possessed in the embraces of fair Donna Margareta without disturbance; which
was the cause that our Lovers had time not only to contemplate one another by
the Light of the Chamber, but also to recount their several Adventures after so
long an absence, and how for the future they should regulate their Affairs to
conceal their Amors from the World. And as the time flies swiftly from those
that pass it so delightfully, so our Lovers thought of nothing less than
rising, though the Sun was got a pretty height, till hearing their Maids enter
the Chamber, they resolved (though most unwillingly) to rise, and cloth
themselves speedily, for fear lest Don Sebastian and Don Sancho should find
them abed, being advertised by their Waiting-maids that they were ready to
visit them, because Don Sebastian the loser had at two Games recovered a good
part of his Money, and was willing to give over with the loss of fifty Crowns.

The Ladies were no sooner dressed, but the Cavaliers entered their Chambers to
give them the Bon-jour, and know how they had rested; telling them how they had
passed the night, and how the Games had gone through all the Play, concluding
with the Praises due to Heaven for the happy recovery of Donna Leonora: Yet
there were some who (according to custom) said she was hardly thoroughly
recovered, because she looked somewhat thinner and paler than ordinary.
Finally, all things being ready for a march, they took leave of their Host and
Hostess, who could hardly contain themselves for joy that they had thriven so
well by that nights Adventures. Let us a while leave them to congratulate their
good hap, and whilst the Coach is running smoothly along, let us a while give
scope to our fancies, to consider the deceits that are in the World, and with
what crafts and subtilties this sensual Appetite will plain and smooth the
greatest rubs and difficulties that oppose the satisfaction of its inordinate
desires.

Can any man in the World reasonably boast to know better secrets for the
preventing the wanton slips of a Wife, than to guard her with as many eyes as
Argus, placing more Sentinels in the House than a wise and provident Captain
would do in a Town ill fortified and hard to be defended; for there where
suspicions and jealousies reside, we may easily infer that they are matched
with care and vigilance, and a man whose spirit is tormented and disquieted
with these two Passions, is continually upon his guard. Let a man watch as long
as he will, and fix all his cares upon that design; let him even exhaust his
spirits with more crafts and devices than Dedalus of old, when he invented the
Cretan Labyrinth: After all this, I am clearly of opinion, that it is as
impossible for a man to defend his Honor and his Wifes Chastity from the
Attaques of a potent pursuer, who assaults his Wife with Courtship, and batters
her with fair words, and undermines her and corrupts the Sentinels with
Presents, or deceives them all by Stratagems (especially if her passions and
inclinations be on his party) as to hinder the Sun, when he is for some few
minutes eclipsed, to return to light us in four days time, or to confine his
Rays for fifteen days together to the tops of the Pyrenaean Mountains, without
suffering Night to cover the face of the Earth with her dark and obscure Veil.
Admit but a few Examples. What should we think of Danae's Tower, Atalanta's
Swiftness, Calisto's Honesty, Lucretia's Chastity, King Lycomedes his
Vigilance, Juno's Jealousy, the strict guard kept upon the Vestals Purity?
What should we judge, I say, of this, but that all the Industry of all the
Fathers, Husbands, Brothers, Wifes, and Kindred before mentioned, were not
capable to prevent Jupiter, Tarquin, Achilles, and and all the rest, from
wreathing themselves with the Branches of those Trees which they had so
diligently fenced? For there is no Stone so hard, but the continual dropping of
Water upon it will make a breach and decay it; nor no Ox so unruly, but he is
at last made pliable to the Yoke; no Mine, but may be countermined; No Fortress
so high, or so difficult of ascent (if Philip of Macedon may be credited) over
which an Ass laden with Gold cannot pass; not any Husband so vigilant, as to be
able to hinder the diligent cares and subtle underminings of a Lover from
ruining the Fortress of his Honor. See but the conclusive Example of Don
Carlos, and consider what Husband, though ever so jealous or politic, could
have prevented the success of such well-founded Designs? Who would have
invented such a subtilty as that of Don Sancho, or imagined that a Spanish
Duke, the Gravity of whose Nation even out-does Gravity it self, should suffer
himself to be so blinded by so disordered and vile a Passion? And yet Antiquity
assures us, that a famous old Poet whose renown has so long taken up such room
in the World, made himself be let down in a Basket through a Window for the
Love of a Woman. I conclude therefore, that it is no wonder Don Sebastian fell
thus twice into an accident which he was neither suspicious of, nor provided
against; since the most subtle and suspicious do daily the same. But you may
wonder at me, that I make so many Considerations upon what serves so little to
my Business; that I thus give wing to my Quill, to precipitate me, like another
Icarus, into a Sea of vain Imaginations, without having any other reward for my
Error than a thousand Surnames of Fool and Ignorant. I take Heaven to witness,
it is not in my power to do otherwise, though I am often more vexed and enraged
at my own prolixity, than any one else can possibly be: And then it happens to
me as to a Horse unaccustomed to a large Carriere, who at first starting,
flurts sometimes to the right hand and sometimes to the left, making a deformed
O^ running at the Ring.
Caracol: So always when my Pen would begin to write after a long diverted
Narration, my Fancy finds it self so dull and defective, that it is very
difficult for it to return to the Clew of the Discourse which it left before,
and wind it up handsomely, without making a great many notorious faults and
knotty incongruities.

CHAP. III.
IT is accounted twenty Miles from the Inn of Carcuela to the famous City of
Toledo; The way is so fair and even, in comparison of that which we have left
behind us, that a Coachman coming there can hardly make his Horses go quietly,
they find the Coach come so lightly along. This alacrity brought them with all
speed imaginable within sight of Toledo, the beauty and stateliness of whose
Buildings causes no small admiration in the beholders. Our Ladies here were
desirous to alight within half a League of the City, to take a view of that
stately Castle which is so singular an Ornament to the City, where the silver
Streams of the River Formerly called Tagus.
Tayo, conducted by the incomparable Art of the famous Jago of Cremona in the
Duchy of Milan, arise more pure than the most polished Crystal, falling into
most costly and curiously wrought Fountains in the Courts of the Castle. Their
curiosity also made them desirous to take a view of the magnificence and
incomparable Grandeur of the principal Church in which the happy Ildesonsus
received the A sort of Copes warn by the Priest at Mass.
Chasuble from the Hands of the Blessed Virgin Mother of God.

All these Rarities, and many others, which this fair Prospect discovered, did
so delight the Women, and especially Donna Margareta and her
Waiting-Gentlewomen, that they begged of Don Sebastian to spend four or five
days in that City, that they who had never before seen such Magnificences,
might have a more leisure view of these. Don Sebastian, to whom all things were
indifferent, provided he enjoyed but the fight of Donna Leonora, who was the
Center of all his Desires, and the sole Object of his Affections, answered,
Thou do not consider, my Dear, that my Will so depends on that of our Noble
Company, that without them I can resolve on nothing. I question not (replied
Donna Margareta) to obtain this favor of Don Sancho, if it be your pleasure:
And as for Donna Leonora, it is enough that she is a Woman, and therefore of
the same curiosity of seeing Novelties, as well as of the same Sex with me, and
thereore I need not doubt of her consent. Our chance in this is very sinistre
(replied Don Sancho) to be entreated where we ought to be Suppliants, For I
have in Toledo an Affair of very important concern, which I can conveniently
dispatch whilst I tarry here; and I assure you, Sir, that my care of my own
Concerns in this was so small, that if Donna Margareta had not desired to stay
here, I had passed on without mentioning it, for fear of losing such charming
Company. We have been very unhappy (answered Don Sebastian) in this, that
through all this Journey my Wife and I have had no more opportunity to manifest
the amity and affection we have for you, since you could doubt of our granting
you that which my Wife made no question of obtaining without difficulty of you.

Their Discourses had proceeded further, for Don Sancho (being an excellent
Courtier) had his Answer ready, if Donna Leonora had not said, The fault is in
my Uncles want of Courage; for he is so bashful, that I that am but a Woman, do
often both say and do things which my Uncle would not have the boldness to do,
for fear of being troublesome. Truly (said Don Sancho smiling) I may chance find
occasion to be revenged on you both more effectually than you would perhaps
desire, and make one of you grant me to be a troublesome Friend, and the other a
hardy man. Let us for the present wave these Complements (said Donna Margareta)
and mind our way; and, if I be not much mistaken, I see a great many coming
toward us on Horseback. It is true (said Don Sancho) and it would be
convenient to ask this man that comes here who they are. This Traveller being
asked the question, informed them, that they were Cavaliers of the Country,
who were returning from the City, where they had been seeing a Combat of Bulls
which had been there that day. And for that reason (said Don Sancho, having
dismissed the Traveller) it were fit to send to our Servants to attend us, that
we may return to take Coach; for besides these Cavaliers, we shall meet
abundance more People that are coming here on the other side; and it would be a
disparagement to us to be in this equipage on foot. This cannot be done
(replied the Company) for, Sir, the Cavaliers you speak of are so near us, that
it is impossible for the Coach to be here before them. Then all the means we
have to amend this fault (replied Don Sancho) of letting the Coach go so far
from us, is to send them word that they stay near the old Castle, which is in
the half way to the City, for it cannot be above a thousand Paces from thence
to the City; and whilst these Cavaliers pass by, we may enter into this
pleasant Forest, and take the Air amongst the shadows of the Trees; for we have
time enough, and too much yet to go to Toledo, though we stay there an hour.
This concluded on, they took a little Path which led them to the Forest, where
they were no sooner entered, but they searched for the most convenient and best
shaded place to repose themselves in, where being sat, they were most
delightfully diverted by the charming Notes of the Nightingale, and the
melodious Consort of the other little winged Choristers: But they presently
distinguished from the other Notes one which founded more of Art than the rest,
which added such a charming sweetness to its natural perfection, that the
confused Notes of Birds even seemed to cease, as did the Discourse of our
Cavaliers and Ladies, to listen to that Voice, which with most incomparable
skill sung this Song.

1.
THe fair Enamel of the Fields,
The pretty Birds sweet Harmony,
The gentle Blasts which Zephyrus yields,
Join to make time pass pleasantly.
2.
The Crystal Streams which from their source
Murmuring sweetly, separate,
And after joining in their course,
Do ravishing delights create.
3.
Over verdant Meads and Fields to walk
On the soft Grass, in Shades repose;
By gliding Brooks to sing and talk,
Where sweetest Flowers their leaves disclose.
4.
All choicest sorts of Fruits and Flowers
In Orchards, Fields, and Gardens be,
The pleasant Groves and sweetest Bowers
No pleasure yield to unhappy me.
5.
O, what strange ill disturbs my Peace!
Since what such joys to others brings,
Does make my Sorrows still increase,
And adds weight to my Sufferings.
6.
Flowers, Rivers, Shades, Fountains, and Groves,
In vain to me your Sweets you lend:
Inconstant ^e, another loves,
On whom alone my Joys depend.
This Song was finished with so feeling a sorrow, and such admirable dexterity,
that it astonished all the hearers, believing that this voice proceeded not
from any Mortal, but rather an Angel or Celestial Spirit, that willing to
delight himself in the admiration of his own Excellencies, had chosen this
Forest as the fittest place to lay his Scene, delighting himself in his own
voice, which the Echo returned with advantage at the end of every Verse: And
as they were getting up to turn their eyes toward the place whence this voice
came, they heard the same Voice make this Complaint.

The^e are many choose the Flowery Meads and pleasant Shades for t^eir
divertisement: But, alas! I c^se a seat upon the Bank of this pretty Brook,
there to lament the evils I su^er. These fair and shady Trees seem to me more
sharp and prickly than Thorns and Thistles: The singing of the Birds seems to
me as harsh and disagreeable as the noise of Screech-owls. Alas! can my eyes
behold any thing that does not administer a subject of sorrow and complaints,
in a place where I find my self a forlorn Exile, and have no other use for my
eyes but to shed tears. The Rocks and horrid Precipices, the savage Beasts, and
the Rivers which seem to be swelled bigger with my tears, are faithful
witnesses of my cruel Martyrdom and afflicting Torments.

These words ended the Discourse, it being interrupted by the storms of sighs
and showers of tears which flowed from the Complainer. After that Storm was a
little blown over, this Discourse followed the former.

How piercing are my sorrows, that seem even to penetrate insensible things!
The Groves, as concerned at my complaints, seem continually to resound them to
the neighboring Plains: These Rocks, methinks, seem even cleft with their
sorrows, at the mournful Songs with which I alleviate mine. When I consider my
self plunged into such an abyss of sadness, banished from that light which
formerly shined upon me with so propitious an influence, into a strange
Country, where nothing but mishaps surround me, this is a torment too
insupportable. And if amongst this crowd of afflictions Sleep find an
opportunity to close my eyes, its operation is contrary to what it is designed
for; for in stead of suspending my cares, and refreshing my tired Body, my
Dreams are so full of disturbance and anguish, that my ordinary moanings and
complaints are more supportable than the heaviness I feel when I awake.

Upon finishing these words, she begun again to bemoan her self with such
mournfui Language as was able to mollify the hardest Rock, saying, To what end
serve these Hands, this lately so much admired Beauty, the Nobility of my
Birth, or these resentments of my misfortune? Since I am unable to be revenged
of this Traitor that has robbed me of the richest Jewel I had, the loss of
which is so much the greater, as it is utterly irrecoverable: A Jewel without
which a Virgin becomes like a Flower scorched with the Suns heat, or like the
Vine whose tender Branches are pinched and ^illed by the nipping Frost of a
cold Morning. O thou great Sovereign of of the World, who from thy Imperial
Throne do now behold an injustice done me, as great as the most disloyal
wretch in the World could commit, side with me in the punishment of a crime as
offensive to thy Majesty as injujurious to my Honor: O leave not this fault
unpunished, thou who art the firm support of the innocent, and the scourge of
Offenders. But, alas! unhappy that I am, what is it I say and wish against him
in whom the Destinies have placed all my happiness, all my felicity and hopes,
and without which my Life is no more able to sustain the assaults of Death,
than Snow to resist the heat of Fire. O ye fair Streams of Tayo, whose rapid
Courses lead you to the beauteous City of Lisbon, do me the kindness a little
to deviate, and traversing the desert Rocks of Siera Morena, plunge your selves
into the sacred Betis, and with your confused rumors tell him my soul adores,
that his disloyalty and ingratitude have made me breathe out my soul in sighs
upon your flowery Banks; and you my ey^, turn the current of your salt Strea^,
which you shed day and night, to mix with the fresh ones of Tayo, that if that
friendly River do me this first and last courtesy, you at least may (which I
can never do) kiss the happy Country of my once dear Lover.

Her mournful plaints and heavy accents ended with such profound sighs and
inward groans, that all the Company rose to see whether she (for by her voice
and discourse they knew her to be a Woman) that uttered them had not ended her
Life with her pitiful Regrets; and peeping through some Branches which spread
on that side whence the Voice came, they saw a Lady sitting by the side of a
Rivolet which slowed into the Taio, with her Head mournfully hanging on one
side, and her Face toward the Water. Her Hair, though hanging careless, and
moved at the discretion of a gentle Wind, was of so lively a color, that the
richest Gold of Arabia could not compare with it. She was clothed in a Robe of
black Velvet, embroidered with Flowers of Silver, with a Star of Gold in the
middle of each of them bordered with Crystal, which joined the corners of every
Flower in unequal measures, being made in the shape of Loops, and buttoned with
Buttons of the Seed of Pearl: So that it seemed Perfection had joined all its
subtilties in the composing the Garment, as well as the Body. This costly Habit
caused as much amazement in the beholders, as the former sight of her lovely
Hair had done. Her Head was then bended down upon her Knees, which made them
all unwilling to part without knowing who she was, and whether she, who seemed
rather a Divinity than a Mortal, were alive or dead. They were going to divide
the Boughs which hindered them with their Hands, and cut them with their Swords,
and so leap the Rivolet, which winding with a great many circlings and
turnings, made an Islet where the Lady sat, but were hindered by the approach
of two Women of comely Mien toward the Lady, one of which came and sat down
by her, and said to her angrily these words:

If I considered, so often as I advise you of your duty, that my words serve to
no other end but to spend my spirits, I should trouble you no more with my
Discourse, nor employ my time so unprofitably, to preach to you that are deaf
to all I say; and all my Remonstrances and Reasons, though never so good and
pertinent, have no more influence upon you than upon a senseless creature. I
call Heaven to witness, and desire no pardon for my sins from thence if it be
not true, that your despair and melancholy have reduced me to that state, that
they will at last bring me to my Grave, unless (taking pity of her that next
under God and your Parents has given you your being) you moderate your
passions, showing us once more a cheerful and contented look. And wonder not if
I take your Interests so to heart, and that your sorrow so afflicts me; since
those from whom you hold your Life, and I my Livelihood, have obliged me to it
by their Bounty. And what good can you hope for from your sighs? Can one, think
you, find any that will be in love with misfortunes and disgraces, for the
pleasure they take in bewailing them? Think you that your sad countenance and
blubbered eyes will win more upon your wandering perfidious Husband (for so he
is as strictly as Vows can bind) or sooner reduce him to his duty, than if your
lovely Face take up again its former Arms, with which you vanquished him
before? No, no, Love is not inflamed by such sinister ways, especially having
the inconstancy and ingratitude of such a young man for Opponent. Take example
by other Ladies, who are so far from striving, like you, to disfigure their
Faces, that they use all the Dresses, Fards, Perfumes, Paints, and Pommades, to
render themselves more beauteous, and set them off to the best advantage, not
sparing for any thing that may render them more lovely, the better to win the
hearts of their Lovers. You will tell me now, that Lovers also are subject to
sighs, and tears, and complaints; which if I grant you, you must allow, that
though they do it for the present, they blame themselves for it afterward,
considering that it is better to pass the time in a cheerful enjoyment of what
we possess, than to plunge ones self into a Sea of sorrow, which ruins the
Beauty, enervates the forces of the Body, and stupifies those of the Soul: For
what reason have we to despair, since what seems impossible to day, is very
easy oft-times to morrow. You might have remarked this in your own Affairs,
which before seemed irremediable; but the good reception you have had with the
King makes us now not doubt of that success which we could scarce hope for
before: And I remember that yesterday you said you did not fear but that your
Honor was safe, and your Business in a good estate; and now it is strange to
see you so changed and afflicted, that if I knew not your inconstant and
impatient humor, considering your Affair is in so fair a condition of suiting
to your desire, I should rather fear this sadness to be an Augury of some
future misfortune, than a bewailing of the former.

These words were not spoken in vain; they wrought the same effect in this
afflicted Lady as Water, which thrown in the face of one in a Swoon, does by
its freshness recall the wandering spirits; for they immediately retrived her
from that depth of sorrow and melancholy into which the memory of her wrongs
had plunged her: for now a modest Blush spread a rare Vermilion over her face,
which was pale before; and as ordinarily silence is most suitable to an
afflicted spirit, she only showed her Governante a more cheerful countenance
than before, telling her, that she would endeavor always to satisfy her
desires, and at the same time called her Chambermaid (which was she that came
along before with her Governante) to dress her Head, during which employment
she often stroked her lovely Hair with her own fair Hand, which resembled an
Alabaster stone upon a Rock of Amber. O beauteous and dear Nets of amorous
Hearts! the Bowstrings of Love! O lovely Fingers, capable to play upon our
Passions like Virginals, and tune them to any sort of Music.

Our Company could not then behold the face of the Lady of the Stars (for so we
must call her till we know her right name) nor that of her Governante, who had
by a long discourse (which they could not well hear) endeavored to oppose her
consolatory remonstrances to the others grief: Yet they all resolved, though
with regret, to depart in ignorance, lest they should be discovered by a Troop
of Cavaliers and Ladies which came walking by a Rivolet, and for fear of
incurring the censure which the pryers into others concerns merit. They
concluded by the circumstances and occurrences beforementioned, that the Lady
of the Stars was a stranger, and that the others that were coming were her
Friends and Servants, the most of them; and that making some stay at Toledo,
she was come to walk and to divert her self in this pleasant place, with all
her Family, to endeavor to shun or alleviate the sorrow which her sighs, her
tears, and her words had manifested her heart to be clogged withal.

CHAP. IV.
THe Considerations last mentioned in the foregoing Chapter caused the
departure of our Company out of the Shade where they were, returning the same
way they came, hoping to meet some body by the way, of whom they might learn
the Name of her whom all the Company had such a desire to know: And whilst they
were walking gently to the place where the Coach attended them, every one made
their particular judgment and remark upon the Lady of the Stars, all but Donna
Leonora, who ruminating upon what she had seen and heard, found her self
somewhat surprised at this rencounter, and therefore listened attentively to the
rest, without descanting on it in one word, as the Company did. Don Sebastian
seeing her somewhat melancholy; approached her to know the cause. Don Sancho
and Donna Margareta seeing his intention, begun to mend their pace, and go a
good way before, to give them the means of a private entertainment, in talking
of things which might tend to their future pleasure and contentment. Don
Sebastian seeing himself hereby at liberty to discover to Donna Leonora the
sufferings which her Beauty had imposed on him, after having asked her how she
did, and w^er her discomposure of spirit did not proceed from that of her Body,
fell to beholding her with more contemplative eyes than a Capuchin or Chartreux
would do a Portraict of Devotion. He had already begun to accost her with more
than Mercurian eloquence, but his Discourse was interrupted by the abundance of
sights and sobs, which by the hardness of their passage seemed to be drawn from
the very bottom of his breast; but his Love recalling his Courage, and rallying
his dispersed Spirits, he took the boldness to take hold of her curious Hand,
and pressing it somewhat harder than before, he said with the best grace
possible these words following.

It is the common course of men of understanding, when they find either Body or
Mind oppressed by any Malady, first to find out a Person proper and able to
heal them, and then to apply themselves to him for a Remedy, and purchase a
Cure, though accompanied with the sharpest Corrosives. Now, Madam, it is no
longer time to dissemble, since your Beauty has reduced me to that state, that
I can find no way instrumental to my cure but by thus casting my self at your
feet, humbly to implore your pity, who alone can fit a Plaster to my Wound.
The scorching Rays of your Celestial Eyes have kindled such a Flame in my
Heart, that nothing but some refreshing drops of Pity can prevent the reducing
of it to Ashes, and consequently my Body to the Grave. My bashfulness, and the
fear of offending you, have hitherto restrained my Tongue from discovering the
inward pain I have endured ever since I first saw you; and though I was always
the most unwilling man alive to displease you, yet was I still as unable to
suppress the Civil broils which Love and Fear raised in my Breast, till at last
the former having quite subdued the later, has brought me (like the poor
harassed Country which has long been the Seat of War) to join with the
Conqueror, because unable to resist him, and so, forced by his Commands, I thus
make use of this happy occasion, to lay open my Wounds and Torments to you, not
despairing of a Cure from your Goodness, or that Distemper which you have been
the cause of. The very irrational Animals teach us this by their example, who
feeling themselves hurt, do by a natural instinct by their complainings
discover it to men, to draw assistance from their pity. These Reasons, Madam,
have made me desirous to hazard your displeasure, to know from your Sentence
whether I must live to serve you, or die to appease your displeasure: And if
your curiosity make you desirous to try the influence which the Rays of your
Divine Beauty have upon my Spirit, approach but with a regard of pity my sad
and afflicted Breast, and you shall see that the Sun does not more gild and
enliven the sad and melancholy Fields with his warmth and light, when parting
from his nocturnal Horizon he returns in the Morning to our Hemisphere, than a
pleasing look from your charming eyes would infuse into my languishing heart.

Donna Leonora, though more invited to laughter than pity by so pleasant and
extravagant a Discourse, yet comporting her self the best she could, and
turning her eyes very modestly on one side, she spoke with a low voice these
words following.

There is no confidence to be put in Men of this Age, for (as we may see by the
late Example of the fair afflicted Lady) their treachery and infidelity does
now seem to be arrived at the last stage of its greatness; so that every Woman
that shows her self favorable to their prayers, and condescends to their
entreaties, finds at once her inconsiderate facility, and great simplicity in
harkening to their deceitful words, rewarded with shame, contempt, and disdain.

O puissant Love (replied Don Sebastian) give me a persuasive spirit, that
authorizing my Allegations with the strongest Oaths, and grandest
Exaggerations, I may leave this fair Incredulous satisfied of the reality of
the torments I suffer for her. No, Fairest, the revolution of the Stars, the
accidents and inconstancy of Fortune, nor all the rigorous cruelty (my Dear
Lady) which you can possibly invent against me, though they be Instruments
violent and strong enough to beat down and ruin the firmest affection, shall
never be able to efface your Merits printed in my heart, nor the lively Image
of your Perfections which Love has there engraven; but contrarily, such
unhappy miscariages will still frame new designs of vanquishing the greatest
impossibilities, till at last (like Hercules, more advantaged by the difficulty
of his undertakings) I thereby win the Palm from all the other Lovers of this
Age.

Donna Leonora hearing these words, was forced to restrain her laughter more
strongly than before, finding it still more earnest to break prison, and would
have answered him again, had she not been restrained by the fear she had of not
being any longer able to act well a part so improper to her Sex: Therefore
knowing that bare Complements would not serve on this occasion, she had
recourse to her Eyes, which are fitter instruments of deceit than the Tongue in
such an affair; since oftentimes a Servant seeing his Mistresses Eyes fixed on
him, or stealing glances at him, does with joy conceive a hope that those Eyes
are the Messengers of Love, which are but the Spies of his Imperfections:
Besides, the Tongue cannot so easily utter choice or pathetick expressions to
the purpose; for the mind being taken up with the thoughts of something that is
most pleasing to it, makes the Tongue unable to belie the Heart, binding it up
from its former liberty, and thereby disabling it from saying what it would:
But the Eyes the mean time are unconcerned in that passion.

Don Sebastian seeing himself so firmly viewed by those Eyes which had before
been Burning-glasses to his Heart, imagined his Love to be already victorious,
and thefore desirous to lay hold on the occasion, stretched out his Arms to
embrace that Body which had the night before been both active and passive in
others far more agreeable. Donna Leonora showing a force and address with
somewhat more than a Female strength, escaped so nimbly from his Arms, that Don
Sebastian's ecstasie of joy almost depriving him of sense, he amorously kissed
and embraced the Air. O bold Lover! (said Donna Leonora) are these the means to
win my favor? No, no, Services and Civilities, courteous entertainments and
generous deportments are the ways whereby Ladies affections are obtained, and
not with such rash and daring attempts as this. But seeing his astonishment,
she continued thus, with a more favorable look; For this time, Seignour Don
Sebastian, I pardon you, on condition you fall no more into the like offense;
and let me entreat you that we may mend our pace, to overtake our Company, lest
my Uncle should suspect something of what is past. As for the rest, leave it to
time, which will convince me (though you be never so subtle) whether your
Discourses proceed from a real love, or a fained affection, or only to give
scope to your Wit, and try the strength of my Judgment.

My death (answered Don Sebastian) shall satisfy you in that immediately, if
you have neither faith, nor pity of one who loves you more than himself. No,
no, fear not dying of this distemper (replied Donna Leonora) for your Physician
will rather try all Experiments which shall be judged necessary for your
recovery. O my dearest hope and life (said Don Sebastian) if you keep your word
I shall account my self the happiest Cavalier in Europe. Content your self for
the present with what I have said (answered Donna Leonora) for I should be as
sorry my rigor should be instrumental to the death of so brave and generous a
Cavalier, and one whose exemplary civility has obliged me, as I should be
unfortunate if my Uncle should know the care I take for his safety: And let
these two Motives oblige us to break off this Conversation for the present.

Don Sebastian, notwithstanding the last words of this Discourse, was so
intranced with joy for the former, and even transported out of himself, to have
received an answer so much better than he could hope for, that had she not
recalled him to himself by twice or thrice speaking to him, he had been
metamorphosed into a Stone, like another Whom Mercury turned into a Stone for
discovering his Theft.
Battus; but recollecting his spirits, after such short acknowledgments as his
sudden ecstasie would allow, they marched more nimbly than before to overtake
their Company, who were staying by the way, and talking with some Coachmen and
Servants whom they supposed to belong to the Lady of the Stars, which indeed
proved to be true, and so was that which they before imagined of her; and one
of those Servants gave them this account. Gentlemen, we are Servants to one of
the greatest Lords of Toledo, by whose command we conducted this strange Lady
(which you saw within the Forest) into that place, which for its pleasure and
divertisements seems to be a Terrestrial Paradise, that she and all her Family
might recreate themselves amongst those pretty Flowers and clear Streams. And
can you not tell me her Name? (said Donna Leonora.) No (said the Coachman) but
I know she is of great Quality, because the King being at Toledo when she
arrived, she waited on him to requite Justice for an Injury that has been done
her by some Grandee of this Kingdom; and it was reported at Court, that his
Majesty had received her very graciously, and had no sooner read a Letter which
the Infanta, Governess of Flanders, had sent him in her behalf, and heard from
her the Particulars of the Cause for which she desired Justice, but he
dispatched away a Party of his Guards to seize upon him she complained of,
though he be very considerable at Court; for the King declared, that Greatness
should be no more exempt from Justice than Poverty; and whatever place they
have near him, that his Favor shall be no bar to his Justice. For her Beauty,
it is beyond compare, and none that have yet seen her but say, they have never
before beheld the like, and that it is almost impossible so much Perfection
should be possessed by one less than immortal.

Here the Coachman ended his Discourse, being interrupted by a young man of
good fashion who stood by, and said, If, Gentlemen, you have a desire to know
this beauteous Stranger, as by your Discourse I judge you have, you may easily
do it if you please to lodge in our House, where, besides your satisfaction in
seeing this Lady, you will find an Inn which, not only in reputation, but in
effect is one of the best in all Castile. In what Quarter of the Town is it?
(said Don Sebastian.) It is (answered the young man) in the middle of the first
Street which you shall come at after you have passed the Cocodober. They all
agreed to go thither; and having dismissed the Coachmen and the other Servants,
they poceeded on their way. They soon got to the Ruins of the Old Castle where
their Coach attended them, whereinto being entered, they quickly arrived at the
City, and passing through the Bridge-gate, went to lodge at the Inn we just now
spoke of, where we will leave them to take up their Quarters, and return to the
Lady we left in the Forest.

CHAP. V.
THe duskishness of the Evening had already begun to gain upon the Light, and
Night begun to unfold her dark Veil to spread over the face of the Earth: The
Gallants begun to return home, satisfied with the Pleasures of the foregoing
Day: The jolly Shepherd with his Whistle begun to summon his Flocks, loaded
with Wool and Flesh, to their Folds; and the Traveller, though wearied with
the Labors of the day, doubled his pace, to avoid securely in his Inn the
incommodities of the night; when this fair Lady of the Stars departed from the
pleasant place where we left her, her Governess having first by her solid
persuasions and sage counsels retired her from the abyss of sorrow into which
she had plunged her self, and after said, It is time for us to return to the
City, and I am of advice, that, for the better variety of Recreation, Dorida
should sing to her Guittar some pleasant and divertising Song, which may make
the way we have to go to the Coach seem shorter. I will do what you please,
Madam, answered Dorida; and to testify my joy to see my Lady so well recovered
of her melancholy humor, I will sing you of the Adventures of a Portuguez
Draper, to whom his Mistress had given an Assignation, which succeeded
unfortunately: And though the words of it are none of the sutablest in the
mouth of a Maid, yet I will venture on it, Madam, if you please to give me
permission. I give it you (replied the Governante) for I partly know the effect
of it. Give me my Guittar (said Dorida) and for once I will make bold with
Modesty. Having taken and tuned it, she played so dexterously on it, that she
struck an admiration into all that heard it: But when she sung, it was hard to
judge whether her Vocal or Instrumental Music were more delightful. The Song
(which was one of the same fame in Spain as those of Robin Hood in England) was
of a Portuguez Draper, who coming to Castile, became enamored of a pretty
young Woman that was lately married to a certain Villager of the Country
called The Mancha; and one day as he was selling her some Cloth, he opened to
her his Cloth and Affection together. She who was as cunning as any of her
Neighbors, seemed to receive it kindly, but immediately told her Husband of
it, who (as crafty as she) ordered her to give him an Assignation to come and
enjoy her, which she failed not to do, nor he to come accordingly. He was no
sooner unclothed, and one foot in the Bed, but the Husband, who was hidden hard
by, accompanied with four or five Friends, entertained him so unhospitably with
horrible blows, that though he was naked, and the Weather cold, he was glad
that he could get alive out of their hands, and so escape home with his Limbs
unbroken, though desparately bruised.

The Verses run pleasantly in Spanish, though without Ryme, without which
neither French nor English ones have any grace; and Dorida sung them so
gracefully, that all the Company was so well pleased with the Bastinadoes of
the Portuguez Draper, that it was a good while before they could give over
laughing; but the Night drawing on, and they being arrived at the place where
the Coach attended them, they were forced to end their divertisements, and
every one to take their places in the Coach; and the Boot being plucked up, the
Coachman drove so speedily, that in less than a quarter of an Hour they got to
the Inn, where Don Sebastian and his Company were before arrived, and after
much inquiry in the House, not able to learn the Name of the Lady of the Stars;
were all retired to their several Beds.

Let us leave them to their Rest, and whilst they sleep, slip back to Viso, to
see what the matter is there; for I have heard such a noise, methinks, there,
within these three days since we left it, that I fear Fortune has been playing
some of her wonted freaks, and changed all their pleasures into sadness; which,
if it be so, you shall know presently in the next Chapter.

The End of the Third Part.
THE AMOROUS TRAVELERS, OR THE Night-Adventures.
PART IV.
CHAP. I.
I Question not but your memory is good enough to retain the Story I told you
of Don Sebastian's Cloak, which he left with Catalina at Viso (on another
account than Joseph did his with his Mistress) as a recompense for the Courtesy
he received of her, or at least to exempt her from the Chastisement her Husband
would have given her, if he had not left it to bear off the Blows. The same day
that Don Sebastian parted from Viso, Roderigo (a man as extremely covetous as
wicked, being far more desirous of a full Purse than a clear Conscience) went
out also toward Sancta Cruz to sell the Cloak; where so soon as he was
arrived, and had given the Innkeeper charge of his things, he went into the
Town to find a Broker of secondhand Clothes, or, to speak more plainly, a worse
Rogue than himself, to help him to a Chapman for his Cloak, or else to buy it
himself. It was not long before he found one of his Acquaintance, to whom
(after the accustomed Complements betwixt Persons of their quality) he told him
in short the cause of his Journey. Get you home to your Inn (said the other)
bring you the subtilest Tailor in the World, who shall in the turning of a hand
so metamorphose and disguise it, that the Owner himself should never know it.
Roderigo well satisfied with the Broker's promise, returned to his Inn, where,
as he was entering, he found himself seized on by two Sergeants, and immediately
after heard the voice of another, of somewhat greater authority than the rest,
which animated them, as the Captain of a Galley does his Slaves, saying, Hold
him fast, my Mates, and take special care he escape not; for according to the
marks given us of him, this is questionless the Thief we seek for.

Roderigo seeing himself taken, and called by his right name, remained so
astonished that he knew not where he was, and being to answer to the
Interrogatories put to him, his fear made him stammer so at every word, that it
made all the bystanders think him guilty. Wherefore bringing him to his
Chamber, whither presently all the Sergeants and Algnazils of the Town entered,
partly to aid their Companions if need were, and partly to steal all they could
conveniently lay hands on; they presently stripped poor Roderigo to his Shirt,
and searched him from Head to Foot, to see if they could find any thing of that
which had been stolen; but seeing that all their diligence was in vain, not
having found about him above fifteen or twenty Reals, of which the Commissary
made himself Master, they went presently to seize on a Bundle, which by chance
they espied at the corner of the Chamber, and opening it, they found there Don
Sebastian's Cloak. I Will lose my Head, said the Commissary, if this be not a
Highway-man; his very looks, and this Cloak, which without question he has
tobb'd some body of in these Mountains, betray him. Use me civilly, Master
Commissaty, (said Roderigo, now somewhat better encouraged) for I take Heaven
to witness, that if you search from the one Pole to the other, you shall not
find an honester man than my self (God bless the King) nor one that makes more
profession of Honor: And thank God that these Poultrons hold my hands, for if
I were at liberty, I swear by the Etenal -- that I would -- O impudent Thief!
(said the Commiffary, giving him three or four smart blows over the Pate with a
Cudgel) do thou speak thus boldly to Justice it self? I assure thee, that if
thou bridle not thy Tongue better, I will send thee to the Gallows immediately.
I hope God will not give thee the power (said the Prisoner) but I beseech him
to let me live (as I hope I shall) to see thee and thy damned Companions
stretched upon the Wheel.

These words put the Commissary and his Mates in such a rage, that for all the
Host cried out on them to let him go, and he would answer for his forthcoming;
and although he that had been robbed, being there, cried out, Let him go, Sirs;
for he that you torment so cruelly is not the man that robbed me; for all this
these enraged Officers (having the Law in one hand and Cudgel in the other)
followed on their merciless strokes, and beat him like Mortar, and after
dragged him to prison, all bruised and battered as he was, without giving leave
to the Clerk to write his Examination, or draw his Process. The Host being
Friend to Roderigo, sent presently away to advertise his Uncle of his
misfortune, who no sooner heard it, but he came presently to Sancta Cruz, which
was but two Leagues from Viso. Being arrived, he solicited the business so
diligently, giving ample testimonies of his Nephew's honesty, that those,
joined with some Money which he disbursed, fetched him out of Prison in two
days, with the reputation of one of the honestest men in Spain.

Having dispatched this unlucky Affair, they both returned to Viso, carrying
the Cloak along with them, which had cost them as much as it did Don Sebastian
when he bought it new. By the way Ozmin (for so was Roderigo's Uncle called)
asked his Nephew whence he had this Cloak which had cost them so much money and
trouble. Roderigo was ashamed to answer him; but seeing him persist in and
continue his demands, and thinking the business would come out first or last,
answered him, I acknowledge, Uncle, that my Wise and I have done you wrong in
this concealment. I understand thee not (replied Ozmin.) The truth is (said
Roderigo) my Wife got this Cloak from one that belonged to the Cavalier that
lay at your House in my absence. I remember no such thing (said Ozmin) for I
know not that there has been a Cloak lost in my House this two years; and if
there were, I am not so old but my memory is good enough to remember it. At
this rate there must be some Mystery hid in this Cloak (said Roderigo, not
imagining the loss of his Honor, or his Wifes Chastity) for why should my Wife
tell me so, if it were not true? I know not what mystery there should be (said
Ozmin) but this I am sure of, that (thanks be to God) there has been no Cloak
lost in my House this two year; for if there had, it would have been asked for:
Therefore either thy Wife deceives thee (if this be true thou tellest me) or
else thou have stole it somewhere else, and would do so me. I am better
assured of my innocence in this business (said Roderigo) than of what I should
say to it: But if you please, Uncle, to be but patient till we get home, I will
either know the meaning of it, or cease to be Roderigo. We shall know that anon
(said Ozmin) and I wish I prove a false Prophet. These Discourses, and others
they used by the way about the Money they had disbursed, lasted them to Viso,
where being entered their House, the first thing they did, Ozmin called for his
Niece, and the Boy, and Maid, and taking the Cloak out of a Bag, Which of you
(said he) knows of any one of those that lodged here lately that has lost this
Cloak? Which of them do you mean? (said the Boy.) Of those that lodged here
whilst Roderigo was in the Country, said Ozmin. Do you mean him (said the Boy)
that had a Coat of Tawney-colour'd Cloth embroiderd with Gold? The very same,
said Ozmin. It cannot be (said the Boy) for none of them enquired for any. Look
you now (said Ozmin, turning the Cloak, and viewing his Nephew) did I not say
as much? He was going to answer, but was interrupted by the Boy (who therein
was even with his Mistress for his former unjust cudgelling) who said very
confidently, Sir, this Cloak belongs to none of the Cavaliers you speak of, but
to the Cavalier who lay here with his Wife the same night that your Nephew
Roderigo came home from the Country. Ambrose is in the right (said the Maid) I
know the Cloak by the Lace and the Lining, for Don Sebastian gave it me to keep
when he came in, and it was in my Master's Chamber till his Page fetched it
away. That Is very true (said Ozmin) for going for my own, I found it there.
Catalina seeing her self convinced by so many Witnesses, and tormented by
remorse of Conscience, said no more than if she had been a Marble Statue,
knowing that all her feminine craft and subtilty could neither remedy so far
gone a mischief, nor contradict so apparent a verity. The name of Don Sebastian
infused suspicion into the head of Roderigo, and that made him call to mind,
that the day after his arrival his Wife had her eyes continually fixed upon
him: And seeing that her very looks discovered her, as well as the testimonies
of the Servants, he concluded that the Cloak was an infallible proof of her
Adultery: Wherefore taking her by the hand, and leading her into her Uncles
Chamber, he spoke thus to his Uncle. I must now speak a word or two to this
impudent Woman, to have of her an entire relation of this Affair; and I firmly
swear by etc. That if she confess not the truth freely, I will be her
Executioner my self, and hang her at the Chamber-window. So having shut the
Chamber Door, he begun to recount her subtilties to her Uncle, and the crafts
and inventions she had used to get Don Sebastian conveyed out of the Chamber
(for he was confident they were used to that end.) The poor Catalina did
nothing the while but weep, seeing her self more than sufficiently convicted:
But her Husband more nearly touched with the loss of his Honor than the sorrow
of his Wife, transported with choler, took a Cord which he found under a Bed in
the Chamber, and spoke to her as follows: If thou desire a longer time to
live and repent thy sins, it is in thy power, if (leaving the custom of common
Offenders, who by impudently denying their offenses follishly think to conceal
that which is apparent to all the World) thou tellest me freely, and without
constraint, the naked truth of what I shall demand: if so, I swear and promise
thee faithfully to pardon this fault, upon condition that thou never commit
such another; otherwise thou shall know by the cruel torments which I have
prepared for thee (showing her the Cord) that death were a thousand times more
desirable for thee than life. The poor afflicted Catalina, melting her self in
tears, begun to look upon her Husband with a countenance so sad and pitiful,
that (had she been guilty of the greatest crime) it had moved compassion in the
cruellest Cannibal or most barbarous Scythian; and after a while, her sorrow
gave her leave to utter these words.

What would you have me say? wretched and unfortunate that I am! since my
words, though never so composed, will be equally fatal with my silence: But
since my Offense has brought me to so extreme a misery, that which way soever I
turn me, I see none but terrible and frightful spectacles, which represent
nothing but death, and that with the gratest horror, let death come then when
it will, it cannot but be very acceptable, since it will put an end to all my
sufferings: Kill then, Roderigo, O kill thy unfortunate Wife, since she has
violated that Faith and Promise she made to thee, and which even the most
barbarous of Women are bound to observe: Let me die then, since I have deserved
it, and revenge with thy own hand the injury I have done to thee only. I
confess I have made use of so much impudence in committing adultery with Don
Sebastian, that I have now none left to deny it; or if I should, there are
witnesses enough, besides my own Conscience, to contradict me; even this very
Cloak, if it could speak, would testify against me, and discover my guilt.

This penitent sinner here ended her Discourse, and her tongue remaining fixed
to the roof of her mouth, and her courage failing her with her strength, she
sunk down in a swoon upon the floor. Her Husband thereupon ran to her to
Poniard her, and had undoubtedly done it if his Uncle had not detained him, who
afflicted with this accident, and touched with compassion at the sighs and
tears of his unhappy Niece, staid his Nephews hand, and said, Moderate a little
thy passion, my dear Nephew, and give not such scope to thy choler; let her
live, that is the greatest vengeance thou can take of her, since the
apprehension of death is a thousand times more afflictive to a Criminal than
death it self: Be patient, there is remedy for all, and consider the best way
to salve thy Honor. I find my self in this almost as much offended as thy
self, and therefore beg of thee that we may no further publish our disgrace,
because yet none knows it besides our selves. And think not light of this
advice, since there are many that if they thought their affronts and disgraces
were secret, and unknown to others, would be so far from thus resenting such a
private injury, that they would rather endeavor to get what money they could
of the Agressor to keep it so still. Then bridle thy choler, and sheath thy
Poniard, and beware of doing that in haste which thou will have time enough to
repent. That we may therefore consider of what we have to do, come along with
me, and let us leave this wicked Woman to her tears and lamentations, whilst we
study a chastizement worthy of her offense. With these Reasons and some other
he got him out of the Chamber, and locked the door after him, and brought his
Nephew to a Closet, where taking a Bag out of a Coffer, wherein there might be
about six hundred Reals, he spoke as follows.

I know that the wisest man in the World would find a hard task of it, to
resist his just resentments of such an accident; but far harder to pardon his
Wife for it: and much more thou, who art naturally of so impatient and
choleric a temper. I love you both as my own Children, having intended you for
my Heirs, and as such I would use and entertain you; but seeing that from this
Affair one can expect nothing but some unhappy sinistre accident which might
hazard the loss of you both, if I endeavor not to prevent it by the removal of
one, I have to this purpose invented a remedy, which my long experience in the
World has brought into my mind, which is this, that thou take this money, and a
Horse which I shall give thee (for I can imagine no other cure more proper for
the present distemper) and go serve the King for some time in some of his
Armies, and I assure my self that time will make thee forget what is past,
chiefly when at thy return thou shall find thy Wife more humble, more
tractable, and more diligent to please thee than before; for Women in her
condition find themselves commonly so confused and ashamed, that never after
they dare speak but with great respect, and moreover study nothing but to obey,
knowing that their fault has made them forfeit their privilege of Domestic
Command. These were Ozmin's persuasions to his Nephew.

Roderigo, who was of himself a jolly Fellow, young and hardy, having before
his Marriage made diverse Voyages into France, Italy, Germany, and the Indies,
and understood that kind of life as well as another, gave an attentive ear to
his Uncle; and remembering himself of the time past, and his old Camerades, he
thought he might now with Money in his Purse appear better amongst them, and
find more pleasure in a Military life, than when his indigency forced him to
expose himself to a thousand dangers to get a living. He therefore took the six
hundred Reals, and three hundred more which he accepted of in stead of a Horse,
choosing rather to march on foot with them, than on Horseback without them, and
set out the same day, without taking leave of his Wife, and bent his Course
toward the Mancha; where we will leave him to his Journey, because the
cheerful voices of pretty Birds tell us that the Morning approaches, and that
therefore we are expected by the Cavaliers and Ladies which we left in Bed at
Toledo, when we returned from thence to Viso, to take an Account and make you a
Relation of what is passed: And I am afraid they are by this angry at me for
engaging my Pen so long in so mean and pitiful a Subject, which was before
busied with others of as great concern as any that can be imagined in matters
of Love.

CHAP. II.
THe Clock had scarce struck Eight, when all our Company that came from the Inn
of Carcuela were risen, except Don Carlos and Don Sebastian, the torment of
whose amorous thoughts having kept them waking all night, made them glad to
make amends in the morning. Don Carlos awaked first, and calling to mind his
good fortune the night before at the Carcuela, he esteemed himself the happiest
man alive, and praised Don Sancho a thousand times for his subtle invention,
whereby he had had the enjoyment of his Mistress. The contentments he had
already received, made him far more earnest after others, and made him far more
desirous than before of another nights enjoyment: But seeing the grand
difficulties, or rather the absolute impossibilities which obstructed it, as
well for the difficulty of continuing his Disguise much longer, as also in
regard that the Inns betwixt Toledo and Madrid, being the best in Spain, would
never admit of such another device as that of the Carcuela; this consideration
put him into such an inquietude, and afflicted him in such manner, as none is
able to judge of but such as have felt the like; particularly, when he
considered the delicious pleasures he had enjoyed in her Arms, when his eyes
beheld her with such infinite delight, and his lips sucked such ravishing
Ambrosia from hers: It was then, I say, when the past joys coming so freshly
into his mind, touched him with such piercing smarts, and irresistible
passions, that they reduced him to such a condition, that sometimes he remained
without motion like a dead man, and sometimes with such strange and extravagant
actions, as if he had been quite besides himself; the poor Cavalier giving
sufficient testimony, by such irregular motions, that he was in the height of
his distemper, and suffered as great a torment as one in the highest fit and
most violent excess of a Fever, being without hope that Don Sancho should give
a second help to his pain, which thought made him so weary of this World, that
he was almost ready to send himself by a violent death into the other.

The same morning, after all were up except Donna Leonora who pretended to be
indisposed, Don Sancho led out Don Sebastian to walk and take the Air in a
great Gallery of the House which looked toward the Corodober, thereby to give
time to Donna Margareta to visit Donna Leonora, that the two Lovers might have
time to content their desires. Donna Margareta, that she might not let slip so
fair an occasion, as soon as she saw her Husband go with Don Sancho to the
Gallery, went straight to Donna Leonora's Chamber, where they easily found
occasions to dismiss their Attendants: What they did there, is fitter for you
to imagine than me to recite; I shall only say, that if Don Sebastian (whose
impatiency not suffering him to stay long in any place, had made him with
Prayers to force Don Sancho to return to Donna Leonora's Chamber to visit her)
if he, I say, had deferred his coming but a little longer, he had undoubtedly
caught our two Lovers in the fact; for just as they opened the door, they were
shuffling the Cards to deal about for another Game: But for all their goods the
Fates had ordered it otherwise.

Don Sebastian being entered, took a Seat and sat down by Donna Leonora's
Bedside, and asked how she did. Donna Leonora for the present counterfeiting
somewhat a weaker voice than ordinary, endeavoring by her carriage to show all
the sweets that Nature had endowed her with, told him with two or three deep
sighs (Don Sancho and Donna Margareta having left the Room) that the love she
bore him had reduced her to that condition, that unless his compassion and
invention did join to give a remedy to her malady, her life would assuredly be
in extreme danger; assuring him, that all that night she had not closed her
eyes, and that her Spirit had not allowed any repose to her Body, whilst she
remembered their sweet Entertainments and agreeable Discourses they had had the
day before by the way.

It is not questionable whether Don Sebastian were not overjoyed at this
charming Language, not suspecting the Serpent that lay hid under those sweet
Flowers; but even ravished with content to see all things so favorable to his
designs, he was going to make a long Narrative of the immeasurable love he bore
her: but Donna Leonora's Servants interrupted him, and for this time hindered
him by their entrance from employing his Rhetoric to so bad purpose.

So soon as Don Sebastian had left the Room, and Don Carlos saw himself alone
with Don Sancho, having dismissed all the Servants, he bid him sit down by the
Bedside, and begun this Discourse. My dear Sancho, if ever Master were obliged
to his Servant for the kindness he had done him, I am confident my obligations
to thee are greater than ever any have been before; and I question whether if I
should make thee Master of all I have, I should ever be able to recompense thee
for the grand Obligations in which thy Services have bound me: Assure thy self
that time shall make good what I say, and if Heaven spare my life, this
deceitful Age, amongst all her ingratitudes, shall not be able to produce one
so worthy of blame, as my gratitude to thee shall be of praise. If I have not
hitherto made appear to thee in deeds an effect answerable to the generosity of
my words, thou know the cause so well, that it is needless for me to employ
more time in informing thee better.

This I intended to speak (my dear Friend) that I might discover to thee the
infinite affection I bear thee, as also to encourage thee in thy designs, and
to pray thee as earnestly as I am able, to continue what thou have so happily
begun, because in all Enterprises if the end prove not answerable to the
beginning, the undertaker loses not only the glory of what he has already
done, but also runs a hazard of having his Reputation spoiled by the mockeries
of those that understand it. I do not mean, my dear Friend, (continued Don
Carlos, embracing him) that thou have not brought this Affair dexterously to
the point I desired and thou promisedst, making me enjoy that which I most
desired in the World; but to tell thee more freely, and setting aside all
circumlocutions, I would desire thee to set thy hand once more to this Affair,
and with thy wonted subtilty and address oblige me once more in what I shall
say to thee; for not only I, and all I possess, but even Posterity, through
the Reputation thou will acquire, will recompense thee with Immortality amongst
those of the most refined Wits.

Don Sancho seeing him speak to him with such grand civility, answered him the
most discreetly he could possibly: But Don Carlos hurried on by the excess of
his passion, had not the patience to let him finish his Discourse, but
interrupting him, begun again as follows. The torment that my soul endures,
to see me constrained to separate from my dear Mistress without any appearance
of a possibility of another single enjoyment, swells my sufferings too big to
be allayed by any thing but death, which will undoubtedly ensue, if thy wit and
industry do not once more bring me to a nights enjoyment of her.

That which you desire, Sir, (replied Don Sancho) is not so great a difficulty,
but that I could heartily wish that satiating your desires were no bigger, and
that your passion would end so soon as my invention could satisfy it in this:
But, Sir, to what purpose serves it, if my new Tasks still increase as fast I
finish the old ones; and if in stead of being content with the often enjoying
of what you desired, you continue in such a disposition, that you are still
ready to begin again, and to play the same Person so often, that at last I fear
yo^ (...) will grow stale, and your imposture (...) ^scovered, and at last
change into some (...) disaster? I swear to thee upon the faith of a Gentleman
(said Don Carlos) that to morrow I will take leave of them, if I can content my
desire but this one night; and find but thou an invention for the later, and I
engage to make a pretext for the former. Furthermore, thou see we are near
the Court, and in one of the chief Cities of the Kingdom: All these things
considered, oblige me to part hence; for if I should stay longer, I shall be
sure to be known, which I would not be for all I esteem in the whole World.
Upon this promise (said Don Sancho) I engage to make you lie together this
night; and this is the means I shall prescribe: Don Sebastian her Husband is
passionately in love with you, and enjoys no other light but that of your eyes,
believing you to be of another Sex: It is therefore necessary, for the happy
success of our Plot, that you show him the best countenance imaginable, and
make him believe that your Flame equals his. I have done that this morning
(said Don Carlos) to satisfy his passion the best I could, knowing we shall
not be long together, and that I have not long to humor his vain importunity.
So much the better, (replied Don Sancho) it is convenient to follow on your
blow, and finally conclude, that if he come to you this night, he shall find
the Door open, conditionally it be done as silently as may be, without so much
as a word, lest I should hear, who you shall make him believe do lie in the
same Chamber with you. And as those that love ardently do always willingly make
themselves believe what they desire, so he will make little difficulty to
believe all you shall say. And further, I persuade my self, that if thousands
of obstacles should obstruct his design, the imagination of the intended
pleasure would make him resolve to hazard as many lives, if he had them, to
accomplish his designs. This done, I will treat with a Servant-maid in the
House, who is a good lusty wench, and whom I find to be as tractable as I can
desire for my design, and she I am sure will not refuse that to a Cavalier,
which she is free enough of to others of meaner rank; so that a little Money,
and less Courtship, will easily work upon her good nature. I will therefore
give her Money to buy a pure Holland Smock and fine Night-dressing, with some
rich Perfumes to sweeten her Locks, and other parts, and take away the smell of
the Kitchen. The appointment shall be half an hour after Ten in the Evening;
and I will order her to be as silent as you shall desire Don Sebastian to be:
and when you judge the hour to approach, it will be necessary you leave the
Chamber to go to your Pages, who for that purpose shall be ordered to leave
open the Door, for fear of making a noise; and in the mean time I will keep my
Bed, and expect my Damsel, with whom, being come, I will stay a little while,
and then rise, and pretend my self very ill at the Stomach with a sudden qualm,
and tell her very low, that I would desire her patience a very little while,
and I will return to her immediately; and so I will come to you into the Pages
Chamber. But first it will be necessary you tell him, that for some reason,
which you may easily invent, you and I have changed Beds, that so entering into
the Chamber, he may turn to the left, and not to the right, and so he will come
directly to my Bed, where he will find this fair Lady of the Kitchen, with whom
let him pass the night as contentedly as he can; but in the darkness and
secrecy that will then be, assure your self he will find all Cats gray: And in
the mean time, Sir, without pains or danger, you may arrive safely at his Wifes
Chamber; where having brought you by this device, I think I may then leave you
to your self for the rest. This being finished, I think it may be easy to add
three or four more Acts to the Play, if you think it worth the Candle. Which
being done, we may easily disengage our selves of their company, and return
speedily home; for I am afraid my Lady, your Mother, will be in great care for
you, hearing nothing of you, and will have just cause to complain of our
Proceedings, if we add not another invention to our former, to excuse our
selves of so grand an absurdity, of staying so long from her without writing to
her: But as for that, let it be my care, and rely upon me, that I have not yet
so exhausted my Inventions, but I shall have one left for that purpose to bring
us handsomely off. Here Don Sancho ended his Discourse, and Don Carlos remained
as satisfied as the Soldier, who the same day of his showing his Certificate of
the Services he has done on several occasions, receives the full recompense of
his Services, and the accomplishment of his desires; or like a sick person, who
by a violent Fever being brought to despair of Life, sees the fury of it abated
on a sudden, and himself able to walk without any pain about the Chamber. This
resolution being taken, Don Carlos acquainted Donna Margareta with it, whose
inclinations led her to approve well of it, and dispense with her Husbands
having a new Bedfellow, being so well satisfied with her own. Finally, they
studied their Parts so well, that before the Sun had finished his Carriere,
they were all ready for the Stage.

The End of the Fourth Part.
THE AMOROUS TRAVELERS, OR THE Night-Adventures.
PART V.
CHAP. I.
THe half hour past Ten at Night was scarce come, when our mercenary Damsel
(desirous to know whether the Embraces of a Cavalier or those of his Servants
were more pleasing, having often tasted of the one, but seldom of the other)
left her own Chamber for Don Sancho's, more trimmed and perfumed than a
Country Bride; or like an old Woman, who, careful to supply the defects of Age
with the industry of her Hands, so washes, paints, and polishes her face, that
the defaults of Nature being rectified by the supplements of Art, of a wrinkled
deformed Megara, she becomes a plump and beauteous Helena. Being come to the
Chamber Door, she opened it silently, (it being for that purpose left unlatch'd
by Don Sancho) and, being entered, she shut it as it was before, and presently
she found the Bed, it not being the first time she had made such Visits; and
could it have been darker than it was, she could easily have done it, being
daily so well acquainted with the Chamber. Being in the Bed, I cannot say, not
is it material to the Story, whether the scent of her Perfumes and clean Linen,
overcoming that of her Sweat, might work any effects upon Don Sancho's
Concupiscence, she having spread her Perfumes (and not without reason) over
most parts of her Body; or whether (like the Beggar that would deceive his
Stomach and Senses, by eating his Bread in the smoke of Flesh-meat) he might
fancy that this were some beauteous Lady, and compare her Eyes to Stars (or
more properly to those of an Owl) brightest in the dark, and in that
imagination break his intentions, which were only to stalk under her Belly to
another design: However he passed this quarter of an hour I know not; but this
I know, that her attractions were not strong enough to keep him beyond it: for,
suitable to his design, feigning a qualm, he left her at the quarter of an hours
end, and went as softly as he could possibly to his Master in the Pages
Chamber, where we will leave them jesting and laughing at what was past, and
earnestly expecting what was to come, and Don Carlos only staying for the hour
of Assignation, and return to Don Sebastian, who also expected his.

Don Sebastian, I say, who had thought every minute a year hitherto, till the
time came in which he hoped for the full fruition of his dear Leonora, in the
midst of his tedious expectatation of the Clocks striking Eleven, fell into a
profound sleep; but whether proceeding from the bare effects of drowsiness, and
the ascent of moist Vapors from the Stomach to the Brain, or by a more
immediate influence from Heaven, which perhaps moved by mercy to his spiritual
welfare, as once it was to Adam's temporal, used the same means to a contrary
end from that which Adam's was designed for, that being in order to his
enjoying a Woman, and this to prevent it in Don Sebastian: Which of these to
attribute it to I know not; but this chief cause of his sleep, working by the
other of drowsiness, I am the more inclined to favor, when I consider the
effect of it, which was this.

Being newly fallen into a sound sleep, he fancied in a Dream that the Clock
struck eleven, (the appointed hour) and he burning with desire of the fruition
of his Mistress, leaped out of the Bed as hastily as the little noise he durst
make would permit, and being got into the middle of a great Gallery, into which
most of the Chambers of the House opened, he thought he saw a terrible
Apparition approach him, at the sight of which he was seized with such horror,
that his Hairs stood upright upon his Head; and desiring to return to his
Chamber the same way he went out, he saw it appear again on that side him.
Brutus or Dion were not more affrighted when they saw, the one in his Tent, the
other in his Gallery, those Phantomes which Plutarch speaks of, than Don
Sebastian then really was, though effectually but in a Dream; and turning his
Head on that side again where he had seen it first, he saw near him a Figure
wrapped in a white Sheet, the Visage only appearing, which made him lay hold
on his Sword, with his Back against the Wall, and putting himself into a
posture of defense against this airy Enemy, which made straight to him, he
fancied that by the glimmering light of a Lamp which hung near him, and thereby
made the sight more dismal, that it was the Shadow of his Father lately
deceased, whom, after having with deep groans twice or thrice pronounced the
word Alas! with a most pitiful accent, and a pale and ghastly visage, he
thought he heard pronounce these words.

Whether go thou, wicked and debauched young man? Alas! unhappy that thou
art, turn thy eyes inwards, and consider that thou live not like a Christian,
but quite contrary, like a vile and impious Libertine, daily crucifying by thy
sins him whom thou professest to adore, and from whom thou hold thy being
and subsistence, who (notwithstanding thy obstinacy and hardness of heart) has
hitherto spared thee in order to repentance. Consider how thou losest thy Soul,
in indulging thy Body and sensual Appetites, daily striving to outwade
Sardanapalus in the stinking Puddle of beastly Lusts, amongst unchaste Women,
to be by them fitted for a Sacrifice to eternal Flames: If thou did but
consider the terror of those Flames that there attend thee, thou would not
a minute longer continue in this vile and detestable course of life, but for
ever abandoning these execrable Megera's, which have always reduced to extreme
misery, and conducted to a deplorable end, those that have prodigally consumed
and unhappily lavished away with them their time and substance, and rendered
themselves Slaves to them and their brutish passions; thou would then, I
say, change thy way of living, being as thou art a reasonable Creature, and
professing Christianity, thy aim should be truly Christian, to attain one day
to Celestial Beatitude. Finally, forthwith examine thy Conscience, bewail thy
sins like another penitent Magdalene, and delay not to reconcile thy self with
God; for thou know not how short a time of life he has allotted thee. And
without more word it vanished.

These words, though seemingly spoken in a Vision, wrought a stronger effect
upon him than the ordinary ones of a troubled Fancy; for wakening, he found
himself bathed in sweat with the apprehension of what had passed, which so
tormented him, that he forthwith wept most bitterly. His Wife the while, whose
expectations had kept her waking, admired at his unwonted emotions in sleep,
and his tears when waking; but saying nothing, expected still that he, thinking
her asleep, should go and leave room for her Lover: but he, whose mind was
fixed on better things, joining his hands, and fixing his eyes toward Heaven,
spent the best part of the remaining night in such fervent and hearty penitence
and Prayers, that his Wife lying awake and hearing him, it struck such a holy
sentiment into her soul, that she made a firm Vow to imitate her Husband, as
she had done before in wantonness, so now in a firm and through repentance;
with which good resolution let us leave them expecting to disburthen their
Souls to their Confessors, to return to Don Carlos, whose Head was filled with
worser thoughts.

Don Carlos thinking that (the Clock having struck Eleven) Don Sebastian was by
this time at the place appointed, went to the Door of Donna Margareta's
Chamber, but finding it shut, he was forced to return, imagining that Don
Sebastian was not yet come out: He came again an hour after, but found it as
before, which made him think that either some indisposition or sinister
accident kept Don Sebastian confined to his Chamber; wherefore almost
despairing of success this night, he went to sleep upon one of the Pages Beds:
But his other Affair still running in his head, he arose and went four or five
times more, still finding the Door shut as formerly: So quite giving over his
design, he betook him to his rest. The Damsel of the Kitchen having also
attended the return of Don Sancho three hours or more, and seeing he came not,
she rose and returned to her Chamber, thinking he had but mocked her.

CHAP. II.
THe Clork had scarce struck six, when our penitent Don Sebastian went to
Confession to the Fathers Teutins, where kneeling before a learned and holy
Father, he wept, and confessed his sins, with a sincere and hearty repentance.
Having heard Mass in the same Church, and finished his Devotions, he came forth
to return home, yet intending first to visit the other Churches, and to begin
at the great one; but passing into a Lane that comes into the Street called L'
Alcana, or The Mercers Street, he met a Man, who no sooner saw and knew him,
but stepped to him, and gave him a stab with a Poniard near the left Pap,
speaking these words so loud that most of the Street heard him, Die thou
Traitor, that have robbed me of my Honor; and leaving the Poniard sticking in
his Breast, he fled to the Church.

All that saw this ran to him (as the custom is) and carried the wounded man to
the next house: There one looked at him, another wept, one asked how it came,
one ran for a Surgeon, another for Balsom; another, more wise than the rest,
stopped the Blood by Charming; a thing permitted by the Spanish Inquisition, by
reason of the great profit that comes by those holy Words: And this, I say, is
no foppery; for I my self have seen diverse Persons abandoned for irrecoverable
by the Surgeons, which one of these Charmers by Prayers and Orisons
completely healed in less than eight days. But all their Charms and holy Words
availed little for Don Sebastian, for it was God's will he should die of that
Wound, as we shall see by and by.

The mean time there was so confused a noise and rumor about the Church, as if
a great Army had been storming a Town, which was valiantly maintained by the
Defendants: At last one might perceive that all this Hubbub proceeded from the
Commissaries, and a Troop of Alguazils who accompanied them, to lend their
assistance to take the Murderer forcibly out of the Church, the Priests, and
many People that assisted them, protecting him; but notwithstanding their
resistance, they entered the Church forcibly, and seized the Murderer: but
being upon the point of carrying him off, the Priests, seeing the Privilege of
the Church broken, took heart again, and, assisted by the People, took him
away, and brought him into the Church again. The Officers on one side cried Aid
for the King; the Priests on the other side, Succor for the Church: The People
flocked in on both sides, which so augmented the bruit and clamor, that it
almost seemed to equal that of the Sack of Constantinople: But at length the
Officers Party proving too strong for the other, carried him forcibly away, and
in spite of the Priests hurried him to Prison. Upon this Combustion arrived the
Governor of the Town, who seeing the Criminal was secured in the Gaol, made
the wounded man be carried to his Inn, sutably to his quality.

I will not trouble you with a Relation of Donna Margareta's tears and
lamentations, nor those of his Friends and Relations, at the News of it: I will
only tell you, that having laid him on a Bed in a low Room, all the People in
the House came to see him.

The Lady of the Stars, of whom we have not spoken this long time, had never
been out of her Chamber since she came from the Forest; but hearing of this
Tragical Accident of Don Sebastian, she ran to his Chamber, where she found all
in tears and lamentations; and approaching to the Bed where the poor Don
Sebastian lay bathed in Blood, but with a cheerful Countenance, more like a
sound man than a dying one, and comforted his Wife in this manner, (who in the
mean time pittiless of her self, tore her Hair, and lamentably bruised her
Breast and Face) What do thou do, my dearest Wife? Is this the comfort thou
give thy dying Husband, to add a Wound to his Spirit, far worse than that of
his Body: Alas! every Hair thou tearest from thy Head pulls my very Soul from
my Body. Cease thy tears, my Dear, if thou love me; for if thou knew the
state I am in, in stead of thus afflicting and tormenting thy self, thou
would behold me with a cheerful look, and think me so much more happy than I
seem miserable, as celestial happiness exceeds that which is earthly; for,
blessed be God, I have this morning received Absolution for all my sins, and
want nothing now but the last sacred Viaticum, which I beg of thee as the last
Office thou can do to me, by sending for the next Priest that can be had, for
I cannot long expect his coming.

At these last words the Lady of the Stars approached to the Bed, trembling
like one in an Ague-fit, and considering the wounded Person more attentively
than before, she dropped down at his Feet, saying, Alas, my dearest Cousin, to
what point have my misfortunes driven me! This was all she could say, because
she immediately fell into a Swoon. The bystanders ran to her, and taking her
up, carried her to her Chamber. The mean time the Priest was sent for to Don
Sebastian, and having excluded the Company all but Donna Margareta, did the
last Offices to him due to a dying man, which he received with great
cheerfulness, and presently his strength decaying, being unable to speak a word
more besides his last Farewell to his Wife, and recommendation of his Soul to
its Creator, gently breathed it out into his Arms.

I know not how to express to you Donna Margareta's sorrows and despairs, which
are as much too great for me to discover, as they were for her to endure; so
great, that they rendered her so deplorably disconsolate, that all that saw it
feared she could not long survive her Husband. Let us leave her to her tears,
(since our first movements are too violent for our selves to stop, much less
for others) to return to the Kinswoman of the Deceased, who returning from her
Swoon wept so bitterly, and lamented with such pitteous accents, that they drew
tears from the eyes of all the beholders. This while her Governess, who was
gone to Mass to a Chapel near the Inn, met by the way with Don Carlos and Don
Sancho, and knew them both, for all the Disguise of the one. They all staid at
Mass tgether, without knowing of Don Sebastian's mishap. Don Carlos and Don
Sancho, after the Mass ended, hearing of the Accident, hasted to the Inn. The
Governess of the Lady of the Stars, after she had known them, never lost sight
of them, but carefully dogged them to the Inn, and went straight to her Ladies
Chamber with the News, but was there much astonished to find her in that
condition, and asked the cause, and how this Accident happened; many being
present, and particularly the Governor, who had never left the Chamber from
the time that she was brought thither in a Swoon: for, as I have said, and now
tell you again to refresh your memory, the Governor had made Don Sebastian be
brought into the Inn, to know who and whence he was, and those of his Company;
but the Beauty of this Lady detained him all this while by her Beds side, to
see what would be the issue of so many misfortunes. The Governess having
satisfied her curiosity, came and whispered her Lady in the Ear, and told her
as low as she could the Adventure she had met with in the Church. This News so
comforted her, that she remained almost senseless with an excess of joy for so
unexpected an happiness; but at length rallying her spirits, which had been
almost as much dissipated by this joy as the former sorrow, and fearing lest
delay might ruin an Affair of so grand importance, she asked for the
Governor, whom she remembered she had seen in the Chamber a little while
before, and he, being not far off, came presently to her. After some few
Discourses, the Governor commanded two or three of his Guard to charge the
Host to see that none should part out of his House, and to take into custody
all the Servants of Donna Leonora, and of the deceased Don Sebastian, and so
made all avoid the Room but two Women, himself, and the Lady of the Stars; who
seeing her self thus private with him, began this Discourse.

I would willingly, Sir, excuse my self from making you a Narrative of things
so little suitable to one of my Quality; but I know no other remedy but to lay
open my Malady to you, in whose hands lies the power of healing it: On you
only depends my hope, my repose, and contentment. Give me, if you please, Sir,
one moments audience, and having learned by the relation of my Life the Chance
that brought me hither, you will have just cause to call it deplorably unhappy.

The Governor desirous to know whither these Prayers and Supplications tended,
promised her his best favor and assistance, and, if need were, to employ all
his Friends to that purpose. Upon this promise (said the Lady of the Stars) I
trust in the Divine Bounty that all things will succeed happily with me: And
having staid a while to take breath, she broke silence as follows.

CHAP. III.
UBeda, one of the principal Towns of Andaluzia, is the Place of my Nativity;
my Name, Hortensia: This wounded Cavalier that you see brought in here is my
Cousin, his Father and mine being own Brothers. I had not attained the second
year of my age when my Father went into Flanders, to command a Regiment of
Horse under Ferdinand de Toledo Duke of Alva, with whom he acquired such
reputation, by the signal Testimonies of his Valor and Courage, that the Duke
for recompense of his Services made him Camp-Master-General. But as the best
Fortune in the World is mixed with bad, Fortune, that never leaves any one long
in the same state, was pleased to afflict my Father, by taking out of the World
her who had brought me into it, mixing this mishap with the happiness he
enjoyed in his new Charge. I had attained the tenth year of my life then when
my Mother finished hers; so that the smalness of my age made me incapable of
considering the greatness of my loss.

The renown of my Beauty, which became an object of admiration to all
beholders, being spread about on all sides, my Father, as a sage and advised
man, judged that so rich a Treasure would be unable to guard it self, without
the assistance of a Person able and fit for the protecting and educating a
Daughter of so Illustrious a House; and therefore unwilling to trust me to any
others Conduct but his own, he took me out of the House of his Brother, who was
Father to this murdered Cavalier, and carried me with him into Flanders, and
there presented me to the most Serene Infanta, our Kings Sister, and Wife of
the Archduke Albert.

In this House I was cherished and beloved of all, especially of the Infanta.
The favors I received seemed to be the cause that my Wit became so refined,
and my Beauty so augmented, that coming to the age of fifteen, every one
admired me as the wonder of Nature, (...) Phoenix of my Sex, and consequently
adjudged me the pre-eminence above all the Ladies of Flanders. But as all
things under the Moon are so far like it, that they are never firm or durable,
and like the Waves, are only constant in inconstancy, Destiny had designed me
this misfortune, that my Father, loaded with years, and overcharged with age,
paid his last Tribute to Nature, suddenly sinking into the bottom of the Grave,
when he was arrived to the highest step of Fortune. Ye malignant Stars, what
cruelty did ye show me at that time! Would God you had been so courteous, as
when you took away the Lives of my Father and Mother, to have bound up mine in
the same Bundle. O how happy had it been for wretched me to have then endured
Destinies utmost rigor, rather than to live to see my self thus exposed to
such a multitude of misfortunes.

But as time remedies all things, and Women (following the Rule of their
natural levity) are apt to forget that soonest which they ought longest to
remember, the Year being past, and my Mournings thrown off, with them I lost
the memory of Father and Mother, and changed my sorrow and lamentation into
mirth and jollity, as more fit and pleasant to my Age and Constitution,
beginning to listen to the Discourses and Cajolleries of young Gallants, but
always with so reserved a modesty, that the most critical of my Companions
could never charge me with an immodest word or dishonest action: And still, as
Water sprinkled upon Fire does rather increase than abate its burning, so my
coyness did more augment the violence of their Flames. Thus I entertained my
self, till Heaven to punish my private sins, and Love to revenge my slighting
of so many of his attempts, did both conspire to wound me mortally with the
love of a young Cavalier, Son of a certain Duke of Andaluzia, who was newly
arrived at Court: And though a seventeen years experience had taught me how
little or how bad Fruit is gathered from such like Amors, yet neither that,
the multitude of Examples I had found by reading, nor all the holy
Considerations and Religious Resolutions, the Vows, Prayers, and Fastings that
I made, not the firmest Resolves I could invent, were able in the least to
efface the Image of Love that was fixed in my Heart. The many glances of my
Eyes did still discover the sentiments of my Soul, and his in recompense
returned them with interest. These intercourses, and many others which passed
betwixt us, did kindle our Affections into so violent a flame, that at last,
vanquished by his fair Promises, obliging Letters, and solemn Protestations,
backed with his sighs and tears, and serious Vow of marrying me, I committed to
his disposal that unvaluable Jewel which all the Riches of the Indies can never
retrive: but this Traitor had no sooner taken possession, but he deserted his
Purchase, and leaving the Court, returned to his own Country. The condition I
then saw my self reduced to, and the extremity of my resentment of such an
injury, are as far beyond my words to express, as then my patience to sustain:
My Nails revenged upon my Face, and my Fingers upon my Hair, the injury which
their enticements had brought me to, and my tearing of my Clothes seemed to
testify that they had been instrumental to my sufferings. I cursed a thousand
times my ill fortune, and as often accused my rash resolution: I was even
blinded with the tears, and choked with the sighs which daily issued from my
sorrowful eyes and afflicted heart. I addressed my secret complaints to Heaven,
not daring to discover them to any beneath it, and privately joined both my
Reason and Imagination, to see if either of them could find a path to escape
these miseries. The best expedient I could light on was, to go cast my self at
the Infanta's feet, and recount the injury which this ungrateful and perfidious
man had done me; who at first extremely blamed me, but at last showing her his
Letters and Contract written by his own hand, she undertook my Cause, and writ
to the King her Brother in my behalf, sending me accompanied with two Cavaliers
and two Women, to demand Justice at his hands. Coming to Madrid, I understood
that his Majesty was here at Toledo, where I arrived the very day that he
departed hence; and my fortune was so prosperous, that the same day the King
reading my Letters, and understanding my Complaints from my own mouth,
dispatched away a Party of Horse of his own Guards, to seize the Person of him
that had so injured me; but Fortune now has at once proved so favourabe and so
contrary to my happiness, that she has this day put my Enemy into my hands, and
my poor Cousin into those of Death; for my Governess has just now told me, that
one of those Ladies that came along with him is the same Don Carlos in
disguise, for whom my eyes have shed such floods of tears.

You see, Sir, the deplorable History of my Life, and it is from you I now
desire advice how to comport my self in this Affair: And fear not, Sir, but the
kindness you shall do me shall be amply rewarded by the Archduke, the Serene
Infanta my Roval Mistress, and by the King himself, whose Office it is to see
Justice done to such injured Innocents as my self.



The Governor heard all this attentively, and took such compassion of this
afflicted Lady, that taking her by the hand, he spoke to her the most
courteously he could imagine, saying, Leave this Affair (Madam) to my
management, and I promise you, that without either bruit or process I will
accomplish all your designs; and if I should be so unhappy as not to obtain of
your Husband (for so I may call him) that which I demand, I will carry him
Prisoner to the King, there to receive the just chastisement of his
ingratitude; and so doing, I shall accomplish the desires of his Majesty and
the Infanta his Sister, to whose liberal hands I am obliged for all I possess:
Besides all this, I was so happy once as to have a particular amity with your
Father, being Captain when he commanded the best part of the Army in Flanders.
But I wish your Governess be not deceived, because it is scarce possible for
any man to be Master of that Beauty which both these Ladies possess. Scruple
not at that, Sir, (replied Donna Hortensia) for he I speak of is one of the
most accomplished Cavaliers for Beauty that is under the face of the Heavens,
and, disguised in a Woman's Habit, is able to deceive the most crafty and
suspicious Man alive. I will go, Madam, by your permission, (said the
Governor) and talk to him immediately. If you please to do so, Sir, (replied
the Lady) you will much oblige me; but I conceive it necessary my Governess
first describe to you the fashion of his Habit, and the color of his Clothes,
lest you should mistake another for him. He (said the Governess) that wears the
white Damask Gown wrought with Silver is Don Carlos: and I do not at all
question it; for I saw him at Mass this Morning with Don Sancho one of his
Gentlemen. We shall know him presently (said the Governor;) and thereupon left
the Chamber of Donna Hortensia, and went to that where were Donna Margareta,
Donna Leonora, and Don Sancho; and without saluting them, or making the least
semblance of doing so, but looking with a severe countenance (astonished at the
Beauty of these Ladies) upon Don Sancho, he spoke to him with a haughty voice,
and rigorous words, as follows: It Is you must either tell me presently who
moved you to assassinate so barbarously this poor Cavalier, or expect the
Hangman to extract it from you by torture.

I know not, Sir, (answered Don Sancho) why you speak to me in this manner,
since the nobler a Cavalier is, the more civility and courtesy ought he to
express both in words and actions; and after the Information made, and
Witnesses examined, if there be found any one that deposes against me, from
the Murderer himself, to him that is least concerned, let my Head be cut off
backward like a Traitor: But withal, if I be absolutely cleared, that which you
have already said is unjust. The King has not put this Authority in your hand
to use it so imperiously, and with such arrogance; but only to chastise
offenders, and protect the Innocent. Gentlemen, (said the Governor) avoid the
Room a while; and you (said he to his Guards) go along with them, whilst I
speak to this insolent and rash man. So soon as all were gone, the Governor
began to examine Don Sancho. and ask him abundance of Questions, to which he
answered the best he could; and after his Examination he made him leave the
Chamber, and his Guards bring Donna Margareta, charging them not to let her
speak with Don Sancho, or Donna Leonora; and having questioned Donna Margareta,
he sent her away as he had done Don Sancho, still giving the same charge to the
Guards. Last of all he made Donna Leonora be brought, to whom, after many
Demands and Answers, he made this Discourse following.

It is no wonder if the ordinary sort of People of this Age are so inclined to
Vice, since Persons of Quality, without either fear of God, or respect of the
World, are naturally so averse from Virtue. In former times Nobility was
distinguished, as first of all created, by a more than ordinary Virtue: but
now, on the contrary, it flies that, and glories in Vice. This that I say is so
unquestionably true, and so notoriously known, that through all Spain it is
brought into a custom, and practiced, as Theft was formerly amongst the
Lacedaemonians, as a Gallantry. Wonderful miscarriage! that we who command
almost the third part of the World, and whose Reputation is spread through all
the rest of it, should have so little rule over our selves, that in stead of
being (as we boast) more virtuous than others, we should be so much more
vicious, daily committing such base unworthy actions, that the Nations that are
subjugated by us, are most impatient under the yoke of men so much their
inferiors in Wisdom, Learning, and Virtue. That a Noble young Duke, whose
Valor ought to promise as many Victories as Alexander obtained, should so far
forget himself and his Reputation, as to follow after a Woman, disguised in a
Habit so vile and abject as that which you now wear, and to indulge your
Pleasure, to abdicate the Nobility of your Sex, and to range your self amongst
those who, in the judgment of all wise men, are esteemed an imperfection or
mistake in Nature.

Pardon me, Sir, if I speak too freely; and that having knowledge of your
fault, in stead of praising it, as your Parasites ordinarily do, I blame and
reprove it, since both my Charge and Conscience oblige me to it; and if I
should fail in that devoir, I should more justly incur the title of
Pusillanimous, than now that of rash or unmannerly. I speak not of the death of
this Cavalier your Camerade, since not having yet made a full scrutiny into it,
I know not whether your hands are stained with it, or no. If not, (as I desire
they may not) all things may easily be remedied. That which you have to do at
present, is to return to Flanders, (to which I counsel you as your Friend and
Servant) and there espouse the Daughter of Gonsalvo de Mendoca
Camp-Master-General, whose Honor you have ravished under promise of Marriage;
and thus accomplishing your Word which you have given her, and that Promise you
have made her in writing, you will cover or deface the infamy you incur by so
unworthy an action, and at the same time acquire the Title of the most generous
and virtuous Prince in Spain: otherwise I must command you in the King's Name
immediately to quit this Habit for your own, and accompany me to attend his
Majesty, and there, according to the duty you owe him, do by fair means or foul
that which by love and civility you are obliged to. This you cannot avoid,
since the most Serene Infanta has writ about it to the King her Brother. To
think to deny what I have said, is in vain, since Don Sancho your Gentleman has
confessed it; and besides, I have had the honor to know you a great while.

CHAP. IV.
IT is not to be questioned whether Don Carlos was at once seized with fear and
astonishment, hearing the Governor speak so freely, and thereby understanding
that his Majesty had been fully informed of the Affair by the Infanta; and he
knew the Kings of Spain exact so complete an Obedience from their Subjects, and
Justice has so impartial a hand over the Grandees, that in my remembrance there
was a memorable act to that effect at Madrid, where one of the greatest Dukes
of the Kingdom, for cudgelling an Alguazil, was deeply fined by the President
of Castile. These kind of Examples stop the most rash and hardy Courages, and
makes them moderate their own Choler by seeing the punishment of others,
thereby stopping the current of their fiery Youth, and accustoming them to obey
the Laws, by the strict observation of which the State is aggrandized, and the
Princes Authority maintained.

Don Carlos, as well accomplished and crafty as he was, and endowed with an
excellent Judgment, seeing himself brought to such a nonplus, redoubles the
forces of his wit by the presence of danger, and suiting himself to the present
Occurrences, and knowing that good Language would work better effects than all
the Menaces and Rhodomontadoes he could invent, to him who would be more
provoked than daunted with them, laying aside his effeminate behavior, with
which he had hitherto treated with the Governor, he begun this Discourse with
the greatest affability and courtesy imaginable.

To deny, Sir, that the Age in which we live is the most perverse and
detestable that ever was, and that Nobility it self is as corrupt and wicked as
the vile Populacy, would be a signal absurdity; the daily Examples we see are
sufficient testimonies: And it would be an aggravation of my Crime, and a
defamation of Virtue, to justify Vice, in being so inconsiderate as to
vindicate the fault which I ought rather to be ashamed of, in taking a Habit so
unbecoming a Person of my Quality: But I think there are few dare take up the
first Stone against me upon this subject, since the most virtuous man in the
World has not always been able to resist the assaults of Love; and I question
whether you can produce one since the Celestial Globe has rolled over the Heads
of Mortals, that has not one time or other been subject to it: I avoid
Examples, which are so numerous, that to undertake to enumerate them, would be
to enter a Labyrinth from which I should never disentangle my self: I only
entreat and conjure one thing of you, for her sake whom you love best, not to
refuse me a favor I would beg of you, and then I shall conclude my Discourse
in few words. I vow and promise you, upon the Faith of a Gentleman, said Don
Antonio (for so was the Governor called) to do what you desire, provided it be
a thing that entrench not upon my Honor or Conscience. It neither shall
prejudice the one nor the other, replied Don Carlos, smiling. Speak then what
you desire, said Don Antonio, that I may give you some proofs of the Service I
have vowed for you. I only ask, said Don Carlos, whether ever Love had a
Jurisdiction over your Spirit? Yes, said Don Antonio, and in such manner, that
often transported by this frantic passion, my extravagances, both in words and
actions, have caused laughter in all that knew me; and to this very hour I feel
its effects. If perhaps (said Don Carlos) you were yet desirous to enjoy your
Amors, would you think it an unpardonable crime to make use of that Habit your
self which you blame so rigorously in me, if you were assured of the
accomplishment of your desires in the enjoyment of your Mistress.

The Governor, after a short time of silence, thought it convenient to
acknowledge it, fearing that a denial might be a wrong to one whom his Soul
adored; and therefore he thus answered him smilingly: I should not only, Sir,
for her sake take upon me this Habit which you wear, which is suitable to a
Lady of the best Quality, but even that of a Kitchen-wench, to enjoy her who is
Mistress o my Heart, and whose Eyes have kindled those Flames in my Breast which
daily consume it. Then, Sir, (replied Don Carlos, smiling) you have much
wronged me by your accusation, since you by this seem to possess as much good
fellowship as another: And further, you ought to consider, that the ancient
Poets, who have always adored Jupiter, as he on whom the vast Machine of the
Universe depended, have yet introduced him in a Woman's Habit to enjoy his fair
Calisto, and otherwhiles have given him the shape of a Bull to embrace his
beloved Europa. I have presumed, Sir, to trouble you with this Discourse, to
put you in mind that the faults committed through excess of Love may justly
claim a privilege of remission above other offenses: And, by what I understand,
you, that censure with such liberty the miscarriages of others, may justly
undergo a reprehension for your own. But laying aside these and many other
Reasons which might be pertinent in order to my vindication, as to the point in
question, I shall now inform you, that I am not only willing to accomplish the
Matrimonial Vow I made to the Lady you speak of, but also to part hence to
morrow morning to beg pardon of his Majesty for the fault I have committed, and
permission for a Journey into Flanders to seek the dearest Object of my Soul:
And I assure you, that what I have already done, was not with a design to
deceive her, nor falsify my Faith; but only in order to the obtaining
permission of his Majesty and my Mother for our conjunction in the Sacred
Union. But all that now remains to trouble me is, the apprehension that this
youthful action should come to the Kings Ear, the prevention of which I would
willingly purchase with half of what I possess. If, Sir, you promise me (said
the Governor) to accomplish what you have said, I will engage to procure that
his Majesty shall never know it, and that those of this House shall never
publish any thing to your disadvantage, on condition that you be not found
culpable of the murder of this Cavalier, Husband of Donna Margareta. I promise
you, upon the Faith of a Gentleman, (replied Don Carlos) to perform all this
that you desire; and let my Head pay the forfeiture, if the Murderer do in the
least charge me with this Assassinate, or any of my Domestics. Ah, Sir,
(replied the Governor) how cordially shall I embrace you if this be true that
you have said! And if you please to accompany me but a little way, I shall save
you a Journey into Flanders, to seek that which you shall find nearer hand.

These words struck Don Carlos into a great astonishment, being unable to
comprehend what Don Antonio meant by this Discourse, but however he followed
him into the Chamber of Donna Hortensia, whom they sound sat upon her Bed,
upon a Cushion of Crimson Damask embroidered with Gold, having round about her
abundance of Violets, Jessamins, and Roses. At first Don Carlos did not know
her, partly because her Head was turned on one side, and partly for the
alteration which was caused in her Face by the griefs and afflictions she had
lately suffered, being but newly returned from a Swoon: But turning her Head to
answer the Governors Salute, she was presently known to Don Carlos, who even
ravished with joy, ran to her to embrace her, with such violence that it was
beyond her power to hinder it, and presently he spoke to her as follows. O my
dearest Life, sweetest Pledge of my Heart, I here cast my self at your Feet,
that you may take what vengeance you please upon so unpardonable a crime. Why
do you not answer me, my Soul? Why turn you from me? But alas! What is it I
demand? What do I say? Or what can I think, that had not the discretion to
guard so inestimable a Treasure when I had it in my possession? O that
overruling Providence, who sounds the bottoms of our Hearts, and knows the
depth of our Intentions, whose influence upon my Spirit has made me a thousand
times repent my ingratitude to this incomparable Lady, which I have now the
happiness to embrace, would vouchsafe to touch hers also, and cause her, by
burying my offense in eternal oblivion, once more to bless me with that
affection I have so justly forfeited. And why this aversion (said he) my better
Genius? And these words he accompanied with the tenderest Caresses he could
invent, sometimes kissing her Rosy Lips, sometimes her lovely Cheeks, which
had newly changed Deaths pale Livery for the most lovely Scarlet, and sometimes
her Hands more white than Ivory, with a violence too strong for her resistance.
All that were present at this Interview were transported with joy, and
particularly the Govenour remained more ecstasied with the pleasure he took at
our two fair Lovers reconciliation, than Archimedes when he traced the Lines in
his Study which defended the Walls of Syracuse.

Like as green Wood laid on the Fire consumes all its moisture before it
inflame, and after that is spent, takes Fire and burns like dry Stubble: So
this Lady, whose Humidity had all this while been distilling through her fair
Eyes in pearled drops, after its evacuation her Heart begun by little and
little to take hold of the Fire of Love; till at last being come to a total
Conflagration, she cast her self on his Neck, and embraced him with the same
Arms with which a while before she had defended her self against him; and with
all the dearest testimonies of an entire affection, called him her Soul, her
Life, her Happiness, sealing each word with a hundred Kisses.

Stay here thy flight, my Pen; for my Eyes are so dazzled with this ravishing
object, that they will no longer serve me to form these Letters, nor my Hands
to regulate those Lines I should trace upon this Paper.

It is not to be doubted whether or no the Governor were still more rejoiced
with the incomparable Amity of our two Lovers, seeing all his designs thereby
prosper to his desire. He approached toward them; but it was after the
appearance of shame upon their Countenances, they having begged pardon of him
for their incivility, since the sudden transport of so unexpected a joy had
made their Devoirs to him give place to the resentments of their own good
Fortune. But Don Antonio, who was as courteous as discreet, and most
advantageously endowed with all the Accomplishments befitting a Cavalier of his
condition, answered them with so civil and obliging language, promising them to
employ all his Power and Authority in their service, that both out Lovers were
brought to acknowledge that Divine Mercy had regulated their mishaps and
disorders by a signal Providence, that by his sage and prudent conduct they
might happily arrive to the accomplishment of their desires. And for a further
confirmation of their happiness, after they had all three consulted together
about what they had to do, having called Don Sancho, who was by this time
Friends with the Governor, the Governor having cleared him from the aspersion
he had laid upon him of having discovered his Masters Secrets, he spoke as
follows.

Since you have already done me the Honor to put the Conduct of this Affair
into my Hands, thereby judging me capable, by my experience in the Intrigues of
Worldly Affairs, to manage it to the best advantage, my advice is, that without
further dispute you all enter into two Coaches, which I will send you for that
purpose this Evening, and become my Prisoners in my House: As for the rest,
leave it to me, and I question not but the extreme desire I have to serve you,
will inspire me with the means of conducting your Affairs to the Point desired.
Having said this, he took leave of them to go to his Lodging, leaving our two
Lovers in the possession of all the joys imaginable.

Don Carlos already touched with Don Sebastian's lamentable end, and repenting
himself of his fore-past Life, had so far moderated and cooled the Love he bore
to Donna Margareta, that he had no further remembrance of her than what his
Charity obliged him to, considering that it was not in the poor Ladies power to
avoid what had happened, had she been as chaste as Lucrece. On the other side,
his indifference for Donna Hortensia, which had hitherto been so great, was now
converted into so lively Flames, that it seemed to him that Heaven had
transplanted all the Accomplishments he before so much admired, from Donna
Margareta to her. Also Donna Margareta, whose repentance was first begun by her
Husbands devout Prayer, was now become so complete a Magdalene, that the
continual Currents which from her beauteous Eyes watered her Rosy Cheeks,
seemed sufficient to have washed clean the most defiled soul, whilst her sighs
made an Earthquake in her Body. She still called upon her dear Sebastian, who
was already bathing in the Floods of unspeakable Joys, which he possessed from
the Beatifick Vision.

Reader, stay here a while the speedy current of thy thoughts, to take a short
consideration of the volubility and vicissitude of Mundane Affairs. He that is
to day over head and ears in Feastings, Plays, and Dances, and immerged in an
inundation of Delights, having the richest Canopies over his Head, and Gold and
Silk under his Feet; listening to no Discourse but that which tends to Mirth and
Laughter; and amongst his Cups and Ladies takes his fill of the most exquisite
delights which Bacchus or Venus can make him Master of; him we see to morrow
with his Affairs changed into so Tragical a posture, that in stead of these
incomparable Grandeurs, all his Accoutrements are but a poor thin Shroud, which
invellops his miserable Corpse; his stately Lamps and Candlesticks of Gold and
Silver, with which before he was usually attended, now changed into four dim
Wax Tapers, which burn unprofitably about his wretched Carcass; and all his
rare Music and ravishing Notes changed into the pitteous Lamentations of his
Friends and Kindred, with which they mournfully attend his Obsequies. He loves
to day that which he will hate to morrow, and he abhors this day that which he
will passionately love the next. I could enlarge far enough upon this Subject,
were it not a wrong to my Discourse and the Readers patience, which I will
endeavor to satisfy by returning to my Narrative.

The Evening was no sooner come, but the two Coaches which Don Antonio had
promised our two Lovers arrived at their Lodging, into which they all entered,
after a long trouble which they had undergone to persuade Donna Margareta to
leave the Company of her dead Husband for theirs. Her affliction had reduced
her to so pitteous a condition, and her strength was so abated by the excess of
her sorrows, that she had scarce enough left to sustain her self: at last,
partly by compliance, and partly by compulsion, considering that staying alone
in the Lodging some tragical event might happen through her sorrow, she so far
complied with their entreaties as to accompany them, after having left in
charge with some Women, which the Governor had sent to that purpose, to
enshrowd the Body of her dead Husband, and to see performed all the Ceremonies
requisite to a Cavalier of his Quality, till and things were prepared for his
Funerals.

Being arrived at the Governor's House, Donna Clorinia his Wife, with her two
Daughters, and a Niece of hers, all endowed with an excellent Beauty and
incomparable Civility, went out to receive them, and to testify their joy
which was caused by the Honor which was done them by their arrival. An hour
was spent in the Complements and Caresses usual in such rencounters; and after
that they bent all their Discourse to the comforting of Donna Margareta, and
representing to her whatsoever they thought conducing to the moderating her
resentments, and alleviating her sorrows; till at last their sound Advice did
so far fortify and encourage her, that her Countenance testified that her
heaviness was somewhat abated, which gave no small content to the Company, who
attending the hour of Bedtime, endeavored to divert her the best they could,
by entertaining her with things most suitable to pass the time contentedly.

Bedtime being come, Don Antonio took Don Carlos and conducted him to his
Chamber, Donna Clorinia his Lady doing the like to Donna Margareta and Donna
Hortensia, and so every one retired to their several Lodgings, where we will
leave them, till the Sun with his resplendent Rays begin another Course in our
Hemisphere, and reserve the remainder of our Narrative for the sixth and last
Part of this Book.

The End of the Fifth Part.
THE AMOROUS TRAVELERS, OR THE Night-Adventures.
PART VI.
CHAP. I.
THE Sun was already pretty well elevated, and his ardent Rays begun to annoy
the Labourer of the Field, that he was forced to quit his Cart for his ordinary
repose, when Don Antonio sent Don Carlos a Suit which had been newly made for a
Son of his about the same Age with Don Carlos, whose return from Italy he daily
expected. The Habit was of pure Gray Segovian Cloth, with a Doublet of Cloth of
Gold: The Coat was open on both sides, all overspread with Stars of Gold, and
interlaced with a Golden Twist, wrought with such curious artifice, that it
composed the rarest Knots that Humane Industry could invent. The Suit being so
rich and magnificent, the Cloak, Hat, Ruff, Sword, and all the rest of the
Accoutrements were suitable, and became him as well as they would have done him
they were designed for: And if before in his Female Habit he seemed a Venus, in
this his Masculine one he was no less an Adonis.

I leave it to the judgment of those Ladies that have already loved, or at
present do so, whether his dear Hortensia were not highly pleased to see him so
advantageously habited, and in a fashion which seemed to her so much more
agreeable than that which he had lately cast off: So that no longer able to
dissemble the excess of joy which she took in seeing the accomplishment of her
desires, and her self possessed of what she loved more dearly than her life,
she lovingly embraced him, bestowing on him an infinite number of Kisses, which
brought no less satisfaction to her self than appetite to the Governor's Wife
and Daughters, who were all so taken with the sight of this lovely young Duke,
that each of them could heartily have wished the same liberty, if Modesty, the
cruel Tormenter of that Sex, had not kept back and restrained them.

We will leave them all in this pleasant humor (except only Donna Margareta,
not yet well cleared of the grief caused by so irreparable a loss) and return
to the Murderer of Don Sebastian, whom we left in Prison, who was no sooner
extended upon the Rack, but he cried out to slacken the Cords, and that he
would truly answer to all they demanded of him: Which they having done, he told
them his name was Roderigo Carcia, Son of Pedro Carcia Inhabitant of Viso; that
he had married a Niece of Ozmin Gutierres an Innkeeper of Viso, called
Catalina de la Croix; and that having had certain and apparent proofs of her
dishonesty with Don Sebastian, she having confessed that he had lain with her
the Night he lodged at Viso, he had with his Poniard given her a Recompense for
her Treachery and Disloyalty, (which indeed was true; for after he had received
the Money of his Uncle for his Charges of going to the Wars, thereby to wear
away the sense of this dishonor, the Devil had tempted and incited him to
return to Viso, and kill his Wife, which he did accordingly.) After which he
confessed, that intending to go to Flanders to serve his Majesty in the
Low Country Wars, his evil Genius had conducted him to this City, where being
arrived, and desirous to see the Great Church before his departure, he had by
the way met with Don Sebastian, and transported with extreme Choler, and
pricked forward with a furious appetite of Revenge, seeing before his eyes the
sole cause of his misfortune, and not able to bridle his resentment of the
injury, he leaped to him and stabbed him.

This was all his Deposition, and all which the Torments could extract from
him, though so extremely violent and cruel, being given in the presence of the
Governor, that he was scarce carried off alive: For which cause the Governor
presently set at liberty all Don Carlos his Domestics, and Donna Margareta's,
and early the next morning sent the wretched Roderigo to the Gibbet, to prevent
any Trouble or Sedition in the City; for the Archbishop had sent his Interdict,
and Excommunicated the Governor (as the custom is when the Secular Power
infringes the Ecclesiastic, as it had done here by taking the Criminal
forcibly out of Sanctuary.) And herein they proceed with great severity; for
this Interdict has such efficacy, that there can no Mass be celebrated in any
Church till it be taken off. But the Judge proceeding equitably in such
Affairs, makes Inquisition whether the Offender killed his Adversary by
Treachery, or on equal terms; and if he find that he dit it fairly, he is
obliged to send him back to Sanctuary; but if the Murder was perfidiously
committed, then the Judge sends him to the Gibbet, and after makes his dead
Body be carried to the Church (as the Governor here did with Roderigo.) After
this the Bishop is obliged to take off the Excommunication, by reason of the
scandal it would bring to the Parishioners; especially seeing the Judge has
proceeded fairly, and according to Law: And therefore this is but a thing of
course; for what reason is there that Churches should serve for a Refuge to
Persons so hateful to God and destructive to Man as are Murderers and
Assassines.

After Justice had been executed on Roderigo, and all the Services due to the
dead had been performed to Don Sebastian, they passed some days in Sports and
Recreations, Don Antonio sparing no cost that might conduce to the contentment
of his new Guests; but Don Carlos seeing himself more rigorously treated than
ordinary by his dear Hortensia, did daily consume himself with a languishing
desire of other privacies than those he enjoyed before Company; for those were
all the courtesies he could obtain from her till they were authorized by the
indissoluble Bonds of Matrimony, which made him pass his time with such sorrow
and melancholy, that those things which served for a divertisement to others,
were but an augmentation of his discontent: Wherefore no longer able to endure
the excess of his passion, one day he took Don Antonio aside, and brought him
to walk with him in a Garden which Don Antonio had in a Place called the
Cigarral, situate in the most pleasant and fertile place that is near the City
of Toledo; where being arrived, they entered into a spacious Walk, bordered with
many Woodbinds and Jessamins, and shadowed with Fruit Trees so thick and
expanded, that they were proof against the Suns most penetrating Rays in the
hottest Summer; where our Duke having a while entertained himself upon various
Subjects, at last told Don Antonio, That the most passionate desire that
disturbed his Breast, was to accomplish his Marriage with the greatest
expedition possible; and withal, earnestly begged his consent and assistance,
that he might without further delay go to present himself and his dear
Hortensia at Court to his Majesty, that he might thence obtain Letters to the
Duchess his Mother, to solicit her consent to, and presence at the Marriage.
Don Antonio highly applauded his design, and closed with him in his resolution.

They were no sooner returned to the City, but Don Carlos communicated his
intention to his Mistress and Don Sancho, and at the same time ordered his
Equipage to be ready to depart within three days.

It is impossible for me to represent to you the extreme contentment which all
his Friends and Servants received from that design, principally the fair
Hortensia, who was so much the more overjoyed, when she remembered the troubles
and miseries she had endured, and considered the unspeakable joy she now
possessed: And still acknowledging the Divine Goodness, from which she obtained
all these Benefits, she for a grateful acknowledgment continually elevated her
Eyes to Heaven: And as the rigours of a tedious. Winter make the Spring far
more delightful, so all the traverses of her inconstant Fortune made the
pleasures of her assured Happiness more delicious.

All things being prepared for their departure, and themselves ready to enter
into the Coach, Donna Margareta would have taken leave of them; but Don Carlos
and Donna Hortensia did seriously declare, that they could not consent to her
departure: And though our beauteous young Duchess had some cause of Jealousy,
having a strong suspicion of what had past betwixt them, yet this never abated
the force of her affection: And though Don Carlos had seriously excused
himself, by professing that he had changed his Habit for another intent, which
for many Reasons was fit to be kept secret, yet their Amors having formerly
been so publicly known, and she having seen many manifest appearances of it,
she inwardly gave little credit to his Protestations; yet being infinitely sage
and discreet, the better to content him, she made no semblance of it, but
seemed to credit all he said. Add to this the love she bore to her deceased
Cousin Don Sebastian, having both been educated together in their tender age,
and by whom Donna Margareta had a Son; and further moved with the pity which
one ordinarily bears to the afflicted, and the Virtue she had always remarked
in her Person, all this made her bear her an intimate affection; and that the
more, when she considered that she was the cause that Donna Margareta lost so
advantageous a Match as that of Don Carlos.

All these Considerations made such an effort upon her Soul, that fearing that
all the entreaties of Don Carlos, Don Antonio, and Donna Clorinia his Wife
should not be able to prevail with her to accompany them, she fell to making
such Caresses to her, embracing her so lovingly, and conjuring her with so many
tears, that at length her entreaties surmounted the others resolution, and
prevailed with her to go along with them, accompanied by all her Train.

Being arrived at Madrid, the Governor, that would never abandon them till he
had finished what he had so happily begun, presented them to his Catholic
Majesty. Things there succeeded so happily, that the King and Queen, well
pleased at their arrival, made them all the best Entertainment they could
expect or desire. All the Grandees then at Court flocked into the Room,
astonished at the Novelty, but far more at the Beauty of our two Lovers, to see
so many Perfections in Mortal Creatures. The Queen, who had not all this while
been able to remove her Eyes from the fair Hortensia, with the sole sight of
whom she was so highly satisfied, thought her pleasure could not but be much
augmented by a nearer approach, which consideration made her so far dispense
with that of her Royal Grandeur, that she tenderly embraced her, and kissed her
twice or thrice, and at that time entertained an affection for her, which never
ended but with her life.

At the same time the King, considering the Duke's graceful behavior, could
not refrain from embracing him, and testifying by his Caresses the content he
took in his ready obedience to his Commands, he in requital recompensed him
with his Friendship. And to make it appear to Posterity, that the Services of
those who have spent their Blood, or hazarded their Lives in their Kings
Service, the Defense of their Country and Faith, as the late Gonsalvo de
Mendoca had done, should not remain without a Recompense suitable to their
Merits, I give you (said he to the Duke) fifty thousand Ducates, to help to buy
your Marriage-Clothes. And to let the Infanta my Royal Sister see, that what is
pleasing to her is so to me, I intend that the Nuptials shall be at my Charges,
and that with a sumptuousness and magnificence suitable to the Splendor of the
Spanish Court.

This said he made him As the Grandees of Spain do before the King.
put on his Hat; and because one told him that the Dinner was upon the Table,
the King took him by the hand, and placed him at the Table with himself: The
Queen did the same to Donna Hortensia; so that our two Lovers had this day the
Honor to dine at the same Table with their Catholic Majesty's.

In the mean time having sent a Courrier to the Duchess Dowager, the Duke's
Mother, to advertise her of what was past, and to beg her Company, all things
were prepared for the Nuptials, and that with such care and diligence, that in
less than eight days all things were made ready for that Solemnity. All the
Great Persons and Cavaliers about the Court had prepared their Habits and
Liveries for the Game called de las An ordinary Pastime in Spain upon great
Solemnities, where the Cavaliers combat with Tilting-staves made of Canes.
Cannas, and those so rich and magnificent, that Art with diversity of Colors
seemed to have surmounted Nature it self, which wrought an admiration in all
the beholders.

The old Duchess, Mother of Don Carlos, arriving at Madrid, received all the
contentment imaginable, worthily accounting that day the happiest of her whole
life; and the joy was the more ravishing, after her fears and sorrows for her
Son in his absence, fearing lest some sudden mishap had been the occasion of
that and his silence.

Madrid had never seen within her Walls greater Magnificences than these: The
King, the Queen, the new-married Couple, and the whole Court were so richly
Habited, that the sole Embroidery of their Clothes was valued at above six
hundred thousand Crowns. I cannot assure you of this for truth, nor dare I
depose it for a verity, lest some Critic catch hold of it for a lie: And
besides, I cannot make out absolute proofs of all I have said in this
Narrative, nor such plain Demonstrations as are used in Mathematical Rules and
Figures; and I think it is fitting for a Writer to embroider his Discourse (as
they did their Habits) with a little descanting and enlargement. But to return.

All these rejoycings ended with the day; our new-married Couple, according to
the Custom, were conducted to their Chamber, and to a Bed somewhat softer and
better accoutred than are ordinarily found amongst the Inns of Sierra Morena,
or that of the Carcuela. I suppose it unnecessary to tell you what they did
there; for I believe you know as well as my self. The next Morning their
Friends came to visit them in Bed, and made themselves merry with the Jests
usual upon that Subject: but our two Lovers filled with pleasure, and even
ecstasied with the Delights of the Night past, suffered all this Raillery as
patiently as Gamesters that have won a great Sum at Play would do those of the
bystanders.

About fifteen days after, the Governor Don Antonio took leave of them to
return home; and Don Carlos having thanked him for all the Civilities he had
received of his Liberality, made him a Present of eight curious Horses. The
fair Hortensia was no less munificent in her Presents to Donna Clorinia and her
Daughters, than Don Carlos had been to Don Antonio, who would not have accepted
of the Present but by the importunity of Don Carlos his entreaties, which he
uttered with an accent that sufficiently testified his resentment of his
Civilities, telling him that he would seem to despise his Friendship in
refusing this small testimony of it.

He then left Madrid to return to Toledo, where we will leave him to his
Journey (which I have heard since was very prosperous) and return to Donna
Margareta, because it is now time to speak of her, whom we must conduct to a
safe Port (before we draw out Ship into the Dry Dock) where she may happily
pass the rest of her days in all the Pleasures and Contentments that a Lady of
her Age and Beauty could desire; that afterward my Pen wearied with writing,
and my Spirit tired with so long a Discourse, may have some time to repose, and
prepare themselves for another subject.

The beauteous Donna Margareta, feeling her self somewhat disburthened of her
troubles, and now able to support the weight of her afflictions without the
help of her former Company, demanded leave one day of Donna Hortensia to
depart, and, in recompense of her former Favors, made her an offer of her
future Services, with all the submission and civility imaginable.

The fair Hortensia understanding by these words that she on whom above all
others she had fixed her affection, intended to leave her, without whose
company she was not able to live contentedly, nor indeed at all, more than a
Body deprived of its Vital Faculties, begged her longer stay with sighs and
tears enough to mollify a Tygre, saying, that without her she was the
miserablest Creature alive. Don Carlos immediately arriving, and seeing his
dearer Half thus afflicted, ran to her, fearing some strange accident had
happened, and taking her in his Arms, learned from her own mouth the subject of
her forrows; No, no, (said he) my Dear, I will procure her to stay, if all my
Estate, my Supplications, and those of my Friends can have any power to
persuade her to it.

Donna Margareta, who never thought before that her departure could bring so
sensible a grief to the Duchess, repented of what she had said, and to show
the zeal she had to her Service, she promised her to stay with her as long as
she desired: Whereupon Don Carlos said, You will wrong the Friendship, Madam,
that we bear to you, if you think any longer by your departure of crossing our
designs, which are to procure you a Husband suitable to your Quality and Merits;
for it is neither just nor reasonable that a Beauty like yours should fade and
consume it self unprofitably. Upon this the two Ladies embraced one another;
and by their Kisses and extraordinary Caresses testified the excess of their
Amity.

Donna Margareta remembering what had passed betwixt her and Valerio, the Page
of her deceased Husband, when by a strange accident (as you have heard in the
beginning of this History) he had enjoyed her, and considering that to live
honestly, and to pass the rest of her Life in Sacred Wedlock (without which the
most reserved and modest Woman must have an especial Providence from Heaven to
live in Chastity) she thought it necessary for the discharge of her Conscience
to marry him; which being discovered to her Confessor, he not only approved
and praised her pious resolution, but also enjoined it as necessary.

Valerio was of higher Blood than Fortune, being the Son of an ancient
Gentleman of Osmus, whose Estate had been very much impaired by the loss of a
great Sum of Money, which being Imbarqued upon a West India Plate-Ship, had
been taken by the Low Country Rebels Fleet; and he being thereby much
impoverished, and having many more Children to provide for, had presented this,
being a well-bred and rarely accomplished Youth, to wait upon Don Sebastian, at
his Marriage with Donna Margareta at Osmus, who had always a great affection to
him for his dexterity and wit, till at last fortune raised him to this
Happiness.

Donna Margareta, as I have said, having taken this resolution, imparted it to
Don Carlos by one of her Gentlemen; but he at first, not knowing the cause of
her Resolve, did much resist it, wondering to see a Lady of her Quality
desiring to be married to a young man who not long before was Page to her
Husband: But at last, seeing her resolution immovable, he consented to it, and
gave him for a Portion ten thousand Ducats on his Marriage-day, making him
Superintendent of his House.

And thus having brought him to this happiness, in the enjoyment of the fair
Donna Margareta; and Don Carlos in that of his dear Hortensia, we will leave
them there in all the felicity they could enjoy or hope for, to consider from
the Occurrences of this Narration the Vicissitude of Humane Affairs, the
Deceits and Wiles that are daily practiced in the World, the Changes of
Fortune, and the Misfortunes that daily pursue Unlawful Actions.

FINIS.

