An ABSTRACT OF THE CASE OF THE City of Londonderry.
THE Services and Sufferings of the said City on the late Happy Revolution are
sufficiently known, and have been acknowledged by the Repeated Votes and
Addresses of the Honorable Houses of Commons both in England and Ireland: And
in particular, by the Votes in England, of April 9. School, their Disbursements
and Losses for the Public Service, were, (on a moderate Computation) allowed
to amount to about 30000 l. But the want of a proper Fund has hitherto been the
Reason that no Compensation has been made for the same: So that to this Day,
great part of its Suburbs, and many Houses, even within the Walls, ly in
Rubbish; the Inhabitants thereof, by what they have Undergone for securing and
defending that important Place, being reduced to great Poverty, and rendered
unable to re-build them.

AND in regard that the preserving that Place (at so critical a Juncture)
prevented the Irish Army from being transported to England or Scotland, and
consequently kept England Quiet at Home, and made the Reduction of Ireland much
more easy, both in respect of Blood and Treasure.

AND the said City being the only Place in that Part of Ireland, to which
Protestants in time of Eminent Danger can resort, the Relief it gave them on
the late Revolution not being the first Instance thereof: For in the Bloody
Massacre of 1641, the said City was likewise a Refuge to Thousands of Poor
Protestants.

Wherefore the Inhabitants of the said City do humbly hope, That now the
Forfeitures of Ireland are designed to be appropriated for the Public Service,
that their Extraordinary Case will be by this Honorable House compassionately
considered.

An Abstract of the CASE of the City of Londerry.


