An ANSWER To Mr. Lenthall's Pretended CASE.
I. THAT instead of 12000 l. due from Mr. Lenthall at Sir John Cutler's Death,
(as the Case suggests) there was above 14500 l. then due, as has since been
owned, under Mr. Lenthall's Hand and Seal.

II. That the Account stated in May 1697, is the Third passed by Mr. Lenthall
under Hand and Seal, since Sir John Cutler's Death; and all of them were passed
deliberately and fairly, as has appeared by the Originals produced to the
Committee, where the same (with what is since incurred) have been Examined in
Mr. Lenthall's presence, and he could make no Objection, because of Vouchers to
every Article that required them, and he could not pretend Surprise, as owning
to have had Coppys of Accounts delivered to him.

III. That the Pretense about Mr. Boulter's making an Abatement, is altogether
frivolous, many Persons can witness upon occasion: And as to Mr. Folkes's being
to have 1000 l. on that account, it is already disproved upon Oath.

IV. That the Deeds executed by Mr. Lenthall, about the Estate and Office, were
done voluntarily and deliberately, has fully appeared to a Committee of
Parliament two years ago; where the said Deeds (with Mr. Card, and others
concerned therein) were examined in Mr. Lenthall's presence, and he declared
the Deeds to be with his Approbation, and that he directed them to be drawn.

V. That though Mr. Lenthall says he only knew since May last, that the Mortgages
were Assigned to the Earl of Radnor, yet there is very ample Proof that he was
acquainted with the Transferr as soon as 'twas agreed upon, and he declared his
Satisfaction with it: Besides, for two years last past, he has received, from
time to time of the Earl of Radnor, several large Sums of Money, and under his
Hand and Seal has charged and annexed the same to the Securities so Assigned as
aforesaid; for the proof whereof, and of this fair and regular passing the
Accounts and Deeds, the Committees and the Journals are referred to.

That there was any certain Rent to be paid for the Marshal's Office, is
denied, the present Marshal holding it on Trial; and by his Account it does
appear, that nothing has been made on it, nor indeed is like to be, while the
Warden of the Fleet makes so bold with Acts of Parliament, and bids Defiance to
the Laws.

As to Mr. Lenthall's value of the Oxfordshire Estate, and the Prison, it is
only answered, That the Earl of Radnor is willing that the same be Sold to the
best advantage, for his Lordship desires but what is justly due to him, and he
wishes the Estate and Prison would amount to it; however it is hoped that Mr.
Lenthall's trifling and false Suggestions will not prejudice or lessen his
Lordships Right, nor hinder so great an Advantage to the Public, as the Bill
to pay the Encumbrance, and dissolve the Prison would effect.

To Mr. Lenthall's Case.


