An Answer BY AN ANABAPTIST TO THE Three Considerations Proposed to Mr William
Penn, By a pretended BAPTIST, CONCERNING A MAGNA CHARTA FOR Liberty of
Conscience.

Allowed to be Published this 10th Day of September, 1688.

LONDON, Printed and Sold, by Andrew Soul at the Three Keys, in
Nags-Head-Court, in Grace Church Street, over against the Conduit, 1688.

An Answer BY AN ANABAPTIST TO THE Three Considerations etc.
YOU desire, All your Dissenting Brethren to Consider, and then Answer.

(...) have Considered, but I cannot tell ^ther you suppose all Dissenters are
(...) Brethren, or that all are your ^^hren who dissent from you. If first, It
seems probable to me, you have been either Educated in ^ange Soil, or have
forgotten (...) Brothers Dialect; so that I can^^ discern, that you are any
other^^ a Baptist then only in Masquerade, therefore am shy of owning the
^^tion: But if all that dissent (...) you, must therefore be reckoned (...)
Brethren, then I am in that ^^ber, and because I think Mr Penn not have so much
leisure as my at present to attend upon your ^^es, I intend to be in the first
Rank your Respondents.

I consider also that though you have proposed but Three Considerations, yet
you have bolted out a Mulitude of Questions, which administer an occasion for
as many more to be retorted.

To your first Question, Then; What Validity or Security can any pretended or
designed future New Law or Charter have, when we see so many of the present
Laws we already have, may be, and are by the Dispensing Power Dispensed with?

So many of the present Laws -- The Grievance then with you may lie rather in
the Number, than in the Dispensing Power. His Majesty might with your leave
perhaps have dispensed with some Persons, and some Penalties too, but not with
so many altogether.

One would think by that you would not have Quarreled at the Dispensing Four,
tho the Act for levying Twelve Pence a Week had never been Prosecuted, so as
the Twenty Pound a Month had been Levied, nor if the Conventicle Act had been
Dispensed with, so as the Thirty fifth of Queen Elizabeth had been rigorously
Executed.

I cannot tell how many, but all the Laws that are Dispensed with, are Penal
Laws of a like nature for matters Ecclesiastical: Uniformity, Sacraments, Oaths
and Tests are the Subject of them all. If this be your Grief, you must be
either a Conforming Baptist, or such a strange sort of a Baptist, as in my
Forty Years Conversation among them I have never met with.

But to come more close to your Question, What Validity can a New Law have,
seeing so many of these we have already are Dispensed with?

I Answer with a like Interrogation, I grant that the King may do what his
Royal Pleasure is with his own, Does it thereupon follow, that He may do so
likewise with what is mine? If I acckowledge and thankfully accept His
Dispensing with a Penalty, to which I am Obnoxious, because I take a Liberty in
matters of mere Religion, which I am not allowed by Statute Laws, Is it of
necessry consequence that I therein acknowledge He may also impose a Fine upon
me for lawfully using a Liberty when granted to me by Law?

Its hoped the designed New Charter for Repeal of such Penal Laws as are
inconsistant with the Doctrines of Christianity, will according to His
Majesty's Declaration, both maintain the National Religion, as it is now (...)
stablished by Law, and provides (...) such a Christian Liberty as may s^ Ease
and Secure the Consciences, P^^sons and Properties of all that (...) Live
Soberly, Righteously and God in this present Age, whether they (...)
Conformists or Non-conformists (...) the National Religion. And a G^^^ remains
valid, tho a Penalty may (...) dispensed with.

But what if the New Law (...) have no more Validity or Sec^^^ then these Old
Ones that are D^^^sed with? The Dissenters will (...) be in so much a better
Case by a New Law, as that they will then be Se^^^ by Law, whereas till that be
done, (...) are always subject to be Ruined (...) color of Law. But why are
you Querulous at the Dispensing Po^^ in this particular case wherein it
Exercised? The King declares his Opinion, That Conscience ought not (...)
constrained, nor People forced in m^^^ of mere Religion. This Principle the
ground of his Dispensation. H^^ you not lately observed, T^^t d^^ Gentlemen,
who being in Comm^^^ would not Execute these ^^r^ L^^^ and were therefore for a
s^as^^ (...) aside, are now returned again (...) their former Stations, with
R^^^on, and the Love of their ^^^bours? Have you not Re^^ the Ap^^logy for the
Church of England (...) relation to the Spirit of Pers^^^^ for which she is
accused? How (...) former Errors are ext^^^ed by (...) stances, page 4. That
^ho t^^ (...) Parliament) of the Church of (...) did not perform what (...)
mised by some Leading M^^^ ^^ters (in procuring them a Bill of yet there was
little or nothing against them for about Nine (...); but they had their
Meetings al^^ as publicly and as regularly as the ^^^h of England had their
Churches. ^^ou not remember a Vote of the (...) of Commons in 1680. whereby it
Resolved, That the Prosecution of ^^stant Dissenters upon the Penal (...) was
at that time Grievous to the ^^^ct.

^^all the Justices that did not Exe^^^ these Laws gain Esteem by it? the
Church of England excuse her from the charge of Severity by not Executing these
Laws for (...) Years together? Shall the Com^^^ in Parliament Vote the
Execution ^^em a Grievance? And may not King extend his Compassion to^^ds his
Dissenting Subjects, and say shall not be Executed? To make a signal Act of
Grace the ground groundless Jealousy, and cause Contention, to say no worse of
it) ^^ghly Disingenuous, and discovers ^^^ry froward and perverse Dispo^^n: But
let us consider your next (...) of Questions.

Have we, or can we have any higher ^^er here in England then King, ^^ds and
Commons in Parliament As^^led? The Laws that are now Dispen^^^ with, and
rendered useless, were they made by that Power? Can your New ^^rter be made by
any higher or other ^^er? Do you think there is any Tempo^^ Spiritual Power
here in England a^^^ the Dispensing Power? And can you (...) it appear to us?
To these Questi^^^ you desire Mr Penn would let his Brethren and you know his
Mind honestly.

In his stead I Answer, We have no Law Makers, but King, Lords and Commons in
Parliament Assembled, but yet we are in England, as well as in other parts of
the World, under a Law to God, and thereby each Man is obliged to preserve
within his own Breast the Answer of a good Conscience, from which no Law of
King, Lords and Commons can absolve him; and hence it is that we have many
Fundamental Maxims of Law grounded upon the Law of God, and common Reason of
Mankind, as well respecting the Sovereigns Prerogative, as the Right of the
Subject, not written in Acts of Parliament, but in their Nature so invariable,
That (as our Lawyers tell us) Acts of Parliament made against them are void in
themselves. And if this Opinion be true, these Fundamental Maxims of Law,
whether in Spirituals or Temporals, tho they may be for a season by a
particular Act of Parliament interrupted, they are not thereby vacated, but
still retained, and will at one time or other again discover their Vigor. Acts
not contradictory to these Fundamental Laws may be useful for a season, but not
having that innate Stability as Fundamental Maxims have, may afterward become
useless, improper and grievous to be put in Execution; hence those common
distinctions between Malum in se, and malum prohibitum. And subsequent thereto,
in many cases a power or no power of Dispensing, That which is unlawful in it
self to be done, as Murder, Th^ft, Trespass, and the like, cannot be made
lawful by any Law or Dispensation whatsoever. That which is lawful in it self,
but becomes unlawful, because prohibited by a particular Statute, may be
Dispensed with, so as no particular Person be Damnified by that Dispensation,
and not otherwise. Among the many Vicissitudes of Succession to the Crown,
between the two Houses of York and Lancaster, Do you think there were no Laws
in being, made in the Reign of a King of one of these Branches (in Fact)
dispensed with by his Successor of the other Branch, till they came to be
Repealed in Parliament? Were the Oaths of Fidelity and Obedience made to the
Line Interrupted, required to be taken by all Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, and
other Officers Commissionated by the other Line which succeeded, until they
were Repealed in Parliament? In the various changes of the National Religion,
between the Reigns of King Henry the the Eighth and Queen Elizabeth, were all
Penalties imposed by Laws respecting Religion, exacted without any Relax or
Suspension, till those Laws were Abrogated in Parliament. In the first Year of
King Henry the Fourth a whole Parliament held in the Twenty first of Richard
the Second was Repealed: In one of which Laws then made, diverse Pains of
Treason were ordained, whereby, as the Act of Repeal says, No Man did know how
he ought to behave himself to Do, Speak or Say for doubt of such Pain; and if
that Law had been Religiously observed till the moment of its Repeal It could
never have been repealed. In the Second Year of Richard the Third, a Statute
made in the First of the said King was Dispensed with by Proclamation. Vaugh^^
(...) page 353*
Now I would gladly hear wh^^ cause my pretended Brother Bap^^ has to Quarrel
at his present Maje^^^ gracious Dispensing with Laws in^^^ing Temporal
Penalties for Ecclesiatical Matters, and rendering then use^ less for the
present, in that respe^^ only, till they can be Repealed Parliament. And
wherein the exceed of this Dispensing Power has exce^^ed what has been in Fact
done by (...) Royal Predecessors, and admitted may be lawfully done by our
greatest Lawyers. But to proceed,

Shall your New Charter have a Pe^^ty inserted to be inflicted on the Infringe^
or Breakers of it or no? If not, W^^ will your New Charter signify? N^^ three
skips of a Lowse: And if it (...) a Penalty, Cannot any King by his Prerogative
and Authority Royal Dispense (...) the Penalty? And what will it sign^^^ then?

This pretended Baptist's Resolution of the first of these Questions is (...)
Weak as it is Idle, and both that an^ the others, may receive a satisfactory
Answer.

Such a New Charta as is desired, i^ no Penalty be annexed, may be very
significant in many respects, (1) (...) may be materially good and oblig^^, to
Obedience by its innate Virtue, o^^ pain of Condemnation by the Divin^^ Law;
and in that respect of greater signification, and much more desirable then such
Laws as are materially ^^d, and cannot be obeyed without Brea^^ of a Law of
God. (2) This Ne^^^ ^^^ter may, without annexing any ^^lties, Repeal all those
Penalties, (...) which Persons are compelled to ^^rm Acts of Divine Worship,
^^ary to their Understanding, (...), and a Good Conscience, and put (...) of
the Power of any Dispensa^^^ ^o revive those Laws, or to im^^ Penalties of the
like kind. (3) (...) a New Law may without any Pe^^s by its simple Declarations
put ^^e to that, which is now unrea^ly made the ground of all our ^ests, and
confirm to us all those (...) by which our Liberties and ^^rties are preserved.

(...) presuming it may also have Pe^^ inserted to be inflicted on the ^^gers
or Breakers of it, These ^^e so qualified as not to be Dis^^ with; (if under
the color ^^^f evil minded Men do not prac^^on the Sovereign Power: For (...)
a case, if the Sovereign Power (...) Dispense with the Penalty of a (...) Laws,
it may be divested of such (...) as are necessary for its own Pre^^on, (but in
any ordinary case, if ^^rson or Body Corporate receive ^^lar Damage by the
breach of New Law, He or They may if the ^^tors please, be Entitled to a ^^lar
Action by the same Law, and recover Damages against the Breakers of it, (...)
Rep. (...), 342.
at the Kings Suit, by ^^ent, or Presentment, or by a (...) Action, with which
the King (...) Dispense.

(...) Instance you give, to put us ^f Doubt, in Mr Langhornes (...), touching
the Kings Right in Dispensing with Penal Laws, I shall not Repeat, but only
observe, That the Opinion you cite (however you may do it in scorn) carries
such an Evidence in it for a Dispensing Power (not in ordinary Cases, as that
Author has well observed) but upon extraordinary Occasions, when the King in
his Wisdom shall find it necessary, as calls for more Cunning then I yet
perceive in you, to raise any material Objection against it.

Qu. Now where is the assurance then of Mr Penn's New Charter?

Ans. Our Assurance will lie not only in the Authority of the Legislators,
equal to any other Law, but also in the Authority of the Matter, which will
command an Assent in every Man's Conscience as soon as he reads it, Not to do
that to another, which he would not have done to himself. Our Assurance will be
in our Love and Affection One toward Another, as Neighbors concerned to
promote the common Interest of the Realm. In the Watchfulness of all Parties
against any one particular Faction, if any such should rise up, and attempt to
in thrall the Consciences of all the rest, in our thankful and dutiful
Behavior toward our Sovereign for breaking off those intolerable Yoaks we
could not bear, and setting us upon such a lasting Foundation, both for our
Civil and Religious Liberties, as with a discreet. Care and Managemant of them
may remain firm to Perpetuity.

Qu. But who can tell what King we may have after our present Sovereign whether
so merciful, or so just? Or what SheriffS the next King may chose, and what
Returns of Parliament Men they may make? For you know the Forfeiture on the
Sheriffs making a false Return is no great matter, and cannot a King pardon it
by his Dispensing Power or Authority Royal? What will, nay what can your n^w
Charter then signify, when it either is or may be, (according to your own
Doctrine) Invalidated, Disannlled, or Annihilated in an instant.

Ans. If there should be raised by my Querest, or any other like him, such a
perverse Spirit and behavior in any Party of Men, as to prevent the Nations
selted enjoyment of these Privileges we now have as Men and Christians, by his
Majesty's Prudence, Justice and Clemency, who can tell (indeed) what the sad
Consequences of it may be? But if Duty, Reason and common Interest prevail,
here is nothing offered that should cause any Man to slack his utmost diligence
and endeavors to arrive at the Settlement proposed by a New Charter. For what
do these Queries tend to, or what of any weight do they contain? For,

First, Does William Penn, or any party of Dissenters propose any such Methods
to be persued, as may advance Prerogative to that degree, as to Invalidate, or
Annihilate all our Laws?

Secondly, Is not the National Religion, as it is Styled in (...) first place
to be maintain^^ (...) as well secured, as any (...) new Law can make it with
(...) a Liberty for consi^^cion, D^^ters from it in the worth^^ (...)
(Expl^^ing of all Li^^^ness) as may free th^^ (...) future inconveniency upon
(...) of Religion.

Thirdly, Is any thing (...) that by a new Cha^ter, (...) power should be given
to (...) for choosing of Sheriffs, tha^ he has, or that the penalti^^ a
Sheriffs making false (...) shall be less then now they (...) or any thing else
to retur^ Case worse then it is.

You take it for granted, I (...) which I do not know, nor you^ neither, as I
suppose, that the (...) Forfeiture, who shall make a (...) turn is no great
matter, or that the King can pardon, or di^^^^ with. The Case of S^
Sam^^nardiston whe^ein he had a Ver^^^ Eight Hundred Pounds damage against a
Sheriff for a false Retur^ inform you otherwise; and ^^^^ly a new Charter will
not ma^^ Penal then now it is, but if it (...) ever happen, notwithstanding
Charter, as it has heretofore ^ap^^ notwithstanding our old Charter, (...)
Knights and Burgesses should (...) duly chosen; the same Fa^e ^^^tend such a
Parliament, as di^^ of 38 H. 6.

^ow come to your second Con^^^^on, wherein you pray Mr (...) to consider, What
his New ^^^ter can signify, so long as there High Commission Court, or a high
mission for Ecclesiastical Affairs (...)? Cannot those Commissioners (...) any
of your and our Preachers, ^^hers, or Ministers to Task when ^^^se? Cannot
they, when they (...) a mind to it, suspend Mr Pen, ^^^corge Whitehead, Mr
Alsop, ^^^obb, Mr Mead, or Mr Bowyer, (...) as the Bishop of London, etc. ^ot
the Court when they will; or (...) think fit, or be commanded, sus^^^ silence
or forbid any or all the ^^^ing Ministers to Preach any (...) in their
Meetings, if they will (...) Read any Declaration or Order (...) ever, that the
King shall set forth require them to Read? Remember Magdalen College Men;
Re^^ber also that Sawse for a Goose is ^ay be Sawse for a Gander.

^^s. The case of Magdalen Col^^^^ is published at large, you may ^^d it if you
please, and Answer (...) you can, especially the para^ase in Edwards the Sixth
time. (...) pray what is that to a New ^^^ter? If wrong Judgment was ^^^n by
the Court (as you per^^^s suppose) in that case, do you ^^^e no difference
between Dis^^^ing with a Law, and wrong ^^^gment given against a Law (if (...)
such should be) in Westminster (...) or the Ecclesiastical Court.

^f the Dissenters you name, or you who pretend to be a Baptist, be of the
Clergy of England in the Eye of the Law, and hold Ecclesiastical Affairs and
Benefits, they or you may for Mis-behaviour be suspended from them by the
Ecclesiastical Commissioners. But why do you fancy that a New Charter (by which
it is expected that Penalties for matters of mere Religion will be repealed)
should be made to signify nothing, by the Ecclesiastical Commissioners which
now are; I can easily foresee that a New Charter may make that Commission in
the cases you mention to signify nothing; but I cannot imagine how that
Commission should make a New Charter insignificant. As to the silencing of
Dissenting Ministers, its evident as the Law now is, their reading or not
reading the Kings Declaration in their Meetings will not prevent it, if the
King withdraw his Favor, nor is there any cause to give the Ecclesiastical
Commissioners any trouble about them; for as the Laws now are there are other
Ecclesiastical Courts, which with the aid of the Justices at their Sessions are
sufficiently empowered to Censure, Fine, Imprison, Banish or Hang them for their
Nonconformity to the Religion Established by Law.

You exhort us to see before we Leap, whether the Words in the Orders set forth
in the Gazett, for contempt of his Majesty's Authority will run no further then
just Mr Penn will have it. And ask, Can he stop the Current of it when he
pleases? and says, If he could, we are not sure he would; for formerly he had
no great kindness (we know) for us Baptists and other Dissenters, and if he
could and would we are not sure of his Life, how long; therefore it will be the
greatest piece of Weakness and Folly in the World for us to Dance after his and
the Jesuits Pipe alone, contrary both to all common Sense and Reason, and our
own general Interest.

Ans. How do you make out your Inference, That to do as you say is the greatest
piece of Weakness and Folly? I take it to be altogether as great folly to Dance
after your Pipe in Company, contrary to common Sense, Reason and Interest, as
after Mr Penn and the Jesuits alone; surely in this you take the Dissenters to
be very forgetful of what their Senses so lately testified, when under the
feeling Prosecution of Penal Laws, and to be unreasonably ignorant of their
Interest in desiring those Penal Laws may be Repealed in Parliament, and a due
Liberty of Conscience Established in their room. But for what cause do you
reflect upon Mr Penn? I take it as a certain Evidence, that all Pamphlets on
this Subject, that are interlaced with personal Reflections asserted on
Surmises, without proof, are designed to promote Factions Dissentions, rather
then to Unite in one common Interest, and heal our uncharitable Divisions. I
have known Mr Penn for many Years, and have been credibly informed by others,
that from his Age of Seventeen Years he has been an ^^mate Associate with the
most ^^^nent of Dissenters, that when (...) was of Christ Church College in
Oxford, he was fined for his (...) from the Religious Ceremonies (...) the
College: He suffered (...) Hardships in his Fathers Family (...) that account,
has been a con^^^^ Advocate these Twenty Years (...) the Liberty we enjoy and
hope (...) to have confirmed: I have (...) of many good Offices he has (...) at
Court, both for Dissen^^^ Conformists; and that he has imp^^^^^ that Favor
which has been (...) him by his Prince, both before (...) since his Ascending
to the Th^^^ for the Benefit and not to the (...) judice of others: I have not
(...) of any rich Presents or Rew^^^ that have been given or required any of
his Services, or any ^^ployments he seeks or accepts (...) How his pleadings
for Liberty Conscience has or can tend to (...) improvement of his Revenues,
(...) cannot apprehend neither; th^^^fore if you will free your (...) from the
suspicion of an ill (...) sign, and a groundless Aspe^^^ tho Mr Penn may be no
Frien^ such pretended Baptists and now Dissenters as you are; its incu^^^ on
you to show wherein he has ^^^nifested that he had formerly great Kindness for
those that really such upon this account.

I pass by your trifling about enlarging or limiting Authority the power or
will, length or ^^^ness of Mr Penn's Life, and pro^^^ Thirdly, To consider
above all what ^^^ity or Validity this New Charter ^^be of, when there is a
standing Ar^^^ kept on Foot? Whether Guns will (...) Reason, or Dragoons mind
Chart^^^ or Arguments? your reference to (...) practice in France, if we are
not ^^angely Infatuated and given up to ^^n and Destruction; your Query ^^ether
their Carriage and Quartering ^^ll agree with a New Charter for ^iberty, and if
Mr Penn be a Friend (...) Liberty for Liberties sake, you de^^^^e an honest,
clear nnd satisfactory Answer to these Three Points.

In Mr Penn's stead give me leave ^t present to return you an answer, ^y asking
you some Questions; Is the Western Rebellion, slipped out of your mind? Was there
no occasion given for multiplying Dragoons? Is Sovereign Power so limited by
our Laws, as that it cannot make use of such means as are of apparent and
absolute necessity for its own preservation? Did you ever know of any Army
wherein no dissorders were committed in their Marches, or Quarternings? Are our
Dragoons without any discipline, for reforming or punishing abuses when they
are complained of?

Do you, and such as follow your Examples, take a right course to avoid such
mischiefs, being done in England by Dragoons, as are committed in France? I am
as far from defending any of their disorders, or desiring their continuance
longer then needs must, as I am from beleiving you to be a Baptist.

But sure I am, whatever you are, your Reasoning are very unfavory, and unsafe,
tending to fasten us under that Bondage, you seemingly advise us to avoid; for
to deal plainly and honestly with you, (as you desire Mr Penn to do) I see no
way to escape the dissorders that are either felt or feared, but by giving His
Majesty full satisfaction, not only of our Fidelity, but of our Affection also
to his Person and Government, in complying with what he shall propose, for
maintenance of the National Religion, and all the possessions of the Clergy, as
Established by Law, and abolishing all such Penalties for Nonconformity to the
National Religion, as may be found inconsistent with the common Right and
Reason of Mankind, Doctrines of Christianity and Interest of England.

I shall now consider your closing points (1) In the mean time it appears to be
highly the Duty of all Men as well Dissenters as others, who have Votes in
choosing Parliament Men, above all to choose such Faithful Patriots as will
take care of these things already hinted, and others that may be brought before
them; that our Liberties, our Laws, and our Lives may be preserved from ill
designing Men, and from future Quo Warranto's, and all the high Violaters and
Infringers thereof called to account, and justly punished; this will well
become them, and secure us, more then any titular Charter whatsoever.

If you had only advised the choosing Faithful Patriots for Parliament Men,
without cutting out their Work, your advice might have been sound; or if you
had only looked forwards that our Liberties, and our Lives might be preserved
from ill designing Men; and our Laws so settled, that all good Subjects may
equally share in the benefit of them; your Advice might have been seasonable;
for it is evident that our Circumstances require as wise and moderate Men,
experienced in civil and Religious affairs, as every Parliament in England did;
and if the Nation be blessed with such a Choice in the next Parliament, all
sober persons, may by their wise Councels be out of fear of suffering Prejudice
by future accidents of State: But at this juncture to talk of calling to an
Account, and punishing all such as you may reckon high Violaters and Infringers
of our Laws and Liberties is very unseasonable: Pray tell us since you
undertake to Chalk out the way for a Parliament, and propose the Work you would
have done by them, how far they are to look back, and where and with what sort
of Men you would have them begin; with such of the Clergy, or of the Lawyers,
as were the first Advancers of Prerogative above your measures; or with the
Dissenters for thankfully accepting the Kings Indulgence, and making use of the
Liberty he has been pleaed to grant in their peaceable and Religious
Assemblies? after so many Convulsions in the State, Pl^^^^ and Counter-plots as
we have known in our Age. The same things to be liable to Penalties (...) one
season, which at another time have been marks of the greatest Loyalty; sober
Men cannot but think it is high time to adhere to, and pursue those Royal
Methods, that have been with good success begun, and are proposed to be ^^tled
on terms of lasting security and Peace.

If the Case should be proposed to any Assembly (your self being in the
company) in reference to any Man that you can mark out as it was by the Jews,
in reference to the Adulteress before our Savior, That he who is without Fault
should cast the first Stone, your supposed Criminal might escape by the
Assemblys going out one by one, from the Eldest to the last convict in their
own Consciences; and if you should have the confidence to stay behind the rest,
it might be no good evidence of an awakened Conscience; but if Peacemakers
have singular marks of favor always attending them, certainly such worthy
Patriots as at this season shall be found in that Work, repairing our Breaches,
healing our Divisions, settling our Civil and Religious concerns, that whoever
will conscientiously discharge his duty to God, his King and his Neighbor, may
not only enjoy Peace and Truth in his Days, but leave it on like terms as a
Blessing (...) his Posterity, will deserve the ^^est marks of favor from all
^^^d Men, and may therein also ^^^est a Blessing from Heaven.

Liberty, say you, is indeed a Fine ^^^d, but Remember Brethren what Apostle
Peter has told us, That (...) there were, that while (...) promise them
Liberty they ^^^^selves are the Servants of ^^ruption? And Observe what ^^ws;
For of whom [a Man is (...) ^ome, of the same he is ^^ght in Bondage, And then
(...) ask (I suppose Mr. Penn or my (...) How Do You. How will you (...) that
Word?

Answer, I like it as part of Holy (...), Teaching me (1) Not to ^^e that
Liberty whereunto I am ^^ed by the Gospel, (2) To prize (...) Liberty in the
Gospel which is ^^^lged me by my Sovereign and ^romote what in me lies, the
^blishing of it by a New Charter (^) Not to hearken to you, or any, ^^^th
perhaps did never feel the (...) of this Liberty, and would guide me of it, by
talking of Li^^ies of another Sort which signi^^^ nothing to me or any other
Con^^tious Dissenters, if we be depri^^^ of this (4) as inducing me (...) the
better understanding of the (...) you cite) to consider the Con^^^ by which I
am cautioned not ^^^^ken to any such, as promise Liberty, who are themselves
(...) by, and in Bondage to their own Fleshly poluting Lusts, (5) as
instructing me by certain Characters to discern what sort of Person^ they are
who (by enticing Words would beguile me of my Liberty: chiefly such as despise
Government, are Presumptious, and not afraid to speak Evil of Dignities: And
with this short Paraphrase, I may after your Example, ask, How do You; Or how
will you like that word?

In this I agree with what you say, The Name of Liberty signifies nothing
without the Substance. And that which the Dissenters desire and endeavor
after, is that such a Liberty may be obtained, and secured by a New Charter to
Perpetuity as is substantial: But in this we may differ, if you think a present
Liberty signifies nothing, for it is now, and will be at all times, so long as
we can enjoy it, the present comfort of our Lives, and of so great value, that
I think he that has felt the want of it, will not easily be enticed to make a
Forfeiture of his present Liberty, by taking any such course as you steer to
Secure Penal Laws for Coertion of Conscience under the Name of Substantial and
English Liberties, If these Penal Laws be the Goose you advise us not to part
with for sticking down a Feather; and the Bird in the Hand, I cannot Guess how
you came to be a Baptist; sure I am you do not show your self in the Colors
of an English Anabaptist, for your course tends to the binding of Heavy
Burdens on their and other Dissenters Shoulders, which its most likely you
never did, nor will touch with one of your Fingers.

You exhort us, To be of one mind as Brethren, to let Brotherly Love and
Charity continue, and tell us, nothing will save us but Union. Pray take your
part in the Exhortation let Brotherly Love have a beginning (for I fear that is
not yet settled between us) and then I doubt not but the profitable Experience
of the Exercise of it will give it a continuance; If you are for uniting, be
content to part with those Offensive Weapons that have caused our divisions,
let our Civil Liberties as Men, and our Religious Liberties as Christians be
settled upon sure Foundations, let temporal penalties, for dissent in ^^rituals
be set aside, and the (...) Names of Sedition, Felony Tru^^ be server'd from
such things as (...) in no manner offensive to the ^^vil Government, but mere
Opinion and peaceable Exercises subsequ^^^ in matters of Religion. Let (...)
learn to be kindly affectionate (...) Compassionate as Men and ^^^bours ought
to be one to (...) whether True Believers, Mu^^^ or Unbelievers and then the^^
be no ground to fear that the ^^ruptions or projects of Rome, Ca^^va, France,
Holland, or any (...) else should ever dis-unite (...) be able to gain any
advantage attempting to sow amongst (...) Seeds of Dissension.

FINIS.

