AN ACCOUNT OF THE CONFESSION OF William Lord Russel, With the manner of his
Behavior in Prison, and the Christian Speeches he made at the Place of
EXECUTION IN Lincoln's Inn Fields, Where he was Beheaded for High Treason,
Against His MAJESTY. On Saturday the 21st. of July, 1683.
Licensed and Entered, according to Order.

THe continual discoveries of Horrid Plots is enough to discourage Malignant
Spirits from their Progress in Iniquity, till Divine Ju^tice makes a seizure of
their offending faculties; nor will the ever-seeing Eye of Heaven wink at such
Enormities, as we too often are made acquainted with; how does daily and woeful
experience tell us the dangers and difficulties of Conspiracy! yet,
notwithstanding, such is the impudence of some dissatisfied persons, that they
neither can, nor will, desist from seeking their own ruins, by contriving
their own overthrow. Treason, above all things, in the eye of God and Man, is
most detestable; and as seldom goes unrequited, as any transgression
whatsoever; but such a vain thing is man, that the hopes of advancement, and
the self-promise of honor corrupts the mind, and debauches the senses of too
many in our Age: And some (never sati^fied with the Blessings of the Almighty)
aspire to that height, which in the conclusion meets with the greatest fall; as
you may observe by these subsequent Lines:

It is not long since my Lord Russel had the repute of a noble, brave, and
generous Gentleman, whose deportment (before this snare he was drawn into was
by all commended; no Gentleman could have a better ^eport than this unfortunate
Lord, now as much decry'd by his fatal concern. But yet, as he has been an
Offender against his most gracious Majesty, by the subtle insinuation of
long-headed Statesmen, so we hope that his sincere Penitence may procure his
Pardon in the Court of Heaven.

AFter the Trials of Mr. Walcot, Mr. Rouse, and Hone, was Arraigned the Lord
Russel; who desired longer time, in order, to prepare for his Trial, but it was
not allowed of by the Court: then be ex^epted against the Jurors, as supposing
them not to be Freeholders, Inhabiting within the City of London, and
therefore desired counsel to be assigned him, to debate it as matter of Law,
which was accordingly granted him; and Mr. Holt, Mr. Poluxphen, and Mr. Ward
were allowed him as counsel to debate the matter, whose opinions, after many
arguments between the King's Council and them, they were overruled by by the
Count; whereupon the Jury was called over, and the Prisoner challenged about
thirty of them, but at last twelve of them were sworn, and the Indictment read,
the substance were to this effect: That William Russel Esquire (For so he was then
styled) together with James Duke of Monmouth, Ford Lord Gray, Sir Thomas
Armstrong, and one Ferguson, and others, had conspired to Levy War and
Rebellion in the Kingdom of England, to compass the death of His Majesty, and
to make a miserable slaughter amongst the Subjects of our Lord the King, etc.

To this Indictment He having Pleaded not Guilty, Mr. North opened the matter
of Fact, and was seconded by Mr. Attorney General, who at large declared the
Hainousness of the Crime, which in Evidence, was to be given against the Noble
Lord the Prisoner at the Bar, which was also insisted upon by Mr. Solicitor
General. After which, Coll. Rumsey was Sworn, who deposed, That the Duke of
Monmouth, the Lord Russel, Sir Tho Armstrong, and diverse others, being at one
Mr. Shepherds a Vintener, in the Parish of St. Nicholas Bashaw, he was sent to
them by the Earl of Shaftsbury, to know what forwardness they were in, as to an
Insurrection, to which he received answer, that Mr. Trenchard who had promised
to raise 1000 Foot and 4000 Horse, to be aiding in the Design, had certified
them by a Letter, that he could not so soon effect it as was required; for that
the persons he desired to allure to his interest, would not rush upon a Design
e're they had provided for their Families, and that the Earl of Shaftsbury must
be contented, at which the Earl seemed much disaffected. He further deposed,
that diverse Consults had been held, in order to the raising men in diverse
places, and that an Insurrection was to have been on the 19th. of November: and
that he viz. Colonel Ru^say was to have been a Commander at Bristol and the
Duke of Mo^mou^h, Gray, and Armstrong of the Muse and Savoy.

This deposition made, the Lord Howard of Estrith was Sworn, Who decla^ed the
whole Conspiracy at large from time to time, how the Plot was carried on by the
Earl of Shaftshury in chief, and that he had declared his dissatisfaction in
the coldness of the Duke of Monmouth and other Lords to join wi^h him; and that
he had 10000 Men in the City at his beck; and seeing things were so far
advanced, he would cause the design to be put in Execution: and that diverse
Messages passed between the Earl and the Lords in relation to put^ing off the
design longer; which at last was from time to time put off, till the Earl
doubting his safety, fled into Holland, where he d^ed; after which a Council of
Six were constituted, who were the Duke of Monmouth, the Earl of Essex, the
Lord Russel, the Lord Howard, (the n^w Witness,) Mr. Sidny, and Mr. Hambden,
the younger, who were to determine a^l matters as to the Insurrection; and that
they to his knowledge met at Hambden's House, and at the House of the Prisoner,
to debate about carrying on the Design, and that Aaron Smith was sent into
Scotland to persuade the Gentry to Rise there.

The next that gave Evidence was Mr. Shephard a Vintner, living in the Parish
of St. Nicholas Bashaw, who deposed, That Mr. Ferguson came to him in the Name
of the Duke of Monmouth, and also named several persons that were to come to
his House; desiring a private Room, which they had accordingly; and that the
Lord Russel was there: And that at that time a disc^urse happened about an
Insurrection, and a Declaration was read, in order to a Relation of the
grievances of the Nation, tending to a Rising. etc.

During the time of his Imprisonment, since he was Sentenced to Death, he spent
most part of his time in meditation and Prayer and other holy exercises, have
had conference with several eminent Divines of the Church of England, in order
to his preparation for Death and a happy Eternity, On Friday the day before his
Execution, his Lady and his Children attended with several of his servants came
to take their last farwell of him in prison, only his Lady (we are informed)
stayed with him all night, to take part in the Agony of her beloved Lord in the
last night of his being in this world, which was spent in Prayer and heavenly
Conferences in order to his eternal state.

In this Heavenly manner did he prepare for his great change, and with a
thousand reflections upon his late transactions past away the tedious night,
till the dawning of the last day he was ever to see in this world: and then
with a redoubled fervency he renewed his Divine Petitions, humbly beseeching
his blessed Savior to commiserate his distress, and take him into his
everlasting favor, which is the only happiness that sinful man can desire to
enjoy: It was much to be taken notice of what sudden changes appeared in hi^
countenance, when sometimes calling to mind his misspent time, he s^emed to be
cast down; and an a sudden was raised again at the thoughts and assurance of
Christ's everlasting Love, on which he firmly grounded his never-failing hope.

On Saturday morning being the 21st. of July, he was conveyed in a coach
accompanied with two Reverend Divines, Dr. T^^lorson, and Dr. Burnet, from
Captain Richardson's House to Lincoln's Inn Fields, where there was a Scaffold
built on purpose for his Execution, where, when he came, he behaved himself
with so much civility in his deportment, that he moved the Spectators to great
pity, all lamenting his sad state, and grieving that he should be so strangely
drawn in to this praeminary: He took no^ice of the great Assembly that came
there to behold that sad spectactle, which in a little time was to be presented
to their watery eyes; every particular person as much applauding his Behavior
as condemning his evil Conspiracy, which for all I can hear was the only Crime
that ever he was known to be guilty of in so gross a nature. After a fine
Oration made to the people, the particulars whereof we cannot, as yet, give you
a Just Account of, by reason of the multitude of sorrowful Spectators that
hindered the hearing of what was said, but after some conference with two
Reverend Divines, he made Preparation for the other World, and so went to
Prayer, beseeching God in his great mercy and pity to take him into his
everlasting Kingdom; and having given some short Admonition to Loyalty, he
freely submitted his Head to the Block, when the Executioner soon separated his
Head from his Body, while his Soul, it is hoped, flew to eternal happiness.

Printed for J. Coniers.


