AN ANSWER TO Several LETTERS Written by SCOTTISH GENTLEMEN In His Majesty's
Dominions beyond the Seas, To the MASTER and GOVERNORS OF THE Scottish
Corporation AND HOSPITAL in LONDON. Giving a true Account of the Erection of
the said Company, and its Progress from the Year 1664, to 1677. for the
Satisfaction of such as desire that Information.
GENTLEMEN,
WE cannot but judge well of your Intentions, by the desire you testify in
your Letters, to be informed of the Grounds and Motives that induced us to
procure the Erection of a Corporation of our Countrymen in London: And as we
rejoice to perceive you acted by the same Charitable and Public Spirit that
moved us, so we think it our Duty to satisfy your just Demands as clearly and
succinctly as possibly we can. Though we need not put you in mind that many
useful and great Works have had their Rise from low and fortuitous Beginnings;
your own, and the experience of the World, being sufficiently furnished with
many Instances of this Nature; yet that you may the more fully understand the
Original and Progress of our Society, by the accidental Motives and real Causes
of its Establishment: take the pains, Gentlemen, to be informed,

That in the Year 1664, a worthy Member of this Society, who is still alive,
being visited with a long Fit of Sickness, and in doubt of Life, resolved to
communicate to the Poor of his Country (whom he found to be numerous, and
under great streights) part of the Fruits of those his Labors, which the Lord
had been pleased to bless with Success. But his Charity having a farther
Prospect than a present Supply to the Indigent at that time, and being willing
to mortify a Gift, that might be a standing Stock for the Relief of the Poor
not only of the present but future Ages; and to secure the same to Posterity,
as far as worldly Contingencies could permit, and beyond the uncertainties of
private Trustees, whose malversation or decay, often disappoint the pious
Intentions of Donors; he took thereupon the advice of Council.

Their Answer and Resolution was, that his present Charity might be safely
enough distributed, but that if his intention was to settle a perpetual Stock,
the use and improvement whereof might be a standing Supply for the Poor of his
Country, the surest Expedient for that was to obtain Letters Patent from His
Majesty, for the erecting of an Incorporation of Scots in London which having
the Privileges of a permanent and authorized Society, would be by Law empowered
to act and oblige themselves and Successors, in such a manner as no private
Consociation could pretend to. This Resolution was immediately imparted by the
Sick Person to the most sober and discreet Men of our Country, who then had
the direction of that voluntary Contribution, which by the name of Box-money
was collected for the use of the Poor. They maturely weighed the matter first
privately among themselves, and then in a general Meeting of our Countrymen,
who all foreseeing the advantages of the Design, and applauding the Council,
notwithstanding their doubts of procuring the Patent, bestirred themselves so
zealously in that Affair, that having made application to the Earl of
Lauderdale, and made appear to him the profitableness of that Project, they
obtained of His Gracious Majesty, by the intercession of the Earl, after a
Reference and satisfactory Report made to His Majesty on that Subject, a Patent
in ample Form; which took place the Third of September 1665. and Mr. James
Kinnier was chosen first Master.

So good a Work was almost stifled in the Birth; for the Contagious Plague
which then dispeopled London, and those fatal Flames (which the Year following
by the deplorable ruin of the City purified it from Infection to the very
foundation;) if not wholly crushed, yet suspended for some time the execution
of our good Intentions. These dismal Times, however, put not a stop to the main
Wheel of Charity, for during the Sickness Year, when our Beginnings were but
small, there were Three hundred Scots, and of Scottish Extraction, who dyed of
the Plague in and about London, buried at the Charge of the Company, with as
much decency as the Calamity of the Time would permit; and many who were
Infected maintained, and taken care of, until they recovered, and by God's
blessing the Contagion ceased, without putting the several Parishes where they
had lived to one Farthing of Expenses.

Whilst the City lay buried under its own Rubbish, though many of our Members
who had been scattered by these two heavy Visitations, were again returned, and
as earnest in their desires as formerly to promote that Work of Charity; yet
the lowness of our Stock, which was hardly sufficient to supply the Necessities
of the Poor that then lay upon us, made us almost despair of bringing our
designs to any accomplishment. We wanted a Hall for our Meetings, Ground to
build upon, and Money to purchase and effectuate both. Nevertheless in the Year
1670, the City having to admiration recovered, or rather outdone much of its
ancient splendour, we resolved with revived hopes vigorously to set upon the
performance of our long intended resolutions. To that effect having several
times assembled the Body of our Company, to consult about the measures we were
to take, we at length had notice given us of a piece of waste Ground in
Blackfriars, where formerly had stood a large dwelling House belonging to a
Lady: having after a view found the Ground for our purpose, we made application
to the Lady for the Purchase. She was unwilling to sell the Ground right of her
Inheritance, but being informed of the Pious and Charitable use that it was
designed for, she frankly granted us a Lease of it for a Thousand Years. Having
laid this foundation, we again in several Meetings of the Corporation
considered of the ways of raising Money to go on with our Buildings; and found
so great readiness not only in the Members of our own Society, but also in
several persons of worth and quality of our Nation, who liberally and
bountifully both gave and lent us Money, upon no other Security but the Bond of
the Corporation, that we were enabled in several Gradations to build, first
four dwelling Houses fronting the Street in Blackfriars that leads to the
River, with an Inscription on the Frontispiece, declaring them to be for the
use of the Poor of our Country, which were finished in the Year 1671, next our
Hall, and a House contiguous to it, the Hall having its Entry from the Street
in Blackfriars, and lying open to Bridewell Ditch, with an Emblem of Charity
cut in Free Stone, and fastened in the Wall, finished in the Year 1672. And
lastly another House which stands upon a parcel of disputed Ground that lay
long undetermined, with a Kitchen and two Rooms over it for a Dwelling House
for our Beadle, which at the sole Charge of the Members of the Company were
finished in the Years 1675, and 76. The Charge of the whole Building, viz.
Seven Dwelling-houses, the Hall with two small Rooms adjoining to it, the
Kitchen and two Rooms over it for the Beadle, by a true Computation, amounting
to Four thousand four hundred, and about fifty Pounds English, no
inconsiderable Sum to have been raised and disbursed in so short a time. And
though the Corporation has by such a vast Expense contracted Debts; yet when
we consider the cheerful and free Contributions of those who have already
concurred with so much Unanimity in that charitable Work, and the former
experiences that we have had of the Goodness and Blessing of Almighty God, in
raising us up many times unexpected Supports to our languishing Hopes; we
cannot but confidently believe, that the like means may hereafter free us from
Encumbrances, as have hitherto advanced the Work in such a progress to
perfection: And the rather, that none of those bountiful Benefactors who have
even above their Abilities contributed to the Work, have any reason from the
success of their honest Endeavors, to think their worldly Estates any way
lessened thereby; God Almighty, who charges as a Debt on Providence what is
cheerfully given to the Poor, having many times imperceptible ways to repay
what that way is lent to himself: And that moreover all such whose hands have
been open in their Charity, besides the inward satisfaction of Conscience, the
inseparable Companion of Virtue, and the hopes of future Bliss, the promised
Reward of Well-doing, have also their Names and Benevolences recorded to
Posterity in a large Sheet of Parchment hung up in the Hall, for their present
satisfaction, and an encouragement to others hereafter to imitate their
laudable Example.

God Almighty having thus far prospered our Endeavors, we thought it convenient
to have our Patent, which in some things was defective, and not rightly
conceived, altered and enlarged. Accordingly having addressed our selves to his
Grace the Duke of Lauderdale, the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, at the earnest
desire of the Duke, has been Graciously pleased, to renew our Patent in such
full and ample form as was requisite: And the Lord Chancellor of England, and
other Officers of State through whose hands it past, have with a Generous and
Charitable Liberality been pleased to discharge us of their usual Fees; to
whose Noble Munificence we do acknowledge our selves Eternally obliged. Nor
must we profess less Gratitude to the Magistrates and Governors of this famous
City of London, who have not been wanting to encourage us by many Favors, and
to many other Charitable Persons of the English Nation, who professing
themselves much taken with so laudable a work of Charity, have freely and
bountifully assisted us with their Benevolence, which we hope will not be
frustrated of Reward.

Hitherto, Gentlemen, we have acquainted you with the Motives that gave Being
to our Corporation, and with its Beginnings and Progress to this present: We
shall now briefly give you an Account of its Constitution and Government, with
some few Instances, amongst many others, of the Benefits and Advantages that
may therefrom redound to the Poor of our Country.

The Corporation consists then, of a Master, Eight Governors, Three and thirty
Assistants, with some subservient Officers appointed by them, ^s Register,
Treasurer, Stewards and Beadle, and of entered Members. The Master is yearly
chosen out of the Assistants by the eight Gover^ors, who are perpetual, and
must be all Scottish men born. If the Master dye before his Year be expired, the
eldest Master is to supply his ^lace until a new Election: And upon death, or
exclusion for misde^eanor, of any of the Governors, the eldest Master amongst
the As^^stants, provided he be a Scottish man born, is to succeed in the Office;
^ut if otherwise, he is only after he has been Master, to continue As^^stant,
and the next Scottish man successively of the Assistants that has ^een Master,
is to be admitted, according to the true and genuine sense and meaning of our
Patent. Out of the Assistants, by the Master, ^overnors and Assistants, there
is likewise yearly chosen a Treasurer, ^ho in course falls to be Master: and
who, to prevent all fraud and ^alversation, by suffering the Money to be in
several hands, is alone to ^eceive the Companies Rents, which are collected by
two Stewards al^red and of new elected every Quarter-day; and at the Years end
is (...) give in his Accounts at a Public Meeting, which being audited and
^^st the Balance, is to be delivered to the succeeding Treasurer for the
^^llowing Year: so that the increase or diminution of the Public ^ock, is
punctually and publicly known every Year.

It is to be observed that in all Meetings concerning the Affairs of the
^orporation, whatsoever is spent is not charged upon the Public ^ock, but
every one freely and without grudging pays his proportion, ^ough most have
already considerably contributed to the Founda^^on.

Now as to the Advantages which the Poor may receive by this Cor^oration so
constituted, they are many; for Lands may be either pur^hased in the Name of
the Corporation, or made over to them in trust, ^o be managed and improved for
the use of the Poor, with far more ^^curity than can be expected from any
private Trustees who are not ^^iected in a lawful permanent Body. Legacies and
Donations, of that nature soever, tending to the benefit of the Poor, may
likewise ^e made over to the Company; whereby the Necessitous of our Coun^^ey
who are here decayed and aged, may, by way of Pension, be sup^^ied, such as
fall Sick relieved and taken care of, such as dye, decently ^^ried, and such as
want Money to go to their Native Country, fur^^shed; (Instances of all which
we daily meet with in abundance:) without Burden to the Parishes where they
live, Charges to Strangers amongst whom they have been, and Disparagement to
the Country to which they belong; and this we think a Consideration to be
valued ^y all the ingenuous Lovers of their Country. We are likewise by ^ur
Patent enabled to be serviceable to our Countrymen beyond ^^a, in performing
the Wills of the Dead as Executors, and distribu^^ng their Legacies amongst
their Friends as they shall appoint, or in ^ispensing the Charity of the
Living, in the manner that themselves shall prescribe, without fraud or
prevarication, the nature of our Con^titution made up of so many Persons whose
private Interests are so various, and their public so uniform, in no
probability being like (...) admit of any. Many other Benefits you your selves
may gather from the Privileges of such an Incorporated Body, which we shall
not, present, to your farther trouble enumerate.

To conclude, Gentlemen, we are fully persuaded that your own ca^did
Reflections upon what we have above intimated to you, will (...) only incline
you to approve our charitable performances in this kin^ but also encourage you
to assist us with your Counsels, and benevol^ Concurrence in a Work of so much
advantage to the Indigent of (...) Country; it being not only a Christian
duty, but in some manner so the Interest of all Men, especially such as are
abroad, to exerc^ their Charity in this way; for whosoever shall but consult
his own ^^perience as to the ebbings and flowings of Temporal Goods, and t^
many Revolutions of Providence, though Prosperity, at present, n^ seem with a
smile to invite his Soul to take its rest, shall have reas^^ without a blush or
shame, to think it not altogether impossible, but t^ (if not) himself, yet some
of his Relations who are dear to him, (...) at some time or other be obliged to
that wherewith at present his C^^rity is pleased to oblige others. Though this
be a Truth which uncertainty of worldly Enjoyments does too often confirm, yet
as our Duty to wish well to all Men in General, so particularly we p^ God that
he would be pleased more and more so to prosper you in (...) World, that you
may have occasion to be fully satisfied with your (...) Portion, and abundantly
to supply the Necessities of others; an^ grant you in the next the lot of the
Righteous, and the rewar^ Well-doers: This is the hearty and earnest wish of,

GENTLEMEN, Your affectionate Brethren and Countrymen, JOHN RENNEY present M^

FINIS.

