AN ABSTRACT Of the most material INTERLOCUTORS of the LORDS of SESSION, during
the dependence before them, of the CAUSE of the two Danish Ships, the
Palm Tree, and Patience of Sunderburg, adjudged Prise by the High-Court of
Admirality, anno 1672. AGAINST Alexander Acheson Captain of the Frigate, or
Private Man of War, by which the said Ships were brought up, and the Owners of
the said Frigate, viz. John Duke of Rothes, Lord High Chancellor, and William
Lord Cochran, deceassed; Charles Maitland of Haltoun, Lord Thesaurer Deput,
(and one of the Lords of Session,) Sir John Cohran of Ochiltrie, Sir William
Bruce of Balcaskie, (Clerk of the Bills,) Sir James Standfield of New-milnes,
Robert Baird of Sauchtonhall, Sir William Binning, etc. EXCERPED Out of the two
DECREETS of the LORDS pronounced in favor of the Strangers, 25. February 1674.
but not extracted till the 30. of July, 1680. WITH The Articles of His
Majesty's TREATY with the King of Denmark, relating to the Case of Ships and
Goods taken at Sea in time of War; an Article of His Majesty's INSTRUCTIONS,
insisted on by the Capers, against these Ships; His Majesty's LETTER to the
LORDS (in the Case of another Ship) relative to His INSTRUCTIONS; and diverse
other Papers, related to in the DECREETS.

EDINBVRGH, Printed for the STRANGERS, in the Year, 1682.

An Abstract of the most material Interlocutors in the two Decreets of the
Lords of Session, in favor of the Owners of the two Danish Ships, the
Palm Tree, and Patience of Sunderburg, against Captain Acheson and his Owners,
in whose favor they were adjudged, Reducing the Admirals Decreets, and
ordaining the Capers to pay the Value of the Ships and Goods.

Upon Debate of the Reasons of Reduction, in praesentia,
22. February 1673. THE LORDS FIND that Reason of Adjudication, that the
Strangers had not Passes conform to the Formula agreed upon in the Treaty
betwixt the Kings Majesty and the King of Denmark, (albeit the Ships loosed
from Norway, in the beginning of July, 1672. long after the breaking out and
knowledge of the War) not to infer a Confiscation of the Ships, and Loadings
alone; But that it imports a just ground to seize and bring the same to
Trial, and that it puts the burden of Probation upon the Strangers, by
Documents and Witnesses above exception: That the Ships and Loadings belong to
the Kings Allies, and Freemen, and not to the Kings Enemies AND FIND, that the
Oaths of the Skippers and Owners, which would have been sufficient, if they had
been adhibited at the obtaining of the Passes, conform to the Formula, are not
now sufficient to clear the Property of the Ships and Loadings. AND THAT the
being of no Passes aboard relative to the Voyage, but general Passes before the
War, and that by the Skippers Oaths, it appears that they concealed the
Fraught-Brieffs, and that they were hid apart from the rest of the Documents
and found by the Privateer; and bear a greater Fraught to be paid, in case the
Ships were brought up to Holland; provided a safe Delivery were made of the
Goods; DOES IMPORT, an intended Delivery of the Goods in Holland,
notwithstanding of the Missives and Documents aboard. AND FIND the same grounds
jointly to be a sufficient presumptive Probation of a Contrivance, and that the
Ships and Goods are not free. BUT YET, to admit of a contrary positive
Probation by Documents and Witnesses above exception; That the Ships and
Loadings belong to the Subjects of Denmark, His Majesty's Allies, unless the
Privateer prove the same to belong to the Kings Enemies. LIKE AS THE LORDS
FIND, that the true Port being concealled, or made Arbitrary by the
Fraught-Briefs, if the Privateer should instruct. That Dail-boards such as were
in these Ships, are ^ounterband by the Custom of the Admirality of England or
Holland, that ground was sufficient, (though the Ships and Goods were proven to
belong to Freemen) to infer Confiscation of both. THEREFORE THE LORDS granted
Commission mutually, to either Party, for proving the Property and Value of the
Ships and Goods; the quantity of the Loadings, and that the Port designed was
London: And to the Defenders, that the Goods were Counterband.

But upon a Petition given in by the Pursuers, Representing a mistake in the
said Interlocutor, as to the matter of the Fraught, (the Fraught being not a
greater for Holland, than for England, but a less.) And craving the Benefit of
a contrary Probation, as to the matter of Counterband, etc.

Eodem die. The Lords ordain these words, Viz, [That the Fraught-Briefs bear a
greater Fraught to be paid, in case the Ships were brought up to Holland,
provided a safe Delivery were made of the Goods, which the Lords find, did
import an intended Delivery of the Goods in Holland, Notwithstanding of the
Missives and Documents aboard; to be left out of the Interlocutor, and grant a
contrary Probation to the Pursuers to prove, That Dails are not Counterband;
And ordain the Probation to be hinc inde, up Documents above exception.

Upon Report made of the Commissions, by the Pursuers from the Magistrates of
Sunderbare and Christiania, and from the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London,
with an Attestation from the Admirality of Holland, and His Majesty's
Declaration in favor of the Danes.

25. February, 1674. The Lords having advised the Reports with the Depositions
of the Witnesses, contained therein. etc. Then find that the property of the
said Ships and Goods, does belong to Carsten Matsen and Hanse Petersen. and
their Owners, His Majesty's Allies, And therefore Reduce the Decreets of
Adjudication, etc.

Upon Informations given in hinc inde, in Relation to His Majesty's
INSTRUCTIONS.
23. July, 1674. The Lords having considered the Informations given in by
either Party, together with His Majesty's Instructions, especially that Artcle
thereof, concerning concealled Documents, they notwithstanding thereof, adhere
to their former Interlocutors and Decreets, Reducing the foresaid Decreets of
Adjudication, obtained before the Admiral, in regard of the Probation, That the
Ships and Goods belong to the Kings Allies, and Freemen.

Item, Upon a Hearing in Presence, upon His Majesty's INSTRUCTIONS.
30. July, 1674. The Lords having heard, etc. They adhere to their former
Interlocutor, And ordain the Decreets to be Extracted.

Upon a Petition of the Capers, for a new Hearing, and Delay till November.
Eodem die. The Lords having considered the said Supplication. ADHERE to their
former Interlocutors. And ordain each Party to name a Merchant for Valuing of
the Ships and Goods, and remit to the Lord Collingtoun, to consider the
Valvation, and to give his determination thereanent; And ordain the Decreets to
be extracted accordingly.

The Capers at this time being Trading with the Ships, and the Strangers by the
Envoy of Denmark, having Represented it to the King, and made Application to
His Majesty, for having the Values of their Ships and Goods decerned to them,
conform to their probation at Sunderburg and London; with the Damages and
Charges they had sustained: And His Majesty having recommended the case to his
Grace the Duke of Lauderdale; All which after diverse years expectation of the
Success, taking no effect; The Strangers apply to the Lords in the Winter
Session, 1679. And after long Tergiversation of the Capers obtain at last this
Interlocutor, upon a full hearing in presence.

27. February, 1680. The Lords having called both Parties and their
Procurators, in their own presence, and fully heard, etc. And having advised
the Reports, anent the value of the Ships and Goods, from London and
Sunderburg, THEY FIND, the Ship, the Palm Tree, proven to be worth 5000. Ricks
Dollers. And, the Ship, the Patience, proven to be worth 3500. Ricks Dollers,
and each hundred Dails of which the Loading of either Ship consisted, proven to
be betwixt 5. and 6. lib. Sterling; AND DECERNE the Value of the Ships as
proven. And modifie the price of each hundred Dails to 50. lib. Scots, etc.

Against this Interlocutor, the Capers having Represented to the Lords, by a
Petition given in the last day of the Session.
1. Toat the Process had slept, and behoved to be wakned. 2. Several of the
Strangers were dead, whose Factories behoved to be renewed. 3. By the King's
INSTRUCTIONS, double and conceall'd Documents (both which occurred in these
Ships) were a positive ground of Confiscation. 4. The Value could only be
Decerned as the Ships and Goods were worth here. 5. The Goods were Counterband
by the Dutch Placaets. 6. The Value behoved to be Decerned according to the
Roupe. 7. They behoved to have Allowance of the Admiral's Tenths; The Kings
Fifteenths, and the Companies Thirds.
28. February, 1680. The Lords supersede Extracting of the Decreets till the 1.
of June. To the effect the Defenders betwixt and that time may produce the
Roupe, which was made of the Ships.

And when June was come, and an Answer made to their Petition by the Strangers,
upon Consideration of Both,

22. June 1680. The Lords adhere to their former Interlocutor of the 27. Feb.
1680. and Interlocutors preceding, AND ALLOW the Pursuers the Annual-rent of
the sums Decerned as the Value of the Ships from the Month of February, 1674.
or after such time as the Defenders traded with the same; The Pursuers proving
the Defenders have tradrd with them ever since: And if the Pursuers and their
Procurators will not burden themselves with the said Probation; The Lords
ordain the Decreets to be Extracted as to the prices according to the foresaid
last Interlocutor.

After which Interlocutor, upon a Petition given in by the Strangers, referring
the Defenders Trading with the Ships to their Oaths; a Term was assigned them
to Compear and Depone, And whereupon an Act being Extracted, and called, The
Term was circumduced against them.

After the Extracting of the foresaid Act, whereupon the Term was circumduced
against the Capers for not compearing to Depone anent their Trading with the
Ships, Captain Acheson, Sir William Bruce, Sir James Standfield, Sir William
Binning, and others, his Owners gave in a Petition: Upon which, though ipsis
verbis, the same with the Petition immediately preceding; the Lords ordained
both Parties procurators to be heard in praesentia, as they were about three
weeks after: And then upon a most contentious Debate, as to the Dutch Placaets,
Double and Conceall'd Documents, the King's Instructions, etc. By an
Interlocutor.

20 July, 1680. The Lords adhere to their former Interlocutors. BUT ALLOW
Deduction of the Admiral's Tenths, and the King's Fifteenths; The Defenders
producing Discharges thereof before Extracting of the Decreets.

After this Interlocutor, the Capers produced a Roupe, which they pretended
they had made of the Ships, a ter they were declared free; And gave in a
Petition, wherein they again recurr to the pretense of Counterband; Upon
Consideration whereof, and of the Answer made by the Pursuers to the Roupe.

24. July, 1680. The Lords refuse to grant the Desire of the Petition in
respect that point a^e^^ Counterband was formerly considered by them; AND
REFVSE to sustain the Roupe in regard the same was not formal, and that it was
posterior to the Lords Interlocutor; whereby they Declared the Ships and Goods
free: AND THEREFORE ADHERE to their former Interlocutors, And ordain the
Decreets to be Extracted.

Then the Capers gave in another Petition, Representing, 1. They could be only
liable for the Ships as Rouped, and for the Goods as sold to the Exchequer. 2.
Former Interlocutors allowed them to instruct at what Rates the Ships and Goods
were sold here, And therefore they could be no further liable than as they
sold. 3. They could not be liable for Annual-Rent, Because those of them who
bought the Shipe might as Lawfully Trade with them as a Stranger. 4. They
behoved to have Allowance of the Tenths, Fifteenths, and Thirds. 5. They could
not be liable in solidum, but singuli pro virili.


Which being Considered,

29. July, 1680. The Lords notwithstanding thereof Adhere to their former
Interlocutors, in respect there was nothing therein Represented, but what had
been formerly under their Consideration; (...) refuse to allow any Deduction
upon account of the Companies Thirds.

After this the Capers gave in a new Petition, Craving a Delay till November
thereafter, upon these Grounds; 1. That several of the Pursuers were dead,
whose Factories were therefore expired. 2. Several of the Defenders were dead,
(as namely, the Lord Cochran) whose Representatives behoved to be called.


Which Considered,

30. July, 1680. The Lords notwithstanding of what was thereby represented;
ADHERE to their former Interlocutors; And refuse to delay the Extracting of the
Decreets.

Which Decreets nevertheless when Extracted, were (upon the very same pretenses
which had been so often Repelled by the whole Lords in time of Session)
Suspended by three of the Lords in time of Vacance.

Articles of the Treaty betwixt His Majesty and the King of Denmark, in the
year 1670. Printed at London, Anno, 1672.
ARTICLE XX.
BUt lest such freedom of Navigation or Passage of the one Allie, and his
Subjects and People, during the War, that the other may have by Sea or Land,
with any other Country, may be to the pr^judice of the other Allie; And that
Goods and Merchandise belonging to the Enemy, may be fraudulently concealled
under color of being in Amity: For the preventing of Fraud, and clearing all
Suspicion, It is thought fit, that the Ships Goods, and Men belonging to the
other Confederate, in their Passage and Voyages be accompanied with Letters of
Passe-port, and Certificate: The Form whereof to be as follows,

CHARLES, the Second by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, etc.

Christian, the fourth by the Grace of GOD, King of Denmark and Norway, etc.

When therefore the Merchandise, Goods, Ships, or Men of either of the
Confederates, or their Subjects, and Pople, shall meet in open Sea, Streights,
Ports, Havens, Lands and Places whatsoever, the Ships of War whether public or
private, or the Men, Subjects, or People of the other Confederate; upon
Exhibiting only the foresaid Letters of Safe Conduct and Certificate; there
shall be nothing more required of them, nor shall search be made after the
Goods, Ships, or Men; nor shall they be any otherwise whatsoever molested or
troubled, but suffered with all Freedom to pursue their intended Voyage. But if
this Solemn and set Form of Passe-port and Certificate be not Exhibited, Or
that there be any other just and urgent cause of Suspicion, then shall the Ship
be searched; which is nevertherless in this case only understood to be
permitted, and not otherwise. If by either party any thing shall be committed,
contrary to the true meaning of this Article, against either of the
Confederates: Each of the said Confederates shall cause his Subjects and People
offending, to be severely punished, and full and entire Satisfaction to be
forth with given, and without delay to the Party injured, and his Subjects and
People for their whole loss and expenses.

ARTICLE XXIV.
BOth Parties shall cause Justice and Equity to be Administered to the Subjects
and People of each other, according to the Laws and Statutes of either
Country, speedily and without long and unnecessary Formalities of Law, and
Expenses, in all Causes and Controversies, which are Depending, or which may
hereafter arise.

ARTICLE XXXV.
AND for the greater security of the Subjects of both Kings, and for preventing
of all Violence toward them from the said Ships of War, all Commanders of any
of the Ships of War, belonging to the King of Great Britain, and all other His
Subjects whatsoever, stall be strictly charged, and required, that they do not
molest or injure the Subjects of the King of Denmark. If they shall do
otherwise, they shall be liable to answer it in their persons, and Estates; and
shall therein stand bound, until just Satisfaction and Compensation shall be
made for the wrongs by them done, and the Damage thereby sustained, or to be
sustained. In like manner, shall all the Commanders of the Ships of War,
belonging to the King of Denmark, etc.

ARTICLE XXXVI.
BOth Kings shall take Care, That Judgment and Sentence in things taken at
Sea, be given according to the Rules of Justice and Equity, by persons not
suspected, or interested, and being once given by such Judges as aforesaid;
they shall strictly Charge, and Require their Officers, and whom it shall
concern to see the fame put in due Execution, according to the Form and Tenor
thereof.

ARTICLE XXXVII.
IF the Ambassadors of either King, or any other public Ministers, residing
with the other King, shall happen to make complaint of any such Sentence: That
King to whom complaint shall be made, shall cause the said Judgment and
Sentence to be Reheard and Examined in his Council; That it may appear whether
all things requisite and necessary, have been performed according to the Rules
of this Treaty, and with due Caution. If the contrary shall happen, it shall be
redressed, which is to be done at the furthest within three months time.

Neither shall it be lawful either before the giving of the first Sentence, or
afterward, during the time of the Rehearing, to unload, or sell, and make away
the Goods in controversy, unless it happen to be done by consent of Parties,
and to prevent the perishing of the said Goods and Merchandise.

The Third Article of the Kings INSTRUCTIONS concerning Prizes, sent down in
June, 1673. which relates to Double and concealed Documents, so much inlisted
on by the Capers in these Decreets.
THat where any Ship met withal by any of the King's Royal Navy, or other
Ships, Commissionated by His Authority, shall fight or make resistance, or the
Master or any of the Company shall throw away, burn, tear, or conceall any of
the Ships Papers, or Documents: or shall have ^o papers at all found on board
in the said Ship, or shall bring or offer to the Court any false or double
Writings, for Evidence; thereby to clear her, or her goods, or any of them; the
said Ship and goods shall be Adjudged and Condemned, as good and lawful Prize.

The King's Letter to the Lords, concerning the Ship, the Calmar, dated 24th
July, 1674. Relative to His INSTRUCTIONS.
WE have fully Considered your Letter To Us of the date the 25th. February, And
do find that you have hitherto proceeded exactly in the Process depending
before you, Concerning the said Ship and Goods, according to the Instructions
formerly sent unto you, which were intended by Us to prevent the Fraud of Our
Enemies, or of such as might drive a private way of Trading with them, to the
prejudice of Our Service: And not to be a snare to Our Subjects, or the
Subjects of any Prince in Alliance with Us, when the property of either Ship or
goods, coming into any Port of Our Dominions, does really appear to belong unto
any of them, etc.

Other Papers relating to the Ships, the Palm Tree and Patience of Sunderburg,
viz. The Passes, Toll-Schedules, Freight-Briefs, and Missive Letters, aboard of
the Ships when taken. Depositions of the Masters and Mariners, after they were
brought up. Commissons of the Lords of Session for proving the Property, etc.
Reports thereof from the Magistrates of Sunderburg, Cristiania and London; with
an Attestation of the Admiralty of Amsterdam; His Majesty's Declaration in
favor of the Danes; and the Protestations taken in behalf of the Strangers,
against the Capers sending the Ships to sea, after the Lords had declared them
free.
Relating to the Ship the Palm Tree.
Pass from the Town of Sunderburg.
AUgustissimi ac Potentissimi Regis, Christiani quinti, Daniae, Norwegiae,
Vandalorum, Gothorumque Regis, Ducis Slesvici, Holsatiae, Stormaeriae and
Dithmarsiae, Comitis in Oldenburg and Delmenhorst; Nos constituti Consules ac
Senatores Civitatis Sonderburgi, universis and singulis cujuscunque dignitatis,
status, conditionisve fuerint, has Literas nostras inspecturis, ut cujusvis
status and conditio postulat: notum facimus and testamur. quod harum
praemonstrator C^vis noster dilectus, Christianas Matthiae Nauta, officiose
nobis significaverit, qua ratione cum presenti sua Navi hic apud nos structa,
and Palmae nomine insignita, illique adjunctis and illatis mercibus, ad
tractanda sua negotia, and honestam versuram exercendam, divino favente numine,
in marl Orientali and Occidentali, pro re nata and occasion data, hoc vere and
futura aestate durante, navigate constituit; offic^o^e and obnixe a nobis
petendo, ut sibi ad majorem sui cautionem and satisfactionem, patentes
salvi-conductus literas impertiri haud gravaremur. Est itaque ad omnes and
singulos, tam summos quam alios rei bellicae Praefectos, imprimis Dominos
constitutos classis Admirales, Vice-Admirales, Capitaneos, Classiarios,
Legatos, Excubitores, and reliquos Naviculariam facientes, humillima officiosa
and amica nostra petitio, ut praememorato Nautae civi nostro dilecto, cum Navi
praesenti, Naviculariis and injectis Mercibus, pro negotiorum and honestae
mercaturae condition, in mari Orientali and Occidentali, per sua Freta, Terras
and Territoria, si illa forte inviseret; aut (quod Deus prohibeat) per maris
intumesentiam and tempestates, ad illa dejectus propelleretur; non tantum
liberum, securum, ac tutum, tam accessum quam discessum concedere: sed etiam,
in necessitatis casu, illum omni and promotionis and subsidii genere prosequi
dignentur. Id, serenissima Regia Majestas, Rex ac Dominus noster
clementissimus, clementissime recordabitur; and nos erga unumquemque pro
cujusvis status condition ac requisito, ut humilisme officiose and amice
recompensemus, semper paratissimi erimus. Et in majorem rei certitudinem, has
Literas consueto Civitatis nostrae Sigillo firmari jussimus. Dabantur, die
decimo quarto Mensis Martii, anno milesimo sexcentesimo septuagesimo secundo.

Jacob Jensen. Hans Pehman.

Locus Sigilli.

Toll-Schedule.
In His Royal Majesty's Custom-office in Christiania, Carsten Matsen from
Sunderburg Skipper, paid Custom for his Ship, being a Pinnace with two Tops,
called, the Palm Tree, of the bigness (according to the Metbrief dated in
Dramm, 28. April 1671.) of 1537/8 Lasts; with which, upon the 14. of this
instant he arrived here, being loaded with 12500. Dalls, and has paid for each
last 4 Ricks-Orts, extending in the whole to 172. Ricks Dallers, 2. Marks, 18.
Shillings: and passes free. Dated in Christiania, in the Custom-office, 22.
Junii, 1672.

Locus Sigilli. Jurgen Seckman.
Registered Nicolas Fluggen.

Freight-Brief.
Anno, 1672. the 23. of June, are we underwritten, in name of the Holy Trin^y,
one with another, agreed in accord as follows; to wit, That I Kirsten
Hammers, the ^elict of Jens Paulsen, here at Christiania; shall give to Skipper
Carsten Matsen of Freight, of this his new presently employed Ship, called the
Palm Tree of Sunderburg, 230. lib. Sterling of Freight, after that the Lord
shall give a happy and safe arrival at London. And in case he unexpectedly
shall be brought up against his will to Holland; then of Dollars 920. after
good Delivery. And that in this manner, with Gods assistance, shall of me the
Freighter Kirsten Hammers, and of me Skipper Carsten Matsen be acoomplished and
kept skaithless. Wherefore, we each with another have subscribed these few
lines; whereof each of us has received the Double. At Christiania, day and
date foresaid, and promise to the Skipper of Caplaken, five pound Sterling.

Kirsten Hammers, Relict of Jens Paulsen.

Missive Letter by the Freighter to John Shorter Merchant, since Sheriff of
London.
Much honored and respected Friend, Signior John Shorter, Salutem. Your good
Letter, the 21. May, with Skipper Carsten Matsen, is delivered into my hands:
out of which, I perceive your good will toward my Husband Jens Paulsen of
blessed memory. As concerning the agreement for Freight with the forenamed
Skipper, to take in a Loading for you, I have with the help of good Friends, in
the best manner and utmost diligence, done accordingly; as appears out of the
enclosed Memorial. I suppose you will continue in your real integrity toward
me, as I did find you always toward my Husband of happy memory: and besides
the Account of the foresaid Memorial, you will consider the great perils at
Sea, which I shall leave to your good discretion. And it is my humble request,
that you with the first would assist me with some Money, either in Hamburg, or
else here in the Country: because there is small occasion to draw a Bill of
Exchange, of Ricks Dollars, from hence upon London; and I cannot do it except
with great loss. And God knows how I stand in need of Money for the present, to
clear up my Husband, of happy memory, his Accounts, for his governing Office,
notwithstanding there is a great deal, in respect of my Husbands good will,
resting unto me. Therefore, I took occasion the 8. ditto, to draw a Bill of
Exchange upon you, payable to Claus Hansen. If the same shall be presented unto
you, I expect your good payment, after that Hans Paulsen is well arrived. And
if any occasion may happen, and I should send a Bill of Exchange upon you, I
hope you shall accept of, and pay it. Wherein otherwise I can serve you, it
shall be done. And hereby wishing you well, I recommend you to the Lords
protection, and remain,

Your obliged Servant, Kirsten Hammers, Relict to Jens Paulsen.

Depositions of the Master, and one of the Mariners, before the Admirality.
Edinburgh, 13. July, 1672.
COmpeared Carsten Matsen Master of the Ship, called the Palm, of the Age of
30. years unmarried; Who being solemnly sworn and examined, Depones, That he
lives at Sunderburg, and that there are eleven Eaters in the Ship, beside the
Deponent. And that all of them live at Sunderburg, except one Man who lives
three miles from it, and another in Norway. And depones, That he has been
Master of the Ship these two years bygone, since she was built at Sunberburg,
and that the Deponent and Hanse Jebsen in Sunderburg are sole Owners of the
said Ship. And that the said Ship is 153. Last. And that the said Ship was
loaded at Christiania in Norway, with 12500. Daills, by the Widow of Jens
Paulsen in Christiania. And depones, That he was going to London with the said
Loading, And that he has no Charter-party, but a Missive-letter, direct to John
Shorter Merchant in London, from the said Widow. And that M. Shorter is to pay
the Deponent 230. lib. sterling of Freight, besides the Caplaken which is 5.
lib. And depones, That no part of the Ship or Loading belongs to any Hollander.
And that there is in the Ship three great Anchors, and a Warp-Anchor, three
great Cables, two Haassers and a Pertling: all Masts clad, and Blocks full. And
depones, That about six weeks ago, he was at London with Daills in this same
Ship, in the immediate preceding voyage, which were consigned to Mr. Shorter.
And all this is of truth, as he shall answer to GOD. And depones, He was taken
by Captain Acheson upon the 2. of July instant.

Carsten Matzen.

Eodem die, Compeared Michael Christinsen, one of the Mariners of the said
Ship, of the Age of 36. years, Married, and lives at Sunderburg: who being
solemnly sworn and examined; Depones, That he was hired at Sunderburg, to go to
London the former Voyage, which accordingly he performed: and was hired in this
Voyage, to go to London also. And as to the residence of the Master and
Mariners, depones conform to the Master. And depones, That he knows not the
Owners of Ship or Loading, And that he saw not any Papers hid, destroyed, or
cast overboard.

M. C. C. Bickerstaff. M. Jo. Stuart.


Commission of the Lords, conform to their Interlocutor 22. Februarii 1673.
IN action rescissoria intentata coram Senatu Regni Scotiae, ad instantiam
Christiani Matthiae, navarchi and alterius ex exerciteribus navis Danicae, cui
nomen Palmae Sunderburgensi, tam prose quam pro altero exercitore ejusdem
navis, ac Christiana Hammers domina mercium quibus onerata fui^t, agentis;
adversus Alexandrum Acheson praefectum navi bellicae Brussia dictae, ejusque
navis exercitores, aliosque quorum interest; ad rescindendam sententiam
quandam, a Suprema curia Admiralitatis latam, qua dicta novis Palma
Sunderburgensis cum mercibus damnata est; adque restitutionem ejusdem navis, ac
mercium, actoribus, cum omni causa faciendam, vel pretium eisdem solvendum,
atque damnum resarciendum. Partibus de tota re controversa in judicium vocatis
and auditis, superque scriptis ab utriisque exhibitis, deliberato; VISUM EST
SENATUI, Ex eo quod navis de qua queritur, literis trajectitiis juxta formulam
foederis inter serenissimum Regem nostrum, ac Regem Daniae initi, non esset
instructa, etsi primo Julio, superioris anni, ex Norvegia (postquam jam diu
belium inter serenissimum Regem nostrum, and Ordines uniti Belgii vulgo
innotuerat) solverit; non quidem, per se, induci confiscationem navis aut
mercivum; sed illud tamen, navi capiendae, atque huc adducendae, ut in eam
inquireretur; justam prebuisse causam. Adeoque and onus probationis, per
documenta and testes, omni exceptione majores, actoribus imponere; navem atque
merces ad confaederatos, and non ad hosts pertinere: nec ad hoc probandum
(alioquin sufficiens, si dum literae trajectitiae impretrarentur adhibitum
fuisset) jusjurandum navarchi, aut exercitorum, nunc sufficere. Praeterea cum
literae istae, quibus navis instructa fuit, scriptae sint in genere, and ante
bellum, nec de itinere, in quo navis deprehendebatur, mentionem ullam speciatim
faciant; cumque constet, ex jurejurando navarchi, instrumentum locationis
conductionis, quod penes se habuerat, ab eo, dum caperetur, celatum fuisse;
Visa satis haec, ad inducendam probationem praesumptivam simulationis cujusdam,
navemque ac bona non esse libera: sed quae contrariam nihilomninus positivam
probationem admittat, qua per documenta ac testes, exceptione omni majores,
probetur; n^vem atque merces ad subditos Regis Daniae, serenissimi Regis nostri
confaederati, pertinere: nisi eadem, a reis, probentur pertinere ad Regis
nostri hosts. Cumque insuper, ex dicto locatio^^^ conductionis instrumento
patet, verum portum, ad quem hoc itinere navis conducebatur, aut celatum
fuisse, aut conductricis locatorisve arbitrio relictum; vel hoc solum suffici
re, visum, ad confiscationem and navis and mercium, etiamsi alioque libera esse
probentur: dummodo rei docere queant tabulas abiegnas, cujusmodi illae fuere
quibus navis onerebatur, ejus generis mercium esse, secundum consuetudinem
Admiralitatis, vel Anglicae vel Belgicae, quas vulgo contrabanda vocant: cujus
tamen rei, contraria probatio actoribus permittitur. Concessum praeterea
actoribus, uti documentis ac testimoniis idoneis, probent, quanti navis cum
caperetur, pretii fuerit: quot and quales tabulae fuerint, quibus erat onusta;
and quanti eas vendituri fuissent, fi ad portum, quo revera navis, presenti
itinere, destinabatur, appluissent. Vt autem rite ea qua in alteruiram partem
probari convenit, probari possint; SENATUS Praesides, Consules, and Senatus
Civitatum Sunderburgensis and Christianiensis, praesectumque civitati
Londinensi, obnixe rogat; uti testes, adhibita jurisjurandi religione, de iis
quae supra dicta sunt, examinent, illorumque dicta, scripto excepta, ab ipsis
nominibus suis (si scribere norint) and ab actuariis seu scribis civitatum,
subscribi curent, atque una cum hoc praesenti scripto obsignata, actoribus, vel
eorum mandatariis ante diem primum mensis Junii, proxime futuri, huc referenda
tradant. Actum in Senatu, Edinburgi ad diem vigesimum secundum mensis
Februarii, anno Christiano, millesimo sexcentesimo septuagesimo tertio, sub
Sigillo nostrae Curiae, and ex Chirographo Magistri Alexandri Gibson Scribae
Curiae, Deputati Domini Archibaldi Primrose de Carintoun, Militis Baronetae,
Clerici Registri, Parliamenti, ac Consilii supremi Domini nostri Regis.

Al. Gibson.

Report of the Magistrates of Sunderburg.
Nos Consules ac Senatores Civitatis Sunderburgensis, notum testatumque
facimus, oblatum nobis fuisse Rescriptum quoddam Senatus Regni Scotiae, datum
die vicesimo secundo mensis Februarij proxime praeteriti, quo rogati sumus, ut
testes, de capitibus quibusdam controversis, in action inter Christianum
Matthiae navarchum navis Palmae Sunderburgensis, and Alexandrum Acheson,
praefectum navi bellicae, Brussia dictae, coram eodem Senatu pendente;
examinaremus: prout dicto Rescripto fuse continetur. Qua in re, ne officio
nostro deessemus, ad instantiam actoris, testes infra scriptos, in judicium
vocari curavimus: ninirum Matthiam Pauli Plaet, Ernestum Uthermohlen, Thomam
Thomsen, Johannem Dahler, Roticherum Kruss, and Jacobum Jensen Becker, cives
hujus civitatis, virosque fide dignos, atque omni exceptione majores; qui
comparentes, singulique interrogati, juramento corporali ab ipsis praestito,
affirmavere and declaravere, dictam navem in hac civitate fabricatam, ad
praenominatum Christianum Matthiae, and Johannem Jebsen, eosque solos, nunc
pertinere, atque eo tempore quo capta est, and in Scotiam abducta, pertinuisse:
eodemque tempore ad quinque mill nummos imperiales, aestimari potuisse:
eosdemque subditos esse Serenissimi Regis Daniae and Norwegiae. Causam
scientiae itidem sub juramento reddentes, quod noverint illos cives, indigenas,
atque incolas esse hujus civitatis, navemque in eorum and non aliorum usum
fuisse fabricatam, ipsosque ab eo tempore eandem solos instruxisse, atque
abromnibus, solos ejusdem Dominos habitos ac reputatos fuisse, and adhuc esse:
tantique quum Christiania Londinum versus, mense Junio superioris anni, iter
susciperet; ab illis vendi potuisse. Quorum in fidem nomina sua subscripsere
atque figilla consueta apposuere.

Matys Paulsen Plat. Ernst Uther mohlen. Thomas Thomensen. Jens Dahler. Rotger
Kruss. Jacob Jensen Becker.


Comparuere and ipsi Christianus Matthiae and Johannes Jebsen, Cives nostri,
nobisque optime noti qui itidem, juramento corporali praestito affirmavere ac
declaravere; dictam navem hic suis, non alienis sumptibus, fuisse fabricatam;
ad seque solos, ex quo aedificata fuit, semper pertinuisse, and adhuc
pertinere: eamque eo itinere in quo capta fuit, Christianae Hammers civi ac
incolae civitatis Christianensis in Norvegia, tabularum abiegnarum, quibus ab
ipsa onerabatur, Londinum devehendarum gratia, locatam fuisse: atque eo tempore
a se vendi potuisse pretio, quinque millium nummum imperialium. Onus autem
totum, praeter tabulas septingentas ad Navarchum and Nautas pertinentes, ad
eandem Christianam Hammers pertinuisse.

Carsten Matzen. Jens Jebsen.


Quae omnia ita in hac Curia in pleno Senatu, uti supra scripta sunt, peracta
esse, publico hoc instrumento attestamur. Sunderburgi, die quarto Mensis Julii,
anno millesimo sexentesimo septuagesimo etrtio.

Ad mandatum Senatus subscripsi, Christianus Arent Fischer, Jud. Secret.
Juratus.

Report of the Magistrates of Christiania.
PRaeses, Consul, ac Senatores Civitatis Christianiensis, notum testatumque
facimus, oblatum nobis fuisse Rescriptum quoddam Senatus Regni Scotiae, datum
vicesimo secundo Mensis Februarii, proxime praeteriti, quo rogati sumus ut
testes de capitibus quibusdam controversis, in Action inter Christianum
Matthiae Navarchum navis Palmae Sunderburgensis, and Alexandrum Acheson
Praefectum navi bellicae Brussia dictae, coram eodem Senatu pendente,
examinaremus; prout dicto Rescripto fuse continetur. Quae in re, ne officio
nostro deessemus, ad instantiam actoris, testes infra scriptos in Juducium
vocari curavimus, nimirum Claudium Joachimi Schumacherum, Petrum Nicolai
seniorem and Bartholum Eliae Cives hujus urbis, virosque fide dignos, atque
omni exceptione majores. Qui comparentes, singulique interrogati, juramento
Corporali, ab ipsis prestito, affirma^^re and declarav^rei^ Dictam Navem a
Christina Hammer hinc Londinum, in Anglia, versus, conductam fuisse; menseque
Junio, superioris anni, fuisse oneratam tabulis abiegnis and pineis integris,
undecies mill octingentis viginti octo, dimidiatis vero sexcentis sexaginta
sex, longitudinis a novem vel december, ad duodecem pedum, latitudinis vero pedis
circiter unius; quae omnes pertinuere ad eandem Christinam, preter septingentas
quae pertinebant ad Navarchum ipsum, atque nautas; dictamque Christinam Hammer
Civem, atque incolam esse hujus urbis, proindeque serenissimi Regis Daniae and
Norwegiae, subditam. Causam reddentes scientiae: Quod praesentes essent dum
inter dictam Christinam, atque navarchum de locatione conductioneque navis
ageretur. Item, quod scirent tabulas ab ea ad Navem onerandam comparatas
fuisse, and viderint eas illius nomine Navi imponi: quodque eandem Christinam
atque maritum ejus, paulo antequam navis conduceretur, fatis defunctum (and qui
hinc a longo tempore ejusmodi merces Londinum mittere, tam suo quam me^^^torum
Londi ^ensium nomine, erat folitu^) optime noverint. Existimare autem se,
navenm ad (...) nomi^^^um Christianum Matthiae navarchum, and Ioannem Jebsen
mercatorem, Cives Sunderburgenses, ^o^qu^ sol^s, pertinere; ac semper ex quo
aedificata esset, pertinuisse: quod eandem ab illis solis exerceri, ejusdemque
ipsos Dominos habitos ac reputatos esse, scirent: Inque fidem horum omnium quae
a se juratis dicta sunt, nomina suae ac figilla apposuere.

Peder Nielsen. elder. Claes Jo. Schumacher. Berthel Hellesen.


Comparuit and dicta Christina Hammer, civis nostra, nobisque optime nota, quae
ipsa quoque juramento corporali praestito, affirmavit and declaravit,
supradictam navem Palmam Sunderburgensem, mense Junio anni superioris, a
Christiano Mathiae navarcho, oneris tabularum abiegnarum and pinearum, Londinum
devehendi gratia, se conduxisse; eandemque ejusmodi tabulis numero ^ndecies
mill octingentarum vinginti octo integrarum, sexcentarumque vero sexaginta
octo dimidiatarum, longitudinis a novem vel december ad duodecim pedum, uniusque
vero circiter pedis latitudinis, onerasie: quae omnes, praeter septingentas
quae ad navarchum nautasque spectabant, ad ^e proprie pertinuere. Optim e autem
sibi navarchum notum esse, ceu cujus opera aliquoties vir ejus, dum viveret,
usus fuerit; eundemque navarchum, and Ioannem Iebsen cives Sunder burgenses,
credere se dictae navis Dominos solos esse, quod ab illis solis sciret
aliquandiu exerceri, ipsosque illius exercitores, semper habitos ac reputatos
fuisse. Quorum in fidem nomen ac sigillum suum hic apposuit.

Kirsten Hammer, Relict of Jens Paulsen.

Quae omnia ita in Senatu nostro, uti supra scripta sunt, peracta esse, publico
hoc instrumento, Civitatis nostrae Sigillo munito, attestamur. Christianiae,
dit 12. Augusti, anno millesimo sexcentesimo septuagesimo tertio.

Locus Sigilli.
Christianus Rosingius, Notar. Christ.

Report from the Lord Major and Aldermen of London.
TO ALL that shall see these presents, or hear them to be read; and specially
to the Lords of Council and Session in Scotland, Sir ROBERT HANSON Knight, Lord
Major, and the Aldermen or Senators of the City of London, send Greeting. Know
ye, that on the day of the Date hereof, by virtue of the Commission annexed,
there appeared, and personally came into the Kings Majesty's Court holden
before us, in the Chamber of the Guildhall of the said City, the several
Deponents hereafter named, being Persons well known, and worthy of good faith
and credit; who, in answer to the several Queries and Allegations in the said
Commission contained, did by their solemn Oath, which they severally took upon
the holy Evangelists of Almighty God, before us, then and there solemnly
declare, testify and depose for certain and undoubted truth, in manner and
form as in their several Depositions underwritten, is at large contained, viz.

John Shorter of London Merchant, aged forty eight years or thereabouts, sworn
and examined by virtue of the said Commission, deposes and says upon his
corporal oath, That he knows Carsten Matsen, Master of the Ship Palm Tree;
and that he, this Deponent, believes him to be one of the Owners of the said
Ship, and Hans Jebsen to be the other, but the said Hans Jebsen the chiefest.
And this Deponent, for reason of his knowledge and belief hereof, says, that
he has formerly employed the said Carsten Matsen, when that he was Master of
the Ship White Lilly, and has continually employed him the said Matsen, to
bring Goods for him from Norway in the said Ship Palm Tree, from the very first
Voyage she made after her being built, until the last Voyage before her being
taken and carried into Scotland; and that he this Deponent, has formerly
received Advice by writing from the said Jebsen, importing his concern and
propriety in and to the said Ship Palm Tree. And this Deponent also says, that
he verily believes, that at the time of the Capture of the said Ship
Palm Tree, she was designed, and coming with her Loading of Daills to this Port
of London; and that her said Loading did, and does properly and solely belong
unto the Widow Christina Hammers of Christiania. And this Deponent, for reason
of his belief hereof, says, that in May, 1672. this Deponent did write unto
Jens Paulsen, the Husband of the said Christina, who was then living, that he
should endeavor the loading of the said Ship Palm Tree with Daills, in order
to her coming again to this Port of London; and the said Paulsen being dead
before that Advice could come to his hand, his Widow the said Christina did
accordingly take care, and loaded the said Ship Palm Tree with Daills,
according to the said Order and Advice of this Deponent; and consigned the said
Loading of Daills unto him this Deponent, to this Port of London, to be here
sold and disposed of for her Account, except what was the Masters and Ships
Companies; as by the Letters of Advice, received by this Deponent from the said
Christina Hammers, and one Jens Jensen of Christiania, the Correspondent of
this Depo^ent, may appear. And this Deponent verily believes, and has always
so understood for several years past, that the said Carsten Matsen, Hans
Jebsen, and Christina Hammers, are Subjects of the King of Denmark, and of no
other Prince or Nation whatsoever. And this Deponent further says, that he
verily believes that the said Loading of Daills, had they arrived and come to
this Port of London, when the said Ship was surprised and taken, they might
have been here sold for at least five pounds the Hundred; for that this
Deponent did then sell the very same Persons Goods which came hither in the
said Ship Palm Tree (the last Voyage before her being taken) for above five
pounds ten shillings a Hundred, and for near six pounds a Hundred, it being
then the price current, this Deponent sold such Daills for at this Port of
London. And moreover, this Deponent says, that he never knew or understood,
that Norway Firre-daill^ were ever accounted, by the Custom of the Court of
Admiralty in England, counterband Goods, or that they are so adjudged during
this War.

John Shorter.

Peter Splidt of London Merchant, aged forty nine years or thereabouts, sworn
and examined by virtue of the said Commission, deposes and says upon his
corporal Oath, That he well knows Carsten Matsen Master of the Ship Palm Tree
of Sunderburg, and that the said Carsten Matsen and Hans Jebsen are Owners of
the said Ship Palm Tree. And for reason of his knowledge of the same, this
Deponent says, That he has known all the Freights that the said Ship
Palm Tree and White Lilly has brought to this Port of London, for several
years now past, and has received the Moneys due for the same Freights here in
London, by the order of the said Owners, and for their Account, and afterward
remitted the same to them by Bills of Exchange, for their own proper use. And
this Deponent also very will knows, that the said Ship Palm Tree was loaded
at Christiania with Daills, and bound for this Port of London, when that she
was taken and brought into Scotland in July last; and that the said Ships
Loading was consigned to Mr. John Shorter of London Merchant, to be sold at
this Port of London for the proper Account of Christina Hammers of Christiania
(except what was the Masters, and Ships Companie's) for that this Deponent both
before and since the said Ship's Capture, had several Letters writ and sent to
him from the said Christina Hammers, signifying, that the said Ship and her
Loading of Daills were intended and consigned as aforesaid. And this Deponent
knows, that the said Carsten Matsen, Hans Jebsen, and Christina Hammers, are
Subjects of the King of Denmark, and of no other Prince or Nation whatsoever.
And this Deponent further says that the said Ship's Loading of Daills would
have been worth, and sold for here at this Port of London (had they been
brought hither when that she was surprised and taken) the several prices
following, viz. The eleven and twelve foot Daills for six pounds the Hundred;
and the nine and ten foot Daills for five pounds a Hundred: and that he this
Deponent, then sold such Daills for the said Prices (that were of the same
Parcel, as those were of laden in the said Ship Palm Tree, when she was taken)
which came consigned to this Deponent to this Port of London, in June, 1672. in
the Ship St. Peter of Sunderburg, John Matsen Master, laden at Christiania
aforesaid, by Jens Paulsen deceassed (late Husband of the said Christina
Hammers) and Jens Jensen, of Christiania aforesaid, Merchant. And this Deponent
moreover says, that he never knew or heard, that by the Custom of the Court of
Admiralty in England, Norway Daills were ever accounted counterband Goods, or
that they are adjudged so during this present War.

Peter Splidt.

Hans Paulsen, Master of the Ship called the Flying Heart of Sunderburg, aged
twenty four years of thereabouts, and Peter Jebsen, Master of the Ship called
the St. Peter of Sunderburg, aged twenty two years or thereabouts, both
Inhabitants of Sunderburg aforesaid, and Subjects of the King of Denmark, but
at present in this City of London; sworn and examined by virtue of the said
Commission, depose and ^ay, upon their corporal Oaths, jointly as follows,
viz. That they very well know Carsten Matsen, Master of the Ship Palm Tree of
Sunderburg, in the said Commission named, and that the said Ship belongs and
appertains to Hans Jebsen and the said Cars^en Matsen, who are both Subjects
of the said King of Denmark. And these Deponents say, that in July last past,
in the Voyage in which the said Ship was taken and brought into Scotland, she
was designed and intended with her Loading of Daills for the Port of London,
and to no other Port whatsoever. And these Deponents do certainly know, and
solemnly affirm, that the Loading of the said Ship when she was first taken,
did and does properly and solely belong and appertain unto Christina Hammers,
in the said Commission named, who is a Subject also of the said King of
Denmark. And these Deponents also well know, that the said Ship Palm Tree was
built at Sunderburg aforesaid, for that they saw the said Ship there upon the
Stocks, when she was building. And that they, these Depp^ents, were at
Christiania in Norway, where the said Ship was laden: and did therefore know,
that the said Loading of the said Ship belonged to the said Christina Hammers,
and that the same was designed only for the Port of London as aforesaid.

Hans Paulsen. Peder Jebsen.


Charles Moore, Notary public, and Deputy-Register of the High Court of
Admiralty of England, aged forty three years or thereabouts, and John Hough
Notary public, one of the Clerks of the said Court, aged twenty eight years or
thereabouts; sworn and examined by virtue of the said Commission, depose and
say, upon their corporal Oaths, That by the Custom of the Court of Admiralty of
England, Fur Daills are not nor never were since their remembrance, accounted
counterband Goods. Givi^^ for reason of their knowledge, for that he the said
Charles Moore has belonged to the said Court, as a Clerk and Deputy Register,
for the space of twenty years, and he the said John Hough for the sp^^^ of
seven years; and are acquainted, and do very well know, that during the time of
the last War, and this present War, several Ships laden with Fur Daills
(after it was made to appear in the said Court they belonged to Friends and
Allies) have been restored to the Owners; and more particularly, the Ship
called the Dram of Norway, the Christianus quintus, the Salva^^r, and several
others.

Charles Moore. John Hough.


IN FAITH and testimony whereof, we the said Lord Major and Aldermen of the
said City of London, the Seal of the Office of Majorality of the same City, to
these Presents by us signed, have caused to be put and affixed, and the same to
be signed by our Town Clerk; Dated in London, the 22. day of July, anno Dom.
1673. and in the five and twentieth year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord
King Charles the second, by the Grace of GOD, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc.

Robert Hanson, Major. Wagstaff. Thomas Bludworth. William Turner. John Moore.
John Frederick. Richard Ford. William Prichard. William Peake. James Edwards.
Robert Clayton. Patience Ward.


Relating to the Ship the Patience.
Pass from the Town of Sunderburg.
AUgustissimi ac potentissimi Regis Christiani quinti, Daniae, Norwegiae,
Vandalorum, Gothorumque Regis, etc. Nos constituti Consules ac Senatores
Civitatis Sunderburgi, universis and singulis cujuscunque Dignitatis status,
conditionisve fuerint, has Literas nostras inspecturis, ut cujusvis status and
conditio postulat; notum facimus and testamur, quod harum praemonstrator Civis
noster dilectus, Johannes Petri Nauta, officiose nobis significaverit, qua
ratione cum presenti sua Navi, hic apud nos structa, and Patientiae nomine
insignita, illique adjunctis and illatis mercibus, ad tractanda sua negoria,
and honestam versuram exercendam, divino savente numine, in mari Orientali and
Occidentall, pro re nata and occasion data hoc vere and futura aestate
dur^nte, ^^^^gate constituit; officiose and obuixe a nobis petendo, etc. Est
itaque, etc. De verb^ in verbum, as in the Pass granted for the Ship the
Palm Tree, except the difference of the Date,

this being dated 18. March, 1672.
Toll-Schedule.
In His Royal Majesty's Custom-office in Christiania, Hans Petersen, from
Sunderburg, Skipper of the Pinnace-Ship, with two Tops, called, the Patience,
presently sailed by him, of the bigness according as the Met-brief bears, of
1041/^ lasts, of date at Dramm, 26. April, 1671. arrived here the 14. of this
instant, with 9800. Daills, and paid for each Last 4 1/^ Ricks-Ores, comes in
all to 117. Ricks-Dallers, 2. Marks, and 6. Shillings: and passes free. Datum
Christianiae, in the Custom-office, 22. Junii. 1672.

Locus Sigilli. Jurgen Seckman. Registered, Nicolas Fluggen.


Freight-Brief.
Anno 1672. the 23. June, In the Name of the Holy Trinity, we undersubscribers
did accord and agree together, in manner following, That I Jens Jensen in
Christiania unto Skipper John Petersen, for his present possessed Ship, called
the Patientia from Sunderburg, after (GOD grant) a happy Arrival for London,
shall pay him for Freight 175. lib. sterling. But if unexpectedly, contrary, and
against his will, he should be carried for Holland, he after a good Delivery
there, should have for his Freight 780. Ricks-Dalle^^. That this by GODS
assistance, both from me Freighter Jens Jensen, and me Skipper John Petersen,
may he accomplished and kept without skaith, we have these few lines, both
together subscribed, and every one of us taken a Copy for himself. Done at
Christianiae, year and day as above.

Jens Jensen.
Furthermore, there is promised to the Skipper for his Caplaken, 5. lib. sterling.



Missive Letter by the Freighter, to Peter Splidt, Merchant in London.
Much Honored and Respected Friend, Signior Peter Splidt, Salutem. Since my
Cousin Skipper John Petersen from Sunderburg, has bought his Loading of good
D^ills, from me and another good Friend, I entreat you humbly, that after GOD
does grant him a happy Arrival, you will be pleased to be helpful unto him, in
exchanging the same. And if he should deliver you any Money, which for his own
Loading, he remained resting to a Friend here; I entreat you to accept of it,
and if possible, by a sure hand in Hamburg, to order it hither. Time will no
more permit me for the present, but I shall write more about it with Nomen
Ipsen. Be recommended to GODS Mercy.

Christiania. the 23. June, 1672. Your willing Friend, Jens Jenseu.

Depositions of the Master, and one of the Mariners, before the Admirality.
Edinburgh, 13. July, 1672. Compeared Hans Petersen Master of the Ship, called,
the Patience, of the Age of 31. years, Married, who being solemnly sworn and
examined; Depones. That he was born, and dwells at Sunderburg, and that there
are ten Eaters in the said Ship, who live all in Jutland. And depones, that the
Ship was built at Sunderburg a year since, and that he has been Master of her
ever since. And that he first brought the Ship from Sunderburg with Ballast to
Christiania in Norway, and went from Christiania to London, with a Loading of
Daills, to Mr. Pottinger there; and went again from London to Christiania with
Bailast. And at Laerwick took a new Loading of Daills upon Mr. Pottinger's
Account, and came back therewith to London. And from that went to Newcastle,
and took in a Loading of Coals, and from that went to Sunderburg. And then, the
first of April last, was freighted by Aptaket Be^ket, at Jones in Finie, to
take a Loading of Corns to Bremen, and by storm of Weather was put up to
Amsterdam, and Lawrence Kettlestoun there, got the said Corns from the
Deponent. And came with Ballast from Amsterdam to Christiania, without any
Order or Advice from his Owners, the Deponent and his Brother being most part
Owners. And depones, That he loadned the Ship with 9800. Daills, at Christiania
in June last, and got Money from Jens Jensen, who is a 32. part Owner, and lives
there. And depones, That he was going to London with the said Loading, but was
taken by the way, upon the 2 July instant, about three or four leagues off the
Shore of Norway, by Captain Acheson. And depones, That the Charter-party, and
the Letter of Advic were direct to Mr. Splidt in London, who was to help the
Deponent to sell the Loading. And depones, That no part of Ship or Loading
belongs to any of the Subjects of the United Provinces. And depones, That he
cast no Papers overboard, nor has no papers concealled, except the
Charter-party and missive Letter above written. And depones, The Ship is of
burden 104. Last, 4. Auchors, 3. Cables, one Haasser, and a Pertling, and Masts
clad, and Blocks full. And all this is of Truth, as he shall Answer to GOD.

Hans Petersen.

Eodem die. Compeared Niels Christiensen Mariner in the said Ship, of the age
of twenty years, unmarried, who being solemnly sworn and examined, Depones,
That the Master and Mariners are all Danish men, and that he was hired to go to
London with this Loading. And that he knows not of any Papers thrown
overboard, destroyed, or concealed.

M. Jo. Stuart.

Commission of the Lords.
In action rescissoria intentata coram Senatu Regni Scotiae, ad instantiam
Ioannis Petri navarchi and anias ex exercitoribus navis Danicae, cui nomen
Patientiae Sunderburgensi, tam pro se quam pro caeteris exercitoribus ejusdem
navis, ac Ioanne Ioannis domino mercium quibus oneratae suit, agentis; adversus
Alexandrum Acheson, praefectum navi bellicae, Brussla dictae, ejusque navis
exercitores, aliosque quorum interest; ad rescindendam sententiam quandam a
suprema Curia Admiralitatis latam, qua dicta navis Patientia Sunderburgensis
cum mercibus damnata est, adque restitutionem, etc. as in the Commission for
the other Ship, the Palm Tree.

Report of the Magistrates of Sunderburg.
Nos Consules, ac Senatores Civitatis Sunderburgensis notum testatumque
facimus, oblatum nobis fuisse Rescriptum quoddam Senatus Regni Scotiae, datum
die vicesimo secundo mensis Februarii, proxime preteriti, quo rogati sumus, ut
testes, de capitibus quibusdam controversis, in action inter Ioannem Petri
navarchum navis Patientiae Sunderburgensis, and Alexandrum Acheson praefectum
navi bellicae, Brussia dictae, coram eodem Senatu pendente, examinaremus: prout
dicto Rescripto fuse continetur. Qua in re, ne officio nostro deessemus, ad
instantiam actoris, testes infra scriptos in Judicium vocari ^^^avim^s: ^imi^um
Hermannum Cuhe, Ioannem Pauli, Ioannem Kaedt, Hermannum Thormohlen, Nicolaum
Nicolai, and Laurentium Josten, cives hujus civitatis, virosque fide dignos,
atq^^ omni exceptione majores. Qui comparentes, singulique interrogati,
juramento corporali ab ipsis (...), ^ffi^mavere and declaravere; Dictam navem,
in hac civitate fabricatam, ad praenominatum (...) Petri, Paulum Petri ejus
germanum, Ioannem Christianum Helm, and Tichonem Ma^^^^ mercatores,
Laurentiumque Georgii nautam, cives omnes Sunderburgenses, atque Ioannem
Ioan^^^, ac Christianam Hammers, cives Christainienses; eosque solos, nunc
pertinere, temporeque quo c^pta est, and in Scotiam abducta, pertinuisse: atque
eo tempore, ad ter mill and quingentos nummus imperiales aestimari potuisse.
Eosdemque subditos esse serenissimi Regis Daniae and Norw^giae. Ca^sam
scientiae itidem sub juramento reddentes, quod noverint illos cives, indigenas,
atque incolas hujus atque Christianiensis civitatis esse; ipsosque, ab eo
tempore quo fabricata esi, eandem navem solos instruxisse, atque ab omnibus
solos ejusdem Dominos habitos ac reputatos fuisse, and adhuc esse: tantique
quum Christiania, Londinum versus, mense Junio, superioris anni, iter
susciperet; ab illis vendi potuisse. Quorum in fidem nomina sua subscripsere
atque sigilla consueta apposuere.

Herman Thor Mohlen. Nis Nielsen. Laurentz Josten. Herman Cuhe. Hans Paulsen.
Jens Kaett.


Comparuere and ipsi Ioannes Petri navarchus, Ioannes Christianus Helm and
Ticho Matthiae mercatores, cives nostri nobisque optime noti, qui itidem
juramento corporali praestito; aff^^mavere ac declaravere, Dictam navem ad se
ac Laurentium Georgii, and Paulum Petri nautas itidemque cives hujus civitatis;
(qui j^m vero hic non in loco, sed respective Londinum ac Galliam versus quo a
serenissimi Regis Daniae and Norwegiae subditis, cum suis navibus conducti
sunt, iter suscepere) etiamque ad Ioannem Ioannidem, and Christianam Hammers,
cives Christianienses, solos pertinere, eamque quo tempore capiebatur, iter
Christiania Londinum versus faciens, a dicto Ioanne Ioannide conducta, a se
vendi potuisse pretio trium millium ac quingentorum nummum imperialium. Onus
autem totum, tabulis constans abiegnis, praeter mill, ad navarchum and Nautas
pertinentes, ad eundem Ioannem Ioannidem proprie pertinuisse.

Hans Petersen. Hans Christian Helm. Tuge Matsen.


Quae omnia ita in hac Curia in pleno Senatu uti supra scripta sunt, peracta
esse, publico hoc instrumento attestamur. Sunderburgi die quarto mensis Julii,
anno millessimo sexcentesimo septuagesimo tertio.

Ad mandatum Senatus subscripsi Christianus Arent Fischer, Jud. Secret. Juratus.

Report of the Magistrates of Christiania.
Praeses Consul ac Senatores Civitatis Christianiensis notum testatumque
sacimus, oblatum fuisse nobis rescriptum quoddam senatus Regni Scotiae, datum
vicesimo secundo mensis Feberuarii proxime praeteriti, quo rogati sumus, ut
testes, de capitibus quibusdam controversis, in action inter Joannem Petri
nvarachum navis Patientiae Sunderburgensis, and Alexandrum Acheson, praesectum
navi bellicae Brussia dictae, coram eodem Senatu pendente, examinaremus: prout
dicto rescripto fuse continetur. Qua in re, ne officio nostro deessemus, ad
instantiam actoris, testes infra scriptos, in judicium vocari cuaravimus:
nimirum Petrum Petri Mollerum, Magnum Laurentil, Nicolaum Joannis Grisium, and
Christianum Pauli, cives hujus urbis, virosque fide dignos, atque omni
exceptione majores. Qui comparentes singulique interrogati, juramento corporali
ab ipsis praestito, affirmavere and declaravere, dictam navem a Joanne Joannide
hinc Londinum, in Anglia, versus conductam suisse; menseque Junio superioris
anni, fuisse oneratam tabulis abiegnis and pineis integris, octies mill
quingentis quadraginta octo, dimidiatis vero quadringentis and sexaginta,
longitudinis a novem vel december ad duodecim pedum, latitudinis vero circiter
unius, ad eundem Joannem Joannidem pertinentibus, atque mill integris
pertinentibus ad ipsum navarchum ac nautas. Dictum autem Joannem Joannidem
civem atque incolam esse hujus urbis, proindeque serenissimi Regis Daniae and
Norvegiae subditum. Causam reddentes scientiae, quod praesentes essent dum
inter dictum Joannem atque Navarchum de locatione conductioneque ageretur: item
quod scirent tabulas ab eo ad navem onerandam, fuisse comparatas, and viderint
easdem illius nomine imponi navi, quodque eundem Joannem Joannidem optime
noverint eundemque semper Londini, nec usquam alibi negotiatum. Existimare
autem se navem ad eundem, Christinamque Hammer, Civem and illam quoque, hujus
urbis, item Joannem Christianum senatorem Sunderburgensem, and dictum
Navarchum, Paullum Petri, ejus germanum, Tichonem Matthiae, and Lauerentium
Georgij, Cives Sunderburgenses, eosque solos pertinere, ac eo tempore quo capta
est, pertinuisse. Quod eandem ab illis solis exerceri, ejusdemque ipsos Dominos
habitos ac reputatos esse scirent. Inque fidem horum omnium, quae a se juratis
dicta sunt, nomina sua ac sigilla hic apposuere.

Peder Pedersen Moler. Nies Hansen Gris. Magnus Laurensen. Christian Paulsen.


Comparuere and dicti Joannes Joannides, and Christina Hammer, Cives nostri
nobisque optime noti, qui and ipsi quoque juramento corporali praestito,
affirmavere and declaravere, praedictam navem ad se, supraque nominatos Cives
Sunderburgenses solos pertinere, ac tempore quo caperetur, pertinuisse. Dicto
Joanne Joannide insuper affirmante, ac declarante, eandem navem, mense Junio,
anni superioris, oueris tabularum abiegnarum and pinearum, Londinum devehendi
gratia, se conduxisse; eamque id genus tabulis, numero octies mill
quingentarum quadraginta octo integratum, quadringentarumque, and sexaginta
dimidiatarum, longitudinis a novem vel december ad duodecim pedum, uniusque vero
circiter pedis latitudinis, onerasse; quae ad se proprie pertinuere: praeter
quas, fuisse ad mill integras, longitudine latitudineque superioribus pares,
navi impositas, quae pertinuere ad navarchum, atque noutas. Quorum in fidem
nomina sua ac siglla apposuere.

Jens Jensen. Kersten Hammer, Rilect of Jens Paulsen.


Quae omnia, ita in Senatu nostro, uti supra scripta sunt, peracta esse,
publico hoc instrumento Civitatis nostrae sigillo munito, atestamur.
Christianiae die 12. Augusti, anno millessimo sexcentesimo septuagesemo tertio.

Christianus Rofingius. Notar. Christ.

Report of the Lord Major and Aldermen of London.
TO ALL that shall see these Presents, or hear them to be read, and especially
to the Lords of Council and Session of Scotland, Sir ROBERT HANSON Knight, Lord
Major, and the Aldermen or Senators of the City of London, send Greeting: Know
ye, that on the day of the Date hereof, by virtue of the Commission annexed,
there appeared, and personally came into the Kings Majesty's Court, holden
before us, in the Chamber of the Guildhall of the said City, the several
Deponents hereafter named, being Persons well known, and worthy of good Faith
and Credit; who, in answer to the several Queries and Allegations in the said
Commission contained, did by their solemn Oath, which they severally took upon
the holy Evangelists of Almighty God, before us then, and there solemnly
declare, testify and depose, for certain and undoubted truth, in manner and
form, as in their several Depositions is at large contained, viz.

Peter Splidt of London Merchant, aged forty nine years, or thereabouts, sworn
and examined by virtue of the said Commission, deposes and says upon his
corporal Oath, That he well knows Hans Petersen Master of the Ship Patience
of Sunderburg, and that the said Hans Petersen, Tyge Matsen, and Hans
Christian, are the Owners of the said Ship Patience, and Inhabitants of
Sunderburg aforesaid, and Subjects of the King of Denmark, and of no other
Prince or Nation whatsoever. And for reason of his knowledge hereof, this
Deponent says, that he has known all the Freights, that the said Ship
Patience has brought to this Port of London, for several Years now past. And
by the order and appointment of the said Owners, and for their Account, this
Deponent has received the several Sums of Money due for the said Freights,
here in London, and afterward remitted the same to them by Bills of Exchange,
for their own proper use. And this Deponent knows, That the said Ship
Patience was laden with Daills at Christiania, by Jens Jensen Merchant there (a
Subject also of the said King of Denmark,) and was bound for this Port of
London, and no other Port whatsoever, at the time when she was taken and
carried into Scotland, which was in July last. And that the said Loading was
for the sole and proper Account of the said Jens Jensen, and configned by him
to this Deponent, unto this Port of London, to sell the same here for him
(except what was belonging to the Master and Ships Company:) For that this
Deponent both before and since the Capture of the said Ship Patience, received
several Letters from the said Jens Jensen concerning the same Loading, and
consignment thereof unto him to this Port of London, with order to take care of
the Sale and Disposal thereof, for his, the said Jensens Account as aforesaid.
And this Deponent further says, That the said Ships Loading of Daills would
have been worth, and sold for here at this Port of London, (had they been
brought hither when that she was surprised and taken,) the several Prices
following, viz. the eleven and twelve Foot Daills, for six Pounds the Hundred;
and the nine and ten Foot Daills, for five Pounds the Hundred. And that he,
this Deponent then sold such Daills for the said Prices, that were of the same
Parcel, as those were of loadned in the said Ship Patience at the time of her
Capture, which came consigned to this Deponent to this Port of London, in June
1672. in the Ship St. Peter of Sunderburg, John Matzen Master, laden at
Christiania aforesaid, by Jens Paulsen deceassed, and the aforesaid Jens
Jensen. And moreover this Deponent says, That he never knew or heard, that by
the Custom of the Court of the Admiralty of England, Norway Daills were ever
accounted counterband Goods, or that they are adjudged so during this present
War.

Peter Splidt.

Hans Paulsen Master of the Ship called the Flying Heart of Sunderburg, aged
twenty four years, or thereabouts, and Peter Jebsen Master of the Ship called
the St. Peter of Sunderburg, aged twenty two years, or thereabouts, both
Inhabitants of Sunderburg aforesaed, but at present in this City of London, and
Subjects of the King of Denmark, sworn and examined by virtue of the said
Commission, depose and say upon their corporal Oaths, jointly, as follows,
viz. That they very well know Hans Petersen Master of the Ship Patience of
Sunderburg, in the said Commission mentioned, and that the said Hans Petersen
is a Subject of the King of Denmark, and one of the Owners of the said Ship,
and that Hans Christian, Tyge Matsen, Paul Petersen, and Jens Jensen (who are
also Subjects of the King of Denmark,) are other of the Owners and Proprietors
of the said Ship Patience. And these Deponents say, That in July last past, in
the Voyage in which the said Ship was taken and brought unto Scotland, she was
designed and intended with her Loading of Daills for the Port of London, and to
no other Port whatsoever. And that they these Deponents, certainly know, and
solemnly affirm, that the Loading of the Ship when she was taken, did, and does
properly and solely belong and appertain unto the aforesaid Jens Jensen in the
said Commission named. And these Deponents also well know, that the said Ship
Patience was built at Sunderburg aforesaid, for that they saw the said Ship
there upon the Stocks in the time of her building. And that they these
Deponents were at Christiania in Norway, when the said Ship was laden; and did
therefore know that the said Loading of the said Ship, belonged to the said
Jens Jensen, and that the same was designed only to the Port of London as
aforesaid.

Hans Paulsen. Peter Jebsen.


Charles Moore Notary public, and Deputy Register of the High Court of
Admiralty of England, aged forty three years, or thereabouts; and John Hough
Notary public one of the Clerks of the said Court, aged twenty eight years, or
thereabouts, sworn and examined by virtue of the said Commission, depose and
say upon their Corporal Oaths, That by the Custom of the Court of Admiralty of
England, Fur Daills are not, nor never were, since their remembrance,
accounted counterbond Goods. Giving for reason of their knowledge, for that he
the said Charles Moore, has belonged to the said Court as a Clerk, and Deputy
Register, for the space of twenty years; and he the said John Hough, for the
space of seven years, and are acquainted, and do very well know, that during
the time of the last War, and this present War, several Ships laden with Fur
Daills (after it was made to appear in the said Court they belonged to Friends
and Allies) have been restored to the Owners, and more particularly the Ships
called the Dram of Norway, the Christianus quintus, the Salvadore, and several
others.

Charles Moore. John Hough.


IN FAITH and Testimony whereof, We the said Lord Major and Aldermen of the
said City of London, the Seal of the Office of Majorality of the same City to
these Presents, by us signed, have caused to be put and affixed, and the same
to be signed by our Town Clerk. Dated at London, the two and twentieth day of
July, Anno Dom. 1673. And in the five and twentieth year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord, King Charles the second, by the Grace of God, of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.

Locus Sigilli.
Robert Hanson, Major. Wagstaffe, Thomas Bludworth. William Turner. John Moore.
John Frederick. Richard Ford. William Prichard. William Peake. James Edwards.
Robert Clayton. Patience Ward.


Relating to both Ships.
Attestation of the Admirality of Holland, that Daills are not Counterband.
For satisfying, the Petition subjoined, The Petitioner receives this
Declaration, That Norway Daills by this Court, according to the order of
Holland, are not reputed Counterband Commodities. Actum the 13th. April. 1673.

M. Fochen. 1673. By command of the Court, J. de Wit.
Locus Sigilli.

By the Noble and Mighty Lords, the Commissioners of the Court of Admiralty at
Amsterdam.
Bernard Vander Linden, Merchant here, gives with all beseeming reverence, to
know; how that in the year 1672. the Ship called the Patience, whereof Hans
Petersen of Sunderburg is Skipper; and the Ship called the Palm-trree, whereof
Carsten Matsen of Sunderburg is Skipper; was caped and brought up to Edinburgh
in Scotland by some Scots Capers: which foresaid Ships belong to Sunderburg,
and their Loading consists of Norway Daills. And in like manner, the Owners of
the foresaid Ships and Loadings, have reclaimed the same before the Government
of Edinburgh, who have brought the matter in question so far, that the Owners
have to prove that Norway Daills are no ways Commodities of Counterband here in
this Country, so as thereupon the said Ships and Loadings are to be declared
free. Wherefore the Supplicant means himself unto your Noble and Mighty
Lordships; submissively entreating, that you would be pleased to grant him a
Declaration, That Norway Daills are not holden for Counterband Commodities in
this Country, which doing, I remain,

Your Noble and Mighty Lordships Servant, Bernard Vander Linden, in name of the
Skippers Carsten Matsen, and Hans Petersen of Sunderburg.

His Majesty's Declaration in favor of the Danes.
De la part de Sa Majeste le Roy de le Grand' Bretaigne, l'Extraict de la
Response de Monsieur le Secretaire Trevor sur le Memoir de Mo^^^^^r l' Envoye
Extradinaire de Dennem^^^ present le neufiesme Ma^^^^^.
LE Roy m'a command a v^^^ donner (...) response an Memoir que vous auez (...)
sent le neufiesme instant;

Que Sa Majeste est d'accord and (...) durant la Guerre present, tous les
Suiets du Roy de Dennemarc, de quelques Lieux qu'ils en viennent, puissent
passer and repasser librement, auec leurs Gents and Navires. Et quant aux
Marchandises, qu'ils puissent traffiquer librement, and porter en tous Lieux
(except dans les Places assiegees) toutes sorts de Bois, de Masts, de Viures,
le Lin, le Chanvre, le Poix, le Goldron, and toutes sorts de Marchandises,
hormis les Munitions de Guerre, le Canon, and toutes sorts d' Arms, a feu and
tranchantes; lesquelles serunt estimees contrabende.

Jesuis, Monsieur, Vostre --
A Whitehall ce 22. May 1672. I'ay fait chercher les Registres de Monsieur le
Secretaire Trevor, and trouue que cet Escrit est la vraye Copy de ce que le
dit Sieur Trevor escrevit alors a Monsieur l' Envoye Extraordinaire de
Dennemarc. Henry Coventry.
A Whithal, ce dixhuictiesme d'Aoust, 1673.
An Extract of the Kings Declaration in favor of the Danes, delivered by Mr.
Secretary Trevor, in answer to a Memorial of the Danish Envoy Extraordinary, in
May 1672.
THE King has commanded me to give you in Answer to your Memorial which you
have exhibited the 9th. Instant;

That His Majesty does agree and declare, that all the Subjects of the King of
Denmark, may during this present War, freely pass and repass from what places
soever they come, with their People and Ships. And concerning their
Merchandises, that they may and can freely traffic and carry to all places
(except those that are besieged) all sorts of Wood, Masts, Provisions, Flax,
Hemp, Pitch, Tar, and all other sorts of Merchandises, except Warlike
Ammunition, Canons, and all other sorts of Arms, for firing, as well as cutting;
which shall be esteemed Conterband Goods.

I am Sir Your --
At Whitehal this 22. of May, 1672. I have caused look the Registers of the
deceassed Mr. Secretary Trevor, and find that this Writing is a true Copy of
what the said Mr. Secretary wrote then to the Envoy Extraordinary of Denmark.
Henry Coventry.

At Whitehall this 28. of August. 1673.


Protestation in behalf of the Strangers, against the Capers, their sending the
Ship, the Palm Tree to Sea, after the Lords of Session (by their Sentence, Feb.
25. 1674.) had declared the same free, The like Protestation (navarchi navisque
tantum mutatis nominibus) being made at the same time, in behalf of the
Strangers concerned in the Ship the Patience.
AT LIES and EDINBURGH, the seventienth and eightienth days of April, 1674.
and of the reign of Our Saveriagn Lord CHARLES, the Second, the twenty s^xtth
year. The which Days, in presence of me Notary public undersubscribing, and
Witnesses afternamed, compeared Mr. John Jnglis Advocat, as Factor for Carsten
Matzen, Master and Part-owner of the Ship called the Palm Tree of Sunderburg,
and Hans Jebsen Merchant in Sunderburg, the other Part-owner of the said Ship.
And past to the House of William Binning Merchant in Edinburgh, and Residenter
in the said Town of Lies as Part-owner of the Frigate called the Bruce, whereof
Alexander Acheson was Captain, and as cautioner for the said Captain. Where,
having inquired at the said William Binning's Wife, if her Husband was within;
and she having answered, he was not at home: he exhibited, and produced to her
a Factory granted to him, by the said Carsten Matzen, and Hans Jebsen, of the
Date at Sundersburg, the fifth of July, 1673. and an Act and Commission of the
Lords of Council and Session, dated the two and twentieth of February, 1673. at
the instance of his said Constitutents, and the Proprietar of the Loading, of
the said Ship, the Palm Tree against the said Captain Acheson and the Owners of
the said Frigate, and the said Captain his said Cautioner; for reducing of a
Decree of the Court of Admirality, for the Reasons therein mentioned; together
with the said Lords their Interlocutor minuted upon the Margin of the said Act,
by Mr. John Hay of Haystoun, one of the Clerks, of the date the 25. of February
last, bearing, That the Lords having advised the Reports, and Depositions
contained in the Reports, They found, that the Property of the Ship and Goods
belonged to the said Carsten Matzen, and his Owners His Majesty's Allies. And
therefore reduced the said Decree before the Admirality. And also produced the
Printed Articles of Alliance and Commerce between the most Serene and Potent
Prince Charles the second, by the grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France,
and Ireland Defender of the Faith, etc. and the most Serene and Potent Prince,
Christian the fifth, by the grace of GOD King of Denmark, Norway, etc.
Concluded at Copenhagen, the eleventh day of July, 1670. and 37. Article
thereof; Whereby it is declared, That it should not be lawful, either be fore
the giving of the first Sentence, or afterward during the time of the
Re-hearing, to unload, sell, or make away the Goods in controversy, unless it
should happen to be done by consent of Parties. And the said Mr. John Inglis
intimated to the said William Binning's Wife, that he heard, and was informed,
that her Husband and his Partners were to send the said Ship, the Palm Tree to
Sea; and declared his Dissent from their so doing, or disposing of the said
Ship any manner of way whatsoever, as being a free Ship belonging to his
Constituents, Subjects to the King of Denmark, and so found and declared by the
Lords Interlocutor abovementioned: and required that the said Ship might be
kept in a safe Harbor; within this Kingdom and put in safe Custody, ^ill the
said Lords their Sentence was extracted; and he as Factor forsaid put in
possession thereof, in as good condition as she was the time of the Capture.
And if they did in the contrary, protested; likeas, he hereby does protest
against their so doing, as illegal and unwarrantable, and an express Violation
of the said Danish Treaty: and that the Captain and Owners of the said
Privateer, and the said William Binning, as Cautioner for the said Captain,
might be liable each of them in solidum for the highest Prices proven, or which
could be proven by his said Constituents, the said Ship was worth when she was
taken. And for all Cost, Skaith, Damage, and Interest his said Constituents
might sustain, by the said Persons their disposing of the said Ship contrary to
Law, the Lords Sentence, the Treaty, and this his present Requisition: and
might be censured as Infractors and Violators of the said Treaty. To which the
said William Binning his Wife made answer, That she could say nothing, her
Husband not being at home. Thereafter the said Mr. John Jnglis past to the
personal presence of Sir James Standfield of Newmilnes, another of the Owners
of the said Privateer, and having exhibited and produced to him the foresaid
Factory, Act and Commission, I^^erlocutor thereupon, and Treaty; and having
declared to, and required him, and protested tot^dem verbis, against him, in
manner abovewritten, The said Sr. James Standfield, after his reading of the
Lords Interlocutor, and the Article above mentioned of the said Treaty,
answered, That no regard could be had to the Lords Interlocutor, because the
Decree was not extracted; And as to the Treaty it was taken away by the
Declaration of the late War. To which the said Mr. John Inglis opponed the
Lords Interlocutor, and Treaty abovewritten, and adhered to his Declaration,
Requisition, and Protestation founded thereupon, in manner above mentioned.
Thereafter upon the said eightienth day of April instant, the said Mr. John
Inglis as Factor foresaid, past to the personal presence of Robert Baird
Merchant in Edinburgh, another Owner of the said Privateer, and produced to him
his said Factory, the Act and Commission foresaid, Interlocutor of the Lords
thereupon, and Treaty abovementioned: and likewayes, declared to, required of,
and protestated against him in manner above mentioned. To the which, the said
Robert Baird answered for himself, and in name of the present Owners of the
said Ship, That he protested against the said Skipper and his Factor, and
Samuel Makrieth their Cautioner, for all Cost, Skaith, and Damage, that they
had already sustained by arresting the said Ship, whereby their voyage was
already stopped. And likewise protested, No respect could be had to the Lords
Interlocutor, because no Decree extracted. And further protested, That no
respect could be had to that part of the Danish Treaty, in respect the same
extended not to the Ships, but to the Goods that were perishable: without
prejudice of their furher Desenses, as accorded of the Law. To the which, the
said Mr. John Inglis opponed the Lords Interlocutor, and Article of the Treaty
above written; and adhered to his former Declaration, Requisition, and
Protestation, against the said Robert Baird and his whole Partners. Upon all
and singular the Premises, the said Mr. John Inglis, nomine quo supra; and the
said Sir James Standfield and Robert Baird, upon the Answers made by them;
asked Instrument, etc. And sicklike, I the said Notary undersubscribing, at the
Request and Command of the said Mr. John Inglis, went to the personal presence
of the said William Binning, upon the said eightienth day of April, and made
due and lawful Intimation of the foresaid Declaration, Requisition and
Protestation made to his Wife, in the said William's absence, in manner above
mentioned. And having shown to him the aforesaid Factory, Act and Commission
with the Lords Interlocutor, and the Treaty above mentioned; The said William
declared, That he and his Partners, sent the said Ship to Sea, by virtue of an
Adjudication obtained before the high Court of Admirality, and had nothing to
say to the said Interlocutor, or Danish Treaty. These things were done at the
Places afterspecified, viz. to the said William Binning his Wife, upon the
seventienth day of the said instant Month, and year of GOD foresaid, in his
said dwelling House at Leith, betwixt ten and eleven of the Clock in the
forenoon; before these Witnesses Mr. John Elshner Indweller in Edinburgh, and
George Davidson Servitor to the said Mr. John Inglis. And on the said day, to
the said Sir James Standfield, in the House of James Hamilton, at the Sign of
the Ship, in Lies, betwixt four and five of the Clock in the afternoon;
Witnesses, the said Mr John Elshner, and George Davidson, and John Davidson
Indweller in Lies. And upon the said eightienth day of April, and year of GOD
foresaid, to the said Robert Baird in the old Coffee-house of Edinburgh, in Sir
James Stuart's Closs, betwixt eight and nine in the forenoon; Witnesses, the
said Mr. John El^hner, and George Davidson. And intimat and protested to the
said William Binning the said day in manner above written, betwixt the Hours of
two and three in the afternoon, at the Post Office of Edinburgh; before these
Witnesses, Gilbert Story Maltman in Lies, Henry Mader Messenger in Edinburgh,
and William Montgomrey Messenger in Edinburgh. Which said Witnesses were all
specially called, and required, in manner, and at the times above written.

Ita est Ioannes Farquhar Notarius publicus, in praemissis requisitus, testan.
meis signo at subscriptione manualibus. Jo. Farquhar.

The Informations given in for the Strangers, and the Capers, in relation to
His Majesty's INSTRUCTIONS, whereupon the Interlocutor of the Lords July 23.
1674. proceeds, As the same are insert in the Decreets of the Lords, in the
Strangers favor, pronounced, Feb. 25. 1674. but not extraced till the 30. July
1680.

Information for the STRANGERS.
IN the Reduction of the Decreets of Adjudication of the said Ships, the
Palm Tree and Patience, the pretended grounds of Adjudication, being coincident
as to both; the Lords, by their Interlocutor, Feb. 22. 1672. allowed the
Pursuers to prove the Propency of the Ships, and Goods, and Value. And likewise
to prove the Daills that were their Loadings, were not Counter-band by the
Custom of the Admiralities of England and Holland. And allowed the Defenders to
prove the contrary.

After which Interlocutor, there was a Bill given in by the Defenders,
pretending, that by His Majesty's Instructions, it was declared; That the
having or using of false, or double Doctuments or co^^e^ling of Papers, was a
just ground of Confiscation. And that it was proved, and acknowledged by the
Skippers that there were concealed Papers the Skipper of the Palm Tree, having
denied, that he had any Charter-partie, which notwithstanding was concealed, a
Shipboard; and the Skipper of the Patlentia, having declared, that he had no
Paper^ concealed, except a Charter party, and missiue Letter. And thereupon
craving, That the Ships, and Goods might be declared lawful Prise upon that
ground. Notwithstanding whereof the Lords adhered to their former Interlocutor:
but declared that they would consider the same, the ^^me of the advising the
Reports.

There was then Reports made upon the said Commission, whereby the points of
the Interlocutor were fully cleared and proven, viz. That the Property of the
Ships and Goods did belong to the Subjects of the King of Denmark and the Value
was likewise proven, and the Customs of England and Holland, That Daills were
not Counterband.

It being alleged, That notwithstanding, the Ships and Goods must be declared
lawful Prise upon the Pretenses contained in the Bill, viz. That the Skippers
acknowledge by their Depositions that there were Papers concealed.

It was answered, The Pretenses are of no weight: and it were indeed a
Preparative, the like whereof did never escape the Publict Justice of any
Nation, upon such impertinent and frivolous Conceits, to deprive his Majesty's
Allies of their Ships, and Goods, after so clear and full and undeniable a
Probation of the Property, as is here proven at three several Places, vix.
Sunderburg in Denmark, Christiania in Norway, and at London. So that it is
impossible any scruple can remain, but that the Property of the Ships and
Goods did truly belong to the Subjects of the King of Denmark; and were as
truly designed for the Port of London, as is clear by the same Probation.

And as to what was urged upon the concealing of Papers, albeit there had been
Papers concealed, His Majesty's Instructions could be here no ground of
Confiscation. 1. Because his Majesty's Instructions were long after the
Capture, and could not be extended quoad praeterita. 2. By the 24. Article of
the Danish Treaty, which is lex bell, it is provided, that Justice and Equity
should be administered to the Subjects of either Crown, according to the
Statutes and Lows of either Country: and therefore no such private Instruction
could prejudge the Pursuers contrary to the Treaty.

But here the Pretense of concealing Papers was frivolous. For. 1. when the
Ships were taken, the Skippers did produce to the Captain of the Privateer
certain Papers, and cold him that they had those which were pretended to be
concealed a Shipboard; and desired liberty to bring the same: which he
refused, and insolently told them, That they behoved to go to Scotland, what
ever Papers they had aboard, for they did not know what GREAT OWNERS be had.
And withal then said, that they might then produce their Papers when they were
in Scotland. 2. When they were brought to Scotland, the Skippers before the
Admiral, declared, That they had the said Papers a Shipboard, and were allowed
to go a Shipboard and fetch them; and did go in company of the Privateer. And
as one of the Skippers was taking out of one part of the Ship one Paper, the
Captain of the Privateer, or some of his Officers did fall upon the other, not
having the patience, till the Skipper took it out himself. And if that be a
pretty Concealment, the Lords wre desired to judge. 3. What imaginable reason
could there be, for any such fraudulent Concealment, as to Scots or English
Capers; the Papers alleged to be concaled being Documents of the Ships
Freedom, and that the Port designed was London: the Papers being
Freight-brieffs, and missiue Letters, dicreet to Mr. Shorter, and Mr. Splide at
London. 4. The Clause in His Majtstie's Instructions can only be understood in
such a case, when Writs are abstracted and concealed, and whereof the tenor
does not appear, and so in dubio are presumed for the condemnation of the Ship,
or if found, do make out the same. But what is that to the purpose here? For,
primo, The Deposition of the Skipper of the Ship called the Patientia, bears,
That he had no Papers concealed, but a Charter party, and a missive Letter,
e^go he having declared the same, it was no Concealment. And the sense of the
Deposition is singly this; That he had them a Shipboard, and which he had hid
upon the account of the Holland Capers, these clearing that the Port designed
was London, and which did not appear from any of the Documents not concealed.
Secundo. The Skippers deposition of the Palm-Treee, bears only a Denial, that
he had any Charter-parry: but he acknowledged that he had a Brieff, which is
wronguously translated to be a Letter; although it is true that he had such a
missive Letter. And Brieffs in the general comprehend all Papers. And the Paper
found a Ship-aboard, was not a Charter-party, (which is a Contract subscribed
by two, viz. the Skipper and the Freighter) but only a simple Obligement for
payment of the Freight: so that this was no Concealment. And this was likewise
hid for fear of Dutch Capers; and it is against sense, to pretend the contrary.
And it were a rare piece of Ju^tice to condemn Ships upon those Papers, which
are the Documents of their freedom. And there was (...) he Case of any Ships,
where there was so clear a Probation, add^ced, as to all P^^^^^ (...) ^mission.
And Capers should be ashamed to grasp after the Ships and Goods of (...) ^es,
and to make use of Pretenses for that effect, which are absurd and ridiculous.
And (...), the Purs^ers oppone the Reports, and the Probation adduced, which
may co^^^^ce any (...), that has a regard to Justice, that these Ships and
Loadings are altogether (...).

And as to that Quality of the (...), bearing. That if Daills were proven
counterband by the Customs of England or Holland, it should be a ground of
Confiscation; albeit the Ships and Goods were proven to belong to free-m^n; in
re^pect the Freight-Briefs are arbitrary, as to the Port.

It was answered, 1. That it was absurd to pretend, that the Freight-Briefs are
arbitrary, as to the Port, the Port of London being the true designed Port, and
Holland only mentioned in the case of contingency, in case the Ships should be
brought up thither. 2. By the Probation adduced, London is positively proven to
have been the intended Port. 3. The Capers have not at all proven, that by the
Custom of the Admiralties of England or Holland, Daills are counterband; but on
the contrary, it is proven by the Custom of the said Admiralties, that Daills
^re not counterband. 4. By an Extract under the hand of Secretary Coventry, of
His Majesty's Declaration in favor of the Danes, it is evident, that no Goods
are counterband as to the Danes, exexcept Ammunition and warlike Instruments,
and Victual carried to places besieged. So that albeit these Ships had been
absolutely designed to Amsterdam, and that Daills, by the Custom of those
Admiralties, were counterband, neither of which is true; yet, by virtue of the
said Declaration, Daills are not counterband to the Danes. In respect of all
which, there is not the least color or pretense of Law, why the Decreets of
Adjudication of these Ships should not be reduced, and the Ships and Goods
restored, or the Value, as it is proven cum omni causa.

Information for the Capers.
And it being informed by the said Defenders and their Procurators, That in the
Reduction of the Decreets of Adjudication of the foresaid Ships, pursued at the
instance of the said Skippers, against the said Captain and his Owners; Amongst
several grounds of Adjudication insisted upon, which are the grounds of the
said Decreets, such as the informality of the Passes, and that there was no
special Port designed: the principal ground was, That albeit the Skippers
pretended, that the Ships and Goods belonged to Subjects of Denmark, and that
the Goods were going to England, and were to be consigned to Merchants there;
and that the Skippers being examined, concerning the having of any other
Papers, but the Passes produced; They declared upon Oath, they had none, but
each of them a missive Letter directed to their correspondents in England: And
particularly, being examined if they had any Charterparties, they did expressly
depone, That they had no Charterparties. And yet, when they had taken out their
missive Letters, in a secret place upon one side of the Ship, affirming, they
had no more; yet upon the other side of both Ships, a secret place was
discovered, in which there was concealed Freight Briefs for each of the Ships,
by which the Freighters did condition to pay to the Skippers of the respective
Ships, each particular Freight upon safe Delivery of the Goods in Holland. From
which it was Inferred the time of the Debate, That the Passes being general,
and not condescending upon the Port, albeit missive Letters were directed to
Persons at London; yet it was but a Contrivance, and which was clearly
convelled by the Freight-Briefs, which conditioned a Freight for Holland. And
albeit it was pretended by the Strangers, that these Freight-Briefs did
condition a Freight both to England and Holland, and only to Holland, in case
they were taken up against their will, and that the Goods were safe delivered;
yet, so pregnant were the grounds of prevarication and contrivance, that the
Lords upon that Debate, considering, that the Skippers did swear, that they had
no other Papers; they notwithstanding of their Oaths, found the Freight-Briefs
to be concealed, and the grounds insisted upon, to be a sufficient presumptive
Probation of a Contrivance: but yet found, that there was place for a positive
contrary Probation, by Writ and Witnesses above exception, of the freedom of
the Ships and Goods, and gave Commission for that effect.

The sold Lords would be pleased to consider, That long after this Debate, His
Majesty's Instractions which were not then known to the Defenders in the
Reduction, were sent to their Lordships: by which, it was most evident and
clear, that the having of double Documents, or concealing of any Documents was
per se, a sufficient ground of confiscation of Ships and Goods; Whereupon, if
the Defenders had insisted, undoubtedly the Lords would have assoiled them. And
therefore, seeing the Lords, even before knowledge of His Majesty's
Instructions, found the Presumptions of Prevarication and Concealment so
strong, as appears by the Interlocutor, and albeit then, a contrary positive
Probation of freedom was admitted; yet now the Defenders do found upon these
emergent Instructions; and allege, That esto argumenti causa, the Ships and
Goods were free, which truly they are not, what ever be reported by
Commissions, (wherein great Art and Prevarication is used) yet these matterial
Papers being expressly concealed, and that upon Oath of the Skippers, swearing
they had no such Papers: The very Concealment by the Instructions, is a
sufficient ground of Confiscation, whether the Ships and Goods be free or not,
and cannot admit of a contrary Probation. And therefore, it was hoped the said
Lords would then advise the Reduction, conform to the Instructions, without any
regard to what has been done upon the Commissions; Whereby in Justice the
Adjudications must be sustained: or otherwise in case any scruple remained with
their Lordships, they would allow the Parties Procurators a Hearing thereanent.
Especially, seeing upon a Bill lately given in by the Defenders, the said Lords
declared, They would hear them upon the Instructions.

Which Informations above written being upon the 24. July, 1674. considered by
the Lords, together with His Majesty's Instructions, especially that Article
thereof concerning double and concealed Documents; THE SAID LORDS,
Notwithstanding thereof, adhered to their former Interlocutor and Decree, in
reducing the foresaid Decreets of Adjudication obtained before the Admiral; in
regard of the foresaid Probation, that the Ships and Goods belonged to the
King's Allies and Freemen.


