The famous MILLAINESE ASTROLOGER his Prophesies and Predictions for the Year
1700. Being more Esteemed of beyond Sea, than Man in Scotland, Partridge in
England, or Whaley in Ireland.
IN his General Judgment on the Year 1700. he says, That the People who live
under Aries, amongst whom is Britain, shall enjoy a happy Plenty, whereas, on
the contrary, those who live under Capricorn and Libra, shall suffer by want,
and the brutish Rage of Conquerors: Amongst those Places is Rome, Strazburgh,
Alsace, Dauphinee, Austria, Greece, Lithuania, etc. Those under Scropio,
amongst whom is Catalonia, Maurialnia, Norway, Sweden, etc, are threatened with
a Plague. Those under Capricorn, Gemini, Libra and Sagittarius, amongst whom is
Rome and other places already mentioned, as also Spain, Portugal, Part of
Saxony, Italy etc, shall be afflicted with Tragical Scenes, Enmities, Quarrels
and War. He says, The beginning af the Year will be filled with extraordinary
Events and Disgraces, which will be Forerunners of things of worse Consequence.
He adds that there will be Embarkments of Troops, solemn Embassies, and that
the Women will have more Power than Men, though it be dangerous to trust them with
Matters of State.

In the Winter Quarter, which he begins the 20. of December last, and continues
to the 20th of March, he says, that under Libra, Scropio, Virgo, and Gemini, a
Sect will give Trouble to the State; a disturber will ascend a Throne, but
shall have his Handsfull, That a Place will be demolished, to the great
Discontent of it is true Master: That the Season will not conclude without
Bloodshed: That a Princess shall pass from Anguish to Joy: And that an unequal
Marriage will Make, a great Noise.

In the Spring, which he begins on the 20th of March, and carries unto the 21.
of June, he says, That under Libra, Cancer, Capricorn, and Leo, an Assembly
will make a Court very uneasy though they be very Crafty: That there will be
Contestations betwixt the Temporal and Spiritual Powers: That the Birth of a
Boy will occasion abundance of Reflection: That a Republic will deceive its
Companion: That one Prison will not be enough for Criminals; That there will be
danger of Batteries and Popular Insurrections; And that a Woman shall occasion
Mourning to be wore.

In the Summer, which he begins on the 21st of June, and ends on the 22d of
September, he says, that under Leo, Aries, and Taurus, The death of a certain
Person will occasion great Truble to the Nobility. That there shall be a Battle
and some Touns taken, that the Reputation of a certain Country for Feats of
Arms will be obscured; thet under Cancer there will be Feasts and Public
Rejoysings, happy Childbirth, Alliances and Peace; that under Scorpio, Taurus
and Leo, an illustrious old Man will die; It Is supposed the Pope, for Rome is
one of the Places he Means under Leo. He adds, That Fleets will be ill managed,
and that there will be more cause to fear Fit: by Water than by Land.

In the Autumn, which he begins on the twenty Second of Sept. he says, there
will be universal Joy, Particularly under Aquarius, Aries, and Taurus; that
under Taurus, Aries and Libra, War will always be deplorable; that under the
same Sign and Scorpio, a Sedition against Religion will be Punished; and that a
great Man near a Throne shall know that GOD is only to be trusted, and shall
also have occasion to make Reflections upon that of Psalmist, Don't put your
Trust in Princes.

In January, he says, That under Libra, Pisces, and Gemini, There will be a
secret Correspondence carried on for exalting the Church: That under those
Signs and that of Aquarius, a strock of Authority shall humble the Pride of a
People. That under Cancer and Aquarius the Insolence of People and Republics
will occasion Rupturs. That under Capricorn and Cancer, the Public Scandal of
a great Man will much discourse That a great Project will be broken. That under
Aries, Libra, Aquarius, and Taurus, There will be a great Quarrel about a small
Jurisdiction; and a Fire that was extinguished shall be kindled, and in haizard
of burning a long time at the Charge of the Weakest. That under Sagitarius and
Pises, there will be a great Bustle in a Court about a Woman. That under those
Signs and that of Aries, the surprising of a Country will call for vengance,
the establishment of a Cousin will Break diverse Measurs, and many Officers will
be Changed.

In February, he says, That an important Affair will be ruined by Flattery,
under Aquarius and Leo. That under Scorpio and Cancer there will be Treason, a
Fleet in danger. That under Cancer and Aquarius there will be change of
Delibrations amongst some Assemblies, Exiles, and an illustrious Person
unfortunat^ That under Aquarius and Scorpio, a Process of Consequence will not be
ended but by Arms. Under Aquarius and Cancer there will be a Dissension and
Anger amongst those Belonging to the State. That under Pisces, Aquarius and
Capricorn a Reconciliation will occasion greater Jealousy than a war, Under
Scorpio, Sagitarius and Cancer, Magnificence and Civil Dissensions.

In March, under Pisces and Capricorn, an Army shall make a Triumphant Entrance
unto a Country; under Scropio and Taurus a Republic shall be upbraided with
Ignominy and Ingratitude under Pisces Aries and Capricorn, an Hectoring Fellow
causing and endeavoring the Ruin of his Country to exalt him self, under
Aries and Gemini; betwixt Confederats an Assembly brok up under Pisces and
Gemini; a Discovery of some black Politics under Aquarius and Scorpio; a
Rupture and bloody Rencounter, under those Signs and Aries an Accommodation
ready to be signed. A Prince shall become Merciful, contrary to his own
Intrest. The Magistrates occasion and receive much Trouble. Certain Adventurers
shall make a great Noice, The East and West-Indes will draw the Eyes of Europ
after them. The Church will triumph over her Enemies. The People of a certain
Island shall be in Continual Agitation.

In April, under Aries and Libra, the Designs of a potentat, will be opposed in
vain; under Scorpio and Aquiarius, loss of Touns and Battles; under Taurus and
Leo a great Man dies

In May, under Aries, Aquarius and Cancer Threats of the Sword and Pen go^
together, and will have a happy Issue for those that concern themselves in the
Affair Great Debates, Fears of Civil War; under Leo Cancer and other Signs
above mentioned, Mischief fomented by those that ought to procure Good; and
Indiscreet Zeal will occasion Sorrow; but Matters are Past Remedy; under Taurus
Scorpio and Leo, an Interview will keep the World in Suspense; under Taurus
Aries and Leo, War Tribunars overturned by Soldiers and the Misunderstanding
amongst them, makes good Sport to those under Aries; under Gemini and Leo,
Disquiets by reason of Money, when they are at peace from the Sword; under
Gemini and Pisces an unquiet Leader will neither let himself nor others be at
ease A Favoritie near to disgrace; under those Signs and Cancer, Sea and Land
Ech^ with the Reports of Cannon, and shall be Witnesses of a bloody Defeat. A
certain Person thinks himself above Laws and Precepts.

In June, under Gemini and Sagittarius, People careless to defend their
Country; under Gemini and Aquarius Blood shed, a Peace shall not prevent Tears
o^ War; under Gemini and Cancer; a Treaty will occasion great Good for the
Public Repose, an Affair of Importance discovered, an Ambitious Person will
occasion Great Trouble, Under Pisces, Cancer and Gemini, an Invasion make more
Noise afar off than near at hand.

In July, under Aries and Leo, new Conventions and Intrigues to make War* A
General abandoned to the Enemy, has no Remedy left him but Policy. Under
Scorpio and Cancer a Gown-Man performs the Office of a Sword-man, for which He
is commended by all men. Under Cancer, Pisces and Aries, a violent Attac^ costs
a General his Life. The Disobedience of Soldiers retards the Affairs of a
certain Potentate. Under Cancer and Scorpio, a just Grief troubles to a Country
Under those Signs and that of Sagittarius, a Fleet in great danger. Under Le^
and Scorpio, a strange Event befalling a particular Person, will amaze the
Public. Under Cancer a marriage of Consequence treated of, a Prince gives
Largesses out of Policy; False News of a Conspiracy make a great Noise. Private
R^ (...) ^trived

FINIS.

