An ANSWER, To Dr. Jaques Vindication, AGAINST Master KIRKWOODS Defamation.
WERE it not on the Consideration, that this most Invective, False, and lying
Paper has gone through the hands of many Hundreds of People, who, it is like,
never once saw, (...) read the account given by Mr. Kirkwood of his Plea with
the Kirk-^ession, and Presbitry of Kelso, it might be thought altogether
need^^ss to make any Answer thereto; For in effect, it is so far from being
(...) Vindication of the alleged Defamation, that it is not only a down^^ght
Confirmation, but a clear Commentary on, and an Enlarge^ent of the whole affair.

Know therefore, that all Mr. Kirkwood says, ( Page: 38) upon ^is head is,
that Mr. Jaque did let go one Mistress (...) Stone, an ^nglish Woman, who
brought forth a child in his House, and that, (...) the common report went, to
his own Son, without bringing her ^^fore any Judicature, Ecclesiastical, or
Civil.

Now all this, and much more the Dr. confesses, giving, as he says Faithful
and plain account of the whole affair; The sum where^^^ is, that this Mrs.
Stone, a rich Merchants Daughter in London, ^^^ing acquaint with on
Vanderkistee a Dutchman, is married to him ^^^thout her Parents Knowledge;
Which thing she letting fall to the (...) and his Wife, who was her near
Kins-woman, they contrary to (...) inclination, inform her Parents. After
inquiry made by them out Vanderkistee's Circumstances, 'twas found he Cohabited
with other Woman, who was reputed his Wife, and by whom he had ^^^eral Children
then Living. Whereupon the Parents resolves to ^^rsue for a Divorce. In the
mean time the Dr. is advised by them (...) carry away their Daughter to his
House in Yorkshire, which ac^^rdingly was done: tho very much against her
inclination. And besides it was also their desire (says the Dr.) that she
should still go under the name of a Maid, in order to conceal the Marriage.
After some abode in Yorkshire, he brings her and his Wife into Scotland to his
Fathers House at Biggar; Where she lived about three Months, as a chaste
Virgin, None all this time (except the Dr. and his Wife) knowing she was with
Child, till the very Minute her pains of Childbirth came upon her. The Dr.
being at Lanerick, about 7 Miles distant, is alarmed with the sudden news; For
'twas expected the Damsel had six weeks longer to go. Home he flees to his
Fathers House, to Apologize for concealing the secreet so long: But his Father
(he says) was so incensed, both against him and Mrs. Stone, that he would
neither hear, nor believe what they said; Tho she produced a Certificate from
the Minister that Married her.

Now further know, that the Drs. Wife died some days only before this fell out;
So that immediately the report run through the Country, that the young
Gentlewoman, whom all took to be a Virgin; had brought forth a Child to Mr.
Jaques Son, and that not without strong Presumption, his Wife was hastened a
little too, early off the stage of this Life. In the mean time Mr. Jaque
fretted, and was exceeding Impatient, till he got the sick Woman turned out of
Doors: She was no sooner able to stir about (says the Vind.) but he required
her to be gone.

Now, Pray, tell, wherein Mr. Kirkwood faild in his Relation of this affair.
Certainly, if in any thing, 'twas, that he comes short in telling all the
Truth. Many things he omits, which might, and ought to be told: Others he
qualifies and minces by representing them in milder terms, than the matter
requires. Mr. Jaque (says he) Let that Woman go, etc. He required her to be
gone, says the Vind.

This is a strange business, if sounded to the Bottom. The Dr. confesses he was
extremely faulty, and inconsiderate; Guilty of an^ Egregious Act of Imprudence
and Folly. An Act! A wonderful Act (...) An Act with so long a train, that no
Eye under Heaven can reach its End. It Is a continued Series, or Concatenation
of a Thousand Acts; And all these perfect lies, In a word, it is a mere sham;
a^^ down right Imposture. The beginning is told us; But where it was to end,
GOD alone knows. It was hatched at London, From thence carried to Yorkshire,
where it abode for sometime; Then came into Scotland, and settled at Biggar, in
the worst place on Earth; In a place, where it was capable to do most Hurt.

Methinks I see the Dr. with this young Virgin laughing very heartily
together, while alone in a Chamber, considering how notably they cheated all
the World, and Especially the Honest, Old, Reverend Couple, the Father and
Mother. And yet this laughter could not but end with great Anxiety of mind, how
to carry when matters came to a Pinch.

Pray, might one say, Think you the Dr. had a mind to unfold this secret to his
Parents, sometime before the Maids bringing forth the Child. It seems, No, for
certainly the sooner the better. And, since he did it not any time of the six
Weeks before his Wife fell sick; Nor in the eleven days of her sickness, nor
after her Death; It Is highly probable he had no thought to do it at all. It
would seem so indeed, but I must still ask what they resolved to do, when
things came to extremity. He and she had six Weeks, you know, to advise about
that; For according to her Reckoning, lays the Vind. she had so much longer to
go. No question they had determined already what to do. But I Am still in the
mist; and therefore you will excuse me; if I repeat my question by asking what
course, or Method you think, they would have taken, if GOD had not prevented
their design. That Is a Riddle, which I believe OEdipus himself could not unfold
to you: But if I may give you my Conjecture, I Am apt to sancy, the Dr. had a
mind to carry her to some secrect Corner, where she might be eased of her
Burden. A Doctor you know, can in a strait, act the Midwife pretty well. But,
Pray, tell me, what they would have done with the innocent little Babe. GOD
knows: All, I can say, is, if it chanced to be dead Born, any little hole was
sufficient to shut it in. It was but s curious Brat, begotten, as the Dr.
conceives in Adultery, what matter where it lie. And if it happened to be Born
alive, many means, you know, are used to convey such poor Animals out of the
way. And what next think you, would the Dr. have done. He might then with great
freedom return back to his Fathers House with this young Lady, and there get
her Married to some Person of Honor, or rather take her to himself? For no
question her Father (as the Dr. says) being an Eminent and Opulent Merchant in
London, would not stand to give with his only Daughter, a very considerable
Portion, Especially to the Doctor, who had done him and her such Extraordinary
(...) Service.

This is duly Considered, will be found a business of a most horrid Nature:
(...) by this means the Doctor, or any other Person, who should marry this
Woman, would live and dye guilty of Adultery: So that at least, he is (...) and
Part, as we say, of that abominable iniquity, he confesses in his ^ind. (we
need not cite the Page, there being but 7 in all) that with much difficulty he
got this Woman persuaded to forsake her Husband, and go with him to York shire.
He forced her to Perjure her self; and to break that Tie, which God and Nature
had made. He forced her by his Rhetoric. Cursed is that Rhetoric, which
persuades to do wickedness.

For this he seems to make an Apology, saying, he had promised to her Parents
to do so and so. Ah! He promised to do wickedness, and must he perform it?
Surely the Doctor, who is also a Divine, having once entered into that Sacred
Function, will teach no such Doctrine. Nor had the Parents such power over
their Daughter, being now Married, as to force her to leave her Husband, and to
go away with another man into a foreign Kingdom.

He further Apologizes thus: It was found, says he, that Vanderkistee
Cohabited with another Woman, who was reputed his Wife, and by whom he had
several Children then Living; and therefore Mr. Stone resolved to pursue for a
Divoree. Vanderkistee Cohabited with another Woman, etc. Pray, where, Doctor?
In Holland, or London? You are silent in this, as in many other very necessary
Points. It Is more than Probable, 'twas not in London; For it can hardly be well
suppol'd, that a man, especially one of so public Employ, as they say he is,
Viz. a Mountebank, who Cohabites with a Woman, that is reputed his Wife, and by
whom he has several Children living, will be so mad, as to marry another Woman
in that same City, it being a Capital Crime so to do. It Is therefore more
likely 'twas done in Holland his Native Country.

The Doctor it seems has a great Veneration for common Fame tho at a good
distance, even beyond Seas in a foreign Nation; and yet Condemns others
fortaking notice of such matters done at their very door. He carries away a
man's Wife against her will, because it wastalk'd that her Husband had Cohabited
with another Woman; as his Wife in a strange Nation.

He adds, that Mr. Stone resolved to use his outmost Efforts to get-a-Divorce
for his Daughter. Pray, Doctor, has he yet got it? Yea, tell me, if he did ever
Commence the Plea? It Is strange, if he resolved to use his out most Efforts, as
you speak, and yet to this hour, now after many years, has not so much as begun
the work. It would seem you have found out a much better way, to separate man
and Wife, than by a long and expensive Pursuit in Law. One thing here, Doctor
is pretty astonishing, you will not surely deny, but the Wifes presence is
absolutely necessary at the obtaining a Divorce; And yet in the mean time that
this is to be had, you carry her out of the way into another Kingdom. Doctor,
Doctor; Your tale tells very ill. You Will have hard work to reconcile one thing
with another. And besides, by this your carriage, you show your self to be
above Law; For you will not wait, till matters be decided by a Judge, and that
in a business, wherein you are little, or nothing concerned.

A third Apology, is the Doctors acknowledging his Fault. He confesses that he
was Extremely faulty and inconsiderate in the matter; guilty of an Egregious
Act of Imprudence and Folly in not making the thing known to his Parents before
the Woman's delivery. He adds, that be is so far from. Extenating his Crime,
that he is willing to Agravate it against himself.

May it nor seem very strange to see a man, who is guilty of several faults,
some of less, some of more heinous a Nature, only troubled for a lesser fault,
but not touched with the sense of the more horrid Crimes. There Is too just
ground to suspect the sincerity of such a man's Repentance, even for the lesser
fault. This truly is the Doctors case. He seems sorrowful for what he has
done in this Affair Relating to his Parents, which is but a small fault, when
compared with the great injury done Vanderkistre. Where Is his sorrow for that?
Not one Syllable here relating thereto. Hence the Doctors Repentance is but in
part, and by far the more inconsiderable. And besides, we have too great reason
to think, that even this sorrow the Doctor seems to have, is at best but
forced; For, if Providence had not prevented him, he had run on; God knows, how
far.

There Is one thing here following, which by far is the most astonishing of any
in this whole Paper; And gives the greatest Offense to all, that hear the same.
The Doctor, saves the Vind. has ever since suffered, as a punishment, his
Fathers displeasure, and has been an Exile both from his Favor and presence.
Now, think you it not a very strange thing, if the sons Crime be, as is here
Represented and he so penitent for it, and most willing to fall down on his
knees to beg his Fathers pardon; Is it not, we say, a very strange and
Unnatural thing, that the Father, now after many Years will not suffer his son
to come into his presence, and that tho much pains has been taken by several
Persons, to Reconcile Father and Son; but all in vain. And certainly never any
in the World had more, and stronger motives, pressing them to be reconciled,
than Mr. Jaque has.

To pass that he is a Minister of the Gospel, and a man of no small Natural
parts, and one well advanced in Years, being above 70 and not only very tender
and sickly; But is, and has been these 7 or 8 Months before the publishing of
his sons paper, so exceedingly oppressed with several painful Diseases ( Gout
and Gravel, etc.) that many allege he can hardly well recover. To pass, we say
these very weighty Motives to induce the Father to be reconciled with his
son, further know, that he is his only Child alive, and being a Professor of
Medicine is thereby in a Capacity to be very serviceable to him in his prelent
Circumstances. And is it not a cruel and Unnatural thing in a Father absolutely
to refuse to admit his only Child into his presence; and especially now when he
is very like to go off the stage of this World, and step into Eternity? Now, I
say, when he ought to call for him; And give him his best advice, and his
blessing before he die. What is this, but as't were to Curse his son in stead
of Blessing him? Good Jacoh did not treat his Sons Reuben, Simeon and Levi
after this manner; Tho the first was guilty of Incest, Gen: 35 22. The other
two of many cruel Murders, 34.25. Yet this holy man did not banish these his
Sons out of his Family, And at his Death blessed them, 40.28. There Is one
Consideration, which highly Aggravates Mr. Jaques (a riage, Viz. That his son
goes frequently to his house (they both living in Kelso) but is never admitted
into the same Room with his dying Father: For know that Mr. Jaque in time of
his sickness being in an upper Chamber, and his Wife in one below, neither of
them for several Months were able to go the one to the other; For she is no
less infirm than he; So that the son has frequent access to his Mother; But
never suffered to go in to his Father.

Another very pressing Motive is, That this unnatural carriage of the Father
does much confirm the Report, that went of his Son at Biggar.

The chief Reason, why he ought to be reconciled, is the great Scandal his
Carriage gives to many thousands of People. And that which exceedingly
aggravats this Point, is, That of late he preached near a whole Year twice a
day upon that Verse of St. Luke 15.24. about the Prodigal. And does it not,
think you, give ground of Offense so palpably to teach others one thing, and
practice the contrary himself.

We must not here omit to do Mr. Jaque all the Justice that is due him, tho
perhaps it will not a little empair his Son's Credit; Nor likely much advance
his own Praise. In short therefore know, that, when some Persons of good Note
were discoursing with him about his severe Carriage toward his Son, he told
them, 'twas not so much for that business, which fell out at Biggar, as for a
matter of greater Consequence, which he would communicate to no person save one,
and that he had done already.

How here to reconcile the Father's Words with these of his Son
abovementioned, we cannot see, the one saying their difference is on the
account of that business at Biggar, the other for a matter of greater
consequence.

We now come to the grand Apology made use of by the Doctor, the Sum whereof
amounts to this; viz: I Am not, says he, the Father of that Child brought forth
by Mrs. Stone at Biggar, because she is married to one Vanderkistee a Dutch Man.

That she is Married, he proves thus. 1mo. She produced a Certificat to Mr.
Jaque, from the Minister that married her. 2do. Her Father wrote from London to
Mr. Jaque, that she was married to Vanderkistee. 3tio. Mr. Buroughs, Son in
Law to Mr. Jaque wrote also to him from London, that he heard out of
Vanderkistee's own Mouth, that he was Lawfully Married to her, and had bedded
with her.

To pass here, that single Letters about Matters of this kind from remote
places, are often found mere Cheats and Lies, especially coming from persons so
much Interessed; We say, that Mr. Jaque ought not to sit Judge in such a Cause
relating to his Son: He was not to determine, whether these Letters were
sufficient Evidences of the matter under debate, or not.

But let us grant all that is craved, and suppose, that Mrs. Stone, is Lawfully
married to Vanderkistee, etc. It will not hence follow, that the Dr. is free,
as he pretends, of any Crime, except that Act of Imprudence and Folly, (as he
calls it) in not making known to his Parents, Mrs. Stone's Circum, stances
before her delivery. That Is indeed an instance of great Folly; Yet no real
injury is thereby done to any person, only a great offense given to all that
hear thereof. But besides this Scandal, there is horrid iniquity and injustice
committed in this matter, And that, which highly aggravates the Crime, is, that
the injury is irrepairable. Pray, good Dr. (to pass that it is a most Heinous
Crime, to persuade a young Damsel to perjure her self) In sober earnest let me
ask, if you think it not a very great Act of injustice, to carry away a Man's
Wite some few days after Marriage, into a Foreign Nation, to a place 3 or 400
Miles distant. If you take away a Man's Horss, or Purss, he may get you hanged
for your pains, tho you offer to repair the Damnage. What must it then be to
take away a Man's Wife, being that which is dearest and nearest to him of any
thing in this World; And the loss altogether irrepairable. Be ingenuous, I say:
Would you contentedly have suffered this of another Person. Suppose
Vanderkistee had enticed your Wife three or four days after Marriage, to go
with him to a Foreign Kingdom, and kept her there till she brought forth her
first Born; Pray, good Dr. tell me freely, what thoughts you would have had of
him in such strange Circumstances. What would you have said to him, if he had
been cast in your way; Or rather, what would you have done to him, if you would had
such an opportunity, as you could wish. ^urclie You Will say (if you have but one
dram of ingenuity) that cudgelling in the severest manner imaginable, is too
too slender a punishment for so Heinous a Crime, Yea, that tho you pursued him
to death by the Hand of Justice, he would get but what he deserved.

I know very well, Dr. you will tell me; That I Am supposing all alongs that which
is not; That I speak, as if you had been too too familiar with Madam
Vanderkistee; Whereas you never once had a thought tending that way. Doctor, I
must freely tell you, that what you say, is no less absurd. and Ridiculous,
than if you should carry away your Neighbors Mare 3 or 4 Miles, and when you
are challenged, to tell him, you never once laid your Leg over her, Besides Dr.
what if he in the Interim, having use of his Mare broake into some Bodies Park,
and there took the Readiest? Certainly you are a Sharer in his Wickedness, and
if one of you must hang, far rather you, than he. You pretend. you are
altogether Innocent as to this particular, and will have the World to believe
it is so and that upon your simple word, in opposition to the strongest
presumptions almost can be. Doctor, We have a good old Scots Proverb, very
applicable to your Case.

If you do no Ill, do not Ill-like;
If you steal not my Kail, break not my Dyke.
I dare not, nor will I say, you are surely guilty as to this Point; Yet I must
be so free, as to tell you plainly that, which ten thousand think, Viz. They
see not wherein they transgress the Bounds of Chistian Charity, tho they have
thoughts quite differing from what you pretend to in this Matter. They see you
but a Man, and that a Young Man, made up of Flesh and Blood like themselves.
They find also the Gentlewoman forward enough that way, else she had not
behaved, as she has done without her Parents Consent: And having once, you
know, traveled that Road, she would with the greater freedom go it over again.

I need not tell you, Doctor, what a mighty Temptation Opportunity is; And this
you had in an eminent manner a thousand times. Besides, it is safe Fishing, as
we say, in drumly waters. There was no fear, such underhand dealling should
appear above Board.

Nor will it satisfy a considering person to say, you had Work enough to do at
home. Alas, see we not too too many going abroad, when it were fitter, they
should be employed within their own doors.

But I know Topical Arguments are of no Force with those, who think their bare
word should pass for a Demonstration, which is all the Doctor can pretend to in
this, and many other Points of his Paper.

We shall leave off to start any more Questions, tho hundreds all alongs this
Paper offer themselves very appositely to our Consideration, and come to some
other Things of greater Moment, at least more pertinent to our present purpose.

And first, We appeal to any indifferent, and unbyassed Person, that will
seriously consider this whole Affair, with all its various Circumstances,
whether or not Mr. Jaque acted like himself in requiring that Woman to be gone,
who in such a Surprise brought forth a Child in his own House to his own Son,
as the common report went? Was it not, we say, his Duty, as a Christian, much
more as a Minister of the Gospel in that place, and Father to the Person so
calumniated by common Fame, as is pretended, to have vindicated him in a legal
manner from these horrid Aspersions, that went up and down the whole Country of
him. And if it was his Duty so to do, no person ought to blame Mr. Kirkwood for
what he says in his Book relating to this Affair.

As to other things in this Paper, it is needless to be at much pains to give
them any return, most of them being altogether impertinent, others in so
general and ambiguous term: that the best Answer is a flat Denial; Some not
only gross Falsehoods, but manifest Lies; And in not a few one may very well
grant the Premises, and yet deny the Inference: We need not travel far into it
to find out Instances. Lo, one in its very Front. The words are, The like of
Mr. K 's. Pamphlet, all things being considered, was never written in any
Language by any Persuasion, being both Profane, Blasphemous, and Obscene. We
may safely grant you, that never before this time such a Book was written;
Because never any person had such an Occasion, or such a Subject to write on:
Never, we say, was such a Judicature on Earth, and acted such things, as that,
which sat at Kelso 24. September 1695. Of which at large from the 8. Sect. to
the 22, Part 3.

We shall also confess, that there are some Words in Mr. Kirkwood's Book, which
may give Offense to a Modest Ear, and therefore may be called Profane, or
Obscene, (for both these words may pass here, as one, tho the Doctor makes a
difference by interposing a third, and that without any ground) Yet we
positively assert, that Mr. Jaque and his Elders are justly blameable upon that
head, and not Mr. Kirkwood. They most falsely inserted these words into his
Libel, and have recorded them in all the Registers of the Kirk of Scotland, and
published them by Word and Write, far and wide, through the Kingdom to disgrace
him; And may not he repeat their Words for his own Vindication?

And further know, that it were very easy, were we not hastening to a close,
to show you from this Paper a vast number of abominable Lies: But we shall
content our selves with this one, which may well pass muster for all the rest.
The Doctor's words are, The Honorable, Pious, and Learned Nobility and Gentry
of this Ancient Kingdom, who favor the Church Judicatures with their presence
and assistance as Ruling Elders, are not exempted from Mr. K 's. severe and
false Censures of Partiality, Injustice, Envy, Malice, Ignorance and Falsehood.

Now know, that the very contrary is again and again repeated in his Book; And
that not transciently, or by the by; But brought in as 't^^re with an OES in
express Terms, prefixing to it a Title, viz. A necessary Caution, Page 79.
Pray, says Mr. Kirkwood, do not mistake us, as if we were charging ALL the
Members of the Syond as guilty of the abovementioned Crimes, No, No: We are
far from that. ALL the Worthy Gentle men, Sir John Home, Sir John Pringle, and
others, with a good Number of the People, did what lay in their power to stop
the Carrier of the furious multitude, but were not able; Especially, when it
came to a Vote, where a Dunce can do as much as much as a Solomon. And page
128. are these words; As to the many Honorable and Worthy Gentlemen, the
Ruling Elders, Mr. Kirkwood here declares them altogether Innocent, and free of
having any hand in the Sentence past against him.

Yea, how frequently in his Book does he lament and bemoan his sad misfortune,
that Gentlemen sat not his Judges, page 49. We must not here omit (says he) to
tell you, that we are far from ascribing these wild and exorbitant Actings to
every Member of the Committee. No, No, Not to the half of them. These Worthy
Gentlemen above named, would certalnly have abhorred to sit amongst the Actors
of such gross Enormities. Alas! alas! (he adds) It has been Mr. Kirkwood's
great Misfortune, that Gentlemen kept not Diets: Many never came, and some
very seldom.

Now, good Reader, do you not think the Doctor has been bewitched; At least
hudgely demented and blinded with the Passions of ^xcessive Malice, Envy,
Revenge, and such like Prejudices, which ^ave instigated him to write against
the very Light of the Sun at ^oon-tide? By this one Instance you may
conjecture, what kind of Paper the Doctors is, if duly compared with Mr.
Kirkwood's Book.

To conclude; These most scurrilous, affected, and bombast words, ^herewith the
Doctor's Paper is, as 'twere crammed, viz. The Crazie^eaded Pamphleter; The
Vacuum of his Choleric Brain; He has the ^ickets in his Understanding, etc.
deserves no Answer, except to be ^ught at, or retorted upon himself with far
greater Reason, than he (...) a most malicious manner would throw them upon
another. Such ^ords may perhaps amuse the Vulgar Reader, whose capacity seldom
reaches further, than the outside of things; But Men of Understanding, who can
discern the true Use and Importance of words, will laugh at such silly, empty,
and frivolous Notions and Chimera's of a Pedantick Mountebank, and not the
grave Expressions of a Learned and Skilful Professor of Medicine: For in
effect, whosoever shall narrowly consider this whole Affair, will palpably see
that the Doctors Intellectuals are mighty shallow, if we may judge of the Tree
by its Fruit: So that upon just Ground it may be said, that he not olny has the
Rickets in his distorted and decrepit body in a very eminent manner; But that
they are flown up into his empty brain, and there have begot such a strange
Vertigo or Giddiness in his Noddle, that it made him run round two Kingdoms
with another Man's Wife hanging by his tail, giving out to all persons
whethersoever he went, that she was a Chaste and Pure Virgin.

The Doctor concludes with this old Saying, Quos Deus vult perdere, prius
dementat, applying it to Mr. Kirkwood: But with his leave he may upon better
Ground take it to himself; since he openly acknowledges, that he is guilty of
the height of Imprudence and Folly* And that not in a single Act, or two, but
in a long continued Serie^ of a vast number of various kinds of most horrid and
wicked deed^ amounting to no less, (in the Sense and Judgment of his old
Father than that unpardonable Sin against the HOLY GHOST: So tha^ GOD, it
seems, has quite robbed him of all his Intellectual Facultie^ leaving him
nothing in their Room, but a Chimerical Vacuum, ((...) use his own word) as a
fit Receptacle for all sorts of malign Spirits* For certainly no good Quality
can lodge with excessive Folly an^ Imprudence, if we may apply with a little
Variation, that Saying (...) the Moralist.

Nullum Numen adest, nisi sit Prudentia. --
FINIS.

