Unto his Grace, His Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Right Honorable the
Estates of Parliament The Petition of JOHN AYTOVN of KINNALDIE.
Humbly shows,
THAT where in the year 16^5, Your Petitioners Father David Aytoun of
Kennaldie, having granted a woodlet to the Deceast Robert Hamiltoun of Kinkell,
of his Lands of N^^ther Kennaldie, with the pertinents for 11500 Merks, and in
the year 1644; The Woodset being Redeemed, the Deceast John Hamiltoun of
Kinkell, who was Heir served, and retoured to the Deceast Robert Hamiltoun of
Kinkell, his Father did Disp^^e the said Woodlet Lands* and all Right he had
thereto, in favour^ of the said (...) ^^ing Infest thereupon, has continued
(...) of by himself, and your Petitioner: Who is Heir served and Retoured (...)
the said year 1644, which is now 50 years, and upwards, without the least
interruption whatsomever. And Alexander Hamiltoun of Kinkell, who is Heir
served and retoured to the said John Hamiltoun his Brother, who was Heir served
and retoured to the said Robert Hamiltoun their Father, did intent a Reduction
thereof before the Lords of Council and Session, which a seen and returned. But
because he found that the said Disposition is Prescrived, ^o that he cannot
quarrel the samen. He has given in a Petition to Your Grace, and the Honorable
Estates of Parliament in most general Terms; wherein as he does not mention
your Petitioners name nor interest, so neither does he condescend against whom
the design of the Petition is; But most cunningly and subtily after
representing some losses he had sustained in the Late Government for
Ecclesiastical Nonconformity, by imprisonment, confinements, intercommunion,
and other hardships, he concludes the Petition thus, That in regard he was
exposed to the running of Prescription during the time of his troubles, is may
be declared by your Grace and Honorable Estates of Parliament, that fourteen
years may be deduced from the years of Prescription (seeing as he pretends)
during that time he was non volens agere. By which Conclusion of the said
Petition, it is evident that the samen is contrived not so much for Kinkels
reparations of his sufferings in the last Government, as for exposing your
Petitioner to new sufferings under this; Tho he may compare with him even in
the last Government, being fined in 2000 Merks, which he paid for his Absence
from Bothwel-Bridge: And being put to great Expenses by a Process before the
Council, in declining to be a Militia-captain, immediately before this happy
Revolution; And if such a General Act as this should pass in his favors,
without citeing this your Petitioner against whom the main design, Scope and
Aim of Kinkels Petition runs; then your Petitioners Defense of undoubted
prescription, is altogether frustrat and elieded, and the Matter being of great
import to your Petitioner, and of a dangerous preparative to others, who may be
equally concerned in the like cases, and might be totally ruined by such a
general Act. Therefore your Petitioner humbly beggs pardon to represent to
Your Grace, and Honorable Estates of Parliament, the Grounds and Reasons
following; why the said Petition and desire thereof cannot be granted. And,
(...) There being a Reduction of the said Right, depending before the Lords of
Session, they are sufficient and competent Judges to decide in matters of
prescription, and to determine whether any years of Kinkels intercommuning
should be allowed; But it is a thing altogether impracticable, by such general
Acts to anticipate the Lords of Session their Decisions, in Processes depending
before them, especially when the Parties concerned are not called. 2 do: The
reason is evident, why Kinkel all this time did not insist in his foresaid
Reduction because the Instrumentary witnesses in the Disposition were then
living, who were present when the same was Subscrived, and knew that the
disponer was in perfect health and vigor of Body; And now they having dyed
within these few years; And likewayes several other extrinsick witnesses who
were daily conversing with him, therefore he takes this opportunity, knowing the
difficulty of finding a Probation in re tam antiqua, and if this had not been
Kinkels design, what hindered him all the time that judge Ker his brother in
Law was in Power, and one of he Judges of the Nation, and an eminent Lawyer, he
did not then raise a reduction, when the matter was recent, and he could not
pretend he was non volens agere. 3 tio. If this Disposition were reduced, it
would involve your Petitioner in upwards of 60000 Merks, and although he had
several pursuits against him, both for relief of Cautionries, and other Debts,
against which, he defended most litigously, and wherein there were four several
Suspentions discussed, and several grounds of Compensation founded upon; Yet
never a word of this Debt, which certainly he would have done, if there had
been any just ground therefore, both considering the greatness of the Sum, and
Kinkells bad circumstances, his Estate being totaly ruined by Debt these many
years by gone: Like as after your Petitioner had prevailed by obtaining
Decreets of the Lords; He disponed several others of his lands in my favors, in
satisfaction of the sums discerned; As also (...) single and liferent Escheat,
for his further security of the new conquest, did obtain Decreets of General
and special declarator against him after most litigious debates, and during all
the time of the dependence of these processes, there was never so much as
mention made of this Reduction. 4 to. If the point of prescription were to be
discust before the Lords of Session, before whom the Reduction is depending. It
is conceived, that there could be no pretense why Prescription should not run,
during the time Kinkel was confined to the Town and Suburbs of Edinburgh, where
he had Liberty to pass and repass for many Years, So that he being resident in
Edinburgh, and never being so much as denounced for not appearing, cannot be
presumed that he was in the Terms of an Intercommuning, but might certainly
have raised a Sumonds, and given a Citation, which would undoubtedly have
stooped Prescription. And in the year 1684, your Petitioner having pursued
Kinkel and his Tenants before the Stewart of the Stewartry of St. Andrews, he
did then Advocat the cause, and did many other Acts in the years of his
pretended Intercommuning, So that in some Cases, it seems he was Valens agere,
but in this Case he designed not to be, but by his own dilict, has undoubtedly
designed to take advantage of your Petitioner. And it is impossible, That in
Law or Justice, there can be Deduction of years, that he was under the said
Imprisonment, Confinement, or willful and designed lurking up and down the
Country, occasioned chiefly by Captions, for Civil Debts, not yet paid, nor
removed; And under which Captions Kinkel yet lies, during which time nothing
could hinder him to have raised a Process of Reduction against your Petitioner.
By all which it is evident, That he has had a design against your Petitioner,
to bring him to unnecessary Trouble, Charges and Expencess

In Respect of all which, It is Humbly craved, That my Lord Commissioner his
Grace, and Honorable Estates of Parliament, would be pleased altogether to
Reject the said Petition, at least the last part thereof, relating to
Prescription, wherein your Petitioner is so much concerned, and the samen
relating to a Process depending before the Lords of Session; Or otherwise to
allow me to be heard before any such general Act pass in Favors of Kinkel, In
Case your Grace, and Honorable Estates of Parliament should think fit, to take
the samen to your Considerations.


