AN ACCOUNT OF THE Sufferings AND Dying Words, Of Several French Protestants,
Under this present PERSECVTION As it was received from the Hands of several
Protestant Ministers, who Arrived lately in England.

LONDON Printed, and Reprinted at Edinburgh 1699

A Brief Account of the Sufferings and Last Words of several French
Protestants, under this present Persecution.
MOnsieur de Hamlin (a young Gentleman of very good Parentage, and very Zealous
in the Protestant Religion) living long privately in his own House, with an
other Gentleman, and his Host, whom he instructed in all the Principles of the
Protestant Religion; at last they were Apprehended, and cast into Prison: And
while they lay there, in came a Priest, with all his Accoutrements, to say
Mass: But Monsieur de Hamlin, inflamed with Zeal against such Ridiculous
Fopperies, went and overthrew the Chalice and Candlesticks, saying, Is it not
enough to you to Blaspheme God in the Church, but you must also polute the
Prison with your Idolatries? The Jayler seeing this, fell upon him, and beat
him most desperately, and also removed him into a Dungeon, loading him with
Irons, which made his Legs to swell, where he lay Eight Days in a most pitiful
manner: The other Gentleman, and his Host terrified with the Prison, and Fear
of Death, Renounced their Profession. Whereupon M. de Hamlin said to the other
Gentleman, O Unhappy, and more than Miserable Man! is it possible that you
shall be so Foolish, as to save your Life for a few Days? Do thou think
Eternal Life so mean a thing, as to prefer the Present Life before it? Remember
Man, that the sufferings of this present Life are not comparable with the Glory
that shall be revealed: If thou suffer with him thou shall also Reign with him.
Thou can not answer for what thou have already done; yet the Gate of Mercy
is not quite shut: Heap not Sin upon Sin, lest thou epentest when it is too
late, and be an Example to all Apostates. Having ended his Speech, the other
young Gentleman with the Priest going out of Prison; The Priest informed
grievously against M. de Hamlin: And he being Condemned, and carried to the
place of Execution, and there tied to the Stake, he cried out with a loud
Voice, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. How long shall Darkness overwhelm this
Realm? How long will Thou suffer the Tyranny of these wicked Men? They
endeavored to drown his Voice with the Sound of Trumpets, but in the midest of
the Flame he Prayed and Exhorted the People to Constancy and Truth. The Fire
was slow, therefore put him to the greater Torment: But that which most
troubled him, was the Clamorous and Wicked Men set on by the Jesuits and
Friars, who continually cried, Turn thou Heretic, call on our Lady, say, Salve
Regina. To whom he Answered, Depart from me, and trouble me not, ye Messengers
of Satan: For the Fool has said in his Heart, there is not a God: The Men of
Sin have hardened themselves to do Evil continually; But those that Suffer with
Christ shall also Reign with Him. So he rendered up his Soul unto God in the
midst of the Flames, At Mascon in France, the 17 of April 1697.

TWO Ministers who fled out of France in the time of the late Persecution, into
Germany, where they continued a long time: But returning to Valence in France
to see some particular Friends; thinking to pass unknown; They being
discovered, and cast into Prison, the Judge commanded them to be brought before
him; where they were accused of Instructing and Encouraging the Protestants to
continue in their Profession: To whom the Judge said, Are ye the Authors of
this Sedition? Are ye the Cause that so many lose their Lives? By God I swear,
that ye shall suffer for them all, and shall suffer the Torments ye encourage
them to undergo, To whom they answered, Thy Sentence we joyfully embrace; and
we are most willing to be Sacrificed for our Brethren, and resolve to shed our
dearest Blood in the Profession of the Protestant Religion, and unanimously
offer up our Lives for the same. The Judge being much in rage with this stout
Answer, commanded their sides to be Lanced with Knives, till their Bones were
laid open: But the Holy Ministers preached the Living God* and the Lord Jesus
Christ, and exhorted the People to continue in the Protestant Religion, and to
Abstain from the Idolatrous Worship of the Church of Rome. Upon which the Judge
commanded to strick out their Teeth, that their speech might be hindered. His
Orders were obeyed, and their Faces also buffetted, their Eye lids torn off,
their Cheeks Cut and Gasht with Knives, the Skin of their Beards by degrees
plucked off, and their comely countenances wholly defaced and deformed. Yet for
all this, the Meek and Patient Ministers and Marryers said only this; We thank
thee, O Sir, that thou have opened to us so many Mouths to Preach our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, and to Confess the Truth of His reformed Religion: For as
many Wounds as we have, so many Mouths have we to Bless and Praise God, and
Jesus Christ our Redeemer, for giving us Patience and Constancy in the Truth.
The Judge being enraged with their Constancy, ordered the one called Monsieur
Perued, to go back to Prison, from the place of Execution, and cast in a
Dungeon, and there Strangled: And the others Body to be teared and rent in
Pieces with a Hurdle and an Iron Grate: But he being no way affrighted or
daunted therewith, did sing. The Lord is my helper, I will not fear what Man
can do unto me; I will fear no evil, because Thou, O Lord, art with me. As for
thee, O unjust Judge! I appeal from this thy Tyrany, to the Righteous Throne
and Judgment Seat of Jesus Christ the Righteous Judge; where it will appear ye
are but Bloody Tyrants to inflict such horrid Tortures upon us innocent
Protestants. Then coming to the place of Execution, the Judge cried to the
Hangman or Executioner, Dispatch the Heretic Rebel: He nothing troubled
therewith sang aloud,

-- O Lord I yield to Thee,
To whom the Death of all Thy Saints
We know most dear to be.
Thus persuading and encouraging the People to dye in the like Cause, he with a
cheerful countenance, gave up his Body to the Torments, and his Soul unto God:
And is one of these before the Altar that cries, How long, etc. At Valence in
France the 27 of June School.

ANother young Gentleman at Calis, who upon professing himself to be a
Protestant, was apprehended and cast into Prison. And being brought before the
Judge, boldly acknowledged, He believed in Christ, and in the Protestant
Reformed Religion, and valued not what they could inflict on him for his
Profession. Then the Judge called for several Tortures, and all manner of
Torments to be inflicted on him. To whom he said, It would be a Loss and
Damnage to me, if I did not suffer diverse Torments and Punishments for Christ
in his Cause. The Sheriff more incensed* hereby, commanded all the Torments
usual to be inflicted on him; with which he was nothing disturbed, but sung.
The Lord is my Helper, I will not fear what Men can do unto me; I will fear no
Evil, because Thou art with me, O Lord. Then he blamed the Tormentors for
favoring of him, and desired them to do their outmost. The Sheriff not
prevailing that way. He, with some Jesuits and Priests, though by Flattery to
Seduce him. promising him Preferment, Riches, and Honor, if he would deny his
Profession: But he dreeded them as Foolish and Mad, saying, I look for greater
Preferment in Heaven than ye can give me here on Earth. He was then Condemned,
and carried out of the City to be Burnt; Multitudes of Friends and others,
following him, some Kissing him; Weeping for him, and entreating him with Tears
to pity himself: To whom he Answered, Weep not I pray you for me, but weep for
the Enemies of God, who fight against the Protestants: Weep, I say, for them
who prepare a Fire for us, purchasing Hell Fire for themselves in the Day of
Vengence. Cease, I pray you, thus to molest my settled and quiet Mind: For
truly, for the Name of Christ, and the Protestant Reformed Religion, I am
ready and willing to suffer a Thousand Deaths. Others persuaded him to deny his
Religion with his Mouth, and to keep his Conscience to himself. To which he
Answered, O Fools! my Tongue, which by God's Goodness I have, cannot be brought
to deny the ^ame: For with the Heart we believe unto Righteousness, and with
the Tongue we Confess unto Salvation. And thus persuading and encouraging the
People to be willing to Dye in the like Cause, and not to forsake their
Profession for earthly Enjoyments; with an unparalelled Countenance; he gave up
his Body to the Flames, March. 18. School.

ANother young Gentleman, a Soldier in the Garrison at Dunkirk, forsook all
Company, gave himself to Fasting and Prayer, Meditation and Reading of the Holy
Scripture; Coming into the City upon a Holy Day, and seeing the People at their
Pastimes, and other Ceremonial Follies, declared himself a Protestant, and
cried, Away with such Ridiculous Idolatrous Foppries: For God will not be
mocked with your Superstitions; For These that Worship Him, must Worship Him in
Spirit and in Truth. He was apprehended, and tormented with diverse Torments,
which he regarded not, saying, There is nothing in my Mind that can be compared
to the Kingdom of Heaven: Neither is all the World, if it were weighted in a
Balance, comparable to the price of one Soul. And further said, Who can
separate us from the Love of Christ? Can Tribulation or Anguish? And again, I
have learned of my Lord Jesus Christ, not to fear them that can kill the Body,
and have no power to kill the Soul. Having endured a Multitude of Torments, he
received Sentence of Death: And at the place of Execution he said I give Thee
Thanks, O my Lord God, who have accepted me to be a Partaker of Thy Death. and
has not suffered me to be Devoured of my fierce Enemies, Satan and a subtle
World, but have kept me constant in Thy true Faith unto the end. And so he lost
his Head, but found a Crown of Glory; Dunkirk, Agust 3. School.

ANother young Gentleman, seeing the Persecution of the Protestants in
Piedmont, being of eminent Religious Parents, and he himself being most Zealous
in the Protestant Religion: His Parents fearing, that his Zeal might make him
Guilty of his own Death, kept him closs at their Country House, a great way
from the City of Turin. But he hearing of the great many persecutions of the
Protestants, both in City and Country, detasting any further delay, went all
along through By-ways, and much Danger and Weariness, toward the City, where he
came in the Morning: And going before the Judge, said, What a Shame is it for
you, thus wickedly to take away Men's Lives by all manner of Cruelties? And also
endeavor to destroy their Souls, by compelling them to deny their Religion?
Would you know. O ignorant Souls, what I am? Behold I am a Protestant, and an
Enemy to your Devilish Sacrifices: I scorn and despise your Idols, and tread
them under my Feet; and acknowledge only God Almighty, the Creator of Heaven
and Earth, and Jesus Christ His only Son our Lord: But for your prayers to
Saints and your devilish dead Idols, which are the work of Men's hands, none but
Fools will own and worship the same, etc. Come on therefore, and let the
Hangman. Burn, Cut, and Mangle this poor Mortal Carcass; it is very easy to
break and destroy a weak and brittle perishing Body, but the Mind and Soul, you
cannot touch with all that you can do, The Judge enraged ^herewith, said to the
Executioner, Take him and let him feel the power of our Torments, and know what
we can do: Yet, O sturdy youth. I would fain have thee before thou dyest, to
Recant this thy Wickedness, and to save thy self from a wretched Death Consider
what Pleasures thou may enjoy in the House of thy honorable Parents:
Consider the Lamentations and Tears of thy miserable Family and Relations,
which by thy Perverseness will be brought to Ruin: Consider thou art in thy
youth, in the flower of thine Age, in the way to Honor and Preferment, by an
Honorable Marriage agreeable to thy Quality and Estate; do not these
glistering Glories, and the Delights of this World move thee? Does not the
Terror and extreme Grief of thy dear Parents incline thee to pity thy self and
them? Yea, who is there does not lament thy madness and folly. If this does not
prevail, consider the terrible Death that thou art like to suffer: Consider
what variety of Torments are prepared for thee; for thou shall either be
Beheaded by the Sword, or thou shall be torn in pieces by the Teeth of wild
Beasts; or else thou shall be thrown alive into the burning Flames. Now, how
easy and small a matter is required of thee to avoid all this punishment, and
take a little Incense between thy Fingers, and put into the censure in honor
of the Romish Religion, thou shall be set free promising always to desert from
the Hugon^ Religion. When he heard him thus speak: being extremely moved, he
spit in the Tyrant's Face, and presently threw down the Censure, and kicked the
Incense, and said; Away with your Idols out of my sight: Whereupon the judge
commanded the Hangman, without further delay to pluck his Limbs out of joint,
and then with the Claws of wild Beasts, tore off the flesh from his Bo^es;
while he not in the least daunted with their cruel Torments, fell a singing and
praising in this manner* O Lord, I will never forget Thy Goodness and Mercy;
what a pleasure is it, O Lord Jesus, to remember thy triumphant Victories, who
by suffering have attained the height of Glory? Thus with great Constancy and
Courage he continued joyful, and cheerfully sang Praises to God, when he was
all overstain'd and imbrewed in his own Blood, and cruelly tormented in all
parts of his Body. Then they proceeded to the last Torments, which was to cast
him alive into the burning Flames; where he dyed a joyful Marty* singing
Praises and Hallelujah's to God. Turin October 27. School.

FINIS.

