ANSWERS For Aeneas Mcleod Town Clerk of Edinburgh, to the Petition presented
by some particular persons, in name of the Council and Community of the said
Burgh, to his Grace His Majesty's High Commissioner and the right honorable
the Estates of Parliament.
THe said Aeneas having Legally Acquired a Gift for Life of his Office, from
the Magistrates and Town Council of Edinburgh, (to whom that Power does
unquestionably belong) upon payment of 19000 Merks: And having been in
Possession by virtue of his Right, for more than seven years, whereby he has
the benefit of a Possessory Judgment: And having ever since his Admission, been
most faithful to his Trust, and more exact than his Predecessors in Office, and
kept the Registers as well in order, as any other in the Kingdom: It is
confidently relied on, that his Grace and the honorable Estates, will not
sustain Process against him before the Parliament. Because

1. That he is not obliged to answer upon a summar Complaint, in a matter of so
great Consequence, being in effect, the annulling of his Right for Life, which
according to the Acts of Regulation 1672, can only be by a Reduction, wherein
Terms will be granted to produce, and the Reasons debate in praesentia of the
Lords of Session: Especially, seeing he has a Possessory Judgment, which gives
him this Privilege of time to prepare himself, for defending his Gift as
aforesaid.

2. The Complaint being presented by the Town Council of Edinburgh, there ought
no Process to be sustained thereupon, unless there had been an antecedent Act
of the said Town Council and Community warranting the same; By the want of
which, it appears that this Pursuit is only raised by particular persons upon
private designs to surprise the said Aeneas and overturn his Right, when the
Parliament cannot allow a full Hearing, being otherways taken up with the great
Concerns of the Nation. Especially

3. The Ground of the Complaint, being several matters of Fact, Inspection of
Registers, and Examination of the Warrants thereof; which can only be cleared
by Cognition of the Forms and Practicks relative to the said Office: It cannot
be supposed, that the High Court of Parliament, can spare so much time as is
necessary, for so tedious a Cognition as will be requisite, before this Affair
can be Determined. Hence

4 The wisdom of the Nation has determined by repeated Acts of Parliament,
that all Civil Actions shall be first brought before, and decided by the Judge
Ordinary, particularly Act 45. Parl. 2d. Ja. 1. In these words, anent Bills of
Complaint, whilks may not be determined in Parliament, for diverse Causes
belonging to the common profit of the Realm: it is Ordained, that the said
Bills be execute, and determined by the Judges* and Officers of the Courts,
whom to they pertain of Law, etc. Where the Parliament Declares, that the
common profit of the Realm, will not permit their meddling in Civil Actions, in
the first Instance: As also by Act. 26. Parl. 5. Ja. 3. It is Statute, that the
Party Complaining, in any part of the Realm, shall first come to his Judge
Ordinary, etc. As it cannot be denied, but this is a Civil Cause, and either
can be Remeided by Law, in which case the ordinary Judicatories are Patent: or
the Clerks Right can not be overturned by the Laws and Customs of this Kingdom,
as being his Legal Property and Freehold; in which case, it is certain the
Parliament will not deprive him thereof, in their JVDICATIVE Capacity.

5. The Remead by Parliament is extraordinary, when the Supreme ordinary Judge
has committed Iniquity, so that there remains no other means of Redress: sed
non recurrendum est ad Remedium extraordinarium quamdiu locus est ordinario,
Especially seeing the Kings Leidges can run no Hazard of being Prejudged, since
there is always recourse to the Parliament by Protestation for Remead of Law
which is now cleared: whereas the bringing in Actions in the first instance to
that High Court would obstruct public business, and be a greater expense upon
the Nation then the value of any such Actions.

6. The Clerk will not trouble his Grace, and the right Honorable, the
Estates, with an particular answer to the pretended Malversations lybelled;
since, as he is confident, the Parliament will remit the same to the Judge
ordinary: so he will make it appear before the said Judge, that he has behaved
in all points of the said Office, as a most faithful, Exact, and dutyful Clerk,
and that even in all the particulars Lybelled on.

Lastly, The Town has no reason to complain anent the Act of Council, 1678.
Seeing it is in their power, to Rescind the same in all time coming, without
prejudice to the said Aeneas, to whom it is already jus quesitum, and cannot be
changed to his Prejudice, without a manifest Violation of private Rights, and
the known and established Rules of Law, whereby all Rights are Regulat, by the
Laws standing the time of the acquiring the Right, and no Laws are drawn back
to Regulate the past: and as this is a known Rule in the Law universallie
received; so it is more especially our Laws, as appears by the Act 19. Par. 10
Ja. 6. And seeing the said Aeneas, did upon the faith of that Act, and Gift
founded upon it, purchase his Employment at a dear Rate; as also, that the Act
in it self contains nothing but what is Just, and was enacted upon occasions
equally hurtful to the Town and their Clerks, as is well known, to such as know
any thing of the Affairs of the Town of Edinburgh: and that the Gift contains
nothing singular, but what can be Justified by abundance of instances, when the
matter comes to be Discussed before the Judge Ordinary. Therefore the desire of
the Petitioner ought to be refused, and the whole matter remitted to the Judge
Ordinary, as accords, especially seeing the said Aeneas has raised a Summons of
Declarator, anterior to the said Complaint.


