To His Grace, JAMES Duke of Queensberry His Majesty's High Commissioner; And
the Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, and very Honored, The Lords, Barons,
and Burgesses, presently assembled in Parliament; Anna Fowler Relict of Mr.
William Arnot late Minister of the Gospel at Ebdie,
HUMBLY SHOWS,
THAT Your Petitioners Husband died in the Year 1696. and Left Your Petitioner
with five Children, without any mean of Subsistence, except the Sum of Four
Thousand and Six Hundred Merks Principal, with several bygone Annual-Rents,
which He had secured upon the Estate of Cunichie within the Shire of Fife; And
albeit my Right and Security be good, Yet by the cunning and unjust practices
of Mr. Alexander A^^^eck who married the ap^earand Heiress his abstracting o^
the Writs and conveyance of the Estate, I am not only excluded from the
upli^ting of the Principal Sum, but likeways from the uplifting of the Annual
Rents of which there is now Twenty four Years Resting; And albeit the Lords of
Session before whom the Ranking of the Creditors is Depending, Did appoint your
Petitioner to get Payment from James Oliphant present Factor, of an Hundred
Pound Sterlit of the bygone Annual Rents, for prosecuting of my Just Rights,
and supporting of my Poor Family during the Dependence of the Plea, upon my
finding Caution to Refound In caise the same by the Event be not found due;
Yet, the Lords of Session their favor is Proven altogether ineffectuall to me,
In Respect I am not able to find Caution, whereby I am necessitate to Desert
the Prosecution of my just Right, and Your Petitioner and Children Exposed to
Starve, The High Court of Parliament being the Supreme Judicatory of the
Nation, And who have Power to di^pence Justice without being bound to the
Particular Forms by which the Inferiou^ Courts are bound up, And before whom
the Cases of the Widow and Fatherless should be Particularly Considered.

May it therefore please Your Grace and Lord slips, to take your Petitioners
Case to Your Consideration. and to appoint the foresaid Factor furthwith to pay
the Hundred Pounds Sterling modifyed by the Lords of Session without caution, upon
Your Petitioners granting Receipt, and Obligement to allow the same off the
first and readyes of what shall be found due at the Event of the Ranking, or to
remit to the Lords of Session to do the same, upon my giving my Oath that I am
not able to find caution.

And Your Petitioner shall ever Pray.

