ANSWERS FOR THE EARL of LAUDERDALE, TO A PRINTED PAPER, (Entitled, The Case
of JOHN SWINTON, In relation to his Fathers Forefaulture) and to the pretended
Reasons of Reduction of the said Forfaulture, Alleged to be now depending
before the Parliament.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson; 1690.

Answers for the Earl of Lauderdale, to a Printed Paper (Entitled, The Case of
John Swinton, in relation to his Fathers Forfaulture) and to the pretended
Reasons of Reduction of the said Forfaulture, Alleged to be now depending
before the Parliament.
THE deceast John Swinton, being a Person of a considerable Interest and Trust
in the Kingdom of Scotland, in Anno 1651. Upon the Invasion of Cromwell, and the
English Rebels, Swinton did desert his Sovereign, and Native Country, and
abandoned his Charge in the Army; and did join and associat himself with the
Usurper Cromwell; for which he and some other Traitors were Cited before the
Parliament at Perth; and the matter being remitted by the Parliament to the
Committee of Estates; and His late Majesty King Charles the Second being
present in the Committee; and the matter being both notourly known, as also
sufficiently proven, John Swinton was Forefault in anno 1651. for deserting his
Charge in the Army, and joining with Cromwell: Thereafter John Swinton marched
with Cromwell to Worcester, and did actually appear in Arms against his
Sovereign in Person, when the Royal Family, and his Native Country, were at
the last and outmost extremity, where the late Duke of Lauderdale, being taken
Prisoner in defense of his Sovereigns Right, and preservation of his native
Country from slavery, was thereafter detained three years closs Prisoner in
the Tower of London, expecting every hour the stroke of the Executioner; and
was kept other three years in a Vault at Portland-Castle, and being transported
thence to Windsor-Castle, he was likewise detained Prisoner there other three
years: And being Forfeited for his Loyalty by those Regicides, John Swinton did
improve his Interest and Power he had with the Usurper Cromwell, (being his
great Minion and Trustee, being nominat by him to be a Lord both of Council,
Exchequer and Session) to so base and ungenerous ends, that he did persecute
those who had faithfully adhered to their Sovereign and Native Country, in
their distress, and did procure in his own Favors a Gift of the Duke of
Lauderdale's Forfaulture, and thereby did possess a considerable part of his
Estate, to the value of one thousand Pounds Sterling per annum, for the space
of more than 8 years; the rest of the Duke's Estate being possessed by as
notorious Traitors as himself, during all which time, the Duke of Lauderdale's
Lady and Daughter, were reduced to such straits and necessities, that they had
not Bread to eat, the unjust Invaders of his Estate, neither allowing him any
thing out of the same, to maintain himself and his Family, nor yet interposing
with the Usurper for an allowance out of the Public: In which condition the
Duke lived, till it pleased God to extricate him out of these straits and
difficulties, by the happy Restoration of his Native Sovereign King Charles
the Second, in anno 1660.

In anno 1661. John Swinton was sent down Prisoner from London, to be Judged by
the Parliament of Scotland; and being conveened before the Parliament, His
Majesty's Advocat did insist against him, not only upon the former Sentence,
and Doom of Forfaulture past against him in anno 1651. And that the samine
might be put to further Execution, but likewise exhibited a new Indictment
against him, upon several new additional Articles of Treason, and particularly
upon his going along with the Rebels to, and being in Arms at the Fight of
Worcester against his Sovereign in person: And John Swinton having appeared
several times in the Panel, he not only viva voce did acknowledge, but by
Defenses Written and Subscribed with his own Hand, given in to the Parliament,
he confessed his being in Arms at Worcester with the Usurper Cromwell against
his Sovereign, but did plead the benefit of the Act of Indemnity in England,
which did not at all concern Scotsmen, whereupon the Parliament in anno 1661,
did not only Ratify and Approve the former Doom and Sentence of Forfaulture
pronounced against the said John Swinton, by the Committee of Estates in anno
1651, but also for the additional Crimes contained in the new Indictment
acknowledged by himself, both viva voce before the Parliament, and by the
Written and Subscribed Defenses Swinton was again Forfaulted: And in the next
Session of that same Parliament, the Doom of Forfaulture against Swinton is
mentioned and related in the Act of Indemnity, and he and some others are
expressly excepted from the Indemnity, as standing Forfault by that same
Parliament.

King Charles the Second was graciously pleased to gift and bestow Swinton's
Forfaulture to the late Duke of Lauderdale, not only in consideration of his
faithful Services, and great Sufferings, but particularly because John Swinton
had taken a Gift from the Usurpers, of a considerable part of the Duke of
Lauderdale's Estate: So that there was never any Forfaulture upon more just and
important Crimes, nor did ever any Prince Gift a Forfaulture upon more
reasonable and equitable considerations. Nevertheless after the Duke of
Lauderdale's decease, in anno 1682, when his Family and Representatives were in
very hard circumstances, Swinton's Son did impetrat and procure from the late
King Charles the Second, upon most false and disingenuous representations, a
Commission for enquiring into the Method and Procedure, and the Warrands upon
Record of Swinton's Forfaulture: and there being a multitude of frivolous
Objections offered by Swinton's Son, and full Answers thereto, by the Earl of
Lauderdale, and the Creditors of the deceast Duke of Lauderdale: And both
Parties being heard viva voce before that Commission, the Commissioners were
fully satisfied, that nothing of moment was instructed, and that the Crimes for
which Swinton was Forfeited at Perth, viz. his deserting his Charge in the
Army, and joining with the Rebel Cromwell, and his being thereafter in Arms at
Worcester, for which he was again Forfeited in the Parliament, 1661. was not
only true and incontroverted, but acknowledged by Swinton himself, in his
Answers given in to his Indictment, which were Written and Subscribed with his
own Hand, as said is: So that if there had been any Informality in the
Processes of Forfeiture, as there were none; yet these Informalities could have
no effect, and ought not to be regarded: Especially seeing by the 135 Act, Parl.
8. K. Ja. the 6. It is Statuted, that no Forfeiture for Treason against the
King, and His Estates, shall be Reduced for any pretended Cause of Nullity,
that may be Alleged to have been in the Process, except the Crime be either
Remitted by His Majesty, or that it could be purged and acquit by a Trial.
Whereupon the Commission was deserted.

Thereafter the said John Swinton's Son and his Relations, being conscious to
themselves, that they could not prevail to Reduce the foresaids two Decreets of
Forfeiture, pronounced against his deceast Father, the Crimes for which he was
Forfeit being both notour and proven, and acknowledged by himself, they did
fall upon another Contrivance, which was in anno 1685, or 1686. to procure an
Rehabilitation to Swinton's Children, with a Remission of the Crime, thinking
thereby, and by the interest with the Quakers, and others who had then
Influence at Court, that they would lay a force upon the Earl of Lauderdale,
either to Transact with the said John Swinton for the Estate of Swinton, or if
he refused to do the same, they would procure a Recommendation to the next
Parliament, to Reduce the Forfeitures upon the former frivolous Objections, and
pretended Nullities offered before the Commission: But the Tenor of the
Rehabilitation running upon these same false Grounds and Suggestions, which
were insinuat to King Charles the Second, when the Commission was obtained in
anno 1682. and which being objected against by the Lord Maitland, then at
Court, the Letter of Rehabilitation in favors of Swinton's Children, was
refused.

This being a short and true Account of the matter of Fact in relation to the
Forfeitures of Swinton, and the Gift thereof in Favors of the late Duke of
Lauderdale, and the Contrivances that have been fallen upon of late to quarrel
the same: A Paper lately came out in Print, ( Entitled the Case of John
Swinton of Swinton, in relation to his Fathers Forfeiture, with the Reasons of
Reduction of the said Forfeiture) shall be made appear to any indifferent
person to be Disingenious, False, Calumnious, and inconsistent with the Laws of
this, and all other Nations, both from what has been said before, and what
shall be hereafter said in the particular Answers to the Reasons of Reduction.

It is represented in the said Paper, that the Duke of Lauderdale after the
Restoration of King Charles the Second, first entered into the Possession, and
then obtained a Gift of the Deceast Swinton's Estate, upon pretense of his
being Forfeited by the Committee of Estates, in anno 1651. for his being with
the English, albeit there was nothing ever could be made appear to evince that
there was ever any such Forfeiture against Swinton in the year 1651. But the
pretended Extract of a Decree in absence, elicite from an Under Clerk ten
years after, of which there was never the least Warrant upon Record. And as to
the Forfeiture in the year 1661. there was only a Process intented, which never
came the length of a Sentence: And Swinton having objected it to the Duke of
Lauderdale, in the latter end of the year 1673. There were Methods taken in
January 1674. for making up of the Minutes, as if a Sentence of Forfeiture had
followed upon the Process, and a Decree extracted upon the same, 13, or 14
years after the intended Process, and Sir Archibald Primerose, who was then
Clerk Register, dealt first with the Earl of Crafurd to sign the said Minutes,
albeit 13 years after that Parliament, at least that Session of Parliament was
no more in being, and then caused application to be made in behalf of the Duke
of Lawderdale, to the Lords of Session, to give their Warrant for Extracting,
what he was conscious to himself was so unwarrantably done: And that the Earl
of Crafurd had declared under his hand, by a Letter left with his Daughter,
Lady Helen Sinclair, how he was prevailed with by the said Sir Archibald
Primrose, to so unjustifiable a practice, and which Letter is set down at
length in the foresaid Paper; and that the Duke of Lauderdale notwithstanding
of his great power, durst not adventure, albeit that he knew his Title to that
Estate, to be defective, to put a Crime so calumnious, as was charged upon the
Deceast John Swinton, to the Trial of a Parliament, knowing that he would have
been able to have Cleared himself: And that the Letter written by the Earl of
Crafurd, having been shown to the King, he did grant a Commission to make
inquiry in the whole procedor, concerning Swinton's Forfeiture, and to inspect
the Records of Parliament, in relation to the same, and to make Report thereof
to His Majesty. And the Records of Parliament being inspected, there was
nothing found, that related to any pretended Decree of Forfeiture against
Swinton, in the Parliament 1651. And as to the Parliament 1661. all that was
found, did appear from the Records of Parliament to be false. But this Earl of
Lauderdale, had that influence, upon those, to whom the Commission was direct,
as rendered the same ineffectual.

This being the sum of John Swinton's Case, as he is pleased to term it; It is
Answered thereto, 1o. That it is most false and calumnious, that the Duke of
Lauderdale did enter to the possession of the Estate of Swinton, before he
obtained the Gift of Forfeiture: For the deceased John Swinton being Forfeited
by the Committee of Estates, in anno 1651. who had power from the Parliament,
then sitting at Perth, to discuss the relevancy, and probation of the
Indictment, raised against the said deceast John Swinton and others, and to
decide and determine therein, as fully in all respects, as the Parliament
sitting in pleno e^^ sessu, might have done: After the King's Restoration,
that same Committee being appointed by the King to meet in anno 1660. to
manage the public concerns of the Kingdom, until a Parliament was called,
they amongst other things, did Sequestrat the said John Swinton's Estate, whom
they knew they had Forfeited in anno 1651. and did appoint George Hume of
Kaimes, to intromet with the Rent of the said Estate, and to be comptable to
the King, or Lords of Thesaury. And the Duke of Lauderdale did not intromet
with a six pence thereof, until the Martinmass 1661. which was long after, both
the last Sentence of Forfeiture, and his Gift thereof from his Majesty. 2o. As
to the Decree of Forfeiture in anno 1651. Although the Warrands thereof were
lost, with several other public Records coming down from London in anno 1660.
yet the Extract thereof must make as much Faith, as if the Warrants thereof
were yet extant, seeing it is notourly known, that the Lords of Session sustains
all Extracts out of the Registers of these years 1648, 49, 50, and 51. and
refuses to grant Certifications against any Writs Registrat these years,
because the Warrants of the Registers of these years were lost: But that which
puts the truth and verity of this Decree, beyond all question is this, that
Lieutenant Govan who was Forfeited at that same time with John Swinton, and
contained in the same Decree with him, was put to death by Order of the
Parliament, in anno 1661. by virtue of the first Sentence in anno 1651; as is
evident by the last Minutes upon the Margin of that Decree, anno 1651.
Ordaining the Sentence of Death to be execute against him, conform to the said
Decree; and which Minutes are Subscribed by the then President of the
Parliament, 1661. So that to Redargue the Faith and Verity of that Decree of
Forfeiture, were to accuse the Parliament of manifest Injustice, and lay an
Imputation upon the Parliament, of putting a Man to death upon a false Decree,
which the meanest Judicature in Scotland could not be guilty of, far less the
Supreme Judicature of the Nation: and it is obvious to any man's sense, that if
this Decree had been false, Lieutenant Govan when he was called before the
Parliament, and received the Order, and Sentence of Death, would have reclaimed
against the Faith and Verity of that Decree; so that the Parliaments
Approbation of this Decree of Forfeiture, by executing of Govan, and his not
reclaiming against the same, and the Parliaments again approving thereof in the
last Sentence of Forfeiture against Swinton, in anno 1661. are unanswerable
Documents of the Verity and Faith of the said Decree.

3o. For astructing the Verity of the Decree of Forfeiture in anno 1661. there
needs no more be said, but that the List of the Unprinted Acts of the first
Session of the Parliament, anno 1661. contains both the Decree of Forfeiture
against John Swinton, and he Ratification in favors of the late Duke of
Lauderdale, of the Gift of Swinton's Forfeiture: And in the Act of Indemnity,
which was past in the second Session of that same Parliament, the Decree of
Forfeiture against John Swinton, is particularly excepted therefrom, which
beyond all question does adminiculat and astruct the Verity of the said
Sentence and Doom of Forfeiture, and that the same was made up after the year
1673. appears evidently to be false, because the person who Scrolled that
Decree of Forfeiture, whose name was Brown, was put out of Haystoun's Service
and Writing-Chamber in anno 1663, and was dead before the year 1670. And the
Registers of the Decreets of Forfeiture were all Written in one Book by David
Plenderleith, before the year 1669. and delivered in to the Register, and
amongst which is insert the same Sentence of Forfeiture against Swinton, so
that the falseness of that assertion is evident, that the Parliament 1661. did
not proceed to a Sentence upon that Process, raised against Swinton, and that
there were never Decreets Extracted till the year 1674. and Sir Archibald
Primrose was known to be a person of such Integrity, and so Cautious in all his
Actings, that although he be loaded by John Swinton with sinistrous and
indirect Methods, in making up of the Minutes of the said Decree, and
procuring a Warrant for Extracting the same, not sparing his Reputation now
after his death, to attain his unjust ends, which he durst not in the least
adventure upon while he was alive: Yet by what has been said, and by the
following Answers to John Swinton's pretended Reasons of Reduction, it shall be
made evident and clear, he did nothing in this Affair, but what he was
warranted both from the Records of Parliament, and Laws of the Kingdom. 4o. As
to that pretense, that it was thought strange that the Duke of Lauderdale,
being a man of such power, durst not adventure to put a Crime so Calumniously
Charged upon John Swinton, to the Trial of a Parliament. It is Answered, It is
thought more strange, that John Swinton being innocent of these Crimes, as is
pretended in the said Paper, for which he was Indicted and Convict, both by the
Committee of the Estates, 1651. and Parliament 1661. should have suffered the
Duke of Lauderdale to possess his Estate during his Life, who died but in anno
1679. and did never make application either to the Parliament, 1661. or to any
other Parliament that was kept since, for Redressing that pretended Injury
that he received by the Duke of Lauderdale's pretended unjust possession of his
Estate, or for Vindicating himself of those notorious Crimes whereof he was
Indicted and Convict: And if there was no Sentence of Forfeiture pronounced
against the said deceased John Swinton, how came this John Swinton to Address
to, and Employ his Interest with the Quakers and others in England, who had
influence on His Majesty for a Commission, for inquiring into the said
Forfeiture, and procedor thereof; and when this could take no effect, for a
Rehabilitation to the deceast John Swinton's Children, and for a Remission of
the Crime to the deceast John Swinton himself; for if there was no Decree of
Forfeiture against John Swinton, there needed no Commission for inquiring
thereunto, neither was it necessary to have desired a Rehabilitation in favors
of his Children; and if he was not guilty of Treason, there was no need of a
Remission: And how came the deceast John Swinton in his Speech before the
Parliament, 1661. to endeavor to extenuat his Guilt, by pretending that the
Ambition of his younger years having entered him too early into public
Employment, did make him Act these things, which if they were to do, he would
rather with the one hand strike off the other, than be guilty of them; and that
he spoke this, can be made appear by many Witnesses, yet alive: And if he had
been as innocent of the Crimes for which he was Forfeited, as is pretended by
his Son's Paper, would he have used such an expression as this? which clears,
that he was not only guilty of the Crimes, but likewise that he was sensible of
his Fault. But the truth is, John Swinton does sometime run to one Shift, and
sometime to another, as he thinks will help forward his present Design, and
notwithstanding of his pretended simplicity, he resolves calumniari audacter ut
aliquid adhereat. 5o. As to that Alledgance, that the Earl of Lauderdale had
such Influence upon these to whom the Commission was direct in anno 1682, as
rendered the prosecution thereof ineffectual. It is Answered, That this is very
suitable to the rest of his Alledgances, and is a gross Reflection upon those
nominat in the Commission, some of them being as eminent persons, and of as
known Integrity as is in the Kingdom: and the Alledgance is most Calumnious,
for as the Commission was impetrat and obtained by John Swinton, and his
Friends their importunity; so its very notour, that the Commissioners named in
the said Commission, were John Swinton's very good Friends for the most part,
and whom by his Power and Influence at Court for the time he procured most of
them so to be named and appointed, and that the World may judge how the Earl of
Lauderdale was stated with the most part of the Commissioners, their Names are
subjoyned at the end of their Answers.

This being in short the Answer to John Swinton's Case, as it is stated before
his pretended Reasons of Reduction, except to the deceast Earl of Crafurd's
Letter, (which will come in more properly afterward in the Answer to the
Objection against the Minutes.) The next thing that falls in to be considered,
are his pretended Reasons of Reduction.

To the first Reason whereof being against the Decree of the Committee of
Estates in anno 1651, and bearing, that it is a Decree in Absence, not
subscribed by the Clerk Register for the time, but by Mr. Thomas Henderson
pretended Clerk to that Committee, from whom an Extract was elicit in anno
1661, ten years thereafter, and whereof there is no Warrant extant in Records
of Parliament.

It is Answered, 1o. That it is notourly known that Mr. Thomas Henderson who
Subscribes the Extract of the Decree of Forfeiture, pronounced by the
Committee of Estates in anno 1651, to whom the Parliament had remitted these
Processes of Forfeitures, was Clerk to the said Committee of Estates, and the
Extract of the Decree bears, not only the Forfeiture of John Swinton, but of
several other persons, and amongst the rest Lieutenant Govan, who upon the same
Decree was Execute, as appears by the Minutes in anno 1661 upon the Margin
thereof, the last Minut whereof is ordaining that Decree of Forfeiture to be
put to further execution against Govan, and is Subscribed by the President of
the Parliament 1661, and the Sentence of Death was accordingly execute against
him thereupon, though his Crimes were far less obvious and notour than these of
John Swinton's; and Clerks to Committees of Estates, or Criminal Courts, or any
of the Registers Deputs, do grant authentic and valid Extracts, although not
subscribed by the Clerk Register; and it is a mere Calumny that the Extract was
elicit from Mr. Thomas Henderson in the year 1661, and it is an intolerable
imputation and reflection upon the Parliament, to say, that they would upon the
same Extract have ordained Govan to be Execute, and ratified and approven the
Forfeiture contained in this Extract against John Swinton, if the Extract had
not been both true and warrantable; and the truth is, the whole particulars
that are contained in the said Extract were then recent and fresh in the
Memories of a great part of the Members of the Parliament 1661, who had been
Members of the Committee of Estates in anno 1651, and who had pronounced that
Decree of Forfeiture against Swinton and others therein contained. 2o. Swinton
in his Answers, Written and Subscribed by himself, given in to the Parliament
1661, therein endeavors to extenuat his Guilt in joining with the Usurper
Cromwell, and going with him to Worcester, pretending it was because he was out
of the Protection of Law, which Words can no otherways be understood than of
the Decree and Sentence of Forfeiture pronounced against him in anno 1651,
neither does he in his Answers deny that he was Forfeited in anno 1651, which
is a clear demonstration of the verity and truth of the foresaid Decree. 3o.
Whereas it is pretended, that there is no Warrant upon Record of the said
Decree. It is Answered, That it is notour and universally known, that the
Warrants of that year, and of several other years of the Registers, were lost
coming down from London in anno 1660, and that Extracts forth of the Registers
make as much Faith as if the Warrants thereof were yet extant, the Lords of
Session always sustaining such Extracts out of the Registers of these years,
and refusing to grant Certifications against any Writs that are Registrat these
years* because the Warrants thereof were lost in manner foresaid; and if this
Preparative should be sustained or be encouraged to reduce Decreets or Acts of
Parliament, which are Corroborat by other public Acts of subsequent
Parliaments, relative thereto, upon Pretenses that the Minutes or Warrants
thereof are not extant, then the most part of His Majesty's Prerogatives
asserted by the Acts of Parliament, and all Decreets of Forfeitures, whereupon
Annexations to the to the Crown have followed, or Donations to the Liedges may
be all called in question and redargued upon the same pretenses; and therefore
the foresaid Decree of Forfeiture in anno 1651 being unquestionably astructed
as to the verity thereof by the Parliament 1661, their homologating the samine
in putting the Sentence of Death to execution against Govan by virtue thereof,
and by their ratifying the samine in so far as concerns Swinton, and
acknowledged likewise by Swinton in his Answers, the same cannot now be
redargued upon the pretense of the want of the Records which were lost in
manner foresaid.

To the second reason of Reduction, bearing, That the King and Committee of
Estates for reasons and considerations moving them, did restrict the Sentence
of Punishment to the said John Hume (who was one of the persons forfeited in
the said Decree) to the Death, which takes off the effect of the Sentence as
to Swinton and all the rest, till it should be reconsidered by the King and
Parliament. It is Answered, That by this reason appears either the gross
ignorance of the Libeller, or his disingenuity, if not both; for the Doom of
Forfeiture is most solemnly pronounced by sound of Trumpet, and tearing the
Arms of those forfeited, and by reiterat and ingeminat Clauses forfeiting the
Traitors as to Life, Heretage and Movables, which is expressed and repeated as to
John Swinton, and the exception is taxative, and relates only as to John Hume,
who by the former part of the Doom was forfeited as to Life, Lands, and
Heretage also, and which is evident by the exception which restricts the
Sentence as to John Hume, that his punishment should only be Death when
apprehended, and the Escheat of his Movables, and the Liferent of his Lands;
and both Swinton and Govan do not so much as pretend to, or found upon any
restriction of that Sentence, when they were brought before the Parliament
1661, which certainly they would not have neglected, if their Restriction had
been extended to them, and the Decree and Sentence was considered by the
Parliament 1661 as not containing any such restriction in their favors, when
they did not only ordain Govan to be execute by virtue thereof, which was
accordingly done; but also when they did repel Swinton's Answers, as being no
ways relevant, and did ratify and approve the foresaid Decree, and forfeited
him of new for the new additional and supervenient Crimes whereof he was
Indicted.

To the third reason of Reduction, bearing, That by the late Claim of Right in
the Meeting of Estates, It is Declared, that the causing Pursue and Forfeit
persons upon frivolous and weak Pretenses, and upon lame and defective
Probation, is contrair to Law, and that the Crimes libelled against John
Swinton were such, being both irrelevant and calumnious.

It is Answered, 1o. That if the Crimes of Deserting of the Kings Army by a
Commissionat Officer, and going in to the common Enemy, who at that time had
invaded the Kingdom, and having their residence and daily resorting and
conversing with the said public Enemy be irrelevant to infer the Crime of
Treason, then it is not known what can be found relevant to infer that Crime:
For 1o. by Law and the Custom of Nations de re militari, who ever accepts a
Military Commission or Charge, he cannot at his pleasure dismiss or exauterat
himself; and Swinton having acknowledged, and it being proven against him that
he received his Charge in the Army from the King and Committee of Estates, he
could not loose himself, or his cingulum and sacramentum militare fine
missione, and without his Majesty and Committee of Estates their License and
Warrant; and his pretended giving up of his Commission, (which in his Answers
to the Parliament 1661, was by intimating the samine to the Chancellor, and to
Gilbert Ker,) that they received the samine off his hands, does not excuse,
much less warrant his withdrawing from his Charge, whereupon the Law, tho he
had proceeded no further, put this construction and character of Desertion, and
having gone to the Enemies Quarters sine comm^^ tu, Law goes further to put the
Character upon him of being transfuga and hostis; and whatever may be his
Pretenses of his being taken Prisoner and carried to the Enemies Quarters,
where he was some time detained Prisoner, yet they are undoubtedly nothing else
but Excuses, to palliat his treasonable designs against his King and Country;
for if he had not had a design to join with the Enemy, what could move him to
that side of the Water and place of the Country where the Enemy was lying, his
Family being on the other side, and where he could not Escape, being taken by
the Enemy; but the true reason was, he was afraid that the Treaties and
Correspondence which he had with the Enemies before should be discovered and he
punished for the same, and if he had been kept as a Prisoner with the Enemy, is
it possible that they would have suffered him to wear his Sword who had been in
Arms against them, especially when they had disarmed all the Gentlemen in the
Country, and would suffer none to wear Swords but those who who were actually
in their own Service. And whatever might be Alleged against simple Converse,
and being present with an Enemy, as not relevant to infer the Crime of Treason,
yet this Converse being qualified as is Libelled, viz. the deserting of his
Charge in the Army, his going to the place where the Rebels were, his residing
and frequent resorting with them, with his after Carriage in going in with the
Usurper to Worcester, which he acknowledges in his Answers, that he did it at
the desire of the Usurper; by the Construction of all Law, and by the Laws of
this Kingdom is relevant to infer the Crime of Treason, and that of the highest
nature. 2o. The foresaid Decree being ordained by the Parliament to be given
out to him to see the 15th of May 1661, and to give in his Answers thereto
again that day eight days, and accordingly the said John Swinton having gotten
up the said Decree to see, he returned the samine without any Answers, which
certainly he would not have done if he had been innocent of these Crimes
libelled against him in the said Decree, or if the Decree of Forfeiture had
not truly been pronounced against him: and seeing that the Decree of Forfeiture
1651 is not only ratified by the Parliament 1661 as to John Swinton, but
thereupon the said Lieutenant Govan was excecute as aforesaid, it is high and
bold insolence in John Swinton to have libelled such a reason of Reduction, by
questioning the relevancy of his Fathers Indictment, which in effect is of no
less import than to accuse both the Committee of Estates 1651, and the
Parliament 1661 of high and manifest Injustice, and upon the matter is an
impugning of the Authority of the Estates and Parliament, which by the Law is
declared Treason.

To the fourth Reason of Reduction, viz. That the foresaid Decree is defective
in the Probation, the Decree neither condescending upon the Witnesses that
were examined against him, nor upon what they deponed, but only that the King
and Committee of Estates have found the Libel relevant and sufficiently proven,
without expressing what way the same was proven; So that the whole Probation of
that Decree, resolves in the simple assertion of one Clerk, without any
authentic Document or Probation in record, which in Law is no Probation at all.

It is answered. 1st. That the Decree is opponed, bearing expressly Sir Thomas
Nicolson's compearance, who was then Kings Advocat, before the King and
Committee of Estates; and desiring that His Majesty and the said Committee
would consider the relevancie of the said Libel and Indictment with the
Depositions of diverse famous Witnesses, Received, Sworn, and examined
thereanent: So that the Decree condescends that the manner of Probation was by
Witnesses: And it is neither Practice nor Form, to condescend upon the
Witnesses names in any Decreets, but only to condescend upon the manner of
Probation, whether the samine be by Witnesses, Write, or Oath of Party. 2ly.
After that Sir Thomas Nicolson had desired the King and Committee of Estates to
consider the relevancie of the Libel, and the Witnesses Depositions; the King
and the said Committee did find the Libel as it was raised against the said
John Swinton. viz. That he being employed as Leiutenant-Collonel, and having
had the charge of one Troop of Horse, did desert the said Charge, and did go in
to the Common-Enemy, who had invaded the Kingdom, and did oppress the same, and
had frequent Residence with, and did resort to the said Common Enemy diverse and
several times since in the Town of Edinburgh, Cannongate, and Lies, relevant
to infer the Pain and Punishment of High Treason, and found the samine proven
by the Depositions of diverse famous Witnesses, Sworn, Admitted, Examined and
Deponed, as was clearly known to His Majesty and the Committee of Estates: And
therefore, the King and Committee did pronounce the sentence of Forfeiture
against him; so that it is most callumnious to allege, that the foresaid
Decree does only bear, that the Libel against Swinton was found relevant and
sufficiently proven, without expressing what way the famine was proven, or that
Witnesses were adduced for proving thereof. And the former Answer is repeated,
that the Authority of a Parliament is not to be impugn'd, nor are Decreets of
Forfeiture to be reduced upon any pretended Nullitie or informality of Process,
till first the Crime be purged, and the Party by a Remission be rehabilitat,
as is clear by the 135 Act. Parliament 8 King James the 6. And as to that part
of the foresaid Reason of Reduction, viz. That there is no authentic Document
of the Probation upon record, the samine is so fully answered before, that it
is needless to repeat it here in this place.

To the fifth Reason of Reduction, viz. That the Duke of Lauderdale, after he
had got an Gift of the said John Swinton's Forfeiture upon the Decree 1651, he
did cause raise a new Indytment before the Parliament 1661, wherein was
Libelled the same Crime, in the very same Words as it was Libelled against him
in anno 1651: And did design him John Swinton of Swinton, which was an
implicit passing from the said Decree, and an evident Demonstration, that it
was looked upon by the Duke as no Decree, it being obvious and clear by Law
and Common Sense; that a man that is once forfeited, cannot be again forfeited,
seeing by the first Forfeiture in the construction of Law, he is no more in
being, and can have no Estate to forfeit.

It is answered, 1st. That this Reason has the same Truth in it as the rest of
the Reasons have, for the Duke of Lauderdale's Gift to Swinton's Forfeiture,
was not till May 1661; And by their own acknowledgment, the Lords of the
Articles did upon the seventh of February 1661, Ordain Swinton's Indytment to
be given up to him to see and answer; And his appearance before the Parliament,
was upon the 27 of the same Month, which was three months before the Duke of
Lauderdale obtained the Gift of John Swintons Forfeiture. 2o. Although Lauderdale
had caused raise the Indytment after his obtaining the Gift of Forfeiture,
which is most calumnious, and had therein designed him John Swinton of Swinton,
and had Libelled the same Crimes against him, which were in the former Decree
1651. Yet it cannot be inferred either from Law or Reason, that it was a
passing from the former Decree, for the designing John Swinton of Swinton is
of no moment, that being his ordinary Designation, and a wrong Designation
could neither prejudge the King nor his Donatar, and there is nothing more
ordinary, than to design Persons by their former Titles or by their Estates
which they formerly had right to, whether they had lost the samine by
Forfeiture, or had sold or disposed upon the samine. 3ly. Although the King's
Advocat did narrate the same Crimes in the new Indytment before the Parliament
1661, for which he was formerly forfeit in anno 1651, with several other new
Crimes: As particularly his going in with the Usurper and Rebels to Worcester,
and appearing there in Arms against his King and Prince, which was a Guilt and
Crime of an higher Nature, than the deserting of his Majesty's Service; yet it
did no ways loose nor enervate the former Sentence and Decree, which was so
justly pronounced against him in anno 1651. And the King's Advocat did not
insist against the said Deceast John Swinton upon the Crimes mentioned in the
former Decree to forfeit him a new upon the samine, but did insist upon the
Decree 1651; as Probatio probata, and that the said Decree might be ratified
and approven: and accordingly the Parliament did ratify and approve the
samine. As also did of new forfeit him for his being in Arms at Worcester
against the King, which was the only new additional Article insisted upon
against him, so that the first Decree was so far from being past from, that
the same was ratified and approven, and the Libelling of the Crimes in the
first Decree in the last Indytment, was to show a long series and continued
Tract of the said John Swinton, his treasonable Crimes, and not at all to pass
from the former Decree: The King's Advocat expressly desiring the samine to be
ratified by the Parliament. 4ly. Although a forfeited Person in the construction
of Law, be reputed nullus et civiliter mortuus, yet that is only in odium of
himself, and cannot be made use of in prejudice of the King, or his Donatar, or
any other Person; And although a former Sentence might imped and debar him, from
having Personam standi in judicio, yet it cannot hinder, why he may not be
Accused, Indyted and Sentenced for Crimes perpetrat be him after the first
Sentence: And if the last Crimes deserves a greater Punishment than the first
Crimes, for which he was formerly Sentenced, the punishment which he was to
undergo by the first Sentence, may be changed and altered, and the punishment
decerned in the last sentence, may be inflicted upon him: As for Example, if
any Person were sentenced to die as a Murderer, and after his Sentence he
should escape out of Prison, and commit the Crime of Treason, by the first
Sentence he is repute nullus et civiliter mortuus, and has not Personam standi
in Judicio: yet it cannot be controverted, but he may be Indyted of new again
for Treason, and the punishment of Treason inflicted upon him accordingly.

The first Reason of Reduction against the Decree of Forfaulture in anno 1661.
Is in effect an Answer to the several Articles of John Swinton's Indictment, of
which the Earl of Lawderdale does not think himself oblidged to take any notice
but only in so far, as that Reason eithe denis, or extenuats the Crime, for
which he was of new Forfaulted thereby, viz: his going along with the Usurper
in Arms to Worcester) the remnant Branches of that Reason relating to the other
Crimes whereof he was likewise guilty; but were not insisted upon against him,
And therefore are waved by the Earl; tho even as to these it is thought very
strange how any person can have the impudence to assert that John Swinton's
complying with an Usurper, taking Offices and Places from him, who had invaded
his native Country with an Army of Sectaries, had murdered his just and Lawful
Sovereign, the most eminent Persons, faithfullest Subjects, and best Patriots
of the Kingdom, sitting in a Pretended Parliament, called by that Usurper, and
Arch-Traitor, where all these horrible and detestable proceedings were
approven; renouncing and abjuring his Native Prince, and declaring his Native
King, or any other of the Royal Family not capable to succeed in the Royal
Government, were not treasonable Crimes. Therefore to that part of the first
Reason, against the third Article of John Swinton's Indictment, for which he
was now Forfaulted by the Parliament 1661, to wit, his being in Arms at
Worcester; and which part of the Reason bears, that it was denied, as it was
conceived; and that if it could be made appear that he was at Worcester, he
could have instructed, that he was there as a Prisoner; and if he had been in
Arms, as he was not; yet this being a Crime alleged to have been committed in
England, it was remitted by the English Indemnity.

It is Answered, 1. That this is manifestly redargued by the deceast John
Swinton's answers Written and Subscribed with his own hand, given in to his
Indictment in the Parliament 1661. Acknowledging, that he was at Worcester, and
that he went there at the desire of the Usurper: But for his excuse, he says,
the Usurper could have commanded him along with him as a Prisoner; but
acknowledges, that the Usurper used not that as an Argument with him to
persuade him to go; and that was after he had met with what he then looked upon
as hard measure from the King and Country, being out of the Protection of Law,
and that he went i^ no other Capacity, but as a Traveler, having no other Arms
than Travelers use; By which, 1o. It is proven, that he was personally present
at Worcester, and that he went there at the Usurpers earnest entreaties and
importunities; which show that there was great intimacie betwixt him and the
Usurper. 2o. That he hade conceived a prejudice against his King and his
Country by the Sentence of Forfeiture pronounced against him in anno 1651.
which he styles the hard measure he met with, and his being out of the
protection of the Law. 3o. That he was there personally in Arms, such as a
Traveler uses to ride with, viz. Sword and Pistol, which are all the Arms could
be carried by any single Horseman there; And although he denis that he drew
either Sword or Pistol, or did join with any Troop or Regiment; yet his being
present with the Enemies in Arms, is a sufficient demonstration of his joining
with them, against his King and Country, and is per se relevant in Law, to
infer the Crime of high Treason, it being very difficult to prove a man's
particular Actings in an Army, who had no remarkable Charge, and his serving
the Usurper at that time, is sufficiently cleared by the rewards that the
Usurper gave him afterward: And the good Services which are pretended that
Swinton did to his Contrymen at that time, is an evident demonstration of
his intimacy and interest with the Usurper; and which could not be done by a
prisoner.

2o. As to that Alledgance, that the Crime being committed in England, it was
remitted by the English Indemnity. It is Answered, that the English Act of
Indemnity did extend no further than to the Kings English Subjects, and not to
any Subjects who were Scots-men; for as no Law made by the Parliament of
England could hinder the Parliament of Scotland to proceed against Traitors and
Rebels, who were Scots-men: so no Indemnity past in the English Parliament
could Indemnity a Scots-man's Crimes, or could hinder the Parliament of
Scotland from proceeding against them; albeit they had been particularly
Indemnified by the Parliament of England. And all that is now represented for
John Swinton, in this reason of Reduction being entirely under the Parliaments
consideration, at the time and by them found relevant and proven to infer the
Crime of treason; And what is now alleged being then proponed and repelled by
the Parliament, cannot now be drawn in question, And as to which the former
Answers are repeited.

To the last part of the first Reason of Reduction insisted upon, against the
said Decree 1661. viz. That the Decree is lame and defective in its
probation? albeit it bears, to proceed upon John Swintons Judicial Confession,
yet there is no such Confession extant in the Records of Parliament, other than
what is contained in his Written defense, which are so qualified, that it could
never be a ground of Forfeiture.

It is Answered, 1o. That a Judicial Confession emitted before so High and
Supreme a Court as a Parliament, makes full Faith without being Subscribed; and
the assertion of the Parliament, and their Act thereupon, is a full and
sufficient Probation: And although a Judicial Confession emitted before an
Inferior Judge, such as Commissar or Sheriff, does not make Faith, unless it be
Signed by the Party; yet a Judicial Confession emitted before the Lords of
Session, which is a Supreme Court, and so marked and Minuted by the Clerk, does
make as great Faith, as if it were Subscribed and Signed by the Party: And it
cannot be denied that John Swinton compeared before the Parliament, and viva
voce confessed these horrid and detestable Crimes of Treason and Rebellion,
that he was guilty of, and particularly of his being in Arms at Worcester with
the Usurper, against his native King, for which he did blame his Ambition in
his younger years, which prompted him to these Treasonable Acts, and as a
Remorse and Abhorrence of them, he said, if they were to do, he would rather
with the one hand strike off the other, than be guilty of them; upon which
Confession, the King's Advocat took Instruments. 2o. He did not only confess
the Crimes Libelled and insisted on viva voce, but in his Answers, written and
subscribed by himself, given in at the same time to the Parliament, he did
acknowledge the same; and although in his Answers he did endeavor to excuse and
qualify these Crimes, to procure the Commiseration of the Parliament, that his
Life might be spared, yet the Parliament did most justly Repel his Answers, and
proceeded, and gave Sentence of Forfeiture against him, and the excuses and
qualifications adjected, are so far from being extenuations of his Crimes, that
they rather do aggravat the same, being Insinuations of the great favor,
interest and intimacy he had with the Usurper as is evident by the Answers
themselves, hereto subjoyned; So that the Decree of Forfeiture, proceeding not
only upon a verbal Confession emitted viva voce; But also upon a Written
Confession, Subscribed by John Swinton himself, the same cannot now be
Invaliditate, or drawn in question, upon the pretense that it is lame and
defective in its probation.

The second Reason against the Decree of Forfeiture 1661. is, that the Minutes
are Forged and False upon the pretended Grounds following, viz. That albeit
there be a considerable time interveening betwixt the Minutes dated the 7 of
February, 15 of May, and 12 of July 1661. Yet it appears by ocular inspection,
that they are all written at one and the same time, and with the same Pen and
Ink, and being compared with the Minutes upon the end of the Indictment,
Subscribed by Glencairn, which are the true Minutes, they are much more recent
and fresh. 2o. All the three Minutes, which are on the Margin of the
Indictment, being Signatures of the Procedure of the Parliament in pleno
consessu, the first thereof which is on the 7 of February, 1661. bears the
giving in of the said Indictment against the said John Swinton, then Panel,
with the former Decree in anno 1651. and craving that the said Decree might
be Ratified, and the new Indictment found Relevant, and admitted to Probation:
The King and the Estates of Parliament are said to ordain before Answer, the
new Indictment to be given up to John Swinton to see and answer; and yet it is
evident by the Records of Parliament, that the Articles sat the 7th of
February, and not the Parliament, and Ordained the same thing that the
Parliament Ordained, to wit, The giving up of the Indictment to John Swinton;
and by Robert Hamilton's Diary, one of the Senators of the College of Justice,
and then one of the Clerks of the Parliament: It is evident, that upon the 27
of February, John Swinton having formerly received his Indictment, was brought
that day to the Bar, and after his Dittay was read, he was appointed that day
15 days, to give in his Legal Defenses; (neither was that Term before Answer)
either the style of Parliament, or any Court at that time, being introduced
since, nor was it at all in this case intelligible, it being impossible that an
Indictment could be considered before it was given up, and seen by the party,
by which it is clear, as is pretended, that the forsaids Minutes are forged. 3o.
The second of the said Minutes being dated the 15 of May 1661. appears, as is
pretended to be false by ocular inspection, and to have been made up after the
year 1670. upon these Grounds, First, When the Clerk that writes the Minutes,
thinking upon the year, wherein the said Minutes were made up by him, which by
the Earl of Crafurd's Letter appears to have been in the year 1674. he did
first write the figure 7, and correcting it afterward, he mends it thus, 6
Secondly, By this Minut, dated the 15 of May, John Swinton is made compearing,
and Judicially confessing, that he went with Cromwell and his Army to Worcester,
and was with him in that Battle, whereas there was no such Judicial Confession
made, and if it had been made, he had certainly Subscribed it; and Robert
Hamilton's Diary bears only, That the said 15 of May John Swinton's Dittay,
with his Answers, were read, and he also heard speak verbally for himself, and
that the Lord Advocat opponed the Dittay, and produced the former Decree of
Forfeiture against him, which de facto was never produced till that time,
though the first Minut falsely bear it to be produced upon the 7 of February;
and which former Decree the Panel desiring to see, the Parliament assigned
him Friday come eight days, to say what he could say, which last part of the
foresaid Minut, does also bear, That the Panel was ordained to see the
foresaid Sentence of Forfeiture, and to answer Friday come eight days, but
with this difference, that the Minut bears upon the Pannel's desiring to see
the said Decree, it was then given up to him, whereas it is evident by
Alexander Reid his hand, who was Servant to the Lord Advocat, written on the
back of the Copy of the said Decree, delivered to Swinton, that it was not
given up to Swinton to see till the 17 of May; by which it is evident, that
Swinton did not make any judicial Confession that day, there being no vestige
upon Record, either subscribed by him or the President; and it were absurd, if
he had emitted any judicial Confession, that any further diet should be
assigned to him to answer, since confessus pro condemnato habetur.

3o. This Minut of the 15 of May 1661. Ordains Swinton to see and answer, as
said is* against the 24 of May, and yet neither does the Decree bear, That
Swinton was again called, nor any thing at all of this matter of Fact, that he
was ordained to see the former Decree, upon the 15 of May, and to answer
thereunto against the 24. which those that framed the Decree did industriously
omit, as forseeing the inserting thereof would have inferred a Nullity against
it, nor was he ever called before the Parliament, that day, or any time
thereafter.

4o. As to the third and last Minut, which is upon the 12 of July 1661. It is
alleged, That the falsehood thereof is manifest, in so far as 1o. It makes
Swinton compearing that day as a Panel, whereas it is certain he did not
compear that day, nor at any time after the 15 of May. 2o. By the said Minut
not only the foresaid pretended Decree of the Committee of Estates 1651. is
Ratified, but Swinton is declared of new, guilty of the Crime of Treason, upon
his judicial Confession; and yet there is no such judicial Confession extant,
but what was so qualified as cleared him. 3. It makes the Parliament Ratify
the said pretended Decree, without his being heard upon his Defenses against
the same, tho a day was assigned to him for that effect. 4o. The Minut has none
of the Solemnities of a Sentence of Forfeiture, not bearing Read, Voted,
Touched with the Scepter, or any Warrant for publication by sound of Trumpet,
or Tearing of Arms, and the Signatures of Sentences, and Dooms of Forfeiture,
after the Voting and Touching thereof, are always written on a paper a part,
distinct from the Process, and signed by the Chancellor, or President of
Parliament, which was not observed in this case.

5o. All the said three Minutes are subscribed by the late Earl of Crafurd as
President of the Parliament 1661. with these Letters adjected to his
Subscription, I. P. D. P. as if they had been Subscribed by him in that
Parliament in praesentia Dominorum Parliamenti, whereas the Earl's Letter,
which a little before his death, he wrote to the deceast John Swinton, in the
year 1674. discovers not only that they were not signed by him till then, which
was 13 years after, but that they were not so much as written.

6o. After the said Minutes were made up by Haystoun and Craufurd's
Subscription impetrat thereto, Sir Archibald Primrose the Register, thought
himself not in Tuto to give any Extract thereof under h^ s hand to the Duke of
Lauderdale, till upon a Petition given in by the Duke to the Lords of Session,
bearing, that the said Sir Archibald scrupled to give any such Extract, which
clearly shows, the falsness of these Minutes; And although he was conscious to
himself of the same, yet to gratify the Duke of Lauderdale, he prevailed with
the Earl of Craufurd to sign them, so many Years after the Parliament 1661.

The Reasons of Falsehood against the Minutes being fully set down: It is
Answered thereto in order as follows, viz. To the first Reason against the
Minutes, that albeit the samine were written at one and the same time, yet it
imports not, it being notourly known to all Persons, who are versant in
Bussiness, that Clerks do ordinarily write their first Minutes upon Papers a
part, or Scrolls, and thereafter, or when the affair in Debate is brought to a
close, and Decree pronounced thereintil, they are in Use to transcribe the
Minutes, and subjoyn the Interloquitor or Sentence: And it is no Argument, that
they appear much more Fresh and Recent than the Minutes Signed by the Earl of
Glencairn upon the end of the Indytment, to infer from thence, that they were
made up long after, for the goodness or badness of Ink will make Writ seem old
or new, and some Ink will retain its Color fresh for 20, 30, or 40 Years,
Whereas other Ink will lose its Color, and appear old in three or four
Months. But 2ly. The Allegiance is most Calumnious, that the Minutes do appear
to be Recent, or of the same Ink; and although it did, yet it is Notour, that the
writings of a Clerk, who has one fixed and habitual Character, will look so
like to his other Writings, though at a different time, that a Man will not be
able to distinguish the difference; But especially, where they used to be
served and furnished with one kind of Ink from one place; which Clerks, who
have much Writing, are ordinarily in use to do, whereas the Writings of other
Persons not used nor habituat with Writing, and with the same Ink are easily
distinguishable.

To the 2d Reason of Falsehood against the first Minute, It is Answered, That
although the Clerk of the Process should have mistaken, and placed the Figure 7
for 27. yet that cannot infer any nullity in the Minute; for suppose the day
had been left blank, the month and year being condescended upon, does not
render a Minut or any other Paper null; so neither can a Clerk's mistaking, or
inserting one day for another, seeing the matter of Fact cannot be controverted,
viz. That Swinton did compear before the Parliament upon the 27th of February,
it being acknowledged by themselves, and is also evident by Robert Hamilton's
Diary; and it is a pitiful Argument to conclude from this mistake, that the
Minutes were forged and made up by Haystoun; for it Haystoun or Sir Archibald
Primrose had been guilty of forging the Minutes, they would have been much more
exact, and would not have given them a Date, which might have been so easily
Canvelled by the Date of the Minutes Subscribed by the Earl of Glencairn upon
the end of the Indictment, being of the same Date of the Minut in question,
which Haystoun could not but know, he being Clerk to the Process, and having
the Grounds and Warrands of the same in his custody, which certainly he would
have perused very exactly, if he had designed a Forgery of the Minutes, and
could not fall into so gross a mistake; and it is notour to any, who are
versant in business, that Clerks, especially in the throng of business, such as
was in the Parliament 1661. do fall in mistakes of this nature: So that in all
this pretended Forgery, there being nothing but a quibling on the Date of a
Minute, where-through the inadvertence of a Clerk, in the throng of business,
and without any design, the Figure 7 is set down in place of 27, the samine can
never arise to any matter or moment, thereby to redargue a true matter of Fact,
viz. That John Swinton did compear before the Parliament, the 27th of February,
and that his Indictment was read, and that he gave in Answers thereto,
acknowledging the Crime; far less to overturn a solemn Decree of Parliament.
2o. As to the Criticism upon the words, Before Answer, that it was not the
Style of Courts at that time. It is Answered, That it was introduced in Courts
long before that time, as may be observed in Durie's Decisions; and it was very
proper and pertinent to insert it in the Interloquitor of Parliament, in regard
that John Swinton having formerly gotten out his Indictment, and appointed to
Answer the samine against the 26th of February: And having compeared before the
Parliament upon the 27th, and the Advocat having insisted against him, and
craved, that not only the former Decree of Forfeiture might be Ratified, but
also that the new Indictment might be found relevant: The Parliament being
resolved to indulge the Panel a further day, did notwithstanding of the
Advocats desire, ordain Swinton before Answer, to see the new Indictment, and
give his Legal Defenses, which was both proper and pertinent. And as to the
last part of that Reason, that these words, Before Answer, were not
intelligible in that case, it being impossible that an Indictment could be
considered before it was given up and seen by the Party. It is Answered, that
the same is very intelligible, if John Svvinton will take notice that the
Parliament refused upon the Advocats desire to Ratify the former Decree of
Forfeiture, which very justly they might have done, without allowing him a
further time, and might have ordained that Sentence to be put to execution
against him, as they did to Govan: And therefore the words (Before Answer)
ordaining him to give in his Legal Defenses, before they would Ratify the
former Sentence, or consider the relevancy of the new Indictment, were most
properly adjected, and are very intelligible to any ingenuous or dis-interessed
person.

To the third Reason of Falsehood, being against the second Minut, dated the
15th of May, 1661. and first Branch thereof: It is Answered, 1o. It does not
appear ever to have been the 7th Figure; and there is only a stroke of a Pen
drawn through the 6th Figure, which might have been done through inadvertency,
or a mistake of the Clerk at the time: And if this pretended Vitiation were
compared with the Margent of Govan's Libel, where palpably the Date is Vitiat
likewise, through mistake and inadvertancy of the Clerks, that it cannot be
determined whether the Date be 13, 18, or 19. Any indifferent person will
easily conclude this pretended Vitiation not to be upon design, or a Forgery:
And in effect it is so improbable, pitiful, and inconsistent a pretense, that
it deserves not the least Answer; and it is not at all Vitiat, as it is set
down in John Svvinton's Paper.

To the second Branch of that Reason concerning John Svvinton's Judicial
Confession, it is so fully Answered in the Answer to the last part of the first
Reason of Reduction, that it is needless here to repeat it. But as to that part
of it founded upon Robert Hamilton's Diary, which John Svvinton makes use of to
Canvel the Faith of the former Minut, bearing, That the first Decree of
Forfeiture against Svvinton in anno 1651. was produced, and that Robert
Hamilton's Diary does not make mention of any Judicial Confession emitted by
John Swinton that day. It is Answered, That Robert Hamilton not being Clerk to
the Process, was not obliged to mark so fully all that was done, as Haystoun
who was Clerk thereto: And by comparing Robert Hamilton's Diary with the
Journals of Parliament, it will be clear and evident, that he did only Minut
these things that were most remarkable in every Affair that came in before the
Parliament, and did not Minut so fully as those who were Clerks to every
particular Process. And Swinton having given in his Defenses and Answers to the
new Indictment: And likewise having Judicially acknowledged his Crime; that
which was most remarkable that day, was Swinton's compearing, giving in his
Defenses, and speaking verbally for himself; in which words, speaking verbally
for himself taken notice of by Robert Hamilton's Diary, is certainly included
his Judicial Confession, mentioned and taken notice of by Haystoun in his
Minut: And it is of no weight, that the Minut bears the Decree of Forfeiture
to be given up to him that day; and yet by the Note written by Alexander Reid's
Hand, upon the back of the Copy of the Decree delivered to John Swinton, it
appears not to have been given up till the 17th of May thereafter; For the
Clerk might very well have marked, that the foresaid Decree was given up to
him, it being so appointed by the Parliament. And although it had not been
given up till the 17th day thereafter, it cannot at all derogate from the Faith
of the Minutes, and there must be more Credit and Faith given to the Minutes of a
Clerk, than to any Notes of the Advocats Servant upon the back of the Copy of
the Decree delivered to Swinton, which was no part of the Process kept by the
Clerk, and might have been put on by the Advocats Servants mistake or
inadvertancy, or might have been a double of the Decree given to John Swinton
thereafter, when the Principal Decree was gotten back from him. And as to that
pretense, that it was absurd to assign him a further Diet after a Judicial
Confession, since in Law Confessus pro condemnato habetur. It is Answered, That
it was very consistent with the Parliaments Procedure in that Process, because
John Swinton not only being Indyted upon new Crimes committed by him in anno
1651. But likewise the Decree in anno 1651. being to be Ratified and Approven,
his Judicial Confession being only in relation to these new and supervenient
Crimes, the Parliament might very well assign him another day, as they did upon
his desire, to give in his Answers to the Decree 1651.

To the third Branch of that Reason, It is Answered, that there was no
necessity to insert in the last Decree of Forfeiture, that he had gotten up
the former Decree to see, unless that Swinton had returned the samine with
particular Answers; and although it had been insert, it would infer no nullity
in the Decree, although John Svvinton never appeared before the Parliament
thereafter; for having neglected to give in his Answers, the Parliament might,
and did very warrantably proceed both to Forfeit him upon the new Indictment,
and to Ratify and Approve the first Decree.

To the fourth Reason of Reduction being against the third and last Minute. It
is answered, 1o. That the Minut is opponed, bearing no such thing as Swinton's
compearance that day, but it does only bear, that the Parliament having
considered that member of the new Indytment of Treason pro tempore insisted on
with the Pannals answer in Write, and Viva Voce, and judicial confession,
desire of the Lord Advocat with the former Decree of Forfeiture, they repelled
the said Answers given in in Write, and viva voce as no ways relevant, and
found the formentioned Article and Member of the foresaid new Indytment
insisted upon relevant, and proven without making any mention of the Pannal's
Personal Compearance. And as to that part of the Reason, denying any judicial
Confession to be emitted by Swinton, or extant in Process, the former Answers
are opponed. 2o. Although there was a day assigned to the said John Swinton, to
give in his Answers against the first Decree, yet there was no necessity to
call him before the Parliament thereafter; unless he had given in his Answers,
which he not having done as he was appointed and ordained, the Parliament did
very justly proceed to pronounce a Sentence of Doom and Forfeiture against him
upon the new Indytment, and to ratify the former Decree of Forfeiture in anno
1651. And the deceased John Swinton, returning the said Decree without any
Answer, was a clear and convincing Argument, that he intended to make none
against the said Decree, being conscious to himself, that it was justly
pronounced against him: So that there was no necessity to call him when the
Parliament advised his new Indytment, and pronounced Sentence upon the samine,
especially considering that by the quality adjected to the sentence, he was
recommended by the Parliament to His Majesty as to his Life. 3o. As to the last
part of that Reason anent the want of the Solemnities, as Read, Voted, Touched,
Warrant for publication by sound of Trumpet, and tearing of Arms; which
certainly would not have been omitted, as is pretended, if any Sentence of
Forfeiture had been truly past. It is Answered, 1o. That it is admired with
what Confidence it can be asserted, that there was no Decree of Forfeiture
past in that Parliament against John Swinton in the Year 1661, but that it was
made up in the Year 1670, or thereafter, seeing amongst the list of the
Imprinted Acts of the first Session of the Parliament 1661, there is Insert,
not only a Decree of Forfeiture against John Swinton, but also a Ratification
of John Swintons Forfeiture, in Favors of the late Duke of Lauderdale; And in
the Act of indemnity, which was past in the second Session of that same
Parliament, the Decree of Forfeiture against John Swinton, is particularly
excepted, and by the Decree of Parliament in anno 1661, John Swinton being
recommended to the King as to his Life, he was ordained to be kept Prisoner in
the Castle of Edinburgh, till his Majesty's pleasure was fully known: So in
prosecution of that part of the Decree upon the sixteen of July 1661, within
four days after the Decree, the Commissioner subscribes a Warrant to the
Magistrates of Edinburgh, to deliver the Person of John Swinton to the Captain
of the Castle of Edinburgh, or his Lieutenant, and whereupon Mercer Lieutenant
of the Castle gave his Receipt, which will appear by the Register of the
Tolbooth, and Warrants thereof; all which being joined with the Duke of
Lauderdale's Possession of Swinton's Estate, conform to the foresaid Decree of
Forfeiture, do fully Adminiculat and astruct the Verity of the said Doom and
Sentence of Forfeiture. 2o. As to the want of the Solemnities, it is Answered,
that it is known that Sir Archibald Primrose was a man so Exact and Cautious,
that he would not have put a Decree and Sentence of Parliament in the List of
the imprinted Acts, nor would he have given an Extract thereof under his hand
had not the foresaid Sentence been both Voted and Read; the hazard thereof, and
of forging a Decree of Parliament, being no less, than his Life and Fortune.
And it is evident, that the Parliament having considered the Process, and
having repelled the Defenses, which were formerly given in, both in Write and
Viva Voce: And having likewise considered his Confession, formerly mentioned,
they behoved to Read and Vote the samine, these being solemnia sententiae latae
quae semper et necessario inesse presumuntur, etiamsi non expressa. And as to
the tearing of his Arms and sounding of the Trumpet, there was no necessity
thereof, that Solemnity having been performed in the first Decree of
Forfeiture in anno 1651. And the Touching of Decreets of Forfeitures, is no
ways necessar, that being only a Solemnity adhibit to public Laws, to
signify the Royal Assent, but not at all to Sentences and Decreets betwixt or
against private Persons, except by the Forfeiture, the Lands of the forfeit
Person be annexed to the Crown: And if any such Solemnity was used in any other
Decreets of Forfeiture, it was ex super-abundanti, there being no such thing
required by our Law.

To the fifth Reason of Reduction, being against the whole Minutes, It is
Answered. 1o. That esto it were true, that the Earl of Crafurd did sign these
Minutes at the time condescended upon in his Letter, yet he does not at all
therein question the Truth of the said Minutes, and of the Sentence of
Forfeiture, and John Swinton's making use of this Letter, to Canvel the Truth
of the Minutes, is the greatest Imputation and Reflection upon the Honor,
Integrity, and Ingenuity of the Deceased Earl of Crafurd: For can any Man in
Sense or Reason think, that the Earl of Crafurd who was a Man of such Honor
and notour Ingenuity, to have had accession to the Signing and Forging of
Minutes, which were false: And the Earl of Crafurd being President when the
Sentence was past, he might very warrantably have Signed the Minutes and
Interloquitors, although never so long after, and their not being signed till anno
1674, as they pretend, is neither a Presumption, that they were false and
forged, and made up at that time, nor yet is a nullity upon which the Decree
may be drawn in Question: And it is notourly known, that Sir Archibald Primrose
was a Man of such Integrity, that he would not have had the least accession to
such a villainous Action, as forging of Minutes in a Process of Treason, which
was to ruin a Man both in his Life and Fortune, and necessarly would in danger
his own. And Sir Archibald Primrose, nor Haystoun, were not so much oblidged to
the late Duke of Lauderdale, as could induce them to forge and make up Minutes
to gratify him, neither did Swinton, nor any of his Relations while Sir
Archibald Primrose or Haystoun lived, take upon them the confidence, to allege
that these Minutes were Forged or made up by them, but they have fallen upon
this Device since their Death, thereby to make some specious Pretext, to be
reponed against the Decreets so justly pronounced against the said John
Swinton. 2o. The Subscriptions of Persons in Office must make Faith, otherways
there can be no Security nor Certainty to People in their Rights; and where a
person is Functus and Exauterate, it is ridiculous to think, that either his
private Letter or Assertion should unhinge public Laws and Sentences,
especially such as are founded upon undeniable Evidences, both as to the
Relevany and the matter of Fact, otherways it should be in the power of any
President of the Parliament, or other Judge at one dash to defeat and obliterat
all the public Acts and Sentences they have made and past in their Office, and
this Letter was impetrat by the importunity of John Swinton from the Earl of
Crafurd, and was never made use of, nor produced while Sir Archibald Primrose
lived. 3o. Although the Minutes and Interloquitors had not been signed by the Earl
of Crafurd, yet it is no Nullity, there being no special Law nor Custom
requiring the famine at that time, and the Minutes and Interloquitors of the
other Processes of Forfeiture against Guthrie, Govan, Arkindlass, and others in
that Parliament, are not signed by the Chancellor or President, neither are
there any of the Minutes or Decreets of Forfeiture in that Parliament so formal
as these Minutes and Decree against John Swinton, which will be evident by
inspection of the Records; and the method and way of managing that Process was
advised by Sir John Nisbet of Dirltoun, who was one of the greatest and
eminentest Lawyers and Formalists in the Nation; and it can be made appear, by
persons yet living, who were in Haystouns Chamber at that time, that this
Decree and Procedure thereof, was made use of as an Example in extracting
other Decreets of Forfeitures, which were pronounced in that and subsequent
Parliaments.

To the Sixth and last Reason of Reduction, bearing, that Sir Archibald
Primrose did not think himself in tuto to give Extracts under his hand of the
said Minutes, until application was made by the Duke of Lauderdale to the
Lords. It is Answered, That it seems the Drawer of the Paper has forgot
himself, for in the state of his Case at the end of the first Page, he says,
that Sir Archibald Primrose did cause application to be made to the Lords of
Session in behalf of the Duke or Lauderdale, to give their Warrant for
extracting what he was conscious to himself was so unwarrantably done; and in
this Reason he Alleges, that application was immediately made by the Duke of
Lauderdale upon Sir Archibald Primrose's scrupling to give out Extracts of the
Minutes, which is very inconsistent with what he says in the state of his Case,
that application was made by Sir Archibald Primrose; but the truth is, the Duke
of Lauderdale truly desired the samine might be by Warrant of the Lords, to
make the Extract the more authentic, and in case that the Minutes should be put
out of the way (which the deceast Swinton neither wanted Cunning nor Art to do,
if opportunity offered,) to be an Adminicle for proving and making up the tenor
of the Minutes, the late Duke of Lauderdale desired an Extract of the Minutes,
and John Swinton's Answers also, which was the only ground of scruple that Sir
Archibald Primrose had, because it is not ordinar for Clerks to give the
Extracts of Minutes, Interloquitors, or Answers, but only of Decreets, and
therefore Sir Archibald Primrose as an exact and cautious Clerk, did scruple to
give the Extract, either of the Minutes, or of Swinton's Answers, till the Duke
of Lauderdale made application to the Lords for that effect; and it is
ridiculous Nonsense, to think that the Lords Warrant to Sir Archibald Primrose
for extracting of the Minutes could have made them true, if they had been false
and forged by himself, of freed him from the punishment due to Forgers; and it
is an injurious and calumnious Reflection upon the memory of Sir Archibald
Primrose, to allege that he was conscious to himself of the falsehood of these
Minutes.

From all which it is most evident and clear, that both the Decreets of
Forfeiture against John Swinton did proceed upon most relevant grounds in Law,
and upon most legal and full Probation in matter of Fact, and for which (and
the other Crimes acknowledged in his Answers, but were not insisted upon at the
time) if he were of new to be indicted, he would be again Forfeit by the
standing Laws of the Kingdom. And these Decreets and Minutes thereof being
considered, and compared with most of all the other Decreets of Forfeiture past
in that and subsequent Parliaments, there will be none found either more
relevantly libelled, or so formal as to the Minutes, and so securely buckled,
either as to the Form of Process, or Probation thereof.

And there is nothing in the printed State of John Swinton's Case, and in his
pretended Reasons of Reduction, but what is either Calumnious in matter of
Fact, or altogether Irrelevant in point of Law, and are Reflections in the
highest degree upon the Honor and Authority of these Parliaments; and it is
the hight of Boldness and Insolence for John Swinton to crave Reduction of his
Fathers Forfeiture by way of Justice, which is a downright Accusing and Taxing
of the Parliament and their Sentences with Injustice, to which the Sentences of
the Lords of Session are not obnoxious or subject, and far less the Sentences
of Parliament, which is the Supreme and Sovereign Court of the Nation: And such
a Preparative as this, is of most dangerous Consequence, both as to the
Interest and Security of His Majesty and His Subjects; especially seeing by many
ancient standing Laws and Acts of Parliament, Decreets of Forfeiture are not to
be reduced per modum justitiae upon any pretended nullity of Process till the
Crime be purged, and that there be a special Remission of the Crime for which
the Forfeiture proceeded; and albeit His Majesty's Bounty cannot be limited to
restore any person by way of Grace, yet by such a Restitution, neither His
Majesty's Donatar, nor the Interest of any third Party is prejudged; and it was
upon these Considerations, that all the former Commissions that were appointed
to make Enquiry into this Forfeiture came to no Issue, and were rendered
ineffectual.

In respect whereof, the Earl of Lauderdale ought to be Assoilzied from the
said pretended Reasons of Reduction.

Follows the Names of these who were appointed in anno 1682, by a Commission
under the Great Seal to take Trial and Enquiry anent the deceast John Swinton's
Forfeiture. Sir George Gordon of Haddo, Chancellor. William Marquess of
Queensberry, Thesaurer. John Marquess of Athol, Privy Seal. James Earl of
Perth, Justice General. Sir David Falconer, President of the Session. Sir
George Mckenzie of Tarbat, Clerk Register. John Drummond of Lundin, Thesaurer
Deput. Sir George Mackenzie of Rosehaugh, Lo. Advocat. Sir John Lockhart of
Castlehill, and Sir John Murray of Drumcairn, Senators of the College of
Justice.


John Swinton's Answers to his Indictment, given in to the Parliament, 1661.
written and subscribed with his own hand.
ANSWERS by way of Defense, for John Svvinton of Svvinton, to the Indictment of
Treason, whereof he stands accused by the King's Advocat, at the instance of
the King, before the King's Commissioner and Parliament, adhering to what was
offered by him to the Commissioner, the 27th of the last Month, by way of
Information, and protesting, that if need be is, according to the then grant of
the Commissioner and Parliament, (intimat by the Chancellor as President) he
may be further heard to speak in their presence, by way of Information, or
otherways; in obedience to their Command, he (having liberty and allowance from
the Lords) does singly and plainly answer by way of Defense in Write; Thus,
waving all dilator Defenses, even such as the Law allows him, either as to what
might be said to the Informlaity of the Process, or to what he might say why he
ought to be left to the common proceedings in Law, before the Court ordinary to
be Tried, by the known Laws of this Nation, which is the common Benefit and
Security of every Subject to plead, specially in this time of peace and
settlement; As also waving what he might have to say in that known Maxim of
Socii criminis. And even this way of pleading by Writ, and severals of that
kind, he does with his own consent, without disputing, homologat the
Jurisdiction of the Court of Parliament, not so much as excepting against any
one from being his Judge in this matter, being willing it should receive a
plain and clear issue, even in this way, being about to give his Answer to this
Court, thus constitute of the Representatives of King and people, whatever may
be the debateable Consideration, how far the King or people distinctly
considered, are subject to, or above the Law: Yet here taking them
Collectively, there is more to be said for these proceedings, that run not so
properly in the Channel of Law, specially if the Parliament being thus
Constitute in these Trials, shall proceed not only by virtue of their Executive
Power, but also of their Legislative: And as this states a vast illimited
power, (as it were in the Parliament) So it calls upon all and every one of
them, in the dread of the Living God, to consider what they do in these things,
that they judge not for men, but for the Lord, who is indeed Supreme; and
therefore as he declines not the Law of his Native Country, but may in his
subsequent Answers, say somewhat to that, why he ought to be Assoilzied, and
acquitted from the Indictment: Yet being to answer before a Court, that (it is
like) will not look upon themselves as so strictly tied to the Letter of Laws,
as the extraordinary Courts of Justice must be, as having a large and mixed
power comprehensive of Law, Equity and Reason, and it may be reason of State
too, so to speak; and a power incontrollable, to execute their Determinations,
whether de jure, or not, he shall leave to the judgment of that in every one of
their Consciences, wherein as they weigh and consider it in the coolness of
their minds, they will own that de jure it is Supreme; The higher power to
which every knee must bow, and ought to be subject to, in heaven and earth; to
which the King and people must give an account, even the light of Christ in
every of their Consciences, the Law written in their hearts; the Faithful
Witness for God, that discovers to man his Thoughts, that brings him many times
after his first sleep to consider what shall be the end of Pride, Lust and
Vanity, that which oppresses this Just Witness, which is the Foundation of
Society of all just Laws, the vinculum that ties man to God, and one to
another, even that which leads to the Love of God, and to love our Neighbor as
our selves, and stablisheth that grand Principle of Justice, to do as one would
be done by, is the Foundation of all just Magistracy, is the Line and Rule of
true Judgment, proper to be minded and headed, and turned to by the
Commissioner and Parliament, and every Member of it. To this Rule, Law and
Judge, the Defender submits and appeals in this matter, even the Light and
Witness for God in their Consciences: And as to what he shall offer to them of
the Law of this Nation, (which is or ought to be Founded on this) Equity or
Reason, he shall leave it to this Witness near them, and in their hearts, the
Eternal and Ingrafted Word, Christ the Light, that enlightens every man that is
come into the World; To this he shall leave it, as the last appeal, and let him
stand Justified or Condemned, according as the Judgment shall be given in this
Law, which is only in this case, (and as they are constituted) capable to bind
a Parliament, who may, it is like, look upon themselves as to men, and Letter
of Laws as Supreme, which he does not think unproper or unserviceable for the
Parliaments Consideration, to be thus offered in limine, which they will find
of the greater necessity and use for them, to mind upon the account of the
King's Honor and Safety, the Nations and their Own, the Foundations of all
Laws, (outward) Government, Magistracy having been so perplexed and involved,
intrinched upon, brangled, shattered, and a general Consternation; The minds of
men by reason of these things, much estranged, engaged in Animosities and
Factions, and that through their departing from this just Law, and principle in
themselves; So that is impossible for them, going by another Rule than this, as
the Supreme, to be guided in a safe and healing Path, so as they may be a
Blessing to themselves, and the people over which they are, and have comfort in
their Work when they have done; This is his Advocat in all their Consciences,
and to this he shall commit what he has to say by way of Defense, here to
stand or fall, to be cleared, acquitted, or condemned, having a place in the
Light and power of God, to receive whatever shall be the issue of this matter,
as from his own hand, not minding man nor men, laid down at quiet in his will,
standing in that which is out of the fear of man, in the fear and dread of the
living God.

And so to proceed to his Answers, The Defender denis the Indictment, as it is
conceived: As to the first part of the first Article of the Indictment,
(passing the general part of it, and the Acts of Parliament therein mentioned
some of them being only Statutory, none of them meeting the particulars Charged
against the Defender, or any one of them strickly taken, as all Laws are to be
in this case especially, and where the Pursuer shows, how in particular way of
application, they do, and does condescend, it may receive a particular Answer)
The Defender does deny this Article, and all of them as they are conceived; Yet
does not deny but that he sat in the Parliament 1649. Whether he did Vote to
the Rescinding of that Act of Parliament 1648. relating to the Engagement, he
does singly declare, That he does not remember, neither can he say how far he
Voted, or consented to the putting out of any Officer of State, Judges or
others, their places, or any thing else, particularly Charged in this Article,
the thing is so long ago; but supposing it were clearly proved that he was a
Voter in both these, or in any thing else Charged against him, as acted by him
as a Member of that Parliament, affirmative; It is offered by way of Defense,
That he came and sat in that Parliament by a Commission from his Country, and
they were not only owned by the Nation as a Parliament for the time, but also
by the King in that capacity, he receiving Commissioners from them as the
Parliament of the Nation, Treating with Him as such, a Treaty concluded, one of
the Articles of which was a Ratifying of that Parliament, and their
proceedings, with an engagement to complete it in a more formal way, at his
home coming, which was done by an Act of (...) of (...) of (...) date,
particularly by the King and Parliament: Much might be said upon other Mediums,
but this is so strong, so full and clear, to Assoilzie the Defender from that
part of the Libel, as it may suffice.

As to the other Branch of the first Article of the Indictment, wherein the
Defender is Charged with several other particulars, as his Voting to, and
carrying on the Murder of Montrose, Huntly, and others; and all these Charged
upon him, as he was a Member of the Parliament 1649. It not being remembered,
That what was done in most, if not in all these particulars, was done by that
Parliament, that sat in the month called March, One thousand six hundred and
fifty, which (whatever else might be pleaded to warrant its Indictment,) was
the time appointed by the Act of Parliament of (...) 1648, conform to the Act
of Parliament (...) for constituting Triennial Parliaments; so his Defense to
that part of the Charge is, (repeating also here that part of his Defense to
the former, the Treaty, and the Act of Ratification past by the King and
Parliament,) that he as he came there by virtue of a Commission from his
Country, so he came to a Parliament that stood upon a more unquestioned Foot in
Law, and in these particulars, he is not, nor cannot be charged as acting any
other ways than in the Capacity as he was a Member of Parliament; and by way of
Information, he has said somewhat toward clearing himself from the Odium that
has been cast upon him in these things, and might say more, and may if there
be opportunity, yet this shall suffice by way of Defense. To the second Article
of the Defenders Charge, as to the first part of it, he does simply deny it,
and admits it of consent relevant to be proven, and tho he should be acquitted
of this Indictment upon this Trial, he does hereby consent and declare, that if
ever hereafter it can be made appear, that he was Guilty of betraying his
Trust, let the conclusion of the Indictment take place against him, or the
worst of Punishments can be devised. As to the second Branch of the second
Article of his Charge, he does deny it as it is conceived, tho he does not deny
but as he received his Charge from the Committee of States, he did to the then
Chancellor in the Committee-Room at Stirling, declare his laying down of his
Charge, desiring him to intimat the same to the Committee, and at the same time
did intimat the same to Colonel Gilbert Ker his immediate superior Officer, and
forthwith Crafurdland was put into his place: This he thinks he is able to
prove instanter (if need beis,) as also before ever he went to that part of the
Country where his Estate lay, and where his Business called him, he was upon
the place where Colonel Ker's Regiment was, where he actually did see the
foresaid Crafurdland in his Charge, he being occasionally there for clearing
some things with his Officers, and others relating to his former Charge, this
was not under some Weeks (if not Months) after he had laid down his Charge,
and the other in the possession of it, so that it can never be said with any
color that he deserted his Charge, as the word is commonly received and
accepted, and as the import of it is in this place of the Charge. It is also
true, that his Occasions leading him toward Berwick-shire, where the only
Estate he had lay, he was Seized upon and made Prisoner by a Party of the
English, carried to their Generals Quarters, and having given an account to him
of his Occasions in these parts, he did declare to him, that tho he was his
Prisoner, yet he should have liberty upon his Parol (or so) to go to his
Lodging and about his Affairs. That he was taken Prisoner and thus brought in,
he offers him to prove (if need be,) and tho through the General's Permission
he had liberty to go into the Country with his Family, and as the necessity of
his own Affairs or the Countries did require (whose Condition then was much
distracted and oppressed) He came to Edinburgh sometimes, he having a ready
access to the General, through the forementioned opportunity, and he forward
enough to oblige him, which he can truly and singly say, that (according as
the State he was then in could admit) he laid him out to the outmost for
preserving of that part of the Country and every individual in it, as he had
access and opportunity; and if this can be called joining with the Enemy, as
this Case is circumstantiated, or that by any Law of God or Man it can ever be
charged upon him as a Guilt specially to infer the conclusion of the
Indictment, let all sober Men judge. To the third Article of the Indictment, he
does deny it as it is conceived, tho it is true that he was at Worcester, and
as he was there, it is also true he went thither through the earnest Entreaties
and Importunities of him, that (though he does ingenuously declare, that he
cannot say that he did use that as an Argument) could have commanded him along
with him as his Prisoner, and whose Prisoner he was upon the matter, and this
after he had then met with that he then looked upon as hard measure from the
King and Country out of the protection of Law, these temptations he was under,
and yet he went in no other Capacity than as a Traveller, no other Arms than a
Traveller; and if it shall be made our that ever he joined so much as in any
Troop, or carried any Charge, or that in any occasion there, the Battle or
otherways, he did draw his Sword or loose a Pistol, he admits all or every one
of these relevant of consent to infer the conclusion of the Indictment. It is
known how greatly useful his there being was to his Countrymen, not only of
his nearest Relations whom he found deadly wounded, but many others, the
particulars whereof needs not to be mentioned, he having indeed a sufficient
reward in the work it self, doing it upon a free and single intention, never
thinking of making use of it upon such an occasion as this. Only this he can
say in the presence of the searcher of hearts, that he thinks if the Parliament
should find the Indictment against him upon that single Head of being at
Worcester, as he does look upon that as Principal, and all the rest but
Accessories (as it were) even in the intention of the Libeller, the Sentence
past as to Life and Estate, and it ready to receive its last Consummation, he
could receive it, and ly down under it with a more cheerful heart, than he
enjoyed any time he was at Worcester, to see and be Witness of the reproach of
his Country, and the distress his Contrymen was under. His Defense is, that
it was in England the Crime, whatever it was, was committed where it is
properly try able, and where the King (in whose Name, and by whose Advocat this
Indictment is prosecute) has Indemnified the Defender from it; And that he
has so done, will appear by the express words of the 5th Clause of the Act of
Indemnity. And tho it may be Objected that this is an English Law; It is
adduced in the case of Crime committed in England, tryable in England,
pardonable in England, pardoned in England, and that by him against whom the
offense was committed, whatever it was, the Defender actually a Prisoner in
England, and from thence sent hither a Prisoner, brought hither in an English
Frigot; so that as to this Crime, in this case, as it is circumstantiated, it
is pleadable, and by the Defender Pleaded as his Defense. And this is mainly to
be minded in this particular of the Indictment, That the Defender (when he
could have shunned it) was taken in England, was kept 19 Weeks and upwards
closs Prisoner there; was sent from England hither by the King's Authority, to
receive a Trial in his own Country, for such things as he is chargeable with
at the instance of the King, as acted here in his own Country. For it can
never be understood, that the King in Honor, Justice, or Equity, would send
him down out of England, to be tried for his Life and Estate here, for a Crime
committed so many years ago in England, and which he has absolutely and freely
Remitted there, as fully, as if the Defenders Name and Surname were
particularly expressed, as Indemnified, and that particular Act of his being at
Worcester, expressly remitted; by reason whereof he ought to be Assoilzied from
this Article of the Indictment. As to the 4th Article of the Indictment, It is
denied, as it is conceived, tho he does not deny but he was in a Parliament of
England by a Call and Commission from his Country, the Nation having so far
submitted to the Union with England, that they sent their Deputies to several
Parliaments. By what Law this is Criminal (specially as it is circumstantiated)
when the Pursuer shows, it may receive an Answer. To the other Branch of the
Article, The Defender does ingeniously declare, he does not remember that he
was at any such Vote of renouncing the King and his Family, neither does he
think he was; however, if he was, it was in England: And if it should be
proven, as he is confident it will never be, he repeats his Defense adduced in
the Case of Worcester. To that Branch of the Article, His receiving Employments
from Oliver Cromwell and others, as one of the Commissioners for Administration
of Justice, and one of the Council: That part of the Article is so far confessed
by him, that he was in these Employments, but never in these, nor in any, till
his Country Nationally had submitted (stopping for the good of the Nation to
the necessity of the time) to the Authority of England. And as things were then
stated, he does believe, it was looked upon by the Nation as for the good and
service of the Country, that Contrymen were admitted to, and did act in
these Employments; and that it was looked upon as no dis-service or
disadvantage to his Country at that time, that the Defender was one: And he
can truly say, that the service of his Country was none of the least
inducements, to engage him in the accepting of, and continuing to these
Employments. And if ever it can be made appear, that he sought after one or
either of them, let it infer the Conclusion of the Summons, as relevant of
consent. What the tendency of his way in these Employments was, toward the
service or dis-service of his Country, let his greatest Enemy Witness in this
day, he shall not in these things bear Witness for himself; the more narrowly,
and particularly his way in these things shall be inquired into, it shall be
the less disadvantage to him. And as to the insinuations of the great profits
and advantage he has had, he shall only give it this Answer, which is single
truth, that notwithstanding whatever he received one way or another, he can
solemnly declare, and does, that tho he were not chargeable by the King, nor
any other, as to his Estate, or any Charge relating thereto, upon the account
of his acting in these things, but were cleared of all these, he is two
thousand Pounds Sterling and upwards more in debt than he was left by his
Father, when be died in the year 52. occasioned through his Expenses in
tumbling about in these matters: This he mentions only upon this occasion, that
it may appear he has not enriched himself in these times, but indeed even in
that way half endangered the destroying of that Estate conveyed to him by his
Ancestors. And now having given these plain Defenses to the Articles of the
Indictment, wherein he has endeavored to contract much of what might be said,
not only by way of Information, but also by way of Defense peremptory, being
purposely omitted; tho they may be looked upon as so formal (as it may be
judged) need were, yet let them be weighed in the just Balance, the eternal
Rule of Righteousness, and the Defender doubts not, but by that Law which is
Supreme, the Law of this Nation, the Law of Nations, Equity and Reason; nay,
admitting Reason of State also in its place, to have its own weight, as this
matter now stands before the Parliament, and is circumstantiated, it being
remembered by the Commissioner and Parliament, that it was not early the
Defender became engaged in the Public Transaction of these times, as is
manifest by the Indictment it self, the Parliament in Justice will find the
Answers relevant, to elide the Indictment, and to Assoilzie the Defender.

Sic Subscribitur J. Swinton.
Extractum de Libro Actorum, per me A. Primerose Cls. Reg.

Minutes of John Swinton's Process of Forfeiture in anno 1661.
EDinburgh 7 February. 1661. Sir John Fletcher His Majesty's Advocat, having
given in, and repeated in presence of the Parliament, the Libel and Indictment
pursued by him for His Highness Interest, against John Swinton, Pannal:
Together also with the Decree of Forfeiture pronounced by the Committee of
Estates, as having Power by Act of Parliament for that Effect against the said
Pannal, Dated at Ferth the second day of April 1651. He craved that the said
Decree of Forfeiture might be ratified, and approven by the Estates of
Parliament, and Ordained to be put to Execution. And without Prejudice thereof,
Further craved, that the said new Indictment might be found Relevant and
admitted to his Probation. The Kings Majesty, and Estates of Parliament before
Answer, ordains the new Indictment to be given up to the said John Swinton,
Pannal: He being in Prison within the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, to the Effect, he
may see the samine,, and answer thereto 15 May 1661. The Pannal having seen the
said new Indictment, and given in Answers and Objections there against Extant
lying in Process; And who being Personally present, and heard speak for himself
Viva Voce in open and plain Parliament, did judicially Confess and Acknowledge,
That he went in Company with Oliver Cromwell, with that Army to Worcester, and
was with that Army at the Battle of Worcester: Whereupon His Majesty's Advocat
asked Instruments, and declared, that he insisted allannerlie pro tempore upon
that part of the said new Libel, bearing that the Pannal did go along with the
said Usurper, In Arms in the Army of Sectaries libelled: and was actually at
Worcester, upon the 3d of September 1651 years, and did Fight in Hostile manner
against his Majesty and Army of Scotsmen, at the least was with the said
Usurper, with his said Army of Sectaries in Arms as said is, and that he
Treasonably Assisted, Countenanced and promoted all the said Usurper his wicked
and treasonable Purposes and Designs; Likeas the said Lord Advocat repeated his
former Desires, and not only craved, that the said Decree of Forfeiture might
be approven, and ordained to be put to Execution: But likeways, that the Pannal
may be again found and declared to be guilty of the Crime and Liable to the
Pain and Punishment of Treason: And to be Decern'd and ordained to underly the
samine. The Pannal craved to see the former Sentence of Forfeiture, which was
given up to him to see and give in his Answers upon Friday come eight days,
being the 24 of May instant; and to allege why the samine should not be put to
Execution, with certification etc. 12 July 1661. His Majesty and Estates of
Parliament, having considered that Member of the new Indictment of Treason pro
tempore insisted upon, with the Pannal's Answer in Writ, and Viva Voce, and
Judicial Confession and Declaration, desire of the Lord Advocat, with the
former Decree of Forfeiture. They repelled, and repells the said Answers and
Objections made and given in in Writ, and Viva Voce as no ways Relevant, and
finds the forementioned Article and Member of the said new Indictment insisted
upon, relevant and proven by the said Pannal his judicial Confession; And
therefore not only ratifies and approves the former Decree of Forfeiture
against the said John Swinton, Pannal, but also of new finds and declares, that
the said Pannal is guilty of the said Crime of Treason; And has incurred the
said Pain and Punishment of High Treason etc. And recommends to the Kings
Majesty his consideration, the putting the Sentence and Decree to Execution
against the said Pannal, In so far as concerns his Life allannerlie, and
ordains the Person of the said Pannal to be kept in Prison within the Castle
of Edinburgh, till His Majesty's pleasure be further known thereanent.

Sic subscribitur Crafurd Lindsay, I. P. D. Parl.
Extractum de libro Actorum per me. A. Primrose, Cls. Reg.

FINIS.

