AN ANSWER To the PRETENDED Refutation OF Dr. Olyphant's DEFENSE

EDINBURGH, Printed by J. W. for Thomas Carruthers, and Sold at his Shop in the
Parliament Closs, M.DC.XC.IX.

An Answer to the pretended Refutation, etc.
ONE might very justly imagine, that this Refutation had been rather designed
for that of the Melius Inquirendum, than of Dr. O's Defense, if it was not for
the Title Page: And I appeal to any Man that had any Confidence in the
Refu^^r's Ingenuity, if the Matter of Fact as it is ^ow set down in the
Refutation, be not ^^ite different from what he imagined it was ^y the Melius
Inquirendum. The Apotheca^y and the File in his Shop before appealed (...) as
Witnesses, to testify the Patient's being several times Vomited, are now
declined; the File he confesses proves no such thing, and the Apothecary, says
he, cannot purge himself of partial Counsel, which is calling in ^^estion the
Honesty of that Gentleman, whom all of his Acquaintance know to be of ^^ch
steady and firm Principles; that even his ^wn Interest when at Stake, or that
of his ^earest Relations, could never bias him to do any thing he thought
unjust or disingenuous. But it is pleasant to hear how he Declines the Patient,
because, says he (if we may believe himself) a very mannerly Supposition by
the by, He remembers nothing that passed for Four or Five days together after
the taking the Vomit. Why, what if he did not; does that prove he remembered
nothing before he took the Vomit? Now I hope, the Refuter does not pretend he
Vomited the Patient after the Dr. had done it. It was unlucky indeed the
Patient should have remembered the Dr's Vomit, and the great Benefit he found
by it (which he as justly as Generously, owned on all Occasions, and frequently
to the Dr. himself) and in the mean time have forgot that the Ordinary had
given him severals before. However, I do assure the Refuter, had the Dr. known
any thing of his giving warm Water or Whey for Vomits, he would have been far
from denying them place among his other Achillean Cures and Pen-gun-Artillery.
And here I must take notice of a most admirable turn of Gigantick Wit in the
Refutation; the Dr. in his Defense is speaking of the Answerer's Remedies as no
better Artillery to attack the Disease, than Pen-Guns would be to take a Fort;
and here the Refuter most waggishly turns the Cannon on the Dr. by turning the
Body of the Patient into the Cannon: I do confess indeed, says he, they are
but Pen-Guns in Respect of the Dr's Artillery, the Discharging of which had in
stead of taking the Fort, almost split the Cannon, which was no great mark of a
very good ^unner. Now, had the Ordinary by an overcharge of Milk and Sugar,
burst his Cli^er-pipe, and at the same time taken the ^ort, I am certain the
Dr. would have been ^r from upbraiding him with his small Skill ^n Gunnery.

I shall say nothing to the Refuter's most Christian way of defaming a Man
safely, by making his Words have a double meaning, ^s he does also the
Representation of the Matter of Fact, especially after his own fair Confession
in the Refutation, where he flat^y acknowledges he had answered both un^ustly
and Irregularly. And if, says he, in any thing I have Transgressed, my
Adversary is to blame, who attacked me both unjustly and irregularly; and every
man must defend as he is attacked.

I am now come to these few Answers given to the Dr's Authorities in the
Refutation, and shall begin with what is said to that of Fernel, which I find
the Refuter looks on as the most Material thing he has to say. He alleges
that in the first Quotation brought by the Dr. from Fernel, that Author speaks
only of intermitting Fevers. Now to cut off all further Debate, I shall grant
it be true; but in the mean time, if the Reasons that moved Fernel to Vomit in
intermitting Fevers, can be used for doing the same in continued ones when
attended with Vomiting and overflowing of Gall, is it not the same thing for
the Dr's purpose. And that it is, so is evident by the Quotation which I shall
again insert Quum per accessiones multoe bilis spontanea vacuatio contingit,
febris sine Medicamento integre solvi potest. At quum ea aut nulla aut parcior
existit medicatio adhibenda, ne neglecta Febris speciem mutet and deterior vel
prolixior evadat. When, says he, there happens by turns a great Evacuation of
Bile if its own accord, the Fever may end without any Medicine; but when that
is either none at all or too little, Medicaments are to be given, lest the
Fever by being neglected, change its Species, and become worse and of longer
continuance. And afterward, Quum enim precipue impura sit prima corporis
Regio, in qua and humor noxius fluctuat, statim initio ejus nonnihil tempestive
expurgandum est, presertim si vel oris amaror, vel Cordis dolor, vel Nausea vel
in appetentia vel suffocatio acrius urget. For seeing the Stomach and intestins
(which is the Prima Corporis Regio) in which the Noxious Humor fluctuats, are
most unclean, some of it is to be timeously evacuated in the beginning,
especially if there be bitterness in the Mouth, Oppression of the Heart, or
squeamishness or want of Appetite or suffocation. Now, I would gladly know if
any Man ^a show the least Reason, why all that may (...) be applied to
Continued Fevers that ^ve Remissions, and are attended with ^dounding Choler,
as are these Fevers ^e Dr. first discoursed of. And in effect the Affinity
between Agues and most ^f our Fevers is so great, that not only Vomiting, but
the Kinkina or Jesuit's Bark, ^e true Specific Cure of Agues has been ^ery
succesfully introduced into the Cure of them.

He comes next to Celsus, whom the Dr. owned both in his first discourse and
defense ^o have used warm Water for a Vomit, and gives a good Reason for it;
but to ^ive that now for one in any case, except ^erhaps after a slight
Surfeit, is truly to ^reat the practice of Medicine in Ridicule. And I wonder
if the Refuter would use the Kinkina in an Ague, or the Ipeca Coanha in (...)
Dysentery, because Celsus knew nothing of them.

After that he passes over those pat Quotations of Willis, Sylvius, Etmuller,
Michael Hartman, and Dr. Tournefort's Testimony, that it was the Practice of
the best Phy^icians in France, not only to give Antimonial Vomits, and the
other most Drastick Medicines; but to mix Vomiting and Purging Medicines
together, all which the Dr. had Riveted in his Defense; until he comes ^o
Sydenham. Neither does he Answer the Quotations brought from him, but tells us
from the Schedula Monitoria, that he used Blooding and Purging in Febribus
quamplurimarum specierum, in very many sorts of Fevers, and not in most part of
Fevers, as the Refuter Translates it; which is very true, but these were
properly Symptomatical Fevers of the Inflammatory kind, and quite different
from these the Dr. speaks of, which are ten to one the most ordinary here, and
even Sydenham had practiced a long time before he had seen any other, as he
tells himself in the Preface to these Fevers he Cures by Vomiting, Quo quidem
tempore, says he, nondum mihi innotuerat, aliam aliquam Febris speciem in rerum
natura inveniri. At which time (which was a good time after he had Practiced
Physic) it was not known to me, there was any other sort of Fever to be found
in Nature. And how much a Kin those Fevers were to Agues he tells in the same
Preface in these Words. Dicta itaque Febris continua Intermittentium quasi
Compendium quoddam, and e contra singuli earum Paroxysmi Compendium hujusce
m^^i videbantur; atque adeo discrimen in hoc maxim versari, quod continuae
conceptam semel effervescentiam Sunechoos eodemque semper tenore perficerent;
intermittentes autem partitis vicibus ac diversis temporibus eadem
^^ungerentur. Therefore, says he, the foresaid continued Fever seemed to me as
a sort of compend of the Intermitting Ones, and on the other hand, each Fit of
those seemed a Compend of this; so that the Difference lay mostly in this, that
the continued Fevers did hold out in the ^^me Tenor, and did perfect without
Intermission the Effervescence they had begun; whereas the Intermitting Fevers
did the same at different times and by Intervals. And that this is positively
true in most Fevers we have, and most remarkably so in these we have had this
Season, every Man that has accuratly observed will easily be convinced.

At last he comes to Dr. P's Dissertation of the Cure of Fevers by Evacuation,
and tells us, that there Sweating is proposed as the best and ^eadiest
Evacuation for Curing all Fevers, without any respect to the Seat of the
Morbifick Matter. I Answer, that Dr. P. did not Design that Discourse for the
Use of any who did not know that nothing could be Evacuated by Sweating which
did not immediately come from the Blood, so that the Morbifick Matter must of
necessity be Seated in the Blood and Blood Vessels, before it could be brought
away by Sweating, and not in the Stomach as Dr. O. supposed.

I have now done with my Answer to that Refutation of the Defense, and leave it
to be judged by any Man that is Impartial, whether or not it deserves that
Title. I am quite Tired with the Subject, and shall conclude all with a Letter
the Dr. received from a Physician at London of his Acquaintance, concerning his
Short Discourse, which I hope the Reader will neither find Impertinent nor
Tedious, it being written by one whose Wit and Good Humor are equal to his
Learning and Ingenuity.

DEAR SIR.
I Thank you for the Present of your small Treatise about Vomiting in Fevers,
^ut at the same time, I approve of your Reasons, you must give me leave to
condemn your Conduct: I know you begin to storm at this; But have a little
Patience. There was a Physician of this Town, perhaps the most Famous in his
time, being called to his Patient, complaining (it may be) of an Oppression at
his Stomach; he would very safely and cautiously order him a Gentle Decoction
of Carduus, sometimes hot Water; I don't know but he would allow now and then
fat Mutton Broth too. The Patient was Vomited, and the Doctor could justify
himself that he had not omitted that necessary evacuation; this was his
constant Practice. Being Chid by his Colleagues, who well knew he neglected
Antimony, not out of Ignorance or Fear, he would Roguishly tell them, Come,
come Gentlemen, that might cure my Patient, but it would kill the Distemper,
and I should have less Money in my Pocket. A pretty Business indeed, a Rich
Citizen overgorges himself, which by Management may be improved into a good
substantial Fever, worth at least Twenty Guineas; and you would have me nip the
Plant in the Bud, have a Guinea for my Pains, and lose the Reputation of a safe
Practitioner to boot. The Gentleman had Reason; all Trades must live. Alas! our
People here are grown too quick-sighted, they will have Antimonial Vomits, and
a Physician dares not omit them, though it is many a good Fee out of his Pocket.
Join I say with these Wise Gentlemen; they wish well to the Faculty; procure an
Order of the College, and banish Antimony the City of Edinburgh, and the
liberties thereof. It Is a Barbarous thing in these hard times to strangle an
Infant Distemper; they ought no more to be murdered than young Cattle in Lent.
Let it be as great a Crime to kill a Fever with an Antimonial Vomit, as to Fish
in Spawning time. The Dutch Physicians are like the rest of their Nation, Wise;
they banish that Heathenish Jesuitical Drug that would quickly reduce their
Practice to a narrow Compass in the hopefulest Distemper of the Country. These
Rogues that Dream of nothing but Specificks and Panaceas, I would have them all
hanged, not so much for the folly of the Attempt, as the Malice of their
Intention; Rascals, to starve so many worthy Gentlemen, that perhaps know no
otherwise to get their Liveliehood. Will the Glasiers ever puzle themselves to
make Glass Malleable, would the Knitters ever so much as ^ave dreamed of a
Stocking-Loom, or the ^oung Writers Petitioned to have Informations Printed;
All those are Wise in their Generation, and must the Physicians be the on^y
Fools?

We all know here there is no danger in Antimonial Vomits, but this is inter
nos; you must not tell your Patient so, let them believe as I said before, that
Antimonial Vomits are dangerous, deleterial, break the ^ibres of the Stomach,
etc. and that you cannot safely give them. So shall you be ^iled a cautious
safe Physician, one that ^on't spoil the Curll of a Man's Hair to pull him out
of a River. We have some dangerous Dogs here, that in a Quinsy, when a Man is
ready to be chock'd, will blood him forty Ounces at once; is not this
extremely hazardous? They cut off Limbs, cut for the Stone; is this safe? I
tell you the Reputation of a wary safe Physician is worth all the Parts of his
Character besides. Now I hope you will allow I have Reason for what I said.

I have seen the Melius Inquirendum, and am too well acquainted with the Style
and Spelling, not to know that it is Dr. Eyzat's; but here I must be with you
again, how come you to write against one that says two Drams of Emetick Wine is
a sufficient Dose for a Man. Suffer not such things to come abroad; they will
imagine you are not got so far as the Circulation of the Blood in Scotland;
write seriously against such People. Fie upon it, I will never allow them to be
above the Dispensation of Ballads and Doggrel, etc. I am

Sir Yours, etc.
London, August 23, 1699.
FINIS.

