GROCERS-HALL, London, August 20. 1644. At the Committee appointed by Ordinance
of Parliament, for Raising and Maintaining of Horse and Foot, for the Garrison
of Gloucester, and for the Counties of Gloucester, Hereford, Monmouth, Glamorgan,
Brecknock, and Radnor.
Gentlemen,
WE have formerly desired your assistance for Gloucester, and the Counties above
mentioned; and understand, That in some Parishes our Letters have not been
publicly read; in some, Subscriptions have been taken, and the Money not
Collected; in some, Collections made, and the Money not brought in; and in
others, neither Subscriptions, nor Collections, where the Letters have been
read.

What should be the cause of such backwardness in so good a work, (as is the
stopping of Supplies to the Enemy, the opening of Trade from the West, the hope
of reducing South Wales to the King and Parliaments Obedience; but especially
the promoting of the Gospel in those blind and ignorant Countries) we cannot
apprehend.

And because some Malignants, as we are informed, have reported, That we have
mis-imployed what has already been brought in; We give this just account of
the careful Managing of the Contributions already received, (being not above
2500 l. except the Subscriptions of some of the Committee,) That besides 100.
Case of Pistols, 100. Saddles, 300. Muskets, and 50. Barrels of Gunpowder, we
sent down 250. Horse completely furnished, with a fortnights advance, both to
Officers and Troopers, who seasonably coming to Colonel Massey, Governor of
Gloucester, with other of his Forces, and the assistance of the Country, did by
the blessing of God, give a great defeat to the Enemy at Red Marley, the
particulars whereof, we presume, cannot be unknown unto you.

Yet we must acquaint you, That if further supplies come not timely to that
worthy Colonel, he will not be able to draw into the field, nor act more then
the defensive part.

(...)
