Representation unto His GRACE HIS MAJESTY'S HIGH COMMISSIONER And the Right
Honorable the Estates of Parliament, anent the Survey of the Kingdom of
Scotland, and Navigating the Coasts and Isles thereof.
IN Anno. i681, The Lords of Privy Council having appointed John Adair to make
a Survey of the whole Kingdom, and form particular Mapps of the several Shires,
in Respect there were no exact ones done for them, did ordain a yearly Sellary
to be paid him for that end, and recommended the design to the Nobility,
Gentry, and Burrows, for a futeable encouragement to bear its-charge: But after
several Shires were surveyed and exact Mapps of them made up, no thing
answerable to the Work, or charge thereof could be procured either from Council
or Country: So that the design was in a manner abandoned until the year 1686
That the Parliament then sitting were pleased to consider that exact
Geographical Mapps would be both honorable, and useful to the Inhabitants,
and that true Mapps and Descriptions of the Sea Coast would not only be
Honorable and useful, but most necessary for Navigation, and might prevent
many Ship-Wracks, and great losses occasioned by the want of them in time past.
And therefore did form and pass an Act in favors of the said John Adair,
ordaining him forthwith to go on in the design, and for bearing the charge of
Land Mapps did Authorize and empower the Heretors in each Shire to meet and
impose upon their valued Rent, such a Sum as they should think proper to bear
the charge of the work, to be uplifted by the Collectors of the Supply, and by
them paid in to the said John Adair, when surveying or having surveyed their
respective Shires: But this part of the Act being founded only upon a
recommendation to the Heretours was not put in Execution, albeit several Shires
were surveyed, with respect to the said fond, by the said John Adair with great
Travel and Expense: Likewise for bearing the charge of Navigating the Sea
Coast, and Isles, and making Mapps of them, one shilling Scots was imposed upon
each Tun of all Ships and other Vessels belonging to this Kingdom, and two
Shillings Scots upon each Tun of Foreign Ships yearly for the space of five
years next after the date of the Act, to be uplifted by the Collectors of the
Customs at the several ports, and by them paid in to the said John yearly at
Mertimass. But the present War which shortly followed after, the negligence of
some Collectors, and the fraud of others, rendered this part also of very
little or no account, albeit John Adair in obedience to the Act of Parliament
did Survey and Navigat the Sea Coast from Sunderland point in England to
Buchanness, and delineat the same in eight large Mapps including the Firths and
Rivers of Forth and Tay: In which are laid down all the Ports, and Creicks,
Headlands, Bays, Islands. Rocks, Sands, Shelves and other hazards, with the
marks by which they may be escaped, their true bearings and distance, the
deepings, with the best and ordinary places for Anchorage. Which work beside
his hazard and travel coast above 300 pound starling: and to render the survey
true, and exact, he did buy and bring from Abroad Mathematical Instruments and
other necessars, to the value of 100 pound starling, also he brought over from
Holland one Moxon an engraver to whom he paid 70 pound starling which in all
will be three times as much as was got from the Collectors upon the account of
the Tunnage.

After all these discouragements, and disappointments some three years ago
several Noblemen, and Gentlemen from a sense of the usefulness of the said
design, proposed the cutting of the Mapps already done, and Printing of them,
with a Description be way of Subscriptions and made account that 600 or 700
subseribers might be got at 20 Shill. starling each and the one half being
paid per advance might bear the Charge, But this project succeeded no better
than the former, for of that number not one hundred was procured, which being
of no proportion to the design the money uplifted from the subscribers (except
very little) was let remain in the hands of those who received it, and may be
returned upon giving up the Receipts granted for it. So that the Advance made
upon that head, as the buying Capper plates cutting of Mapps bringing home
Paper and gathering in the Accounts of natural curiosities and monuments of
Antiquity through the Kingdom, for making up the descriptions, was performed at
the expense of the said John Adair, who by it, and what he had bestowed
formerly has not only spent what money he could procure of his own, but also
has contracted considerable debt, so that he is rendered incapable to proceed
any farther in so good a work.

This is humbly Represented that his Grace his Majesty's Commissioner, and High
Court of Parliament may know and consider the state and condition of a design
which truly concerns the Honor and Interest of the Kingdom though more
particularly of these who travel by Sea, as many sadd and daily examples
occasioned by the want of exact Mapps and Descriptions of the Sea Coast and
Isles of this Kingdom do testify.

As to the progress made in the Work, with an Account of the Money bestowed
upon it, and what in modest Computation it will yet coast before it can be
perfected. The Report of a Commit of the privy Council lately appointed to
examine the same lying subscribed in the Clerk of the Councils hands, may not
only be seen, but likewise the Mapps, and accounts themselves are ready to be
shown to any who shall call for them.


