ADDITIONAL INFORMATION For John Abernethyof Mayen, Against John Gordon of
Rothemay.
ROthemay being conscious to himself, that as to the case in general, an Heir
cannot in Law be found liable for Damages, arising by his Predecessors Deed,
when the Crime was not cognosced against the Predecessor in his own time: Mayen
is informed that Rothemay has given in a Petition to the Parliament, pretending
that there is a speciality in this case, for making of Mayen as Heir liable.
and the speciality that he fixes upon is, that James Abernethy his alleged
tearing of the Leaves out of the Register, was a Thift, and that Alexander
Abernethy was a Resetter by concealing them, and that by the Civil Law the
taking away of Writs and Securities is esteemed Thift, and the away-takers a
Thief; and that he shall be liable for the Damage not only as to the Value of
the Write taken away, but likewise for the Damage and Interest of the Party,
as to the value of the Sum contained in the Write. Leg. 27. ff. de furtis. Qui
tabulas vel cautiones amovet, furti tenetur, non tantum pratii ipsarum
tabularum, verum ejus (quod interfuit, quod ad astimationem refertur ejus)
summa quae in his tabulis continetur, and Leg. 31, and 32. eod. And in
condictione furtiva, which was for recovering of the thing stolen, or value of
it if not extant; not only the Thief himself, but his Heir was liable. Leg. 7.
Par. 2. ff. de condictione furtiva, condictio rei furtivae quia rei habet
persecutionem haredem quoque furis obligat.

It is answered for Mayen, 1. The foresaid Laws ff. de furtis, as to the
Punishment of Thift are gone indesuetude, as is clear from Groenwegen, de
Legibus abrogatis. who is one of the Lawyers cited by the Pursuer himself. 2.
They do not at all meet this case, because these Laws are only in the case of a
private Thift, when a man comes into his neighbors House, and steals out a
Bond, or Writes of his Lands, and takes the samen away, or destroys them: But
this is not in the case of tearing Leaves out of a Public Register, or Razing
the samen, for that is Crimen falsi, and punishable as falsehood, as is clear by
the Leg. 1.16. and 23. ff. ad legem Cornelium, de falsis. and L. 1. par. 4..
and L. 16.. 2. eod. And albeit the foresaid 31 Law de furtis, mentions
likewise, Si quis tabulas instrumenterum rei publicae municipi alieujus aut
subripuerit aut interleverit, eum furti teneri. It is clear by the gloss upon
that Law, and all the Lawyers that has written upon the samen, that it is only
understood of such Writes, quae sunt in patrimonio publico, and are stolen from
a public Servant, who has the keeping of them, but not of such Writes quae
sunt in usu publico, such as public Registers: And the tearing, vitiating, or
razing of these, is by the Civil Law positively declared to be Crimen falsi, as
is clear from the foresaid Titles, de falsis, so that the Law cited out of the
Title de furtis, does not at all concern this case.

3. It is clear from the Common Law, that actio furti, an Action for Theft, is
not competent against the Heirs of the Thief. Par. 1. institut. de perpetuis
and temporalibus action: Leg. 1. ff. de privatis delict. civilis constitutio
est paenalibus actionibus haeredes non teneri nec caeteros, quidem successores
id circo; nec furti conveniri possunt. And Leg. 15. cod de furtis, furti
action minime teneri successores, ignorare non debueras, and many other Laws
to that purpose, which being cited in the former Informations shall not be here
repeated.

4. There are many eminent Lawyers who are of the Opinion, that in condictione
furtiva, the Heir is not liable, but in quantum lucratus, in so far as he reaps
Benefit by the Crime. And particularly Cujacius observat. lib: 7. tit. 37.
which is founded upon leg. 3. par. 12. ff. de peculio ex furtiva caufa filio
quidem familias condici posse constat: an vero in patrem, vel in dominum de
peculio danda est Queritur, and est verius, in quantum locupletior Dominus
factus esset, ex furto facto actionem de peculio dandam. And leg. 3. par: ul:
ff: de action: rerum amotar. And therefore it is most agreeable to reason, that
the foresaid Law de condictione furtiva, should only be understood in the Terms
of the other Laws, both in relation to that and other Crimes, that the Heir is
only liable in quantum lucratus, by the Crime, as the samine is agreed upon, by
the most Eminent Lawyers that ever wrote upon that Subject.

5. The Action ex condictione furtiva, by the Civil Law can never take place in
this case. For the effect of the said Action, being to recover the thing
stolen, or in case it was not extant the value of it; it is clear by the Title
in the Civil Law, that if the thing stolen was delivered back to the Owner,
there was no place for the said Action. Leg.: 8. ff. de condiction. furtiv. Si
quidem obtulit fur, sine dubio nulla erat condictio. And Leg. 10 eod. caeterum
namo furum condictione tenetur, post ea quam Dominus possessionem apprehendit.
So that if in this case there be no part of the Pursuers Estate takenfrom him,
by the foresaid pretended tearing out of the Leaves, or concealing them. But
the Decree of the Lords of Session, Loosing the Interdiction being made up,
and the Leaves being ordained to be insert in the Register, the Matter is
entire. And if this case would have fallen under the Action de condictione
surtiva, by the common Law, as it could not, for the Reasons foresaid, yet the
Decree being made up, it is in the same case, as if the thing stolen had been
restored: In which case, it is clear by the Civil Law, and common Sense and
Reason, That the Action ex condictione furtiva takes no place: So that
Rothemay, either ignorantly or wilfully always mistakes the case, as if he were
in the case of a thing stolen and not restored. For suppose this had been a
Thift, as it was not, (but if it had been true, it was a Crime of another
nature:) Yet was it ever heard of, that when a Bond or other Write was stolen,
if the Bonds and Writes were restored, or if cancelled, where the Tenor was
made up, if in such a case, either by the Civil Law, or any Law in the
Christian World, Action was sustained against the Heir, for the away-taking or
cancelling of the Papers, where the Papers were restored, or the Tenors made
up, which is our case.

6. Rothemay did expressly found upon the forecited Law de condictione furtiva,
in the Debate before the Lords of Session; and the Lords found no speciality in
the case upon that account, the same being fully cleared to them as aforesaid;
but remitted the general Point to be determined by the Parliament, How far an
Heir can be liable for Damnages sustained by his Predecessors Deed, when the
Crime was not cognosced against the Predecessor in his own time; so that if the
Parliament should give an Interloquitor upon any pretended Speciality, it would
not answer the general Question, remitted by the Lords of Session to be
determined by the Parliament, the general Point being the only thing that was
^^^^^^ed. And therefore what is now alleged be Rothemay, as to the pretended
Theft, is no speciality. And if this had been looked upon as a Speciality, the
Lords of Session would have determined the Case themselves, without remitting
the same to the Parliament. And seeing to Decide the Case upon a pretended
Speciality, (where there is no Ground for it, and which is likewise fully
cleared and taken off) would not answer the general Point remitted by the Lords
of Session. Mayen humbly craves, that his Grace His Majesty's High
Commissioner, and Honorable Estates of Parliament, may give their
Interloquitor upon the general Point remitted by the Lords of Session, and
Assoi^ie him from this groundless Pursuit: especially seeing it would be of a
dangerous preparative to determine such a Case upon alleged Specialities: for
there is no case that can occur, but the Parties would always pretend some
Speciality or other, neither is there any Speciality here suggested, or
alleged in this case, but what is sufficiently cleared and fully taken off.


