AN ADDITION TO SWINTON'S CASE, in relation to his Father's pretended
Forfeiture, upon occasion of the ANSWER to it published by the Earl of
Lauderdale.
SWINTON having in his Printed CASE and REASONS of REDUCTION, in relation to
his Father's pretended Forfeiture, given so true and clear an account of that
Affair to the World, as upon the severest Scrutiny can be made into the matter
of Fact, as represented by him, it will be impossible for his Adversaries ever
to convell; he shall not trouble himself to take so much notice of the Paper
published by the Earl of Lauderdale by way of Answer, as to make any formal
Reply unto it. But the Earl's Design in that Paper, being only to obscure and
darken, what he found was set in too great a Light, for him by any other method
to cope withal; and to render the CAUSE of a Son unfavourable, by reflecting
upon his Father: he shall endeavor to take off, what therein may seem to have
any weight with those that read it.

AND in the first place, As to what the Author of the Earl's Answers is pleased
so virulently to libel against the Fame and Reputation of the deceass'd
Swinton, in the odious Comparison he makes bewixt him and the Duke of
Lauderdale, DEBASING the one as a Traitor to his King and Country, and
EXTOLLING the other as little less than a Martyr for both; those who shall
consider the Answer the former gave in to the Indictment, exhibited against him
in the Parliament 1661, will (even tho they never knew him) find him of far
another Character, and very clear from so black an Imputation: and one whose
Deportment in all the Transactions (whether public or private) of his Life,
are so well known, and have left so fair an impression in the minds of all that
knew him, as whatsoever the Duke's great Merits were, in relation to his King
and Country, the deceass'd Swinton, were he living, would think he had no
great reason to envy his MEMORY either as to the one or the other.

Whereas it is alleged, That this Swinton's Brother did procure a Commission
from the late King Charles, for enquiring into the Method, Procedure, and the
Warrants upon Record, of Swinton their Father's Forfeiture; and there being
several Objections offered against the Forfeiture, and Answers made thereunto
by the Earl of Lauderdale; the Commissioners were convinced, that nothing of
moment was instructed on the Objector's part, and the Commission thereupon
deserted.

IT IS ANSWERED, That Swinton's Brother having represented to the late K.
Charles the clear Grounds of Nullity of the Forfeiture, and the unjustifiable
Methods had been made use of in the Procedure concerning it; his Majesty found
them so convincing, that he was pleased to grant a Commission to the Earl of
Aberdene, then Chancellor, and several others, to take trial of the same, and
to report. And accordingly inquiry thereinto being made, and the Parties heard;
the Lords of the Commission were fully satisfied of the truth of what was
objected against the Forfeiture. But by the influence the Earl of Lauderdale
had upon several of them, the Report was delayed: and shortly after, the Earl
of Aberdene being laid aside, the Commission thereby expired. So that to
allege, that the Commission deserted upon the account that there was nothing
instructed against the Forfeiture, is most calumnious and false.

Whereas it is alleged, That albeit the Warrants of the Decree 1651 be not
produced, yet the Extract must make as much Faith as if the Warrants were
extant, seeing the Lords of Session sustain all Extracts out of the Registers in
the years 1648. 1649. 1650. and 1651. and refuse to grant Certification against
any Writs registered those years, because the Registers of those years were
lost.

IT IS ANSWERED, That the pretended Extract of the Decree 1651. can make no
Faith, because it is not subscribed by the Clerk Register for the time, as all
Extracts of Decreets of Parliament are in use to be. Neither is it so much as
made appear, that Mr. Thomas Henryson, who is alleged to subscribe that
Extract, was Clerk-depute to the Committee of Estates. And seeing there are no
Warrants of that Decree extant, it cannot make Faith. For as to what is
asserted of the Lords of Session, concerning Extracts for those years, it is
most calumnious; the Lords not sustaining such Extracts, to satisfy the
Production in Improbations: but all they do is, to stop the Extract of the
Certification for some time, that the Parties may raise a Proving of the Tenor,
of any Writ registered those years; and allow the Parties to make use of any
pretended Extract they have, only as an Adminicle in proving the Tenor: but do
not sustain such Extracts per se to make entire Faith. Which if otherwise, were
of dangerous Consequence, since Persons might forge Extracts of Decreets and
Bonds for those years, and so ruin whom they pleased in their Estates and
Fortunes.

And whereas it is alleged, That the Truth and Verity of the Decree 1651, is
adminiculated by this, that Lieutenant Govain who was forfeited at the same
time with Swinton, and is contained in the same Decree; was by virtue of that
Decree put to Death, by Order of Parliament, in the year 1661.

IT IS ANSWERED, That the Parliament 1661, did not consider that Decree 1651,
as a standing Decree against Govain, upon which he could have been summarly
executed: but on the contrary, he being called before the Parliament, that
Decree was given him to see and answer, by which it was turned into a Libel,
and as he was to answer it as a Libel, so he did actually give in his Answers
to it, and the Parliament gave their Sentence against him, as upon a Libel and
Answers. So that Govain's being one of the Persons comprehended in the Decree
1651 with Swinton, is so far from adminiculating the Verity and Truth of that
Decree, that it redargues the same. For if the Parliament had looked upon that
Decree, as a true and valide Decree; they would have ordained the Sentence
therein to be put in Execution against Govain without any further Demurr. But
having allowed him to see and answer, it is a clear Demonstration, that the
Parliament considered that pretended Decree only as a Libel, and not as a
formal, standing, legal Sentence. Especially seeing upon the Answers given in by
him, they passed a new and solemn Sentence against him, forfeiting his Life and
Fortune, ordaining his Arms to be lacerat, and delete out of the Herald's
Books, with all the other Solemnities of a Forfeiture. Which it is absurd to
think the Parliament either would or could have done, if the Decree 1651 had
been looked upon by them, as a true and valide Forfeiture; it being as
repugnant to Sense, as contrary to Law, for a Man once forfeited to be
forfeited over again.

Whereas it is alleged, That the Verity of the Decree of Forfeiture 1661, is
adstructed by the List of the unprinted Acts, which bears that there was a
Decree of Forfeiture against Swinton; and by the Act of Indemnitie, in which
with other Decreets, that Decree of Forfeiture is excepted.

IT IS ANSWERED, That the mentioning of that pretended Decree of Forfeiture
1661. in the List or Index of the unprinted Acts, and the exception thereof out
of the Act of Indemnitie, do not instruct that there was such a Forfeiture. For
the mentioning of a Title of Law, does not instruct that there is such a Law,
unless the Law it self be extant. Seeing in this, as in all other cases of the
like nature, the Maxim takes place, Quod non creditur referenti nisi constet
de relato.

And whereas it is alleged, That if Swinton had been innocent of the Crimes
contained in the said pretended Decree of Forfeiture 1651, and had had any
ground to have questioned the same; he would have made Application to the
Parliament 1661, or to Parliaments subsequent, for getting the same reduced.

IT IS ANSWERED, That it is notourly known, that the Duke of Lauderdale being
the chief Minister of State in this Kingdom, had that Influence upon the
Government all his time; that it had been to no purpose for Swinton, to have
made any Application for reducing of his Forfeiture, so long as the Duke lived.
But immediately after his Deceasse, Swinton's Son Alexander applied to the King,
and procured the aforesaid Commission, for trying the Nullity of the said
Forfeiture, which if it had not been made ineffectual by the Earl of
Lauderdale's means, and the Earl of Aberdene's being turned out of Office, to
whom, with others, the Commission was granted; there had certainly been a
Report made, finding the Nullities now alleged against the said Forfeiture,
sufficiently proven as they are now instructed. But as a convincing evidence,
that the deceass'd Swinton did never acknowledge the Forfeiture; all was done
that he could do, during the Duke's Lifetime, to recover his Estate from him.
In order to which, several of Swinton's Friends having made Application to the
Duke, they so far prevailed with him, and so conscious was he of the invalidity
of his Right; that in the year 1663, he condescended to accept of 5000 lib.
Sterling: and was content to allow as a part of that Sum, the three years
Intromission he had had with the Rent of the Estate of Swinton; and looked upon
the Remainder as sufficient to satisfy and compense any Intromission Swinton
had had with that part of the Duke's Estate that he had possessed the time of
the English Usurpation. Which matter of Fact, if need were, could be proved by
several Persons of quality, who communed betwixt the Duke of Lauderdale and
Swinton at that time, and particularly by the Earl of Tweddale: and that the
reason why that Communing did not take effect, was the Duke and Swintons
differing in the Computation of Swinton's Intromission: the Duke computing it
to amount to 5000 lib. Sterling, and Swinton contending it amounted but to 4000
lib. Which clearly evinces, that as the Duke did not look upon the Forfeiture
as valide and legal, so he never intended to make further use of it, than to be
repayed of what he conceived Swinton had intrometted with of that part of his
Estate which he had possessed under the English.

Whereas it is alleged, That Swinton in his Answers given in to the Parliament
1661. endeavors to extenuate his Crime, in joining with the Usurper Cromwell,
and going with him to Worcester, pretending he was out of the Protection of the
Law; which could only be understood of the Decree of Forfeiture 1651. And that
in his Answers before the Parl. 1661. he does not deny his being then forfeited.

IT IS ANSWERED, That Swinton by his mentioning in his Answers, that he was out
of the Protection of the Law, did not understand he was so by a Decree of
Forfeiture 1651. But that he being then denounced for not Compearance, the
Denounciation did put him out of the Protection of the Law. And that Expression
cannot be otherwise understood, seeing in his Answers he makes no mention at all
of that pretended Decree of Forfeiture, 1651. And it is most absurd and
ridiculous to pretend, that Swinton's not denying in his Answers before the
Par. 1661. that there was such a Decree in the year 1651. is an evidence of
the verity of it. For 1. the Answers being made to the Indictment, and there
being no mention in the Indictment of the Decree 1651. he was not obliged to
answer, nor take notice of any thing but what was in the Indictment. 2. His
Answers could not bear a denying of the Decree 1651. because his Answers were
given in to the Indictment, before the Decree 1651. was produced, or made use
of against him. Seeing it appears by the Lord Presmennen's Diary, the 15 of May,
that Swinton's Dittay with his Answers were then read before the Parliament:
and that the Lord Advocat opponed the Dittay, and produced the former Decree
of Forfeiture against him. And it appears by a Copy of the said Decree
delivered to Swinton, by Alexander Reid the Advocate's Servant, that it was not
delivered to him till the 17 of May, it being marked upon the back with the
said Alexander Reids hand, that it was given to Swinton the 17 of May, to
answer the 24. Whereas it is evident by the Minute on the Margent of Swinton's
Answers, that the said Answers were given in by him upon the 14 of March 1661.
and given up to the Advocate to see, which was two Months before the Decree
1651. was produced. And Swinton being upon the 15 of May allowed to see and
answer to that Decree, he was never thereafter called before the Parliament,
and so had never an occasion to make any Answer to it.

Whereas it is alleged, That the Author of Swinton's Case does show his
Ignorance and Disingenuity, in asserting that the Restriction in the Decree
1651. restricting the Sentence to the Punishment of John Hume to the Death,
takes off the effect of the Sentence, as to Swinton, and all the rest; seeing
the Doom of Forfeiture was solemnly pronounced by sound of Trumpet, and tearing
the Arms of those forfeited; and by several reiterated Acts, forfeiting them,
as to Life, Heretage, and Movables: and that Swinton did not pretend to, or
found upon any Restriction of that Sentence, when he was brought before the
Parliament 1661.

IT IS ANSWERED, That the Penner of the Earl of Lauderdale's Answers does
grossly bewray as well his Ignorance as Disingenuity in the said Alledgance. For
the Restriction in the Decree is plain and express, which is subjoyned after
the pretended Sentence, which the King and Committee of Estates, for Reasons
and Considerations moving them, did restrict to the punishment of John Hume to
the Death. Which Restriction being in general Terms, must be understood to
relate to all the forementioned Persons, and so clearly takes off the effect of
the Sentence, as to Swinton and all the rest, until it should be reconsidered
by the King and Parliament. And there was very good reason for the Restriction,
and that the Sentence should have been instantly put in execution against John
Hume: because the Crimes libelled against him were most atrocious, being his
keeping a Correspondence with the Enemy, his discovering the condition of the
Castle of Edinburgh, by throwing a Letter over the Wall to the Enemy, etc. and
the Probation was clear against him, he having acknowledged the Crime, before
the Court-Marshal and Ministers of the Castle. Whereas there was nothing
libelled against Swinton, except only his pretended deserting of the King's
Army, and his frequent residence with, and resorting to the Enemy in the Town
of Edinburgh, Cannongate and Leith, which could infer no Crime, far less the
Crime of Treason: seeing Swinton did not desert the Army, but laid down his
Charge, which was taken off his hand, and given to another; and all the
converse he had with the Enemy, was in the quality of a Prisoner. And as an
unanswerable evidence that it was not designed any Execution should pass upon
the said pretended Decree 1651. till it should be reconsidered, as to the rest
of the Persons therein-mentioned; when Govain was brought before the Parliament
1661, he was (as has been said) ordained to see and answer that Decree, not
as a standing Sentence against him, but only as a Libel: and the Parliament
upon consideration of that Decree as a Libel, proceeded to a Sentence against
him. As also when that Decree was produced, and made use of against Swinton,
he was allowed to see and answer it. All which clears beyond contradiction,
that the Restriction was looked upon to take off the effect of that pretended
Sentence in the year 1651. as to Swinton and all the rest, (except Hume,)
before it should be reconsidered by the King and Parliament. Neither does that
pretended Decree bear, that the Solemnities by sound of Trumpet, and tearing
of Arms, were used in presence of the Committee of Estates, as is usually done
in the case of all solemn Forfeitures: but only bears, an Order for performing
of those Solemnities, which never appears to have been actually done. And it is
frivolous and inept to pretend, that Swinton did not found upon that
Restriction in his Answers to the Parliament 1661. seeing the Decree 1651. was
not mentioned in the Indictment, nor was that Decree founded upon by the
King's Advocate, nor made use of by him against Swinton, for two Months after
Swinton's Answers were given in; as is clear by the Minute upon the Answers,
and Presmennan's Diary.

Whereas it is alleged, That by the Law and Custom of Nations, whosoever
accepts of a military Commission or Charge, he cannot at his pleasure dismiss
or exauctorate himself. And Swinton having accepted of a Charge in the Army
from the King and Committee of Estates, he could not disengage himself without
their leave.

IT IS ANSWERED, That it is a great Mistake that an Officer in an Army may not
quit his Charge and Commission when he pleases: and it appears, that what
Lawyer soever the Author of the Earl of Lauderdale's Answers may be, he is not
a Soldier. For every one knows, that knows any thing of military Affairs, that
a commissioned Officer may give up his Commission, and liberat himself
whenever he thinks fit to do so. Which being a thing of such ordinary, and
universal Practice; it is strange how any man should have the confidence to
controvert it.

And whereas he asks the question, What could (whilst his Family was on the
other side) have moved Swinton, to come to this side of the Water, where the
Enemy lay, and where he could not escape being taken; if he had not had a
Design to have joined with the Enemy?

IT IS ANSWERED, That the deceass'd Swinton gives a clear account hereof in his
Answers, before the Parliament 1661, viz. That after he had intimated to the
then Chancellor, at Stirling, the laying down of his Charge, desiring him to
acquaint the Committee of Estates with the same; and at the same time intimated
it to Colonel Gilbert Ker his immediate Superior Officer, Crafurdland was put
into his Place. And that before he came to this Part of the Country where his
Estate lay, and where his Business called him; he was upon the Place where
Colonel Ker's Regiment was, where he did actually see Crafurdland in his
Charge: and that his Occasions leading him to Berwick-shire, where the only
Estate he had lay; he was seized upon and made Prisoner by a Party of the
English, and carried to their General's Quarters: and having given an account
to him of his Occasions in these Parts, the General declared to him, although he
was his Prisoner, yet he should have liberty upon his Parole, to go to his
Lodging, and about his Affairs. And both the manner of his quiting his Charge,
(as thus related,) and that he was taken Prisoner, and thus brought in; he
positively offered him to prove before the Parliament: which was unquestionably
relevant to liberat him from the least Suspicion of having any Design to join
with the Enemy, and his Family was not on the other side, but this side of
Forth at that time, and under the Power of the Enemy.

And whereas it is alleged, That the Decree 1651, being ordained by the
Parliament to be given up to Swinton to see, the 15 of May 1661. and he
ordained to give in his Answers thereunto against that day eight days. And that
accordingly he having got up the Decree to see, he returned the same without
any Answers: which he would not have done if he had been innocent of the Crimes
libelled against him in the said Decree.

IT IS ANSWERED, That the deceass'd Swinton never got the Decree it self to
see, but only a Double, marked on the back by Alexander Reid the Advocate's
Servant: and which this Swinton has yet to show, and now produces. And albeit
he was ordained upon the 15 of May, to see and answer that Decree against that
day eight days: yet he never was thereafter called before the Parliament to
give in his Answer to it. And so it is false, that he gave back the Decree
without making any Answer: since he could not give back what he never received;
and could make no Answer to the Copy which he did receive, unless he had been
called to do so.

AND here it cannot but be taken notice of, that how cautious soever those who
framed the Draught of the Decree against Swinton, which is pretended to have
passed in the Parliament 1661. to omit out of it that Ordinance of Parliament,
whereby upon the 15 of May 1661. Swinton was ordained to see the Decree 1651.
and to give in his Answer to it against that day eight days (being the 24.)
the Earl of Lauderdale is not only forced in this place of his Answers, to
acknowledge there was such an Ordinance, but afterward, (tanta est vis
veritatis,) to acknowledge, when he comes to quible upon the forged Minute of
the 12 of July 1661, that Swinton did not compear that Day, and consequently
was never called before the Parliament, after the 15. of May. And it is left to
all judicious Perusers of what is now published on either hand, in relation to
this Mystery of Iniquity, (wherethrow the deceass'd Swinton and his Family have
been so great Sufferers, and for so long a time;) to consider, whether it be
presumable, that he being a Prisoner in the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, within Call
of the Place where the Parliament sat, and a Term having been assigned him, to
give in an Answer to that pretended Decree 1651. the Parliament, (for the
Honor and Justice of which, the Earl takes upon him now to be so much
concerned,) would, without calling Swinton to give his Answer, have proceeded
to a Sentence against him, albeit the matter had been but of a civil import; or
tho there had been no such Term assigned, would have proceeded to a Sentence
against him, in a Cause that was Capital, and in a Crime of Treason, without
calling him to the Bar, to hear the same pronounced. Which to suppose, were the
highest Reflection upon the Honor and Justice of a Parliament, that ever Man
was guilty of.

Whereas it is alleged, That the Decree 1651, bears that the Libel was found
relevant, and proven by the Depositions of diverse famous Witnesses, as was
clearly known to his Majesty and the Committee of Estates. And therefore the
Decree cannot be said to be without Probation, seeing the way and the manner
how the Libel was found proven, is condescended upon.

IT IS ANSWERED, That it seems the Author of the Earl of Lauderdale's Answers,
has not considered the Decree. For as to that part thereof that concerns
Swinton, the Libel is found relevant and proven: but the manner of Probation,
whether by Witnesses or otherwise, is not expressed neither as to him, nor any
other contained in the Decree, except John Hume; as to whom the Libel is found
proven by a missive Letter, and his own Confession. And albeit in the end of
the Decree, it bears that the Libel was sufficiently verified and proven, by
the Depositions of several famous Witnesses sworn, examined, etc. these are but
words of Style in Decreets of absence, and are not to be regarded. Seeing in
that part of the Decree, where the Committee of Estates had the Libel and
Probation, under their consideration; it bears only, that the Libel was
sufficiently proven: without condescending upon the manner of Probation,
whether by Writ or Witnesses. And as a convincing evidence, that there was
neither Writ nor Witnesses adduced for proving of the Crime libelled against
Swinton; (which if there had been, the same would have been expressed;) the
manner of Probation against John Hume, being by a Letter under his hand, and by
his own Confession, the same is particularly expressed in the Decree. And
certainly pari ratione, if there had been any Probation led against Swinton,
whether by Writ or Witnesses, the same would have been likewise expressed and
condescended upon.

Whereas it is alleged, That the Duke of Lauderdale did not raise a new
Indictment before the Parliament 1661 against Swinton, before he obtained the
Gift of Swinton's Forfeiture, since he obtained not the Gift till May 1661, and
the Indictment was given to Swinton in the Month of February before. And that
albeit the Duke had caused raise a new Indictment, after his obtaining of the
Gift, and had libelled the same Crimes against Swinton, and had designed him
John Swinton of Swinton; yet that was no passing from the former Decree 1651.
there being Crimes added that were committed after the year 1651. and it being
ordinary to design Persons by their former Titles, a wrong Designation could
not prejudge the King nor his Donatar. And that the King's Advocate did not
insist against Swinton upon the Crimes mentioned in the former Decree, to
forfeit him of new again, upon those Crimes; but did insist upon the Decree
1651, as probatio probatae, and that the said Decree might be ratified and
approven, as it was by the Decree 1661. and Swinton also of new forfeited, for
his being in Arms at Worcester against the King, which was the only new
additional Article insisted upon against him. And that although a forfeited Person
in the Construction of Law, be reputed civiliter mortuus, so that he has not
personam standi in judicio; yet that is only in odium of himself, but cannot
prejudge the King nor his Donatar, nor hinder a Party forfeited committing
Treason after the Forfeiture, to be forfeited of new: no more than a
Murtherer's being sentenced to die, as a Murderer, could hinder him, if
escaping out of Prison after Sentence, he should commit Treason; to be
forfeited, notwithstanding of the former Sentence standing against him for the
Murder.

IT IS ANSWERED, 1. That albeit the Duke of Lauderdale's Gift of the Forfeiture
was after Swinton had received his Indictment before the Parliament 1661. yet
it is notourly known, that the Duke designed to have the Gift before that time,
and accordingly thereafter procured it. And albeit the Gift was obtained after
the Indictment was given to Swinton; yet seeing it was before the pretended
Forfeiture 1661. it was ipso jure null: since by the Claim of Right, it is
declared, that the disposing of Forfeitures before Sentence, is contrary to
Law. 2. The raising of a new Libel against Swinton before the Parliament 1661,
being for the same pretended Crimes, for which it is alleged he was forfeited
by the Decree 1651. albeit there were other Crimes added in the Libel, yet
that was a clear passing from the Decree 1651, as what eo ipso was looked upon
as no Decreets it being absolutely inconsistent in Law, to forfeit a man twice
for one and the same Crime. And the designing the Defender John Swinton of
Swinton was an evident Demonstration, that he was neither considered nor looked
upon as a forfeited Person. For tho in ordinary Discourse, Men in such
Circumstances may be designed by their former Titles; yet it is ridiculous to
pretend, that was ever done in instrumentis publicis, or can be done in an
Indictment of Treason: in which the Conclusion being to forfeit Life and
Estate, the designing the Party by an Estate, must necessarly infer an
acknowledgment in the Drawer of the Indictment, he had that Estate to forfeit,
and consequently th^^ it was not forfeited before. And this is a thing so
vulgarly know^^ that if Swinton had been looked upon as a forfeited Person, the
King's Advocate could not have committed so gross a Mistake, as to have given
him the Designation OF SWINTON. And albeit ordinarily Errors in Designation do
not prejudge thr^^ Parties; yet in this Case, if there had been an Error, (what
in rei veritate there was not,) it behoved to prejudge the King and his
Donatar, being made use of to evince, that the Government did not look upon
Swinton then, as a forfeited Person. 3. The King's Advocate did not make use of
the aforesaid Decree 1651. as a Probation of the Indictment 1661. but libe^
the pretended Crimes, without respect to, or so much as making mention of the
Decree 1651. And when the said Decree was thereafter produced, Swinton was
allowed to see and answer i^ as a Libel, and so it could not be made use of as
a Probation. 4. As to that Pretense, that the Parliament did ratify and
approve the Decree 1651, and of new forfeited Swinton, for being in Arms
against the King at Worcester; it is what is absolutely inconsistent, and
repugnantia in adjecto, to ratify a former Forfeiture and of new to forfeit,
And in this Case, the former pretended Decree 1651 could not be ratified:
because by giving a new Indictment to Swinton for the same Crimes, it was
passed from. So that if there had been any Ratification of it, such a
Ratification could import no more but the ratifying of a Libel, which can never
have the effect of a Forfeiture. 5. A man that is forfeited, is not only
civiliter mortuus, not having personam standi in judicis, but also being
forfeited, he has no Estate, both his Person and Estate in the Construction of
Law being extinct: and therefore being forfeited once, he can neither quoad
vitam, nor quoad bo^^ be forfeited a second time. And the Instance of a
Murderer committing Treason, after his being condemned for the Murder; is
most impertinent, and absurd: there being a vast difference betwixt such a one,
and a Person that is forfeited. For a Man that is sentenced for a Murder, his
Escheat only falls, which carries the Right to his Movables: but his Lands and
heretable Estate still remain with himself, and go to his Heirs. And therefore
if a Person sentenced for Murder, should make his Escape, and thereafter
commit Treason; he may be forfeited, and his Forfeiture will carry the Right to
his Lands and heretable Estate. But it is not so in the case of a Person
forfeited, who what Crime soever he commit after, is incapable either as to
Life or Fortune of a higher Punishment.

Whereas it is alleged, That John Swinton, by his Answers given in to the
Parliament 166^. does acknowledge, that he was at Worcester, and that he went
thither at the desire of the Usurper, which sufficiently proves the Crime
against him.

IT IS ANSWERED, That Swinton's Answers are opponed, which bear expressly, that
he did deny that Article of the Indictment, as it was conceived. And tho he
acknowledges that he was at Worcester, yet he declares it was as true he went
thither through the earnest Entreaty and Importunity of him, that (though he
does ingenuously acknowledge he could not say, he used that as an Argument;)
could have commanded him along with him as his Prisoner, and whose Prisoner
he was upon the matter: and that he went in no other capacity than a Traveller.
And that if it should have been made appear, that ever he joined so much as in
any Troop, or carried any Charge, or that upon any occasion there, in the
Battle or otherwise, he did draw a Sword, or loose a Pistol; he admitted all,
or any one of these relevant of consent, to infer the Conclusion of the
Indictment. And as an evident Demonstration that Swinton was not at Worcester,
hostili animo, or out of any design to act against the King, or to the
prejudice of his Native Country; he declares in his Answers, he could say, in
the presence of the SEARCHER OF ALL HEARTS, that he thought, if the Parliament
should find the Indictment against him, upon that single Head of his being at
Worcester, ( as he does look upon that as the Principal, and all the rest but
as Accessories, even in the intention of the Libeller;) and the Sentence that
should pass, as to Life and Estate, were ready to receive its last
Consummation; he could receive and ly down under it, with a more cheerful
Heart, than he enjoyed any time he was at Worcester, to see and be Witness of
the Reproach of his Country, and the Distress his Country men were under.
Which Confession being so qualified, and particularly that he was there as a
Prisoner, it cannot be divided: and so did not prove that Article of the
Indictment, and could never infer any Crime against him, far less the Crime of
Treason.

And whereas it is alleged, That the English Act of Indemnity did extend no
further than to the King^s English Subjects, and not to Scotsmen. And as no Law
made by the Parliament of England, could hinder the Parliament of Scotland to
proceed against Traitors who were Scotsmen; so no Indemnity passed in the
English Parliament, could Indemnifie Scotsmens Crimes, or could hinder the
Parliament of Scotland to proceed against them, albeit they had been
particularly indemnified by the Parliament of England.

IT IS ANSWERED, That as by the Law of Nations, Crimes may be judged and
punished in the Place where they are committed; so Persons committing Crimes,
may be indemnified by the Supreme Authority where the Crimes are committed:
seeing a judicando and condemnando, ad condonandum and remittendum, vale^
consequentia. And therefore, as the deceass^d Swinton in his Answers urges
(with no less elegancy of Expression, than force of Reason,) this being a Crime
alleged to be COMMITTED in England, TRIABLE in England, PARDONABLE in England,
PARDONED in England, and that by him AGAINST WHOM the offense was committed;
that English Act of Indemnity, if he were guilty, behoved to free him. Which
being general, and so comprehensive, not only indemnifying all his Majesty's
Subjects in England, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging; but
also the Subjects of all OTHER his Majesties's Dominions; it must necessarly
comprehend Scotsmen, that had committed Crimes in England. And therefore they
could not be pursued for the same, before the Parliament, or any other
Judicatory in Scotland.

And whereas it is alleged, That a judicial Confession, emitted before a high
Court of Parliament makes full Faith, albeit not subscribed. And Swinton did
not only emit a Confession viva vo^e before the Parliament, but also in his
Answers, which are subscribed by him, he acknowledged his being at Worcester
with the King's Enemies.

IT IS ANSWERED, 1. That it is denied, that Swinton did emit any judicial
Confession of the Crimes libelled before the Parliament, and there is no
vestige of any such Confession extant upon Record. 2. It is a great mistake in
the Author of these Answers, to assert that a Confession, albeit judicially
emitted before the Parliament, should make Faith, without being signed, either
by the Party, or the President of Parliament: it being against the Principles
of Law, and incontroverted Custom of all Courts of Judicature whatsoever,
(whether supreme or subaltern) to admit judicial Confessions, without being
signed either by the Parties themselves, or by the Judge that presides. 3. As
to any pretended Confession in Swinton's Answers; the former Answer is opponed,
that it is qualified, and cannot be divided, but must be taken as it stands:
and which so taken, could never have inferred a Crime against him, much less
the Crime of Treason.

As to what is alleged against the Reason of Reduction, founded upon the
Nullitie and Falsehood of the Minutes; the MINUTES themselves, that REASON of
Reduction, and the Earl of CRAWFVRD'S LETTER, are opponed, which the Penner of
the Earl of Lauderdale's ANSWERS, finds such rugged, stubborn, and untoward
Pieces to deal withal; as all the pitiful Shifts and Evasions he tortures
himself with, to shape an Answer to them, serve but to demonstrate to the World
that they neither ARE, nor CAN be answered.

And whereas it is alleged, That albeit the Interlocutories had not been
signed by the Earl of Crawfurd, yet that is no Nullity, there being no special
Law nor Custom requiring the same at that ti^^ And the Minutes and
Interlocutories of the other Processes of ^^^feiture against Govain, Guthrie,
and others passed in that Parliame^^ are not signed by the Chancellor, nor
President.

IT IS ANSWERED, That the Alledgence is most ^^lumnious. For it was the
constant Custom of the Parliament 16^^ and has been in other Parliaments, both
preceding and sub^^quent, for the Chancellor or President, as they sign all
the W^^rants for the ACTS and STATUTES that pass in Parliame^^ so they are in
use to sign all Minutes, that are Warrants for D^^CREETS and SENTENCES; as is
evident from the RECORD^ and particularly, in the Minutes of those very
Sentences against ^^vain and Guthrie, in the Parliament 1661. mentioned in the
^^ledgence: and of those in the same Parliament, pronounced against (...)
Marquess, and late Earl of Argile, (then Lord Lord) Ardkinglass, and^ And it
were against Sense to think, that a Minute of a Clerk shou^^ take away a Man's
Life and Fortune, without being signed (...) the Chancellor, or President of
Parliament.

IN RESPECT OF ALL WHICH* Swinton's REASONS OF REDUCTIO^ (which are instantly
verified and instructed; (...) ought to be sustained: and the ACT given in
(...) him, reducing the aforesaid two pretended Decree^ of Forfeiture, ought to
pass, and he to be restor^^ against the same by WAY OF JUSTICE*


