ARTICLES AND RULES, FOR THE BETTER GOVERNMENT OF His Majesty's Forces in
SCOTLAND.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most
Sacred Majesty. 1678.

CHARLES R. Articles and Rules for the better Government of His Majesty's
Forces in SCOTLAND.
ARTICLE I. ALL Officers and Soldiers (not having just impediment) shall
diligently frequent Divine Service and Sermon, one Sun-dayes and other days
set apart for public Fasting and Humiliation, in such places as shall be
appointed for the Regiment wherein they serve. And for those, who either
wilfully or negligently absent themselves from Divine Service or Sermon, or
else being present, do behave themselves undecently or irreverently during the
same; if they be Officers, they shall be severely reprehended at a
Court Martial: But if Soldiers, they shall for every such first offense
forefeit each man 12. pence to be deducted out of his next pay, and for the
second offense, shall forefeit 12. pence, and be laid in Irons for 12. hours.
And for every like offense afterward, shall suffer and pay in like manner.

ART. II. DUring the time of Divine Service, Public Prayers, and Sermon, as
aforesaid; If any Sutler or Seller of Ale, Beer, Wine, or any sort of Drinks,
Bread, Victuals, or other Commodities or Merchandise whatsoever attending the
Army, shall put or set any such thing to sale, he shall forefeit the full value
thereof for the use of the poor.

ART. III. WHoever shall use any unlawful Oath or Execration, (whether Officer
or Soldier) shall incur the same penalty that is expressed in the first
Article.

ART. IV. IF any Officer or Soldier shall presume to blaspheme the Holy and
Individed Trinity, or the Persons of God the Father, God the Son, or God the
holy Ghost, or shall presume to speak against any known Article of the
Christian Faith, he shall have his Tongue bored through with a red hot Iron.

ART. V. IF any Officer or Soldier shall abuse or profane any place dedicated
to the Worship of God, or shall offer violence to any Minister or Chaplain of
the Army, or any other Minister of Gods Word, he shall suffer such punishment
as shall be inflicted on him by a Court Martial.

But whoever shall take any of the Utencils or Ornaments belonging or dedicated
to Gods Worship in any Church or Chapel, shall suffer Death for the fact.

ART. VI. AFter the service of God Almighty, all Officers and Soldiers shall
serve us faithfully, to the best of their Skill, Power and Understanding, and
to that purpose, every one of them of what quality or condition soever, shall
for himself take the following Oath, which shall be administered by such person
or persons, and in such places as Our Self, Our Major General, or the
Chief-Officer commanding Our Forces shall appoint.

Form of the Military Oath to be taken by every Officer and Soldier in the
Army, and Militia.
I A. B. Do swear to be true and faithful to my Sovereign Lord King CHARLES,
and His lawful Successors; And in my station to maintain the present Government
in Church and State, as it is now established by Law, and to oppose (to my
power) the damnable principle of taking up Arms against the King, or those
Commissionate by Him upon any pretext whatsoever; and to be obedient in all
things to His Majesty's Major General, or Commander in Chief authorized by His
Majesty for the time being; and will behave my self obediently to my superior
Officers, in all that they shall command me for His Majesty's Service: And I do
further swear, that I will be a true, faithful and obedient Soldier, every way
performing my best endeavors for His Majesty's Service, obeying all Orders,
and submitting to all such Rules and Articles of War, as are, or shall be
established by His Majesty. So help me God.

ART. VII. NO Officer or Soldier shall use any traitorous words against the
Sacred Person of the King's most Excellent Majesty upon pain of death.

ART. VIII. WHoever shall hold correspondence with any of our Enemies, or shall
give them advice or intelligence, either by Letters, Messages, Signs, or
Tokens, or any manner of way whatsoever, shall suffer death for it. And
whatever Regiment, Troup or Company shall treat with the Enemy, or enter into
any condition with them, without Our leave, or leave of Our General, or of the
chief Commander in his absence, the Officers of such Regiment, Troup or
Company, who are found guilty, shall die for it, and of the Soldiers who shall
consent thereunto, every tenth man by lot shall be hanged, and the rest shall
be punished at the discretion of Our General. But whatever Officers or
Soldiers can prove that they did their utmost to resist and avoid such a
Treaty, and were no way partaker of the Crime, they shall not only go free, but
also be rewarded for their Constancy and Fidelity.

ART. IX. WHoever shall go about to entice or persuade either Officer or
Soldier, to join or engage in any traitorous or rebellious Acts, either
against Our Royal Person, or Kingly Government, shall suffer Death for it; and
whoever shall not reveal to his Superior Officer such a Conspiracy or intended
Rebellion, so soon as ever it shall come to his knowledge, shall be judged
equally guilty with the Contrivers of such a Plot or Conspiracy, and
consequently shall suffer the same penalty.

ART. X. IF any Officer or Soldier shall behave himself disgracefully toward
Our General, Lieutenant General,, or other Chief Commander of the Army, or
speak words tending to his hurt or dishonor, he shall die for it.

ART. XI. HE who in presence of Our General, Lieutenant General, or other
Commander in Chief, shall draw his sword with a purpose to do any Officer, or
any of his fellow soldiers a mischief, shall die for it.

ART. XII. SUch respect and obedience as is due to Our General or Great-Officer
from those under his Command, is likewise due unto all Superior-Officers from
their Inferiors, under the like penalty.

ART. XIII. WHosoever shall presume to violate any Safeguard, Conduct, or
Protection, given by Us, Our General, Lieutenant General, or other Commander in
Chief of Our Forces (knowing the same) shall suffer death.

ART. XIV. IF any number of Soldiers shall presume to assemble to take counsel
amongst themselves for the demanding their pay, any Inferior-Officer accessory
thereunto shall suffer death for it, as the Heads and Ringleaders of such
mutinous and Seditious meetings; and if any Captain being privy thereunto,
shall not suppress the same, or complain of it, he shall likewise be punished
with death.

ART. XV. NO Officer or Soldier shall utter any words tending to sedition,
mutiny, or uproar, upon pain of death, or suffering such punishment as shall be
inflicted upon him by a Court Martial. And whoever shall hear any mutinous or
seditious words spoken, and shall not with all possible diligence reveal the
same to his Superior Officers or Commanders, shall be punished, as a
Court Martial shall think fit.

ART. XVI. IF any Inferior Officer or Soldier, shall refuse to obey his
Superior Officer, or quarrel with him, he shall be cashiered: But if any shall
presume, to resist any Officer in the execution of his office, or shall strike,
or lift up his hand to strike; Or shall draw, or offer to draw, or lift up any
weapon against his Superior Officer, upon any pretense whatsoever, he shall
suffer death.

ART. XVII. EVery Soldier, shall keep silence when the Army is marching,
embattelling or taking up their Quarters, (to the end, that their Officers may
be heard, and their Orders executed) upon pain of imprisonment, at the
discretion of the Officers.

ART. XVIII. HE, who shall in anger draw his Sword, whilst his Colors are
flying, either in Battle, or upon the March, unless it be against the Enemy,
shall run the Goad-loup.

ART. XIX. WHen any March is to be made, every man who is sworn to his Colors,
shall follow them; And whoever shall (without leave) stay behind, or depart
above a mile from the Camp; or out of the Army without license, shall march in
Irons, for such time as shall be found fit.

ART. XX. WHen the Army, or any part of them, shall march through, or lodge in
the Country; None of them shall extort free quarter, or money from them, or
shall commit any waste or spoil: Or cut down Fruit Trees, or planting, deface
walks of Trees, Parks, Warrens, Fish Ponds, Houses or Gardens, trade down, or
otherwise destroy standing Corn in the ear. Neither shall they put their horses
into meadows without leave from their Chief-Officer, upon pain of severe
punishment: But if any Officer or Soldier shall wilfully burn any House, Barn,
Stack of Corn, Hay, or Straw, or any Ship, Boat, or Carriage, or any thing
which may serve for the provision of the Army, without leave from the Commander
in Chief, shall suffer death for it.

ART. XXI. WHen the Army or any part thereof, shall come to engage the Enemy in
fight, whosoever shall run from his Colors (be he Native or Stranger) or does
not defend them to the utmost of his power so long as they are in any danger,
shall suffer death for it: And whatsoever person shall at any other time run
away from his Colors, shall suffer death.

ART. XXII. IF any Regiment, or Commanded party shall not behave themselves in
fight against an enemy, as they ought to do, they shall either die or be put
out of the Quarters, until by a notable Act they redeem their honor.

ART. XXIII. WHen it shall please GOD, that Our Forces shall beat the Enemy,
every man shall follow their Officer in the chase; But whoever shall presume to
pillage or plunder, till the Enemy be entirely beaten, and any misfortune
happen, he shall suffer death, or such other punishment as shall be pronounced
against him by Our General Court Martial, and the Pillage so gotten, shall be
forfeited to the use of the Sick and maimed Soldiers.

ART. XXIV. When any Town or Place shall be taken (though by assault) no man
shall presume to Pillage any Church or Hospital (without leave or necessary
reason) much less to set fire to any Church, Hospital, School, or Miln^:
Neither shall they offer violence to any Churchmen, Aged-men or Women, Maids
or Children, unless they be found actually in arms against them, upon pain of
Death: And whoever shall force a woman to abuse her (whether belonging to the
Enemy or not) and the fact be sufficiently proven against him, he shall
certainly suffer death for it.

ART. XXV. IN what place soever it shall please GOD, that the Enemy shall be
subdued and overcome, all the Ordinance, Ammunition and Victuals, that shall be
there found, shall be secured for our use; and for the better relief of the
Army, and one tenth part of all the spoil shall be laid apart toward the
relief of the sick and maimed Soldiers.

ART. XXVI. Whoever shall take any General, Officers as Prisoners, shall present
them to Us, or Our General, or the Officer in Chief, commanding our Forces, who
will reward them: And they who shall take other Prisoners, may keep to
themselves, the Officers and Volunteers, giving their Names to the
Martial-General; But shall not put them to Ransom, without Our, or Our General
Officers leave. And they are immediately to send all private Soldiers so taken,
to the Martial-General, who is to take them into custody.

ART. XXVII. IF any Soldier shall be drunk in the Enemies Quarters, before they
have wholly laid down their Arms and yielded to mercy, and any hurt or mischief
ensue thereon; he shall be punished according to the prejudice, if it be
general, or with Irons, Bread and Water, if no hurt ensue it.

ART. XXVIII. ALl Officers whose charge it is, shall see the Quarters kept clean
and neat, upon pain of severe punishment.

ART. XXIX. NO Officer shall ly out all night from the Camp or Quarters, without
his Superior-Officers leave obtained for the same; upon pain of being punished
for it, as a Court Martial shall think fit. Neither shall any Soldier or
Officer, go any by way to the Camp, other than the common way laid out for all,
upon pain of being punished as aforesaid.

But if any Officer, shall without leave, be absent from his Quarters a week, he
shall lose one months pay; and if longer, he shall be discharged of his Command
or Place as a man unfit to bear office in the Army.

ART. XXX. NO Soldier shall presume to make any alarm in the Quarters, by
shooting of his musket in the night, after the Watch is set; unless it be at
an Enemy, upon pain of death.

ART. XXXI. NO Soldier shall in anger draw his sword in any Camp, Post, or
Garrison, upon pain of death.

ART. XXXII. When warning is given for setting the Watch, by beat of Drum, or
sound of Trumpet or Fife, if any Soldier shall absent himself without
reasonable cause, he shall be punished by riding a Wooden-horse, or otherwise,
at the discretion of the Commander.

And whatever soldier shall fail at the beating of a Drum or the sound of
Trumpet ot Fife, or upon any alarm given to repair to his Colors, with his
Arms decently kept and well fixed (unless there be an evident necessity to
hinder him from the same) he shall either be clapped in Irons for it, or suffer
such other punishment, as a Court Martial shall think fit.

ART. XXXIII. Who ever makes known the Watchword without order, or gives any
other word but what is given by the Officer, shall suffer death.

ART. XXXIV. A Sentinel who is found sleeping in any Post, Garrison, Trench, or
the like (while he should be upon his duty) shall suffer death, or such other
punishment as Our General Court Martial shall by their sentence, inflict for the
same.

And if a Sentinel or Pardue shall forsake his place, before he be relieved or
drawn off; or upon discovery of an Enemy shall not give warning to his Quarters
according to direction, he shall suffer death or such other punishment as Our
General Court Martial shall think fit.

As Likewise, if any Soldier employed as a Scout, shall not go upon that
Service so far as he is commanded; or having discovered an ambush or approach
of the Enemy shall not return forthwith to give notice or warning to his
Quarters, or if he enter into any house, and there or else where be found
sleeping or drunk, whilst he should have been upon duty, he shall suffer death.

ART XXXV. Whoever shall do violence to any who shall bring victuals to the Camp
or Garrison, or shall take his Horse or Goods, shall suffer death, or such other
punishment as he shall be sentenced to by Our General Court Martial.

If any any presume to beat or abuse his Host, or the wife, child or servant of
his Host, where he is quartered or billetted, he shall be put in Irons for it:
And if he do it a second time, he shall be further punished, and the Party
wronged I shall have amends made him. And if any presume to exact (...) quarter
without leave from the Chief Officer upon the place, they shall be severely
punished at the discretion of a Court Martial.

ART. XXXVI. NO Soldier or Officer shall use any reproachful or provocking
Speech or Act to another, upon pain of imprisonment, and such other punishment,
as a Court Martial shall think fit.

Neither shall any Officer or Soldier, presume to send a Challenge to any other
Officer or Soldier to fight a Duel; Neither shall any Soldier or Officer
presume to upbraid another for refusing a Challenge: For whoever shall offend in
either of these cases, if he be an Officer, he shall lose his Place and Command,
whatever it be; and if a private Soldier, he shall ride the Wooden-horse, and
be further punished as a Court Martial shall think fit. And if any Corporal or
other Officer commanding a Guard shall willingly or knowingly suffer either
Soldiers or Officers to go forth to a Duel or private fight, he shall be
punished for it, by the sentence of a Court Martial.

Forasmuch, as all Officers of what condition soever, shall have power to part
and quell all Quarrels, Frays and sudden Disorders between Soldiers and
Officers, though of another Company, Troop or Regiment, and to committ the
disordered persons to prison, until their proper Officers be acquainted
therewith: And whoever shall resist such an Officer (though of another Company,
Troop, or Regiment) or draw his sword upon him, shall be severely punished, as
Our General Court Martial shall appoint. But if two or more, going into the
field to fight a Duel, shall draw their swords, or other weapons, though neither
of them fall upon the spot, nor die afterward of any wound there received; yet
if they be Officers, they shall lose their Places, and if common soldiers, they
shall be punished with riding the Wooden-horse, or otherwise as a Court Martial
shall direct. And Lastly, in all cases of Duels, the Seconds shall be taken as
Principals, and punished accordingly.

ART. XXXVII. NOne shall be Mustered but such as are completely Armed, Viz.
Each Horseman to have for his defensive Arms, Back, Breast and Foot, and for
his offensive Arms, a Sword not under three foot long in the Blade, and a case
of Pistols, the Barrels whereof not to be under fourteen Inches in length; and
each Trooper of Our Guard to have a Carbine besides the foresaid Arms: And the
Foot to have each Soldier a Sword or Dagger for their Muskets, and each
Pikeman a Pike of sixteen Foot long and not under, and each Musket-teer a
Musket (with a Collar of Bandaleers) the Barrel of which Musket to be about
four-foot long and to contain a Bullet, fourteen of which shall make a pound,
running into the Barrel.

If any borrow Arms of another to pass the Muster withal, the Lender, if he
be a Soldier, shall forfeit the value of the Arms so lent, to be taken out of
his Pay, and the Borrower shall be severely punished.

ART. XXXVIII. NOne shall be allowed upon any Muster, who by loss of Limbs, or
otherwise is unable for Our Service, but by Order from Us or Our General.

ART. XXXIX. NO Housekeeper or Inhabitant in the usual Quarters of Our Guard
of Horse or Foot, or in the usual Quarters of any other Regiment or Garrison,
shall be received or entertained into Our Service and Pay, and Mustered as a
private Soldier without Order from Us, or Our General; Nor shall any Officer
demand or receive directly or indirectly any sum of money whatsoever, from any
under his command, for admitting and entertaining him into his Troop, Company
or Garrison, upon pain of being Cashiered or rendered incapable of ever being
employed again in the Army.

ART. XL. NO Captain of a Troop or Company shall upon pain of being rendered
incapable of ever serving in Our Army any more, be allowed to Muster any
Servants in his Troop or Company, but those who are not only fit and able for
Our Service, but also are bound by Oath and Pay to follow the Troop or Company,
and who duly and constantly appear at every Muster in proper Arms, unless
they have leave to be absent, which is not to be granted but upon a real and
good occasion. And whatever other person shall present himself or his Horse in
the Muster, to mislead the Muster-Master or defraud Us, shall suffer such
punishment as Our General Court Martial think fit.

ART. XLI. NO man shall presume to present himself to the Muster Master to be
enrolled in the Muster-rols by a counterfeit or wrong name or surname, or Place
of Birth or Habitation, upon pain of running the Goad^loup, if it be a Footman;
or forfeiting the Horse and Arms he has if he be a Horseman.

ART. XLII. ALL forlofs for some time shall be given by the Captain of each
Troop, or Colonel of a Foot-Regiment, and if it shall be found, that under
such Licenses there is any collusion, the person guilty thereof shall not get
what remains due of his Pay, nor thereafter be admitted into that Troop or
Regiment.

ART. XLIII. NO Muster-Master shall knowingly let any pass the Muster, but such
as are qualified according to the precedent Articles, upon penalty of losing
his place.

ART. XLIV. Whatever Lieutenant, Cornet or Ensign shall discover and make
proof to the General-Officer or Colonel, that his Captain has made false
Musters, the said Captain shall be Cashiered, and the Lieutenant or Ensign
discovering as aforesaid shall have the place of his Captain; and whatever
Sergeant or Corporal shall discover and make proof of false Musters as
aforesaid, shall have for each time the sum of five hundred merks Scots money,
payable by the Play Master at the first Muster immediately following the
discovery so made; but if his accusation shall upon examination be found false
and malicious, in that case he shall be immediately Cashiered, and suffer such
further punishment as shall be judged fit by Our General Court Martial.

ART. XLV. IF any Soldier shall be sick, wounded or maimed it Our Service, he
shall be sent out of our Camp to some fit place for his recovery, where he
shall be provided for by the Officer appointed to take care of sick and wounded
soldiers, and his wages or pay shall go on and be duly paid, until it does
appear that he can be no longer serviceable in Our Army, and then he shall be
sent by Pass to his Country, with money to bear his Charges in his Travel.

ART. XLVI. ALL Captains shall use their utmost endeavors to have their Troops
and Companies complete and full, and within two days after every
General-Muster, both the Captain and Our Muster-master shall send to the
General: (if he requires it) and to the Treasurer or Play Master of the Army a
perfect List and Roll of all the Officers, Troopers and Soldiers of their
Troops and Companies, that are in actual Service, punctually expressing at the
foot of the Rolls what new Officers, Troopers and Soldiers have been
entertained since the preceding Muster, in lieu of such as have been Cashiered
or are deceased, with the day when the one died or went off, and the other was
entertained in his place.

ART. XLVII. ALL Commissions granted by Us or Our General, to any Officer in
Pay, shall be brought to the Muster-master, who is to receive and enter the same
in a Book fairly written, and no Commission Officers shall be allowed in
Musters without a Commission from Us or Our General: and the same entered with
the Commissaries General of the Musters or their Deputies, who are hereby
required forthwith, and from time to time to send the Officers names to the
Secretary, and Judge-Advocate of Our Forces, or Register of Our Court Martial.

ART. XLVIII. NO Commission-Officer after Enrolment, and being Mustered, shall
be dismissed or cashiered without Order from Us or Our General. But for
None-commission-officers or private Soldiers, their Captains, with the
approbation of their Colonels, or of the Governor of the Garrison where they
are, may discharge them when they find cause, taking other
Non-commission-Officers or Soldiers in their Places: Provided that such
Colonel or Governor, shall forthwith certify the Commissaries General of the
Musters, that (by their approbation) such Non-commission Officers or Soldiers
were discharged, and others taken into their Places Respectively. And in
Quarters and Garrisons, where they are only single Troops or Companies, the
Captains certificats are forth with to be sent and accepted by the Commissaries
General, expressing the day of each Non-commission-Officers or Soldiers
Discharge or Death, and who was entertained in his Place.

ART. XLIX. WE do expressly forbid any Soldiers Duty either of Horse or Foot,
to be done by any other then the Soldier himself, but in case of sickness and
disability or other necessary cause, his Captain may dispense with his absence,
without causing him to find another to serve in his stead.

ART. L. THe Muster-Master shall always (the night before) give notice to the
Officer in Chief, commanding any Regiment, Troop, Company or Garrison, of the
time and place for their Musters, that so the Officers and Soldiers may have
time to make ready for their Muster. Upon every Muster, three Muster Rols are
to be prepared of the Respective Troops and Companies, in which Rols the names
of all private Soldiers are to be written Alphabetically, one of which Rols is
to be in Parchment for the Play Master, and to be subscribed (together with
another Roll which the Muster-Master is to keep) by two Commission-Officers (at
the least) of the Respective Troops and Companies, and the Muster-Master; The
third Muster Roll is to be subscribed only by the Muster-Master, which the
Officer is to keep, and no Rolls are to be allowed by the Muster-Master and
Play Master, otherwise then as We have herein directed: and the said Muster-Rols
are to be perfected forthwith upon every Muster.

ART. LI. IF any Trooper or Dragooner, shall loss or spoil his Horse, or any
Foot Soldier his Arms, or any part thereof by negligence or gaming, he shall
remain in the quality of a Pioneer or Scavenger, till he be furnished with as
good as were lost at his own charge; and if he be not otherwise able, the one
half of his pay shall be deducted and set apart for the providing of it, till he
be re-furnished.

Neither shall any Soldier pawn or sell, or negligently or wilfully break his
Arms, or any part thereof, or any Hatchets, Spades, Shovels, Pick-axes, or
other necessaries of war, upon pain of severe punishment, at the discretion of
our General Court Martial.

And where Arms or other necessaries aforesaid shall be pawned, they are to be
forfeited and seized on for our use.

ART. LII. ALL Officers and Soldiers, and also the Muster-Masters, not duly
observing these Orders and Instructions, and every of them respectively shall be
cashiered, or liable to such other punishments as our Self, our General or
Court Martial shall appoint.

ART. LIII. NOne shall presume to spoil, sell, or convey away any Ammunition
delivered unto him, upon pain of suffering death, or such other punishment as
our General-Court-Martial shall think fit.

ART. LIVE. NO Officer, Provider or Keeper of our Victuals or Ammunition for our
Forces, shall imbezil or willingly spoil, or give a false account of any part
thereof; to whom he is to make his account upon pain of suffering such
punishment as our General Court Martial shall think fit.

ART. LV. NO Commissary or Victualler shall bring or furnish unto the Camp any
unsound or unsavory Victuals of what kind soever, whereby sickness may grow in
the Army, or the service be hindered; and if upon Examination before our
General Court Martial, he shall be found guilty, he shall suffer such punishment
as they shall think fit.

ART. LVI. NO Officer or Soldier shall be a Victualler in the Army, without
consent and allowance of our General, or of the Officer in chief of the
Regiment, upon pain of being punished at discretion.

ART. LVII. NO Victualler or Seller of Beer, Ale or Wine, belonging to the
Army, shall entertain any soldier in his House, Booth, Tent or Hut, after the
Warning piece, Tattoe, or Beat of Drum at night, or before the beating of
Revalles in the morning; nor shall any soldier (within that time) be any where,
but upon his duty, or in his quarters, upon pain of punishment, both to the
Soldier and Entertainer, at the discretion of a Court Martial.

ART. LVIII. THe Commission-Officers of every Regiment may hold a Court Martial
for that Regiment, upon every necessary occasion. There shall also be a
Provost-Martial of every Regiment, like as there shall be a Martial in the Troop
of Guard, who shall have the same privilege in his own Regiment or Troop, as
the Provost-Martial-General has in the Army or Camp, and such fees also as the
Court Martial shall allow.

ART. LIX. THose who are Judges in our General Court-Martials, or in Regimental
Court-Martials, shall hold the same rank in those Courts as they do in the Army
for orders ^^ke, and they shall take an Oath for the due administration of
Justice, or (where these Articles assign no absolute punishment) according to
their consciences, the best of their understandings, and the custom of War in
like cases; and shall demean themselves orderly in the hearing of causes (as
becomes the gravity of such a Court) and before giving of sentence, every Judge
shall deliver his vote or opinion distinctly; and the sentence is to be
according to the plurality of votes, and if there happen to be an equality of
votes, the President is to have a casting vote.

And when the sentence is to be given, the President shall pronounce it; and
after that the sentence is pronounced the Provost-Martial shall have warrant to
cause execution to be done according to the sentence.

ART. LX. AT our General-Court-Martial there shall be a Clerk, who is to be
sworn to make true and faithful Records of all the proceedings of that Court;
and there shall be also such other Officers appointed both for that, and also
for the Regimental Court Martials, as shall be necessary: And our General
Court Martial may appoint and limit the Fees of our Provost-Martial General, as
they shall think fit.

ART. LXI. ALL controversies, either between Soldiers and their Captains or
other Officers, or between Soldier and Soldier, relating to their Military
capacities, shall be summarily heard and determined at the next Court Martial
of the Regiment.

ART. LXII. IN any matter which shall be adjudged in any of the aforesaid
Regimental Court-Martials, either of the Parties that finds himself aggrieved,
may appeal to our General-Court-Martial, who are to take care, that if the
party appealing make not good his suggestion, recompense be made to the other
for the trouble and charge of such an Appeal.

ART. LXIII. IN all Criminal Causes which concern our Crown, our
Advocate-General or Judge-Advocate of our Army, shall inform the Court, and
prosecute on our behalf.

ART. LXIV. NO Officer or Soldier shall presume to hinder the Provost-Martial,
his Lieutenant or Servants, in the execution of that Office, upon pain of
death, or such other punishment as our Court Martial shall think fit. But on the
contrary, all Captains, Officers and Soldiers, shall do their utmost to
apprehend and bring to punishment all offenders, and shall assist the Officers
of our Army or Regiment for that purpose, especially the said Provost Martial
his Lieutenant and Servants. And if the Provost-Martial or his Officers require
the assistance of any Officer or Soldier, in apprehending any person,
declaring to them that it is for a capital Crime, and the party escape for want
of aid and assistance, the party or paies refusing to aid or assist, shall
suffer such punishment as our Court Martial shall inflict.

ART. LXV. THat Officer or Soldier who shall presume to draw his Sword in any
Place of Judicature, while the Court is sitting, shall be put to death. And, We
hereby authorize our Provost Martial, General of our Army by his own authority
to apprehend such offenders. And if any Soldier being committed for any
offense, shall break prison, the said Provost Martial General shall by his own
authority apprehend him; and the offender shall suffer death, or such other
punishment, as our General Court Martial shall think fit

ART. LXVI. IF any fray shall happen within the Camp or Place of Garrison, in
any of the soldiers Lodgings, or where they meet, it shall be enquired into by
the Officers of the Regiment, and the beginners and pursuers thereof punished
according to the quality of the offense.

ART. LXVII. IF any Inferior Officer, either of Horse or Foot be wronged by his
Officer, he may complain to his Colonel, or other Superior Officer of the
Regiment, who is to redress the same upon due proof made of the wrong done; but
if he fail therein, the Party aggrieved is to apply to the General-Officer for
redress; And if the accusation be false, the Complainant is to be punished,
according as his Officer deserved, if he had been found guilty.

ART. LXVIII. IF any Colonel or Captain, shall force or take any thing away
from any private Soldier; that Colonel or Captain shall be punished according
to the quality of the Offense, by the judgment of Our General Court Martial:
But if a Soldier shall be wronged, and shall not appeal to the Court, or his
Superior Commanders, but take his own satisfaction for it, he shall be punished
by the judgment of a Court Martial.

ART. LXIX. IF any Soldier die, no other shall take or spoil his goods, upon
pain of restoring double the value to him to whom they belong, and of such
further punishments as Our Court Martial shall think fit. But the Captain of the
Company of which such a Soldier was shall take the said Goods into his custody,
and dispose of them for paying his Quarters, and to keep the overplus (if any
be) for the use of those to whom they belong, and who shall claim the same
within three months after his death. And if any Captain or Officer die, the
Chief Commander shall take care of preserving his Estate in like manner.

ART. LXX. NO Provost Martial shall refuse to receive or keep a Prisoner sent to
his charge by authority, or shall dismiss him without order, upon pain of such
punishment as a Court Martial shall think fit. And if the offense for which the
Prisoner was apprehended deserved death, the Provost-Martial failing to receive
and keep him as aforesaid, shall be liable to the same punishment.

ART. LXXI. IF any person be committed by the Provost-Martials own Authority,
without other command, he shall acquaint the General or other chief Commader
with the cause thereof within twenty four hours; and the Provost-Martial shall
thereupon dismiss him, unless he have order to the contrary.

ART. LXXII. NO man shall presume to use any braving or menacing words, signs,
or gestures, where any of the foresaid Courts of Justice are fitting, upon pain
of suffering such punishment as the Court Martial shall think fit.

ART. LXXIII. When ever any sentence of Death is given out in the under
Court Martial, it shall be read by the Register of the Court in the presence of
the condemned, and signed by the President; thereafter it shall be given to the
General or chief officer, who may notwithstanding suspend the same until he
shall acquaint Us, or see it put in Execution when he shall think fit.

ART. LXXIV. IN the General Court Martial shall always preside one of the Great
Officers of the Army; Like as, in the Regiments of Foot, the Colonel or
Lieutenant Colonel: And when it shall happen to fall out amongst the Horse, the
Captain of Our Guard shall Preside, or a General officer, who for want of number
to make up twelve with the President, may call Officers of Foot, who all shall
take the Oath aforesaid; and then proceed to their judgment, until sentence
shall be pronounced against the Delinquent, or in the matter contraverted.

ART. LXXV. Whatever is to be published, or generally made known, shall be done
by beat of Drum or sound of Trumpet, that so no man may pretend ignorance
thereof. And after that, whoever shall be found disobedient or faulty against
what is thus published, shall be punished conform to the pains contained in the
Proclamation, IT is Our Royal Pleasure, That the foregoing Articles and Rules
(in number, 75.) for the better Government of Our Forces in Our ancient Kingdom
of SCOTLAND, be forthwith Printed and Published. For doing whereof this shall be
to all Persons that may be therein concerned a sufficient warrant. Given at Our
Court at White Hall the 26th. day of Feb. 1674/5 and of Our Reign, the 27th.
Year.

By His Majesty's Command, LAVDERDALE.



FINIS.

