blazon of the City of London
Advertisement.
PRoposalls Made and approved by the City of London, for a Yearly Increase of
Wealth, by Subscriptions, to Advance Money at Interest for Lives, of whatsoever
Age or Sexunder Ten Several Ranks or Classes, which Subscriptions will Produce
great Advantage to the SURVIVOURS,as is particularly instanced in the Schemes
and Paragraphsfollowing, ( VIZ.)

The particular Sums to be Subscribed. The Number of Persons requisite for
each Rank. Total Sum to be Subscribed by each Rank. The Yearly Interest
thereof. 1 5 2000 10000 600 2 10 1000 10000 600 3 20 500 10000 600 4 25 400
10000 600 5 50 200 10000 600 6 100 100 10000 600 7 200 50 10000 600 8 400 25
10000 600 9 500 20 10000 600 10 1000 10 10000 600

The Subscribers Names, Qualities, Sexes, and Places of Habitations. First Rank
2. between 3. between 4. between 5. between 6. between 7. between 8. between 9.
between 10. between A. B. of Cheapside, London, Goldsmith, for his Son John. 5
The same for C. D. of Cornhil, Gent. 5 E. F. of Paternoster-Row, Mercer, for
himself. 5

By which Schemes it appears, There is 10000 l. to be Subscribed on each Rank
or Class of Sums and Persons, the Interest of which comes to 600 l. per Annum.
but no Subscriber shall be held Obliged to pay his Money until the said Sum of
10000 l. be fully underwritten, (that is to say) If he have Subscribed 5. l.
until 1999 other Persons of the same Rank or Class (as to Age) have each of
them Subscribed 5 l. to make up the same 10000 l. Or if he have Subscribed 50
l. until 199 other Persons of the same Rank or Class (as to Age) have each of
them Subscribed 50 l.

EVery person for whom a Subscription shall be made, shall, from the time his
Money is paid, receive Interest after the rate of Six Pounds per Cent. per
Annum; and as any of those that are in the same Rank, dye, the Survivours of
that Rank, shall receive the Interest Money that should have been paid to the
deceased equaly divided amongst them (that is to say) If one of the ten
Subscribers for 1000 l. each man, do dye, the other Nine that shall survive,
shall receive besides the Interest for their own 1000 l. (each) Subscribed
(which is 60 l. per Annum) their equal share of that 60 l. which would have
accrued to the Deceased and so of the rest.

Every Subscriber, when he comes to Subscribe, shall declare the Age or Ages of
the Persons for whom he does Subscribe (Viz.) Whether they be under the Age of
7. or above 7. and under the Age of 14. Or above 14. and under the Age of 21.
Or above 21. and so of the rest of the said Ranks. And if any Person
underwriting, either for himself or any other shall Declare, and Subscribe the
Person for whom such Subscriptions shall be made, to be of any other Age then
by the Rules or Instances aforementioned, are allowable to pass in such Rank or
Classas he shall under-write for, such Subscriptions and the Moneys thereupon
paid shall be forfeited, and go to the rest of that Rank.

If any Person shall under-write, the first five Sums above mentioned, which
amounts to but 110 l. and enter himself, or those for whom he under-writes,
according to their respective Ages, in five several Ranks or Classes, he has
thereby a possibility of receiving five times 600 l. which is 3000 l. per
Annum, during his Life, if he survive the rest. And so if any shall
under-write, (in like manner) all the ten Sums first above mentioned, which
amounts to 2310, l. he has like possibility of receiving ten times 600 l. per
Annum. during his Life if he Survive the rest.

Every person when he comes to demand any Interest-money, must bring
Certificate from the Trustees of the respective Rank or Class in which the
Subscription was made, that the Person upon whose Life the money is demanded
was alive at the time when the Interest by him demanded became due; But if no
Demand be made of any Persons Interest by the space of three years
successively, such persons shall be held as dead, and his Interest for the said
three years, and until he shall afterward appear to ma^e demand, shall be
lost to him, and divided among the rest of the Subscribers; which said Trustees
shall for the first year be nominated and chosen, by the Major part of the
Subscribers in each Rank respectively, as soon as the said Rank or Class shall
be filled up, and afterward annually.

If any Person desires to transfer his Interest, it will ^ell every year for
more Money then it would have done the year before, for, the more Persons dye
the greater will ^he Income be to the Survivours, And any man may transferr his
Interest to whom he pleases.

This Fund for the security of the payment of the sa^d Interest shall be settled
to the satissaction of the Subscribers as shall be advised by Council learned
in the Law.

There are already Printed several Sheets, Entitled, A Collection of Letters
for Improvement of Husbandry and Trade. And more are designed monthly. They are
for the use of every body, and it is hoped they will be the means of Improving his
Majesty's Countries h^^her than ever any other yet attained to.


