An Address Presented to the Reverend and Learned Ministers of the Church of
England, by one sincerely desireous of finding out the Truth, in behalf of
himself and others equally concerned, as well for their own as the general
Satisfaction.
THERE can be no doubt, but that the main Concern of Man in this Vale of Tears,
is the Salvation of his Soul. If this be lost, he loses all: if this be gained,
he gains all; and both for an Eternity. No body then can blame me, if being
solicitous to save my Soul, I have recourse to those, whose Learning must needs
enable them, and whose Charity cannot but incline them to instruct me in this
weighty Affair. I therefore humbly beseech you most Reverend and Learned
Doctors of the Church of England to afford me a clear and satifactory Solution
of these following Doubts.

First, I desire to know, whether all things necessary to Salvation are
contained in Scripture? If not, where must I seek them? If they be, then they
are either clearly contained in it, so that there is no need of an Interpreter,
for the meaning of the words; or not. If there be no need of any such
Interpreter, then I humbly ask what these necessaries to Salvation are, and in
what Chapter and Verse of Scripture each of them may be found. For Example, Is
the Belief of a Trinity, One God and Three Persons, necessary to Salvation? If
it be; as the Creed of St. Athanasius assures us it is, in what Chapter and
Verse of Scripture is it clearly expressed? If you send me to the 1 Epist. of
St. John, Chap. 5. Verse. 7. where we read, There are Three who give Testimony
in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and Holy Ghost, and these Three are One; or to
the Gospel of St. John, Chap. 10. Ver 30. I and my Father are One; I desire you
to show clearly out of Scripture, that the Word One here signifies a strict
Identity or Union of Substance, as the Church of England holds, not a mere
moral Union, as many Learned Arians and others will have it, and as we all
confess the same word signifies in St. John, Chap 17. Ver. 2. where our Lord
prays that all Believers may be One, as he and his Father are One; where
certainly he cannot be supposed to mean One in Substance. In what Verse then
and Chapter in Scripture have we these or the like Words, The Word One in the 1
Epist. of St. John, Item in St. John's Gospel, signifies a strict Identity;
which notwithstanding I conceive ought to be, if all Necessaries to Salvation
be clearly contained in Scripture. Now if the Belief of a Trinity be not
necessary to Salvation, I desire it may be clearly owned in these or the like
words: It Is not necessary for Salvation to believe Three Persons and One God,
notwithstanding the Creed of St. Athanasius, and Definition of the First
Council of Nice, when the Church was in her Purity not the least corrupted.

Again, Is the Belief of the Incarnation necessary for Salvation? Where is it
clearly expressed in Scripture? You refer me to St. John, Chap. 1, The Word is
made Flesh. But you know that many Learned Men, Nestorius and others, denied
that Word to signify a strict Incarnation, but either a Moral Union, or a mere
external appearance of a Man, as those who held Christ not to have a real but a
fantastic Body. Now be pleased to show me in what Verse or Chapter it is
clearly expressed, that the said words signify a strict Incarnation, But if
you deny the Belief of this Mystery to be necessary to Salvation, own it for
our satisfaction, in these or the like words; It is not necessary for Salvation
to believe, that the Second Person of the blessed Trinity was made true Man.
And if the Belief of neither Trinity nor Incarnation are necessary, show me
what is, and where expressed in Scripture.

Then in order to Practice, I desire to know whether it be necessary to
Salvation, to keep holy the Lord's Day, that is Sunday and not Saturday. If it
be, I desire to know in what Chapter and Verse it is clearly contained in
Scripture; as also where the Abrogation of the Saturday is clearly expressed.
If it be not necessary for Salvation to keep holy the Lord's Day, I desire your
warrant for it in these or the like terms: It is not necessary to keep holy the
Lord's Day, that is, Sunday.

If you say that every one is only bound to believe what is clear to him in
Scripture, reading it with sincerity and humility, then I must desire to know,
What if I reading Scripture fincerely and with humility, cannot find clearly
expressed either the Trinity or Incarnation? will it not be necessary for the
Salvation of my Soul to believe these two Mysteries?

Put the Case I have recourse (as by these I have) to Church Guides, and they
tell me I must believe those Mysteries; is it necessary I believe these Guides?
If it be; then Scripture alone is not clear in Necessaries to Salvation; for
here I am obliged to believe what is not clear to me in Scripture. Again, am I
bound to keep holy Sunday, tho I find no Precept for it in Scripture, and not
Saturday, tho I find an express Command for it, no where Abrogated in
Scripture, because my Guides tell me I must do so? If I must, then Guides are
necessary to Salvation, and Scripture alone without them is not sufficient. Be
pleased to own this Proposition -- Scripture alone is not sufficient, without
Guides to Interpret it. If notwithstanding my Guides I am not bound to believe
either Trinity or Incarnation, or observe Sunday, then I must beg of you to
warrant with your Authority these words: I am not bound to keep holy the Lord's
Day or Sunday, tho the Guides of the Church tell me I must, if I cannot find it
clearly in Scripture.

But you will tell me, That Necessaries to Salvation are either clear in
Scripture, or evidently deduced out of Scripture. Very well. Assign then these
Necessaries, and deduce them out of Scripture; show the Verse and Chapter from
whence is evidently deduced an Obligation to keep holy Sunday and not Saturday.
Again, the Evidence of that Deduction is either had immediately from the mere
reading of Scripture, without help of Guides, and then I desire to see the
places from whence these Necessaries are evidently inferred; or it cannot be
had but by the help of Guides, and then the Scripture alone is not sufficient.

Secondly, But if all Necessaries to Salvation be not clear enough in Scripture
to be understood without any Interpreter, then it will be necessary to know who
and where the Interpreter is. If you remit me to the Decision of the true
Church, it will be necessary to know which is that Church. If you tell me all
Christian Churches joined together; then it follows that I am bound to believe
nothing but what all Christians agree in; for what they disagree in, cannot be
the Sentiment or Decision of the whole Church, but only of a part of it. I am
not then obliged to believe the Trinity; for the Arians, though Christians, deny
it. I am not obliged to believe the Incarnation, for many Christians deny that
Christ was God made Man by a strict Incarnation, but only by a Moral Union;
that is, he was a Man who had the Authority of God as his Plenipotentiary, and
the like. Now then let me know on what all Christians agree, and let me have
your Warrant that I am bound to believe neither the Trinity nor Incarnation,
nor any thing wherein all Christians do not agree. Now if you tell me I am
obliged to stand to the Determination of one particular Church, or some and nor
all tell me which and why that or those more than others? What Church, for
example, were particular Persons bound to follow Two hundred years ago, before
the Reformation.

I conceive, an Answer to these Doubts absolutely necessary for the Salvation
of my Soul. For how can I be Saved, if I know not what is necessary thereunto?
I need not say a satisfactory one, for no other can flow from your Learned and
Virtuous Pens; I only fear that some Pin feathered Divine, out of an itch to
appear in Print may prevent yours. and put me off with a Flim-flam, or an
uncharitable Jeer, or Railing against some particular Church he may fancy me to
be of, which is nothing to my purpose, who seek where I may find securely
Necessaries to Salvation, not where I cannot find them. This would be also
prejudicial to the Church of England; for when Men see Doubts so sincerely and
submissively Proposed, Answered only with Jeers, Railing and Invictives, or
omitted and let pass, as not deserving an Answer, they must needs doubt of the
Learning, as well as of the Virtue and Charity of their Leaders.

Now were the Satisfaction I here desire, Intended for my self alone, it might
have seemed more proper to have made my Address in particular to some one of
your Reverend and Learned Body; but torafmuch as it concerns so many others,
and, as I persuade my selt, will prove extremely beneficial to Religion, it
being the surest, nay only way to end the many Controversies of this Age. I am
forced to desire of you, whose high Character obliges you to a Zeal (...), a
public, and withal a speedy Answer by which you will highly oblige,

SIRS, Yours ever.

Reprinted at Holy-Rood-House, 1688.


