ANSWERS FOR THE BREWARS Within the TOWN of Edinburgh and Suburbs, And the
Privilege of the Shire of Mid-Lothian: To the Reasons offered to Their
Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Right Honorable the Estates of
Parliament, by the Magistrates of Edinburgh, in Relation to an Imposition of
Two Pennies upon the Pynt of Ale, now Craved by them for the space of thirty
Years, upon pretense of Payment of the Towns Debts.
THe Paper offered in behalf of the Good Town of Edinburgh, craves an
Imposition of two Pennies upon the Pint of Ale and Beer, to be either Brown or
Inbrought and Vended within the Town and Suburbs and Liberties thereof: To be
granted to the Magistrates for payment of the Towns Debts, over and above the
annexed Excise of two Merks upon the Boll, and the Additional Excise of three
Pennies upon the Pint imposed by this present Session of Parliament, and that
for the space of thirty years, for the reasons contained in the said printed
Paper.

Before the Brewars make any particular Answer to the reasons contained in the
said printed Paper, They humbly offer to my Lord Commissioner's Grace, and to
the Right Honorable the Estates of Parliament be way of preamble the
Considerations following.

First, In als far as their Reasons are Ushered in with an Narrative of the
great Debts, the Good Town of Edinburgh lies presently under. It is humbly
represented in behalf of the Brewars of the Shire and Others. That as they are
not to enquire in the private concerns of the Good Town, or how by the
Mismannagement of the Successive Magistrates of the Burgh, the Debts thereof
have swelled to such an considerable sum as is narrated in the Reasons, so it
is hoped the High Court of Parliament will not think it reasonable that the
Towns Debts should be paid and satisfied out of such an Fond, as will be an
unsupportable burden upon the said Brewers, and upon the whole Leidges
resorting to Edinburgh, and an direct Incroachment upon that Freedom and
Liberty as to which in the Trade of Brewing and Immunities thereof, for
enjoyment of the same, They are humbly to expect from the Justice of the
Parliament, a full and free Security and protection; and wherein all the
Leidges residing in Edinburgh (with them) are equally concerned.

Secundo, The Good Town of Edinburgh upon the pretense of payment of their
Debts, have since the year 1661. obtained several Gifts from their Majesty's
for the time, of two pennies upon the pint of Ale and Beer, and which in the
first instance and thereafter, were opposed by the Lords of Session, Members of
the College of Justice, and Heretors of the Shire: And who, notwithstanding,
and (because these Gifts were then craved for some few years to the end
foresaid) did for some time Connive at the same. But finding that this was
designed as an perpetual Servitude upon the Country, and their being an gift
of this nature obtained in the year 1666 for eleven years after the expiring of
an former that had been granted in Anno 1660. And this meeting with opposition
from the College of Justice and the Heretors; The Affair was settled by
Transaction, and there was an solemn Contract entered into in January 1670.
betwixt them and the Good Town, whereby the said Gift for eleven years was
restricted to fix: And upon expiring whereof, the Magistrates for the time, did
bind and oblige themselves and their Successors, not to seek or procure any
such Gift or Imposition, for the future, upon account of the Towns Debts, that
should remain unsatisfied, after expiring of the Gift swarestricted, and in
case any such happen to be in time coming procured, the same by the samen
Contract per verba de presenti, now as then and then as now, was declared Void
and Null: So that the Acquiescence of the College of Justice and the Heretors
of the Shire to this Gift, being in the Terms foresaid, was to be understood as
an Bar or Land, mark to secure against the obtaining of all such Gifts in time
coming: And the Town of Edinburgh can no more pretend to be free of the said
Contract, than they can be of any Debt they are due by Bond: And howbeit the
Good Town by their power with, and influence upon the Ministers of State,
during the late Reigns, have obtained an Continuation of this Exaction; yet
that being directly contrair to an Final, Legal and Determining Settlement, in
relation to the point in controversy, can be no Rule to perpetuat this Burden
any longer, first upon the Brewars, and consequently, in the second place, upon
the College of Justice and Heritors, who entered in the said Transaction, and
upon the Inhabitants of the Burgh; and in effect upon the whole Leidges
resorting to Edinburgh, who are concerned in this Matter, either by Selling of
Bear, Buying of Ale, or both,

Tertio, The obtaining an Gift of this nature by an particular Clause in the
Claim of Right, is declared to be contrair to the known Laws, Statutes and
Freedoms of this Realm: And albeit it will be pretended for the Magistrates,
That this was looked upon as an Grievance, as being done without Authority of
Parliament; yet it is Humbly Conceived the design of the Law was adapted with a
Reguard to the liberty of the Subject, and consequently that there is par ratio
now as of before: And therefore it being res judicata upon the Matter by the
Parliament, as a Redress to the Grievances of the late Times, it is hoped the
Magistrates will not crave a Revivance of such an Imposition now, which in the
former Government was found an most unsupportable Burden, by most of the
Burgesses of the Burghs of the Kingdom: And when the same Address was offered
in the 2d Session of the current Parliament, the same was by a Solemn Vote of
Parliament Rejected and thrown out of Doors.

Quarto, It is Humbly offered to my Lord Commissioner, His Grace, and Estates
of Parliament, That as the Imposing of such an Burden upon the Brewars, will be
very uneasy to them and to the Inhabitants of the Burgh, and all others whose
Privileges allow them to stand in opposition to any such Gift; so with all
Submission, it may unevitably prove prejudicial to His Majesty's Interest,
because there being now an additional Excyse imposed by Act of Parliament,
Which, with the Fomer, will be about four Merks and an half upon the Boll of
Malt, the granting of any New Gift to the Town of Edinburgh in addition
thereto, will lay many confiderable Brewars aside as unable to continue in the
exercise of that Trade, where there is so great an Advance in the first
Instance to the Tax men, and such eminent danger in the Retale, seeing this
Addition would make the Imposition upon every Boll of Malt to arise near to
Five Pound Scots; and which throw most places of the Kingdom will adequate the
intrinsic value of the Bear, and so far probably low the price thereof, as the
most of the Heretors of the Kingdom might sensibly feel the prejudice there fra
arising, which is of an universal Concern to Their Majesty's and the hail
Leidges, the sale of Bear being the greatest part of the Rent of the Nation,
and the product thereof in the Matter of Excyse, being the chiefest Perquisite
of the Crown, in relation to the Interest of the Government.

Quinto, As the granting of such an Gift would by an natural Consequence in all
probability lay a Foundation to the Inconveniences abovementioned; so besides
all those it would upon the Matter turn the Brewing in Edinburgh to an
Monopoly in Favors of a few Brewars, who it seems join and concur with the
Good Town in this Application, and thereby make Ale good and bad at their
pleasure, there being no such security in the Matter of Brewing as an universal
Freedom in that Trade, and whereby every one is a Check to another for the
better Consumption and Retale of Ale; whereas if an Monopoly of this Trade
shall be settled amongst a few Brewars, the Wisdom of the High Court of
Parliament from former Experience may easily judge what will be the Consequence
thereof.

This being premised for the Brewars, and for which they Crave my Lord
Commissioner, His Grace, and High Court of Parliament, humbly pardon for so
long an Preamble in an Matter of so great Import, and wherein they are so
nearly concerned, they do in the next place with all due Submission, as to the
Reasons offered in behalf of the Good Town of Edinburgh, make the particular
Answers following.

As to the first, In Relation to the Debts owing be the Town in the year 1633
and how the same was increassed by their Expenses at the Coronation of King
Charles the first, and what they farther advanced for his Relief in the year
1648 and in the year 1650 at the return of King Charles the 2d, It is Answered,
That with all Submission the making of an Insinuation of this nature, now after
the space of 50 years and more, is to run too far backward by a reviving of the
Calamities of these Times: And if every on that was thereby damnified, were to
expect an suitable Reparation, where this might land at, is left to the
Parliaments Consideration; And as Prescription is the great Security of the
Leidges in the natural possession of their Property, so by that same parity,
long taciturnity and acquiescence ought to Bury in Oblivion all the
Transactions of these Times.

As to the Second. In Relation to what the Town suffered in the late Usurpation
before the year 1660 by Building the Citidale of Leith the former Answer is
opponed, and it too great a stretch for the Good Town to Run so far backward in
the prosecution of their present Pretentions, without Disputing the Veracity of
what is asserted for them, least that may lay down an inconvenient preparative
for many such Addresses of this nature.

As to the Third, In Relation to the Gift of the Citidale of Leith, In Favors
of the Duke of Lauderdale, and to the Towns purchase thereof from him: It Is
Answered, That it is but too notour that all these Transactions were the
natural Consequences of state intrigues carried on by an prevailing party of
the Magistracy for the time for propagating their own private ends: And it will
not be proper for the present Magistrates to dip further upon this marter. And
thereby to discover the management of their Predecessors, which is often Liable
to be misconstructed, where private interest is at the bottom, and where the
discovery makes nothing to the present purpose.

As to the Fourth, In Relation to the first Gift granted by King Charles the
2d. upon an Narrative of an former, that had been granted during the English
Usurpation, and Relating to an second Gift that had been granted for defraying
the Expenses of bringing in the Water: And that thereby the Towns Debts still
remained unsatisfied; It Is Answered with all Submission this Reason contains
its own Ditty in its bosom. For 1. It acknowledges that the Good Town had an
Imposition of an plack of the pint during the foresaid Usurpation; and
consequently had sufficiently wherewith to defray all the Burdens and Expenses
they were put to, by that Government. 2. The Renovation of these Gifts for so
many years, being (as is acknowledged) for payment of the Towns Debt, does
Argue ill Conduct in the management, where the Debts still increased,
especially seeing it is but too notour that the Inhabitants of the Burgh, paid
considerably upon the Account of the inbringing of the Water: But this is only
informative represented, there being no Shadow of Relevancy in this Reason.

As to the Fifth, In Relation to the Transaction betwixt the Town and the Earls
of Argyle, Errol, Marshal, and Strathmore, concerning an Debt due by them to
Heriots Hospital; and to an Imposition they got for twelve years after
expireing of an former in liew of this Debt: And that this before it expired,
proved ineffectual as being illegally laid on. It Is Answered for the Brewars,
that if this Reason come to be canvassed at the Bottom, it will be of als
little weight as the former, it being but too well known that the Transaction
with these Noblemen, was the voluntar Actings of the Magistrates for the time,
upon their own private Designs, and by the influence of the Ministers of State
that had then the management of public Affairs; And so are not now to be
obtruded in Relation to this present concern, from any dissappointment that
these Actings met with: And wherein the Brewars are not in the least concerned,
nor in any Discharge given in by the Good Town to these Earls, there having
been neither Force nor Law upon the then Magistrates to have done the same. And
as to all these Mismannagements the Town have Recourse in Law against the
Actors thereof.

As to the Sixth, In Relation to the bringing in of the Water and of the
Maintenance and upholding of the Wells, the former Answer is opponed; and it is
known that the Inhabitants of the Burgh are annually stented, in order to the
support of all the private concerns thereof, and which makes nothing to the
present point.

As to the Seventh, which narrates the Towns present Debt, the Expenses of
repairing the Peer at Leith, and keeping the Towns Guards, the Brewars Repeits
their former Answers, in Relation to the defraying the Towns Debts, that a
farther Addition of Excise upon the Brewars which will unevitably Ruin their
Trade and be a Burden upon the whole Leidges, is not (with all Submission) a
proper Ford or fit Remedy for this Disease. 2do. It is very well known that
the Exactions of the Town upon the Account of their Harbor; is more nor
sufficient to defray the Expenses of the Reparations thereof: And the same
Answer is Repeated to the Expenses of the Guard, which is maintained upon the
Charge of the Inhabitants, and which the Magistrates upon enquiry will not
deny, but utcunque these being extrinsick Digressiens to the present point in
Controversy, do not merit the Parliaments Consideration; nor that the Brewars
in their Answers shall take notice thereof.

As to the Eight, Wherein the Magistrates assert their Zeal to the present
Government, and the great advancements they have made to the publik upon that
Account, at least that the same was done out of the private Fortunes of these
who were Magistrates since the late Revolution, It Is Answered that it is hoped
the drawer of this Reasons, in his evincing the Loallity of the Magistrates
which had it is arise from an free offer of their own, will not make this a
Fundation for laying on an Imposition upon the Brewars, which were a derogation
to that airly appearance they made in their Loyalty toward the present
Government, if there doing thereof was on prospect to be reimbursed at the
Expenses of third parties, who, as occasion offers, will be equally ready with
them, to serve the interest of the present Government: And it strange how such
an inference as this, can be brought in to the High Court of Parliament, as an
new Ground for laying on an new Imposition upon the Brewars which they are not
able to bear, And thereby the Magistrates Zeal for the Government to be
supported at the Expenses of them and the whole Leidges.

As to the Ninth, In Relation to the Towns Debts, and that without this
Imposition, the Magistrates will not be enabled to pay the same, and will be
forced to give over there Offices: It Answered for the Brewars that without
dipping upon the secret concerns of the Town, it is humbly conceived that the
Reparation of these Breaches is not to be expected to be made upon the private
Expenses of of the Country Brewars, nor out of any Fond that there Trade is
not able to bear: And if the Calamities of the Burghs of the Kingdom by such an
preparative, as this should be a Fundation of an new Imposition upon third
parties that have no Dependence upon the Burgh, the Consequence may prove very
dangerous: And the preventing whereof with Reguard to the Interest of the
Nation, is humbly offered to the Serious Consideration of the High Court of
Parliament.

As to the Tenth, In Relation to the late Imposition upon Cloth and Wine by
the Parliament, with an Regard to the Exigencies of the Burgh; And that the
same does not Answer the designs of the Parliament, It is Answered that the
Argument urged from this Reason is Retorted, for if the Parliament out of their
prudence thought fit, to take off the Imposition upon Ale laid on and Gifted in
behalf of the Town, as being then understood to the Parliament as a Grievance,
and in liew thereof, to give them an additional Excyse upon Wine and Cloth, it
is a strange Inference, that if this Fond do not answer the design, that the
Town should crave the Parliament should return to the doing of that which they
consider as an Error in the former Government, or at the least to have been
illegally Imposed, seeing the rectifying thereof was still with an regard to the
advantage of the people, which its hoped will still convince the High Court of
Parliament that the Demands of the Good Town in relation to the Brewars will
prove such an unsupportable Burden, as that my Lord Commissioner his Grace and
Essa es of Parliament will never yield thereto: And whatever Fond shall be
thought (...) for support of the Interest of the Town, this of all, with due
Submission, seem to be the most improper as tending not only to the utter
Ruin of Brewars and an heavy Imposition upon the whole Leidges resorting the
Town of Edinburgh but to the great prejudice of Their Majesty's Excyse, and
that of most of the Heretors of the Kingdom who are and may be concerned in the
Consumpt of Bea^

As to the Elveenth, In relation to the Town of Edinburgh's being the chi^^
Metropolis of the Kingdom and the Seat of all the Judicatories. It is Answered
That as the first is not denied, so quoad the Second it seems to be no good
Argument for what is now Craved: For it is too notour that the great Support of
the Town of Edinburgh, does chieflly arise from its being the Seat of the
Judicatories of the Nation, and that therefore it is a bad Argument to draw
such an Consequence as this, that their Supporters should be further burdened.

As to the Twelth, That the Brewars in Edinburgh do concur by an Consen^ under
their Hands, and that no prejudice can arise to the Heretors by this ne^
Imposition It is Answered, 1mo. It is denied that there is any general
Consent^^ the Brewars of Edinburgh, but on the contrair most of them concur
with these (...) the Shire, in opposition to what is now craved in behalf of
the Good Town. 20 (...) any such Consent has been impetrate, it is upon design
by a few of the Brewa^^ of Edinburgh, who are to become Tacksmen to the Good
Town, if this ne^ Imposition were granted, and would thereby ruin that Trade
as to all othe^^ by inhauncing the same solely to themselves: And as an
evidence thereof upon enquiry, it will be found that they have preconcerted the
Affair with the Goo^ Town toward the carrying on of this design; and are to
have an extraordinary advantage in the set thereof; and so to make this an
argument to influence (...) Parliament in the present Claim of the Good Town is
somewhat extraordinary and in behalf of the other Brewars is remitted to my
Lord Commissioner (...) Grace and Honorable Estates their serious
Confideration.

And lastly, As to the endurance of this Imposition for 30 years, the former
(...) are Opponed: And albeit for satisfying my Lord Commissioner his (...) and
the High Court of Parliament; the Brewars have offered particular Answers to
the foresaids Reasons; yet the same is in adherence to the General Answers
premised and which they humbly entreat in an matter of this moment And in an
Case so circumstantiat may be seriously considered, and if any difficulty
occcur in the premises; that my Lord Commissioner his Grace and (...)
Honorable Estates will allow the Brewars an Hearing in plain Parliament
especially feeing that what is now craved by the Town of Edinburgh as an Ex^^^^
upon both the Town and Country Brewars, will be upwards of 60000 lib. Sent
yearly, which in thirty years time arises to Eighten hundredth thousand pound
Scots, besides the great Incomes the Town has, by their ordinary Reven^es and
therefore such an exorbitant Grant will prove an unsupportable burden (...) the
Brewars, the Inhabitants of the Burgh Heretors of the Shite, and all other
repairing to the Town of Edinburgh, so of how dangerous Consequences might be
as to the Interest of all the Leidges. is seriously remitted, as aforesaid to
the Consideration of the High Court of Parliament.

In respect whereof,

