ARTICLES Concluded upon by the OFFICERS and SOLDIERS Now in Arms by
Authority of the PARLIAMENT Of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND.

Together with, The Answer of the NOBLEMEN and GENTLEMEN now in Arms for the
COVENANT?

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most excellent Majesty.
1648.

Articles concluded upon by the Officers and Soldiers, now in Arms by
authority of the Parliament of the Kingdom of Scotland.
WE being servants to the State, and unwilling to engage in a Civil War, do
conceive our selves obliged to remit the ways of prosecuting of all duties to
Religion, and to our King, to the determination of Church and State: And let
them move in it, as they will be answerable to God: Our lives shall ever be
ready to be exposed to all hazards for the good of both; and if all duties for
them, and for our friends release in England shall now be deserted, let the
blame before God and men lie upon the obstructors of it: And if no further use
be made of our service, We do demand,

I. That security be given to all who are or have been engaged in this service
for their Persons, Honors and Estates, whereby they may be free from all
dangers, prejudices and censures whatsoever, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil,
for their accession to the late Engagement, or any thing done by them relating
thereunto, or to this service for our own defense: And this to be confirmed by
Parliament, or the lawful Authority of the Kingdom.

II. That in regard of our extraordinary charges and loss; one Months pay be
instantly delivered unto us, for payment of thee Irish Forces, and that Boats
and Ships presently be provided for their transportation into Ireland: And for
preventing all disorders upon their march through the West Country by
Free-quartering, We do desire that a regular course may be taken for their
entertainment during their abode there, which shall be no longer then wind and
weather shall serve, and Boats be provided to transport them.

III. That one Months means be provided for the Scottish Forces, and that they
be not disbanded, until the Irish Forces be transported; and that sufficient
pledges be delivered for performance of what is desired. And that our
disbanding and transportation be done by Authority of the Committee of Estates.

These reasonable demands being performed, We the Irish are ready instantly to
march toward any part of the West coast which shall be thought most fit for
our transportation into Ireland, and we of the Scottish, instantly to disband:
Otherwise, rather then expose our Lives and Fortunes to the mercy of any, by
the want of fitting assurances for what is past, or the loss of our Honors by
deserting the interest of those commanded by, or joined with us, We are
resolved to sacrifice our selves at the dearest rates we can; And take God to
witness how free we are of the guilt and consequences that may follow
thereupon.

Stirling 18. September. 1648. We have appointed our Commissioners to stay no
longer then six a clock at night, to morrow the 19. and that the Treaty shall
then end; and that the Cessation shall expire eight hours thereafter, unless
the desires before mentioned be fully granted.


Signed by Warrant and Command of the Officers now in Arms by the Authority of
Parliament, JO: SPALDGUGE.

The Answer of the Noblemen and Gentlemen now in Arms for the Covenant, to the
Articles of the Officers and Soldiers that joined in the late unlawful
engagement against England, and now continue in Arms to disturb the peace of
this Kingdom.
WE have consiered the desires of the Officers and Soldiers at Sterlin, and
do return this answer; That the Imputation of neglecting duties to Religion and
to the King mentioned in the preface to the Articles cannot be charged on Us,
who have never been wanting in the use of all lawful means, to prosecute the
ends of our solemn League and Covenant: But upon those who joined in
prosecution of the late unlawful engagement against our neighbor Nation of
England, which has been destructive to all these ends.

Touching the first Article, We refer you to the Answer given in our former
papers, and do here again declare, that we shall not challenge, nor incite any
other to challenge any of your number for their lives and Estates, but shall
endeavor to secure them so far as we can without approbation of their
actions, or the breach of Covenant and Treaties. As for that which concerns
exemption from Church Censures, we cannot meddle therein without breach of
Covenant, but must refer you to the Judicatories of the Kirk, to whom you may
make your own address, and receive their answer.

Concerning the second and third Articles, we refer you to the Answer given
by our Commissioners to the Commissioners on your side, which was, that we
held it unreasonable that they should desire any thing from us, or any other
who adhere to us, for satisfaction of their Officers and Soldiers, because we
will not Involve our Selves in any thing which may Import an accession to the
late engagement, or may be the ground of a quarrel to England against this
Kingdom; But if they had real Inclinations to Peace, they and their adherents
might without our accession thereunto take course amongst themselves for giving
satisfaction to their Officers and Soldiers, and therefore did desire (and do
now again renew the same) that all their forces, and the forces of these who
adhere unto them, may be disbanded betwixt and the twenty fifth, or at furthest
the twenty eight day of this month of September, and and that none of them be
found together after that time, in Troops, Companies, or Regiments; and we
shall betwixt and the said day, disband all our forces and none of them after
that time shall be found in Troops, Companyes, or Regiments; for the punctual
performance whereof on both sides, mutual pledges are to be given. And further
we cannot say in answer to these Articles.

If you shall not agree to the desires made in our last papers of the 16 of
this Instant, and not rest satisfied with these answers, but shall continue in
Arms to the disturbance of the Peace of this Kingdom, and persist in the
courses in which you are now engaged, contrary to the Declarations of the
General Assembly and their Commissioners, We do hereby certify unto you,
that all who have been active in the late engagement, as well those in England,
as those in this Kingdom, and all such as have, or shall hereafter join with
you, are to be declared enemies to both Kingdoms, and that this Kingdom will
be necessitated to concur with the Kingdom of England for punishing them
accordingly as breakers of the Covenant and Treaties, and we leave it to you
seriously to consider whither the ways and courses you are upon, be reallie
for the good of the King and this Kingdom, or a safe way for the relief of
your friends that are prisoners in England.

We do declare that unless the desires contained in our papers of the 16, of
this Instant, and in this paper be clearly and positively agreed unto, and we
advertised thereof before Friday the 22. of this instant, at twelve of the
Clock in the day, that then the Treaty shall end, and that the cessation from
Acts of Hostility and marching of forces shall expire eight hours thereafter.

September 20. 1648. Subscribed by command of the Noblemen and Gentlemen now in
Arms for the Covenant. Mr. THO. HENDERSON.

FINIS.

