ARTICLES of AGREEMENT,
Concluded, Made, and Agreed on this Twenty eight Day of May, in the Year of
our Lord, One Thousand six hundred ninety and four, between the Royal Free
Burrows, Cities, and others of Their Majesty's Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, who
shall be pleased to Subscribe, and be Concerned in the Scots
Linen-Subscription-Book, for the Linen-Manufacture in that Kingdom of the one
Part; AND Nicolas Dupin of the City of London Esquire, in Trust for the Members
and Subscribers who shall be hereafter pleased to Subscribe, and be Concerned
in the aforesaid Linen-Manufacture in England, of the other Part.

1. IMprimis, That it is Declared and Agreed, that there shall be a general
Joint Stock of Thirty Thousand Pound Sterling, to carry on the
Linen-Manufacture in the aforesaid Kingdom of Scotland, and that the said Stock
shall be divided into sixty hundred Shares, or Parts, in manner and form
following; That is to say, Thirty hundred Shares or Parts, being the one Moiety
of the aforesaid Sixty hundred Shares, shall be Subscribed by the Subscribers
in the aforesaid Kingdom of Scotland, who shall hereafter Subscribe for the
same, at Five Pound Sterling for each and every one of the aforesaid Thirty
Hundred Shares.

2. Item, That there shall be Thirty hundred Shares, or Parts more to be
Subscribed for in England, by the Subscribers who shall Subscribe for the same
at five Pound Sterling, as aforesaid, for each and every one of the aforesaid
Thirty hundred Shares, being the other Moyetie of the aforesaid Sixty hundred
Shares, which said sixty hundred Shares, at five Pound Sterling per each, and
every Share amounts to the sum of Thirty thousand Pound Sterling, as aforesaid,
and the same to be paid at four several even and equal Payments, THAT IS TO
SAY, The Sum of One Pound five Shillings Sterling, being the first Payment to
be paid to the Scots and English Linen-Treasurers, hereafter to be chosen at
the Cities of Edinburgh and London, for each Shate they shall Subscribe for, on
the first Day of Nevember next ensuing, the Date of these Presents, or within
fourteen Days then next following; and the like Sum of One Pound five Shilling
Sterling more, being the second Payment to be paid on the first Day of May then
next following, or within fourteen Days then next after, which will be in the
Year of our Lord, One Thousand six hundred ninety five; and the like Sum of One
Pound five Shilling Sterling more, being the Third Payment to be paid on the
first Day of November then next following, or within fourteen Days then next
after. And lastly, The like Sum of One Pound five Shillings Sterling more,
being the fourth and last Payment, to be paid on the first Day of May, then
next following, or within fourteen Days then next after, which will be in the
Year of our Lord, One Thousand six hundred ninety six.

3. Item, It is further Agreed, That in case any Subscribers in the aforesaid
Kingdom of Scotland, should not pay in, or cause to be paid in to the Scots
Linen Treasurer, at the City of Edinburgh for the time, being the aforesaid Sum
of One Pound five Shillings Sterling, being the first Payment to be paid on the
first (...), or within fourteen, Days thence next following, as before limited;
That then and in that case, such Person or Persons Subscriptions shall be void,
to all Intents and Purposes, as if he or they had never subscribed; and that
then it shall and may be lawful to, and for the Scots Society and Subseribers,
or Major Part of them, at the said City of Edinburgh, to have full Power and
Authority, to Nom in at and Appoint a Committee, consisting of six Persons at
least, who shall have full Power to Sell and Transfer into the Transfer-Book,
or Books, to be provided for that purpose under the Common Seal, or other ways
of the sald Scots Society and Subscribers, as aforesaid, all, or any of the
said Shares when Forefeited, as aforesaid to such Person or Persons, who shall
be willing to buy the aforesaid shares so Forfeited, as aforesaid, at the same
price and rate as they were first Subscribed for. And the said Money for the
said Shares to be to the use of the Joint Linen Stock, and that then the said
shares so Transferred, shall be good and valid to the New Purchaser, to all
Intents and Purposes.

4. Item, It is further Agreed, That in case any Subscribers in the aforesaid
Kingdom of England, should not pay in, or cause to be paid in to the English
Linen Treasurer, at the City of London, for the time being, the aforesaid Sum
of One Pound five Shillings Sterling, being the first Payment to be paid on the
said first Day of November next, or within fourteen Days then next following,
as before limited; that then and in such case, such Person or Persons
Subscriptions shall be void to all Intents and Purposes, as if he or they had
never Subscribed; and that then it shall and may be also lawful to, and for the
English Society and Subscribers, or major part of them, at the said City of
London, to have full Power and Authority, to Nominat and Appoint a Committee,
consisting of six Persons at least, who shall have full Power and Authority to
Sell and Transfer into the Transfer Book or Books, provided for that purpose,
under the Common Seal, or otherways of the said English Society, or subscribers
as aforesaid, all, or any the said Forefeited shares aforesaid, to such Person
or Persons who shall be willing to buy the aforesaid Shares, so Forfeited as
aforesaid, at the same price and rate as they were first Subscribed for, and
the said Money for the said Shares to be to the use of the general joint
Linen-Stock; and that then the said Shares so Transferred, shall be good and
valid to the New Purchaser, to all Intents and Purposes.

5. Item, It is also Declared, That in case of failour of payment in of all,
every, or any of the aforesaid remaining three respective Sums of One Pound
five Shilling Sterling per Share, in the above Articles meentioned as
aforesaid, to be paid at the several Days of Payment above limited, according
to the true Intent and Meaning thereof, for the space of one Month next after
any of the said Days of Payment, on which the same ought to be paid, as
aforesaid, that then and in such case, every such Person or Persons, making
such Desault, which hinders the Trade, for non-payment, shall from time to
time, upon every such failure respectively Forfeit and pay to the Linen
Treasurer, in any the said Kingdoms, where such Forfeiture for non-payment,
shall be the Sum of five Shillings Sterling per each Share for the time being
in Committee assembled, for the use and benefit of the general joint Linen
Stock, for each and every share and shares that shall be so unpaid for, and in
arrear, until all the Money due for the said Shares, and all the said
Penalties, Arrears, and Forfeitures due for the same, shall be fully satisfied,
contented and paid, and that the Share and Shares of each and every such
Person or Persons making such Default as aforesaid, shall from time to time,
and at all times hereafter, be subject and liable to all such payments,
penalties and forfeitures, until the full value of the said Shares of such
Person or Persons, so in arrear be spent out and determined, and the said
Shares to be sold and disposed of by the Linen Committee of Trade, hereafter to
be chosen, to any Person who will give most for the said shares, to answer the
aforesaid Debts.

6. Item, It is further Declared, that there shall be two Linen Treasurers
chosen, viz. One Treasurer to be chosen at the said City of Edinburgh, by the
plurality of Votes of the joint Proprietars in Scotland; And another Treasurer
to be chosen at the City of London, by the plurality of Votes of the joint
Proprietars in England: Which afotesaid two Treasurers shall give good and
sufficient Security in Scotland and England, to the liking and Satisfaction of
the Major part of all the joint Proprietars for the time being, and that the
said Treasurer and Treasurers shall be chosen immediately after, and so soon as
the subscription Book or Books are filled and shut up, which will be on or
about the first day of November next ensuing the date of these Presents, or
within fourteen days then next after.

7. Item, That the said Linen Treasurers, shall make up their Accounts in both
Kingdoms once in every four Months, of what Money they have received. and what
Money they have paid out, and what Money they have in their hands, and what
Debts are due to the Company, and by whom due, and where the said Money is
lodged; and give an account of the same in writting, to the Courts and
Committees at Edinburgh, and in London, and send a true Coppie of the same to
each Kingdom: and that the said Treasurers shall not pay any Money out of the
Linen joint Stack they nor either of them shall have in their hands without a
warrant first Signed by five Affistants, at least the Governor, Deputy
Governor, or Chair-men hereafter to be chosen at the next General Court, to be
always one of the five.

8. Item, That there shall be two Books for Subscriptions, and Transserrs, and
whatsoever Orders, Penalties and Laws, shall be write and Signed in one Book,
shall be also write and Signed in the other, with the several Seal or Seals of
the Subscribers in each Kingdom of Scotland and England; And that one of the
said two Books shall be kept by the said Scots Society at the said City of
Edinburgh, or by such persons as the Linen Court, or grand Committee, or Major
part of them in that City shall think fit: such Book keepers giving good
Security to the liking and Satisfaction of the said Court, or Grand Commit
aforesaid: And another of the said Books to be kept by a Commitee thereafter
mentioned, as the plurality of Votes of the joint Proprietars in the City of
London shall think fit, he giving such Security to the said English Linen
Committee as aforesaid: Which said two Subscription Books shall not be removed
out of one Kingdom into another, after that these Subscription Books are filled
and delivered to each Kingdom, on pain to forfeit the Sum of One Thousand Pound
Sterling, to be paid in to the Linen Treasurers for the time, being by the
Linen Members of that Kingdom, who shall suffer their own Transfert Books to be
removed out of one Kingdom into another as aforesaid: and the said One Thousand
Pound, when Forfeited, to be paid to the Sole use and benefit of the general
Joint Linen Stock.

9. Item, It is further Declared, that it shall and may be lawful, to and for
the said Scots Society, to Sell and Transferr their own Shares, or any number
of them they shall Subscribe for in Edinburgh in their own Transferr Books; And
(...) shall and may be also lawful, to and for the said English Society, to
Sell and (...) ferr their own Shares, or any number of them they have
Subscribed for, or otherways in their own Transferr Book at London.

10. Item, It is also Declared, that thereshall be in the said City of
Edinburgh, in the Scots Linen Company, thirty Affistants. and out of the said
thirty Affistants a Governor, Deputy Governor, and Treasurer shall be Elected
and chosen, But in case there shall be no Governor, nor Deputy Governor
Elected or chosen as aforesaid, that then in such case, there shall be a
Chairman chosen in their Rooms; Which aforesaid thirty Assistants, Governor,
Deputy Governor, Treasurer or Chairman shall be chosen by the plurality of
Votes, of all the Joint Proprietars at Edinburgh in Scotland, at the first
General Court or Grand Meeting, which will be on or about the first day of
November next, or within fourteen days next after.

11. Item, It is also Declared, that there shall be in the Scots Linen Company
at London, thirty Affistants, and out of the aforesaid thirty Affistants, a
Chairman shall be Elected and chosen, which aforesaid thirty Affistants and
Chairman shall and may be chosen by the plurality of Votes, of all the Joint
Proprietars at the said City of London in England, at the first General Court
or Grand Meeting there, which will be on or about the aforesaid first day of
November next, or within fourteen days then next after.

12. Item, That a Committee of Trade consisting of six Persons, shall always
Annually be chosen, nominated and appointed out of the aforesaid thiry
Affistants, for to meet and sit at the City of Edinburgh, in the said Kingdom
of Scotland, as often as necessary occasion shall Require: in manner and Form
following. That is to say, The Committee and Members at London, who shall have
the Major part, or greatest numbers of Shares, shall and may have full power
and liberty to choose, nominat and appoint three persons, whereof their
principle Agent for the time being may be always one, to direct, Sir, serve and
Affist in the said Scots Linen Committee of Trade at the said City of
Edinburgh. AND in like manner, the Governor or Chairman, and Affistants of
the Scots Linen Society for the time being; may have liberty to choose nominat
and appoint three persons, to sit with the other aforesaid three persons, which
together makes up the aforesaid six to be a Committee of Trade: to sit, direct,
serve and Affist in the said Scots Society, and Committee of Trade at the said
City of Edinburgh; Which said Scots Linen Committee so chosen, shall have a
Competent allowance out of the said Scots Linen Joint Stock for their trouble
and pains, Reserving to the plurality of Votes of the Major part of the Joint
Proprietars in both Kingdoms, power to increass or lessen the number of Agents
as they shall think fit.

13. Item, It is also agreed, that the Subscribers shall have liberty to
transfer (...) own Shares in their own Transfer-books in each Kingdom, at the
lawful and usual days and times; and the said Books not to be shut without the
Consent of the Major Part of all the Joint Proprietars in each Kingdom.

14. Item, It is mutually agreed, that the Committee at London, shall be
acquainted, and have notice from the Commmittee of Trade and Store-keeper at
Edinburgh, of all the Quantities and several forts of Linen, the Lengths and
Breadths each Piece contains, and to send Patrons of each sort of Cloth they
have in the Company-store Edinburgh to the Scots Linen Company at London, for
them to see and try what each sort of Cloth is best and most Mercatable, and
what each sort of Cloth will yield and be sold for per Yard, Eln, or whole
Piece, and to send notice thereof to the Court or Committee of Trade at the
City of Edinburgh, and the said Committee of Trade to enquire into the several
Prices, of the several forts of Linen Cloth, and to examine and compare the
Prices, that such sorts of Cloth yield in Scotland, and what such sorts of
Cloth yield in England, with the Costs and Charges, by sending of such Cloth
to the Linen Committee at London aforesaid, and all such sorts of Cloth that
shall appear and Prove to yield the most Profit in England, (the Coasts and
Charges being allowed) all such said Linen Cloth shall be sent to the Scots
Linen Committee at London, to be disposed of to the best Market, in such
Quantities, and at such proper Seasons and Times, as shall be reasonably
ordered and appointed by the said Scots Linen Committees of Trade: And if it
should happen the said Committee and Court of Affistants, should not agree in
sending up the Linen Cloth in such manner as aforesaid, or that any other
great Differences should happen, that then in such Case, the aforesaid Comitte
of Trade shall acquaint the Governor or Chairman in Court assembled for the
time being, where such Differences may be fully heard, debated, and determined.
Upon their not agreeing, the Governor, Deputy Governor, or Chairman, shall
immediately call a general Court of all the Joint Proprietars in Scotland and
England, where all such Differences shall be heard, debated, and determined by
the Major part of all the Joynt-Proprietars; and in case there should be an
Equality of Votes, that then in such case, the Governor, Deputy Governor, or
Chairman shall have the casting Vote: But in case no general Court should be
called as aforesaid, that then in such case, the Scots Linen Treasurer shall
stop payment of any Money to carry on the Trade, until a general Court is
called, on pain of Forfeiting his Place, if he does not stop payment as
aforesaid.

15. Item, That the Scots Linen Cloth abovementioned, shall be sent up to
London as aforesaid, with a Letter of Advice to the Tresaurer, or Storekeeper
belonging to the said Linen Committee at London for the time being, with a just
and true Account of what Sorts and Quantities of Linen Cloth, they shall from
time to time send up to London as aforesaid, and the same to be sold and
disposed of to the best Market, according to such Allotements and Prices as
shall be made for the Sale thereof by one person, to be chosen by the Scots
Linen Comittee at Edinburgh, together with another person to be chosen by the
English Linen Committee at London, or Major part of them.

16. Item, It is further declared, that the Linen Committee of Trade at
Edinburgh shall enquire into what sorts of Cloth are most profitable in
Scotland, to be sold to the best Market there: And all such Cloth as shall
appear to be more profitable to be sold in Scotland, for the Good and Profit of
the general Joint Linen Stock, than the same can be sold for in England, shall
be sold in Scotland; and the Money for the said Linen Cloth shall be paid
into the Scots Linen Tresaurer, for the use of the Joint Linen Stock at the
same time the Cloth is delivered by the Store-keeper to the Buyers, but in
casethe Committee of Trade in Edinburgh shall know the Buyers to be sufficient
and responsable persons, and the Buyers to allow a reasonable Consideration for
the space of three or four Months Forbearance of paying the Money, which shall
be due for the said Cloth they shall so buy of the said Linen Company, that in
such cases, the Committee of Trade shall allow them such time for payment
abovementioned, as they the said Committee of Trade shall think fit at
Edinburgh.

17. Item, It is also agreed, that the Length Breadth of every whole Piece, or
half Piece of Linen Cloth, of all the several sorts to be made in the
Scots-Linen Society, shall be settled and a Leaden-seal to be aff(...)ixt to
the end of each Piece, the better to distinguish the Company Linen Cloth from
others.

18. Item, It is also agreed, that there shall be likewise a Committee of
Trade, consisting of six persons chosen by the Plurality of Votes of the Joint
Proprietars in England, to sit and do Business for the Good of the general
Linen Joint Stock in the City of London; and that a Chairman shall be chosen,
out of the six aforesaid Members to sit with them, and the Scots Linen Cloth
that shall be send to London to be sold, there shall be delivered to the
Store-keeper, who shall give good and sufficient Security to the English Linen
Court and Committee at London, and that it shall be in the power of the
aforesaid Linen Committee of Trade at London to trust any person or persons,
who shall buy any Quantity of the Companies Scots Linen Cloth for the space
and time of three or four Months, provided they know the Buyers to be
sufficient and responsable persons, and the Buyers to allow a reasonable
Consideration for the Forebearance of the Money, according as the said
Committee shall think fit, and the said Money for the said Linen Cloth so
sold, shall (when due) be paid into the London Linen Tresaurer at London, to
be by him returned to the Scots Linen Tresaurer at the City of Edinburgh for
the time being, for the use of the Scots Linen Joint Stock within thirty days
next after the Receipt of such Parts of Parcels of such Linen Cloth, with a
just and perfect Account of the same, together with th(...) benefit of the
current Exchange for the time being.

19. Item, It Is further declared, that what Costs and Charges shall be expenced
for Fraught Carriages and Storage, or any other Expenses or Charges relating to
the said Scots-Companies Linnen-cloath, the same shall be paid and allowed out
of the Scots general Linen joint stock.

20. Item, It is further declared, that a just Dividend of all the Profit,
shall be made at a just and reasonable convenient time, by the general consent
of the plurality of Votes, of all the joint Proprietars in the aforesaid two
Kingdoms of the Scots-Linnen Joint-stocks; And, that it shall be lawful for any
Subscribers and Members, to Transfer all, or any of their own Shares, to any
person or persons whom they shall think fit, into the Companies Transfer-books
at the several and convenient time or times; but it shall not be lawful for any
Member to withdraw his or their Stock, nor any part thereof, out of the general
Joint stock of the Scots Linnen-Company, nor the general Joint Stock be
dissolved, but the said Stock shall remain, to be employed to carry on the
Linen Manufacture in Scotland.

21. Item, Whereas there is but thirty hundred Shares to be subscribed for in
the Kingdom of Scotland, It is hereby declared, that the thirty hundred sharer
shall be divided and subscribed in manner following, That is to say, Twelve
hundred shares to be subscribed in the City of Edinburgh; To the Royal Burrow
of Perth, sixty five shares; To the Royal Burrow of Dundee, eighty five shares.
To the Royal Burrow of Aberdeen, one hundred and twenty shares; To the Royal
Burrow of Stirling, forty five shares; To the Royal Burrow of Linlithgow,
forty shares; To the Royal Burrow of St. Andrews, twenty shares, To the Royal
Burrow of Glasgow, three hundred and thirteen shares; To the Royal Burrow of
Air, forty shares; To the Royal Burrow of Haddingtoun fifty shares; To the
Royal Burrow of Dysert, fifteen shares; To the Roys Burrow of Kirkaldy, sixty
shares; To the Royal Burrow of Montross, fifty-five shares; To the Royal Burrow
of Couper, twenty five shares; To the Roys Burrow of Anstruther Easter, ten
shares; To the Royal Burrow of Drumfreis fifty five shares; To the Royal Burrow
of Inverness, fifty shares; To the Royal Burrow of Burnt-Island, twenty shares;
To the Royal Burrow of Innerkeithing, ten shares; To the Royal Burrow of
Kinghorn, thirteen shares; To the Royal Burrow of Breichen, fitteen shares; To
the Royal Burrow of Irving twenty shares; To the Royal Burrow of Jedburgh,
forty shares; To the Royal Burrow of Kirkubright, fifteen shares; To the Royal
Burrow of Wigton fifteen shares; To the Royal Burrow of Pittenweem, thirteen
shares; To the Royal Burrow of Dumfermling, twenty eighth shares; To the Royal
Burrow (...) Anstruther Wester, five shares; To the Royal Burrow of Selkirk,
twenty three shares; To the Royal Burrow of Dumbarton, twelve shares; To the
Royal Burrow of Renfrew, fitteen shares; To the Royal Burrow of Dumbar, twenty
share To the Royal Burrow of Lanerk, twenty shares; To the Royal (...)
Aberbrothick, eighteen shares; To the Royal Burrow of Elgine, (...) shares; To
the Royal Burrow of Peebles, twenty shares; To the Royal (...) of Craill,
fifteen shares; To the Royal Burrow of Tayn, thirteen shares; To the Royal
Burrow of Culross, ten shares; To the Royal Burrow of Bainff, sixteen shares;
To the Royal Burrow of Whithorn, ten shares; To the Royal Burrow of Forfar,
twelve shares; To the Royal Burrow of Rothsay, thirteen shares; To the Royal
Burrow of Nairn, ten shares; To the Royal Burrow of Cullen, ten shares; To the
Royal Burrow of Lauder, fifteen shares; To the Royal Burrow of Forres, thirteen
shares; To the Royal Burrow of Rutherglen, ten shares; To the Royal Burrow of
North-berwick, ten shares; To the Royal Rurrow of Kilreny, ten shares; To the
Royal Burrow of Annan, ten shares; To the Royal Burrow of Senquhar, ten shares;
To the Royal Burrow of Galloway, ten shares; To the Royal Burrow of Dingwal,
ten shares; To the Royal Burrow of Dornoch, ten shares; To the Royal Burrow of
Queens-ferry, twenty shares; To the Royal Burrow of Fortross, thirteen shares;
To the Royal Burrow of Kintore, ten shares; To the Royal Burrow of Innerara,
fifteen shares; To the Royal Burrow of Inverurie, ten shares; To the Royal
Burrow of Wcik, fifteen shares; To the Royal Burrow of Kirkwal, thirty five
shares; To the Royal Burrow of Innerbervie, ten shares; To the Royal Burrow of
Strathnaver, ten shares; To the Royal Burrow of Lochmaben, thirteen shares; To
the Royal Burrow of Cromartie, seventeen shares.

22. Item, It is further declared, that in case at any time hereafter, there
shall be necessary occasion for to increase the aforesaid general Joint
Linen-stock of thirty thousand pound Sterling, for the better carrying on of
the said Linen-Trade in the said Kingdom of Scotland, that no Sum or Sums of
money, shall be raised or borrowed for the time being, unless the same be upon
a just and reasonable Occasion, and as the said Linen-Trade shall require the
same. And in case any Sum or Sums of money shall be hereafter raised, to carry
on the said Trade as aforesaid, That then the same shall be laid out, and
employed to the sole and proper use of the said Linen-Trade, and all things
relating thereto, and not otherways; and that the said Money so to be raised,
shall not at any one time exceed the Sum of one pound Sterling per each of the
aforesaid sixty hundred shares, in one Year at most; which said one pound
Sterling per each share, will amount unto the Sum of six thousand pound
Sterling; provided always, that the Members of the Linen-Company, have lawful
and due notice sent to them two Months before such payment, that they may have
due time to provide the same. But in case any of the said Members should not
pay in, or cause to be paid in, the aforesaid Sum of one pound Sterling per
share, they have in the Joint stock, according to the time limited to the
Linen-Treasurer, or Treasurers, for the use aforesaid, that then, and in such
Case, it shall be lawful for the Committee of Trade; to Sell and dispose, of
one or more of the said, Persons Shares, so in Arrear to any Person or Persons,
who shall give most for the said Shares, for to Pay and answer the Arrears and
Debts, such said Members owes to the Company: But no more Share of such
Members, so in Arreats, shall be sold, then what shall prove sufficient to
answer the Debt, due by him to the Company; And in Case there should be any
over plus of Money left, after the said Shares are Sold, and such Persons Debt
satisfied and Paid, that then such overplus shall be justly returned, and
paid unto the aforesaid Member. And it is also Declared, that no Member shall
be liable to be sued by Law, either in person or Estate, by reason of any Debt
he owes to the Company, relating to his Shares, he has in the Joint Stock, but
the Shares of such person of persons, to be only answerable for his, or their
Debts, he owes to the Companies Joint Linen Stock.

23. Item, It is further Declared, and thought Reasonable and necessary, that
the Joint Proprietars-shall be Informed once in every three Months of all
Proceedings, that they may give their best Advice and Assistance, for the
Carrying on of the said Trade.

24. Item, It is further Agreed, that a General Court shall be called, and fit
four times every Year at the least, at the said City of Edinburgh, and that due
notice thereof shall be given to all the Proprietars in both Kingdoms, or their
Agents: Who shall give the Proprietars due notice of the same, by Affixing an
Advertisement in writing, upon the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and at the Royal
Exchange in the City of London; Twenty days before any such of the aforesaid
General Court shall fit. That is to say, the first General Court to be held on
or about the first day of November next, ensuing the date of these present or
within fourteen days then next after, the second General Court to be held on
the first day of February then next after, or within fourteen days then next
after, the third General Court to be held on the first day of May, then next
ensuing, or within fourteen days then next after: The fourth General Court to
be held, on the first day of August then next ensuing, or within fourteen days
then next after, which will be in the Year of our LORD, One Thousand (...)
Hundred Ninety-Five.

25. Item. It is also Declared, that it shall, and may be lawful to, and (...)
the chiefest Agents of the English Linen Subscribers, or Major part of them, to
(...) chosen off, and added to the Grand Committee, of the said Scots Linen
Society at Edinburgh: They the said Agents, having lawful notice from time to
time given them of such Committee for them, to be there when they please, an^
shall, and may be also always of the Linen Courts and Committees of Accounts
and all others now and hereafter to be settled Linen Committees, or Managing
the said Trade. And may have free liberty at all times hereafter, to Oversee,
and Inspect the Treasurers Accounts, and all other Accounts relating to the
said Linen Manufactory, and to Copy out the same, and to send true Coppies
thereof, to the English Linen Commitee at London, if they think fit, the said
English Agents to be Paid by the English Linen Committee.

26. Item, For all other matters, or things not herein or hereby Expressed,
contained or provided for, that if any difference shall hereafter arise,
concerning these present Articles, and Linen, or any differences concerning the
ordering or Managing the said Linen Trade: That then, such differences shall be
settled, Agreed, and composed by the plurality of Votes, of all the Joint
Proprietars of both Kingdoms, at the next General Court, next following, at the
aforesaid City of Edinburgh.

27. Item, It is further Declared, and Agreed, that there shall be six Trustees
nominated and appointed, to whom the General Joint Linen Stock shall be
Assigned, and made over in Trust, for the whole Linen Company in both Kingdoms;
Which said six Trustees, shall give good and sufficient Security, to the liking
and Satisfaction of the Major part of all the Joint Proprietars, concerned in
the General Joint Linen Stock: Three of which said six Trustees shall and may
be chosen at the said City of Edinburgh, by the plurality of Votes, of all the
Joint Proprietars in Scotland: And the other three Trustees, which makes up the
aforesaid six Trustees, shall, and may be chosen in the City of London, by the
plurality of Votes, of all the Joint Proprietars in England; Provided always,
the aforesaid six Trustees shall be obliged to re-deliver up the aforesaid
Trust to the Linen Company, at any time, when by the plurality of Votes, of all
the Joint Proprietars in both Kingdoms, of the General Joint Linen Stock, shall
be thereunto required, as Free from Encumbrances, as they had the same.

28. Item, It is further Declared, that the Subscribers shall have a Certificat
under the Common Seal, or otherways, of the said Linen Company, for each one
Share they shall subscribe for in the Linen Subscription Books, wherein shall
be mentioned the several Days, and Quarterly Times of Payments, as in the
Articles limited: and when soever the Subscribers minds to dispose and Transfer
in the Companys Transfer-Books, any of his Shares, to any person or persons
whatsomever, such Members shall at the same time of the Transfer, deliver to
the Purchafer, or otherways his Certificat relating to the same, for each and
every Share he shall so dispose of, to the person to whom he Transfers the said
Shares.

29. Item, It is also Declared, and Agreed by all and every the Subscribers,
now and hereafter, to be concerned in the Scots Linen Subscription Book, and
Joint Stock that Nicolas Dupin Esquire or his order shall have, and receive
from each, and every Subscriber, the Sum of Eight Shilling Sterling, for each
and every ones Share, they and every one of them shall Subscribe for, to be
Paid to him, the said Nicolas Dupin or his order as aforesaid, upon
Subscription, he or his order giving a receipt under the said Nicolas Dupin his
hand, signed for the same, which aforesaid Eight Shilling Sterling, being in
consideration of the said Nicolas Dupin, his great costs and charges, pains and
Industry, in promoting and helping to Procure Subscriptions, for the raising a
General Joint Stock, and his Traveling in charges from one Kingdom into
another, to promote and encourage the Linen Manufactory, in the said Kingdom of
Scotland; and for his several other Charges, and Expenses he has, and must of
neossity be at, in promoting and encouraging the said Linen Manufactory, in the
said Kingdom of Scotland.

30. Item. It is hereby also Declared, That whereas several persons who have
subscribed Twelve hundred shares in the Scots Linen Subscription Books at
London in England, and in pursuance of certain Articles in the said
Subscription Book, bearing date on, or about the thirteenth Day of November,
One Thousand-six hundred ninety three, Did pay to Nicolas Dupin Esquire, the
sum of nineteen shillings sterling per each share at subscription: It is hereby
Declared and Agreed, That all the aforesaid Subscribers who have not sold, or
otherways Disposed of their said Twelve hundred shares aforesaid, or any number
of them to other persons, shall have free liberty to come in and subscribe in
the Subscription Book, belonging to these present Articles, for so many shares
as they now have, and have not sold and disposed of as aforesaid, in certain
Articles, bearing date on or about the seventh Day of February, One Thousand
six hundred ninety three; and the aforesaid Persons to be freed from paying the
sum of eight Shillings sterling for each share, which is to be paid to the said
Nicolas Dupin upon subscription, by these present Articles, and the said
Nicolas Dupin to give the said subscribers aforesaid his receipt for the eight
shillings per each share aforesaid, for such number of shares they shall
subscribe for, as if such subscribers had paid down the same in specie;
provided always the said Subscribers come in, and Subscribe in the
Subscription Book relating to these present Articles at London, at any time
before, Twenty hundred of the said thirty hundred Shares in these present
Articles mentioned, shall be subscribed for at London.

31. Item, It is also Declared, That whereas by certain Articles, bearing date
on or about the seventh Day of February, One Thousand six hundred ninety three,
several persons at Edinburgh in the Kingdom of Scotland, have subscribed the
number of six hundred Shares in the Linen Subscription Books relating to the
aforesaid Articles, the same being part of eighteen hundred shares subscribed
in the whole. It is hereby Declared, That all the aforesaid Subscribers, who
have not sold, or otherways disposed of their said Shares, or any number of
them, to other persons, shall have free liberty to come in and subscribe in the
subscription Book, belonging to these Articles at Edinburgh, for so many Shares
as they now have in the aforesaid Articles, and the aforesaid persons to be
freed and excepted from paying the sum of eight Shillings Sterling per each
Share, which is to be paid unto the said Nicolas Dupin upon Subscription by
these present Articles, and the said Nicolas Dupin to give the said Subscribers
his Receipt for the eight Shillings per share aforesaid, for such number of
Shares as they shall subscribe for, as if such Subscribers had paid to him the
same in specie; Provided always the aforesaid Subscribers come in and subscribe
in the subscription Books, relating to these present Articles at Edinburgh, at
any time before twenty four hundred of the said thirty hundred Shares in these
present Articles mentioned, shall be subscribed at Edinburgh in Scotland.

32. Item, It is also Declared, That every person or persons shall have one
Vote for each and every five Shares as he has in the general joint Stock to
Vote for, and if he has to the number of twenty Shares, that then he shall have
four Votes to vote for at every general Court, but no more.

33. Item, It is further Declared, That when ever any of the Courts of
assistance, or any Committee relating to the Linen, shall at any time sit to do
business, each Member shall in that Court and Committee have but one Vote to
vote for, and no more.

34. Item, It is further Declared, That no Subscriber in Scotland shall have
liberty to Subscribe above Twenty Shares at most, at his or their Subscription
(the Chief Royal Burrows aforesaid only excepted) so that they come in before
the Books be filled, whilst there is room to subscribe.

35. Item, It is also further Declared, That the majority of Votes of all the
joint Proprietars of both Kingdoms at a general Court assembled, shall and may
have liberty to make Bylaws, for the better Government of this Linen
Manufactory, Provided that such Bylaws shall not be contray or repugnant to
the Laws of this Kingdom, and such Bylaws shall be approved of by some of the
chiefest Judges of the said Kingdom of Scotland.

36. Item, It is also Declared, That there shall be no benefit or advantage
taken (...), but that each and every persons interest shall devolve and come to
(...) Administrators or Assigneys.

37. Item, It is also Declared, That every person who purchases any Shares
from the first Subscribers, shall accept of the said Shares by Transfer in the
Companies Books, and such New Purchasers shall be bound and obliged by all and
singular the Articles abovementioned, and written as if they were Parties
thereto by Name subscribing.

38. Item, It is also Declared, That no Subscriber in London shall be admitted
to subscribe above twenty Shares, the English Linen Corporation only excepted.

39. Item, It is also Declared, That if the Linen Treasurer to be chosen at
Edinburgh by the plurality, of Votes, of all the joint Proprietars in Scotland,
should at only time hereafter during his Treasurership, fail, break, or any
other ways miscarry with the Companies (...), or any share thereof, that then
in such case the Scots Linen Company shall be responsable for the Loss and
Damage thereof, to the English Linen Company.

40. Item, It is also Declared, That if the English Linen Treasurer to be
chosen at London by the plurality of Votes, of all the joint Proprietars in
England, should at any time hereafter during his Treasurership, fail, break, or
any ways miscarry with the Companies Stock, or any part thereof, that then in
such case the English Linen Company shall be responsable for the Loss and
Damage thereby to the Scots Linen Company.

41. Item, It is also Declared, That if the full number of Shares allowed to
the Royal Burrows, and Cities in the Kingdom of Scotland, should not by them be
subscribed for by the time hereafter limited next ensuing, that then and in
such case it shall and may be lawful to, and for any other person or persons in
Scotland to come in and subscribe the remaining part of such Shares as shall be
left by them unsubscribed for, as aforesaid.

42. Item, It is also Declared, That it (...) the full number of thirty hundred
Shares abovementioned, to be subscribed for in Scotland, should not be
full-subscribed for i^ that Kingdom by the said fourteenth Day of October next
ensuing as aforesaid, that then and in such case it shall and may be lawful to
and for the English Nation to subscribe the remaining part of such Shares as
shall be left unsubscribed for in Scotland as aforesaid, over and above the
thirty hundred Shares, allowed to the English, as aforesaid.

43. Item, It is also Declared, That in ease the thirty hundred Shares above
mentioned, (...) in England, should not be fully subscribed for in (...)
Kingdom by the fourteenth Day of October next ^^suing, as aforesaid, that then
and in such case, it shall and may be lawful to, and for (...) person or
persons in Scotland to come in and subscribe the remaining (...) Shares as
shall be left so unsubscribed for in England as aforesaid.

44. Item, It is Declared, That if any of the Subscribers shall at any time
hereafter be willing to sell and transfer any of his own Shares to any person
or persons, that then in such case it shall be lawful for any member of the
Linen Company to purchase the aforesaid Shares, it being more reasonable that
any Members of the Company should have and buy the said shares than any
stranger, notwithstanding any thing in the Articles beforementioned to the
contrait.

FINIS.

