Answers for Alexander Hamiltoun of Kinkel, To the Petition given in be way of
Answer, for John Ayttoun of Kinaldy against him,
THE said Alexander Hamiltoun of Kinkel having given in two Petitions to his
Grace, and the Honorable Estates of Parliament, the one whereof was General,
and the other Special condescending upon the Right and person, in relation to
which the clause in the General act anent prescriptions is craved to be
extended. Kinnaldie gives in a Petition by way of answer, wherein he
represents, that the Right of Woodset condescended upon in Kinkels second
Information was Redeemed; But that not being hujus loci, all that I shall say,
is, that it was no other ways Redeemed than by elicting upon Deathbed, the
Discharge and rennonciation condescended upon in my second Petition, and that
for no Onerous cause, as shall be made appear in due time.

In the nixt place, he gives particular reasons why the desire of my Petitions
should be refused; And 1 mo. Because there being a Reduction of the said Right
depending before the Lords of Session, who are Judges competent. It is
impracticable to anticipat their Decisions when the parties concerned are not
called.

To which it is Answered, that the Authority of King and Parliament is
Sovereign, and cannot be declined, nether is it impracticable or unusual for
that Honorable Court to re^one person^ losed in the (...) oppresive (...)
against the said opp^^sions, and ru^^ing consequences thereof* and that either
by General, or special Acts, and without any regard, whither the same by
consequence, may be prejudicial to causes depending before the Lords of Sesion
or not; And even without Citation, or hearing of parties, which was imposible
by reasons of the vast number of Donators, and such others, and also was
needless, in regard that by such a Restitution against the Injustice of
Arbitrary Power, no particular persons Right was directly impugned; And it is
clear by the General Act anent Fines and Forefaulturs, and several particular
Acts in favors of Forefaulted persons, for repetition of the bygone Rents of
their Lands; And the King and Parliament are the only competent Judges in many
such cases, in respect the Lords of Session, and other inferior Judges being
more strictly oblidged to the Letter of Law, are not capable to give persons
oppressed a Just and full redress.

Although it is humbly conceived, that in this case, the Grounds of Common Law
would stop the course of prescription while Kinkel was non valens agere, if the
mentioning of shorter prescriptions only in the foresaid clause of the General
act did not make the case more doubtful, although it is very probable that
there being the same reason of equity for discounting the foresaid years of
oppression in long prescriptions, that the mentioning of shorter prescriptions
was not intended by way of Restriction; But because there was greater ground to
doubt as to them, or because these short Prescriptions were only under the
Parliaments view, as a case wherein greater numbers of people might be
concerned, and therefore Kinkel has good ground to apply to the Parliament for
explaining, and extending the said Clause; and also Kenaldies complaint of this
method as singular as groundless, especially seeing the same was actually done
in a case betwixt the Earl of Airly and Sir John Damster, and that there is the
same Reason in long and short prescriptions, as said is; As also, seeing Kinkel
was obliedged to make a particular Condescendance, to the effect Kinaldy might
give in his Answers, which he has accordingly done, and which supplies the want
of a Citation.

To the second Reason it is answered; It is most groundless for Kinaldy to
allege, That Kinkel delayed to insist in this Process, until he was sure of
the Death of his Witnesses insert in the Renounciation. Seeing 1 mo. The true
Reasons of delay, were his bad Circumstances the time, and because Kinkels
papers, when his house was Garisoned were robbed, and he could not have access
to them, until a little before the intenting of the said Reduction, as also he
is clear to depone that he never saw the said Renounciation, nor knew any
manner of way who were the witnesses insert therein. 2 do. Kinkel has proven
his reason of Reduction, ex capite Lecti by witnesses yet living, and beyond
all exception. 3 tio. As Kinkel could not then foresee such a happy Change by
which he might Exspect more impartial Justice. So no man can imagine, he would
have suffered prescripion to run against him, If he had been in the least
Measure valens agere; And where it is alleged there was nothing to hinder
Kinkel from intenting this Reduction dureing the Lifetime of his brother in
Law, Judge Kerr.

It is Answered, that as Kinkel was then stated with Kinaldy instigat the
Archbishop to persecute him, and took from the Bishop the gift of his Escheat
about the time he was under an Process of excumunication, and Kinkel being
ingadged to Kinaldy upon the account of Cautionrie, and under summar execution
for several sums, and further his affairs being otherwise perplexed: It is a
frivolus inference from Kinkels for bearing in such an unfavourable Junctur to
ingadge in a tedious and expensive pursuit to conclude that he was conscious of
the injustice of the Plea, Especially considering that he knew there were 20
Years of the Prescription then to run during which space, and at any time
therein he might have pursued as certainly he would have done, If he had not
been Debared by the Legal incapacity the violence of the time brought him under.

To Kinaldies 3d reason, it is Answered, he thereby clearly Insinuats which he
exptesly confesses in other parts of his Petition, That he has no other defense
to appone to Kinkels just claim: But that of prescription which being in it
self a little not very favorable, is in this particular case wherein a great
number of these years ran against Kinkel when he was non valens agere, as said
is most odious and unjust, and therefore no regard ought to be had to the
representation he makes of the great loss he will sustain by reponing of
Kinkel, Seeing on the other hand Kinkel has lain under the pressure of the said
loss ever since the granting of that renounciation, and if Kinaldy be involved
in 60 Thousand Merks because he is forced to testore to Kinkel a part of his
own which he has so long Possessed upon an invalid tittle neither Kinkel nor
the judges are to blaime.

And as to his alledgance, That if there had been any Just grounds for Kinkels
claming this Sums he would have objected it by way of compensation in several
pursuits at Kinaldies Instance against him, and would certainly have mentioned
it when he disponed his other lands to Kinaldy in satisfaction of these Debts;
as also when Kenaldy obtained Decreets of General and special Declarator of
Kenkels single and Lifere^t Escheat.

It is answered. That these pursuits were for liquid debts and could not be
compenced by the sums contained in this Woodset, until Kinkel had first
obtained a Reduction of the foresaid Renunciation, and after that he had
intended a process of Count and Reckoning, and thereby stated a Liquid sum due
by Kinaldy upon the account of the Woodset; which being a long and expensive
process: It is clear the same could not be soon discussed as to furnish Kinkel
with a defense of Compensation against Kinaldies more summar pursuits, as also
these very pursutes which Kinaldy did rigorously and unmercifully prosecute
against Kinkel with the bad circumstances he was under the time by the Bishop
of St. Andrews, his persecution did reduce Kinkel to so great Extremity: That
he was hardly able to maintain his Family with Bread, and no wonder if at that
time Kinkel thought it not fit to engadge in tedious and expensive processes,
Especially considering that at that same time under a process of
Excommunication at the Archbishop Sharp's instance, at which time Kinkels
Escheat was gifted to Kinaldy, who joined with the Bishop in persecuting
Kinkel, in the redeeming whereof it was upwards of 3500 Merks, during which
severities Kinkel was forced to remove from his own house to live at a great
distance from the Bishop, and was shortly after denunced fugitive by the Lords
of His Majesty's Privy Council for not compearing when cited for Ecclesiastic
Nonconformity, and it is easy to judge if Kinkel under such circumstances had
great Encouragement to enter into an expensive process against one so well
stated as Kinaldy was at that time, for the stories Kinaldie tells of his own
sufferings, I shall not trouble His Grace and this Honorable Court with the
true account of the Matter of fact, which would be little to Kinaldies Credit,
only it is clear he was not fined for refusing to be a Militia Captain; But on
the contrar did accept and exercise that Employment though indeed he was fined
some time after for having cowardly deserted when there was Appearance of
Action.

Kinaldies fourth Reason for refusing the desire of my Bill is, That during the
time of Kinkels Confinement to Edinburgh, and when he was so much as under a
Denounciation or intercomuning, he might have raised a Summonds and given a
Citation, which would have stopped Prescription, and that in the year 1684 the
time of Kinkels pretended intercommuning, he did advocat a Cause at Kinaldies
instance against him, and did several other Acts.

It is answered, 1 mo. I am not seeking Deduction of any years wherein I was
only confined, but only during my intetcommuning and Indictment. 2 do: It is
denied that in the year 1684. I was valens agere, it is true indeed that
Kinaldy having at that time raised a Process against me and my Tenants, an
Advocation was exped in their Name, which could not have been in my own, seeing
being denounced and intercommuned, no Lawyers could at my instance have
mannadged that, or any other Process, as also I had not personam standi in
Judicio upon the accounts foresaid.

It is further represented for me, that Kinaldie is ungenerous, so frequently
to mention my debts, seeing the other Estate belonging to my brother who
granted that renounciation in favors of Kennaldy was transmitted to me with
the Burden of the said debts.

And seeing by the grounds of the common Law, and upon the same reason that his
Majesty's Commissioner for the time, and the Honorable Estates of Parliament,
reponed persons lesed against shorter prescriptions, they ought also to be
reponed against long prescriptions; And seeing Kinkel is able to depone* that
as soon as ever he was Master of the foresaid Woodset, which was carried away
with the rest of his Writes when a Garrison was put in his house, he sent it to
his Writer, to the effect he might raise summonds of Reduction, which further
clears that the only reason of Kinkels forbearing this Process so long, was his
not being in a cappacity to prosecute it.

May it therefore please his Grace the Lord High Commissioner, and the Right
Honorable Estates of Parliament, not only to repone Kinkel against so many of
the years of this Prescription, as run against him while he was not valens
agere by reason of Denounciation intercommuning and a Process of Treason
depending against him; But also to give some effectual relief to his swae
distressed and ruined Family, in compensation of his grievous and long
sufferings.


