DE VENTRE INSPICIENDO: OR, REMARKS ON Mr. ASHTON's ANSWERER In a LETTER to a
Friend.
Dear SIR,
IN Compliance with your Commands, obliging me to give you my Thoughts upon
what the Answerer of Mr. Ashton's Speech has said in Relation to the Civil and
Common Laws, which he has been pleased to produce (as he thinks, conducing to
his purpose) you receive this. You very well observe that this Answer has
prevailed with many (especially those whose Education has not enabled them to
examine his Quotations) to entertain Opinions that we were very hardly, d^^l^
with, as to the Affair of the Prince of Wales, contrary both to the Laws of
Nations, Civil and Old Common Law of England. All that I have to alledg in the
matter, is, that the Civil Law never made Provision in such a Case as the
Prince of Wales happens to be; because unreasonable, as I shall demonstrate in
this following Letter: And as for his Old Common Law, i will appeal to all the
unprejudiced World, if it reaches the business he brought it in for. His Laws
of Nations I shall not concern my self in, both as it is not enjoined (...) by
you, and likewise because it is too abstruse; but it will be I think, sufficient
for me to prove, he prevaricates with the Laws (I mean Civil and Common) which
the generality of our English World are better acquainted with, and so leave
you to judge of the sincerity of the Person: For 'till he convinces me that it
is a Law of Nations for every Prince to prove (when the next presumed Heir does
or does not demand it) That the Child, he is satisfied, was Born of his Wife,
be truly so; though such a thing might happen when she was perhaps at Prayers
in her Closet, etc. I say, till he proves this to be usual amongst all Nations;
For as Justinian (who I think, understood the Law of Nations as well as this
Gentleman) defines the Laws of Nations to be, it is, Quo jure ^^nes Gentes
utuntur, Instit. lib. 1. Tit. 2. Sect. 1.
I believe I may very well forbear any thing of that matter. It will not be
unnecessary, if I hint that the freedom I use is caused chiefly by the Security
a private Letter ought to carry with it, which I suppose, will sufficiently
admonish you of the Caution and Circumspection you are to use in Exposing it.

First then, he Asserts that the Civil Law upon any Occasion of Suspicion
(observe the word of Latitude, ANY OCCASION, etc.) Did Order that Notice be
given twice a Week to the Parties concerned; that they may receive full
satisfaction; that the Mother is to be kept in an House by it self, etc. As in
the Answer to the Speech; and all this upon any Occasion of Suspicion. In
Answer to which, I reply, what the Civil Law mentions in Relation to Spurious
Issues, or Supposititious Births, may be reduced to a very narrow Compass,
without leaving any thing material unsaid. The Sanatus Consultum Plancianum (of
which Digest. Lib. 25. Tit. 3. de Agnoscendis and Alendis Liberis) contains two
Cases; of which the fi^^^ Commands that a Woman Divorsed from her Husband,
shall within thirty days after this Divorse give Notice to her Husband, if she
be with Child, that he may take care of, and make provision for it; or that the
Husband deny the Wife to be so with Child by him; which if he does not do, he
is obliged to take care of, and Educate the Child that shall be Born of her.
The second is, That those Women who after a Divorse, feign a false Birth,
render themselves Obnoxious and Punishable; as the Law in such Cases has
provided: Of which see Cod. Lib. 9. Tit. 22. Ad Legem Corneliam de falsis.
Which was then Capital, but was afterward moderated by the Emperor Leo. Novel.
77.

But in the Time of Marcus Antoninus and Verus Emperors, there happened two New
Cases; and by consequence, required a new Remedy; the first was of a Woman
Divorsed from her Husband, who denied she was big with Child by him; the
Husband Asserted she was: upon which (the Man earnestly desiring an Heir to his
Family) the Emperors wrote to Valerius Priscianus the Praetor of the City, That
it seemed most fit to them upon the Husband's Request, that three Midwives
should be sent to this Woman and in^pect her Body, etc. Of which Digest. 25.
Tit. 4. de Ventre inspiciendo. The other Case was, of a Woman, who after the
Death of her Husband affirmed her self with Child; upon which the Praetor
Commanded, That, that Woman who, after the Death of her Husband, Asserted her
self to be with Child, should give Notice twice a Month to them, to whom this
matter did appertain, viz. The next Heirs at Law; that satisfaction might be
given them, etc. As in the Answer p. 13. From hence, Sir, I think you may
plainly discern the disgenuity of this Answerer. For I appeal to you, and
profess I would to all Mankind if the forementioned Cases (and yet they are
those he refers us to; and I Challenge him to give me any other in Civil Law,
any ways relating to supposititious Births) have any Relation to that of the
Prince of Wales: The first of these Cases, being between a Husband and his Wife
after a Divorse: The second, of the Inheritance and Possession of an Estate,
between the Relations of a dead Husband and the Wife, who Asserted her self
with Child. But in the Case of the Prince of Wales, I think there was no
Divorse; neither could there be any dispute of Inheritance in the business,
when his Father, King James, was then alive; and consequently no such thing as
Succession or Mission in the Possession of the Goods of him who was still
living. For the Rule in Civil Law is, Viventis nulla est haereditas neque
^uccessi^, according to the 29. Dig Tit. 2. L. 19. de Acquirenda vel omittenda
haereditate. From all which I infer, That (supposing the Civil Law, which this
Gentleman has been pleased to Quote, were indeed Common Law (upon which the
true State of the Controversy alone depends) and more over in the great
Charter of England) that King James was not obliged to such a Formality,
neitheir of the Cases amounting, in the least, to have him concerned in them.
By the by, I cannot omit wondering, since this Gentleman seems to be so mightily
taken (and I may well enough add so mightily mistaken) with Civil Law, he did
not gratify the World with an Exposition of the Edict of the Emperors
Dioclesian and Maximinian Cod. Lib. 9. Tit. 22. L. 10. de partu supposito.

Cum suppositi partus Crimen Patrui tui Uxori moveas, apud Rectorem Provinciae,
instituta Accusatione, id proba. So that from Civil Law it is not any Cause of
suspicion will do the business, but proof must be made to render it sufficient
-- Actori Incumbit Onus probandi. And so much for his Civil Law. With this
likewise exactly agrees the Basilicon, (...), Lib. 31. Tit. 7.

In this business I have designedly waved giving you the Exposition of the most
Celebrated Civilians Cujacius, Molinaeus, and Faber, upon these passages, I
have had occasion to quote, because I was loath to have my Letter swell to a
Volume. But if any curious Gentleman will take the pains to examine the Learned
Works of the forementioned Civilians, he will find their Expositions agreeable
to what I have produced these Laws for.

I shall now briefly observe what I judge material to object to his old Common
Law, and then take my leave of him and you for the present. I shall save both
the Expense of Time and Paper, if I only desire you to peruse that Chapter in
Bracton, to which his Margin does refer you; you will find it chiefly concerns
what the Civil Law, I mentioned before, provided for: And as for Fleta (who
almost in every thing follows Bracton,) he says, That supposing the Husband and
Wife being Summoned by the King to appear before the Sheriffs, upon Complaint
of the next Heir, that they have Forged and Suborned a supposititious Child. To
use his own Words. Si potentes videbantur esse Parents, ad Prolem suscitandam
pro haerede judicabitur nisi querens decere possit Contrarium. That if the
Parents be thought able to get Children (their Child) shall be adjudged Heir,
except the Plaintiff can prove the contrary. Take Notice here what both Bracton
and Fleta say, That this Writ is to be Issued out by the King, etc. Therefore
granting this were now true Law (which I deny) yet I cannot perceive how it
would reach the King. For who is so mad to suppose the King would issue out a
Writ to his Officer, for the Examining the Queen, his Wife, with whose Issue he
himself is well satisfied* His friend Bracton would have told him according to
his Old Law, That if the King Rule indeed contrary to the Laws of the Land;
that all that Subjects ought to do in the matter is to have recourse to
supplication (to use his Words,) Cum Breve non currat contra ipsum.) That he
would correct his Error, which (says he) if he refuses and denies to do, it is
altogether sufficient punishment for him, That he expect God a Revenger. For
(as he goes on) no Man may presume to call his Actions in Question, much less
rise up against his Act. Bracton. lib. 2. cap. 8. de acquirendo rerum Dominio,
fol. 5.

To end all, I Will transcribe you what our Oracle of the Law of England says in
this matter. Youll, without difficulty, suppose, I mean my Lord Cook.

For the Benefit and Safety of Right Heirs contra partus suppositos, the Law
has provided Remedy by the Writ de Ventre Inspiciendo, whereof the Rule in the
Register is this. Nota. Regist. f. 227. Bracton. l. 2. f. 69. Britton. f. 165.
Fleta. l. 1. c. 14.
si quis habens Haereditatem duxerit aliquam in Uxorem, and postea moriatur
ille sine Haerede de Corpore suo Exeunte per quam Haereditas illa Fratri ipsius
defuncti descendere d^beat; and Uxor dicit se esse pregnantem de ip^ d^functo
cum non sit, habeat Frater and Haeres Breve de Ventre inspiciendo. It seems
by Bracton and ^etu, which followed him, that this Writ does lie ubi Uxor
alicujus in vita Viri sui se pregnantem fecit cum non sit ad Exhaereditationem
very Haeredis, etc. Ad querelam very Haeredis per praeceptum Domini Regis, etc.
which is to be understood according to the Rule of the Register: when a Man
having Lands in Fee-simple dies, and his Wife soon after marries again, and
feigns her self with Child by her former Husband: In this Case, though she be
married, the Writ de Ventre Inspiciendo, does lie for the Heir. But if a Man
seized of Lands in Fee (for Example) has Issue a Daughter, who is Heir
Apparent; She in the Life of her Father cannot have this Writ for diverse
Causes. First, Because She is not Heir, but Heir Apparent; for; as has been
said, Nemo est Haeres Viventis; and this Writ is given to the Heir to whom the
Land is descended. And both Bracton and Fleta say that this Writ lies ad
querelam very Haeredis, which cannot be in the Life of his Ancestor, and
herewith agrees Britton and the Register. Secondly, the taking a Husband, in
the Case aforesaid, being her own Act, cannot bar the Heir of his lawful
Action once vested in him. Thirdly, the Law does not give the Heir Apparent any
Writ; for it is not certain whether he shall be Heir Solus Deus facit Haeredes.
Fourthly, the Inconvenience were too great, if Heirs Apparent in the Life of
their Ancestors, should have such a Writ to examine and try a Man's lawful
Wife, in such sort as the Writ de Ventre Inspiciendo does appoint; Or if She
should be found to be with Child, or suspect; then She must be removed to a
Castle, and there safely kept until her Delivery; and so any Man's Wife might
be taken from him against the Laws of God and Man. So far my Lord Chief Justice
Coke. Instit. Part. I. lib. 1. cap. 1. lib. 1. fol. 8.

You may now see what obliged our Answerer to run to his Civil and Old Common
Law, the first being little practiced in England, and neither that nor Old
Common Law understood, but by the most eminent Professors. But for the modern
Exposition of Laws, he supposed we were a little better versed in. I hope some
of our able Lawyers will take care to vindicate the Honor of their Profession,
and not suffer it to be thus abused by crafty People, to insinuate Falsehood
into, and poison the minds of the Ignorant and Unwary. For my own part, what I
have here said, is just what my Leisure would suffer me hastily to set down,
and therefore wants those Ornaments both of Method and Elegance I could wi^h it
clothed with; however, considering it an Epistle of one Friend to another, it
carries, I hope, its Pardon along with it. Before I take my Farewell, I cannot
omit saying somewhat to the grand popular Objection generally urged, That it is
not expected that the Birth of the Prince of Wales be proved Spurious, since a
Negative will not admit of Proof. To which I answer, That the asserting his
Highness, the Prince of Wales not to be K. J's Son is an Affirmative. For
suppose I assert Titius not to be the Son of Cajus, I affirm him to be the Son
of Somebody else: So till the Prince of Wales be proved to be the Son of
Somebody else than of K. J -- s, I should do a very great Injury to Equity and
Common Justice (since his Father has owned him) should I pronounce him a
Bastard. Beside, the Matter never came to Litigation or Dispute; and to hang
People before we judge 'em, has ever, I think, been deemed and looked upon as
too severe and unjust. We ought, in an Affair of such Moment, to be very wary
and cautious how we proceed; since the Example, I fear, may be of direful and
pernicious Consequence. Encouraging you still to be steadfast in the Truth, I
take my Leave of you with these excellent Lines of Horace, Justum and tenacem
propositi Virum
Non Civium ardor prava Jubentium;
Non vultus instantis Tyranni,
Men^^ quaetit solida.


I am, Dearest SIR, Your most Faithful and Affectionate Friend And Humble
Servant.
April 5.. 1691.

