ANSWERS For the Burghs Royal, to the MEMORIAL in behalf of the Burghs of
Regality and Baronie and Other Unfree Traders.
THe Memorial is so ill digested, that it is much more easy to answer it, then
to resume it.

The Heads principally complained of, are, that Retailers in unfree Burghs
should be liable. and Secondly, that the proportion of 10. lib: of the
Taxt-Roll of 100: lib, is an over proportion upon the unfree Traders.

But to clear this matter from all the Mistakes contained in the Memorial, the
true import of the Act of Parliament 1693. for the Communication of Trade, is,
first, to be considered, and by the said Act these points are evident. 1. That
the Act ratifies and approves the Contract betwixt the Burghs Royal and Mr.
John Buchan about the ten pounds which he undertook of the 100. lib, for the
Communication of Trade that he was thereby allowed to grant. 2. After the
Expiration of Mr. John Buchans Contract, the Communication of Trade should
continue, The Burghs of Regality, Baronie and other unfree Traders, paying or
relieving the Royal Burghs of a just proportion of the 100 lib: of the Tax-roll
effeiring to their Trade, and which Proportion was to be equally condescended
on by the first general Meeting of the Royal Burrows after the Expiration of
the said Contract, and so forth thereafter with a Provision of Relief by the
Parliament; Whereby it is evident, that the Memorial pleading for a perpetual
Communication, must also acknowledge, that the power of rating the Trade of
unfree Burghs and others, and burdening them with an effeirand Proportion of
the Tax-roll, and distributing the same among them Belongs in the first place
to the Convention of the Royal Burrows under Correction of the Parliament. And
3. That for this Communication the Parliament, Strictly discharges all persons
whatsomever, to exercise any kind of Trade, except Burgesses in Royal Barghs,
and these who pay their Proportion of the said Quota: Whereby it is manifest,
that by this Article of the said Act of Parliament, unfree Burghs and others
refusing to pay their Proportion, and accept of the Communication, are not to
claim the Benefit of the Act of parliament 1690. But are expressly discharged,
to exercise any kind of Trade; and the Acts of parliament made in favors of
Burghs Royal are to be put in full Execution against them, as if the Act 1690:
or Act 1672: had never been made, and it is positively ordained, that none be
exempted.

This being the plain meaning and import of the Act 1693. Its evident, that
Retailers that have not the Benefit of the said Communication are liable as
unfree Traders; Likeas the Lords of Session, did most justly find by their
Decreets, that they were so liable which is an evident Confirmation; And
farther what can be more unreasonable, then' that the unfree Burghs and other
unfree Traders, should pretend to this Liberty of Retailing free of all Burden,
when it is perfectly known, that almost all the inland Burghs Royal of Scotland
have no Trade; but that of Retail, and yet pay their proportions of the
Tax-roll for the Liberty thereof: But the true Reason and Ground whereupon the
Act of parliament 1693. proceeds, puts this matter beyond all Debate; In as
much as it is evident, that the parliament judged the Communication so great
equal and easy a Favor, that they likewise judged, that none that should
refuse it could pretend to any manner of Trade to give them any privilege
above the meanest Burgh Royal, which is exactly the case of Retailers that the
Memorial most unreasonably pleads for, nor can there be any thing more
manifest, then that the foresaid Act 1693, for Communication of Trade, did take
away all former Liberties indulged to unfree Traders, and brought the matter
precisely to this point either accept of the Communication offered, or
otherwise give over all Trade exerced by the Royal Burrows, either by Export or
Import, or by Retail, since the true design of the Act was, thas unfree Brughs
and others, shoul either accept of the Communication with its just burden, or
otherwise, that the Burghs Royal should have all the Trade without exception,
but no ways that unfree Burghs should have their freedom to accept or not; And
yet though not accepting be in a better case, then the far greater part of the
Burghs Royal, which were most absurd.

The Memorial seems to suppose, that the Act 1693: was only a Ratification of
Mr John Buchans temporary Contract with the Burrows, but the contrary is so
manifest by the Tenor of the Act, making the Communication perpetual, and this
Communication the only Ground of any Liberty for Trade, that who ever reads it,
must acknowledge that this Act 1693. was purposely designed to terminat all
differences betwixt Burghs Royal and unfree Traders, and to bring the unfree
Traders to this precise point, either accept of the Communication or Trade none
at all.

The second ground of Complaint contained in the Memorial, is, That the
Proportion of Burden laid upon the unfree Traders, is much heavier then that
upon the Royal Burghs effeiring to their respective Trades. But 1. The Memorial
represents both justly and ingeniously, that any alledgiance of this kind, can
no ways militat against Mr. John's Buchans relief and reimbursement for the
bygone five years of his Contract; for seeing that he ingadged therein optima
fide and had the Authority of the Parliament, confirming the same, and upon the
Faith alswell of the Act of Parliament, as of his foresaid Bargain and
Contract, has made such considerable Advances of public Payments, beside the
vast Charges he has been at. It were the greatest Iniquity imaginable, if he
should not in the first place, be fully reimbursed of all his Advances and
Charges with Annualrent thereof; specially seeing, that he has recovered such
Decreets before the Lords, as would undoubtedly obtain him full payment, were
it not his Tenderness to occasion so great trouble even to those that are
Refractory: And farther, such is Mr. John's unwillingness to distress these
unfree Traders, that he is content to allow them five years and a quarter from
Lambass last, for reimbursing the Sums due to him, and to take his payments
Quarterly, providing that these concerned will agree to any sure Method,
whereby his Reimbursement may be made effectual.

But 2. This Complaint of Inequality betwixt the Burghs Royal and the
Vnfree-Traders, is wholly groundless, ^s may appear by the Taxt-Roll given in
by Mr John Buchan to the Lords of privy Council, whereby it is evident, that
the Sum then Stented was 13 lib. 10 s. upon the consideration of 3 lib. 10 s
added for Mr. John's Expenses, and advance of Money; yet the Burden thereby put
upon the Unfree-Traders, was not half so great as the Burden of the Burghs
Royal in the respective Shires, Comparing Trade with Trade. 3. To make this
Point more clear by Examples, the Unfree-Traders in Linlithgow-shire and those
of Roxburgh-shire, do both complain to the Parliament, that they are
over-burdened, and yet the Unfree-Traders in Linlithgow-shire, that is, the
Towns of Borowstounness, Grange-pans, etc. are only stented to 22 s. in the
Taxt-Roll, whereas the Town of Linlithgow that has not the tenth part of their
Trade, is Stented to 30 s. And as for Roxburgh-shire, the Unfree-Traders there,
viz. the Town of Kelso, Hawick, Melross, and others therein, are only Stented
to 21 s. when the Burgh of Jedburgh alone is 26 s. albeit it has not the
fourth of the Trade of the foresaid Unfree-Traders in that Shire, and so the
like Examples may be given in almost every Shire of the Kingdom; and it can be
made appear, that the Unfree-Burghs have three times more Tunnage in Shipping,
(which is the greatest part of the Trade of the Nation,) then the Royal Burrows
have, whereby it may plainly appear, that when the Royal Burrows demand of the
Unfree-Traders the Sum of 10 lib. only in the Taxt-Roll, and that they Stent
themselves, and pay in their several proportions to the General-Receiver, their
Burden is by far less and in effect not the third in proportion to the Royal
Burrows, in the several Shires of the Kingdom.

The Memorial alleges, That the Royal Burrows have Lands, and considerable
Common Goods, whereby they may pay a far greater proportion then the
Unfre-Burghs. To which it is Answered, That several Royal Burghs, as Dyser^,
Culross, Easter-easter, and others, have no common Goods, and yet do pay their
part of the Taxt-Roll to all Cesses and Supplies, effeirand to their Trade. But
2. It is most certain in general, that the common Goods given to Burrows, was
not at all given to them for the payment of their sixth part of the Cess,
Supply, and the like public Burdens, but really and truly for the support
only of the respective Burghs, as to their particular and respective Expenses,
for Watching, Warding, building and repairing of Prison-Houses, providing and
^urnishing of Guard-Houses, maintaining of their Kirks, Harbors, and other
public Works, sending of Commissioners to Parliaments, Conventions of Estates,
and general and particular Convention of Burrows, and defraying their other
incident Expenses, to all which, it is well known that the common Goods of the
Royal Burrows are so little sufficient, that the greatest part of them have
been necessitat for these very ends and uses to Stent their Inhabitants, or
contract Debt, to which might be added, that several Unfree-Burghs have also
common Goods. But 3. The truth of the matter is, that Cess, Supply, and the
like Burdens, whereof the Royal Burrows bear the sixth part, are directly
Imposed on them in regard of their Trade, and the Estates personal and real
that their Burgesses have arising from it, of which Cess and other Burdens, it
is well known, that even their real Estates bear so small a proportion of it,
that they are not only exceedingly burdened, but were they to pay the foresaid
public Dues out of the said real Estates, the same in many parts would be
quite exhausted, but in effect all this is but Trifling! It is the Trade of the
Royal Burghs that is considered as to the payment of Cess and Supply, and since
the Vnfree-Burghs, and others, have the Communication thereof by Act of
Parliament, it is most just, and ordained by the same Act, that they should
also bear their proportion of the said public Burdens, and when their Interest
in Trade shall be duly considered, as above-demonstrat, it will plainly appear
that the foresaid 10 lib. of the 100 lib. is a very moderat and easy
proportion, and would be certainly found so, if the distribution thereof were
once equally and fairly settled.

And where it is alleged, That the Custom-Books are the best rule for valuing
the Trade, and that by these it will appear that the Unfree-Taders have not the
fourtieth part of the Trade of the Nation. It is Answered, That the
Custom-Books are no rule: For 1. A great part of the Burden on Trade, is paid
by Retailers in Burghs Royal, whose Trade neither does nor can appear in the
Custom-Books. 2. The Trade that does appear by the same Cnstom-Books, is again
diffused to the Retailers in Vnfree-Burghs, as well as to the Retailers in
Burghs Royal. 3. The Custom-Books are only kept at Sea-Towns and Ports, where a
great quantity of Goods is entered in other men's Names, and for certain does
not belong to the Merchants of the respective Burghs Royal, but to Merchants of
other Towns, both free and unfree, as may be seen at Leith, Newport-Glasgow
Prestoun-pans, Borrowstounness, etc. 4. If certain Unfree-Towns, as
Borrowstounness, Grange-pans, Prestoun-pans, Greenock, Kelso, and the like,
were rated according to the Custom-Books, these alone would pay the 10 lib.
without burdening the rest of the Unfree-Burghs, whereby it is manifest, that
the Custom-Books are no rule in this matter; but the true and only just rule
is, that the proportion of Trade, whether by Export, or Import, or Retail,
should determine the proportion of the Burden, and by this rule it will quickly
appear how light a part the Unfree-Traders have by the said 10 lib. proportion.

But the true, short, and clear account of this whole matter is, that such of
the Unfree-Traders as have the real Benefit, will not agree to an equal
distribution of the 10 lib. among themselves, which would render all easy, and
therefore a clamor is raised on the account of some of the smaller
Unfree-Burghs, that their own Neighbors only, endeavor to over-burden. But 1.
As to what is past, let Mr. John Buchan be relieved, as all do agree And 2. As
to the future, let the Unfree Traders, either take upon them the Burden of the
said 10 lib. which for certain (if justly divided) will be both light and
easy; or otherwise, let them give over, and renounce all Trade in favors of
the Burghs Royal, who will never decline the whole Burden, when they shall have
the whole Trade, according to the true meaning of the said Act 16^3, and there
is an end of the Contraversie.

The Memorial does also plead, That the Unfree-Burghs undergoing their
proportion of the Taxt-Roll, may also be allowed to be represented in the
Conventions of Burrows, but by what right or reason? The Royal Burghs are such
by their Charters of Foundation and Erection, whereby they also make the third
Estate of the Kingdom, and have the Right of their Conventions established by
many Acts of Parliament, whereas the Unfree-Traders are really Usurpers upon
the Burghs Royal, as to the point of Trade, and the Communication is only
introduced as an expedient, that seeing that they will and do ursurp Trade, they
may have a lawful Title to it, paying their just proportion of the Burden,
which can never be a ground to give them access to other Privileges of the
Royal Burghs, whereof there is not the least Vestige or Title in the Acts of
Parliament, and in effect all the vagrant Chap-men in the Country may as well
crave to be represented in the foresaid Convention, as the foresaid
Vnfree-Burghs. They allege indeed, that since they come in to bear Burden, and
have a visible Interest, to see that they be not wronged in altering or
changing of the Taxt-Roll, they ought also to be represented; but the Act of
Parliament 1693 is most clear in the contrary, giving (as reason is) the power
of proportionating, and likewise of altering and changing the Taxt-Roll,
expressly to the Burghs Royal, in their general Coventions, and providing no
other remedy for the Vnfree-Burghs, if over-burdened, but to apply to the
Parliament, which is indeed sufficient; and since they have such an easy Offer
of Communication, it is but too visible, that all their quarrellings at the
Burden that attends it, are plainly partial, self-interest, and untoward Humors.


