ABBREVIAT Of the Depositions of the Witnesses, Adduced by the Earl of
Lauderdale against the Earl of Aberdene.
1. THE Earl of Aberdene when he was only President of the Session, and neither
Chancellor nor Officer of State, procured and wrote for a Commission, for the
Trial of the Mint.

The Viscount of Tarbat in Answer to the 2d. Interrogator, Depones, That the
Earl of Aberdene did write out of England to the Deponent, to haste up a
Commission for Trial of the Mint, and that accordingly the Deponent did send up
a Draught of a Commission, and thinks he has some Letters to that purpose, but
at present cannot find them out.

2. When the Earl of Lauderdale was going to London, and that the Earl had
obtained his Majesty's leave to that effect; Yet the Earl of Aberdene was so
earnest in the prosecution of the Commission of the Mint, that he refused to
let him go.

The Duke of Queensberry in Answer to the first Interrogator, Depones, he was
present when the Earl of Lauderdale offered to take leave of the Earl of
Aberdene, but what past betwixt them, he did not know, only he minds, that the
Earl of Aberdene told him, that he had refused to let him go up, till the
business of the Mint should be over, and cannot be positive, whether the Earl
of Aberdene called a Council, or a Quorum of the Commission of the Mint, but
one of them he believes was called, and that a Clerk was sent to order his
stay, to attend the Commission of the Mint.

3. That the Earl of Aberdene had a prospect and design the time of that
Commission; and before the raising of the Process for the benefit of the event
thereof, and that he dealt for the same.

The Viscount of Tarbat in Answer to the 5th. Interrogator, Depones, That
Aberdene did recommend to the Deponent (when he was going to Court) his Affairs
in general, and to speak to the King in his savours, which the Deponent did;
but the Deponent had no Commission from Aberdene anent the Mint in special; And
Depones, That the Deponent understanding, that the Money due upon the Mint was
to be exacted; he proposed the same to the King, in savours of Aberdene, albeit
he had not any special Commission for it; but what was the King's Majesty's
Answer, the Deponent conceives he is not holden, and is not free to condescend
thereon.

To the 8th. Interrogator he Answers, That as to what past in private betwixt
the King's Majesty and the Deponent, he refuses to answer; but as to a Letter
sent to, or received from the Earl of Aberdene, Depones, That he did acquaint
the Earl of Aberdene of the Deponent, This was before the raising of the
Mint-Process.
his proposing to the King, that the Earl might have a Gift of what was due
upon the Mint, and that this was in the Harvest time, 1682. And that Aberdene
did write, and return Thanks to the Deponent, for making the proposal in his
behalf, which Letters the Deponent thinks he has, but cannot at present find
them out.

The then Lord Chancellor in the midst of his Answer to the 4th. Interrogator,
Depones, That the first suspicion he had, that the Earl of Aberdene had
interest in that Affair, as to his own particular, was, when the Vote was put
concerning John Falconer the Warden his Deposition, whether it did prove
sufficiently, or not; and when that Vote was like to miscarry, as to Aberdene's
intention in it; Aberdene said to the Lords, that if this was the way they
served the King, they who were the King's Judges, (or to this purpose) that he
would be forced to let the King know of it: To which the Lord Pitmedden
Answered, That he wished the King were amongst the Lords, to Judge of their
carriage; that then the Deponent began to suspect that Aberdene had some
particular interest in it, not having observed formerly, that the King's
business made him so forward.

Colonel Grahame to the first and second, Depones, That the Earl of Aberdene
then Chancellor, and the Duke of Queensberrie Lord Thesaurer, employed the
Deponent upon some public Accounts, and at the same time the Deponent was
employed by them to move the late King, and King James (then Duke) some things
relating to their present private Affairs, and particularly for a Gift in
favors of the Earl of Aberdene, of 1000 lib. Sterling a year, or 20000 lib.
Sterling, This was during the dependence of the Process.
which was thought to be equivalent; and before the Deponent went out of
Scotland (being about the end of February 1683.) he went to my Lord Thesaurer's
Lodging, and had his allowance upon the matter, as to the quantity; after
which, the Deponent went to my Lord Aberdene, and acquainted him with it, and
communed with him upon the different Fonds, that it could be made out of; and
amongst others, that of the Mint. But whether or not Aberdene, or the Deponent
proposed it first, the Deponent cannot be positive, but remembers particularly,
that when the Deponent proposed, that in case the Lands of Dudhope were taken
from the Earl of Lauderdale, the House, Parks, and Constabulary of Dundee,
should be given to the Deponent by the King; that the Earl of Aberdene answered
to this purpose, that he should be very well content, but that he heard, it
will be little useful to either of them, because they were resolved to part
with nothing; however he allowed the Deponent to ask that Gift of the 20000
lib. Sterling, as freely out of that Fond, as out of any other; and accordingly
the Deponent, when he came to New-mercat, where the late King, and King James
were for the time, he did represent to the King, (and then Duke) the Services
of the Earl of Aberdene, and endeavored to persuade his Royal Highness to
gratify him with some considerable Gift, and particularly with 20000 lib.
Sterling, and told his Highness, that several Fonds might be found for it, such
as the Fines, and the Decree of the Mint; all which his Royal Highness heard,
and said, he would speak to the King about it; and als far as the Deponent can
remember, he said further, when my Lord Middletoun came, he would see something
done, and this the Deponent did signify from New-mercat, by a Letter to the
Earl of Aberdene, the 13th of March 1683, and Depones, That when he spoke to
the Earl of Midletoun, to savor himself anent the House and Parks of Dudhope,
the Earl of Midletoun Answered that he could not do it without Aberdenes
Consent, and said something as if he had been someways engaged to him in it;
and so soon as the Decree of the Mint came up, the King having given Warrant
of before, a Letter was drawn by the Advice of the Earl of Midletoun, and the
Deponent who best knew the Lands, and the nature of the Gift, ordering the Earl
of Lauderdale to dispone the said Lands, as is more fully expressed in the
Letter for that effect, direct to the Lord High Thesaurer; But withal, the
Deponent declares als far as he remembers, he had no advice from the Earl of
Aberdene thereanent; but after he gave him an account what was done, he had his
approbation.

The Deposition bears, That Aberdene had written to the Deponent several
Letters, wherein were public concerns, which he produced, but only read these
parts thereof that concerns this Affair.

The first Letter is without a date, and bears these words; I hope you do not
think I am less sensible of your kindness, that I doubt of the effects of the
Mint affair, since both the Earl of Middletoun and your self, are of a (...)
mind, and say only this, That I could not do half so much for my self, were I
present: This Letter makes mention, that Aberdene had received one from the
Deponent of the last of March.

The second Letter is dated the 14th. of April thus, The Duke has asked no
opinion of me, but what he should do in the Affair of the Mint, and als hard to
give you advice at this distance anent it, not knowing what may be his
Majesty's, or the Dukes purpose therein, further than that you should
cheerfully comply with what you see is their inclination.

The 3d. Letter is dated the 24 of March, which being torn, there could be no
more read of it than follows; I could not but let you know that I would be very
well satisfied in what you do for your self anent 1. (...) and Jurisdiction ye
wrote of, and do thank you for your care in my Concerns. 2. (...) think that
project will be little useful 3. (...) you or me, for they are resolved 4.
(...) nothing on that account; and the Deponent thinks so far as he remembers,
that the words that are wanting and torn of the Letter, has been these, First,
(anent the House) The 2d. is, (I) The third (useful for) And the 4th (to part
with nothing, or do nothing on that account) And upon the other side of the
same Piece of the Torn Letter, swa far as the Deponent can make sense thereof,
it is to this purpose, I shall Answer your Letter more Particularly by the next;
The Lands about Dundee and the rest, are not of that valued Rent you write, and
Tweedale Leads the Teinds of Innerkeithing, nor would I have so much stress
laid upon that Project, if his Majesty should please to make effectual for me,
that which you name, in any way he seems fit (which the Deponent thinks he
meant to be the 20000 lib.) I shall think my self very much obliged to my Lord
Middletoun and your self, and am very well satisfied with your own success that
way.

To the 7th. Depones, he never heard his present Majesty tell his own Thoughts
concerning my Lord Aberdene, his being both Judge and Party; and what has past
besides in Discourse betwixt the present King's Majesty and the Deponent, the
Deponent conceives he is not holden to give an account thereof.

4. That the Earl of Aberdene took unwarrantable Courses in the Trial, and
Process of the Mint, which is evinced in these following particulars.

1. The Earl of Aberdene gave spes veniae to Sir John Falconer, to Depone
against the Earl of Landerdale, and assurance of keeping of his place.

My Lord Chancellor Depones, in Answer to the first Interrogator, That he has
very often heard my Lord Aberdene say in general, That any Officer of the Mint,
who would make Discoveries of my Lord Lauderdale's Malversation, would do the
King good and acceptable Service; and that Aberdene often has said to the
Deponent, that if he would speak to Sir John Falconer, to make such
discoveries, Sir John might expect great favor in his own particular.

In Answer to the 3d. Interrogator, Depones, That the Marquess of Montross has
often told the Deponent, that he had a Warrant from my Lord Aberdene, to give
assurance of Indemnity to Sir John Falconer, if he would inform against the
Earl of Lauderdale, and that the Deponent has just ground to believe, that the
Marquess of Montross gave a very fuil assurance of Indemnity in the Earl of
Aberdene's name.

The Viscount of Tarbat in Answer to the 3d Interrogator, Depones, That he
heard the Marquess of Montross, and the Earl of Perth several times say, that
they were warranted to give assurance to Sir John Falconer, if he would confess
all that he knew concerning the Mint, and that it should not prejudge himself.

My Lord Reidfoord in Answer to the first Interrogator, Depones, That Sir John
Falconer having compeared at the Bar, and offered to speak in that affair, to
the best of the Deponents memory, my Lord Aberdene told him from the Bench,
that if he took that course, he behoved to take his hazard of the issue, or
something to that purpose, but does not remember if Sir John Falconer did
appear thereafter.

My Lord Collingtoun in Answer to the first Interrogator, Depones, That Sir
John Falconer did offer to speak for himself, and did speak, but if he was
interrupted, the Deponent remembers not.

Sir John Falconer Depones most fully in this particular, That he was several
times dealt with by the Earl of Aberdene himself, and by the Marquess of
Montross, at Aberdene's desire, to Depone against the Earl of Lauderdale.

2. The Earl of Aberdene behaved himself with great concern in the Process.

My Lord Chancellor's Deposition to the 4th. Interrogator, which is insert in
the Probation of the 2d. Article, is repeated likewise in this place.

The Duke of Queensberrie in Answer to the 2d. Interrogator, Depones, That he
observed the Earl of Aberdene's zeal in that, and several other matters before
the Session, as to the prompting of Advocats, but the Deponent minds not the
particulars.

My Lord collingtoun in Answer to the 2d. Interrogator, Depones, That the Earl
of Aberdene then Chancellor, was very intent and forward in the business of the
Mint, but what private interest he had therein, or if he had any, the Deponent
knows not.

The Lord Reidfoord in Answer to the 2d. Interrogator, Depones, That my Lord
Aberdene did preside as one that was serious in the Affair, and the Deponent
looked upon him as earnest to bring the Process to a close.

The Lord Forret in Answer to the 2d. Interrogator, Depones, That the Earl of
Aberdene then Chancellor, appeared to be more concerned than usually he did in
ordinary Processes. And in Answer to the 7th. Interrogator, Depones, That the
then Chancellor his carriage to the Lords, and the words he then spoke to them
were unusual, but cannot condescend upon the words.

The Lord Salin to the 2d. Interrogator, Depones, That he heard the Earl of
Aberdene then Chancellor, resume the Debates, and very fervently urge these
grounds, which did agree most to his own opinion.

My Lord Pitmedden in Answer to the 2d. Interrogator, Depones, That in the time
that he was present at the Debates in the Inner-House, he heard the Earl of
Aderdene then Chancellor, desire the Advocats that were employed against
Lauderdale, to speak to certain Points that himself proposed, but remembers not
whether they were formerly mentioned by the Advocats on either side.

Sir Alexander Gibson in Answer to the first Interrogator, Depones, That the
Earl of Aberdene then Chancellor, did behave himself with concern and
forwardness in the Process of the Mint, more than he observed him to do in
other Processes; and at the time of the Debate, he did several times suggest,
or propose to the Lord Advocat Grounds and Reasons, to be urged against the
Earl of Lauderdale, and Officers of the Mint.

3. The Lords having after the Debate given their Interlocutor anent the
Copper-Coyn; and of which Interlocutor, the Earl of Lauderdale had gotten a
Copy from the Clerk. The Earl of Aberdene caused some days thereafter, alter
the Interlocutor, and was angry with the Clerk for giving a Copy thereof.

Sir Alexander Gibson in Answer to the 3d. Interrogator, Depones, That the
first Article of the Libel anent the Copper-Coyn, having been Debate, the Lords
gave their Interlocutor, whereby they Repelled the Defenses, founded upon the
King's exoneration and Act of Indemnity; and found that the same could not
secure the Defenders from being liable in restitution in quantum sunt
locupletiores facti, by the profits of the Copper-Coyns, more than was
contained in the Warrands; and the Deponent having written the Interlocutor in
these Terms (a Copy whereof he now produces, written by Sir Patrick Hume's Man's
hand, as the Deponent conceives) the Deponent did immediately after writing
thereof, show the same to the Lord Advocat, who was satisfied therewith; and
then the Deponent gave a Copy of it to the Earl of Lauderdale, who had called
for it; But Sir Patrick Hume, who was employed in that Process for the King's
interest, having seen the Interlocutor, he about two days thereafter told the
Deponent that it behoved to be Rectified: and these words, in quantum sunt
locupletiores facti, left out: And in the Outter-House, he gave the Deponent a
Note, or Memorandum, for altering the Interlocutor, to be offered to the Earl
of Aberdene, which Note the Deponent then gave to the said Earl, then sitting
upon the Bench, who having immediately moved the matter to the Lords; the
Interlocutor was altered, and made in the Terms as it now stands in the
Decree; and immediately thereafter, the Process being called, and the Earl of
Lauderdale's Advocats having Debated something further anent the Point of the
Copper-Coyn, they founded upon the Interlocutor as it was first written by the
Deponent, and whereof they had gotten a Copy (which Copy they offered to
produce) whereupon the then Lord Chancellor did sharply rebuke the Deponent,
for giving the Earl of Lauderdale a Copy of the said Interlocutor; but does not
remember that he discharged the Deponent to give any more Copies of
Interlocutors to the said Earl; but the Deponent having received the foresaid
Check, and the cause being of importance, and carried on for the King's
interest (as the Deponent conceived) he resolved to give no more Copies of
Interlocutors in that Process, until Sir Patrick Hume should first see them.

The Lord Pitmedden to the 4th. Interrogator, Depones, That he did see the Earl
of Aberdene cause alter an Interlocutor Judicially, and reproved the Clerk for
having given out a Copy of the Interlocutor.

4. That the Earl of Aberdene caused Vote John Falconer the Warden's single
Deposition, to be a sufficient probation against the Earl of Lauderdale, albeit
it was formerly voted, not to be sufficient.

The Lord Pi^medden in Answer to the 5th. Interrogator, Depones, That when the
Probation came to be Advised, the Question was moved, whether the Testimony of
John Falconer Warden, being but a single Witness, could be a Probation, The
Deponent being then to Vote in the Cause, desired of the Earl of Aberdene then
Chancellor, to call the Advocats to Debate that Point, how far a single Witness
in any case could prove, in regard the Deponent was unwilling to give a Vote
against the King, so long as he had hopes to be cleared; and this desire being
refused, and the Question being put to the Vote, the Deponent Voted, that a
single Testimony did not prove, and it was so carried by plurality of Votes.
After which the Earl of Aberdene did say, in these, or the like words, (Is this
the way, my Lords, you guide the King's Affairs, this must be represented) and
the Deponent Answered, God bless the King, it were happy for the Lords, that
his Majesty were often among them, to behold their Actions; And the Earl of
Aberdene Answered the Deponent in these, or the like words, how come you to
answer more than the rest: And thereafter the Earl of Aberdene did represent to
the Lords, that this Vote seemed to be contrair to a former Vote whereby the
Lords had found my Lord Lauderdale liable for the faults of the Servants. By
which the Deponent supposing, that the Earl meaned that Interlocutor, which was
pronounced when the Deponent was Ordinar in the Outer-House. He Answered to the
Earl, that he did not know of that Interlocutor, and therefore could say
nothing of it. And the Lord Hercarss desired the Earl to make his best use of
it: And the Deponent does not remember distinctly what followed, whether there
was a second Interlocutor, or Vote, or how the Interlocutor was Dictated; for
the Deponent was a little discomposed with what had past betwixt the Earl of
Aberdene and him in the Premises, and so took not notice.

My Lord Chancellor Perth's Deposition to the 4. Interrogator, which is
inserted in the Probation of the 3. Article, is repeated likewise in this place.

The Lord Reidfoord in Answer to the 3. Interrogator, Depones, that he
remembers John Falconer the Warden, his Oath was Voted not to be a sufficient
Probation; and that the Earl of Aberdene seemed to be discontent at the Vote,
and said it was the King's Interest, and if the Lords pleased, they might
Assoilie my Lord Lauderdale, or the Officers of the Mint; but remembers not
whether he expressed one or both of them: And that thereupon there was an
Overture made, that it was sufficient against John Falconer himself. And the
whole Officers being found liable in solidum, it might be looked upon as a
sufficient Probation upon that Head; and the Deponent thinks it was so carried
by plurality of Votes in a second Vote.

Sir Alexander Gibson, to the 4. Interrogator, Depones, that at the Advising of
the Probation, some of the Lords having demurred as to that Point, if the
single Deposition of John Falconer Warden of the Mint, was sufficient to prove
the quantity of Copper Coined in the first Journey. The Earl of Aberdene did
appear displeased, and in passion, used these expressions to the Lords that
this was not his Interest, but the King's Cause, and if the Lords pleased, they
might Assoilie the Earl of Lauderdale, or used words to that purpose. And
thereafter it being put to the Vote, The Lords found the said Deposition was
Probative upon that ground, that he being an Officer of the Mint, and Deponing
upon a matter incumbent to his Office and Charge, his Deposition did
sufficiently prove against himself, and consequently against the Earl of
Lauderdale, as being liable for him and the rest insolid^m* in the terms of a
formal Interlocutor, and does not remember that that Point was tune Voted, or
not, nor yet how the Votes ran, but that it was carried by plurality of Votes;
And Depones, that upon the Lord Aberdene's uttering the foresaids expressions,
my Lord Pitmedden said, that he wished the King were sometimes present to hear
them.

Adam Chrystie Depones, that at the Advising of the Probation, some of the
Lords said, that John Falconer Warden, seemed to be Examined before the
Commission as a Witness, as appeared by the style of his Deposition; (bearing,
John Falconer of such an Age, Depones.) And next, albeit he were Examined as a
Party, some of the Lords said, it was debateable how far it should operate
against another, albeit it were Probation against himself. And after some
Debate amongst the Lords, the Earl of Aberdene seemed to be angry and
displeased, saying, My Lords, This is not my private concern, but the King's
Cause. (If you will, for my part you may Assoilie the Earl of Lauderdale) And
afterward it was carried affirmative.

5. Albeit by the Interlocutor, the Lords found the Earl of Lauderdale only
liable for the rest of the Officers of the Mint, in solidum quoad the Buleon;
yet after the Interlocutors were drawn upon the Advising of the Probation, the
Earl of Aberdene caused apply the Interlocutors as to the Buleon, to the whole
other Articles of the Libel, and found the Earl of Lauderdale and Lord Maitland
liable in solidum, for the whole malversations of the rest of the Officers of
the Mint.

The Duke of Queensberry in Answer to the 2d Interrogator Depones, as to the
Earl of Aberdene's urging, that the Earl of Lauderdale and his Son might be
found liable for the rest of the Officers of the Mint. The Deponent does not
remember the Argument he made use of to that purpose.

The Lord Reidfoord, in Answer to the 2d Interrogator, Depones, that he thought
my Lord Aberdene earnest to have every one of the Officers of the Mint found
liable in solidum.

Sir Alexander Gibson, in Answer to the first Interrogator, Depones, That the
time of the Advising, the Earl of Aberdene was of the opinion, and did urge
that the Earl of Lauderdale should be found liable in solidum for the other
Officers of the Mint.

To the 4, 5, 6, and 7. special Interrogators, Depones, that after the Deponent
had drawn the Interlocutor, given upon Advising the Probation, Sir Patrick Hume
did draw another Draught of the Interlocutor in more ample terms, and in
special, as to the several Officers of the Mint, their respective
malversations; and therein the Interlocutor which was given upon debate, as to
the second Article anent the Buleon (finding the general Libel in solidum for
the rest of the Officers of the Mint) is applied and repeated, as to all the
Articles of the Libel relating to the Mint; Which Interlocutor Sir Patrick did
show to the Earl of Aberdene, the Deponent being present: And after the same
was read, the Deponent told he was not clear to Extract the Decree in the
terms of the Interlocutor, unless the same were brought to the Lords, and
considered; Whereupon the Earl of Aberdene ordained the Deponent to Transcribe
that Interlocutor, and to bring it in to be read before the Lords the next day,
which the Deponent did accordingly: And the Interlocutor being read, the Lords
did acquiesce thereto, and the Decree was Extracted conform to the samen.

The King declared, he would not have the Lord Maitland insisted against;
whereupon my Lord Maitland Compeared at the Bar, and declared he could not
Defend, and discharged his Advocats to Defend, and gave in a written
Declaration and Submission to that purpose: Yet notwithstanding he is made
Compearing, and no notice is taken of his Declaration, and refusal to Defend,
but is Decerned in solidum.

My Lord Chancellor Perth, in his Answer to the 6. Interrogator, Depones, That
in the Council held at Windsor (where were present, beside the Counselors of
the Scots Nation) Prince Rupert, the Marquess of Hallifax, the Duke of Ormond,
the Earl of Sunderland, the now Lord Thesaurer of England, etc. The late King,
of ever blessed memory, did declare, that whatever faults might be in the
Family of Lauderdale, or amongst the Officers of the Mint, he thought my Lord
Maitland was not chargeable with any of them.

The Earl of Belcarras, in his Answer to the first Interrogator, Depones, That
he was in a Scots Council at Windsor, where the late King's Majesty, after
hearing the report of the Commission anent the Mint, said, That my Lord
Maitland, (to whom his Majesty had spoken) was but a young Man, and had been
much out of the Country, and therefore thought he had little meddling in that
Affair; and his Majesty said, he thought he should not be meddled with; and
that after some debate in the Council about that matter, the Deponent thought
it was his Majesty's resolution, that my Lord Maitland should not be meddled
with in that Affair.

The Bishop of Edinburgh, in Answer to the first Interrogator, Depones, that
the late King's Majesty, in a Scots Council held at Windsor Castle, the 24. of
August 1682. After hearing the report of the Commissioo anent the Mint read and
considered, and that some in that Council had moved, that the Lord Maitland
might be turned out of his Office of being General of the Mint, als well as the
other Officers; His Majesty did say, that my Lord Maitland could not be guilty
of any malversations in his trust of the Mint, since his Majesty knew, that for
the most part he was out of the Kingdom, by his Majesty's own allowance, and
that he was very young: So if when at home any errors were committed by him,
they were to be imputed to his Father, under whose conduct he was; and
therefore his Majesty declared, he would not suffer my Lord Maitland to be
meddled with, or touched in that Process. All which his Majesty spoke, with a
great deal of zeal and concern for the Lord Maitland's interest.

The Viscount of Tarbat, in Answer to the 7. Interrogator, Depones, that in the
Council at Windsor, the Deponent heard the late King say, he would not have the
Lord Maitland pursued for the Mint, or some words to that purpose: But what the
Deponent heard his Majesty say in private, the Deponent conceives he is not
bound to declare it.

The Lord Forret, in Answer to the 6. Interrogator, Depones, that the Lord
Maitland did appear before the Lords, and declared in their presence, that he
would not Defend in the Mint-Process, and discharged his Advocats to compear
therein for him, and gave in a Declaration to that purpose in Writ.

The Lord Collingtoun, in Answer to the 6, Interrogator, Depones, that the Lord
Maitland did compear before the Lords, and declared, that he would not Defend
in that Process of the Mint, nor allow Advocats to defend for him, but referred
himself to the King.

The Lord Reidfoord, in Answer to the 6. Interrogator, Depones, that the Lord
Maitland did appear, and declare, that he would not defend in the Mint-Process,
nor allow appearance for him against his Majesty; and believes he did offer a
Declaration or Submission, or some Writ to that purpose, but it was refused at
that time: But does not remember whether the Lords opinion was asked or not.

The Lord Salin to the 6. Depones, that the Lord Maitland did compear at the
Bar, and did insinuat by discourse to the Lords, his own innocence, and little
accession to the mismanagment of the Mint, and that his late Majesty did very
well understand it; and declared he would not defend in that Process, but be
silent and absent.

Sir Alexander Gibson to the 2. Interrogator, Depones, that when the day of my
Lord Maitlands compearance was come (he being out of the Country the time of
the Citation of the rest of the Defenders) and he being called, he did declare
in presence of the Lords, that he would not defend in that Process, nor allow
Advocats to appear or defend for him, but submitted himself to the King's
Majesty, and gave in a Declaration Subscribed by him to that purpose, which is
in the Deponents hands: But it was found by Interlocutor, that the Lords could
not receive this Submission from the Lord Maitland; and that he being conjoined
with his Father in the Commission, the Process behoved also to go on against
him; and remembers not whether this Interlocutor was pronounced before the
Parties and Advocats were removed, or after; And in respect of that
Interlocutor, the Deponent conceived he could not insert the Lord Maitland his
Subscribed Declaration in the Decree.

To the additional Interrogator, Depones, that he had no express warrant from
the Earl of Aberdene, to mark my Lord Maitland compearing, nor give out he
Decree against him as compearing; but Depones, that he having Written the
Interlocutor, as to the Lord Maitland, according as it was pronounced, viz.
That the Lords could not receive a Submission from the Lord Maitland; but being
conjoined with his Father in the Commission, the Process must also go on
against him: And in regard he declined to propone any defenses in the Cause,
the Lords admitted the Libel to Probation against him; And the Act being
Scrolled accordingly, Sir Patrick Home who had the managing of the Process, did
score out these words, (In regard he declines to propone any Defenses in the
Cause) and caused Extract the Act against my Lord Maitland compearing, as will
appear by the Interlocutor, and Scroll of the Act, which are lying in Process;
whereunto the Deponent gave way, considering the trust that Sir Patrick Home
had in that Process.

Mr. James Dalrymple, in Answer to the 6. Interrogator, Depones, my Lord
Maitland did compear, and made a gentile and discreet Discourse in the terms of
the Interrogator, remembers not, if he gave it in in Writ, or not, but
remembers he said, he would make no Defense, nor would allow Advocats to
compear for him.

7. The Probation was not Voted severally, in relation to every Article, but
jointly, whether the Articles were proven or not.

Sir Alexander Gibson, in Answer to the 7. Interrogator, Depones, that at the
Advising of the Cause, the Probation was pointed and read, as to every Article
severally; but to the best of the Deponents memory, there were only two Votes,
one anent the Probation of the quantity of the Copper Coined in the first
Journey, and the other after the reading of all the Probation, as to the rest
of the Articles.

Adam Chrystie, before the end of his Deposition, Depones, that after the
Voting of John Falconer the Wardens Deposition, the remanent Articles of the
Libel severally, one by one, and the Probation relative to every one of them
was read in Praesentia, and in the close they were all Voted together, as the
Interlocutor was Written thereupon: So that to the Deponents best memory, there
was only two distinct Votes in Advising all the Probation.

8. After the Session was up, the Earl of Aberdene would have an Interlocutor
added to the Decree, which was not at all moved to the Lords, viz. That the
Officers of the Mint should be remitted by his Majesty to the Lords of the
Privy Council, or Justiciary, to be punished.

Sir Alexander Gibson, to the 1st, and 2d. of the 7. particular Interrogators,
Depones, that after the Decree was extended, and ready to be Subscribed, Sir
Patrick Home told the Deponent, that there was a Conclusion in the Libel,
whereupon no Interlocutor was given, viz. That the Officers of the Mint be
remitted to the Lords of Privy Council, or Justitiary, to be punished according
to Law, for their malversing; and did desire the Deponent to insert this
following Clause in the Decree, viz. As to that Conclusion of the Libel,
whereby his Majesty's Advocat craves, that the late Officers of the Mint having
committed such manifest and gross Acts of malversation, in relation to the
Mint, and their respective Offices, they ought to be remitted to the Lords of
Privy Council, or Lords of Justiciary, to be otherways punished according to
Law. The Lords superceded to give Answer thereto, but remits the same to the
King, that his Majesty may do therein, and give further order thereanent, as he
in his Royal Wisdom shall think fit and expedient. And the Deponent having
refused to insert that Clause, in regard he had no warrant for it; Sir Patrick
told him, that the Lord Chancellor expected it should be done, and desired the
Deponent to speak to him thereanent. And the Deponent having gone accordingly
to the Earl of Aberdene, told him, that Sir Patrick had desired him to insert
the foresaid Clause in the Decree, which he conceived he could not warrantably
do, seeing there was no Interlocutor for it. And the Earl said to the Deponent,
that there being such a Concluson in the Summons, it was necessary there should
be an Answer given thereto, and said, there was no hazard for the Deponent to
insert the said Clause, there being nothing concluded thereby against the
Defenders. And the Deponent Answered, he was not clear to do the same; and the
Deponent thinking it would not have been further pressed, and having some
business in the Country, went out of Town, resolving to return at night; But
about 3 or 4 hours thereafter in the same day, (being a Saturday) he received a
Letter from a Servant in the Deponents Chamber, who wrote the Decree, showing
him, that it was still insisted in, that the said Clause might be insert in the
Decree, and that there was to be a meeting of the Lords of Session to that
effect that night, and desired the Deponent to haste in to the Town; and
accordingly the Deponent having come, he went to Sir Patrick Home, who told him
that he had spoken to my Lord Aberdene, who told him he was now content the
Decree should be Extracted without that Clause.

9. The Earl of Aberdene, then Chancellor, was in use to threaten other persons
with Process at the King's instance, but for his own ends.

The Lord Chancellor Perth, in Answer to the 5. Interrogator, Depones, that the
Earl of Broad-Albane entreated the Deponent to interpose with my Lord Aberdene
then Chancellor, that the Process of Treason intented against him might not go
on, until the King were acquainted with the circumstances of that matter. That
my Lord Aberdene spoke to the Deponent, of purchasing his Lands in Caithness,
which purchase he pretended he was designing sometimes for the King (then Duke)
and sometime for Duke Gordon; though the Deponent has good ground to believe
since that it was not designed for either of them; and that the highest that
ever he heard the Earl of Aberdene offer, was 100000 pounds for the Earl of
Broad-Albans whole interest in Caithness: And that the Deponent was informed,
that the Process went on anent the Forefaulture, or was stopped, according to the
appearance of going on of that Bargain, or not. But when the Deponent said to
my Lord Aberdene, that it was not well to go on in that Process against my Lord
Broad-Albane, before the King was better informed of the matter: And that my
Lord Broad-Albane in stead of appearing to answer to the Criminal Process,
would go to London. The Lord Aberdene then said, he should not much trouble
himself about that, for he would send up his Libel after him.

The Duke of Queensberry to the last Interrogator Depones, he knows nothing of
the Bargain betwixt the Earl of Aberdene and Broad-Albane, but what he heard
from the Marquess of Athole: Only the Deponent remembers, that when the Earl of
Aberdene spoke to him of that Bargain, he pretended it was for the King or
Duke, and still shunned owing of it for himself.

The Viscount of Tarbat, in Answer to the 10. Interrogator, Depones, he knows
there was a Treaty betwixt the Earl of Aberdene and Broad-Albame, because both
Parties told the Deponent of it; but what was the Treaty, or the Price offered,
the Deponent remembers not; but only the Deponent thought then it was a low
price that was offered.

Colonel Grahame, in Answer to the 8. Interrogator, anent the Bargain betwixt
the Earl of Aberdene and the Earl of Mar, Depones, that the Deponent might
have said such a thing to the Earl of Perth, as is mentioned in the
Interrogator, viz. That the Deponent was afraid the Earl of Mar was like to
lose the Government of the Castle of Stirling, or his Regiment, if not both:
But Depones, that if he said it, it was out of no knowledge of any designs of
the Earl of Aberdene had to prevail with the Earl of Mar, to part with several
Superiorities in the North in his favors, or his threatening him with the loss
of his Regiment, or keeping the Castle of Stirling, or Tack of the Lordship
thereof, upon the account of these Superiorities, and knew nothing of the
Transactions betwixt them, anent the said Superiorities.

Octavo Novembris, 1682.
SEDERUNT, Haddo Cancellarius, Newtoun Praeses, Nairn, Tarbat Clericus
Registri, Collingtoun, Costlehill, Reidfurd, Pitmedden, Harcars, Saline, Boyne,
Drumcairn and Kemney.
THe which day the Lord Chancellor produced a Letter from His Majesty, direct
to him, which being read, the Lords ordained the same to be Recorded in the
Books of Sederunt; of which Letter the Tenor follows; Suprascribitur. CHARLES
R. Right Trusty and right well beloved Cousin and Counselor, We greet you
well; Whereas by Our Letter to you, bearing date at Windfor the twenty fifth of
August last bypast, upon Our hearing the two Reports fent unto Us by the
Commissioners, lately appointed by Us, for the Trial and Examination of the
State of Our Mint, of that Our Ancient Kingdom, We did signify, that We had
removed the persons therein named, not only from their respective Places and
Offices in Our faid Mint; But also from all other Public Offices and
Employments, which they did then enjoy under Us; And did likewayes order you to
take care, that Our Council should Command Our Advocat to prosecute them before
competent Judges, either Civilly or Criminally, as accords of the Law; It is
now Our Will and Pleasure, and We do hereby Authorize and Require you, to take
care that Our Council Command Our Advocat to prosecute the therein mentioned
Lord Hattoun, now Earl of Lauderdale, Sir John Falconer, Alexander Maitland,
and Archibald Falconer, civilly before the Lords of Session only, and when We
shall have an Account of the Refult of that Civil Process before them, We shall
thereafter signify Our Pleasure concerning any further matter, that may be
laid to their charge, in such manner as to Us in Our Royal Wisdom shall seem
fit: And in regard We did not in Our said Letter to you, of the 25th. of August
last, make mention of John Falconer, the late Warden of Our said Mint,
notwithstanding of his Malversation (which clearly appears by the Report of Our
said Commissioners) during his long continuance in the Place of Warden
aforesaid; It is also Our express Pleasure, that he be prosecute in the same
manner and method, which We have prescribed for the Process against the
persons already mentioned: For doing of all which, these Presents to be
Recorded, both in the Books of Our Privy Council, and of the Session (if
needful) shall be to you and them respective, and to all others who may be
therein concerned, a sufficient warrant: And so We bid you heartily Farewell.
Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the 2d. day of October, 1682. And of Our Reign
the thirty fourth year. By His Majesty's Command Sic subscribitur.

Double of the KING 's Letter, in favors of the Earl of Aberdene and Colonel
Grahame, 1683.
AT Edinburgh the eighth day of May One thousand six hundred fourscore three
years, His Majesty's Letter underwritten, direct to William Marquess of
Queensberrie, Lord High Thesaurer for the Kingdom of Scotland, and John
Drummond of Lundie, Lord Thesaurer-Depute, was presented and read, and ordained
to be Booked; Whereof the Tenor follows. Sic suprascribitur. CHARLES R. Right
Trusty and right well beloved Cousin and Counselor, and right Trusty and well
beloved Counselor, We greet you well, We have seen and fully considered the
Decree (bearing date at Edinburgh the 20 day of March last) obtained at the
instance of Our Advocat, against Charles now Earl of Lauderdale, Richard Lord
Maitland, and the other Officers of Our Mint, of that Our Ancient Kingdom, by
which they are found justly liable to Us in great and considerable Sums, much
above what we are informed, they are able to pay, and are thereby fully
convinced that their Malversations, and Abuses of their Trust have been so
great, that they ought not (for the terror of others) to pass without severe
punishment: Yet out of Our Royal Goodness and Clemency, being unwilling to
ruin them and their Families, and calling to mind the forwardness of the said
Earl of Lauderdale and Lord Maitland in Our Service, in several other stations,
and the many good Services done to Us and Our Royal Ancestors, by their
Predecessors; We have now thought fit to let you know, that seeing the said Earl
of Lauderdale and Lord Maitland, did fully submit to Our Determination, and
have since humbly begged, and Petitioned Our Favor; It is therefore Our Will
and Pleasure, That the said Charles Earl of Lauderdale and Richard Lord
Maitland, Dispone to Our Right Trusty and right well beloved Cousin and
Counselor, George Earl of Aber dene Our Chancellor, in the most ample Form and
manner, that he can in Law require, all and whole the Lands of Dudhope, Benvie
and Balrudrie, and all others whatsomever, lying within ten miles of Dundee,
which formerly did belong to the deceast Earl of Dundee, and have been since
possessed by the said Earl of Lauderdale, or the Lord Maitland; and also, that
they Dispone to the said Earl of Aberdene, all Houses, Tenements and Gardens,
lying within the Town of Dundee, or Bonnot-Hill, belonging to them, with all
the Right they have to the Passage on the Water of Tay, any manner of way, with
the whole Profits and Emoluments thereof; as also the Right of Patronage of the
Parsonage of Dundee, and all Superiorities and Feuduties, or other Duties
whatsomever, lying without the said Town, within the bounds aforesaid, which
formerly did belong to the said deceast Earl of Dundee, and were since possessed
by the said Earl of Lauderdale, or Lord Maitland, Make full Right of, and
Dispone to Our right Trusty and well beloved Colonel John Grahame of
Claver-house, The House of Dudhope, with the Garden, Orchard, Park and Planting
adjacent thereunto: as also the Office of Constabulary of Dundee, and all other
Jurisdictions, Privileges and Superiorities (and particularly the Rights,
Privileges and Emoluments of the first Fair) within the said Town; Together
with all other Rights, Profits and Emoluments therein possessed by the said Earl
of Lauderdale, or Lord Maitland, which formerly did belong to the said Earl of
Dundee, that are not there above particularly ordered to be Disponed to the
said Chancellor. Providing always that the said Colonel John Grahame pay to
Our said Chancellor twenty years Purchase for one years Liferent that can arise
unto him by this Disposition, which at any time has been accounted for in the
Rental books, as a part of these Lands, Disponed to Our said Chancellor: And it
is Our further Will and Pleasure, That the Rights of the said Lands, Houses,
Jurisdictions and Superiorities, and others generally and particularly
abovementioned, as well in favors of Our said Chancellor, as of the said
Colonel Grahame, be free of all Burdens and Incumberances whatsoever,
especially the Warrandice of the Lands and Estate of Craig, the Lady Maitland
her Jointure, and the depending Process at the instace of the late Earl of
Dundee's Creditors; Or otherways, That the said Earl of Lauderdale, or Lord
Maitland, Give such Warrandice as shall be satisfactory to Our said Chancellor,
and the said Colonel Grahame, for their respective Securities in the
Premises: upon the performance of all which abovementioned, We do hereby
Declare, That We will give a full and general Indemnity, Remission and
Discharge to the said Earl of Lauderdale and Lord Maitland, in as ample Form
and Manner, as in Law they can require, for any cause or offense, Civil or
Criminal, in any public station preceding the date hereof: Declaring likeways
hereby Our express Will and Pleasure, that seeing We have now shown so much
Favor and Clemency to the said Earl of Lauderdale and Lord Maitland, they be
first obliged to Discharge and Renunce all such Claim and Relief, that they as
Generals of Our Mint, have, or could pretend against Sir John Falconer, late
Master, Mr. James Falconer, Son and Heir to the said deceast John Falconer late
Warden, and the rest of the late Officers thereof. And for further Security, We
do hereby Assign and Dispone to Our said Chancellor, and the said Colonel John
Grahame, all Our Right, Title and Interest, in and to the said Decree against
the late Generals of the Mint, with full Power to Pursue for, and recover the
Sums contained therein, until Our said Chancellor, and the said Colonel
Grahame shall be fully sarisfied and paid of the sum of 20000 lib. sterling,
in manner after specified, viz. First 5000 lib. to Our said Chancellor, and
2000 lib. to the said Colonel Grahame, and thereafter 11000 lib. to Our said
Chancellor, and 2000 lib. to the said Colonel Grahame; Declaring nevertheless,
That upon the Earl of Lauderdale and Lord Maitland, their granting of the
abovementioned Dispositions, this right to the above mentioned Decree, granted
by Us to Our said Chancellor, and the said Colonel Grahame, shall be void and
null. So We bid you heartily Farewell. Given at Our Court at Windsor-Castle, 1.
May 1683. and of Our Reign the 35th. year. By His Majesty's Command, Sic
subscribitur, Middleton.

Copy of the KING's Letter.
To Our right Trusty and well beloved Cousin and Counselor, George Earl of
Aberdene, Lord High Chancellor of Our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland.
Sic suprascribitur: CHARLES R.
RIght Trusty and right well beloved Coufin and Counselor, We greet you well,
Whereas We are certainly informed, that the Earl of Lauderdale and Lord
Maitland, have fully Settled and Agreed with you, to your satisfaction of the
Donations granted by Us unto you in Our Letter, bearing date at Windsor Castle,
the first day of May last, directed to Our Thesaurer-Principal and
Thesaurer-depute, and that in order to their fully satisfying Our right Trusty
and well beloved Counselor, John Grahame of Claverhouse, there was lately a
Dispofition of the House, Garden and Park of Dudhope, and of the Office of
Constabulary of Dundee, signed by the said Earl and Lady Maitland, at
Edinburgh, and by the Lord Maitland at Westminster, in favors of the said
Colonel Grahame, conform to the Tenor of Our said Letter; And whereas We have
ordered Our Secretaries to enquire, whether all Our Commands in Our said Letter
are obeyed; We find by them, that the said Earl of Lauderdale and Lord
Maitland, have not as yet Discharged and Renunced all Suit, Claim and Relief,
that they, as Generals of Our Mint, have, or could pretend against Sir John
Falconer late Master, Mr. James Falconer Son and Heir to the deceast John
Falconer late Warden, and the rest of the late Officers thereof: And seeing We
have been graciously Pleased to show so much of Favor and Clemency to the laid
Earl and Lord, it would be most unreasonable, als well as unjust, that they
should have recourse to any Relief from the said late Officers of the Mint,
whom We have already so considerably Fined; For if this Relief were allowed,
the said Earl and Lord might thereby reap more advantage, than if they had not
at all been called in question, for any thing relating to the Mint. And now
calling to mind, the many good and faithful Services performed by the said Earl
of Lauderdale, and Lord Maitland, and their Predecessors to Us and Our Royal
Progenitors for several Ages; And being always no less ready and willing to
confer marks of Our Royal Favor upon the Families of well deserving Subjects,
than to do Justice to all: We have ordered Our Secretaries to enquire of the
Lord Maitland, whether he will obey Our former Command, in discharging the said
Relief, who having declared that he is willing to submit to Our Pleasure; And
We being very well satisfied with his ready and frank obedience to Our Commands
herein; Therefore We have been graciously Pleased to sign an ample and full
Exoneration, Discharge, Remission and Indemnity, in favors of the said Earl of
Lauderdale, and another to the said Lord Maitland (both of the date of these
Presents) which We have ordered to be herewith sent unto you: Upon your receipt
whereof, We do hereby authorize you to call for the said Earl of Lauderdale,
and to acquaint him, that as We have so graciously condescended to do Our part,
in favors of him and his Son: So We doubt not, but he will be so dutiful as to
obey Our Commands, in discharging the said Relief, and to allow him a weeks
time for the performance thereof; At the expiring of which time, or sooner,
upon his giving obedience to this Our Command, We do Require you to call for
the Lord Collingtoun, Our Justice-Clerk, and the said Colonel Grahame of
Claverhouse, in his presence, and to cause him (the said Earl of Lauderdale) to
Deposit the said Disposition, and Discharge of the Relief aforesaid, in the
custody of the said Lord Collingtoun in Trust, until the said two Remissions
shall be by you past under the Great Seal of the Our Ancient Kingdom, which We
do hereby require you to do with all possible and convenient speed. And so soon
as you shall have appended Our Great Seal to the said two Remissions, it is
Our further Will and Pleasure, that you again call for the three forenamed
persons, with the said Sir John Falconer, Mr. James Falconer, or any having
authority from them, or for their behove, and see the said Earl of Lauderdale
for himself, the said Lord Maitland, and Lady Maitland, deliver the foresaid
Disposition, (as his and their proper and voluntar Facts and Deeds,) to the
said Colonel Grahame, and to deliver the Discharge of the Relief aforesaid, as
his own proper and voluntary Fact and Deed, to the said Sir John Falconer, Mr.
James Falconer, or any other for their behove: And at the same time you are to
deliver up the said two Remissions (under Our Great Seal) to the said Earl of
Lauderdale. But if he shall refuse to give ready obedience to these Our
Commands, within the time already prefixed (which We do not expect) We intend
not hereby to put the least stop thereafter to any Diligence raised, or to be
raised by the said Colonel Grahame, against the said Earl of Lauderdale, and
Lord Maitland, for making Our said Donation effectual unto him: And in that
case (if it shall happen) it is Our Pleasure, that ye return the said two
Remissions to Our Secretaries of State: For doing all which, this shall be your
warrant: And so We bid you heartily Farewell. Given at Our Court at Whitehall,
the twenty fifth day of March, 1684. and of Our Reign the thirty sixth year.

By His Majesty's Command, Sic subscribitur, MIDLETOUN.


