ANSWERS for Colonel Sir JOHN HILL, Leiutenent Colonel JOHN FORBES, and JOHN
FORBES Writer in Edinburgh. TO The Petition presented be Allan Cathcart, James
Meinzies, and Thomas Hamiltonn, late Captains of the said Colonel Hill's
Regiment.
WHereas the Petitioners allege, That the said Colonel his Leiutenant
Colonel, and John Forbes as Agent for the Regiment, uplifted the Regiments full
Pay, and as yet has not compted for a great part thereof, as to the Petitioners
proportions, qua Captains for themselves and Companies; And therefore craving
Count and Payment of what is justly due to them, etc.

Answered, That 1mo. The Petition and Desire thereof is unintelligible, and
impracticable to give Obedience to what is thereby craved; In respect that the
Petitioners their Claim is altogether indefinit and illiquid, not condescending
upon the Commencement of their Service, and Endurance thereof, nor upon the
particular Sums due to them, and yet unpayed. So that esto The Persons
Complained of, were charged with Horning in the Terms of this Petition, they
should not know what Sum to pay, or how to give Obedience. And that therefore
the Petitioners ante omnia ought to be special in their Claims, whereby it
would appear, that they have no ground to creat your Lordships or Others this
Trouble, summarly by such a Clamorous Bill.

2do. Esto the Petitioners were Special in their Claim, and the Colonel and
Others, duly Cited, yet neither he nor his Leiutenent Colonel. or Agent would
be found Liable to the Petitioners. For 1mo. John Forbes the Agent is Comptable
only to the Colonel; By whose Orders, he Dispenses the Regiments Money, and
makes payment to the Respective Companies, and other uses of the Regiment, and
accordingly he has so done, as per the Colonels last Discharge in April by
past, for all the said John his Intromissions with the Regiments Money,
preceding March School. 2do. As to the Colonel, he oppones these very
Petitioners, their Discharges of their full payment for themselves, Subalterns
and Companies to the said John Forbes, for the Month of February last, and all
proceedings. In contemplation whereof, and of the like Discharge from every
Captain and person else Concerned, the Colonel did give him the said General
Discharge; So that the Petitioners having Acknowledged their full payment, as
said is, they were in the wrong to present any such Petition.

And 3tio. Quoad the Leiutenent Colonel, the Petitioners do most Injuriouslie
Acclaime any thing of him; Not only because of their said General Discharges
that outerly preclude them every manner of way, But likewise that the
Lieutenent Colonel medles not farther then to Receive what is due to himself,
from the Agent by the Colonels order, and accordingly he has Acknowledged
himself paid, as per his General Discharge, also to the Agent for all by
gones preceding the beginning of March last. And seeing there can be no
nothing more Injurious then to Load Men's Reputations with your Lordships, as
alleged Guilty of keeping up the Petitioners Pay, while the Contrair Appears,
by the Evident Demonstration aforesaid.

It is Humbly Hopt your Lordships will Refuse the desire of the Petitioners
Bill with a Repremand, for not better minding their said Discharges, and good
Offices done them by so Obliging a Colonel, as they knew from there Experience;
Sir John Hill was to all his Officers and them in particular.




