An ACCOUNT of the several Treaties of the Allies, with the Crown of France.
Dantzick, October 12.
OUR last Advices from Poland say, That the new King's Affairs go on with all
the success that can be desired; and that his Majesty, by the Advice of his
best Counselors, was resolved to go to Lemberg, to receive the Homage of the
Polish Army in the Neighborhood of that place, before he go to Warsaw. In the
mean time 300000 Florins, raised by a certain Impost since the late King's
death, is ready here to be disposed of as his Majesty shall think fit. The
Prince of Conti has not yet dared to go to Marienburg, nor to stay one Night
ashore, but keeps for the most part on board. Craici Coronni, the chief of his
Party in the Neighborhood, has not as yet got above 400 Poles together at
Oliva for Conti's Service: And the Castellan Bidgouski Niemenouski, having come
some days ago to salute the Prince of Conti, in a very reverend manner, he
thought himself not kindly enough received, and thereupon rode immediately away,
with 40 of his Retinue; whereof the Prince having asked the reason, the
Cardinal told him, That the Poles loved to be complimented. Many others have
also deserted him, because they have been disappointed of their Money, in which
they reckoned to have wallowed. It Is now said, that the Princes Creatures
design to go to Lithuania, to try their fortune there, but with as little
appearance of success as they have had in Prussia. Our Senate have now 4000
Soldiers on Foot, beside 6 Companies of Burghers, who keep Guard day and night.

Hague, October 21. To day the Peace betwixt us and France was published here
with much solemnity, according to which all Hostilities are to cease in four
Weeks, time beginning from the 2^st of October 1697. being the day of
publication here, and reaching to the 18th of November in the East and North
Sea, from Terneuse in Norway to the end of the Channel, and from thence to Cape
St. Vincent, after the 2d of December; and from thence after the 30th of
December to the Line, and after the 21st of June 98, all over the World. The
6th of November is to be observed here as a day of General Thanksgiving. The
Ratification from Spain is not yet arrived, but that under the Great Seal of
England was exchanged on the 17th. N. S. We expect every day that the German
Ministers will terminate their Affairs so as to Sign the Treaty. Yesterday an
English Ketch was stranded at Heye, but the Crew saved. The Earl of Portland is
gone hence again to Loo. The Earl of Manchester being bound to Venice on his
Embassy, has been here with the English Ambassadors. Vice Admiral Everts, and
our Men of War from England, is arrived at Middleburg.

The Treaty of Peace betwixt France and Spain consists of 38 Articles; the
chief of which are, That there shall be a perpetual Peace betwixt the two
Kings, their Heirs, Successors, and Dominions. That G^ronne, Roses, Belveder,
Barcelona, and all others taken since the Treaty of Nimeguen, shall be restored
to Spain, in the same Condition they were taken. That the Town, Citadel and
Duchy of Luxemburg, with the Artillery taken therein, the County of Chiny and
their dependencies shall be restored in the present state. Charleroy the like.
Mons and its dependencies the like, except 16 Villages which are named
Courtray, with the Artillery therein found, and it is dependencies, as they are
at present. All such Places taken before or on the Day of this Peace, in what
place of the World soever, shall be mutually restored by the said two Kings.
All the Places reunited by the most Christian King, since the Treaty of
Nimeguen, shall be restored to Spain, according to the List, with their
Sovereignity, immediately after the Ratifications, except 82 Villages which the
King of France pretends to, as the dependencies of Charlemont, Maubeuge, etc.
which shall be treated of by Commissioners on both sides, or left to the
Arbitriment of the States of Holland. The French shall have the use of the
Wagons in the Neighborhood for two Months, to carry off their Artillery, etc.
All Prisoners shall be released without ransom, on paying their Debts. That the
Subjects on both side shall have freedom of Trade one with another, paying the
ordinary Imposts. That all Papers belonging to the restored Places, as also
those taken from the Citadel of Ghent and the Chamber of Ryssel, shall be
restored. That all Contributions and Arrears shall mutually cease, after the
Ratification. The Subjects of both sides shall be restored to their Estates,
but without any expectation of Arrears or Rents from one another, during the
War. No Goods or Effects confiscated, shall be levied on either side. And those
that have served the contrary side, shall be restored to their Estates, and the
Protection of their Sovereign! Which Re-establishment shall be performed
according to the 21st and 22d Articles of the Treaty of Nimiguen. The 24th and
25th Articles, concerning Benefices, shall be executed; so that those who have
Offices shall hold 'em. The Subjects of either Prince are at free liberty to
dispose of the Estates they have under either. Each of the Kings shall pay the
Taxes the Generality of their Subjects is taxed in, as shall be regulated by
Commissioners. The Rents settled upon the Dominions by the foresaid Treaties,
shall be paid to whom they are due. All the Prizes taken in 4 Weeks after the
Publication, betwixt Terneuse in Norway and the end of the Canal, shall be
restored in 6 weeks to the Cape of St. Vincent; 10 weeks to the Mediterranean,
and to the Line; and in 8 Months all over the World. In case of a new Rupture,
the Subjects of each are to have 6 Months to return their effects. The Troops
are to retire to their dwn Territories immediately, on the Ratification. The
Rents of the Lands shall be continued to the Possessors: till the Day of
Restitution. The Treaty of Nimeguen shall be executed, except where it is
herein otherwise provided or altered. The Licenses granted by the Parliament of
Tournay, shall take effect during the French Kings possession. The Town and
Castle of Dinant shall be restored to the Bishop of Liege as they were taken.
The King of Spain shall restore P^nz^ to the Duke of Parma. The Treaty 'twixt
France and Savoy in 1696. shall be comprised in this. And the King of Sweden
and others, as they are in the Treaty 'twixt England and France.

The Treaty betwixt France and the States of Holland consists of 21 Articles:
The principal of which are, That there shall be a perpetual Peace betwixt them
and their Subjects. That by virtue of the said Treaty, they shall promote one
another Welfare, agree to no other Treaty to one another disadvantage, but
break the same, and the first that it is proposed to shall discover it: That any
goods taken into Arrest, or Confiscated on either side, shall be restored
without regard to differenced of Religion. That the Count d' Auvergne shall be
restored to the Marquisate of Bergen op Zoom. That all Conquests in and out of
Europe shall be mutually restored. That Prisoners of War shall be released
without Ransom. All Contributions and Arrears shall cease upon the
Ratification. All pretensions shall be annulled on both sides, the better to
prevent a Rupture. Subjects on both sides shall have Justice done them in the
ordinary way, without having recourse to Letters of Reprisal. If any thing be
acted against this Treaty, the Transgressors shall only be punished. In case of
a Rupture, the Subjects on both sides shall have 9 Months to withdraw their
Effects: The Treaty betwixt France and Brandenburg in 1679, shall be
re-established. That betwixt France and Savoy in 1696. confirmed. The King of
Sweden shall be comprehended in this Treaty, and those who in 6 Weeks after the
Ratification shall be named by France, and on the part of their High and
Mightinesses, the Kings of Great Britain and Spain, and all the Allies, who
shall declare they will accept of the Peace 6 Weeks after the Ratification, as
also the 13 Swiss Cantons, and particularly the Protestant Cantons, Geneva, and
their Dependencies, the Grison Leagues. Neufchatel, St. Gall, Mulhouse, Bi^^ne,
B^e^, Embden, etc. and the King of Sweden and all other Potentates, may be
Guarantees of this Treaty.

Hague, October 22. The Articles betwixt the Emperor and France are not yet
Signed, which is ascribed to the Tricks of the French, that they may have
opportunity to make new Proposals. An account of all the Conferences is sent to
the King at Loo. Abundance of Vessels are ready, to sail hence for France. It Is
thought the King will stay for some time at Loo. The Officers are forbidden to
trouble his Majesty there. We hear the Muscovite Ambassadors are to have their
Audience of Leave next Week and that an expedient is found out to furnish them
with some men of War, without doing any prejudice to our Trade in Turkey.

Hague Oct. 22. We hear from Turkey, That they are much alarmed at the Elector
of Saxony's being chosen King of Poland, because the French assured them, that
(...) would carry it, and declare War against Muscovy We hear from Danesick,
That the French on board Conti Squadron begin to grow very sickly. And We are
informed from Dunkirk, That the French Court have ordered their privateers
there to be put to Sea, and seize all the Ships belonging to Dantzick, because
they have declared for the Elector of Saxony.

Hague, Oct. 23. We hear the Venetians have sunk diverse Turkish Ships, and
forced 7 Sualtana's into Harbor. That the English have taken 9 French
Merchant-ment on the Banks of Newfoundland. The English and French Ambassadors
have agreed to give mutual Pasports for English and French Ships, that are to
go long Voyages: All the Points betwixt the Imperialists and France are now
adjusted, except the Pretensions of the Duchess of Orleanc^, which it is
thought will be accommodated in a few Days.

Paris, Oct: 18. The Re-establishment of Trade with the Dutch has been
published here. The King that his Subjects may enjoy the Fruits of the Peace,
h^th suppressed the Capitation, the Utensil and the Militia. It is not yet
certain when We shall publish the Peace, some think that it will be deferred
till the Emperor sign. It Is said the Marriage of the Duke of Burgundy is put
off till January, because the Jewels, etc. designed for the Wedding Suits
cannot be got ready before that time, M. Villeroy is returned hither from
Flanders. We hear, that the Prince of Conti has not yet landed; and are
impatient to hear of the success of his Affairs, of which we are now very
doubtful.

The Port Letters yesterday say, That the Content Transport Ship with 50.
English Prisoners, is arrived at Plymouth from St. Maloe^; from whence Captain
Purchase is a^ at Weymouth with 130. The latter reports, that upon the Peace's
being proclaimed at St. Maloes, which was on Saturday sennight all the Prison
Doors where the English lay, were thrown open, That the (...) Soldiers there
seemed very much dissatisfied at the Peaces being concluded; and that
Companies, Wigs, Redcoats, etc. might be had there at an easy rate. They add,
that a few days before they came away, a small English Brigantine with Wine,
from Antegoa, and a Spanish Vessel of 200 Tuns were brought in thither and that
the Privateers and Men of War are laid up as they come in. The Devonshire, and
three other Men of War, are come into the Downs from Spithead; in order to be
laid up. Sir Cloudesly Shovel continues still in the Downs with 8 or 10 of his
Majesty's Ships.

London. There are Letters in Town by the last Mail, intimating, That the
French King, upon disbanding his Soldiers, had given orders to his General
Officers, to acquaint their Soldiers, That it was not his inclination to
disoblige those who had been seviceable to him; but the Peace being concluded,
He was willing to ease such as had been supporters of the War, and wished every
one to retire to their native Countries to improve the ground; promising them a
reward for their Services. And that to those who were inclinable to follow the
Art of War, he would give Recommendations; and ordered them to give them thanks
for what they have done.

There are also Letters which say, That all the Commotions in Poland are
procured by the Natives on purpose to draw what Money they can from each of the
Competitors, into the Kingdom, where it has been very scarce for some years;
and that afterward they design to declare: And that the great est part of the
Nobility, Gentry, etc. having already joined with the Elector of Saxony, it is
not doubted that the Prince of Conti will fail in his Enterprise.


