ANSWERS For the Earl of Argyle and Lord of Innes, To the Representation
printed by the Duke of Gordon.
THE Duke of Gordon pretends by the foresaid Representation, to stope the bad
Impression, which he says has been given of his Cause, without any design to
Anticipat his legal Defenses; and yet he is so far from touching any Point of
the favor that all good Men do and will perpetually retain for the Marquess
of Argyles memory; that he only offers a Paper of a few particulars, wherein
the Account given by his advisers, has very little Truth, and as little
Consistency.

The Marquess of A^gyll did certainly Represent one of the most loyal Ancient
and worthy Families of the Kingdom, and did eminently possess all these good
qualities, which from his Predecessors had descended upon him, and albeit the
Motives that did incite his Adversaries to prosecute him in the Year 1661.
were, no doubt most violent; seeing nothing could satisfy them,
notwithstanding of his then Majesty's known inclination to the contrair, save
his Blood and Death; yet nothing was either alleged or proven against him,
save a few inconsiderable Deeds of that Epidemick Compliance with the English
Usurpers; wherein the whole Kingdom and a great part of his Judges were
Involved; so that all Men may wonder, as all good Men regrate, that such a
strange and severe Forfaulture, the most Groundless of the many hundreds that
have been of late Rescinded, should yet for more than eleven Years, since the
last happy Revolution, stand Unreduced.

But to the Representation, It begins with a Story of a Tocher of 30000 lib.
contracted by the Marquess of Huntly, with his Daughter to the Lord Drummond;
for which, the Marquess of Argyle, and Earl of Southesque, with the Lord of
Innes and others, became Cautioners, and that for Relief of this Debt, and of
22000 lib. more, that they were also engaged in, for the Marquess of Huntly to
Murray of Skirline; the Marquess of Argyle got security by Infeftment, in the
Barronies of Lochquaber and Badenoth; and that the Earl of Southesque Pursuing
the Duke of Gordon for Relief of the Half: It was made appear in that Process,
that the Marquess of Argyle possessed these Lands from the Year 1644.

The truth of which Story is, That the Marquess of Argyle was indeed engaged in
these Debts, as in several others, for the Marquess of Huntly his Brother in
Law, and got Security for his Relief; but had in effect little or no
Intromission, till after the Year 165^. at which time, having Compted with
Marquess Lewis the Duke of Gordons Father, it appears by the Printed Minute of
Contract, that all Intromissions being discounted, the Marquess of Huntly
acknowledges himself Debtor to the Marquess of Argyle, in the Sum of 337028.
lib. and for Payment of the Annualrents thereof, he Assigned him to as much of
his Rents; And likewise, gives the Marquess of Argyle power to Sell Lands for
payment of the Principal.

But so Groundless and Inconsistent is the Dukes Representation in this matter,
that First it forgets that the Lord of Innes did truly pay the half of the
said 30000 lib. with Annualrents thereof, to the Earl of Perth, for which
having got his Assignment, against the Marquess of Huntly, and the other
Cautioners: The Marquess of Argyle, who had taken upon him the whole Debt, did
most justly give to the Lord of Innes a Security for the said 15000 lib. with
the Annualrents, making then 20000 lib. out of the Lordship of Enzie, a part of
the Estate of Huntly, which now the Duke of Gordon so very hardly and unjustly
disowns. 2. The Representation makes mention of Southesques process, but
concealls that Southesque prevailed in that Process; not because the Marquess
of Argyl had got Payment of the Debt by his Intromissions, which had been
ridiculous, since thereupon the Duke of Gordon should have been assoilied; But
because the Infeftment of Relief, having been given to the Marquess of Argyl,
for Southesque behoof, as well as his own; the Earl of Southesque mentained his
Right against the Forfeiture, and the Retour of Quinquennial Possession,
whereby the Duke of Gordon thought to have excluded him, by the Marquess of
Argylls Possession, and thus the Earl of Southesque prevailed; but not at all
on the account, that the Marquess of Argyl had got Payment by his
Intromissions, which was never dreamed of.

The Representation goes on and alleges, That the Marquess of Argyl did
Purchase Beattons Apprysing; But designedly suppresses, how that the Marquess
of Argyl was necessitat to Purchase the same for 5000 lib. sterling. and upwards:
And Sir William Dicks Apprysing for eight Thousand Pound Sterling, and upwards.
As likewise, some other Debts, that he might make good his foresaid said
Infeftment for Releif; And how that when he had Purchased all these Debts, he
was still content to give the Marquess of Huntly his Nevoy, the Benefit of all
the Compositions he had made; And that the foresaid Sum contained in the
Printed Minute, is the Sum that was found truly due to the Marquess of Argyl,
after all deduction.

The Representation alleges, That the Marquess of Argyle could nor justly give
Jnnes a Security out of the Lordship of Enzie for the foresaid 20000 lib.
Because Argyl himself had got payment for it by his Intromissions, but this
Paragraph contains so many Falsehoods: That it is a wonder to see them in
Print. For First, It says that the Marquess of Argyl was in Pessession of 9000
Merks a Year of the Estate of Huntly, from the 1644. to the 165^. and so was
paid by his Intromissions; which is so far from truth, that it was in the Year
165^. that the foresaid Printed Minut past betwixt Argyl and Huntly, and where
Huntly confesses himself to be so vastly his Debtor. 2. The Representation
denis that Jnnes paid the 15000 lib. with Annualrents thereof, to the Earl of
Perth; Yet Jnnes does actually produce the Earl of Perths Receipt and
Assignation for his relief after distress, by the outmost legal Diligences,
which no Man can believe, could be given without Payment. 3. The Representation
says, That the Marquess of Argyle had Right to no other Debts of the Family of
Huntly, save the foresaid Tocher of 30000 lib. and the Debt of 22000 lib. due
to Skirlin, since it is certain and can instantly be Instructed that he had
Right to Sir Thomas. Nicolsons, Sir William Dicks, Mrs. Wakfield, and several
others extending to a Vast Sum. 4. Esto, The Marquess made Opposition to
Beatouns Infeftment, yet that does only confirm the necessity he was in to
satisfy Beatoun before he could obtain his own Payment and Relief. And, 5. By
what is said the Honorable Court of Parliament may perceive how absurdely the
Representation would make Innes his Right a contrivance betwixt him and the
Marquess of Argyle, since Innes truly paid the Money to the Earl of Perth,
and Argyle did justly give him a Security for the same out of the Estate of
Huntly as having taken on him that Debt for the Marquess of Huntly, and
included it in the foresaid Sum contained in the Printed Minut.

The Representation to take off the Earl of Argyles just Claim of Debt against
the Family of Huntly upon the foresaid Printed Minut, alleadges things so
inconsistent that it is almost a shame to repeat them; For first, it says that
the Marquess of Argyle had that Kindness for his Nevoy the Marquess of Huntly,
as to cover Huntlys Possession in regard his Father had been Forefaulted from
the English Usurpers, and yet immediately it subjoyns, That the Marquis of
Argyle hereby geting access to Huntlies Charter Christ, had the Opportunity to
make use of retired Bonds and out of the product of Huntlys Estate. to compone
Huntlyes Debts at his pleasure, than which there can be nothing more ungrate,
Unreasonable and absurd. 2. It says that the Marquess of Argyle was highly in
Favors with the English, whereas all Men that remember these times know that
the Marquess of Argyle was the Man of his Quality in Scotland that was most
suspected by the English; And that instead of Favors he could never so much as
obtain Justice of them, and if he had been so much in Favor with the English,
and had been so ill intended toward the Family of Huntly, what should have
hindered him to have taken Possession of the whole Estate of Huntly either by
virtue of the Forfeiture, or by virtue of Beatouns expired Apprysing whereof he
had then Right in his Reison. But, 3. The best account that can be given for
the Marquess of Argyles Vindication in Relation to the Estate of Huntly, are
the Marquess of Argyl his own Words when Arraigned before the Parliament 1661,
which are these: For the Estate of Huntly I had nothing in it but for my own
absolutely Necessary Relief, and was ever most willing to part with any Interest
I had therein, getting his Friends who trofess much Zeal for the standing of
the Family Ingadged for Warrandice to me of any Portion that should fall to me,
for my Satisfaction, and to Evidence that I was no means to harm the Family, I
stood with my Rights betwixt all Fines and Forfeitures and Accounted for any
thing I could receive, and to manifest yet farther that the burden of that
Family was not from any extrinsick Cause of themselves I have under the old
Marquess's own Hand, and his Sons George Lord Gordon, who was a very worthy
Young Nobleman the just Inventary of their Debts amounting to about Ten
Hundredth Thousand Merks in the Year 1640.

These being the Words of the Marquess, having his Death certainly in his View
will no doubt be much better believed then this Groundless Representation. 4.
How unjust then the Representation is to allege that the Earl of Argyle has
nothing to Claim of the Estate of Huntly, and that he should content himself
with the Title of Earl and the Gift of 15000 lib. yearly, which he got out of
his own Estate upon the Marquess of Argyls Forfeiture, and let the remainder of
his Estate go for the Payment of Huntlys Debt, all Men may Judge.

The Duke of Gordon and the Earl of Aboyne possess no less then 5000 lib.
sterling. yearly free of Debt, by virtue of the Marquess of Argyls Forfeiture: And
yet this Paper has the Confidence to say that the Earl of Argyle should content
himself with 15000 Lib. Scots of his Grandfathers Estate, and let the rest go
for the Payment of the Marquess of Huntlys Debt, who ever heard the like!

The Representation ends with some Reflections upon the Printed Minut 1653;
stating the Debt due by the House of Huntly to Argyle; And 1. It alleadges,
that the Writer thereof is not designed, but the Writer is Named and may still
be Designed; besides that the Paper is Subscribed by both Parties and many
honorable Persons. 2. It alleadges, That Marquess Lewis was not Infeft as Heir
to his Father, nor could he indeed be Infeft; because his Father was then
Forefaulted, but what could the Marquess of Argyle do more for the Marquess of
Huntly, than to keep him in the Possession of his Estate, notwithstanding of
his Fathers Forfeiture, and fairly to state the Debt due to him by the Marquess
of Huntly, when he might have Possessed the Estate Irredeemably without either
Count or Reckoning. 3: The Representation again alleadges the Marquess of
Argyles Power with the English and over the Marquess of Huntly his Nevoy, and
that he possessed the whole Estate of Huntly for nine years except only 7000
Merks a year, which are all three false: For the Marquess of Argyle, as has
been said, was in no Favor with the English, nor had the Marquess of Huntly
and dependence upon him, but was a Man for himself, and behaved as absolutely
as any of his Predecessors. And all the Possession that the Marquess of Argyle
obtained, was to have the Chamberlands obliged to pay him his Annualrents as
the Printed Minut bears, and which Annualrents he never got.

So that upon the whole, this Representation for the Duke of Gordon is in
effect much more against him.


