An Impartial ACCOUNT Of the Several FIRES IN London, Westminster, SOVTHWARK,
AND The Places Adjacent.

Begun and carried on by Papists, for the Promoting their Damnable PLOT and
Conspiracy for Subverting the Government, and Destroying the Protestant
Religion; with the several Ways and Methods practiced by them in Manageing
their Horrid Designs of Fire and Desolation.

Discovered by Cap. William Bedlow Who was formerly engaged with them in those
Wicked Practices.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Godfrey. 1679.

An Impartial Account of the FIRES of London, etc.
AMong the several other Cursed ways and means, whereby the Papists have
endeavored to enslave this Nation, they have used none more often, than this
of Firing Towns and Cities; and among the rest, this Famous City of London has
had the unhappiness to taste most severely of their Burning Malice and Fury.

For besides the Burning of London in 1666, which was so apparently discovered
to the Parliament then in being by the Voluntary Confession of Robert Hubert a
Frenchman, who Fired the Bakers House in Pudding-lane, and whose Conscience was
so starttled at the vast Desolations and Ruins he had occasioned thereby, that
he voluntarily confessed the same, for which he was deservedly Executed, and
the abundant Testimony of others to confirm the same; and among the rest, one
Mr. Light of Ratcliff, Informed the Committee of the House of Commons, that
having discourse with one Mr Richard Langhorn of the Inner Temple Barrister,
reputed a zealous Papist, about February before the Burning of London, Mr
Langhorn took him by the hand, and said to him, You expect great things in
Sixty Six, and think that Rome will be destroyed, but what if it be London;
which is a plain demonstration of their intended Damnable design, and this is
that very Langhorn who was last Executed for Conspiring the death of the King,
and the overthrow of the Protestant Religion and Government.

They still proceeded to perpetrate more Horrid Mischiefs and Villainies both in
Southwark, and other places for these Thirteen years last past, both in the
City and Country; and this they have done by several ways and Methods.

As the Firing of London in 1666, was effected, by Fireballs put at the end of
a Pole, and so thrust in at a hole or window; and sometimes by flinging the
said Fireballs and other Combustible Matter into Cellers through the Bars or
Grates of Houses, and thus was that Great Fire in Southwark effected, which
Burnt down so many hundred Houses; and by taking opportunity of the
Consternation and Hurry of the People, they stole their goods as well as burnt
their Houses, carrying away from Southwark to Somerset House, their place of
Rendezvous, the value of Four thousand pounds in Money and Goods, and in the
fire of London above sixteen Thousand pounds value.

They still continued their Burning, as at Wapping, where there were abundance
of Houses burnt; at the Temple in White-Fryers, St. Paul's Churchyard,
Fetter-lane, near New-Inne, Ship yard, Southampton-Buildings, at the
Water-house, in the Minories; and many other places; endeavoring by all manner
of ways to impoverish and destroy this Noble City.

Another way of firing they had, by throwing Fireballs in at Glass-windows, as
they did at a Black-smiths House in Blackfriars. Another was by setting their
own Lodgings on Fire, as the French Man in Shoe-lane did in the time of the
Burning of London: and as some others did at Saffron-hill a while after.
Another way was by hiring Cellers in dangerous places, and then filling them
with Combustible Matter and firing them; which was one of the ways that they
advised me to practice. Another was by firing Hay-lofts, as they did in
Smith-field once or twice. Another was by Strangers pretending to come of
Errands to Lodgings and Chambers: and in this manner was the last dreadful Fire
in the Temple.

Another way was by getting into empty Houses, and setting them on Fire: and
this was done in Budge-Row in London. Another was by creeping into Back-yards,
and firing stacks of Bavins, Reeds, or such like stuff; and this was practiced
at Lime-house. Another way was by going into Victualing-houses, and leaving
trains of Gunpowder behind them for firing; and this was done at a Cooks in
Fetter-lane, and also in Southwark. Another way was by confederating with the
Servants in Houses; and by this means one Elizabeth Oxly having dwelt a short
time with one Mr. Bird, an Attorney in Fetter-lane, took the opportnity when
all the Family was in Bed, to sire a large Press in his Closet, wherein were
Papers and Writings kept; and a while after ran up to her Master and told him
the House was on fire; and then running down she let in the Watch: But it being
observed that her Cloths were packed up, and giving several other marks of
suspicion, she was charged to be accessory to it; and after a small time of
Examination she confessed the fame, declaring that she was hired to do it by
one Mr. Stubbs, who engaged to give her Five pounds for doing the same Upon
this Stubbs was searched for and taken, who confessed that it was true, that he
had persuaded her to do it, and was to give her Five Guinneys to perform it,
besides Five Shillings which he had given her beforehand; and said further,
that one Father Gifford (the same Person whom I was to have assisted in such
wicked Practices, and was his Confessor) had engaged him in the business, by
telling him it was no sin at all to fire the Houses of Heretics; and that the
said Gifford had promised him a Hundred pound for the same, telling him he
should have the Money from the Church. He also declared that he used to meet
the said Gifford and two other Persons in St. James's- Fields, in the dark of
the Evening, to consult of these matters.

And in order to make these Fires more destructive and ruinous, they chose out
the most close and dangerous places to begin their Villainy, and gave
instructions to their cursed Accomplices accordingly, as among old Houses and
Sheds, where Engines cannot play; and to fire Water-houses, and to get the New
River Water stopped during that time the Fire continued. To have some of their
Friends about the Fire, who might persuade the Magistrates to blow up Houses,
where it was not necessary, or rather, where it might do more harm than good,
by opening a passage to the Fire. To have others of the Party, who under
pretense of helping to quench the Fire, may throw their Fireballs to increase
it in the Houses next adjoining, and to break down the Roofs of the Windows to
let in the Fire more easily. To have some others attending, who should cry out
against the French and Papists; and should mightily pity the People, thereby
insinuating themselves so as to be trusted with the removing of Goods, and so
take the opportunity of stealing and cheating them of their Goods; and
sometimes to fire Houses at a distance, as they find opportunity. And lastly,
To observe the Wind and Tide in all their Attempts: as also Frosts and very dry
Seasons; and to chose Sundays for doing their Work, because then there is
little Water to be had. By these wretched Courses have they endeavored to
advance their cursed Interest: And let us not be too secure, for no question
the Plot, though in part discovered, yet is still going on; and these are are
not the last Fires we must expect; and if the Great Design do not miscarry,
they hope to have our Blood too, by Massacring us in the hurry and confusion
that dreadful Fires usually put People unto.

But to proceed to what is of my own knowledge, It was my chance to be at Paris
in the Month of June 1676, at the English Convent of Benedictine Monks, with
whom, upon diverse occasions, I had much ingratiated my self, so that they made
me one of their Confidents; among other Discourses, they talked af a great
Design carrying on, For subverting the Protestant Religion, and introducing
Popery into England. They fell to debate the several ways and means preparatary
to it, and what methods were best to be used to accomplish it; but because they
did nothing without advice of their Fellow-Traytors in England, one of them
produced diverse Letters from London; wherein there were several particulars
concerning the Firing of the City and Suburbs of London; and many other of the
chief Cities and Towns in England. And it was concluded by them that the most
effectual means to make way for their Design, was to weaken and ruin the said
City of London; and some of them wickedly gave God thanks that their Attempts
of that nature had succeeded so well already; and that though it were so nobly
and unexpectedly rebuilt, yet many of the Inhabitants still felt the effects
of that Desolation.

After this and much more discourse of this kind, which was managed with great
zeal and earnestness, they at last asked me, Whether I would assist them in
carrying on this business, as I had done before in the other part? To which I
seemed readily to consent, pretending that I was able to be very serviceable to
them in it, as being very well acquainted with all parts of the City of London,
and could therefore direct them to those places where the greatest mischief was
like to be done; and that I had knowledge also of several of the Chief and most
Trading Towns in England, whereby I was in a Capacity to manage such affairs
with more security and success than any other man; by such discourses as these,
they were so well satisfied of my Abilities in this kind, That it was agreed
amongst them, that I should go for England, and should there be joined with
Father Gifford beforementioned, for the carrying on these Burning Attempts.
This Father Gifford was a Jesuit, and as I understood by the Letters I had
seen, he was one of those that was very Active in carrying on the Dreadful Fire
in London, in the year 1666, and also (as they Reported) the Great Fire in
Southwark, which Fire happened not above a Month before we had the foregoing
Discourse together, and that he had attempted to Fire diverse other places at
several times, though he had missed in the performance of it.

At this great Consultation of the Benedictines, several Letters were produced,
as is mentioned before, all tending to the way and manner of burning the City
of London and its Suburbs, and several other Towns in England, and they were
very earnest with me. that as soon as I came to England I should be very
careful and diligent in Executing the same; and that I should receive all
necessary Orders, Encouragement, and Supplies, to put me into a Capacity of
Carrying things on. I afterward went into Spain, and continuing there some
time, I came at length to London, which was in the Year 1678; and a while after
there was a Consultation held by Gifford and several other Priests and Jesuits,
for Carrying on the business of Firing; which Consults they usually kept every
Week upon that Account.

In this Meeting it was resolved, That Wapping and Lime House should be first
Fired, by that means if possible to burn the Vessels and Ships in the River of
Thames. To which end several of those that were at this Consultation, were to
be assisting there, some by Land, and others by Water, who were to fire those
Ships that lay farthest from Land, and to cut the Cables of Ships, that they
might fall foul one upon another; and in pursuit of this, Lime House was really
fired, though it had not that dismal Effect which they expected, some of the
Conspirators having faled of being present there to manage it. After this
Gifford and my self went upon the Thames several nights, and especially about
London Bridge, to take exact notice of the lowest Rooms, Cellars, and Windows,
and what Places were filled with the most Combustible stuff, whereby they might
have opportunity to burn down the Bridge, which they thought would be most
easy to Effect at the time of High Water, when they might bring a Boat almost
equal with those Windows and Cellers, and thereby more Conveniently throw in
their Fire Bals; there was also mention made of firing the Towe^ of London, but
Father Harcourt (who was lately Executed for High Treason) told them, that they
were assured of that place within, and therefore advised the preserving of it,
as being for their Benefit and advantage.

Briefly, for near a year before I discovered this damnable Design, I was
employed by all ways and means imaginable, to endeavor the setting a Fire
London, and other places; and the chief management of all their intregues of
this kind, was committed to my Conduct, but the Jesuits were to be my
Overseers, that I might not want Combustible Matter sufficient to carry on the
Work; and in August last I designed to take several Cellers and Warehouses,
where I might stow Coals, Wood, and other things fit for our use, of all which
I bought several quantities, and also several Barrels of Gun powder, which I
ordered to be placed in several parts of the City and Suburbs: As for Example,
At my own Lodgings in Essex Garden, at the backdoor of the Palsgrave's Head
Tavern near the Temple, I laid in a great quantity of Coals, and some hundreds
of Faggots, which was designed for burning the Temple, with the Writings and
Records therein. I laid in another parcel in Brewers yard in the Strand in a
Cellar, and some other Old Buildings there; the Cellar belongs to Mr. Morgan at
the Red Bible in Bedford street. Another parcel of Faggots and Coals I laid at
Mr. Browns in White-Friers, and intended to have sent some more into an old
Cellar of Mr. Withers at the Plow in Seething-lane near Tower Hill, and others
into Red-cross-street, Bishopsgate-street, White-cross-street, Queenhithe; and
many other places about this Town: which I am ready to attest the truth of when
required thereto by Authority.

The last Consultation we had about these Designs of Firing, was in August
last, 1678, and others were then Contriving and Conspiring, To take the King
out of the way (which is a soft word to express Treason and Murder) and those
other of the Nobility and Magistrates, that might obstruct their business,
which was to have been first done, and then my Firing of London was to have
succeeded; and in the horror of that dreadful Conflagration, all the Papists
were to have appeared in Arms, and declared openly for the Pope.

Many other Designs have been Contrived, in order to the carrying on these
Affairs to Fire many places, and several Persons have been Employed therein,
but few of them acquainted with each other, some of which Fires have had
Effect, and others have failed. But these Wretches are never weary of
committing wickedness, and will therefore never cease Contriving our
Destruction, by all ways and means Imaginable; having all their Engines ready,
awaiting only the giving the Traitorous and Dreadful Stroke against the Life of
our Gracious Sovereign, whom we hope God will ever defend from their Cursed
Malice and Villainy. Amen.

FINIS.

