THE Lord General Monck HIS SPEECH, Delivered by Him in the PARLIAMENT On
Monday, Feb. 6. 1659.

EDINBURGH, Reprinted by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone-Church, 1660.

The Lord General Monck his Speech, etc.
Mr. SPEAKER,
AMongst the many Mercies of GOD to these poor Nations, your peaceable
Restoration is not the least: it is His work alone, and to Him belongs the
glory of it: and I esteem it as a great effect of His goodness to me, that He
was pleased to make me amongst many worthier in your service, some way
instrumental in it. I did nothing but my duty, and do not deserve to receive so
great honor and respect as you are pleased to give me at this time and place;
which I shall ever acknowledge as an high mark of your favor to me. Sir, I
shall not now trouble you with large Narratives, only give me leave to acquaint
you, that as I marched from Scotland hither, I observed the People in most
Counties in great and earnest Expectations of Settlement; and they made several
Applications to me, with numerous Subscriptions: the chiefest heads of their
Desires, were, For a Free and Full Parliament; and, that you would determine
your sitting; A Gospel Ministry, Encouragement of Learning and Universities;
And for Admittance of the Members secluded before 1648. without any previous
Oath or Engagement. To which I commonly answered, That you are now in a Free
Parliament; and if there be any force remaining upon you, I would endeavor to
remove it; and that you had Voted to fill up your House, and then you would be
a full Parliament also; and that you had already determined your sitting: and
for the Ministry, their Maintenance, the Laws and Universities, you had
largely declared in your last Declaration; and I was confident you would adhere
to it: but as for those Gentlemen secluded in the year 1648 I told them you had
given Judgment in it; and all People ought to acquiesce in that Judgment: but
to admit any Members to sit in Parliament, without a previous Oath or
Engagement to Secure the Government in being, it was never yet done in England.
And, although I said it not to them, I must say with pardon to you, That the
less Oaths and Engagements are imposed, (with respect had to the Security of
the Common Cause) your Settlement will be the sooner attained to. I am the more
particular in these matters, to let you see how grateful your present
Consultations about these things will be to the People. I know all the sober
Gentry will heartily close with you, if they may be tenderly and gently used;
and I am sure, you will so use them, as knowing it to be our Common Concern, to
expatiate, and not narrow our Interests; and to be careful neither the
Cavalier nor Phanatick Party have yet a share in your Civil or Military Power;
of the last of whose impatience to Government, you have had so severe
Experience.

I should say something of Ireland and Scotland: Indeed Ireland is in an ill
condition, and made worse by your sudden Interruption, which prevented the
passing an Act for the Settlement of the Estates of Adventurers and Soldiers
there, which I heard you intended to have done in a few days; and I presume it
will be quickly done, being so necessary at this time, when the wants of the
Commonwealth call for supplies, and People will unwillingly pay Taxes for those
Estates of which they have no Legal Assurance. I need not tell you how much
your Favor was abused in the Nomination of your Officers of your Army there;
their Malice has been sufficiently manifested: I dare affirm that those now
that have declared for you, will continue faithful, and thereby evince, that
as well there, as here, it is the sober Interest that must establish your
Dominion.

As for Scotland, I must say the People of that Nation deserve much to be
cherished; and I believe your late Declaration will much glad their spirits;
for nothing was more dreadful to them, than a fear to be overrun with
Phanatick Notions.

I humbly recommend them to your Affection and Esteem, and desire the intended
Act of Union may be prosecuted, and their Taxes made proportionable to those in
England, for which I am engaged by Promise to be an humble Suitor to you. And
truly, Sir, I must ask leave to entreat you to make a speedy Provision for
their Civil Government, of which they have been destitute near a year, to the
ruin of many Families; and except Commissioners for Management of the
Government, and Judges to sit in Courts of Judicature, be speedily appointed,
(...) Country will be very miserable. I directed Mr. Gumble lately to present
to you some Names, both of Commissioners and Judges: But by reason of your
great Affairs, he was not required to deliver them in writing to you; but I now
humbly present them to your Consideration.

FINIS.

