A LETTER FROM A Citizen of Glasgow To his Friend at Edinburgh.

Containing some modest Animadversions on a late Printed Letter, concerning the
Affairs of that City.

PROVE. 10.9. He that walks uprightly, walks surely: But he that perverteth
his ways, shall be known.

PROVE. 16.18. Pride goes before destruction: And an haughty Spirit before a
fall.

Printed in the Year, 1700.

A Letter from a Citizen of Glasgow to his Friend at Edinburgh, etc.
SIR,
I was not a little surprised upon the Receipt of yours, of the 11th. instant,
containing the Printed Copy of a Letter concerning the Management of the
Affairs of this City, by which the Author, with no small stock of Assurance,
endeavors to vindicate the great Abuses which the Inhabitants have suffered in
the Administration of their Affairs since the Year 1689.

I am persuaded that neither the Magistrates, nor any other Well-wisher to the
Peace and Quiet of this Town, could be Accessory to the publishing of a Letter
that, I am afraid, must unavoidably move some Persons, who otherwise would ly
Dormient, to make a stricter Inquiry into its Veracity than perhaps, the Author
would, upon more Mature Consideration, be willing to subject it: For as it is
truly Lamentable, That there should be any discord, or even so much as the
Seeds thereof, between our Magistrates and the Inhabitants, so it cannot but be
regreted, that any should be so Malicious as to expose the Weakness of either
the one or the other, by publishing the same in Print: And as there is nothing
more certain than, That a City divided against it self cannot stand, so the
first Aggressor, or Chief sower of Sedition, should remember the Condemnation
pronunced by our Savior, Woe be to him by whom the Offense comes. And I am
sure you will allow it to be an Aggravation of the Guilt, the publishing of it
so unseasonably, to the disquieting of the Minds of the People at this time,
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper being to be Administered here upon the next
ensuing Lords day. And were I not persuaded, that there must be many more
Copies of a printed Paper, than that one which you sent me, I would commit it
to the Flames.

But now, since you tell me that that Letter has raised in several others as
well as your self, a desire of being informed by some impartial hand,
concerning the true Condition of our Town's Affairs, and that you seem to
expect some account thereof from me. I shall inform you of what occurrs to me
at present, with relation to the Contents of that Letter.

As to what is Suggested in the second Paragraph of it, I must say, That though I
was much conversant with the Generality of the People of Glasgow yet I never
heard any Reflection made against the Magistrates and Council for
Mis-management of the Town's Common-Good, further than that they were always
determined by John Anderson of Dove-hill's Counsel and Advice, alleging, That
instead of a free Election (which the Letter-writter says the Town has) they
had allowed Dove-hill the Nomination of the Provost, Baillies, and
Town-Council, ever since the late happy Revolution; whereby the Town's Gift
(though it cost them 9000 Merks, and gives Warrant for as free an Election as any
Burgh of this Nation, and particularly as that of the Burgh of Edinburgh) yet
was never further extended or made use of by them, than to put Dovehill in
place of the Archbishop; these Persons being always preferred whom he named to
the place: And though Dovehill could not always be Provost himself, because of
the set of the Burgh, yet whoever were chosen were but Nominal Provosts, and
he always exerced: And the Expense which the Burgh was put to in procuring the
abovementioned Gift of a free Election of their Provost and Magistrates, was
so far from Relieving them of the Inconveniences which they lay under, that it
has been made use of as a handle by Dovehill to continue, and perpetuate the
Magistracy in his own hands, with such others as entirely depend upon him, who
succeeded one another by turns and private Conceit, eversince the obtaining of
the said Gift; and that by such Methods and Practices as you will fully
understand by and by.

And as an evidence thereof, it is very remakable, that since the year 1689,
there have few or none been able to come upon the Government of the Town, but
such who have been shrewdly presumed to be devoted to Dovehill and his
interest; and none has been altered or turned out of the Town-Council, except
only those who for the good and interest of the Burgh, as well as for the
freedom of its Inhabitants, stated themselves in opposition to Dovehill's
Designs, and endeavored to check his proceedings, when contrary to the true
interest of the City.

For instance whereof John Sprewl who has very particularly signalized himself
for the honor of his Country and good of this City; Thomas Peter's who
faithfully discharged his Trust, and was extraordinary serviceable to the Town,
and gained to it by his diligent management 16000 lib. clear profit on a Tack
of the Excise; John Smith, John Stirling and John Armor, Persons well beloved
by the City, and most Affectionate to its interest, and very capable of
executing the Trust committed to their Charge, are the only Persons turned off
the Council these Ten Years past.

The Magistracy being thus continued in the Person of Dovehill, and his
Dependants, notwithstanding of the Gift by which the City expected to have been
secured against such Practices, and to have had the benefit of a free Election
in the Terms of that Gift, namely to be as free as any City of the Kingdom and
particularly that of Edinburgh, the Inhabitants (I must say) cannot but think
themselves aggrieved, that Dovehill should keep the Tenor and intent of this
Gift to be such a Secret, as that to this hour it has not been either
communicated to the two Houses of Merchants and Trades, or so much as entered
in our Records.

And that I may not seem to assert this without warrant, as not having seen the
said Gift; it appears by the Act of Parliament 14 of June 1690. Confirming the
said Gift, that the Election since that time has not been in the Terms thereof,
nor that the freedom of Election thereby granted to the City and Community of
Glasgow, has ever been Communicated or made effectual to them: For by that Act
of Parliament, it is Enacted, That the City of Glasgow and Town Council
thereof, shall have full Power and Privilege to choose their own Magistrates,
Provost, Baillies and other Officers within Burgh, as fully and freely in all
respects as the City of Edinburgh or any other Royal Burgh within the Kingdom
enjoys the same: And there being no particular manner determined in the Gift or
Act above-recited, for exercing the new freedom and Liberty thereby granted to
the City of Glasgow, it follows necessarly, that before any Election could
legally proceed after the said Gift, the Town Council for the time, together
with the Two Houses, which are the full Representation of the Burgh, ought to
have been jointly consulted about the form of Electing the Provost, Baillies
and other Officers, the Right of which is thereby conveyed to them; especially
to the two Houses of Merchants and Trades, as being the Body of the Society and
Community of Glasgow: And beyond question this must have been the design and
Genuine intent of the Act of Parliament, as you may see by its referring to the
Election of Edinburgh, in which the Trades have a very considerable interest.
Nevertheless Dovehill, instead of conveening the Town-Council, Merchants and
Trades Houses, in order to establish a fett for Electing the Magistrates in all
time coming, pursuant to the Gift and Act of Parliament confirming the same,
steps in into the Archbishops place, and Leits the Magistrates without taking
notice of either the Merchants or Trades Houses, and by that means has,
contrary to the Town's Right and Freedom entailed the Magistracy upon himself
and those of his Appointment ever since the Revolution, and has, during that
time, enhanced the management of the Common Good without Control.

And the People of Glasgow judging themselves extremely leased by this manner
of Electing after the procurement of the Gift and Act of Parliament
abovementioned; and finding themselves most rudely treated by Dovehill, who
frequently gave very insolent Answers to their respectfull Petitions for
Redress of their wrongs, were and (as I am informed) still are resolved to
pursue a Declarator of the Town's Freedom of Election, before the Parliament.

And lest you should imagine this to be a groundless Charge, I shall support it
by the following undeniable instance of his insolent Expressions and insulting
carriage toward the Inhabitants in general:

When several of the most considerable of their Number, did, in Name of
themselves and their fellow Citizens, signify to Dovehill, that they could not
comply with the paying of Stent upon any account whatsoever, but for the King's
Cess; and particularly, that they could not pay Stent for the Burgh-dues,
unless they were decern'd and ordained by a Competent Judicatory; he Answered
very huffily, That it were easier to hold a Lion by the Jaws, than to quarrel
what the Magistrates did in reference to the Stenting of the Inhabitants, and
that he would Stent them for the said Burgh-Dues, for the Defficiencies of
former Stents, and for the Subscriptions of the Royal Burghs to the Indian and
African Company; and bid any that quarel'd either of these to set it to their
knee and right it if they could; all which can be made appear by famous
Witnesses in this Town. And tho all these ought to be paid out of the
Common-Good, yet the several Inhabitants signified their inclination to comply
most cheerfully with their Stent for the^ said Subscription-Money (as they did)
but only insisted, that Dovehill should take the Advice of the Merchants and
Trades Houses, for laying on the same proportionably, and not assume to himself
the Privilege of laying on a Stent Arbitrarly, without allowing them the
freedom of inquiring into the Reasons thereof.

I shall in the next place show you Dovehills sinistrous intreagues and illegal
Practices, as to the method of continuing himself and his Set in the
Magistracy and Council, and debarring all those whom he thought not entirely in
his Interest, not only from the Magistracy and Council, but also, as much as he
could, from having any knowledge of the Town's Affairs: And indeed the matter
is so very Scandalous, that were it not very notoriously known here, I should
hardly venture to expose my self to the hazard of not being believed in the
Relation of a practice so very uncommon; which is as follows.

I have already told you, that when ever any Election was to be made since the
Beginning of Dovehill's Administration, he always assumed to himself the
Privilege formerly enjoyed by the Archbishop, of giving in the Leits, and in
those Leits he never failed of leishing together one of his own Creatures, or
intimate Friends, whom he reckoned to be absolutely under his Management, with
some Person of no Note or Degree within the City, or otherwise hated by the
People, or disaffected to the Government; and after an Extraordinary Method,
the Council behoved to choose by pairs, and not to have their Freedom of
Electing out of the whole Leit; by which means he absolutely secured the
Election to his own Creature or Friend:

And that I may say nothing without Book, I shall (beside many other Instances
to be given) condescend, for Brevities sake, only on two: The first is Provost
Napier (a Creature of Dovehill's) coupled with Provost Barns, a Person whom
Dovehill himself had represented to the Town and Inhabitants, as a great
Malverser and Squanderer of the Common-Good, and a Scourge to the Town in the
time of the late Evil-Government, being a Tool of the late Archbishop's in
fining for Non-conformities, and the then pretended Irregularities; By which
Method he absolutely secured his Creature Napier to be chosen. The other
Instance is, Matthew Cumming his Trusty Friend, who attends the Council on no
Occasion, but when Dovehill calls for him for some Special Eminent Service or
other, particularly about the time of Election; For Cumming being an Old Man,
and living for the most part in the Country, is not able to attend the
Council, as the Duty of a Councellor requires; yet being an old Trusty Trojan
of Dovehill's, it was thought necessary in order to get him chosen, to buckle
him with William Fawside, a Man shrewdly suspected to be both Jacobite and
Malignant.

It falls next in Course, That I inform you of Dovehill's Measures for turning
out of the Council such as upon Trial, he finds not willing to run his Errands,
or close with his Designs: He Lists the Person whom he intends should be put
out, with another Person, that by the Set of the Town cannot be turned out;
and this he did in particular to the forementioned John Sprewl, a Person well
deserving not only of this City but of the Country in general, by Leiting him
with John Leckie one of the Magistrates for the immediate preceding Year, who
by the Old Set of the Burgh behoved to continue, and could not be turned off
for that Year, by which Means John Sprewl must of necessity be removed,
notwithstanding he did then, and at several other times, protest against such
gross and palpable Encroachments upon the City's Right and Freedom of Election:
And there has been such a continued Course of such Practices used by Dovehill,
that it were a needless blacking of Paper to trouble you with any further
instances of it at this time.

But as a further Swatch of his Politics, in contriving of Handles by which he
might preserve his Reputation and Esteem with his own Set; when he foresaw
that at the Convention of Burghs, July 1699, a part of the Burden of the Ten
pounds formerly payable by the Burghs of Barrony, must necessarly have been
laid upon the Town of Glasgow, he writes a Letter to James Peadie then Provost,
in which he declares, that he was so unfortunate, as to be ill-look'd upon by
several eminent Persons of the Nation, and that the Town of Glasgow having
received prejudices on his Account, he therefore desired the said Provost to
make choice of some other Person to represent them at the said Convention,
which accordingly was done: Yet no sooner was the Convention over, but he
endeavored to calumniat the Commissioners that were there for this Burgh,
unjustly alleging (though they had done all that was in their Power to lessen
the Proportion of the said ten pounds, that was intended for Clasgow) that they
were the Persons who brought Burden upon the Town: Because (forsooth) 40
shillings of the said Ten Pounds were laid on this Town for one year: And to
support this Allegation, he affirmed further, that they had trusted too much to
Sir James Smallet, and that if he had been Commissioner, he would have taken
such Measures, as that no part of the said ten Pounds had been laid on the
Town: This was such a Master-peice of his Cunning, as he thought would
undoubtedly Rivet him in the Good Opinion of his Old Core, and secure his being
again chosen Provost at the then following Election; and thereby more firmly
establish himself in all the other Beneficial places he enjoys, such as the
being Manager of the Tack of the Customs, Conjunct Collector of Glasgow,
General Surveyor; Book Keeper to the Town, Towns Agent, and Deburser of their
Money, which many People stick not to say was the chief Butt that he aimed at.

Having now given you this short account of the Council established by
Dovehill, I reckon you will need but few further Arguments to persuade you,
that the noise which he said was made concerning the management of the Affairs
of Glasgow, was not altogether groundless; and I am persuaded, you are already
of Opinion, that his Management in general has tended but very little to either
the Peace, Credit or Interest of this City; and that he is not a Person so very
self-denyed, and regardless of his own interest, as to make a continued
struggle for inhancing the Magistracy, if he had not found his Accounts by it.

And tho the account I give of this matter, may seem to carry along with it a
more than ordinary concern, I have reason to hope, that you will not be so
uncharitable, as to think that either I, or much less, so numerous a Body of
the Inhabitants, as have cried out against the foresaid Abuses, do it upon the
account of any personal prejudice at Dovehill, or any other of those who have
been upon the Magistracy, during his Administration, but what we do or say in
this matter, proceeds merely from the sense we have of our duty, to the City of
Glasgow, whereof we are Members, and from the Obligations that ly upon us by
our Burges-Oaths, to endeavor the good and welfare of the Town: And besides
too, several of them stand in need of no Vindication, particularly Provost
Peadie; who (I am persuaded) has behaved himself very Honestly and
Conscientiously in his station, as some others have also done in theirs.

But to come closer to the Contents of that Letter, which I am persuaded, no
body but Dovehill could be at the Pains to Write, or have the Effrontory to
publish, tho in a blank Persons Name, to Vindicate the Magistrates of Glasgow
(forsooth) from the Mismanagement, which the Community of the City charges only
upon himself, it is observable, that for justifying himself from what he is
pleased in that Letter to call Calumnies (tho the People of Glasgow finds them
to be sad Truths) he proclaims to the World, that he did expose his Books to
the Two Houses, and desired that they would choose Six Persons of each House to
consider the Town-Accounts and management, to the end that they might report
their Opinion to both Houses; and that after these Persons had gone through the
Accounts, and made their observes and remarks thereon, they could not be
prevailed with to make the same known. By which Declaration he pretends to
justify himself, and impose a belief upon Mankind, that all the Noise made
about the Management of the Town's Affairs, was only groundless Suggestion,
Clamor and Calumny.

Yet you must know, that as this pretended exposing the Books to the Members of
both Houses was but a mere sham, there being no free inspection given of the
Books (as he alleges) nor sufficient time to make any reasonable Observations
upon the Management of the Common Good, so neither was the scrimp inspection
that was made, a free offer of Dovehill's for his own Vindication, as he would
make us believe, but merely the effect of an Address, from a great many of the
Inhabitants to the Dean of Gild, desiring that the Books might be exposed, and
which the Council (when conveen'd) did accordingly grant: But Dovehill had so
managed the matter, that the inspection so much desired, proved altogether
useless as to the Design for which it was intended: For although Six were
appointed by each House to receive the Books, and have the free perusal of them
amongst themselves; yet in stead of that free inspection which they ought to
have had, Dovehill who by an unpresidented Conjunction of two such Offices was
both Provost and Book-Keeper (for which he has a considerable Salary) never
parted with the Books, nor allowed inspection thereof, but in his own presence,
he pointing and illuminating the several Posts as he pleased: Neither did he
allow above some few Hours for several days to go through the said Books, and
by that means, any inspection or Survey that they had was so very superficial,
that no distinct Report could possibly be made, especially considering that the
Accounts of two full years, viz. From Michaelmass 1697 to Michaelmass 1699, are
yet unrecorded: During which time many shrewd presumptions can be given, that
there were great Fallacies and Abuses committed: And even in the Accounts which
are recorded, there are several very considerable Articles not instructed; at
least they must follow Dovehills Faith for the Disbursements of all the Writers
Accounts, which tho consisting of several small particulars, yet amount to a
great Sum, and go under such Names as the Revisers could not pretend to
contravert, unless they had some Writers or Agents to Assist them, many
Disbursements being Charged at several times for Doubles and adjusting of
Minutes to the Lords Men, Clerks, Macers, etc. and several other Articles of
that kind, which at least ought to have been attested by the Towns Agent, to
whom they pay a yearly Sallary; and besides it was not unknown to some of them,
who were appointed to review these Accounts, that Dovehill had several
Law-Pleas of his own, which went on at the same time, and that possibly one
payment might have served for both: All which considerations were in my humble
opinion sufficient Reasons to diswade any discreet Men from venturing to expose
their own Reputations, by giving in a Report under their hands in a matter of
which they could not possibly have any distinct view.

As to the particular Account which Dovehill gives of the Town's Debts, and the
several payments by which he pretends to have reduced them by his painful
management, you cannot well expect any particular Information from me
concerning the same, until I have better Authority to direct my reason, and
ground my belief upon, than any thing contained in that Printed Letter; for
Dovehill being Book-Keeper as well as Provost might easily make a Charge and
Discharge as he pleased: But had he given, as was desired, full and free
inspection of his Books to my Informers, 'twere an easy matter to confute his
said pretended and sham Account, and demonstrate that it was calculated only
for a new Trick to impose upon the People, and persuade them that their Affairs
are in good order, when in the mean time they are (I am very much afraid)
going to Wreck and Ruin.

And therefore, (though for the reasons aforesaid a particular Answer cannot at
present be given to an Account, thus clandestinely patched up by Dovehill and
his Agents, with design to surprise and amuse the People therewith) yet to
obviate the fallaciousness and disingenuity thereof, and to show to the World
that many considerable Sums have been exacted and intrometted with by Dovehill
over and above the Town's ordinary Revenue and Common-Good, I have hereunto
subjoined some noted particulars amounting to the Sum of 126700 lib., which are
most disingenuously suppressed, or at least omitted in Dovehill's Printed
Account.

lib. ss. d, Exacted from the Inhabitants under the Name of King's Cess, etc.
more than warranted by Act of Parliament, about 36700 00 00 Gained upon the
Tack of the Excise of the Five Shires. 16000 00 00 Uplifted of Seat-Mails
before there was one word of building the Blackfryar Church, about 08000 00 00
Received from the Inhabitants for private and public Malt before the
Revolution, about 06000 00 00 Received of the 2 d. per Pint of Ale to this
Year. 60000 00 00 126700 00 00

And this beside the whole Revenue of the Town of Glasgow, viz. Milns, Ladles,
Pecks, Greens, Trone, Bridge, Broomy-Law; Port Glasgow, Drawen-Teinds about the
Town. Teinds of the Gorbals, Flesh-Market, Land Market, the Rent of the Sixteen
Mark-Land, Feu-Duties and Teinds of the Barony.

By all which it is evident to the meanest Capacity, that Dovehills Vindication
is but a further step of his imposing upon and deluding the People, with design
to lull them asleep and keep them as much as he can in gross ignorance of the
Town's Affairs.

And as a further evidence of his Sinistrous design by the said Account, you
may observe a most shameless Piece of Partiality in that sham vindication of
himself and the Magistrates; for he thereby makes all the payments of the
Town's Debts to be made during the time of his own Provostship; but in Provost
Peadie and Provost Napier's time (who are known to be very honest Men) no Debts
were paid; which is a gross and grievous Reflection upon the Reputation of
honest Men; especially considering, it is very well known that, tho Dovehill
was not always in the Provost's Chair, yet he had still the ascendant over it
so far as to have the management of the Council who were all of his own
choosing: For Proof whereof my informers do declare, that they knew several
Sums that ought to have been applied to the payment of Debt in Provost Peadie
and Provost Napier's time, preposterously applied for payment of Debt in
Dovehill's time, particularly 1100 lib. paid by George Murehead late Treasurer
for defraying of Debt in Dovehills time, which should have been paid in
Peadies time: And several instances can be given of the like Practices overall
the Accounts.

And it is very remarkable, that how favorable soever the Letter is to
Dovehill, in all its parts, yet the Writer thereof has omitted Seven Thousand
Merks of Expenses, that the Town of Glasgow was at, in defending the Slaughter
of Major Meinzies; which being so considerable a Sum, I know not how it could
have escaped Dove-hill's Memory, upon perusal of his Books; but I rather begin
to have Charity for him in believing that being ashamed thereof, he has
wilfully omitted it; as being not only extravagant, but an Article too that he
knows might have been easily prevented by taking the said Major alive, and
bringing him to a fair Trial, when he was surrounded by Dovehill and such a
Number of the Inhabitants, as must needs have made his escape impossible; which
is well known to the whole Inhabitants of this place.

Now that I have done Justice to Dovehill, in minding him of what he has
neglected to state in his own Discharge, he can the less blame me, for having,
in Justice to the Community, of which I am a Member, mentioned those
Particulars which he has wilfully concealed in his Letter, and ought to be put
to his Charge: Which, together with the many unnecessary Pleas, in which he has
involved the Town, amount to a great Sum, and can easily be made appear, if he
could be prevailed with, to allow the Inhabitants to inspect his Books more
narrowly, and make their Remarks with greater Deliberation, than those Pleas
were engaged in.

As to the Conclusion of his Accounts, by which he asserts, that there is 50326
Pounds 5 Shillings paid of clear Debt, my Informers seemed to be very glad, if
they could be certified, that the Town of Glasgow's Debts are so much lessened,
since Dovehill's entering into the Magistracy; but are unwilling to believe it,
till the two Years outstanding Accounts be Recorded, and come to Light: For
until that be done, and a fair, full and free Inspection given of his Books,
and a true Charge made against him, (which is noways done in the foresaid
Letter and printed Account, as appears by what is above said) there can be no
just or particular View given of that Matter: And the Inhabitants are deeply
afraid, that instead of finding the Town's Debts lessened, in the Sum which he
pretends, that they will find the Common-Good reduced to such a Pass, as that
in a little time it will not be able to bear its own Weight, if it fall not
speedily into better hands. Nor is this the Case of the Common-Good only, but
even the Inhabitants themselves, by the extraordinary Burdens laid on them, are
become so unable, that many of them have already left the Town, and given up
their Burgess-Tickets, to be free of the Stents and Burdens; and many others
are like to follow their Example: So that Dove-hill's Management may come to
empty the Town of Trading Merchants, as well as he has purged the Council of
such as cannot be devoted to his Interest, unless a speedy Remedy be found: Nor
is it to be supposed, that it was upon the Account of Public Works, that the
Inhabitants have been thus heavily Stented: For the Expense of these are much
more than compensed, by the extraordinary Incomes and Profits, of which
Dovehill has made no manner of Account.

But lest this my long Letter may weary your Patience, though I have several
other things to add on this Subject, I shall conclude at present with this one
Observe: The Writer of that printed Letter which you sent me, says, That the
Magistrates bear as heavy a part of the Stents as any others, and some of them
more than any in the Town: But because I am sure, that the Inhabitants know
very well that Assertion to be impudent and false, I shall only tell you, that
if Dovehill has been Stented for any Trade that he has had these Twelve Years
past as a Merchant, they have done him very much Injustice; for my Informers
assure me, that they never knew of any Trade that he has had in all that time,
except the Provost-Trade; which now, it seems, they incline to believe to be a
better Trade than they thought of: Especially when they consider what Industry
and Art he uses, to keep himself in that Station; what his Circumstances were
when he entered into it what they are now; and how that by that Trade only, he
has paid off so much of his own proper Debts: For they are persuaded, that the
Four Pounds a Day which he gets, when Abroad on the Town's Affairs, and the
Three Hundred Pounds he gets as being Book-Keeper, could never effectuat such
things.

Sir, Though your Importunity has expiscated all this from me, I should not wish,
that it were exposed to any, who would improve it to the raising of Discord:
And tho the Author of that Letter has thought fit to leave a blank for his
Name, for Reasons best known to himself, since we can only guess at them; yet I
could have no Scruple in Citing my Informers Names, were it not they assured
me, that if their Names were known, they might expect no less than Military
Execution, by exorbitant Quartering of Soldiers upon them: For that is the
common Usage of the People of Glasgow, if they seem to quarrel any thing that
Dovehill thinks fit to be done; his ordinary is, to send Two Soldiers to
Quarter on each of them, though often, the Houses which they are sent to, cannot
well accommodat the People themselves: So that it is all one, whether there be
Two Companies, or Two Regiments in Town; for the Locality is still exacted of
those, whom he thinks Disaffected to him, whether there be any Shadow of
Reason for it or not.

If this Account can give you any Satisfaction, I have my chief end by it, next
to that of endeavoring to obviat and expose those Measures, which I think so
prejudicial to the Interest and Welfare of this City, whose Good, you know, I
am in Duty bound to advance, as much as in me lies: And if I fail in the
Performance, I hope you will in Charity rather impute it to my Ignorance, than to
the Want of a Hearty Inclination in

SIR, Your Real Friend, and Humble Sarvant, J. B.
Glasgow, 17th. July, 1700.
Postscript.
AFter I had considered this tedious Letter, I cannot forbear giving you
further assurance, that the several matters of Fact therein contained are truly
and justly related, to the best of my Memory, and according to the truest
Information that I could procure.

But upon second thoughts, my Memory does not serve me exactly whether William
Fawside mentioned Page 7 was coupled with Matthew Cumming or Dovehill's other
beloved Creature Gavin Wood; but that he was leited with one of them, I am
positive: And that George Graham, James Robertson and John Gardener (whose
Characters are well known to the Inhabitants) were likewise severally Leited
with other Trusty Friends of Dovehill's.

And for the further Verification of what I have Written concerning the
Election of our Magistrates, I have hereunto Subjoined a true Copy of the Act
of Parliament in favors of the Town of Glasgow.
June 14th. 1690.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD and LADY, taking to Their Consideration, that the City of
Glasgow is amongst the most considerable of the Royal Burrows within Their
Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, both for the number of Inhabitants, and their
singular fitness and application to Trade, and the convenient Situation of the
Place, upon the River of Clyde; And that the Common-Good of the said City has
been greatly wasted and exhausted, by draining vast Sums of Money from
Magistrates, who were not freely Elected and Chosen, as is usual in other Royal
Burrows: And likeways considering the firm Adherence, and constant Zeal for the
Protestant Religion, of the Community of the said City, Their Majesty's did
grant a full and ample Charter, in favors of the said City of Glasgow, and the
Common Council thereof, confirming all former Charters granted to them by any
of Their Royal Predecessors, in favors of the Community of the said City, or
Gild-Brethren, Tradesmen, or any Society or Deaconry within the same; and also
of new Granting and Disponing to the said City, and common Council thereof, a
full and ample Power, Right and Faculty of Electing their Provost, Baillies,
and other Magistrates, at the ordinary time of Election, as freely as any other
Royal Burgh might do within Their said Ancient Kingdom, promising to confirm
the foresaid Charter in the next Parliament. Therefore Their Majesty's, with
Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, do Statute, Enact and Ordain,
that the City of Glasgow, and Town-Council thereof, shall have Power and
Privilege to choose their own Magistrates, Provosts, Baillies, and other
Officers within Burgh, as fully, and as freely in all respects, as the City of
Edinburgh, or any other Royal Burgh within the Kingdom enjoys the same;
Beginning the first Election at Michaelmass next, and so forth yearly in
time-coming. And further, Their Majesty's, with Consent foresaid, do Ratify,
Confirm, and Approve the foresaid Charter granted by them in favors of the
Community, and Common Council of Glasgow, of the date the fourth day of January
1690, in the whole Heads, Articles, and Clauses thereof, as fully and amply, as
if the same were word by word herein Engrossed; Whereanent Their Majesty's,
with Consent foresaid, do hereby Dispense for now and ever. It is always hereby
expressly provided and declared, that this present Act shall be without
prejudice or derogation to Their Majesty's, of Their Rights to the Regality of
Glasgow, or other Rights, except as to the Power and Freedom of the Burgh of
Glasgow, in relation to the choosing of their own Magistrates, and the several
Erections of Incorporations and Deaconries in that Burgh.

FINIS.

