The Trial of WITCHCRAFT OR, WITCHCRAFT Arraigned and Condemned.

In some Answers to a few Questions anent Witches and Witchcraft.

Wherein is showed, how to know if one be a Witch, as also when one is
bewitched: with some Observations upon the Witches Mark, their compact with the
Devil, the White Witches etc.

by: Mr. John Bell.

Exodus 22.18. Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live.

It is advantageous to have many engaged in writing on the same Subject, even
though they should say little more then what is said by others.

Mr. Durham on the Revelation. Digress. 3. Page 63. Le^^^^ (...)Friend.
Sir,
HAving heard strange things reported of Witchcraft and Witches: I desire to
know from you, what satisfaction you can give me in answer to the following
Queries, wherewith the mouths of People are on that occasion so much filled:
take them thus.

Query 1. How shall one know if a disease be the effect of Witchcraft, seeing
all grant, that strange diseases may happen either to Man or Beast, which yet
are neither the product of Devils or Witches.

Query 2. What means are best to be used for help to these thus bewitched. And
here I would know 1. what is to be thought of causing the suspected Witch,
touch the afflicted Party, 2. If this be not, then what other mean is best.

Query 3. I would further know, what will prove one to be a Witch? and here 1.
If bi^ter cursing and imprecations with malefices following thereupon, will
prove it? and if not that, then 2d. If a persons often enquiring into the
disease of the tormented, or their coming to visit them unsent for; yea, after
they have been discharged the house as being suspected persons, will do the
business? Or 3d. if the afflicted person his or her seeing, in time of th^^^
tormenting fits, so as to know and name particular Persons; will prove the
Person thus seen known and nominate, to be a Witch. Or 4th If none of those,
then (pray) what will do it? your answers agreeably to the mind of the best
Writers you have seen, is earnestly entreated by,

Your Humble Servant.

An answer to the Letter.
Sir,
THo I am sensible, that to speak on this head of witchcraft, is a very hard
Task; considering especially the difficulty of discovering Wiiches; (the
secrecy of the grounds of witchcraft; and the cunningness of some juggling
counterfits, being so great and many) as also considering how Satan seeks to
imitate God i^ his actions; as Scripture, and many strange (tho true) relations
about Witches do abundantly make appear: for example, 2 Kings 5.27. we read
that God by the Prophet makes Naamans leprosy cleave to Gehazi; so Satan does
by the help of Witches at sometimes, take the disease from off one person, and
lays it upon another. Also, we read Acts 8.39. of Philips being carried bodily
out of the Eunuchs fight; so also can the Devil transport bodies from one place
to another, as we find he took our blessed Savior up unto the pinnacle of the
Temple, Mat. 4. And he often carries his own servants into the air, as he did
Dr. Faustus, or over into foreign places; as is usual for him to do with these
Witches. Tho, I say, these with many more things concur to render the
undertaking hard; yet I think it needs not be ill looked upon if an essay be
made of this nature; considering especially how much light may be borrowed from
the Writings of learned men both of old and of late, the direful experience of
former ages, as well as of this, having afforded occasion for such questions as
be proposed by you, and which are current with the common people. Adventuring
therefore to obey your desire, take the Answers in the following Method.

SECTION I. How to know if one be ^ewitched.
IN answer to your first Quer^ I would say; that no doubt most people may be
thought too rash in attributing to Witchcraft every disease that seems strange
and beyond ordinary, as is rightly insinuated, in your ground given for your
first Qu^ry: famous writers instancing in their books many strange and
wonderful diseases, yet no work of witchcraft, as are the Apoplexy, Carum,
Catalepsis, Cramp, with many more mentioned by Dr. Cotta in his Emperiks, and
Dr. Mason in his practice of philosophy, and R Bernard in his Guide to Grand
jury men. All which Authors do yet still affirm these to proceed from natural
causes, and to be curable by natural remedies; tho scarce would a common person
look on the party thus distempered, without concluding witchcraft to be there.

However, where the disease is more then natural, and no less then the effect
of witchcraft it may be known by such signs as Witches themselves in their
confessions, and learned Physici^ians have condescended upon as symptoms of
Witchcraft. I only name a few which we may ^ake thus. 1. When the disease is
such as that wise and skilful Physicians can find no probable ^eason of any
natural cause for it, as it was with M. Throgmortons child, who would often
have a great heaving and swelling of the belly, then a passing to the throat
ready to stop the breath: as also thrusting out her leg or arm so as non could
bow it, with other such like motions 2. When ye tormented Party in time of such
fits vomit up crooked pins, coals, nails, needles, knoted hair, straw, etc. 3.
When the tormented party in ^ime of their fits tell truly many things; some
past, others in doing, as, where the Witch is, what she is doing, saying, etc.
as hapened in the case of Mr. Throgmorton's elder daughter, Mrs ^ean, who could
also tell some things to come, as how many in the house were to be bewitched,
and who they were. 4. When there is supernatural strength, so as that a very
strong man should not be able to keep down a child of about 12. years of age as
it was with one of M. Throgmorton's children. Other signs are given by Authors,
but we pass them.

SECTION II. Of Means to be used for helpin^ the bewitched.
VArious are the methods fallen upon for e^sing the afflicted: among which is
th^^ made mention of in the second Query of causi^^ the suspected Witch touch
the afflicted person as if their touch could cure them: Which y^^ seems not to
be a mean on which we are to re^^ (though I find not the use of it simply
condemned) as having neither a divine appointment, n^^ a natural reason for it.
Add to this (whi^^ some have well taken notice of) that the susp^cted Witches
either presence or absence, is a ve^^ uncertain thing. for 1. Their presence or
absen^^ as Witches takes it force only from their leagu^ and covenant with the
Devil: which as they c^^ renew at pleasure, so can they make their pr^sence or
Touch effectual accordingly; So a^ the tormented party be bad, and take fits,
th^^^ present, by indenting with the Devil over aga^^ (God permitting) they may
procure that in their presence they may take no more fits; and on the contrary,
if in their presence and at their Touch they be well, so that their presence
there will prove nothing, either for curing the diseased, or making them yet
worse, and so thereby founding a presumption for Bystanders to conclude them
Witches, 2. Their touching is an uncertain thing, because (as writers on this
head have sufficiently instructed) by Touching they even sometimes bewitch the
afflicted party. Thus Danaeus in Dialogis suis de Sortiariis, witnesses, that
a Witch touched but the breasts of a woman that gave suck, and her milk dried
up: and the forcited Rector of Batcomb, R. Bernard reports of one Mary Suton a
Bedford shire Witch, that having but touched the neck of one of Mr. Engars
servants, with her finger, he was presently after her departure miserably vexed,
how then can their touch cure the diseased?

So then, the best mean is fasting and prayers, for God only can best free us
from Devils, and in the use of his means alone it is, that we are to expect a
blessing: So that if we would prevent Witches, and whatever else the Devil can
do, let us always rely on God, who has promised to such, that he will cover
them under his wings. etc. Psalms 91.4.

SECTION III. What will prove one to be a Witch*
GReat is the Mystery of iniquity, and its hard to discover the Members of that
Kingdom of darkness, where the King is Satan, the fiery Dragon, the roaring
Lion, and deceive^ of the Nations; and where the subjects are faggots of hell,
Deceivers and deceived: Yet thorough the Lords blessing on the means and
methods fallen upon for detecting such, they may be known, let us then touch at
these, and first negatively what will not prove one to be (...) Witch, and then
positively, what will.

To begin then and go throw with the several particulars contained in the third
Query le^ us consider the first particular which is if bitte^ cursings and
imprecations, evil following there upon, will prove one to be a VVitch, and to
thi^ it is answered, that tho Witches have bee^ known thus to bewitch people
by Cursing the^ whereupon presently evil followed to the person thus Cursed,
yet it is no more then a presumption of ones being a VVitch, for first such
Cursings and Imprecations are in some no other then the effect of a natural
constitution, and so may be acted oftener than once or twice: Constitutions (in
the Judgment of the learned) differing from habits mostly in name, when they
come to any perfection; and habits being got by acts frequently repeated. 2.
Because, as Satan may get a permission from God, to work natural diseases which
do break forth upon cursing, so doubtless he improves it subtily, of which some
do thus conceive. They say, the Devil he knows when his power to do hurt is
granted him of God; as also, he knows the growing, ripening, and breaking forth
of a disease upon man or beast. Again, ere natures act thus break out, he stirs
up some occasion to make the party against whom his design is, to fall out with
some angry neighbor, which being gained, Satan stirs up people hereupon,
because of one or two such practices, to pursue the neighbor to death, as
becoming by her ill tongue a VVitch; when as, tho she be otherwise
pestilentious enough, yet possibly is no VVitch. So then we conclude, that
however this may be an Item to such ill natured cursers and railers to forbear
further provocking of God by such practices to give them over to Satan's power;
yet I see not why cu^sings with harm following them are any oth^^ then a
presumption (however great it be) th^^ one is a VVitch.

2. As to a persons often enquiring into the disease of the tormented, or their
coming to v^site them unsent for, yea perhaps after they have been discharged
the house, as persons under su^picion, its answered in one word, that this is
n^ other then a presumption, and that for this reason among others, that
revengeful spirits (thoug^ they be no Witches) having once cursed, an^ hearing
of some sudden mischance followin^ in order of time thereupon, may inquire
afte^ the afflicted party, yea visit him or her, while under this fit of
cursed joy conceived in them at the hearing of such news, when yet for al^ this
there is perhaps no league with the Devil and as for their visiting undesir'd,
yea, when prohibit and discharged some have rightly imputed the same to the
confidence, or rather impudence of the poorer, and unmannerly sort of people.

3. As to the afflicted persons seeing, knowing and naming diverse persons in
time of their fits, as their tormentors; as it was with Mr Throgmortons
Children (as the Author of the Relation of VVarboys Witches does attest) ye^
will not yt prove ye person or persons so known, and nominate, to be all
Witches, for 1. as to their being seen, doubtless tho the Devil cannot create
any inward species or representation, this being a work of Omnipotency (as
Holy and learned Mr. Durham has observed) yet God permitting him; he by
working upon what is already within the person, may misrepresent objects, by
disturbing inwardly the Faculties and Organs: so that he can presentiate to
the Phanatasie such persons, as he knows the tormented party abhors to see, and
uses to fear: for if he could represent a seeming Samuel, much more a
Graceless man or woman, to deceive the Fancy of disturbed minds of afflicted
Persons; and yet these graceless persons may be no Witches, for doubtless in
this the Devil may lie, as well as speak true. 2. As to their being named, its
but the Devils Testimony, which is not to be laid weight on, in the matter of
life and death; seeing he may accuse an innocent, as histories abundantly declare

Sir, I persuade my self you take up my mind in this matter better then to
think any favor to be intended or allowed, by what I have said of their
Negative marks (as I called them for distinctions sake) to any of these members
of Satan's Kingdom the Wit hes: God forbid any (far less I) should in the least
Favor such for whom God has told us in his word he has no favor they
continuing such; for however I have all along called these but Presumptions,
in so doing; I say no other then what pious and learned Writers on this head
have spoken, who withal are of opin on (as I also am) that such pregnant and
shrewd presumptions sufficiently witnessed are just cause of imprisonment, and
are worthy (after trial) of most severe and condign punishment* but ere the
life can be taken away from them, it will perhaps be found needful, that a
league with the Devil be once proven, for understanding of this, let us premise
these 4. or 5. things. 1. that the Devil seeks not to make any a Witch whom he
finds not some way prepared either by impenitency and obduredness,
distemperedness of passion, profaneness, and the like: for he will not readily
nor willingly attaque and surprise, where he thinks not to gain ground. 2.
Finding man or woman thus prepared, he waits his opportunity of appearing to
them visibly, sometimes in one shape, sometime in another, varying according to
the nature, quality, and condition of the persons to whom he thus appears: thus
he is said to have appeared to Dr Faustus in the habit of some religio^^
person; and now it is, that he works upon the poor creature, whom he at one
time allures by many perswasives, at other times surprising them, frights them
into a compliance with his overtures, according as he finds them ignorant or
witty: for he is a cunning Engineer, who attacks towns according to their
fortification, situation, or garrison: he understands who among men and women
are weak, and on what side; and agreeably, some are min'd, others bomb'd, some
won by storm, others by composition, others again are starved into a surrender,
3 That which he aims at in all their assaults, and in order whereunto he appears
once, or oftener, as he finds need is, to draw the poor, impenitent, and obdured
creature into a league with himself, which League or Covenant, Divines makes to
be twofold: the one implicit, secret and closs; wherein is a mutual consent,
but without any express terms on either side; Mr. Perkins in his discourse of
Witchcraft. chap. 2. Explains this, while he says that when a person desires in
heart to have such or such a thing effected by superstitious forms, etc. And
the Devil consents thereunto, if he then do the business, there is a secret
compact: thus such as by certain forms of words and prayers, call upon the
Devil; and when tho they know it to be unwarantable, yet will do it, because
they find an effect answerable to their expectation in using such charms and
spells, they are in Covenant with the Devil, though they will not let
themselves know or think it. Now this secret compact Satan sometimes, and as to
some persons, rests satisfied with, as when the man or woman is of considerable
knowledge, and has much Mother Wit (as we commonly call it) and so is such as
he knows will not be easily drawn into a more formal and express league with
him; or when he is content they should be shinning professors and such of whom
he designs to serve himself mostly, if not only, in matters seemingly good. The
other sort of league is that which is more express and formal, and when there
be mutual conditions: the VVitch on his or her, part giving over their Soul
(and sometimes also the body) into Satan's power, he on the other part,
promises great things t^ them, knowledge to the ignorant, revenge to the
envious, and wrathful, etc. though he often breaks his promise to them, as he
did to a Hu^garian VVitch, of whom I have read, who being put in prison, and
wanting food, she did eat he own fl sh and so perished: Satan her Master never
once helping her, if it was not to destro^ her self, sooner then otherwise she
might have done. But then 4. the Covenant thus made, he proceeds to confirm it,
which (some say) must be done by blood: therefore, some offer him a Sacrifice;
perhaps of a cat, dog, etc. possibly he condescends thus far to some Witches
of a more then ordinary station: but however I will not be positive in this;
only I find it asserted by some, that he will not part thus with your ordinary
Witches, but must needs Suck Blood of them which is done by Spirits, and that
in several parts of the body, as the crown of the head, under the ear, the
chin, etc, as witches of whom I have read, have confessed before the Judges.
Next follows the VVitch Mark, sometimes like a blew spot, or a little tate, or
reid spots like flea-biting, sometimes also the flesh is sunk in, and hallow,
and this is put in secret places, as among the hair of the Head, or eyebrows,
within the lips, under the armpits, and even in the most secret parts of the
Body. 5. Thus the Devil and they becoming familiar, they get from him Familiar
Spirits, some one, some more, with whom they consult, and act, and over which
Spirits he makes them believe they have all power, and can command them at
pleasure: and in this they assume to themselves a kind of Glory, to think that
they have Spirits at their nodd, to send forth for the torment of others; and
herein they rejoice, that they can keep others in awe by such thoughts of them
or words to them, whereupon follows hurt and mischief. Some have so far run on
in maintaining this point of it, anent the Witches getting familiar Spirits, at
that they think, that Witch^s d^ work all their malice and mischief by those
cursed Caytiffes; and so they make three things concure to the bewitching of a
Person; viz. a Divine permission, a Devilish operation, or the evil Spirits
working: and lastly, the Witches consent; So that the Devil does all, and they
consent to all, which to wit, is done in their behalf, for no doubt, Satan can
go of, and for himself, where he has no league with the Witch, thus some
define a Witch to be such as do act beyond the ordinary power of Nature, by the
help of wicked Spirits. Athen. Merc. V. 1. N. 3. Q. 6.

Now, before we proceed further, we shall take notice of this one Collorary
that may be drawn from what we have now said anent the Covenant with the Devil.
From hence possibly we may gather a reason, why Witches them selves are not
afraid to met with the Devil? For one would think that Humane Nature might
justly fright at the appearance, if not the am^sing name of DEVIL. We would say
therefore, that we doubt nothing, but at sometime^ the Devil appears even to
his own in frightful shapes, to their great terror, especially if he be angry
at them, and designs violence unto them, upon their refusing to do as he bids
them, as Bernard reports he did to old Dembdike, whom he pusht into a Ditch,
because she would not go help Chattox another VVitch, (whom she could not
abide) to make Picturs. The same Author says, the Devil came sometimes to Witch
Chattox gaping upon her in the Form of a Bear, with open month as if he would
have worried her, yet I think the reason why for ordinary they are not so much
afraid to meet, speak to and keep Caballs with him; is, that they being now in
Covenant with him, dream of no hurt in the business: yea, they fancy they have
him at Command. And if it be said, its strange they have no checks of
Conscience in the mean time because of their League with the Devil: We answer,
that it is not so strange as sad, and to be lamented; For they being readily
before that given up of God to a reprobate mind, have their Consciences seared,
so as that they want all sense and feeling of sin.

But now to come to the question more closely, and to show how one may be
convicted of this their league with the Devil; this compact how secretly so
ever made, is to be searched into, and all the presumptions hitherto spoken of,
must tend to prove and discover this compact, which some think may be gotten
done by a narrow scrutiny and search into these among other evidences of this
Covenant. 1. By a Witches Mark. We told already where this is to be found, it
must therefore be again and again diligently searched for; and least it b^
mistaken for a Natural mark, it is to be observed, that this is Insensible, so
that being pricked it will not bleed, as Natural marks will do, But what if
they hide them? Or what i^ they find a way to remove them? We answe^ that God
in his providence will scarce suffer i^ to be so; or if it so fall out, then it
grows again, and comes to its old Form, if we man credit the Grand Witch Lewis
Gaufridus a ric^ and learned Priest, as Bernard calls him: S^ that, tho this
mark be not found at first, it may be discovered at length. 2d. By Witche^
words, as their fortelling what shall happen to others the same found true, and
their boastin^ thereof afterward; as also, their speaking o^ transportation
from home to foreign places etc. 3d. Witches deeds; as their feeding creatures
secretly, which some say they send their errands; their making of pictures,
giving an^ thing to any Man which causes pains or death^ as is, the perusing
one shirt or clothes, returning the same again, and the owner upon wearing
them, and all the time of his or her wearing them, pained or tormented. 4th.
The confession of Fellow-Witches, especially if appearing penitent, and being
called one by one yet all agree in their Testimony; as their having seen, and
been with them at their suspected Devilish meetings, plotings. etc. And here
comes in the report of the Good or white Witch (as they call him or her)
whereby is meant, these Healers or Blessers (as some call them) who pretend to
know who are bad Witches, and where they dwell; and how to heal blasting, for
speaking etc. These being themselves Witches and in league with the Devil, best
know who these are, and what be their practices. 5. A Divine witness. where God
condescends to give it, as, when they pray for a token from God of displeasure
against them if they be guilty; and it accordingly falls out. As it is reported
to have been with one Mother Samuel the Warhoys Witch that tormented Mr.
Throgmortons children, who by bitter curses on her self if she were guilty;
presently her Chin did bleed, the place (as afterward she confessed) where the
Spirits did Suck blood, 6th. And lastly, The confession of the Witches
themselves. Sometimes the arraigned Witches confess their being in Covenant
with the Devil, partly upon being charged with the guilt, (...) of their own
accord, or finally, being draw^ thereto through terror of Conscience.

But now Sir, after all that is said, I desi^^ not to be so understood, as if
hereby I d^sign'd to force any into a compliance with the Conclusions already
laid down, further th^^ the reasons brought by grave Authors alre^^^ hinted
will persuade; nor do I think the Opinions or Practices of others which may
se^^ to run cross to something hitherto asserted are to be taxed by any; so
that what is he^^ said is only to show you what has given the Answerer to your
Questions most satisfaction in these Points. For a conclusion therefore I would
say, that tho I have adventured on these few lines in answer to your Queries,
therein I do not, nor ineeed can I expect to satisfy all even of the more
Judicious, but am apprehensive on the contrary, that I may displease some of
them (for which I should yet be sorry) who may possibly think that the
greatness o^ the Task might have forced me to a more awful distance, and a
giving way to better an^ greater Undertakers; but finding none hitherto forward
for allaying vulgar rude notions about your momentuous questions, I have (ye^
with all submission) adventured on this short essay the questions handled
therein, rather then the answers, being such as may push others forward to
second and much better cares about them; which should much (...)

Sir, Your Friend and Servant.

FINIS.

