A DESCRIPTION OF THE ROYAL FIREWORKS,
Prepared for Celebrating the Universal Joy, for the Inestimable Blessing
afforded by God to the King, Queen, and People of these Realms, in the happy
Birth of the most Illustrious PRINCE of WALES, presented on the Thames
over against White Hall, on Tuesday Night the 17th of July, 1688, before both
Their Majesty's, the Queen Dowager, the Prince and Princess of Denmark, and the
whole Court.
THE first Scene of this Pyrotechnic Opera represented the Joyful Acclamations
of the People, expressed in these Words, written in Letters of Flame, Vivat
Rex, suspending between two Stately Columns, with a Girandola, containing 100
Rockets, all fired at once: And at the same Time, several Water-Machines
discharged diverse Quantities of Water-Baloons and Water-Rockets playing in the
Thames, and thence rising up into the Air, and again falling into the Water,
with great Diversion and Variety; in the mean Time, the Baloons, out of the
Mortar-Pieces from the right and left Wings, with the Triumph-Guns, and a
Mortar-Piece of Nine Cylinders, threw up Baloons into the Air, to a very great
Height, where they broke into several Sorts of Fireworks, as Stars, Reports,
Fire-drops, and small Rockets.

The second Representation was the Figure of Bacchus, mounted upon a Tun placed
on a large Pedestal, holding in his right hand a Golden Cup, and in his left,
the Arms of the Prince of Wales: Over his Head were charactered in Letters of
Flame, Laetitia Populi; while out of the Figure, Tun, and Pedestal, were cast
forth all Sorts of Fireworks, playing both in the Water and in the Air; and at
the same Time, on the right and left Side of Bacchus, were placed, on two
Platforms, Frames of 150 great Rockets, from six to twelve Pounds weight each,
which played continually.

The third Scene exhibited the firing the Ciphers of Their Majesty's Names,
encompassed with two Laurel Branches of Fire, having above them an Imperial
Crown, and above that a Sun in his full Luster, between the two forementioned
Pyramids of forty-five Foot high, supported at each Corner with a Lion
Couchant, and raised upon two large Pedestals, the said Pyramids having each,
on either of the Tops, a large Flower-de-luce burning, environed with burning
Laurels, and casting out diverse Sorts of Fireworks, the Pedestals likewise
throwing out several Thousands of Rockets, both up into the Air, and down into
the Water; and on the four Corners of the Platform, were placed as many large
Girandola's, each consisting of a Hundred large Rockets; and behind these
Pyramids, another large Platform, furnished with five Hundred great Rockets,
which played all the while the Royal Ciphers were burning, besides a Hundred
great Rockets which were fired round about the Platform, on which the Pyramids
were placed.

And now the whole Front of the Fireworks appeared clearly enlightened which
was disposed after this Manner: On the right Hand of the Pyramids was placed,
at a 100 Foot distance, a Figure of twelve Foot high, on a larges Pedestal, the
Figure resembling A Beautiful Woman, in her right Hand holding a Laurel Wreath,
and with her left embracing a Pyramid; on her Head, a Crown, and clothed in a
Scarlet Robe embroidered with Gold, representing the Emblem of Royal Glory,
which was signified by a Motto, raised three Foot above her Head, made out in
flaming Letters of twenty-two Foot long, and two Foot and a half high, in these
Words, Gloria Principis, sending forth a continual Fire of all Sorts; and
behind the Figure, at 100 Foot Distance, was a Platform, upon which all this
while played three Hundred great Rockets.

The next Figure, somewhat advanced before the rest of the Front, was that of
Bacchus, before described, representing the Emblem of the People's Gladness,
expressing in like large Letters of Flame this Motto, Laetitia Populi.

On the left Hand of the Pyramids, was another Figure of twelve Foot high, at
the former Distance; this Figure resembling A Beautiful Woman, was vested in an
Azure Robe, richly adorned, on her Head a Crown, with her right Hand grasping
the British Oak; twined about with Ivy Branches and Berries, standing upon a
Pedestal; at her Feet, on one Side a Hare, on the other Side a Hen and
Chickens, each on a little Pedestal, being all Emblems of Foecundity, and
alluding to her Majesty's happy Fruitfulness, expressed by the Figure of
Foecundity; over whose Head, at three Foot Distance, burned a Motto in fiery
Letters, of twenty-seven Foot and a half long, and two Foot and a half high,
expressing these Words, Fausra Foecunditas; which Figure in her left Arm held a
Child, representing the PRINCE of WALES, over whose Head burned a Motto, shaped
like a half Circle, eight Foot the whole, and four Foot the Semidiameter, in
these Words, Propago Imperii, casting forth a continual and different Fire of
all Sorts, both in the Air and Water, there being also three Hundred great
Rockets which played up into the Air one after another, during the Time the
Figure was burning.

By this last Description of the Front of the Fireworks, and the several
Motto's, will be clearly understood the Design and Intent of the Whole, which
imports this Sense or Meaning, viz. That the Glory of the King, and Gladness of
the People, had been happily augmented By the blessed Fruitfulness of Her
Majesty, having brought forth (in the most Auspicious Birth of His Royal
Highness) A Prince, to propagate the Honor and Greatness of the British Empixe.

The last Firing afforded not an unpleasing Spectacle, by the playing off of
three Thousand Rockets out of six Girandola's, which were played upon two
Platforms, upon the right and left of the abovementioned Figures, each at two
Hundred Foot Distance, in a strait Line with the said Pyramids, concluding with
the Discharge of forty-five Baloons out of the aforesaid Mortar-Pieces and
Triumph Guns from their Platforms, upon the right and left Wings. The end of
this splendid Diversion was made known by the Noise of His Majesty's Trumpets
and Kettle Drums, seconded by the People's repeated Huzza's, expressing the
Satisfaction they had received in the happy and successful Performance of what
had been undertaken, which was closed by the Discharge of the Great Ordnance
from the Tower.

This Description of the Royal Fireworks, now made public, in Memory of the
great Occasion for which they were first designed, is, in all humility,
Dedicated to the Growing Glory of His Royal Highness the PRINCE of WALES, by

His Royal Highness's most humble, and most obedient Servant, M. BECKMAN,
Principal Engineer to His Majesty of Great Britain.


