Unto His Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Right Honorable Estates of
Parliament.
THE PETITION OF JAMES BAYNE His Majesty's Late Mr. Wright.
Humbly Shows,
THAT when King Charles the second of Blessed Memory Resolved to build a Palace
in this his Ancient Kingdom, for the better reception of Himself and
Successors, when ever they should Honor the Nation with their presence. His
Majesty gave Commission to your Petitioner to be Master Wright, which office
he discharged with great Fidelity; And having at the time of Building the
Palace at Holyrood-house, and reparations of the Castles of Edinburgh,
Stirling, and Bass an opulent Fortune of about 50000 Pounds Scots worth of
timber in the Buss of Leith, as is well known to many of this City, and could
be made appear by Irrefrageble instructions, such was his zeal for the publict,
and earnest desire to carry on these works which were to the Honor and
security of the Kingdom, that when there was not Money in the Theasurie to buy
matterials necessary; He furnished all things so far as that his Stock could
reach. And moreover, he raised Money owing him be some Noble Persons, and
Others, Viz: from the Marquess of Tweddal, his Majesty's Commissioner, 7000
pounds, from the Earl of Panmure 12000 pounds, and from the Earl of Strathmore
4000 pounds, and from the Neighbors in Edinburgh, ten thousand pounds, in all
33000 pounds, which was raised in the year 1675, and the Annualrent thereof
since that time, would more then double the Sum, and even after that all was
exhausted, he ingadged his Credit, and ceased not to furnish what was needful,
till that the Palace was completed; But by these means he not only spent his
own Fortune, but stands considerably in debt to others, he being never as yet
reimbursed by his Majesty of the sums given out by him, and his case and
condition being represented to the late King James, his Majesty was Graciously
pleased to Recommend to the Lords of Theasurie to consider your Petitioners
claim and accounts; And the Marquess of Tweddal, now his Majesty's High
Commissioner, the Lord Balcarras, and General Drummond being appointed by the
Theasurie to visit his compts, their Lordships at that time adjusted for
upwards of two thousand pound Sterling by subscribed compts, besides two
thousand and five hundred pounds more of Money foresaid, which these noble
persons did not then fully consider; And report of this being made to to the
Lords of the Theasurie, they granted your Petitioner a preceipt for five
hundred pounds Sterling: But the Revolution and change in Government happening
shortly thereafter, he got no payment thereof, as the precept herewith produced
does evidence, so that there is yet more nor four thousand five hundred pound
Sterling owing be the publict to him, besides the Annualrent thereof; By which
he is reduced to most miserable straits, a most sad and lamentable condition,
and more deploreable than he can express, and which can hardly be conceived by
any but by him who feels its said pressure: For now some of his Creditors are
in possession of his Lands within this City, yielding about eight hundred pound
Scots yearly: And others having personal diligence against him, have frequently
incarserate and imprisoned him, and being liberate only upon his friends, being
Caution to present him again to Prison when required, he is still in danger of
being apprehended by Messingers at the instance or other Creditors; By all
which he is not only put out of all Trade and employment, and has nothing
wherewith to maintain himself and prevent Starving, nor can he any ways
satisfy his Just Debts and relieve his Friends, which is no little Trouble to
an Honest and ingenuous Spirit; Especially considering, That your petitioner is
owing much, amongst others, to Widows and Orphans, who Entrusted him with
their whole Stock, and are thereby now reduced to Beggary; And since all this
Misery is come upon him by his Zeal for advancing Works to the Honor and
Safety of the Nation, and by his being obliedged to pay Annualrent for 27500
pound Scots, which he contracted by carrying on these Public Works as is
evident by a general Suspension herewith produced, which he obtained against
his Creditors, and to which no regard is had, and by his lying out of more then
4500 pound Starling and Annualrents thereof owing him be the Publict, of which
the Lords of Theasurie are most sensible, and after frequent Supplications
declare their willingness to do your petitioner Justice, but allege they have
not a Fond for satisfying him.

IT is therefore humbly Craved, That Your Grace, and Honorable Estates of
Parliament, would take Your Petitioners sad Case, and Circumstances to your
serious Consideration, And in regard to Justice and Honor of the Nation,
Ordain some Fond for paying your Petitioner the 2000 pound Starling and more
already adjusted, the Compts whereof are Subscrived, and the 2500 pound Money
foresaid justly Resting, tho not yet fully Adjusted, Together with the
Annualrent of both the Sums, since the time they became due; and if all cannot
be shortly paid, that in the mean time he may have some Money advanced for his
present miantainace, and the Lords of Session be authorized to grant him
Suspension against his Riged Creditors upon his giving assignation to what is
owing by the Publict to him for their more ready payment, That so your
Petitioner may have wherewith to pay his just Debts, And what is more nor
satisfies his Creditors, he may have it to maintain him in his Old Age, That no
Tradesman hereafter may be discouradged to advance publict Works, when they
shall see and hear how the Honorable Court of Parliament concern themselves to
see the Publicts just Debts Satisfied and Paid. And Your Petitioner shall ever
Pray, etc.


