Battering Rams Against ROME'S GATES, Made to be The Remark of her CHARACTER,
Whom her Children and once Subjects now begin to hate.
I. WHo is it that continues unprepared (unto the Battle of the Lamb) in this
great Day of Slaughter (under which many are brought down into the Valley of
Megiddon) but such, unto whom the Trumpet gives an uncertain Sound? Who being
partakers of and with the Whore of Rome (in her Evils and wicked Abominations)
must look also now to be made partakers (with her) in the Plagues and Torments
come upon her (in a Day and Hour unlooked for,) Widowhood and loss of Children;
for the Grave and Hell cries, Give, give; What now shall be given her? but a
miscarrying Womb and dry Breasts.

II. This state of her (the Whore of Rome and Mother of all our Sorrows) is
that under which she is reputed fallen, and in which she is now made and become
more contemptible than that (of the state of Widowhood itself) relating to the
shame of her Youth and reproach of her Widow-hood, which shall never more be
wiped away and blotted out (of our Remembrance) wherein it stands thus
represented, as does her Guilt the Cause thereof, (in a fresh charge against
her:) Whom call no more Lady of Pleasure (as though she were never to see
Widowhood) and Queen over Nations, that has sat at ease in the flesh, and
sung Arakime to your Souls ( Soul, Soul, take thy ease, etc. for thou have
riches laid up for many years;) alas, in one hour (as was multiplied her
Miscarriages and Misdeeds, so in like manner) is multiplied, complicated and
filled up the measure of her Iniquity; consequent unto which all her Sorrows
and Miseries increased, are now come upon her (both Widowhood and loss of
Children.)

III. Her Character (as a City portrayed with Walls and Gates, and the Fabric
of whose Foundations was first erected and settled on seven high Hills, or
Mountains) is so lively described, that observing this third Advice to the
Painter (of such things and matters requisite in so great undertakings,) there
needs no other Interpretation of the Mystery included, than the life of the
Patron considered, and thus remarked (with Observations on the Parallel between
a bad vile Woman, and such is the Whore of Rome;) wherein under any
Self-security (or carnal Ease and Pleasure promiss'd to the flesh,) the cause
of a Nations Ruin and Misery, lies at stake; of which the Reader is thus
fairly warned

IV. Is she a City walled? Tell her Towers, taise your Batteries, and let all
that have skill in Martial Discipline, now play their Engines of War against
her, scale her Walls, throw down her Bulworks and Fortresses, and cause to fall
to the ground all her Towers of Defense, (so shall you quit your selves like
men;) Let not your Eyes spare, nor Hearts pity; but as she has done unto you,
into her bosom reward it double: Do unto her, according as she has and would
have done, who has drunk of your Blood, until she is again made to vomit it
up: Give her to drink of her own Vomit, (the dregs of her bitter Cup.)

V. Yet the Weapons of our Warfare are not carnal but spiritual, and mighty
(through the Power of God) to the pulling down of Satan's strong Holds; against
whom we wrestle, and not only with flesh and blood, but Principalities and
Powers (Spiritual Wickedness in high places:) Remember therefore Jericho of
old, about whose Citywalls went (her Enemies) seven times round, (touting with
Rams-horns) until they fell, and great was the fall thereof (to the laying open
her Gates, by which entered all the Miseries, Evils and Mischiefs, now thus
come upon her.) Like one on whose Neck is tied a great Millstone, and then cast
down (in the Sea of the bottomless Pit, a Gulf of Misery whence she never again
is to rise; for she is fallen, she is fallen under irrecoverable Loss, Ruin,
and Destruction.

VI. The exalted Power of the Lamb, a species of that Ram caught (by the horns)
in the Thicket, where for Abraham he was made a Sacrifice (instead of Isaac;)
and by whose Horns (of Power) Batteries have been raised and made at and
against the Walls of Mystery Babylon (the Mother of Harlots and all
Abominations, etc.) These like unto seven Trumpets, that have sounded forth the
Mystery of things written in the Book of the Life of the Lamb, with seven Horns
full of Eyes, upon whom was put seven Scals; namely the Mystery of seven
Plagues and Vials filled with the wrath of such the Lamb (ready to be powered
forth upon the Earth and its Inhabitants.) These, we say, have been and are
exalted, above and over the rage and sury of the Beast with seven Heads and ten
Horns, upon whom rides and is exalted such the Where of Rome, Mystery Babylon.

VII. These are the Causes and Reasons, that as many of her Children and Lovers
do already begin to hate her, so others her Children also shall hate both their
Father (the Beast that begot them) and Whore their Mother, that brought them
forth (under such the pale of Mother Church;) who (such their FATHER shall
thrust throw with a Dart, and burn their Mothers Flesh with Fire unquenchable.
Give her a Cup brimfull, for her Pleasure has been and is the Cause of all her
and your Pain, Sorrow and Misery, thus come upon, and that has overtaken you
(her Children,) and her (your Mother;) of which (as you her Children are made
and become sensible of the Cause of such Pain and Grief) shall return and rest
upon her, as occasioned by her Witchcrasts and Sorceries.

VIII. It is the Fraudulency and Guile of their Mother, that stands figured
forth in her, who was first betrayed (by the old Serpent,) which encourages
these her Children (in their boldness and confidence) to follow her guileful
steps, and by-ways of Fallacy, Treachery, and all abominable Deceit: So that no
wonder it is (their Fathers having eaten sour grapes) that the Childrens Teeth
are set on edge; and that all Filthiness (sticking in and upon her skirts) has
and does flow, grow, and reign in and over such a Generation of evil Doers,
from whom we are commanded to fly and be made separate; not so much as to touch
or partake with her (in their unholy things;) whose Portion (that was thus
first beguiled and beguileth) is WRATH, even the wrath of the Lamb: From
whence, you to avoid (who are found flying, laboring, and seeking to make your
escape to the Rocks and Mountains, that they may thence hide and cover you)
shall not, nor cannot so do, but by reflecting on the Cause (in your selves,
and that first leaving or escaping there.)

IX. Wrath is the Mother of us all (of whom we by Nature, as well as others are
born Children and Heirs;) the Mystery of which hereditary Passion (under which
we are thus brought forth) is the Effect of Causes productive unto the
Creatures first Fail from God, under such Ruin and inevitable Destruction,
that pursues Mankinde's imaginary Ways and Inventions, working and wrought up
(or brought forth) fruits of Mystery Babylon, or Hagar, that is in Bondage
(with her Seed or Children) to these the beggarly Rudiments of Romes formal
ways of Worship and Service toward God, under which all Murders, Rapes, and
Villainies are countenanced, as the Sodomy of that City (spititually called
Sodom and Egypt.)

The Character of this the Whore of Rome, or bad Woman; by whom the parallel is
made (according to the Pattern drawn and set before you) between her the Mother
and Mystery of Iniquity, and her Brood, Children of the same.

FINIS.

