At Aberdene, the xiij of June, 1646.
THe Committie of War, within the Shyrefdom of Aberdene, taking seriously to
their consideration; The State and necessity whereunto the present Army of
Horss and Dragrowniers, within the said Shyre, is redacted, through want of
Moneys; to furnish them necessaries: without the which, they can not subsist:
and that the Gentlemen may be free of Assisting Quarters in time coming.
THEREFORE, They have thought expedient, and ordained; That with all possible
diligence, two months mayntenance shall be vplifted from all the Heretors,
Lyf-renters, and Wed-setters, within the said Shyre; (by and attour two months
mayntenance, to be vplifted out of the Shyre of Bamff) And to be paid to
Master ROBERT FARQHUAR of Muny, late Provest of Aberdene, Commissar appointed
for the North, or to his Deputes, to the effect, the said Commissar may pay to
the Officers and Soldiers of the said Army such Moneys as the said Committie
has appointed for supplying their present necessity, and for defraying of
diverse others necessary charges requisite to be debursed in the public
effairs; And that within three days next after the publication of this present
Act; with certification to these who shall happen to failie in payment of the
said maintenance parties of the Horss and Dradowniers shall be direct to
quarter: And ly upon their lands ay and while they make payment, and
satisfaction thereof to the said Commissar, or his Deputes: And the said two
month maintenance; to be paid without deduction, or allowance of any cess
moneys quartering, or assisting quarters paid by any person or persons
preceding the date hereof. AND such like, Ordains the whole Heretors, and
others forsaids, to pay to the said Commissar or his Deputes: Together with the
said two month maintenance the sum of six shillinges eight pennies of each
hundredth merks of valued Rent to be distributed by advyse of the said
Committie, for Clerk Fies, and other insident charges of this Shyre: And
ordains publication thereof, to be made by the Ministers of the said Shyre,
out of their Pulpits after Sermon; and a Roll of the maintenance of each
Pariochin, to be delivered also to the said Minister to be intimate to his
Pariochiners, that evrie one may know his just proportion.

T. ERSKYNE, J. P. C.


