THE Great Soul OF MAN, OR, The Soul in its likeness to God, its Nature,
Operations, and everlasting State DISCOURSED. By Tho. Beverley.

LONDON, Printed for William Grantham, at the Black Bear in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1675.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE Discourse of a Soul may be censured a Nicety by some, who think all
expense of Time and Pains, for the refining Men's Intellectuals in Religious
Matters, a waste and prodigality; either from sloth and stupidity, which having
seized upon them, they lay themselves down upon the first Rudiments of the
Doctrine of Christ, and resolving themselves to stick there, are angry with all
that endeavor to go on to Perfection, as making too much ado, and aspiring to
be over-wise, not remembering the severe reproof upon those, who,
notwithstanding their standing in the Profession of Christianity, are still
such as have need of Milk, and not of Heb. 5. 12, 13, 14.
strong Meat, through the not exercising their senses to discern betwixt Good
and Evil.

Or else in others it arises from the little love and regard they bear to
Religion, and a secret favor for Atheism, upon which they design to keep all
Divine Things under as gross and course Representations as may be, that so they
may take advantage against them, as if they were of the same Leaven with
Mahometane or Popish Fictions.

To this purpose they are carried with great vehemence against the whole nature
of Spirit, and particularly against the Soul of man, as a distinct Being from
the Body; well knowing the Doctrine of a Future State, is both ascertained and
ennobled from a clear understanding, and assurance of such a Spirit; whereas on
the other side, by wrapping up all in Body, that Future State becomes Bodily,
and Material also, and so the Happiness or Misery of it may be blown off, as
pleasant Tales or frightful Stories; for the Body so plainly mouldring into
Dust and Rottenness, it easily becomes a matter of greatest incertainty,
whether ever it shall rise again, or not.

Besides, how does it derogate from the Glory and Certainty of the Divine
Being, when for the denying the spirituality of Man's Soul, all things are
plunged down into the thick Matter, and the Nature of Spirit deemed an aerie
and fantastic, or downright, an incompossible Notion; so that hereby all
foundations are destroyed:

But now if the Soul of Man be, as particularly as may be, understood, and
reasoned into, in its Faculties and Operations; if its immortality, and
continuing life and motion, after it leaves the Body be clearly asserted, and
upon as great moments of Argument, as can be desired, be demonstrated; if its
sentiments of Good and Evil, its apprehensions of a Supreme Justice be so
illustrated, that they may be even felt and perceived within us, so that they
can be no more denied, than the several impressions made upon the Body; if what
the Scripture in great condescension vests under such Symbols, as that it may
strike common Imagination, and alarm the most vulgar apprehension, be by a
Compare of Scripture with it self, and the use of manly Reason, sublimated to
its true spiritual intention, there will arise from all this a daily
improvement of Divine Knowledge and Understanding; a substantial sense and
assurance of the Supreme Spirit and his Being; liveliest fore-thoughts,
strongest assurances of a Future State, and consequently, the most powerful
engagements to lay hold upon Eternal life, and to fly from the wrath that is to
come, which are those two immense Globes of the Future State, or the World to
come. To which ends this following Discourse is endeavored; and that it may be
blessed by God with success is the Prayer of

T. BEVERLEY.

The omission of distributing this Treatise into several Chapters, is supplied
by the following Table.
The HEADS of this TREATISE.
THE Introduction. page 1 Of Invisible Beings, and the proof of them. 11 Of the
Soul, a Spirit distinct from the Body. 41 Of the Nature of a Spirit precisely
considered. 76 Of the Souls Activity and Self-Motion. 81 Of the Souls
Immortality. 84 Of the Souls Self-communication, and so being an Understanding.
96 Of the Souls likeness to God in its Puissance. 115 Of Eternity, and the
Souls participation of it. 156 Of the Soul considered distinctly in its
Intellectual Powers. 184 Of the Soul considered in the Activity of its Powers.
219 Of the Soul of Man, the true seat of Happiness or Misery, present and
everlasting. 235 Practical Conclusions arising from the whole Discourse. 296 A
Brief Inference concerning the Resurrection. 308

ERRATA.
PAge 13. line 26. read Rind of Matter. p. 57. l. 10. after Beasts read in
regard of their Souls. l. 12. for thus read that. l. 16. for returning read
returns. p. 229. l. 6. for contracting read contrasting. p. 250. l. 7. blot
yet. p. 225. l. 26. read Cariere. p. 275. l. 9. for another read others.

THE Great Soul OF MAN.
Job 32. 8. There is a Spirit in Man, and the Inspiration or Breathing of the
Almighty gives them Understanding.
IT is a great Subject; The Soul of Man, and the whole estate of it, Now and
for Ever; of which we have so dark and confused apprehensions, that we can
express very little clearly: Darkness of Conception issues it self into
Darkness of Expression.

For the forming of the apprehensions of the Mind, the Dictates and Results of
our Reason, into clear and eloquent expression, fit to instruct and persuade,
is a gift of the Divine Wisdom and Goodness, in appendage to our Reason, and it
much follows the state and degree of our Reason.

Christ the wisdom of God spoke as never man spoke. The Tongue of Angels excels
even as the Understanding of Angels.

Adam understanding the natures of the Creatures, and fully comprehending them,
gave them fit names, and such as carried the Images and very presences of
things imprinted upon them, as some sounds now create the words that signify
them.

Since so great a ruin of our natures in him, as our Reason is much declined
and degraded, so is also our Eloquence. For though words, because they are
known and agreed upon to signify such and such things, call the mind to the
consideration of those things; and the more advantagiously they are put
together, the more they prevail; yet those words, and our contexture of them
are as much beneath the primitive Eloquence, as the Understandings of men now
fall below the wisdom of Innocence.

Nevertheless, still according to the Readvancement of the Understanding, so
the Faculty of Discourse rises also.

Solomon in his Wisdom and clear Understanding, spoke with Grandeur of whole
Nature, from the Cedar in Lebanon down to the Hyssope that grows upon the Wall;
and of all Piety and Morality, in words of greatest acceptance and
recommendation.

And proportionable have been the Discourses and Writings of the Men of Great
Name for Learning and Knowledge in every Age.

But in nothing is the Faculty of Discourse more maimed and imperfect, than in
Things of a Nature spiritual and retired from Body; and more especially as they
are Divine, and relate to God: Because the knowledge of the Things themselves
is most lost, and the Understanding so cramped concerning them.

To be able therefore in such Treaties to speak so, as to compare Spiritual
things with Spiritual, that is, to observe the Decorum Spiritual Things require
to be spoken with, there is necessary the Divine Revelation of Scripture, and
the assistance of the Holy Spirit: For so to speak is that Divine Utterance, or
Elocution, which the Apostle joins with Knowledge, and magnifies as an Act of
Grace to Fallen man in order to his Recovery, derived from Jesus Christ, the
restorer of Humane Nature, and is in various degrees distributed to the
professors of Christianity, and conveyed to them in the diligent Exercise of
themselves in Sacred Writings.

2. The Dullness and Inattentiveness of Hearers makes things hard to be
interpreted, especially things of great Retreat from ordinary Apprehension. We
cannot speak them plainly enough to make people conceive of them so as to be
affected with them.

Yet notwithstanding we having so often occasion to converse with these great
Sounds, A Soul, An Immortal Spirit, and its Eternal State, there is as great an
obligation to search the Things, as far as we can, lest they appear to us no
more, than great sounds without as great a Substance, whereas indeed their
Substance and Reality exceeds their Sound how great soever.

And to encourage us in this most industrious search we are first to oppose to
the Difficulty this Consideration, That it is not so much the
Unintelligibleness of the things themselves, as the want of a due Intention of
Mind in our inquiries, as also an humble application of our selves to the
Divine Assistance that makes it so hard to speak and hear of these Spiritual
Subjects as Wise men and Christians.

For Discourses of them made up of such words, as the spirit of God teaches,
jointed and put together by the same Wisdom, and then aright received, how
significant and potent would they be, how clearly representative to the
Understanding, how persuasive upon the whole Soul?

And seeing in these things we have a kind of natural Knowledge and Experience,
like Natural Arithmetique, and Mathematiques, (which yet being adorned and
cultivated by Art are much improved) but especially because we have the Word of
God, so great a light to our feet, and lamp to our paths in our Discourse
concerning them, and the promise of the Blessed Spirit to assist our Inquiries
into Truth, There is great reason of Confidence, the closer our Researches, and
the more industrious our Explanations of the things are, the brighter our
apprehensions, and the more prevailing our Knowledge of them will grow, so as
to enlighten and persuade others also.

Committing then this Undertaking to Divine Assistance, I have chosen this
great assumption of Elihu concerning Man, to rest this Discourse upon: There is
a Spirit in Man, and the Inspiration of the Almighty gives him Understanding.

Not that the Soul of Man and its excellent Nature deriving it self in Creation
from God inspiring it, is precisely, and in the first place here intended, or
the original proceeding of the Finite Understanding from the Infinite:

But the mighty Vigor and Force of this Spirit stirred up by God, and the
Understanding acted to the Height by a more gracious inspiration, enlivening,
assisting, and setting it on work in some peculiar persons, and to some
peculiar ends and employment, is that, which this Eloquent Reasoner immediately
means, and has a particular respect to himself in it, as notably assisted by
God in his following Discourses. Yet it plainly appears, he alludes to that
History of the First Creation, the Tradition of which, all Wise and Good men
had conveyed, and assured to them by undoubted Monuments, for it very much
agrees with, and resembles that relation. There is a Spirit in man, says Elihu,
a mighty and Genesis 1. 26.
excellent Spirit; In the Image and Likeness of God, as Moses describes it. And
the Breath of the Almighty gives him understanding, as Elihu speaks. Which in
the words of Moses is thus expressed, God breathed into his Face Genesis 2. 7.
the Breath of Life, and Man became a living Soul. That Inspiration gave that
Soul of Life, whose Nature is Understanding or Intellect, and its Life Rational
and Intellectual.

And herein rest fundamentally those extraordinary Vigors of which Elihu here
speaks, when God by a secondary Donation and Grace enables this Spirit and
Understanding to act like it self, and to appear as it is.

For all excellent motions of Soul inspired by God into eminent personages, are
but Fairer Exemplifications of Creation, and the Universal Nature of man's Soul;
So that while Elihu intends something further, he assures the main position,
That Man in general has a Great Spirit or Soul in him, and an Understanding or
Intellect given him by immediate inspiration from God in Creation.

To give then a description of this Great Soul of man, as a foundation of the
whole Treaty concerning it, I shall do it under these three following Heads.

1. As it is considered in its substantial and Essential Nature, and so I
describe it: An Invisible Spirit and Immortal, made in the Image and Likeness
of God, and nearly allied to Angels, the very Nobleness and Excellency of man's
Being above Brutes and Common matter.

2. As it is to be understood in its immediate Emanations, and Motions of it
self, and so it is An Intellectual Light, endued with all the powers of
Rational and Moral Action. It is that by which a man breaths in the free and
open Air of Reason, and Intelligence: It is the principle of such Action, as is
far above sense, for if rightly ordered, it bears the lofty Characters of Good,
Holy, Virtuous; and because it cannot sink upon a Common level, if disorderly
and irregular, it carries the black indeed, but Tremendous names of Sin,
Wickedness, Vice.

3. As it is to be known in its Resentments, and so, It is that which tastes,
and enjoys all Good, or feels and endures, discerns and perceives Evil, and
Misery. If that be well, the whole is well; If that be wounded, and in Torment,
there can be no Ease, or Remedy; And it is prepared to be a Great, and Ample
Receipt of, and a most vehement Agent in its own Everlasting Happiness or
Misery. This Soul is that, which is Eternally Happy or Miserable.

And though this Spirit be hid in the Body, and the Body seems to be All; yet
it can indeed do nothing, nor feel any thing, but as the Soul does by it; and
this Body, because as it is now, it is an Instrument unfit, is laid aside in
Death, without any prejudice to the Souls Action, or Resentment; but to the
unspeakable Exaltation of it: and at last a Body more fit for its use is given
to it, and which is every way proportioned to its state, whether of Happiness
or Misery.

Now whosoever shall well weigh, and consider this Soul, will stand amazed at
the little value of it among men, (who profess to believe such, or like
representations of it) and will oblige himself to a far higher Estimation of
it, and care for it, there being no other reason to be rendered, why so great
and worthy a Part, or to speak more properly a Man's True self should be
neglected, but what is to be imputed to extreme madness, such as a man's
Throwing himself into Seas, or Flames, or Starving himself, contrary to all
Laws of Self-preservation would be; except that this Soul flies so much from it
self, as it judges by sense, and is so hidden in the body, by acting so much,
not only by it, but for it, that it appears wholly Body.

And men being unwilling to put themselves upon severe Reason to be assured of
it, and very incredulous of Divine Revelation, that else gives a more easy and
sudden Certainty concerning it; they will not believe it is any thing but Body,
and so with Soul deny Soul, preferring Body only, because the Soul is most
sensible, and visible, as it acts, and inspires that, and loves, and is pleased
with it self most, as so active, and therefore wilfully consents to its own
Eclipse by Body.

To remove therefore this prejudice, I begin with the first part of the
Description, That the Soul is Invisible, and so to discourse it, that it may
appear, that Invisible put into the Souls Character is so far from a derogation
to the Soul, that it is a great Advancement to its Nature. For the most
Excellent order, and state of Beings, is of Beings Invisible; Beings not seen
with the Eye, nor felt with the Hand, nor approached to by Sense; Beings whose
operations give assurance to Reason and Faith they are, and of what degree of
Efficacy they are, an Efficacy far surpassing all visible Agents, even to
Infinite, of which even Sense may and must be witness in multitude of Effects,
though the Causes themselves, and the manner of their working be indiscernible
by Sight or Sense.

And now I am speaking of Things Invisible in contra-distinction to things of
Sight and Sense, I would use this occasion to make the way fairer to all that
may be after said, by taking an account of the way, by which Sense comes to its
cognizance of Things, and where it stops, and can go no further, and how Reason
and Faith proceed still, and go infinitely beyond.

By Sense I understand that Power of Soul, that moves toward, and takes in the
perception of Things by the due motion of Bodily Organs fitted thereto; the
objects of which are Bodily and Material also: and though it be the Soul that
acts by these Organs, and so is the true original, and last resort of Sense;
which appears in that though Body, or any part of it be notoriously impressed
by Matter; yet if the Soul be busy, and much taken up elsewhere, no Sense
follows, at least till the Soul is more at leisure, and can give attendance to
Body, or that part of it so imprinted: Notwithstanding this, yet because the
Action spoken of, is immediately performed by matter upon matter, and Bodily
Nature meets in both, the knock of the one against the other is so forcible,
and with such remark to the Soul, that dwells within, and cannot but take
notice, as gives us greatest confidence, and assurance in the result; and
nothing seems more Certain and Undeniable, than things so attested to us, who
are so far sunk down into Bodily Nature, the Soul (as I have already intimated)
being most satisfied in its own Acts by, and upon Body.

Now Sight is comprehensive of all Sense, because Sense turns it self, as much
as it can, to every object by Sight, being the most Excellent of Senses; and
the other Senses quicken, and engage Sight, as much as may be: so that
Invisible Beings, and Beings unaccountable to Sense are much of the same avail
in signification, as to what concerns this Case. In sum then, Things of a
Bodily Grossness are those only, that fall within the line of Senses
Communication, and are termed Visible.

But Reason is a Power, and operation beyond Sense, it self being the stream of
a Pure and Immaterial Fountain, it winds it self in, where matter, that Sense
acts by, cannot enter, and through the outward Rind or Matter, it passes into
what lies within, and where Matter has neither made, nor received any
Impression, yet there it divines by its own proper Sentiments, making use and
advantage, and receiving Service from Sense, so far as it is able to go, it
leaves it, where it can go no farther, and when it has searched beyond it, it
can again compare the fruits of that search with sensible and experimental
Evidences, and so work by Sense, and with it, and also above it, and beyond it;
yea and even without it. Faith yet far exeeds Reason alone, by receiving
Oracles from the Highest Reason and Understanding, God himself; whose infinity
of Knowledge leaving our Span of Knowledge at unmeasurable distances behind it,
gives truest and fullest accounts of all Things, and by believing what he
reveals, we receive the Benefit of his All Comprehending Knowledge.

This general Premisal being given, I come to argue the thing it self, That
Invisible Beings are not the less because they are Invisible, but they are upon
true Inquiry found to be the Greatest of Beings, and therefore the Greater,
because they are Invisible.

with them, we call them Senses, or powers of Perception; and yet by the utmost
Search and Inquiry Reason can put them upon, it cannot find out by them Causes
potent enough for these Effects.

When we survey the whole World, and all the Creatures in it, and their so
Lively and Vigorous, and yet so excellently governed Motions, we are Judges of
the Things themselves by Sense, and they cannot be denied: but Sense can offer
no Cause high enough for these effects, we must needs therefore conclude by the
Suffrage of Reason, There is some Cause unseen, that is the spring of All. For
the Determinations of Reason are, that till we come to the first Cause, every
Thing must have a Cause, and that the Cause must be superior to the Effect in
that thing, wherein it is the Cause of it; when therefore there is an Effect,
to which no seen Cause is able and sufficient, there must be some unseen Cause
that does produce it.

If a man should hear from a Tree, or Beast, the voice of Words, and Humane
Discourse, how readily would he Conceive some higher original of that Speech,
and those Words, than that Beast, or Tree?

If then we observe such a World, and Government of it, as must needs proceed
from a Counsel, and Reason, a Prudence, and Understanding, armed with a power,
and unbounded puissance, and we see none high enough thereunto, we cannot but
conclude, There must be still some Cause as high as these Effects, however it
be Invisible to us.

For when we take account of all the Beings here, we easily grant, the most
Considerable for such Effects is Man, his Reason and Providence were most
likely to summon things so together, and to keep them in their order; but we
presently find he neither has a Might, nor a Knowledge sufficient. Not a
Might, for the Heavens above him are far out of his Reach, or any application
he can make to them. The Earth under him is too big for any of his Engines to
dispose. The Waters about him are altogether out of his Grasp, and all that he
can possibly do in the sum of these, is plainly just nothing at all. His
utmost attempt is to obtain what advantages he can to himself from them,
according to the nature wherein they are already fixed and settled; And as for
his knowledge of them, it is but as a span to the Universe, he searches and
pries, and receives but a very little, and his greatest Knowledge is to know
his own Ignorance, so impossible it is he should be either the Author or
Conservator of them.

But oh how prodigious is it to think, Things should by some lucky Hit cast
themselves as by a Throw into this Order and Harmony!

For Chance provides not for every circumstance of any thing, or if it should
hit so well throughout in one Thing, in how many would it miss? But we see
things great and small, and without number, ordered with so exact a Care and
Contrivance, and among them very many little Things, upon which yet great
consequences and conveniences depend, that none but a most excellent Mind
could forecast or provide for some very great and designing Architect; and it
ought to be no prejudice against him, that we do not see him.

When any one stands on a Tower, and sees upon the Sea a Ship gallantly
Equipped, with its Sails, Masts, and all the various Tackling of it, and when
by settled observation he finds it moves with Design and Instruction, and if he
should further know, it attends certain and stable Rules, though the Pilot and
Sailors are not seen, nor the Artificer that built it, nor the Owner that
designs with it; yet could he think that there neither are, nor were such, but
that all this is the contrivance of Accident, because he sees nothing but the
Ship?

While then Naturalists observe such an Earth floating in the Air, and a World
swimming in the boundlesness of Imaginary Space, and keeping yet those just
Rules by which all things move; should it be any reason to conclude because he
sees none able to guide this Frame, There is none?

Is it not rather to be concluded, There is an Invisible supreme Cause?

If a man were first cast upon a Desert, and after should come to a City
adorned with Temples, Palaces, Magnificent Structures, all of great Beauty,
Proportion and Order, and should yet find no Inhabitants, but what are beneath
the wisdom of such a magnificence; would he so much as suspect, this was a
fortuitous convention of the Materials into such an Union, and not presently
resolve? There are or have been personages equal to the work they see, although
they see not them.

When a man is in an empty Room, sees no man, but hears the voice of excellent
Reason and Discourse, he will conclude; A Man however placed out of sight, or a
Greater than a Man is there.

And why then should we so much as surmize, Effects far greater than these
should have been wandered into by an uncertain up and down Roll, or Frisk of
Things?

And if we allow there is so great, though an unseen Cause of all those Things,
we may allow also, it is greater than any of those things that are seen, not
only because it is their Cause, but because it has reached those Effects that
none of them can extend themselves unto, and have great reason to be assured,
the Cause is the greater for being seen only in its Effects, and not in it
self; seeing those things that are seen, have some such disadvantages upon
them, whatever they are, that they cannot work, as this unseen Cause has done;
and therefore further we have reason to believe, that their very being seen is
one of those disadvantages, and that which runs through all the rest; seeing we
cannot find in a whole world of visible Beings any one, that can work like this
invisible Cause; and therefore that it appertains to it to be invisible, that
it may be a Cause so universal; of both which it is no hard thing to conceive
the account.

For that things may fall under sense they must be gross, and so are cumbersom,
shut out of things by their own unfitness for penetration, capable of
opposition, subject to dissolution. They must also be of a slow, confined,
restrained nature: But things purer, and not condescending to sense may be free
from these; and whatever is the sovereign Cause of all, must be so, for he must
be of an excellency of power, perfectly free, and dis-incumbred, of an
infinitely quick motion, too high for opposition, more intimate to things than
themselves, for he is over all, in all, through all, and therefore must be also
so transcendently pure, as not to fall under dull and slow-sighted sense.

And if there be one unseen Being, there may be more, and they that are, not be
the less, because they are not to be seen, but the greater, resembling in some
degree the excellency of that super-invisible Being, whom no man has seen nor
can see, and such a one we affirm the Soul of man to be.



Now what is there in man, that is seen, to the function of which we would
entrust these offices and administrations? Who can believe the Eye, or Tongue,
or Hand could of themselves contribute to any of these things in the first plot
or device of them? or if we look into all the inward parts of humane body, that
Anatomy pryes into, which of them can be fit for so great an employment? or how
can the whole frame amounting from no higher particulars conspire one part with
another into so high achievements? How notoriously are all the pretenses made
for any of them baffled by true Philosophy? so that there must be some other
Architect of them, though out of sight.

What an excellency is there in man above beasts? Their highest motions, and
such as we admire for their approach to Humane Reason (except such wherein the
wisdom of the God of Nature is immediately seen) stoop as much below those of
men, as the faint light of the Moon falls below the luster of the Sun, or as
the untuned, unmodelled sound of a musical Instrument made by a vulgar Hand, or
wild Notes, come short of the Music and Harmony of some excellent Artist, or
as the gamesom leaps and rebounds of wild Creatures differ from the measured
and becoming moves of a most orderly Dance. And yet the Bodies of men, and the
Organs of sense in them differ so little from those of Beasts in relation to
the main of these great effects, that when we consider man in the majestickness
of true Reason and Understanding, and see so little upon his body, more than in
theirs, we cannot but acknowledge something divine within him, that, as we may
say with reverence to the highest Majesty, sits as a God there. The Body is a
Palace, or Temple indeed compared with the bodies of Beasts, but this shows it
only to be the Residency of so great an Inhabitant, and in some peculiarities
it may be so framed, as to be prepared thereby to be the Instrument of so great
an Artist, but both signify as little to the immediate source of Reason, as a
stately House, or more curious Instrument do to the Offices or Discharges of
the Master of the House or Art, the magnificence and prudence of the one, the
exactness and curiosity of the other. To this we must still recourse, There is
a spirit in man, and the breath of the Almighty gives him understanding, and
teaches him more than the beasts of the field, and makes him wiser than the
fowls of heaven.

And yet it is hard to persuade any serious considerer, that the utmost
attempts and endeavors of matter can arise to the performance of the duties of
very Sense in these brute Creatures, how much less can it to those of Reason in
man? In man then we see effects, that witness enough some great Cause, and
Original we see not; yet still seeing the Effects are plainly greater, than we
can attribute to any thing, that may be seen in man, this Cause, because not to
be seen, is not lesser than other things in man, that are to be seen, but
greater, (and therefore greater for not being to be seen) because it is not
subject to the inabilities of those parts of man, we can see, and yet cannot
ascribe the Effects to, because they are so much above them.

And yet too we might well expect these great Effects from the visible parts of
an Humane Body, if any where, seeing man is the most excellent of the visible
Creatures, we know; but as we reasoned before, in speaking of the first Cause,
All things that are seen are too impure, and unweildy to conduct things to so
great ends, as those of Reason and Intelligence: and so not enough to act in
the likeness of the first Cause, which likeness we must all along observe, as
the true Key of the knowledge of man's Soul.

invisible Beings, and their greatness, easier to us, let us survey the whole
state of Beings visible, and we shall find, It is not any of their outward
lineaments, shape, color, habit, figure, or apparent motion, that makes them
what they are, but their retired Essences.

A Drug has not its nature from its shape, color, or common circumstances,
wherein it may agree, or be exceeded by other things of less virtue, or by
those of its own kind, that have lost their virtue, though they may still have
the outward semblances; but there is something within, that is not to be pored
upon by Sense, but is pierced to by Reason and Understanding. The appearance of
Gold counterfeited deceives the Eye, but is detected by the Reason, that tryes
things themselves. If any thing be painted so to the life, that it cheats the
sight, and seems to be the very thing that it dissembles, yet it is never the
more the thing. It is therefore an unseen nature, from which every thing has
its virtue. Hence it appears, there is a great retirement of that which is the
Kernel of these Beings, from outward garbs, lineaments, appearances, and it
fairly leads us to the belief of Beings invisible, whose whole nature and
beings are hidden from Sense, but only in their operations, wherein they exceed
so much, as to recompense, with that evidence of themselves, the retreat of
their Beings from fight.

For if those poorer things, whose pretense is small, and their effects low,
and their essence but a duly prepared matter, and so must for the most part lie
open to Sense, have yet a secret of their essence in reserve, and made solemn
by a vail of secrecy drawn over them; how reasonable is it to think, the
highest operations should have their seat in Beings wholly immaterial and
invisible, of which the supreme, God, is known to Sense only by effects, and
the Souls of men the lowest of them, by acting in and by visible and material
Bodies indeed, yet in their operations and truest nature wholly independent
upon them?

Invisible Beings have sometimes put on, and the great effects they have
wrought in such, or any other appearances to Sense, as demonstrations of
themselves to it, persuade the reality of their Beings, and the greatness of
them.

For by such addresses, and such kind of effects, as are the most assuring
credentials to men, as they are now in Bodies, they have given to sense and
sight great satisfaction, and notices of themselves, and at the same time
awakened Reason to observe, they were some unusual and stranger Beings, and not
familiar and ordinary ones, and that they took up a short lodging only in these
appearances, to put Sense out of doubt concerning themselves.

For in the mean time, to make it plain to Reason, that they exceeded the force
of all visible things, and were not tied to act by their proportion, or so much
as by the rule the Soul of man in the body acts by, they have always contrived
into some part, or circumstance of their appearances, or the effects they
wrought, tokens of their spirituality and grandeur; they did something
wonderful, so that while they have descended to sense, they have also amazed
it, and one way or other unriddled their disguise. From whence arise these
plain characters of Invisible Beings.

1. The reality of their Beings, notwithstanding their invisibility, seeing
they can, as they please, demonstrate themselves by the way of Sense, and
assume visibility not to make themselves more real, but more known to men, that
otherwise being in body judge at disadvantage of those out of it.

2. Their independency upon visibility, seeing they could do all out of that
visible appearance they do in it, and do indeed much more out of it, than they
do in it.

3. Their preference of invisibility to visibility, seeing they appear only a
short time. Body to highest and truest Beings is inconsiderable, though it seem
great to us; especially those gross and dull ones we converse in, or are to
converse with, and it is in greatest indulgence to us, that they stoop down
into them, as wise men sometimes comply a little while with the fancies and
humors of children.

4. Their superiority to visible Beings, in that they form their appearances
with some extraordinaries, or do things so great in them, as convince them to
be of a higher order.

Now for the assurance of these appearances, I especially rest upon the
Histories hereof in the Scripture, those sensible evidences of the Divine
Presence, the appearances of the good Angels recorded in it, which are so many,
and so plain, as to make up a full proof of invisible Beings, and not so much
as, with any likelihood of truth, to be eluded by those, who profess to believe
those sacred Records.

The sallies of evil Angels upon the world, and the possessions they took of
the bodies of men, doing things in them beyond the general Laws of Body,
related also to us in Scripture, may be reduced hereunto.

As additional proof hereof, we may entertain those memories of such
appearances in common story, that are writ with greatest judgment, sobriety and
arguments of veracity.

Now all this is applicable to the Souls of men thus far, first as it gives a
common proof there are Invisible Beings, of which order we affirm the Soul to
be; and secondly, seeing the Soul was made in the Image of God, and in an
alliance with Angels, it has a substantial greatness like them; lastly, it
must, as they, be independent it self upon matter, and have a force much above
it, though it be for a time subjugated to the laws of a Body, and so cannot
show it self in its own nature, till it be in a separated state, or joined to a
Body more suited to its operations.

If any should say, why are not these appearances more frequent and usual? The
answer is, That were altogether unsuitable to the state and majesty of these
invisible Beings; which like that of the Eastern Princes, stands much in
retirement, and as they were rarely seen, and not but upon great occasions,
when they had weighty designs to manage, or when it had been called into
question, whether they were alive or not, because not seen for some space of
time. Thus invisible Beings, good and holy, have in visible shapes, though
rarely, visited the sublunary world, and for great ends of service to God, and
also that they might thereby refute atheistick and unbelieving conceits, and
give assurance of themselves.

Unholy spirits chained up by Divine Power appear but at command, so often and
no oftener than God pleases; for it may be supposed the Devil would not thus
appear but upon necessity and constraint laid upon him by Divine Providence,
because his Kingdom suffers so much by the knowledge of Beings removed from
sense, yet when he must appear, it is most agreeable to so insolent a Spirit,
to do it to excess, and with greatest troublesomness, if not restrained by God.

But God for the general in this riper Age of the world, and under the settled
light of the Gospel, teaches mankind by rational and intellectual evidences,
that are so easily to be drawn into observation by us, and by those clear and
spiritual documents given us in his Word; especially since such a testimony, as
has been granted to men, of heavenly and invisible powers in a humane body,
acting with a virtue so divine, and miraculous, and so apparent to sense.

For what could be greater, than the whole History of the Life and Death, the
Resurrection and Ascension of Jesus Christ our Lord, to all that are indeed
Christians, an invisible power transacting so lively before sense, all those so
high demonstrations of it self, and then framing and propagating a Doctrine
every way agreeable to it self, and spreading it through the whole world?

If notwithstanding all this the man of Sense will not apprehend, nor accept
any proof of such Beings, except our Senses were daily Spectators of them; he
very ridiculously exacts the trial of those things by Sense, which are plainly
affirmed to be out of the compass of Sense, and all its reach; he demands to
see and touch, that which cannot be seen or felt.

Now it is certain, that which is out of the sphere of any faculty whatsoever,
cannot be tried and judged by that faculty, any more than the eye can judge of
sounds, or the ear of colors, or light be heard, or an excellent noise of
music be seen. Sense ought not to be called to sit in judgment upon things
that are above it, as finite knowledge cannot measure the possibilities of
omnipotency. Ants may as well be consulted with, whether a Palace may be built
over their heap, or Beasts decide, whether there be any reflexes of Reason, as
Sense be put to judge those things, that are only to be discerned by Reason, or
to measure by an unequal Reason, what Faith, which is Reason advanced by
Revelation, can alone give us an account of.

How liberal an allowance is it to Sense, that there is in so many particulars,
as we have already taken notice of, a foundation laid in it for Reason and
Faith to ground their further search, and assurances upon?

And as for the great perverseness of such men, that would make Sense usurp
higher, and their presumptions against invisible Beings in the confidence of
that, the sager consents of wise, learned, and pious men, and the general
inclination the universality of mankind have discovered to a belief of such
Beings, make those presumptions appear no other, than a diffidence or distrust
in every thing but Sense, and is no more considerable, than a Scepticks
suspicion of other things, most assured to other men by sense it self, or an
ignorant man's difficulty to believe the Sun and Stars any bigger than they seem
to be.

From this Discourse of Invisible Beings Inference.
very justly arises an expostulation with our selves, for our irreligious
brutishness and sensuality, that we do not more mind these invisible natures,
and consider God, our Souls, the eternal state, our neglect chiefly arising,
because they are not seen, although we have other great assurances of them. As
Beasts, we are only affected with what strikes our Sense.

But let us observe every thing, the more invisible it is, that indeed of the
greater force and efficacy it is. The Spirits of things lie hid, and concealed
from the eye, till they issue out into operation.

There are some very few things quick upon the Sense, that are also full of
power, as light, fire, a flash of lightning; and we use by these to express
spiritual Beings, because they are of greatest separation from dull Body, and
ordinary gross matter, and too mighty for Sense to be too free with.

But let us consider, how worthy these Invisible things are of our thoughts, by
this plain instance:

If any of those Beings should make an appearance to us, as to some of old,
that we read of in the Scripture, and in a retirement, what affrightment would
it be to us? how unable were any sort of men to bear such an approach? and yet
the force of their Beings is not in their appearance, but in the Essence it
self; for the appearance they take upon them, and throw off again at pleasure,
and they only condescend to Sense by these appearances, that are therefore no
part of their strength; that lies treasured up wholly in their Essences, so
that their being seen adds nothing to them, but as we dwell in Body, they are
represented more plainly to us, and so seem more potent, and dreadful also to
us.

Now when we are to dye, we are to enter into the whole world of these
invisible Beings, and how shall we be able to bear so great a presence, if we
do not prepare our selves for the encounter?

It is true we shall be fitted the more to endure such a state thus far, that
we shall be uncloathed of flesh and blood, in which we are so amazed with any
thing of the other world; but then it is further to be considered, if we are
not reconciled to that Supreme Being, whom though (as the Apostle has assured
us) No man has seen, or can see; yet because of that, his displeasure is so
much the swifter, and the more penetrating, and we but the more fitted to
suffer under it, by our being dis-incumbred from present gross matter; and the
horrible dread of that whole world will rise up against us with more immediate
impression.

But to him that is reconciled to God by Jesus Christ, all things in Heaven are
reconciled also, and he passes through those Hosts, as a man that passes
through the most terrible Armies, under the protection of the General, or as a
stranger through foreign Countries, with the especial gracious Convoy of the
Prince, nay higher than thus, as a particular Favorite, and Friend of the
Prince.

Now there is an Order of these Invisible Beings most blessed: God the happy,
and only Potentate, Jesus Christ, God over all blessed for ever, the Angels of
Glory, the blessed Saints. There is highest and truest blessedness most
certainly to be found among them, nor are they the less, but the more happy,
for being invisible, nor is their happiness therefore fantastic, aerie, or not
solid, because not seen.

For so fine, and pure, as not to be seen, and yet to be, gives the greatest
presumption of the vividness and power of any thing, that can be given of it:
the quickest motions are too quick for sight, and the life of discourse is not
that which the ear hears, differing nothing from common sound, but that which
the mind perceives.

Beings invisible do not know one another less than men in Bodies, but the most
quick communications pass between them. Invisibility is but a just distance
from Sense, as greatness retires and reserves it self from vulgar eyes, and
every days sight, that it may be more adored at solemn times of appearance;
Christ ascending up into his glory, a Cloud received him out of their sight,
but as the Apostle speaks of him, so we may say of the whole state of Invisible
Things; That 1 Timothy 6. 16.
in his time he will show him and them who is the only blessed Potentate, he
will show them in such representations as are proper to them, some fully
possessing the mind, some filling the very Sense, as it shall be heightened and
exalted by the Resurrection, of which the glorious Body of Christ shall be the
supreme Object.

How earnest then should we be in seeking a communion in this blessedness? in
laying hold upon this eternal life? in seeking honor, glory, immortality,
while we are in the world? not in the least dissuaded, that they are not seen,
but looking the more earnestly upon them by faith, because they are not like
the things that profane Sense every day blows upon; and are therefore
continually perishing: for being so dull and gross as to be seen, they are also
of a composition dissolvable, and apt to fly in pieces; whereas eternal
things, whose nature is purer, are not exposed to common eyes. This is indeed
Christianity, while we look not upon the 2 Cor. 4. 18.
things that are seen, but upon the things that are not seen; for the things
which are seen, are but for a moment, but the things which are not seen, are
eternal.

But as there is a blessed and happy order of invisible Beings, so there is an
Order of Beings invisible, most wretched and miserable; the Devil, and his
Angels, and wicked men damned to their fellowship. How black is this state? How
dreadful is the wrath and misery of their punishment? It is like the stroke of
lightning, sooner felt than seen, and the destruction that is the effect of it,
greater, deeper, more sudden and universal, and leaving more dread behind it,
than those things that work by the light and leisure of senses cognizance and
observation.

If any should think there wants evidence of these things, let him think also,
it may not be the want of evidence, but the want of our suitedness to them: It
is because the Soul is swallowed up of Sense, that any man wants evidence; and
we are angry, that we cannot by Sense comprehend things, that are not related
to it, but are nearly allied to understanding, to Faith.

Many things give full satisfaction of themselves to learned men, yet can offer
none to men unlearned; so do these objects display themselves with great
clearness to men of purified minds, that cannot make themselves known to Souls
plunged down into Sense, and the thick matter. The best expedient for the cure
of such men, is first to believe the assertions of men of refined minds,
inviting others to what themselves have found, and then to receive the
assurance, that will arise from their own compliance with, and experience of
divine things.

But further, we want most the prevalency of what we believe, rather than
merely belief: we may be more strongly persuaded of this invisible world, than
we know our selves to be; yet by reason of the great unaptness of the fleshly
state, in regard of mind adhering so to it, the consideration has not the
force answerable to the belief, because it is suppressed, and the want of force
in the belief lessens our feeling of the belief, which we indeed have, and must
have, the principle of it being united with our very Souls.

Having now asserted that there is an order of invisible Beings, and that the
Soul is such a one, I come in the next place to call them Spirits, and so to
treat of the Soul as a Spirit.

There need be no contention about the word, Spirit, it being but a word or
name chosen to express the notion men have in all times had of these insensible
and immaterial Beings, which they have made easy to themselves, and others, by
whatever among sensible natures is most subtle and fine, and had least of the
coursness and thickness of matter, as Breath, Wind, Air. This way of expressing
these Beings has been common to Language in general, and particularly to
Scripture, which attributes to God, that he is a Spirit, and to Angels and the
Souls of men under him.

And yet it may without injury to the cause be granted, that this name may not
have been original to these natures, but derived from those things that have
been more removed from Sense, than others, and from thence transferred to the
most excellent part of the Temperament, or whatever is most vigorous in any
Being, and yet least under the cognizance of Sense, and so at last ascribed to
Beings, supposed to be wholly removed from Sense; and all this does but still
enlighten the main notion of a Spirit; for hereby it was intended to represent
them in their native purity, and separation from Body, by those things that had
least of the dregginess of matter, and yet were well known; so comprehending at
once both their spirituality and reality; their spirituality, expressing them
by things most refined; their reality, in that those things, how fine soever,
were yet sufficiently known to be, and to be of greatest reality and effect.

Hereunto may be reduced the mention Scripture makes of the Spirit of a Eccl.
3. 21.
Beast: Touching which, leaving to Philosophical Disputes the abstrusity of its
nature, (whether it be the highest of material, or lowest of spiritual natures)
I only observe, It deserves not the name of a Spirit, in compare with the Soul
of man; in that it is most evident the Scripture speaks nothing of its likeness
to God, power of Reason, moral action, or immortality; but degrades it from
these, when it says, while the Spirit of a man goes upward, the Spirit of a
Beast goes downward, (that is) as it is prepared for lowest uses; so its state,
motion, and last rest, are altogether here below; and therefore it cannot
correspond, in what is now to be spoken of a Spirit: yet because it extends it
self to actions beyond the measure of other material Beings, unaccountably to
Sense, it is called a Spirit, and yields light also to the general notion of a
Spirit, and shows the infinite Wisdom, and Architecture of the Author of all
created Beings, who formed these Spirits so as to excel the possibilities of
matter, (supposing they do excel them) so little, as to be disputed with some
appearance of Reason, whether they are any more than matter mechanized with
highest and most curious skill, (that is to say) the handiwork of God in
matter?

But to return, Whatever can be spoken in relation only to the word, Spirit, is
of smaller moment; the greatest concern is, what is intended by it? Whether it
be no more, than a mere mode, notion, or manner of speaking used to express the
lively Temperament, vigor, or force of a Body only? Or whether it mean a
substance of an excellent nature, distinct, and separate from a Body?

In answer to which, That the generality of those that have or do use this
word, Spirit, concerning the Soul of man, have, and do understand it in this
latter Sense, is of very little dispute; and that the Scriptures do, as much as
words or expressions can do, to assure us they mean so also, I shall endeavor
to make good by observing what the Scriptures say concerning

1. The original of man's Soul, and its first entrance into the Body. 2. What
expressions it makes use of, to show the distinction of the Soul from the Body,
while in it. 3. How it expresses its distinction from Body, and separation from
it in death.
For the first, The original of man's Soul, we must have recourse to the History
of man's Creation, and we shall Genesis 1. 24, 26. Genesis 2. 7.
find, that the wisdom of Scripture puts a great difference between the
Creation of man, and the other Creatures of life: in that God consults, and
resolves to make him in his own Image and likeness, and by an immediate hand
first builds a Body, as a receptacle for the life he intended him, and when his
Body was framed, raised, and contrived with all its organs, offices, and
ministeries, so that there wanted nothing that should complete and sum up the
perfection of a Body, he breathed into his nostrils the Breath of Life, and
from that breathing of God he became a living Soul. A Soul living that life
that proceeded from himself, a life that proceeded from God, and entered into
that prepared Body, and quickened it; whereas God only commanded the Earth, and
it brought forth every other living Thing, That, and its life together. The
Command of God impregnated the Earth, and then, as at once, it brought forth
the living Creature, and its life; so that in the creation of this lower life,
and the subjects of it, there appears nothing of that method, and solemn order,
observed in man's creation, nor did the Breath of God pass into them, as it did
into man, when it filled all the several organs and instruments of the Humane
Body, with the motions proper to a Body, and such a Body; and which is far
beyond all this, The same Breath of God gives man Reason and understanding, as
we have already expounded this Breath out of Elihu's words, and as he speaks in
another place; The Spirit of God made him, and the Breath of the Almighty gave
him life. This inspiration of the Almighty comprehends this lower life in man,
that sensitive Beings live, and that yet higher life of Religion, and obedience
to the Creator, with which Body has least to do.

For in the very Creation God put Wisdom into the inward parts, and gave
understanding to the heart; and by the word of Creation he said to man, The
fear of the Lord that is wisdom, and to depart from evil that is understanding.
That is, As God created all things by saying Let it Be, and pronouncing it
good, in confirmation of his Creation; so he said to man, by implanting it in
his heart, and approving it for very good, The fear of the Job 28. 28
Lord that is wisdom, and to depart from evil that is understanding.

As in the universal Creation, he saw and declared, he prepared and searched
out wisdom; that is, he found out v. 27.
within his own understanding, fit natures for all things. This was his
preparing and searching out wisdom, and then he gave the proper natures he had
designed, that was his declaring wisdom; thus at the same time he both made up
the beauty of the Universe, and proclaimed his own infinite understanding.

And so particularly in the frame of man, he was infinitely wise, forming man
into the propriety of such a nature, as man should be, that is a Soul, whose
perfection it should be to fear God, and to depart from evil, that was made
with a power to do so upon Reason, and Counsel, in which at once the wisdom of
God the original wisdom, and the wisdom of man the derivative wisdom to be
always conformed to that exemplar shine forth together, the created in
subordination to the increated. Of all which Body is altogether insensible and
utterly incapable. In the original therefore of man, there is according to
Scripture a clear distinction betwixt Spirit and Body.

2. That the Scripture does plainly own the distinction of the Soul from the
Body, in a state of conjunction with it, I argue especially from the powers of
mind, and the actions of those powers, wherein are laid, and to which are
directed continually all the Discourses, and those pressing Reasonings,
Exhortations, Admonitions, and Reproofs, we find in sacred Writings. These
powers according to the universal speech of mankind, it calls Understanding,
Faculty of Reason, Conscience, Judgment; and the actions proceeding from these
it names Thought, Apprehension, or Perceiving, Consideration, Reasoning,
Accusation, and Apology or Defense of Conscience. Judging of Things, and all
these powers working out into these acts, it comprehends in this word, the
Spirit of man, and unites these acts with it, speaking of these powers, as the
Essence of a man, and of the acts, as most connatural to that Essence, to which
also every man's knowledge and feeling within himself give as clear testimony,
and as full as the parts of Body give of themselves to Sense, For the Spirit of
a man knows the things of a man within him.

Now it is plain; All these things are most improper to Body, or so much as a
brutal Spirit, especially, when they lift up themselves to the sense of a God,
and extend themselves to religious concernments, when they receive those high
proposals of the Gospel, and Mysteries, that lie out of the whole region of
Sense; so that though the organs and instruments of the body are sometimes
spoken of, and to, in these cases, yet it is only upon this account, because
they are such, as by which the mind acts, or are symbols and representations of
this rational sense and motion.

These things being then so well known, and every where met with in inspired
Writings, they are as great a demonstration of their consciousness to another
greater and more excellent Being in man than Body, as can be required, seeing
Body has no fitness nor possible sublimation to these things, that Scripture
so wholly insists upon in relation to man.

There must be therefore another man, a more excellent man within, or else all
thus spoken must have been in vain; such powers and actions cannot be ascribed
originally to the most excellent temper of Body, or Tune of motions, but must
have a proper and peculiar substance to reside in, and that, whatever any one
else will call it, is that, Scripture and common speaking calls Spirit.

And this being so plain and clear, and of so general consent, the Scripture
without any industry, as in a case presumed, speaks of Spirit as one thing, and
Body as another, distributes 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
man into Body, Soul, and Spirit. Body is well enough known, Soul is either
Spirit, as it contains within it self the faculties of sensitive nature, and
takes the Government of them upon it self, and the care and feeling of things
that concern Body, and the life of it; or as it moves in the most excellent
parts of Body, that mediate betwixt body and mind, and are fittest for the more
immediate motions of Spirit in Body, and so called Spirits. Spirit is pure
mind, exalted to its own objects, and the highest of those objects, Divine
Things.

This Spirit is that Inward Man, holy 2 Cor. 4. 16.
Writing speaks of, renewed and repaired every day, not in its substantial
nature, but in gracious and heavenly qualities, of which it is the only
residence and receipt, and which are its true health and strength.

Lastly, In this distinction of Soul and Body, is founded that excellent
discourse of the Apostle, Romans 8. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. of Being in the flesh,
and in the Spirit, of being carnally minded, or of the carnal mind, and of
being spiritually minded, or of the spiritual mind.

By which on one side he describes this mind allured, and drawn down to Body
and Flesh, which comes to pass first through nearness to Body, and closest
sympathy with all those natural and sensitive motions, which it self inspires
Body with, but chiefly by degeneracy, the Soul comes to feel it self, and
places its enjoyments wholly in flesh, and makes that the Center of its
reigning passions and affections, and so it self becomes carnal and sensual,
and cannot please God.

On the other side is described Mind lifted up above Body, and out of Flesh by
Grace and the Divine Spirit, to an inseparable adherence to God and Christ, and
eternal things; to which it advances its own motions in Body also, presenting
them a living and acceptable Sacrifice; which is the rational service of a man,
consisting of Soul and Body: Thus the Flesh and the Heart together cry out for
the living God; In the mean time this Spirit of the mind subdues and restrains
its own motions, arising from unholy Bodily inclination and affection.

Now to be carnally minded is death, The mind unpurged and glued to Body, dies
in that sense a Spirit can dye, that is, a death of separation from God, and
deprivation of Divine Beauty and Happiness; and the Body, whose ministry it
uses, and makes it the seat of its carnal pleasures and sensualities, perishes
also, leaving no possible satisfaction any longer from them; and yet that Body,
because it was the Body of that unpurged Soul, and retains its order to it,
remains guilty and foul dust, and rises again so, that the Soul may suffer, and
its misery may be seen in a Body, even as it sinned in Body, which is the
second death.

But to be spiritually minded is life and peace: For Mind renewed, and made the
habitation of the Holy Spirit, and its righteousness, cannot it self dye, no
not as Spirits dye, because of that blessed and immortal alliance, for it lives
in the enjoyment of God, likeness to him, lively motions of it self in all
goodness and blessedness.

And though the Body is dead, that is, is under the sentence of death, to be
unavoidably fulfilled in the separation of the Soul from the Body, upon which
the Body becomes a dead lump; and further it must dye, that the Soul may obtain
a perfect purification from sin, which it cannot have while cemented with Body,
sin being so lodged in that Cement, that there can be no perfect purification,
till that Cement be dissolved; Then when that Cement is dissolved, the
separated Soul becomes perfect Spirit and Divine, through the almighty efficacy
of the Divine Spirit resiant in it, and bearing it up to the perfection of the
Divine life for ever. Thus the Spirit is life, because of righteousness. And if
the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that
raised up Jesus from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his
Spirit that dwells in you. That is, The Body, that was the habitation of the
Spirit, or Soul renewed, and purged from sin, (that Spirit or Soul being it
self the habitation of the Divine Spirit) this Body, because it has still a
relation to such a Soul loses its sinful taint, while it moulders into dust,
and is raised a Body incorruptible and spiritual, that is, a habitation fit for
the Spirit now made perfect, and is filled thereby with the glory of life and
immortality, which is eternal life, and all by virtue of that Divine Spirit,
that dwelt in that Soul, while it was lodged and dwelt in that Body.

And herein lying the true substantial sense of this most weighty Paragraph of
the Apostle, how plainly does it express the distinction of the Soul from the
Body, and that the Soul is a substance of it self, independent upon Body, and
Body altogether dependent upon it, even while it is most immersed into Body?

For first, The Soul it self gives all the life to its own impure pleasures,
and sinful reposes in bodily delights, to which else Body is able to contribute
no more, than Oil to the Flame, which of it self we know always lies still and
dark.

2. Spirit it self assisted by Grace, retires into spiritual enjoyments, and
quenches and dryes up its own sensual affections to Body, and blasts the
satisfactions received from thence, even before that Oil be wasted by the
decays of Body, or dried up by death.

Lastly, It self carries its own fate, (if I may so call it) and the fate of
the Body along with it into eternity; for according to what the Soul it self
is, so is its own happiness or misery, and the Body of necessity follows its
condition; so that it self is plainly All, and the Body only a Cipher attending
the state of this principal Figure.

3. The distinction of Spirit and Body in death is conveyed to us in very plain
and easy terms, and such as carry their meaning very open, if not disturbed
and prevented by ill interpretation: Let us take a view of the clearness of
Scripture herein.

First, Solomon in his Ecclesiastes having considered with some passion and
vehemence, the little or no apparent pre-eminence of men above Beasts in their
death, that as one dies so dies the other, they send out one common vital
breath, and go all to one place, he then casts the account of this into the
common heap of vanity, and comes to a very warm enquiry, Who knows Eccl. 3.
21.
the Spirit of a man that goes upward, and the Spirit of a Beast that goes
downward? Yet thereby resolving the main case enough, viz. that these outward
appearances laid so much to disadvantage, are but only in the Body and outside,
the difference between the Spirit of a man and the Spirit of a Beast is still
very great, as great as between Heaven and Earth, and the motion as contrary,
when they dye, as upward and downward; but still he complains, that this is not
possible to be seen by Sense, and there are very few that reach it to any
purpose by Reason and Religion; and this (says he) is one of the great points
of the vanity of all worldly condition, that both so great a principle of
Truth, and so great a dignity of Humane Nature, should lie so far off, be so
indiscernable: Here is then an equality in the outside or Bodies of men a dying
and Beasts, but a great inequality or excellency of men above Beasts, which
comes home to what we are asserting.

And thus Solomon understood of the Spirit of a man, as is now explained, he
makes us more certain, when after his travel over all things, he comes to
describe man in his end, and does it thus, The Dust returning to the Earth
Eccl. 12. 7.
as it was, and the Spirit returns to God that gave it, he allots to the
several parts, into which he distributes man, a several motion, and a several
rest, according to the several originals of each; The Dust or Body returns to
the Earth from whence it was taken, the Spirit survives and hastens back to God
that gave it.

Agreeably the care of holy men at death, or in any great apprehensions of
danger, that presented death to them, was to commend their Spirit to God. as
David, Into thy hand I commend Psalm. 31. 5.
my Spirit; which words were prophetic of the dying words of our Savior,
Father, into thy hand I commend Luc. 23. 46.
my Spirit: and thus Stephen breathed out his Soul, Lord Jesus receive Acts 7.
59.
my Spirit. Now in that Solomon affirms of the Spirit of man in general, that
it returns to God the Judge of all, whether it be the spirit of a good man or a
bad man, or whether it be for happiness or misery, and that thereupon holy
persons recommended their Souls into the hands of God, as a faithful Creator, I
know not how any thing can be more determinative of the distinction of Body and
Soul in death.

For such words are not words of mere resignation of life back again to the
Fountain of Life, but an entrustment and dependent recommendation, and not of a
life to be secured only for the Resurrection, but of a Spirit immediately going
to God; for else they might, with as much care, have committed Body to him, who
weighs the dust of the Earth in a Balance, much more that of the Bodies of
men, whom he will raise again, most of all that of his Saints, which he will
raise to glory.

If there were not such an immediate return of good men's Spirits to God, why
does the Apostle choose to be Phil. 1. 23.
dissolved, or set at liberty, that he might be with Christ? Or why does he
profess in the name of Christians in general; we desire rather to be absent 2
Cor. 5. 6.
from, than at home in the body, that we might be present with the Lord? What
tolerable account can be given of such speeches; for what composition is it,
that suffers dissolution, that some part (and what part is that?) might have
immediate being with Christ? Or, who is it that would be set at liberty? Or
that is absent from the body, or at home in it, if not this supreme man the
Soul? Or, why should death be preferred for the sake of a nearer and more
immediate presence with Christ, if all the man dye with the body? Or, what man
is it that the Apostle speaks of, caught up into the third Heaven, and makes a
doubt, whether in the body or out of it? Or, how could there be such a being in
the body, or out of the Body, if the body were all, if there were nothing but
body? Or lastly, why does our Savior amplify the dread of the vengeance of
God upon man, above theirs that kill the body, and have no more that they can
do, whereas the hand of God destroys Luc. 12. 4, 5.
both body and soul in Hell.

For let it be expounded to the greatest advantage of the opinion, that
encounters the Souls immortality, viz. That our Savior intends no more, than
that man's killing the body is infinitely less, than Gods destroying that Body
and its whole life in Hell, though after many Ages: Yet it is observable in the
first place, our Savior to imprint the fear of Divine Revenges, places them
not only upon the Body, but upon the Soul, as a distinct and greater part of
man than body.

2. And beyond this our Savior plainly aims at the great odds there is,
betwixt a hand that can execute no further than dying once, and in the body
only, and that almighty hand that sends down the Soul to Hell immediately, and
the Body at the Day of Judgment. For he implies, a man easily slips from man's
severity by death, for he may yet live and be happy in his Soul presently, and
in his Body at the Resurrection; but death can give no escape from the stroke
of God, either to the Soul, which incontinently falls under it, nor to the Body
awakened hereafter to endure it.

Now I know it is possible for Serpentine wits to glide off from these, and
many the like proofs of Scripture, that might be produced, for their way of
elusion is very wonderful, like that of Solomon's Serpent upon a Rock, that
winding every way, yet leaves no track of solid Reason behind it; but yet I
affirm, that such concurrent Testimonies of Scripture are so conclusive, that
no sober consideration can escape from them; unto which revealed Truth is also
to be annexed Reason it self, teaching us, as I have already urged, the effects
of a Soul are too great to be ascribed to any power of Body, and therefore,
seeing every Effect must have an equal Cause, it is a high justification of the
assertion of a Spirit, to which those effects may be duly and worthily ascribed.

And therefore I shall further adventure to avouch from Scripture, that the
Soul is so much the Man, that it has the complete substantial essence of a man
so far in it self, that in comparison of it, the body is but prepared for a
sensible mode or representation, in which the Soul is to act, and show, and
illustrate it self, visibly and sensibly, and that man might thereby become of
the order of the sensible and visible world, beholding and judging by the
ministry of sensitive organs, of the beauty, excellent array and variety of
bodies in this Creation, and himself appear the principal of them; but
retaining still a higher and nearer relation to the Invisible world, to God, to
the state and life of Angels, so that without any prejudice to his main being,
he may be removed out of the body thither, and yet still be himself, as to all
the chief intents and purposes of his Creation, and continue so, till in the
restitution of all things, and the manifestation either of the goodness or
severity of God, after the manner of the sensible and visible Creation, that
is, in such a plain way, as seeing and knowing things by sense, men be again
set out by God in a bodily scheme or fashion at the Resurrection, so that the
Body it shall then have, shall more compliably wait upon all the state and
motions of the Souls happiness or misery.

The Soul then only visibly shows it self now in a body, and is submitted to be
in it; but when it goes out of the body, it wants nothing through the whole
time of its separation, that it had here, but only the appearance of its motions
in a body, nor has any thing added to it, when it is clothed with a body at
the Resurrection, but an opportunity for its glory or misery to be seen
sensibly.

Even as God was excellent and perfect in himself from eternity, when there was
no Creation, or any beside himself, nor received he any thing, or found any
addition to himself by the Creation, for all things that he made, received
their All from him; but only he has illustrated and manifested himself in the
Creation, and the Creatures do no more than show the power, wisdom, and
goodness of God in creating, preserving, and governing them.

After the same manner, (so far as we may with reverence compare any of the
Creatures with the infinitely excelling Creator) the Soul receives nothing from
the Body, or any of the parts of it, but only such organs and instruments which
it is to inspire, govern, and rule, and thereby to show its efficacy, vigor,
and great endowments of understanding and virtue, for all motions from the
highest to the lowest derive from the Soul.

But as to the present case, That the Soul falls in love with its self, as
dwelling in body, and with its lower motions in it, and forgets its own proper
and higher motions of immediate converses with holiness and true wisdom, and
that rule of body committed to it, according to these Laws; this is only its
sin, weakness, degeneracy, and fall, as of a created and mutable Being placed
in a body.

All motions and appetites, that we call in ordinary speaking, motions of body,
and fleshly appetites, are not any thing that body can first proffer to the
Soul, but those that the Soul communicates first, by that universal life and
motion it gives to body; and then derives from its own communications, the
pleasure that it self finds from it self in body.

Yet is not the Souls good or ill management of Body all its holiness or sin;
there are many acts so retired, that body shares not in their praise or guilt:
The Soul in such acts of goodness is like God and good Angels, as if it had no
body, and as unconcerned in this world, as God in his own immanent perfections
and actions. On the other side, wicked men are in some wicked actions alone, as
it were from the body, like Devils and damned Spirits, those spiritual
wickednesses the Apostle speaks of, exercised in spiritual Impurities.

But to return, The Souls acting and taking care of the body is but an
inferior and under-part of its administration, and is for that higher end,
that there might be an image and likeness of God imprinted upon a body, and
sensibly seen in it, by virtue of the Souls acting holily in and upon it. This
is the highest and most excellent part of its Government, and the pleasure it
takes in the lower, should be but an imitation of the Lord taking pleasure in
his lower works, who is never the less spiritual, heavenly, and divine, for
running through and governing the whole world of matter, and rejoicing in his
doings therein; but is always in the perfect purity of his own Attributes, and
guides all things according to them. But contrary-wise, if the Soul makes its
lower and less noble functions its principal and supreme, and instead of moving
the body rationally and religiously, by it self continuing spiritual and
intellectual, it chiefly attends to, and interests it self in its lower
sensitive motions, and so becomes carnal and sensual; this is its great fall
into sin and misery: yet still it retains its prerogative of nature, it is
still the source and life of all motion, though sinful; for body alone cannot
sin, nor any way can it be guilty, but as the Souls body.

The Soul then is All, Thus it is now, in the Resurrection it will be much more
so, when the body is so drawn up into the state of the mind, that the mind has
no opportunity to be carnal in it and with it, because it has no longer such a
low body as this; for even the bodies of miserable Spirits are in this part so
refined, that the Soul can have none of its carnal delights in them, which it
had in these.

In that space of time then between death and the Resurrection, the Soul must
needs be no less complete in it self; for though it has a fitness in it to
animate a body, yet that is as unnecessary to its absolute perfection, as Gods
actual Creation and Government of the world was to his power and wisdom,
whereby he created and governs; and although at the Resurrection it appears in
a body again, yet this is from the ordination of God to set a beauty upon the
visible Creation, in which he will then fully display that part of his glory,
in the glorious body of his Son, and Saints conformed to him, and set out his
justice and wrath visibly also, in the dusky bodies of those that rise to
everlasting shame and contempt.

That the Soul thus separated from the body is thus perfect, I argue from that
expression of our Savior, that they which are accounted worthy to obtain Luc.
20. 35.
that world, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given
in marriage, but are like and equal to the Angels; so that though the Soul has
a power to act, order, and guide the motions of such a body as it is joined to
now, yet they are no way necessary to its true perfection; for its highest
state of perfection even in body is without the exercise of such acts, viz. in
the Resurrection. And further, they that are equal to the Angels, have no more
need of a body, than the Angels have; that is, not as to themselves, or their
own perfection; but only to serve the order of Divine Wisdom, in the various
disposition of the Creation, a body, and a body suited to this free and exalted
state of the Soul, is given to them.

Further, The perfection of the separated Soul may be argued from the Apostles
discourse of the state of immortality, immediately entered into, as soon as ever
the weak and cumbersome Tabernacle of Earth is dissolved. Through the gracious
provision of God, the Soul is invested with life and immortality, and all the
blessedness and entertainment of Heaven, as the most natural receptacle and
becoming robes of good Spirits, without which they would be naked; and Souls
not so received, but left naked of that blessedness, are immediately shrouded
in blackness and darkness, hellish blackness and darkness. For though Souls are
indeed determined by the righteous judiciary appointment of God, each sort to
their own place; yet the natures of these things themselves are so wisely
contrived, as fairly to comply therewith: so that holy Souls uncloathed become
Spirits Divine, heavenly, and blessed, but Souls unpurged as soon become dark,
hellish and miserable.

Now that happy Souls, immediately upon leaving the body, enter into such a
state, is very plain, in that they desire earnestly this state; but if for want
of bodies they lay asleep, or if being nothing but body, the whole man should
lie so long in the earth, as till the Resurrection, it were a much worse state
than the present, for the time might be much better improved in the World, than
in the Grave, and there would be no reason to groan for so long and dark an
interval, instead of a life of Grace, converse with God, and doing good in the
world, which is the life of holy men.

It may indeed be said, It is safer every way to be laid up in the Grave, and
more quiet; and this interval is not felt, nor perceived in the dust, but a
thousand years seem as short as an hour; now this is so far from an answer,
that it tends to subvert the great principle of a future life, for ten thousand
Ages, and an everlasting duration beyond could as little be perceived: There
can be no complaint, that so many Ages of duration were run out, before men,
which lay out of life, came into it, nor can there be any sense of the want of
life, where it was never had; and in like manner, there can be none by them
that are quite gone out of life. But if this way of reasoning were good, it
might be as well for good men, if there were no Resurrection at all, for they
that are thus muffled up cannot make any appeals to God for, nor so much as
know there is reason to desire, a Resurrection, nor resent the want of it, and
so would have no loss. But if good men suffer loss in this total suppression of
life, they must suffer proportionably in those huge spaces of death, the Saints
of God dying in the beginning of the world have already, and are still to lie
under till the end of the world.

Further, This silence and interval of life is equal, (as to the case we are
now speaking of) to Not Being, and seems so to obliterate all the former state,
and the good or evil done in it, as to acquit and discharge it, as if it had
never been, to those whose actions are so quite broken off, and so perfectly
forgotten by themselves; It is therefore certainly most agreeable to Reason, as
well as Scripture, there should be at least a continuation of that sense and
understanding we had of our actions in this world, when we are passed out of
it, whether in relation to happiness or misery, that all should not begin anew
in our acknowledgment of them, and evil men that have been some thousands of
years out of Being, as men, should yet be forced to own those things they did
so long ago, having also been so many other things since, in the various shapes
the matter of their Bodies may easily have been supposed to pass into, and in
which they may have deserved better, or at least been more innocent and
harmless; and if there be nothing higher than that matter tuned to rational
motion, (as men of this opinion suppose) we may easily allow an expiation may
have been made by that same matter for the offenses committed, while it made up
such a man, in the innocence or better demeanor of it self in some other state
into which it removed afterward; and so on the other side the matter that has
been virtuous, while it was such a man, may afterward come to be debauched in
its future disguises, and so a demerit of its former worthy performances ensue;
and thus body not be found by either sort of men such as they left it. So
unreasonable are these Hypotheses, that are set up against the Souls
immortality. Nor would it easily be believed, that there should be a
segregating care of God, to keep every man's body distinct, so as never to serve
any other purpose in the material Creation, it being against evident
experience; though we do not at all doubt of his calling home so much of that
matter to unite with the Soul at last, wherever it may have wandered, as is
necessary to the verity of the Doctrine of the Resurrection, it being united to
a Soul always distinct, and able to give a distinctness to the matter to which
it is reunited. But indeed upon the whole matter, I conclude it of greatest
probability, that the Scripture does most often in its discourses of
immortality and the Resurrection, intend the whole state of eternity or future
life, from the Souls first leaving the body, and entrance into an everlasting
condition, throughout the endless Ages of eternity, without precise
distinctions of the periods before and after the Resurrection of the body,
there being only a circumstantial difference between the Soul in a body or out
of it. Yet this state is generally expressed by the Resurrection, both because
that gives greatest assurance to Spirits in bodies, and seems to them the most
bulky, solid, and intelligible subsistence; and also because the Resurrection
is the consummation of all things in relation to Gods righteous Government of
the world, and judgment upon it, and the illustration or manifestation thereof,
in that way his wisdom has thought most meet, that is, in a visible, sensible
way with respect to mankind.

Including then, and confessing this Article of the Resurrection of the Body,
as most true and certain; I say the Scripture does by the Resurrection express
the whole state of an everlasting condition, whether out of the body before the
Resurrection, or in the body after the Resurrection, yet always fixed primarily
in the Soul. For except the Resurrection be thus understood, there could be no
reason to them, that acknowledge a Soul, why the very foundations of Religion
should be rested so much upon this principle of the Resurrection; for they
might be well secured by the firm belief and full acknowledgment of a future
state, of happiness or misery, reward or punishment in the Soul, a complete
Being without the body, as in the Soul made apparent by a body. But if we thus
expound the Resurrection, of the whole future state, and that this future state
for the former reasons is expressed most of all by the notion of Rising again
with the body, there is both a reason why all Religion is rested upon it,
because the whole life to come is intended by it, and also why rising again in
the body is the fittest expression of that state, because by us as in bodies
the future state is best understood so.

For this separated state of the Soul is that Hades, that state of
invisibility, in which according to the Rules we go by, and the apprehensions
of things we have in this world, men seem to be lost, and we account them so in
the state of the dead, as to be wholly removed from the notions we as men of
this world have of life, though even then they live to God, to whose eye the
visibility and invisibility of his Creatures is all alike, and he calls those
that are invisible to us as visible, and is their God, even as he is of those
most visible to us; his account of them is as strict, his care and provision
equal, or rather superior; He is not ashamed to be called their Heb. 11. 16.
God, for he has provided them a City; and that they are invisible to us,
lessens them not at all to him, they stand as fair in his Register of Beings,
in his Book of life.

Out of this Hades therefore Christ arose, the first begotten from the dead,
and ascended indeed into a glory out of sight, but yet he left thereby such an
argument of a future state, as we are most able to accept. And this very same
Hades or state of invisibility shall give up all that are now in it, into the
most visible representations of happiness or misery.

Having now settled the distinction betwixt Body and Spirit, I come to give
such descriptions of Spirit and spiritual nature, as may make further discovery
of man's Soul, and for a general description of Spirit, I would choose to express
it in this manner:

Spirit is the most perfect kind of Being, that has none of the disadvantages
and encumbrances of body, but has all the force and advantage that can
possibly be supposed in body, or ascribed to it, much transcended in it self;
the reality and substance body seems to us to have, Spirit has much more; the
motion or force body has impressed upon it, is much higher and more excellent
in Spirit, as much more excellent as self motion exceeds motion merely
imprinted; the Sense Body seems to challenge is a thousand times quicker in
Spirit, and of a nature unexpressibly higher, more refined, and surpassing; and
so throughout; all privilege of Being is much more, and more exalted in Spirit.

But more particularly, we may deem of Spirit by these Characters of it.

1. Spirit is purely and perfectly what it is without any mixture or allay,
without any encumbrance of less noble parts; it is wholly and perfectly it
self; That expression of God concerning himself, I am what I am, may in a
degree be accommodated to every Spirit, It is what it is. Thus the Soul of man,
an inferior Spirit, is in the Image of God the Supreme Spirit. The Body is
several things, several humors, and parts amassed, and distributed into some
order, distant in situation, different in their allay, some more excellent,
some baser. But Spirit is All one, one All, All of an excellency, All one
Thing; this may be truly said of the Soul, though not in that high sense, as of
God.

2. It is a Being that cannot be divided or separated. It is like a beam of the
Sun; who can cut off a beam in the midst? It flies back and recoils into it
self; so does the Soul, the Spirit of a man: You can take nothing off from it,
for what can you take but it self, seeing it is All self? It is like virtue,
like light, nothing can be pared off from virtue or light. All is one and the
same, the very nature of these things forbids precision; the Soul goes all
together, and never loses or leaves any thing of it self behind it.

3. It is a Being of perfect communion and communication with it self, like a
Diamond cut to greatest advantage, you see it at one glance, at one eye, the
whole runs as it were into every point; thus the Spirit of a man shines every
way into it self, and rebounds upon it self: The more fine, pure, and active
any thing, though in bodily nature, is, the more it reciprocates with it self,
and runs, as it were, every part into every part of it self, as Light, Fire,
Air, which therefore resemble Spirits, whose property it is more perfectly to
do this.

Now that these are true Characters of a Spirit, besides that we have some kind
of intuitive knowledge, or downright look into these things, by the very
virtue of a Spirits knowledge of it self, and that general sense and experience
we have of our own Beings, and the motions and activities of them, it may yet
farther be assured by what we find and perceive daily to be the disadvantages
of bodies, for we find by effects (as has already been insisted upon) that
there must be a higher order of Beings, than body, which we call Spirits, and
that of this order the Supreme Being is the first, and that inferior natures
are so, because they are made in his Image and likeness; we must then ascribe
to the Supreme Spirit such essential Attributes and Characters, wherein he is
infinite, as may answer those effects, for which we seek so great a Cause; and
so in created Spirits, seeing there are depressions and inconveniences, that
peculiarly belong to body, by reason of which we cannot allow to them such and
such effects, that are plainly above them, we must therefore fix such
Characters upon these spiritual Natures, which we say are created in Divine
likeness, as may ennoble them above those inconveniences, which befall mean
matter.

As when first we ascribe to Spirit simplicity, It is easy to argue, that the
more any thing is simple, sincere, and one with it self, with the more
certainty it does hold its own subsistence, in that it can run no hazard, but
of its entire single essence, whereas compounded Beings are in perpetual danger
of a dissolution; and the more one and single any thing is, with the more force
and power it proceeds to its effects, seeing it moves at once with its whole
self, and a perfect union of its strength: whereas also compounded Beings must
be accountable for their parts, which must be made good, that there may be a
full force for the effect; but parts being but loosly set together, if any be
lost, the whole is impaired, and weakened according to the nobleness and value
of the part it has lost: Lastly, that self-communion and communication,
whereby any Being has its center every where in it self, and has in every
point of it self, the center of its own Intelligence of it self, is vastly
necessary, that any efficient may work with counsel and design, and the full
improvement of it self to every thing it would bring to pass; so that these
things are hereby manifested, to be true Characters of such a Being, as we call
Spirit, infinite in the infinite Spirit; in created Spirits suitable and
proportionable to the rank of their Creation, and so in the Soul of man,
(though under the restraint and disadvantages of a Body joined with it) in
which we are particularly to take notice of the great force and consequences of
these Characters.

1. From hence it follows, The Soul is a most active Being, of greatest life,
vigor, and motion, in a perpetual intellectual self-motion, like the Sun that
is always playing its beams and light; God has prepared the Soul for such a
motion; in its very creation he designed it for motion, and set it into motion,
a rational motion of understanding, will, affection, imagination, and
remembrance, self-reflexion, and conscience. In these it has a most lively
agitation of it self, as soon as ever it was in being, from the very first
moments of its being, and in the very nature of its being, it became a
perpetual motion, a self-motion, or mover of it self; we may perceive it in the
quick and free motion of Thought, the continual motion of Thought, that never
rests. The purity, fineness, and simplicity of it, assures it cannot but be
natural to it, to move, and move it self. God impressed it with life and action
in the very make of it; seeing it is all self, and all of it received motion
alike from the first mover, it can have no heavy and sluggish parts to heave
from their rest, and carry along with it, by which its motion, being
controlled, should grow dull. The most vivacious parts of Body, and which are
most active, having so much load, so much dull matter, to inspire and move on,
are easily damped, but it is not so with Spirit.

And then from without, Bodies continually have their motion arrested, by
encountering other Bodies of a contrary intention, imprinted with the just
opposite motion; but Spirit finds nothing abroad to cool, but every thing
provokes, every thing stirs up their motion: For it is moved to move self, by
every thing that presents it self to it, and the more object the more motion;
like a violent recoil from a hard body, the motion back is made fiercer. Every
thing the Soul meets, instead of abating its motion, reflects it with a new
force, and returns it upon more vehement examination and enquiry; that is, more
earnest motion, if it be in things pertaining to its knowledge; but if in
things related to its affection, the action is more forcible upon it self with
pleasure or vexation, according to the nature of what is encountered.

Whatever is to be abated from this account of the Souls motion, must be
imputed to the inconvenience of its working by Body, whose channels are so
tender and brittle, and cannot endure too great vehemence; in compassion to
which the motion is moderated, the conduits are so strait, and obstructed
through the Senses unexercised to the uses and ends of the Soul, that its
action cannot stream out like it self: Lastly, the instruments and organs grow
weary and heavy, by the disadvantages and rencounters, the parts of matter have
between themselves; upon which the Souls motion seems slower, and tired also.

Yet there is no time wherein Thought stands still, though in the narrowest
Soul, and how meanly soever it be employed, as it is in ignorant and sordid
minds. But further, there are at all times great Examples of the lively motions
of the Soul of man, in wise and excellent persons, and of the greatness and
vehemence thereof; which is yet a thousand fold greater, and will be perfect in
the everlasting state: Its motion will be then wound up to the highest, and
there will be no allay from a heavy Body; then all the thoughts, affections,
powers, will sally out with an unimaginable life. Oh how necessary is it, that
we prepare by holy motion, and action now, to that motion, that it may be
blessed, seeing there is no rest from it, there is no quieting it, nor so much
as slackning the swiftness of it. If it be not a motion that makes happy and
blessed, it is yet as high a motion, but in misery, and to the perfection of
misery.

2. Hence it follows, the Soul is immortal, because it is perfectly it self,
and so separated from all things else; for the alteration of things in matter
is from their composition, one thing having many meeting to make it up, and
these either struggling and contesting among themselves, the stronger subduing
the weaker, or by the forcibleness of outward impression upon one, or more of
the ingredients, a dissolution of that composure is brought to pass. The
Heavens, and heavenly Bodies being purer, and more uncompounded have stood so
many Ages with so little alteration.

A Spirit being simply and entirely it self can neither be forced asunder by
feuds within it self, nor by violence from without; there being nothing in its
substance to make any intestine War, nor any thing weaker or stronger to
subdue, or be subdued; and therefore it receives all strokes upon its whole
self, as an Anvile that is beaten closer and more united by all the Hammers
that fall upon it. All the griefs and troubles, and disquiets that rise up in
it, are only the crosses and counter motions, and actions of its sentiments and
apprehensions; yea the very dismal falls of Divine Displeasure upon it, do but
awaken and stir up sad and grievous apprehensions in it, but do not in the
least touch the essence or substance of the Soul to weaken it.

This is that death, the only death of the Soul, that it is capable of a
darkness in the loss of that Beauty, and excellency of holy motion, and in the
deprivation of happiness and blessedness, the favor of God, a loss of its
perfection without any diminution of Being. And though it be now in the Body,
and seems to be lost in the ruins of that, yet it is indeed so perfectly it
self, so separable in its nature from the Body, (as I have already discoursed
at large) so distinct and complete in it self, that it is only acquitted from
that in death, not at all altered or changed in its substantial self.

So then this simplicity of the Soul witnesses the Immortality of its nature,
and that it cannot be dissolved like the things of this world, that consist in
the union of several things, that conspire and meet together, and afterward
fly asunder; but the Soul has nothing to lose, or part from, but its whole
self, being one simple thing; One All, and All One, there can be no dissolution.

Nay the things of this world, although they are several things, united and
made up so into one, as several things can be, and when those several things
fly asunder, that one thing is dissolved; yet because the parts still continue
to be, they become something else; for there can be no annihilation, or
bringing things back to nothing but by the omnipotency that created them; so
that all the death and dissolution, that is in whole nature, is but only a
continual flux and reflux; a perpetual passing out of one shape, figure,
nature, into another, which, because things love to be as they are, look for
the present like death, perishing, and the decay of the world it self; although
the composition, for that time being, is only brought to ruin; and although
the parts, it may be, are meliorated, made more beautiful and advanced; as when
a Vessel of Silver designed for baser use is broken to pieces, purged in the
Refiners fire, and then made a Vessel of honor, and the materials of a meaner
and decayed Building taken down, and laid into a nobler Structure; yet while
this is doing, it has the appearance of spoil and destruction, whereas indeed
all, even to the very Fragments, is gathered up that nothing may be lost, not
so much as the filth of the Vessel, or the dust of the Building.

We may then thus far derive from lower Nature, what may make the Immortality
of the Soul an easier Notion to us: For we see, It is the twisting things
together, with such unequal strengths of the Parts in motion one against
another, and the liableness of those Parts to the impression of Foreign
Motion, that let in the Mortality and Frailty that is in worldly Things; that
so by the prevalency sometimes of one thing, sometimes of another, there might
be those continual Changes and Vicissitudes, that God has appointed for
Purposes most agreeable to the greatness and mysteriousness of his most wise
Government and Providence.

But the simpler, and more self any thing is, the more hardly it is altered,
till we come to that which is called First Matter and Motion, which in the
abstract Notion of them, and as they are by themselves, cannot be changed or
lost, but by annihilation.

For that we call First Matter, or Matter, as we understand it unimpress'd by
Form, or Particular Nature; though as it is in Particular Nature it by always
dying out of one Shape, Figure, Nature, into another; is yet so immortal in it
self, that it cannot it self perish but by annihilation: And that Motion which
is used by God for the twirling this Matter into so many several Forms, and is
perpetually flitting from one part of it to another, and is even driven and
expuls'd by the Contrasts it has with it self, as it is in those several parts
of Matter, from one to another; cannot yet be spent in the Sum, or any Degree
of it be abated in the Total.

These two, because thus abstracted, they are perfectly and entirely
themselves, have thus much of Immortality, that they never take End, till an
End is put to them by Almighty Efficiency: But Matter is laid by God, and so
lies as a Foundation of his Works, that cannot be removed; and Motion is the
Instrument he has prepared for the management of those his Works; and these in
their simple selves have no Jars within, nor cannot be touched by any extern
Hand; but as they are in composition, undergo those several Changes, and hasten
out of the posture into another, as it pleased God; being still the same in
themselves: For all that Matter can be squeezed into, is Matter; and all that
Motion can be overcome into, is Motion; and so they will be, till they are
disannulled by God.

And thus the Soul, its own Substance, its own Motion, receiving both from God
in its very Being, and so being all Self, as an unshaken Rock, or First Matter,
bears and lies under all the disposes of God, and as highest Life turns every
way with, and subserves his admirable Administrations upon it self, which are
all in Righteousness, Holiness, Justice, and Mercy. This Spirit, I say, lies
under all possible Impressions that can be made on a Soul; and yet it is a Soul
still, it is always the same; It is always the same as to its Essence, and
cannot be so altered or changed, as to become another Thing: It must be it
self, or it must be nothing; and all Action upon it, can but provoke it to
Intellectual Action: So it is found, and so it is left by every thing that
comes near it, except God should come to make a final Determination upon its
Being. There is no change upon the Substance of a Spirit, but Annihilation: The
State, and Condition, and Quality of it may be changed from Good to Evil, from
Evil to Good, from Happiness to Misery, from Misery to Happiness; the very
Being remains unalterable, while it is.

The only way then of the Souls coming to an end, must be by Annihilation, or
being crushed to Nothing by Infinite Power: Concerning which, let us further
consider,

It is true, the Essence and Existence of the Soul are several things: that is,
There is the Nature of the Soul in general, and this is one thing, and is
called its Essence; and this considered in a possibility of Actual Being, or
not Being, as it may be, or may not be: When it is, we call it Existence, or
Actual Being; and this is another thing from its Essence. Therefore it might
either not have come into Being at all; or after it is come into Being, it may
be turned out of Being by the immediate Power of God, who gave it Being, who
only can annihilate or bring to nothing that which is.

In all these things the Soul is beyond all expression excelled by God, who
only, as the Apostle speaks, has immortality: For he it is alone that in the
truest sense is what he is; so inconceivably and perfectly Himself, that he is
only of, and from himself; and Himself so infinitely, that he comprehends and
embraces in himself the whole Divine Nature, and there is not a second God. He
is alone, and besides him there is no God; he knows not any other; with him
there is no variation nor shadow of turning, neither in his Being, nor in any
of the Attributes of his Being: Most Great and Good, Most Happy and for ever
Best. For he has all within himself, and there is nothing without him of any
compare with him, not any thing, but what receives Being from him; so that
neither from within, nor from without, can there be any occasion of change in
him: He it is, whose Essence and Existence are one and the same Thing. His
Essence, in the very true Notion of it, rises up into immediate and absolute
Existence: For there is no other Notion of his Essence, but in his Existence.
It is his very Essence or Nature to Be. He is never so little, as in a
possibility to Be; but always so great, that it is impossible he should not Be.
He is without the allay of a possibility to Be, which also includes a
possibility not to Be. He is the highest and most perpetual Act of Being;
Eternal in the very Life of Being. To grant the Nature of God no incompossible
Notion, is to wrap up a Man's self in the conclusion he is, and that
unchangeably: For he is a necessary Being, a Being that cannot but Be.

And it is of much consideration concerning his Being, that there should be
such a Lock upon the Mind of Man, that it can no sooner grant, There may be a
God; but it is surpised with this, There must be a God: for the very Nature of
Deity concludes a necessity of Being, Absolute Being.

God is Paramount in these Prerogatives of Being; and the Soul cannot be
likened to him, from whom it has its All. But yet a much truer and nobler
Immortality have the Spirits and Souls of Men, than Matter and Motion before
spoken of; seeing Spirit is designed, prepared for, and in its own Nature, and
immediately in it self, of much higher Excellency, Purity, Self-motion, fit for
Intelligency, and all Rational Enjoyment; as much above any Notion of Matter,
or appearance of it in any Form, or acted by any Motion, or into any Nature
whatever, as Heaven is above Earth.

And beyond this, It is the Nature of Spirits, having their Substance, Nature,
Motion, all within themselves, to be always distinct, and to have Subsistence
in themselves, proper and peculiar to themselves, and divided from all others:
whereas the others, as they are made up in such and such Natures, and out of
which they are not found, are continually altering and changing, and passing
out of one Form into another, and have no other actual Subsistence in
themselves, but what they have in these so continually variated Appearances.

For the whole Stock of Matter and Motion, that is in the World, is made use of
by God in common; and these two are always running every way, into all the
successive Compositions the Creator has designed them for, and as they are
governed by him: But all the whole Nature of Spirit, that has ever been in the
Creation, from the very Beginning, has without any confusion, or running one
Spirit into another, been preserved in strictest distinction and separation one
from another, so many proper Subsistences, always known to God, understood, and
taken notice of by him, in this their distinctness; and so are, and shall be
known to themselves for ever; and as such, they shall be manifested and exposed
to the universal Assembly of themselves, Angels, and Men, and judged according
to their Works; because they have been their own, and not another with them.

So then, though the Spirits and Souls of Men, even as Matter and Motion, are
dependent upon the Pleasure of the Creator, whether they shall continue in
Being, or not, if we speak of the thing absolutely; yet it is very evident,
from the consideration of the whole state of the matter, that Spirits are the
most proper and natural Inhabitants of Immortality; and howsoever it may please
the Creator to determine upon the other Parts of the Creation, yet there is as
great assurance as Reason can rise unto, and higher yet from Divine Revelation,
that he intends that our Souls should be for ever; seeing he has made them
with Faculties, and Powers of Action, Intellectual, Moral, and immediately
respecting himself; which are so connatural to the true state of Immortality,
and so plain an approach to, and resemblance of him, who only has Immortality,
that it is almost impossible to a serious Considerer to think, that there could
be any other designation of them by God, but for an immortal duration; seeing
he has so prepared them for such a Condition, who does nothing in vain, nor
does so debase his own Image, as to draw the Lineaments of it in Dust. It
remains then, That the Soul in the Nature given it by Creation, and in the
designation of the Almighty, who gave it that Nature, is an Immortal Spirit.

3. From the Character of a Spirits self-communication, it follows; The Soul is
an Understanding: For the highest degree of Self-communication is
Understanding. Even in things artificial, when any thing seems to communicate
with another, and to receive Intelligence from another, and imparts it again to
it, there is a semblance of understanding; as in the Sympathetique answer of
one Lute to another: When the Heaven hears the Earth, in the Prophets phrase,
it seems to understand it. The mutual Returns of one Creature to another, are a
kind of Understanding in them; or rather that Great Understanding of God runs
through them all, and is an Understanding in their behalf. Life, within the
compass and sphere of that Being that has it, is self-communicated Motion: for
all the Parts are in a confederacy one with another, and at an agreement among
themselves, for the motion of the whole Frame, as if they had treated, and
still held intelligence one with another: But in Diseases they grow strange to
one another; their Language, like that of Babel, is confounded, and in death
utterly silenced. But the higher the Life, still the more appearance of
Understanding, because there is a higher Self-communication, till we come
indeed to the Life of Understanding, and so up to the highest Life and highest
Understanding, which is also the highest, most true, and perfect
Self-communication, that is, the Life and Understanding of God, who has not
only a Life and Understanding within himself, but also of, and from himself;
An Eternal Self-communication, or Reflection of himself, to, and within
himself, upon himself: And this Infinite Spring of Being, and
Self-communication, never ceases, nor can cease to communicate himself to
himself, ever knowing, understanding himself, enjoying, conversing with
himself, which is Eternity of Life; for he that does thus, can never have been
out of Being, nor can ever die: A perpetual Circle of deriving himself from
himself, to himself: A purest Intellect and Mind, ever beholding, and most
divinely resenting it self in unintermitted Knowledge, and understanding of it
self, and so living for ever: For, what understands, lives; and what
understands highest, lives highest; and what understands for ever, lives for
ever.

All Creatures of Life, even of highest Life, the Life of Understanding, have
in an abated sense only Life within themselves, or a Self-communication,
having received it at first, and receiving it still every moment from God. In
Christ was Life as in the Johan. 1.
Fountain, that is, that high Life of Understanding; and this Life was the
Light of Men, that is, the Spring and Original of their Understanding.

And this Understanding, in resemblance of God's Life, is the proper Life of
the Soul: For the Soul lives by feeling it self in these Self-communications,
by perceiving its own Cogitations, Conceptions, Comprehensions, Affections, and
whatever else are the natural Results and Activities of a Rational and
Intellectual Life; even as we feel and perceive Natural Life, by the several
Motions and Self-communications of that Life: And this Life, if we speak
strictly of it, as it is a Life of Reason and Understanding, has no Contrary,
it has no Adversary to encounter, nor is there any Privation of it
conceivable, except by the destruction of the Soul it self into nothing.

For this Life is as near to the Soul, as Luster and Splendour is to Light; if
you take it away, the very Nature it self is lost; all the Wickedness and
Misery in Hell cannot quench it: For who more knowing, sagacious, restless, in
all Motions natural to Spirits, than the Devils? That which comes nearest to
the stupefying this Life, is being sunk down into Body; in the lower state of
which yet this Life remains, though greatly covered and concealed; and it
cannot be long so concealed. This Life is therefore, in this regard, plainly a
Life immortal; except God himself by an immediate hand extinguish it; and this
cannot be believed, seeing it is so near a resemblance of his own Life: For,
that he should make an Intellectual Life, so high in its Nature, to so low a
purpose, is not agreeable with the Wisdom of all the Works of God.

Now this Understanding, as we have said, is Self-communication: For as
Reasoning or Ratiocination is the communicating of Things one with another in a
way of compare, a collating of them one with another, and ballancing them
together, and then giving the account; and the quicker and more sudden this
motion is made, the more lively is the Ratiocination, and the more excellent is
the Understanding: So the Principle of this Ratiocination every moment confers
with it self, what it has attained by this course of Reason, and reciprocates
with it self all it has observed. God in an infinite manner knows himself
within himself, and all that is, in a moment, by an Omnipresent Understanding:
but according to the advantage the Soul has to work with, as it is in the
Body, or in the state of separation from it; so the Understanding of Man goes a
greater or lesser Circle, for the communicating with Things; but every moment
it communicates with it self, what it gathers by its communication with other
things. This self-communication both of the Divine and Humane Spirit, the
Apostle thus expresses to us; The Spirit 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11.
searches the deep or most retired things of God. There is nothing in God
reserved, or afar off from himself; he eternally communicates his whole self
with himself: so he has given to Man to understand himself; The things of a
man knows no man, but the spirit of a man that is within him; and that knows
them. So then a Man has a power of self-communication, or understanding the
things within himself: Yet God communicates with Man's Soul nearer than he can
with himself; that is, he understands more of Man, than Man himself does; he is
greater than our 1 John 3. 20. Psalm. 139. 2.
hearts, and knows all things; he understands our thoughts afar off. The Reason
is, He is the Fountain of this Life of Understanding; In him we intellectually
live, and move, and have our being; and he knows in himself what is done in us,
by the virtue that goes out of him for the doing of it: for he communicates
with himself, all that he enables his Creatures to do.

From all this then it appears, That to understand any thing, is to communicate
with it. The Mind communicates with all it understands; and the Nature of
Understanding, is communicating with Things, and self-communication. The Mind
communicates with it self all it receives by communication with other Things:
The Understanding goes out, to understand things at a distance from it; It
communicates with them; It enters into their Natures, as far as it can: Yet it
is not in this chiefly an Understanding, but that it reflects within it self
its own Observations, in that it communicates with it self all the while, it
communicates with other things, and feels within it self its own Perceptions,
as the Eye perceives its own Receptions. In this it is chiefly an
Understanding; not like a dead Instrument or Trepan, that enters within things,
and knows not that it does so; that takes hold, without any apprehension: or
like the Eye of a Beast, that looks upon things without Knowledge, and comes no
nearer them, than Sense can do. Things that cannot communicate themselves
within themselves, cannot understand. Understanding increases it self by more
plentiful and continual Self-communication: Understandings increase one another
by mutual communication, and grow greater Understandings, and as it were into
one common Understanding. This is the proper Nature, and the Specification of
an Understanding; and the Soul in its very Essence is an Understanding.

4. The fourth Consequence from the Nature of a Spirit, is, That the Happiness
or Misery of it must needs be exceeding great: For since such a Being cannot
but have great Capacities for one of these States, whichsoever of them it is,
it must needs be exceeding great, both because it feels it self throughout in
either of them, and must needs do so, in regard of the Reciprocation,
Self-communication of all its Powers and Motions; and in regard of the Fineness
and Purity of its Being, not abated by Grosness, Distance, and Distinction of
Parts, but the Whole running into it self: as also in regard of the Forcible
motion of a Spirit, which carries therefore its Griefs or Pleasures with the
rapidness of its own motion, and either blesses or torments it self, according
to the vehemence of its Nature.

The Spirit or Soul of Man in the Body discovers somewhat hereof, but in lower
degrees, by reason of the distribution of it self to the several Parts,
Pleasures, Pains, and various Concernments of Bodily Nature; which while the
Soul condescends to, and complies with, it seems to imitate; so that it tastes
generally intermixed Pleasures only, and suffers but alleviated Griefs,
because this agrees most with the Condition of Body, that has nothing pure:
And further, while it is thus interested, its own proper Motions and Activities
are both damped and confined: For Body is dull and strait; and if the Soul
dwells in it, and acts by it, it must proportion it self to it, or else it
cannot be its Instrument.

Yet these Properties of the Soul are not altogether imperceptible, even in
Bodily state; for as the Soul is conformed very far to the Body in those
Regards, so has the Body its Conformities to the Soul, and those much more
necessary, seeing it is acted and moved by it: For even Bodily Sense pays this
resemblance to Spiritual, that in every Part it bears Sympathy with what is
felt in any one Part: Yet this is, because the Soul enlivening the whole Body,
and undertaking for every Part, feels in it self, as in the Center, the state
of every Part; though it feels according to the manner, nature, and situation
of the several parts of the Body.

In some degree of Likeness also the vigor of the Souls Resentments are seen,
in the most spirituous Pleasures or acute Pains of Body, that are able to move
Nature high, which fall out only in a lively Constitution, and not taken off,
so as to chill the Pleasure, or dull the Pain; because the Soul has more
Active Bodily Powers to show it self by, and wherein it can give greater
Testimony of its own vivid Motion, though but in concernedness for the Body.
Thus the Pains of Stone and Gout are much sharper, because they abate so little
from the Constitution: and the vigours of Health are necessary for the receipt
of Pleasure.

But the Soul is much more in things proper to it self All Center, where every
one of its proper Pleasures and Pains meet; that is, Spiritual Joys and
Sorrows: and then the liveliness, persistency of its Nature, carries up to a
height all its Enjoyments, or Sufferings. But this is never so clear, as in its
separated and free estate; for then especially, as it is said of Eternity, It
is all drawn as it were into every Moment: So whatever can be supposed in any
Point of the Intellectual Nature, if we could so distinguish, in the same
instant runs through all; which is the first Height of the Happiness or Misery
of a Spirit.

In the next place, the Happiness or Misery of a Spirit can be no other than a
Happiness or Misery of a Spiritual nature, and so cannot but be great; for that
is the Nature of every thing Spiritual: It is all what it is, and nothing else.
Every thing but Spirit has a great deal of cumber, a great deal of Clothes and
Habiliments upon it: But Spirit is purely it self; Spiritual Happiness has no
clog upon it; Spiritual Misery has no Sheath upon it, it is all Edge: And when
we are entered into the Region of Spirits, there will be no heaviness of Body,
nor diversions of that in the way. The Bodies of the Resurrection, when we
receive them, will be fitted to the velocity and swiftness of our Minds, and
prepared so wholly for them, as most perfectly to attend their condition.

Object. But because we see the Body now such an Obstruction to all Motions of
Soul, it may be doubted, whether there may not be a state of Souls, as
insensible or more insensible than now.

To resolve this, the Scripture tells us, God makes the Happiness of his Saints
like a River of highest Pleasure, and the punishment of Evil like a sea of
flaming Brimstone, both to the height; therefore it withal appears, the
Faculties are raised to the height also: Else there could be no such Happiness,
nor any such Punishment. Insensible things enjoy nothing, endure nothing; and
the lower the Sense, the lower of necessity is also the Enjoyment, and the
Pain: There must be therefore an exaltation of the Faculties to the highest
Life, that in the meeting of the Object, and the Faculties, there may be
greatest Satisfaction or Misery.

Yet it may be understood upon this very account, there may be Glories and
Punishments of higher and lower degrees, according to the advancement or low
estate of the Faculties; and that the state of the other World may be
proportioned to this, that he, who by a Soul more enlarged in this World, he
who by five Talents gained Luc. 19. 17, 19. Luc. 12. 47, 48.
ten, or that knew his Masters will, and yet did it not; these being agreeably
of higher apprehensions, and quicker motions in this World, are in the World to
come, by the continuing elevation of those Powers, made Rulers over more
Cities, or beaten with more stripes: but those of fewer Talents, and meaner
Sentiments, keep still their Ranks, being Rulers over fewer Cities, or beaten
with fewer stripes: Yet in each of these, the state of their Souls here, and in
Eternity, differs as much in regard of their apprehensions, and the clearness
of their Faculties, as Twilight and Noonday. From this state of things that
has been given, it may be briefly inferred in these Particulars following.

1. If the Souls of Men, that are an Inferior Spirit, are so active and high
in their motion; then how exalted, and infinitely adorable are all the
Perfections of that Supreme Spirit, lifted up out of all Height! That
Eternal-Fountain-Author-Spirit, how infinitely pure is his Being, without any
variation or shadow of turning; dwelling in such a Light and Luster of his own
Divinity, that nothing can so much as approach or come within any distance of?
Although his Spirit runs through All, yet there is an infinite separation of
Excellency between God and all things. How clear and bright is his
Understanding, before whom Hell is naked, and Destruction has no covering!
Darkness and Light are all one to him, because Light and Glory are always round
about him, and Hell is but the displeasure of his Holiness against Sin, like a
Flame that dazles, and scorches together: A Fire devours before him, and burns
up his Enemies on every side.

How potent are his Efficacies, which way soever he turns them, for Creation,
Conservation, or the Change of Things, as he pleases! What is his Favor, or
Displeasure, but the highest Efficacies of Kindness, or Severity; of Joy
unspeakable and full of Glory, or of weeping and wailing, without all ease or
remedy! How do all Spirits Good and Holy, cast their Crowns before him, and
laud him with eternal Acknowledgments of both their Being and Happiness, to his
Grace and Goodness, and Acclamations to his Praise! And that Stream from
himself, that feeds with Being and Spirituality those so unhappy and wretched
Spirits, deposed from their Glory and Perfection, necessitates them to survive
the Instances of his Justice and Holiness, to the admiration and everlasting
wonderment of the Blessed, (yet with profoundest Reverence of unstained
Holiness) and their own astonishment and horror without end.

2. If the Soul is a Being so excellent, how foul is Sin, that defiles it; like
a Poison, that presently darkens a Diamond, or infects the very Beams of the
Sun, or soils the Light? We should ever resist Temptations to sin, with the sad
consideration of defiling so excellent and immortal a Spirit.

3. It shows how excellent the Price must be that redeems such a Spirit. Great
is the Redemption of the Soul by Christ, the Renovation of the Soul by the Holy
Spirit.

4. We should consider this Spirit, that though now it is enclosed in the Body,
yet seeing it is prepared to much higher and more excellent motion, it must
burst out; it cannot be always held; it must have a freedom, that it may
expatiate it self: Else so great Powers, having so little Action now, must have
been prepared in vain.

5. We should meditate much upon this great Character of a Spirit: It cannot
die; It is so itself, that it cannot die: Its very Being is Intellect, Life,
and Motion; so that it cannot cease to live, except it cease to be: God, who
alone has power over it, has designed it to be for ever, and framed it for
perpetuity, and so, that it can have no Adversary of its Life or Being: It is
so separate from all things else, that nothing of Body can come near its
Essence or Life. What Sword or Fire can cut off or consume Thought, much less
the Soul, the Original or Spring of it? What most subtle thing in Nature can
destroy the Affection of Love or Fear, much less so attaque the Judgment or
Reason, as forcibly to suppress them? They can kill the Body; but they have no
more that they can do.

No created Spirit, how principal soever, can come near the Being of the lowest
orbed Soul, thus to touch it: Satan the great Enemy of Spirits knows this so
hopeless an attempt, as never once to plot it: All his intendments against
Humane Spirits, are only to sway them to Evil, and so precipitate them into
Misery; but yet they cannot be mastered by the highest Archangel, so much as in
the Government of themselves, except they surrender and betray their own
Absoluteness.

One Spirit may imprint Thought upon another, offer Argument, endeavor to
induce Affection; but the Soul is at its own choice for acceptance; and
whether it accept, or not, its Being is still the same, its Power of
Self-reservation the same; so double-guarded is the Soul in this great
Privilege of being It self: Guarded in its Essence or Life, guarded in its
Liberty and Freedom; which argues it a Being of greatest account. Now in that
it must always live, Holiness and Happiness, the enjoyment, pleasure, and
perfection of its Life, are with greatest earnestness, and upon greatest
necessity to be sought; Sin and Misery, such a degradation of its Life, that
the Scripture calls them Death, are by all means to be avoided and escaped
from: And seeing it has a Secret of its own Freedom, that no Spiritual
Principality or Power can enter into or invade, it can only charge its Ruin
upon it self: But in the Supreme Spirit, God himself is all its strength, who
perpetuates his first Inspiration, maintains its Immunities, guides its Motions
aright when it had lost it self, redeems it from that great Enemy-Spirit by his
Son, the Lover and great Friend of Souls; governs it by his own Holy and Good
Spirit, and is the Happiness and Glory of it for ever. Oh the care that is due
to such a Soul as this! A care due from it self to it self, yet miserably
neglected by it self, in its true self, for it self, as engaged in a Body, out
of which it is yet always hasting, and leaves it in death; it self being in
greatest danger of a death exceedingly worse, though of another nature; in the
bringing about of which, the malice of Hell is always busy and employed,
choosing that as a much higher effect of its spite and cruelty, than
Annihilation, if it had been within the Power of Devils to turn a Soul into
nothing.

6. Lastly, What unspeakable Sentiments of Happiness or Misery does a
self-moving, a self-communicating Spirit enter into, when it enters into its
own place! For there it meets those immense Objects, God, his Favor or
Displeasure, the true appearances of Sin and Holiness, the General Assembly of
Spirits, happy and miserable, with their universal and endless Condition: It
self appearing to it self in its full extent of Nature, Duration, and Relation
to all these. Now its self-motion and self-communication (which are its very
Being, and therefore perfect in its own native Element) are active to the
highest. Self-motion turns it every way, with unutterable swiftness, upon these
Objects; and Self-communication makes all its own, converts unintermittingly
all its Observations upon them, into most beatifying or afflictive Resentments,
according to the Order it stands in to those Objects of Happiness or Misery.

Two principal Accounts of the Soul of Man are now dispatched; the first, of
Invisible Beings; the second, of the Nature of a Spirit; in which I laid down
for a Ground, That the Right apprehension of the Divine Nature and Being, is
the Key of the Knowledge of Man's Soul. As therefore I endeavored to explain
those two Points by it, so I come now more fully to pursue the Resemblance the
Soul of Man has with God, and in this next place to speak of it in the
Potency, Force, and Excellency of its Being and Faculties; first taking
occasion to make this industrious Reflection upon the Souls likeness to God.

It is an usual Observation, That every Creature resembles God in that very
regard that it has a Being, however obscure it be; and the more any Creature
advances in Being, the clearer the Representation of God, till the Scale of
Creatures leads us up to those that God has exalted into the nearest likeness
to himself that Created Natures are capable of; and these are Rational Spirits,
Angels, and Souls of Men; of which, Angels are a higher Order, and at greater
Freedom, being out of Bodies; and the Souls of Men a lower Order, being under
the disadvantage of Bodies; yet in themselves like to God, and like to Angels.

Now it is the Privilege of Spirits to behold in the whole Creation, especially
in their own Natures, the great Perfections of God surmounting themselves (and
much more the rest of the Creatures) as Infinite does Finite; that so God may
be understood, and accordingly adored by them; seeing Spirits in his own Image
of Understanding and Likeness can alone so far know him, as in a true and
proper sense to adore him: and the Glory of God in such an Adoration being the
end of Creation, it argues the necessity of such Creatures, and so
accomplished, thus to give him his Glory.

As therefore, by reviews of the Creatures in general, and particularly of our
own Minds, and by Observations of what excells amongst all, it is possible
without Scripture, though more darkly, to find out the Perfections that are to
be ascribed infinitely to God; and when we come to Scripture, and find that
agreeing with (though exceeding) Natural Knowledge, in its Attributions to God,
we have by this combination of Scripture and Reason, Revealed and Natural
Knowledge, (the praeeminence being easily yielded to Revealed) the most
satisfying Assurances of God we can have.

On the other side, by considering the Excellencies and Perfections attributed
to God in his Word, and finding the same Lines drawn upon our own Minds,
observable both in the Discourses of Scripture concerning them, and in our own
experience (though but according to the degree and model of Creatures) we
understand our own Souls more fully; so that, as the consideration of our
selves and the Creatures, leads us without Revelation to understand God, though
not so clearly; so these Oracles revealing God, and all his Attributes more
certainly and evidently to us, reveal also our selves more plainly, because
they tell us, we are made in his Image and Likeness; and so by knowing God with
greatest clearness, we know our selves also most clearly: for the Knowledge of
our selves (as to what concerns the clearness of it) depends upon our Knowledge
of God by the Scriptures, more than our Knowledge of God depends upon the
Knowledge of our selves by Natural Knowledge, without Scripture: Yet still the
Knowledge of our own Souls, where Men have no Revelation, leads them best to
the Knowledge of God; as the Knowledge of God by Revelation, leads us best to
the Knowledge of our own Souls; because God and the Soul do mutually represent
one another: God, the Original Prototype, and Infinite Exemplar; Man's Soul,
the humble Representation and Copy: Upon which Reason the Apostle having said,
We are his offspring, Acts 17. 28, 29.
immediately argues, Forasmuch as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to
think the Godhead like to silver and gold. Our own Nature deriving from God,
instructs us better concerning him: for seeing we our selves far excel all
those things, however heightened by Art, he that gave us those Excellencies,
must needs have them in himself, and in a transcendency; As he that built the
house, has more honor than the house, and the Life excels the Picture: So, on
the other side, the Excellencies and Perfections of the Divine Being are every
where given us in Scripture as the Rule of Composure for Man's Soul; which
could not be reasonable, were not the being of it first given in the Image and
Likeness of God, and susceptive of the Divine Nature, that is, of the Virtues
of it.

Touching the Souls Likeness to Angels, we need not labor much, but rather in
comparing them with God the Original of both, and occasionally only illustrate
the Doctrine of the Soul, by observation of what we are taught in inspired
Leaves concerning them, though Philosophy has not been altogether ignorant
herein. In general, they are of a middle state between God and us; nearer to
God, in that they are a higher Rank of Spirits, disengaged from Body; much
nearer to us, in that they are Finite Spirits, and God infinitely above them.

In speaking then of the Likeness of Man's Soul to God, we must again have
recourse to his Creation, and when God had said, Let us make Man in our own
Likeness and Image, and formed the Body, as a curious Statuary does a most
exact Statue, he then breathed into it the Breath of Life. Now this Breathing
of God argues, he gave a great semblance of himself, and that God derived
something from himself to Man's Soul, that should more immediately express
himself, and was taken from himself as the Life. Thus our Savior breathed upon
his Apostles, and made them Partakers of a Spirit that had a great Likeness to
his own, in the Infallibility and Heavenliness of his Doctrine, the Power of
working Miracles, the Holiness of their Ministry, and whole Apostolic
Function. God breathing Man's Soul, it became so like him, that some have called
it, A Particle of the Divinity, a Kiss of God, an Imprint of himself.

Now this Likeness of Man's Soul to God, I believe not to be first in those
moral Resemblances of the Truth, Holiness, and Goodness of God, which speak God
the best, and in which to be like God, is Man's Rectitude and Integrity, and the
Foundation of his Happiness as a Rational Agent, nor only in the Intellectual
Faculties; but also in those Attributes which speak God the Greatest, though
these be in this present state of Man much obscured, even as the other.

Of the Soul of Man, an Invisible Spirit, has been already discoursed: Of
other the Greatnesses of God giving a glance, an eye of themselves upon Man's
Soul, we may also apprehend;

There is a Resemblance of his Infiniteness and Ubiquity of Presence, in that
swift and sudden Motion of Man's Soul from East to West, summoning things of
farthest distance into its presence by Thought and Intellectual Consideration;
the Intelligence he endeavors to hold with all the Action and Business of the
World, both Natural, Civil, and Moral; the Correspondency he has with Things
Divine and Heavenly. The Freedom and Liberty of the Increated Will is reflected
in some degree in the Liberty of Man's Will, that can be no way forced or
compelled; in the vastness of his Appetite and Desire, which though now
irregular, yet speaks the Original Greatness of his Soul, and that Joy
unspeakable he was intended for: The Dominion of God, in Man's Dominion over the
Creatures, and the vast and restless Ambition and Desire of Power and Empire so
natural to him: The Eternity of God, in the Immortality, and at last
Unchangeableness given to Man's Soul: The Divine Blessedness, in the Luster and
Glory Man affects, the Well-being he so inseparably from his Nature desires,
the Happiness he is capable of, to which he was designed, and to which he is
exalted by the Salvation of Christ. From hence there is something like
Creation, in the great Works that have been done by Men; and something in
Humane Contrivances and Administrations, like Providence.

And that there is a Force and Potency of Man's Spirit, in a proportion
resembling that Power of God that brings Things to pass in Matter, or like the
force of Angels, that have wrought upon Matter beyond all the Activity that
Matter can be set into by any Material Agency, is not without probability, from
the more than ordinary vigorous Action and great Strength of some Men, as
Samson, and some others of unusual Force: For I am much inclined, under the
Divine Efficacy concurring, to ascribe such Might to the Soul, either acting it
self by extraordinary Organs and Instruments of Body prepared and fitted for
that Might, as in Giants, and such like; or that God may have made use of some
Good Men, in a degree like the Angels, letting out the Powers of their Souls
through their Bodies into Actions, above the generality of Mankind; to which I
am very subject to attribute those Famous Acts recorded by the Apostle, Hebr.
11. 33, 34. They subdued Kingdoms, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the
violence of Fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made
strong, waxed valiant in Fight, put to flight the Armies of the Aliens: For,
though these are miraculous, compared with the ordinary State of Mankind, yet
they may be natural to the unconfined State of the Soul, in its Efficacies upon
Matter; even as working Righteousness, obtaining Promises, not accepting
deliverance, that they might be partakers of a better Resurrection, require as
supernatural an assistance of Mind, in this degeneracy of Mankind, and do as
much exceed the Possibilities of the Soul, so sunk and degraded, as the other
do the Powers of a Spirit shut up in Flesh, and in this State of Humiliation:
And yet certainly all Acts of Goodness and Obedience to God, are connatural to
the true and unfallen Condition of Mankind.

Now what the Skill and Force of a Spirit not restrained and confined to work
by just such Instruments of Body, is in moving Matter with greatest advantage,
and most successful operation, is to us hard to be defined; for the Motion and
Activity of it is Intellectual, and (as we ordinarily conceive) that alone is a
feeble thing; yet when we come to observe what is attributed to Divine
Understanding, That by Wisdom the Lord Prove. 3. 19.
founded the Earth, and by Understanding he established and garnished the
Heavens; and that he only declared by his Word the Pleasure and Determination
of his Understanding, in the creating every thing, we may be very ready to
conceive Infinite Understanding is Infinite Power; and when Wisdom says, I am
Understanding, Prove. 8. 14.
I have Strength, it gives us the Notion of Infinite Understanding, as Infinite
Strength: and if we consider, Wisdom and Power are one in God, it still
heightens the apprehension: and further, if we understand, with many Divines,
the Son of God to be this Wisdom, the Notion is yet raised higher, and we
understand the more by it the Omnipotency of Wisdom. Creation then is the very
Effect of Infinite Understanding; and as all Conceptions, Arguments, Reasons of
Discourse, are the unquestionable Creatures of our Understanding; so all things
that are in the World are the Effects of Infinite Understanding: the World is
the Creature of Divine Understanding. His very conceiving things, with a
pleasure they should be, gave them Being; He spoke the word, Psalm. 33. 9.
and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast: He called to the Heavens,
and they stood up together: There was no other Power used by God, that we read
of. Thus Men of great Authority sit still, and speak things into their
Execution. As for the mighty Acts of Angels recorded in Scripture, they are
veiled as to the manner of their being brought to pass, and the Efficiency that
did produce them; only we read in that Emblem of the Prophet Ezekiel, wherein
all Worldly things are presented as governed by God, and administered by Angels,
that the various Rotations and Changes in this World, shadowed by Wheels, are
full of Eyes, that is, of the Wisdom of God, the Supreme Moderator of them, and
that they are moved on by the Motion of Angels: For the Spirit of the Living
Creatures Ezekiel. 1. 18, 20.
(by which Angels are expressed) was in the Wheels; and when these went, the
Wheels went; and when these stood still, the Wheels stood still; This Spirit of
the Living Creatures managed all: So that it looks to us, as if the Angels did
all by their Spirit or Essence, and that we know is Intellectual: Eyes in the
Wheels, and the Spirit in the Wheels, turned all about. The Angels are
Understandings inferior to God only, and their Efficacy is represented to us
by Lightning, or the most vehement Flame of Fire. When we come down to Man, we
find the Creatures in great subjection to Adam; and there is reason Genes. 2.
20.
to think, it was to his Understanding they paid their Homage: For as an
Introduction to his Rule over them, they were brought to him by God, to receive
their Names from him; and according to his insight into their Natures, he
called them all by their Names, and so entered into his Dominion over them, by
understanding them, and declaring his understanding of them. This was the
solemn Act of his Inauguration into his Intellectual Government. Even as God,
who governs the Stars by his Infinite Understanding, tells the number Psalm.
147. 4.
of the Stars, and calls them all by their names; thus the known Wisdom of
Men of great Understanding commands the Regard and Obedience of those whom they
have imposed Names of Office and Service upon.

In the generality of Mankind, let us consider how immediately any, or all the
Members of the Body move, upon the most silent intimations of the
Understanding, and follow its guidance, twining every way, even into the
greatest Curiosities of Art; stretching themselves to the most industrious and
laborious Employments, adventuring themselves upon the greatest Hazards. We
see, that indeed all things that are done by Men in the World, begin at the
Counsel, Design, and Intendments of Understanding; and that the Contrivance of
one Man's Understanding, dictating to the Understandings of those that are
under, has been the Spring, and given production to the mightiest Effects, the
wisest Polities, the most excellent Laws, huge Volumes, the greatest
Achievements of Armies, the most magnificent Buildings, Establishments of
Empire, the most memorable Projects and Works of Art, the Force of strange
Engines, or whatever is accounted of Grandeur in the World: The Force of
Understanding has been given and conveyed from Hand to Hand, insinuated into
Matter, and so passed from one Piece and Part of it to another, till it has
reached unto, and rested in the Effect. All this put together, may be an Essay
concerning the Power of Understanding.

Now what ways Understanding has to move Matter, immediately by it self, we
are no competent Judges, that have indeed Understandings, but generally so
restrained and imprisoned, that they can find the way of doing little, in
comparison of what may be done by that uncontrovertible way of accomplishing
Effects by the mediatory Services of Matter: Only this we know, When there was
neither Matter to work upon, nor work with, Infinite Understanding brought
forth Matter, and stirred it as he pleased. And though there is no comparison
between Understanding Finite, and Infinite; yet by this it appears, there is no
contradiction for Understanding to produce Matter, when there was none; nor to
move it, when it is. We know too, there must be some way, by which our Souls,
though acknowledged to be Spirits, move our Bodies, known enough to be gross
and material, and that merely by Thought and Consideration what is to be done;
and that they obey them speedily, and with ease: although we are not able to
expedite all the Questions that may be moved in relation hereunto.

In the sum, I think it not to be doubted, but that many of the extraordinary
and wonderful Achievements of Men, the even prodigious Valors and mighty
Prevalencies of some Warriors, that have in heat of Fight moved like
Lightning, have been the true and proper Effects and Sallies out of a Soul,
through the Freedoms given by God to such Persons, for the bringing about those
Changes he has resolved upon, by their Victoriousness and Conquests. And, to
conclude, in all those things that have been done by Men, not plainly
miraculous, nor exceeding the Power of Created Spirits, I know no reason why
the Wonder should be placed any where else, but upon that admirable Freedom
such Souls, by especial Grant from God, have had to work like themselves, and
so to exceed the ordinary Operations of Men. And though this does not equal
their present State to, nor bring up their Services to the Services of Angels,
that Order of Creatures God in his Wisdom has appointed for the greater and
more remarkable Expeditions and Actions in the World, as being always ready,
and, as we say, in procinctu, excelling in prepared and unincumbred strength,
always upon the guard, and harkening to the voice of his word: yet in that such
great and mighty Works do show forth themselves in the Soul, and there have
been so great and wonderful Persons in all Ages, of Famous Memory in their
several kinds and virtues, in whom the Greatness of this Soul has broken
forth; it is a mavelous Instance, that the Soul of Man is a Great, Potent,
and Excellent Spirit, of vast Activities in its own Nature; and that it has a
near resemblance of God, and Alliance to Angels: that however it be for a
little time made lower than Angels, yet it shall be brought into a Condition
wherein it shall be (...), equal to Angels.

For though I make no doubt some Men have greater Souls than others, as one
Star differs from another in Magnitude, and as Bodies differ in Strength,
Beauty, and Proportion; yet there is the main Excellency of a Humane Body,
wherein all agree: So it is in the Souls of Men; the Soul of one Man is a
Measure, and carries the Pourtraicture of the Souls of Men in their Universal
Nature; even as Face answers Face in the water, so the Soul of one Man returns
the Soul of another Man.

Against all this it lies as a great Objection, That the greatest Effects of a
Soul we can observe, are not great and high enough for such a Being as I have
described Man's Soul to be; and the great Effects we do see, are found only in
some lesser numbers of Men. Let us then inquire into these two things; Why the
Effects are not greater, wherein Souls display themselves? and, Why we see them
not more generally and universally among Men?

For the first, it is to be considered, The Soul in the Body is like an
Artificer, that works by a very dull and unapt Instrument, though himself of
excellent Skill; like a valiant Warrior with a Sword of Lead, or as Samson, if
confined to the general Laws of Humane Nature, he had fought with the Jaw Bone
of an Ass only; or like the Eye, though never so quick, looking through a dull
Glass, or in a Dark Room; or like a strong and valorous Man in a Cage, or close
Dungeon; or like a Light in a Dark Lantern; or like a strong Man asleep: All
this is the State of the Soul in the Body; or like a Prince of Just Authority,
in Captivity; or like a Jewel closed up in Clay; or a Beauty shrouded under a
course Covering.

To judge of the Soul now, and according to such Rules as it acts by in the
Body, that it shall never be greater and more active than it appears, is to
conclude the Soul of a Child shall never show it self greater and more active
than it appears while the Child is in Swaddling Clothes: Or, as if the Infant in
the Cloister of the Womb, could make a Judgment of it self, and think it self
in as good a condition, or better, than it should be in the open Air; and that
what it is there, it must be always. The Soul sees now through a glass darkly,
and is in the condition of a Child, and of a Child shut up in the Womb.

That the Body is now a great hinderance to the Soul, is apparent by the
necessity that the Soul must be separated from it, and that it must be
dissolved into Dust, or changed; and that in the Resurrection, our Bodies must
be Spiritual Bodies, fit to cast the Glories and display the Excellencies of a
Soul, to discharge the Activities of the highest Elevation of a Spirit. But to
return to the present State of the Soul in the Body, why it is ordered thus?
that the Body should be such an Instrument out of Tune, to the Soul, such an
excellent Harmonist; such a Dungeon to the Mind, Princely in its Creation. We
may give it thus.

In the very first and most innocent state, the Soul was so framed by God, that
though the Powers of it were much larger than Body, and independent upon it,
yet that they should for a certain season be restrained to the Body, to govern,
take care of, and act it according to its Nature and Measures, according to its
Preparations to run along under the Powers of the Soul, in their Motion, and
not be destroyed by the over-vehemency.

This Body the Soul was able and fit to act to the utmost of its Capacities,
and far beyond them; and yet it was so moderated, as not to overact them: but
it could not raise this Body, or the Matter of it, above its Natural
Excellency: That was reserved in the Creators Power alone, as a Reward of the
Souls Obedience in that Body for the present time allotted to it.

The Soul could not make the Body what it would have it be, or fit it to all it
would have it do, when it found it short: It could not enable body to all
things a Soul had Power for, or a desire to: For it was but a Living Soul, and
not a Quickening 1 Cor. 15. 45.
Spirit; that is, It had a Life given it by God, and such a Life, that it
should be always a Living Soul, that it should never decay, and fall down into
a Dead Thing; and so it could retain its own Life, against any one but the
Author of it, and lose none of that; for this power it had received from God;
and what it found fitted by God to its Activity, and convenienc'd to its Life,
it could act, quicken, and manage: But it was not a Quickening Spirit; that is,
It had not power to make or give a new Life, to continue a Body in Life, or to
raise a Dead Body, or make it more Excellent or Lively than it found it
prepared by God: It had not a Power like the First-begotten from the Dead, who
can make corruptible put on Incorruption, and mortal put on Immortality, and be
even swallowed up of Life; who can change our vile Bodies, that they may be
made like his glorious Body, by a Power that subdues all things to it self. So
then, though the Soul could work to the utmost extent of Matter and Body, and
fill all Bodily Capacities, yet it could not exceed them, nor act according to
it self, because it was confined in Body; but must work and act only as the
Soul of such a Body: nor could it quicken and advance Body, as it would it
self, nor better it above its Rank and Order set by the Creator; and therefore
the Soul could display it self, and its own Spirituality, only so far as Body,
made by God, the Body of this Soul, could receive and convey into Action.

And though this was enough, not only to prefer Man to the top of this Lower
Creation, and to make him under the Creator Lord of All; but to assure enough,
a greater than Body, even a Spirit was there: yet it could not discover, how
great and potent this Spirit was.

Thus the Soul was submitted by the wise Ordination of God, to retire, keep
home, and dwell in a Body, being at the very first set in an Orb lower than it
self, and to manage fewer and lesser Talents, according to the State of the
Lower Creation; and so by its Obedience, Fidelity, and Improvement, to be
advanced to richer and more Talents, and to a Rule over greatest Cities; that
is, to be exalted to the Heights and full Glory of a perfectest Immortality.

Thus was the State of Innocence, wherein Body was much more fitted to the
Excellency of the Soul, though not to all its Excellency; fitted to it only
according to the Lower State of Man in this World, not according to that
Supreme State of Immortality; but differing as much from that, as Possibility
not to die, does from an Impossibility to die; or as a Body Natural, just fit
to entertain a Soul in a temporary condition, and to yield it self to its
displays in a degree convenient to that, differs from a Body Spiritual, framed
to bear and discharge all the highest Spiritualities of a Soul, in its
unchangeable Estate.

Yet this was much above the present Condition of Body under Sin; even as
Innocence, and the Order, Beauty, and Goodness wherein Man was first enstated
by God, excel the Guilt, unnatural Deformity, and Confusion he labors under
now: Since Sin and Disobedience, the Souls manner of Habitation in Body, is
fallen much lower; and it is carefully to be considered, how it fell lower: for
it cannot be conceived, that any thing should be abated from the Life, Vigor,
and Force of the Soul it self: The Soul loses only in the Holy and Happy State
of it, without any diminution in its Esence, or Essential Life; for it cannot
lose in the degrees of those: It must lose in the whole, or not at all; being
one, whole, entire, indivisible Self, as has been before asserted: And thus it
is only a competent Subject for the Happiness or Misery of Eternity, of which
Fallen Angels are a plain Instance, who, notwithstanding their Fall, continue
Principalities, and Powers, and Dominions; and though Wickednesses, yet
Spiritual Wickednesses, and in High Places. The Soul then losing nothing thus,
the Life, Vigor, and Virtue of its Nature must lie close, accumulated and
folded up, where there is not room for an Explanation and free Expatiation; as
Light, that could reach much further, when stopped by any Dark Body, is
reverberated into it self.

We must therefore conceive, that, as a Punishment upon the Sin of Man, there
is a great withdrawing of Divine Blessing from the Lower Creation; upon which
ensues an interruption of the benign Order of Things one toward another, so
that they are continually at feud, and in contest one with another, hindering,
disturbing, and mutually abating the Force, and working to the destruction one
of another: to all which Inconveniences the Humane Body becomes subject, and
both in regard of its Temper and Composition, more subject than many other
parts of Matter; for its Strength is not the Strength of Stones, nor its Flesh
of Brass, nor clear and pure like the Heavens, that abide of old. Further, It
being the Body of that Soul, that is the great Offender, it is most liable to
the Curse: The Soul then, whose Body was at first too narrow for all its
Efficacies, is now limited to one, unequal to any one of them, and very
disturbing of their Execution.

For sometimes, by the oppression of other Parts of Matter upon this Body, all
the livelier and brisker Particles of it are squeezed out and exhaled, whereby
it becomes dull and instagnated; sometimes it is overheated into furious and
inordinate motion, and so weakened and disordered in its great end of serving
the Soul.

The Soul on the other side losing nothing of it self, yet being sunk down from
the Intellectual Spiritual Life, and from the Happiness therein to be found,
which is its true Sphere, becomes also negligent of acting and invigorating the
Body, and guiding the Service of it to such worthy Ends; and with a wilful
supineness falls down into the Animal Life, and presently finding what State
and Temper that Body with which it is joined is of, carries it self, with all
its Powers, almost wholly thither.

If it be a duller Matter or Body, it stays its own Effluxes, the Stream of its
Motion, and tastes its Life and Enjoyment in that sloathfulness and
sluggishness of Flesh, as it were forgetting it has any greater Virtue, Force,
or other Office, than what serves to the maintenance of so low a Life; that the
Soul wilfully enervates, and deadens its own Activity, by slumbring it in the
drowsiness of a lazy Body; so that this Sloth becomes the greatest of all
Sloth, because of the Pleasure this mighty Spirit has in that Sloth, having
found it to be the Temper of that Matter wherein it has sheathed it self;
there being in this very Sloth, as Philosophers teach of Rest of Bodies, as
forcible and great a Cause, as there is of Motion. Thus the great Force of a
Soul is defeated this way, the Body being like damped Powder, that will not
take the Fire, and so the Fire lies still and does nothing: to such Solomon
cries out, Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands
to sleep; the description of an endless and incurable Sloth, Prove. 24. 33. If
the Body be a Composure more lively and spirituous, and apt to overheat, the
Soul presently finds this, and committing it self to the Inclinations of Body,
such Propensions are promoted and enraged, according to the mighty Force of a
Soul, into the Excesses of Lust, Rage, and all Intemperance, beyond the very
Brutish Nature, that has no such Spirit to act it: and thus also the Might of
the Soul is lost, as the Force of the Fire with the Powder in a cracked or foul
Gun, that is scattered, and recoils with mischief; or as an over-measure of
Powder, taking fire without direction; the Effect of which is the slaughter and
destruction of all about it. So that every way nothing is achieved worthy the
Greatness of this Spirit.

Thus the Soul is doubly disabled by Matter, wherein it is set; both because
that Matter is subject to so many disorders, that can no way be perfectly
cured, and so it is unfit for the Souls use; and also, because the Soul crowds
up its own Activities into a contentment with what it finds most natural and
ready in that Matter with which it is joined, complies with it, and troubles it
self no further to amend it: and the longer things continue so, the more stiff
and unreformable the Evil grows. All which put together, is a plain Reason, why
there are no greater Effects of a Soul in the World, and how it comes to pass,
that the multitude of People in it give no other evidence of a Soul, but in a
provision of Natural Life, and the Sensualities of Life, somewhat above the
Rank of Beasts.

Now upon the utmost stretch of this Reason, there would be no Examples of
greater Virtue or Heroickness among Men: But because this State both of the
Body and the Soul is below the Graciousness of the first Creation, and that
there are most merciful Relaxations of the Punishment due to the Sin of Man,
and many Advantages for the betterment of both Soul and Body, vouchsafed by God
through Christ the Mediator, whose Benefits extend to them that do not know
him; hence it is, that the State of Mankind excells it self in many great
Instances.

For the Soul retaining its primitive Vigor and Life, which are its very
Nature and Being; and Body being capable of Refinement to better use, by the
care of the Soul in the Sublimation of it; even as Art polishes the Rude
Matter, directs it into the usefulness of any Instrument; as Chemistry purifies
and exalts it; as the Skill of the Apothecary corrects, and makes it
medicinable: so the Soul designing to mend the Body, sets the Characters of
Wisdom, Virtue, and good Ingeny upon it, forms it to a graceful Mine and
Deportment, turns and twists the Motions of it to the Curiosities of Artifice,
chastises and reforms it to the Precepts of Virtue, and subdues it to the
Industry of Study and Contemplation, hardens it to the fearless and resolved
Actions of War, quickens it to Service in greatest Works and Undertakings, with
whatever else we see in the World worthy of consideration to this purpose,
being the Inspiration of Mind, and the Performance of Body commanded by it.

Now that which under such Pressures excites the Souls of Men to these
Aspirings, must chiefly be acknowledged to Divine Impressions, awakening some
Men's Spirits to the exercise of their richer and worthier Faculties; of which
Scripture gives abundant Testimony in all kinds: And under this, they may be
ascribed to the different Magnitudes of Souls, or the more advantageous Bodies
Providence has contrived for some, rather than for others; and then to the
Instruction and Examples that fall from such Persons, as Influences from the
Heavenly Bodies, and have their Effects upon many, not only of one Age or
Country, but of far distant Places, and succeeding Times; so that there have
been still springing up great and incomparable Persons, Mirrours of the
Greatness and Potency of a Humane Spirit, and their Actions as Monuments of it;
and under them, multitudes of others, though not of so high a degree, yet
endeavoring to raise themselves somewhat toward the Excellencies of Humane
Nature.

But why upon these so fair Advantages the Excellency of Man's Soul is not more
generally retrived, may receive this farther Resolution.

As the Soul working by Body, must have a well fitted and prepared Body to work
immediately by; so it is further necessary to its Operations by Body, that there
be a convenience and an accommodation of several Instruments and Materials,
besides and beyond Body, for it to employ the Ministeries of Body upon, and to
work at a distance by, that the Action may be memorable and great. He that will
build, must first sit down and count the Charge: The King that goes to War,
must consider the strength of his Armies, the number of his Men, the Conduct
and Resolution of his Captains, the sufficiency of his Treasure: He that
separates himself to intermeddle with all Knowledge, must be furnished with the
external, as well as the internal Means of Science; else his Success can never
amount to Eminency.

Now the present State of the World is so impoverished by the Sin of Man, that
it can supply but Few, in comparison of the Many; so that the strait and low
Condition, the unattempting Education and manner of Life, that very many, the
most of Mankind are confined to, by reason of Want, fore-prizes the nobler
Darings of their Mind, and plunges them so low, that they cannot easily rise.
The Experiments of this Case have been very notable in sundry Persons, whose
Souls have been kept low, and suppressed by the lowness and narrowness of (as
they are called) their Fortunes; but have spread and soared aloft, when their
Sphere of Action has been made more ample and high, by accession of those
Fortunes: and we need not make any doubt, but that if the Train had been laid
in their Youth to Generous Employment, they would have much more excelled;
seeing their Souls have, as it were, started out in their riper years to worthy
Menages, being encouraged by plenty of Means, when their Education had been
sordid. And the same thing is proportionably to be believed of very many, who
yet live and die obscure and concealed, and their name in darkness, through
Prejudices of a poor Condition, while their Souls are in themselves as great as
any.

And indeed, it is not intended by God, the degenerate State of this World
should be so noble or free, as to bear up the true and native Greatness of
Souls in a Multitude, and at their full extent of Action; any more than he has
prepared the Firmament for many Suns. A World of Personages, Great for their
Prowess, Virtue, Learning, and Wisdom, would exalt this State too high: It is
therefore so ordered, that the Spirits of the most lie still and contracted by
the very closeness of their Condition, besides other Misadventures; and are so
diverted upon the little things they have to do with, and so straightened by them,
that they think of nothing further; and if they do, yet finding no scope or
opportunity, they repent the Attempt, and retreat back again.

For alas, the Necessities of Mankind in these Bodies are so consuming and
expensive, and the Riches of the Creation hidden deep, and removed far from
use, or else scanty, and daily wasted, that but some of Mankind can be set out
for Glory, and their Undertakings equipped for Grandeur: for, what one Man
has, and uses, another wants; the Abundance of that one Man, is the Poverty of
many about him: How few then can make proof of the Designs and Action of a Soul?

Further, there are continual Supplantations and Underminings of Humane Nature,
and the Virtue of it, by it self; the Endeavors of some to rise are surpised
and counter-wrought by the Jealousies of others, who thereupon suspect their
own diminution or Ruin. The World is full of Suspicion, Surmise, Envy, and ill
Apprehension, because there is not enough for this Soul of Man, whereby to show
it self as great as it is, and would fain appear to be.

This Region is so stinted, that every Greater Intelligence in it thinks it
could it self enlighten and move the whole, and is offended with a Joynt-Light,
as eclipsing and drowning some of its own. Heaven only entertains an
innumerable Company of Glorious Spirits, in their full Luster: Their number is
Ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands, without the
jealousy or envy of any one.

Yet in this very low condition of Souls, the Soul it self is not the less, but
concealed, as many excellent and most potent Things in Nature. A Diamond may be
easily covered, that none of the Beams of it can be seen; the sharp Steel lies
quiet in the Sheath; the Fire, that could inflame the whole Course of Nature,
is hid in the Flint: How often is the Glory of the Sun muffled up in a Cloud?
And, to ascend higher, not only the Angelical, but the Divine Glory is much
reserved, while it is much seen: Verily, Isa. 45. 15.
thou art a God that hidest thy self, O God of Israel, the Savior of thy
People.

Now this thing ought not to be to Practical Inference.
us a Matter of mere Notion or Speculation, but of most serious consideration:
for this Greatness and Potency of our Souls determines it self supremely and
finally into an Ability and Power to bear Eternal Happiness or Misery; and all
else is but accidental, and by the By to it. It was not made great for any Name
of things, that is named in this World, or called Great here, how great soever.
All things that are Arguments of Potency now, do but fall in; the true
intention of the Souls being made so puissant a Being, is, that it might
sustain those weights of Glory, Likeness to God, Everlasting Enjoyment of him,
without being fainted or overwhelmed: But if it miscarry from this Happiness,
or fall short of this Glory, all this its Might and Puissance enable it still
to survive, and bear the massy displeasure of God, angry for Sin; and the most
forcible and terrible Recoils of its own guilty and enraged self, upon it self.

Now a Being thus Potent and Great, as to subsist in that Everlasting
Blessedness or Misery, can together, and comprehensively do those smaller Great
things that are esteemed so in this World: and yet if it should never do any
such, nor have the occasion of doing them; to be created to the Intents and
Purposes of an Eternal Condition, makes it completely necessary it should be
made so Great as we have asserted: And if it were not so, we could make but a
very imperfect account, to what ends the Souls of some Princely and
incomparable Young Men are prepared; whose rising and growing Virtue appears
only so long, as to spring Heroickly, and to give proof of a Divineness in the
Bud, and then by Death to fade in this World, as early as it blossoms, and have
no opportunity left to ripen. In these at once we see both the Greatness of a
Soul, and that this World is not its proper Sphere, or so much as near it; for
if it were, such Souls had been made in vain so Great: But the State of
Eternity justifies the Wisdom of God, in breathing so rich a Principle of Life,
notwithstanding so little Action here; because what is so superabundant now, is
then all of use, and nothing to spare.

And to press this Consideration further, and more generally, the State of
Eternity reduces the Souls of Men universally to thus much of Equality, that
they are all alike stripped out of the Cumber and Incommodiousness of a Body,
and brought to the nakedness and simplicity of Spirit, which is the greatest
Advancement of Being, in an abstract Notion of Being, that a Creature is or can
be receptive of. Nor is Spiritual Motion fettered or tied up any longer by
indigency of subservient Ministeries: All have that which is full enough to
their State.

Souls are then at the height of Immortality and Unchangeableness, under a
Full-sail Activity, every way equal to so great a Nature, whether it be
employed in Fruitions or Indurances.

Let us then expatiate thus into Meditation: We that are but of so many Foot of
Body, and must be lodged in so many Foot of Earth, the measure of the Grave,
have Souls whose Capacities and Action are vaster than the whole Creation of
Matter: We that dwell in houses of clay, and Job 4. 19.
have our foundation in the dust, have yet great and potent Souls. If we could
persuade our selves we are more than this Hand-breadth of Bodily Condition, and
present Life, we should prepare our selves for so great a State of Being, the
State that is proper to Souls. All we toil and sweat for, that we design and
care for in the World, is Self-preservation, Self-enjoyment, and Well-being:
Why then should we not mind these in our largest and most excellent Quality? We
value our selves in that which is least, and throw our selves away in the main
and whole Sum.

Let us then continually reason with our selves: Our Souls are great; when we
go out of the Body, we become Great Spirits. However the Soul keep up close in
the Body, yet it may be dilated beyond all possible Imagination; as they say,
An Angel of Gold may be beaten out to cover a whole Acre of Ground. We see to
what a vastness Education, Study, Advancement in the World, extends the Souls
of some Men, that made little appearance at first: To how much a more immense
Amplitude will the State of Eternity stretch out the Receipt of a Soul? and
what an abundance of Happiness or Misery will it then take in!

How little then, or how great soever we seem now, all will then be resolved
into this final Condition of our Immortal Souls; and the Happiness of these
rests in the Favor of God, a Likeness to him in Holiness, springing out into
an Eternal Enjoyment of him.

And while we are here in the World, in this State of our Souls lies our true
Greatness and Worth: Some that seem so inconsiderable, that no Man looks after
them, yet being greatly Holy, greatly favored of God, Great Spirits, all
Heavenly, the world Hebr. 11. 37, 38.
is not worthy of them, though they wander up and down on montains, in
sheepskins, and goat skins, and be hid in dens and caves of the earth. Others
Great in the World, and being also truly Good, the Back-parts of their
Greatness are only seen.

Yea, even in Bad Men, how small or great soever they are in the World, yet
that they pertain to an Everlasting Condition, that they have Immortal Souls,
this makes them of greatest consideration. To convert them to God, is therefore
a great and excellent Work: To save a Soul from death, how great is the
Service! and how great is the Reward! They that do it, shall shine as the Stars
in the Firmament. How great a Regard to the meanest or worst of Men should it
draw, that they pertain to an Eternal Judgment!

The Consideration of the Soul, as a Being Invisible, and a Spirit, having
invited an often mention of its Eternal or Unchangeable Condition, to which
this present State is subordinate, and disembogues it self into it, as the
Rivers do into the Ocean; I come in the next place to make a modest Research
into the Nature of Eternity, and the Souls Relation to it.

But in speaking of Eternity, I know he alone is able to declare it, who
inhabits Isa. 57. 15.
it; God himself, or the Angels, those Blessed Spirits, who were early assumed
into larger Participations of it: Yet seeing we also are designed to the same
Participations, it concerns us, as far as we can, to understand the Wonder of
it.

Eternity then, in its first and highest Sense, is not any thing distinct from
God, but his stable unchangeable Being from everlasting to everlasting: There
is no other Eternity than this, properly and strictly taken, from which is cast
upon the Mind that contemplates a Being so surrounded with it self, and its own
invariable Perfection, a Notion of Everlasting Duration, and that which is
comprehended by it; because, by reason of the narrowness of our Understanding,
it is conceived in a distinction from the Divine Being it self, we in a
secondary Sense call Eternity.

But even, as what we term Vbiquity, is that which results to us from the
Notion or Apprehension of God the Immense Being filling all, so much as even
Imaginary Space, while he himself is the only true Vbiquity; even so Eternity
is the Infiniteness of God's Being filling all Imaginary Duration, and so
filling it, that the Divine Being it self is that very Eternity, of which
Everlasting Duration is but the Shadow that falls from it, as Unbounded Space
does from his Omnipresence.

God then, the Supreme Eternal, or rather Eternity, is a Being that must always
have been, and ever must be: It is most impossible to conceive he should ever
not have been, or ever not be: And he is a Being that never could, and can
never be otherwise than he is: So that there are no Marks of Distinction that
could ever be taken from his Being, or from the State and Condition of his
Being. He is, He was, He is to come, are all Rev. 1. 8.
united into one Eternal Point or Period in him, and thus expressed, I Exo. 3.
14.
A M: A Being without any variation, Jam. 1. 17.
or shadow of turning.

A thousand years to him, are but 2 Pet. 3. 8.
as yesterday, when it is past; and one day, as a thousand years. And if it had
been said, Ten thousand millions of Years are but as a Minute when it is past,
it had been all one in this Case; for there is no New Thing to him, or in him,
but all is a Just now.

For his Being is the most solid substantial Being, that cannot possibly submit
to any Alteration: What is Infinitely Perfect, can admit no Change. This is the
One, Just, Even, Smooth Eternity.

And understanding God thus, we understand Eternity: And though it be no where
but in himself, and where he communicates the Likeness of it; yet Eternity in a
secondary Sense, becomes a distinct Notion or Sense of a Mode of Being in our
Minds,; and it is a changeless Duration of any Being in the self-same State;
for if there be not Duration, there must be Change; and if there be Change, it
is not a Duration on all sides; for then there could be no Change.

Now this Notion of Eternity could never have come into our Minds, if it had
not been planted there by his Hand, who dwells in it, on purpose that we might
know himself by it; nor had there been a substantial Rest for such a
Conception, if his Being had not given it: All else is but Imaginary Duration.

Eternity then, in this our apprehension of it, is one great smooth Sea,
without any Curl of Change; or as a vast unmeasurable Plain, wherein the Eye
has no Bound, nor so much as Note of Distinction, no Rise, no Fall; like a
great Mountain, that all Generations have passed and repassed, one has gone,
another come, and that has slidden away too, but the Mountain has stood firm.
It is like a Rock, that has stood innumerable Ages, without so much as
scaling; about which the huge Waters have continually waved and rolled
themselves, and dashed asunder; by which smaller Vessels have passed to and
again; gallant Ships, and Potent Armadaes have sailed by, and sunk, or
moulder'd away: this in the mean time without any variation.

It is like an Hour spent in highest Pleasure, no Moment, no Minute of which is
so much as felt. It is like a deep Contemplation, in which the Mind is so lost,
so retired from Body, that it reckons not any Motion, it keeps no account of
Time for it, nor observes whether any Time passed. It is like an undefinable
Point of Just now.

In the next place, to give the greater Light to Eternity, let us state the
Nature of Time. And Time, to speak substantially of it, is nothing but the
Coming of a Thing, or a World of Things into Being, that were not in Being
before. For this makes a new Note in what we conceive, as Duration: And
therefore when the World was made, the Scripture says, In the Beginning. There
was then a new Date, because there was something then, that had not been
before. In Whole Eternity there was nothing New; All was alike One.

Now these things coming in by the way of Change, viz. the exchange of the
State of Nothing, for the State of Existency, are also every Moment subject to
change, and in a continual hover up and down; and while all these things are
performing their Motion in their Changes and Vicissitudes, the Mind of Man
considering them under such a Mode or Circumstance of their Being, there arises
a Notion or Representation of that whole Space, which putting all together, we
call Time in the largest sense; of which, that in the Revelation of St. John
may fitly be understood, Time Rev. 10. 6.
shall be no more; all Change being consummate in the unmovable State of
Eternity. And while it considers their particular Flutters hither and thither,
it takes Measures of the more contingent and unsettled Motion of some, by the
more settled and stated Motion of others: of which the Heavenly Bodies, in their
constant Revolutions of Day and Night, Months and Years, are the supreme
Standard, and faithful Witnesses; which the same Divine expresses, by Time, and
Times, and Half a Time, Rev. 12. 14.
viz. as it is generally understood, a Year, two Years, and Half a Year; or, as
it is otherwise spoken, Forty two cap. 11. 2, 3.
Months, and A thousand two hundred and threescore days.

Below these, the Founding and Ruin of Monarchies, the Birth and Death of
Princes, make the Public Epochs, and give new Characters to Time, which the
Prophet Daniel calls the changing of Times and Seasons: Dan. 2. 21.
Even as these Changes in the Condition of Private Persons, make private and
particular Distinctions of it, in those Places and Families where they are
known and taken notice of: Of which David speaks, not only as a King, but in a
general Capacity, My Psalm (...)
Times are in thy hand.

If we could suppose all things then above us, round about us, within us, even
to a thought standing still, and no alteration, so much as in a thought; where
would be the Measure of Time? or what would be the account of it? or where
would it be at all?

The Being therefore of the Things of Time, or rather that project, and cast
Time, as a faint Shade from themselves, are made and fitted to move, and shift,
and alter; else there could be no Time: even as the Being of God, always the
same, gives us Eternity: else there could be none, but an Imaginary Duration,
as has been already asserted.

If any thing therefore in this World stands faster and longer than other, and
suffers no Change, it becomes a nearer Resemblance of Eternity, as the Hills
are called Everlasting Hills, and the Eternity of God condescends it self to
our Thoughts by compare with them: Before the Hills were Psalm. 90. 2.
brought forth, even from Everlasting to Everlasting, thou art God. Unmoved
Rocks are Rocks of Eternity: God himself is styled the Rock of Ages, Isa. 26. 4.
or Eternity.

Now Time, however full of Fluctuations it is in it self, can yet make no
disturbance upon Eternity, or at all affect it; all its various Shapes can
imprint no Change there: For whether we consider Eternity as One with God; As
our Savior speaks of Abraham, Before Abraham was, I am; so Joh. 8. 58.
it may be said of all the Particulars of Time, Before them, from everlasting
God is. His Being did not wait their coming into Being, nor does it lay down it
self, when they go out of their present Being: Thou Psalm. 90. 3.
(O God) turnest Man to destruction, and say, Return ye Children of Men: The
Heavens wax old as a Garment, Psalm. 102. 26, 27.
as a Vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed: But thou art
the same for ever, and of thy years there is no end. Or whether we consider
Eternity in a secondary Notion, and as we conceive it in Everlasting Duration;
it is always quiet and uninterrupted in the Divine Being: There is Duration,
without any shadow of change, which is the absolute Eternity, and gives the
most perfect Notion of it, and is no where to be found, but in God.

But Time, whether we understand it as that space of Duration in which these
Changeables are running their several Risques, it is incircled and comprehended
by Eternity, as a Drop by the Ocean, above it, within it, round about it: and
indeed it is but the same Duration, distinguished only by those Chequers and
Spots of Change upon it: Or if we understand by it the Creatures of Time, in
those their several Changes, they are created and upheld by the Eternal Power:
He that changes Times and Seasons, without any Variety in himself, rules and
governs them all, till at his command they surrender themselves back into that
Fixed State his Wisdom and Righteousness disposes them into for For Ever, to
which their Motion in this uncertain State prepares them.

Thus, as all things that move must have some certain and unshaken Bottom to
move upon; and things not self-subsistent, but dependent, must have some
independent Strength to rest upon: so fluid, and never-resting, weak Time, or
rather those moveable Beings that give it its Name, must be upheld by unshaken
and all-potent Eternity, to which they pay themselves, as their Great End: For
he by whom are all things, is the same with (...) 17.
him who was before all things, and for whom all things are: Yesterday, (...).
13. 8.
and to day, the same for ever.

Now to collect the Sum of this Explication of Eternity, and Time; it is this:
Eternity is stable and invariable, as the Divine Being that inhabits it, or
indeed is Eternity it self. Time, as it includes what we call Duration, is not
properly Time; for so it falls in with Eternity, as Created Being does with the
Ocean of Being Increated: but as it is in perpetual Change, so it is Time, and
so it falls in with the mutable Creatures, that reside upon it, and are indeed
in those Motions of Change allowed to them, the true substantial Time it self.

And all this speaks the substantialness of the Being of God, and the
Nothingness of all the Things of Time: For if Things had such a Being as they
could like and be contented with, and could continue in it, when they like it,
as long as they would, they would be always what they are: but because they are
neither strong enough to choose their Condition, nor to retain it, they continue
in every Condition, whether Good or Evil, just so long as is appointed by his
Pleasure who keeps Times and Seasons all in his own Acts 1. 7.
hand.

But, on the other side, the Eternity of God must needs be Blessedness and
Happiness: For Eternity expressing Absolute Being, Perfection of Being, Being
with all advantage; Being and Well-being conspire and meet in one in him, even
of necessity. The Apostle, in contemplation of this, adores God, the only
Blessed 1 Timothy 6. 15, 16.
and Happy Potentate; and subjoyns, who only has Immortality, and dwells in
that Light to which no Man can approach.

It is true, Created Beings may be Immortal, and yet miserable: that is,
because Created Being does not, as Increated, result from it self, nor is
Absolute Being; but is given, and upheld, and continued at the pleasure of the
Creator, and so receives variety of Condition, according to the Laws he has
set to it, while it is yet maintained in its Duration and Continuance; the
Favor or Displeasure of God, the Righteous or Unrighteous State of it, making
vast differences herein.

This then is the Eternity of God, his always alike Being, infinitely Happy,
infinitely Blessed. This is the Eternity of Jesus Christ the Son of God, the
Son of God eternally begotten, that though he proceeded and came forth from God
the Father, yet he made no new Date, no Beginning: Eternally begotten, without
the least shadow of turning, to denominate Time, as the Creatures do by
Beginning; but as a Beam from the Sun, as soon as it is, making no new thing in
the Sun; or as Apprehension from the Mind, as soon as the Mind is; or as the
immediate Image and Likeness of the Face, as early as the Face is: thus, and
infinitely more, even incomprehensibly, is Christ the Son of the Father,
coeternal with him. This is the Eternity of the Son of God; but what is the
Fathers Name, or what is his Sons Name in Eternity, none Pro. 30. 4.
can tell; for who can declare his generation? but, Before all things that were
made, and by being made, made a Beginning; before all things that beginning to
be, cast the shadow of Time; even before all things, is the Col. 1. 17.
Savior of the World; that is, he is Eternal.

Indeed, as he is the Son of Man, he gave great, and the greatest Characters to
Time it has, the richest Era and Epochs it has; His Incarnation, in dating
it self from which, Latter Time glories and triumphs; His Death and Passion,
his Resurrection and Ascension, His Appearance the second time from Heaven, to
give a Period to Time. Thus, as the Son of Man, he has enriched and ennobled
Time: But, as the Son of God, he only governs Time, that is, the Things of
Time, and changes Times and Seasons, by setting up, and pulling down what he
pleases; whence Time is variously imboss'd: but by any Change in himself, he
does not give the least Shade of Time.

The Eternity of Angels is much below this perfect, this absolute Eternity; for
they had a Beginning, they came out of the State of Not Being, into Being: but
this of Eternity they have, that their Being given them, continues for ever,
lasts for ever. Indeed even this Duration is not by any necessity of Nature, as
in the Son of God, the only begotten of the Father; for he can neither have
begun to be begotten, nor cease to be begotten, but it must make a Change in
God, a substantial Change. Thus also incomprehensibly stands the Eternity of
the Divine Spirit, proceeding Eternally from the Father and the Son: But the
Everlastingness of Angels has its certainty from the Purpose of God
unchangeable concerning it.

Further, Their Eternity is not like to the Eternity of the Divine Being, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, in that as they received a Beginning, so
there was a Space wherein their Condition was alterable, as appears by the Fall
of some, and the generally received Confirmation of others: And that it is
alterable in Degrees, may be argued by their daily increase in Knowledge,
Additions to which Good Angels receive from the Church, while they stoop down
to look into the things of the Gospel; daily Experience in both sorts;
Increases of Glory to the Holy ministering Spirits, as a Reward of their
Ministry; Aggravations of Punishment to the Fallen Angels, for their many and
great Hostilities to God, his Son, and Servants: The Complement therefore of
either State, is not till the Day of Judgment be past.

These things already spoken, lead to the Description of the Eternity of the
Souls of Men, consisting in three things.

1. That they shall continue for ever in Being, the unchangeable Decree of God
upholding them in a never-ending Existence.

2. That the Substance of their Condition shall never be altered; upon which
account the Scripture often speaks of a For Ever, as a Happiness incorruptible,
and that fades 1 Pet. 1. 4.
not away; on the other side, of Eternal Punishment, of a Worm that never Mat.
25. 46. Marc. 9. 44.
dies, a Fire that is never quenched: All which speak, as much as Words can
convey to us, such an unchangeable State.

3. There is no Interruption or Alteration in the Degrees of their State; there
are no Marks of Distinction, that these Souls should say, Now more happy, now
less happy; Now more miserable, now less miserable: But as highest Delight
takes away all sense of the Motion of Time in this Life, and as sense of
extreme Pain makes an Hour like an Age; how much more in Eternity does the
Perfection of Happiness, and the Extremity of Misery, the substantialness and
absoluteness of either State, swallow up all Notes of Distinction? God is no
more Happy by any addition of Moments we suppose in the Duration of his
Happiness; (I say, we suppose) for indeed he is his own Happiness, and his own
Duration. So in proportion, this State is its own Duration, Heaven one entire
united Moment of endless Delight, Hell of Misery.

1. Now this State of the Souls of Men in Eternity arises, first, from the
fitness such a Nature as Man's Soul is of, that is, a Spiritual Nature, (as I
have already discoursed) to be Everlasting: A Nature which God has with
Infinite Wisdom and Power contrived to be a resemblance of himself. Thus the
Heavens, as they are more durable, are also of choicer Matter, and less
corruptible, than other Parts of the Creation: And those things that by God are
designed for For Ever, are made so perfectly agreeable to their State, that
they need not be altered; as if a Vessel of purest Metal were made so
substantial, that it could suffer no change in the Quantity, Weight, Figure,
Oriency of it, either by Fire, Hammer, or the several Accidents that fall out
in length of Time; nor that there could be so much as a possible Reason to
desire the change of it.

2. From the Will of God, and his unchangeable Decree, that it should be so;
which he makes good and effectual by continually feeding these Beings with
Eternity; that is, from himself he sends them all the Powers of Life and
Motion: So that to ask, When shall these Souls, and the several States of them,
in Happiness or Misery, have end? is to ask, When will a Stream be dry, that is
fed by a Fountain that can never be exhausted, nor the Supply of it be possibly
cut off from that Stream? His Favor is an Eternal Principle of Life and
Blessedness; His Presence of Wrath, and the Glory of his Power set against us,
is as great a Source of Misery and Torment. While therefore he will uphold our
Beings and Faculties, and keep up their Motion, so long they must be; and while
he pleases either to shine out graciously upon us, or to dart against us the
Lightning of his Displeasure, so long we must be either happy, or miserable:
And when either of these is done, to the height and perfection of either, as
they are in the World to come, then according to the Revelation of his Will,
guided with that Wisdom by which he has weighed out all things, they are to be
For Ever. For the most Perfect of all Things now, and that are absolutely the
highest of his Creation, that is, Spirits; and that which is the Top of their
Condition, as that to which the Last Judgment affixes them is, are designed by
God for For Ever.

3. The proper Exercises of Man's Soul, which are in Understanding,
Righteousness, Holiness, declare the designment of it for Eternity. For these
things being such evident Beams from the Divine Glory and Being, cannot die;
and those Natures that have their Action placed in them, are thence argued
Immortal. For seeing these things in themselves, in their pure and abstract
Notions, are unchangeable; the Soul being a Seat so peculiarly dedicated to
them, and immediately fitted for them, and a very Principle of them, as made by
God; it is a very great presumption of its Eternal State.

There remains nothing I intend further touching this Vastness of Eternity,
(concerning which, all Discourse is but as the drop of the Bucket, or the small
dust of the Balance; nothing, and less than nothing) but more clearly to exalt
the Eternity of God, above that of his Everlasting Creatures; and to fall into
Practical Meditations upon Everlasting Duration.

1. It is in the first place certain, No Created Being has an Eternity before
Time: Of God only, and of no Created Being, can it be said, It never began,
Thus it always was, It never made any new Date: From Everlasting to Everlasting
only God is; Of him only it can be said, He was Ever, as he is, and is to
come.

2. Of no Creature can it be said, absolutely, or in regard of it self, (though
it be in its Everlasting State) It must be, or It must be thus, It can be no
otherwise: It can be only said so, upon account of the unchangeable Decree of
God. There is a high agreeableness in the Nature of Spirits to Be; but this, It
must be, is only proper to God. Of him only to acknowledge, He may be, is (as
has been said) to infold our selves in a positive Assurance, He is, and must
be. He is no precarious Being; not a Being at the Free Will of any; no Chance
Being; not a convenient Being only; A Being, of which it may be said, It is
better, and best he should be; though this be true, and that infinitely. But he
is an Infinitely necessary Being; His Being is the First, the Eternal, the
Fundamental Verity.

3. He only is his own Eternity: He alone lifts up his Hand to the Heaven,
Deuteronomy. 32. 40.
and says, I live for ever; He lifts it up in the Triumph and Power of Being:
All Creatures depend upon his Eternity; Himself, and his Eternity are One;
Himself is Eternity, and Eternity is himself. To speak otherwise of Eternity,
is only to speak as children, to speak out of weak apprehension to weak
apprehension: In the Perfect State, we shall put away these childish things
from us. A Creature cannot be said with propriety to be Eternal; but in a low
Sense, in a Sense expressing Gods Communication of himself. The Creature's
Everlasting is measured by God's Eternity: His own Being is the only
unmeasurable Measure, the unaccountable Account of his Eternity; even as his
Righteousness, Truth, Omnipotency, are all Himself; and there are no other of
these, but himself, and his Communications: Even so is his Eternity.

Into what lowest and most profound Meditation 1.
Adorations of the Divine Being should the Thought of Eternity cast us? Oh
infinitely rich and amazing Perfection of Being, Life, and Blessedness! What
can be worthy of our Thoughts, but thy self only! What are all the Creatures
of this World, compared with thee, but despicable, and even to be abhorred
Nothings! Why do we not always gaze with humblest and most astonishing, yet
most delightful and ravishing admiration upon thee! If we could stand near, and
behold Angelical Glories and Heights, not as thy Servants here have done in
Bodily unfitness, but in the Freedom of Spirits; and then compare with thy
infinitely surmounting Glory, we should even disdain (while yet we honor and
value them as thy Creatures of the highest Order, as Thrones and Dominions
under thee) to interrupt our Adorations of thee, to worship them; and see what
reason they have to cover their Faces before thee, and that thou may charge
the loftiest Seraph with Folly: Their Longeve State would shrink into a Moment
old, comparing it with thy never-beginning Eternity; and that Being of theirs,
which compared with Mortality seems so substantial, would appear, if brought
near to thee, but a Shadow, which thy Being casts upon them; at the highest,
but a Beam from thy Splendor. Let our Souls never cease beholding and
contemplating thee, till we lose our selves, and All things; till we find all
again in thy most Blessed and Eternal self; in thy Son, the substantial Image
of thy Eternity; in thy Spirit, eternally breathing from and resting in thy
self.

Yet let us put that Value upon our selves, that thou have put upon us, in
communicating with us such a Beam of thy Eternity, in making us Spirits, in
resolving us for an unchangeable, and unalterable State.

2. This teaches us the Vanity, Folly, and even Ridiculousness of Atheistical
Scoffers, that dream thus, Why did not God create the World sooner? Why did his
Wisdom, Power, Goodness, sleep so many Ages, ere it began to manifest it self,
and make the World? As if Eternity had Sooner, and Later; as if that infinitely
extended, unbounded, changeless State, both backward and forward, arising to us
immediately and necessarily from the consideration of God, could be called to
account by the Measures of Time. If the World had been Millions of Years older
than it is, there had still been an Eternity before it: A Being, with whom a
thousand years are but as yesterday, when it is past. Nor is there any thing
more requisite in Time, but that the Creatures of it should run the Race set
them by the Infinite Creator, and so fix in their unchangeable Condition.

3. We should often reason with our selves, We are made for this unchangeable,
endless State; and if it be not Happiness, how then can we endure it? this
stable, never-altering State! We find now all Confinement, though not to Pain,
but only to one Posture, to one Place, to one Company, to one Action, tedious;
this is, because we find not a perfect enjoyment of Good in them: We are even
weary of Pleasures, because they are but thin and shallow: Even of those things
that at the first we wish our selves a Perpetuity in, we afterward grow weary,
and they are tiresom to us, because we come suddenly to all that is in them.

Divine Things are burdensome to us, because, though they have endless Delights,
yet our Faculties are not suited nor raised enough to them: Nay, those things
that are grateful to the Sensual Appetite, yet if they surcharge it, are not
its Pleasure, but its great Disease. O therefore how little shall we be able to
endure one Posture of Misery for ever! most adverse to all our Faculties, and
yet they so raised and held up, as perfectly to take in and endure that Misery;
and that Misery so extracted and spirituous, as to penetrate them throughout;
and not coming in by Drops, and lesser Rivulets; but Eternity, being all alike,
crowds in upon every Moment: whereas now either the Torment is dulled and
rebated, or instilled and proportioned by such a Succession, as carries hope of
Change; or, if it be extreme, it presently does all it can do; for it consumes
what it has to work upon.

On the other side, How great is the Happiness of Eternity! One smooth, plain,
undisturbed Blessedness, without any diversity, For Ever! The highest
Faculties, in their perfectest State, gratified with highest Enjoyment!
Faculties so strong, that they cannot flag; the Enjoyment so unfathomable, that
we can never feel Bottom in it! One Moment of endless Pleasure! A Moment; for
it has no Tediousness: A Moment; for it has no Change, but is all one, and
yet it is endless and eternal: An Eternity, the Duration of which we cannot so
much as take notice of, being in one Ecstasie of Enjoyment.

When we see miserable Men and Women, going up and down the World, living and
dying without any Observation, it damps the sense of these things; and who
would think, that such are prepared for such an unchangeable State? But how
strange is it, that Men hearing so often of Immortality out of the Gospel, and
that there is so much in their own Souls resounding to it, that they are not
Men concerned to lay hold upon Eternal Life, and to fly from the Wrath that is
to come! Let us look upon this great Level Ocean, that has not so much as one
Wave of Change rising up in it; this huge and vast Champaign, swelling with no
Hills, sinking with no Dales.

And this know, Men may go down to Hell in a moment, thinking they die, and end
together: They may perish without feeling it beforehand, or so much as a
Conceit about it: But whoever are saved by Christ, they perceive themselves
Immortal; Christ 2 Timothy 1. 10.
brings Life and Immortality to light in their Souls, and kindles the sense of
it within them; those to whom he gives Eternal Life, they find this Life begin
in the apprehensions they have now of Eternity.

4. O how vain are those troublesome turmoiling Thoughts and Cares we have about
Time, and the Things of it! Trundling, rolling, wheeling Time, that has no
continuance, that is so made on purpose; the Things that cast it are so weak,
that they are restless in their sudden Changes. O Wheel! as it was cried out in
Ezekiel: Ezekiel. 10. 13.
O changing Time, every Moment something differing! Let us only mind it, as it
has reference to Eternity; for therein it is only of moment: Eternity, that
bears it up, it self unconcerned in its changeableness, yet receives it into it
self, and swallows it up in it self.

5. How necessary is it to change, while we may, from Sin to God? to take the
advantage of Time, in the true Conversion of our selves to God, seeing Eternity
endures no Change? To be wicked in our Eternal State, is Wickedness
unalterable; there are no Reviews or Amendments there. To turn, is the
Advantage offered to Sinners within Time: In Eternity Repentance finds no
place. On the other side, Eternal Life is Love of God, Delight in Holiness,
without end. The Motions of Spirits in Eternity are so swift and perpetual one
way, that there is not the least Moment to design a Change in: A Motion that is
always one and the same, and is a Rest, while a Motion: Even as the most rapid
Motion of a Globe round, that is so swift and rapid, that it is not discerned;
and so even and just, that it looks like standing still. So is the State of
Eternity, Action to the height, and most unalterable.

What I have hitherto discoursed of the Soul, has tended chiefly to illustrate
it in those things that do immediately concern its Natural Perfections, or its
very Being, and the Privileges it therein has, as it was made in the Image of
the Divine Being, and its Perfections. For, that it is an Invisible Spirit,
Immaterial, Immortal, of such mighty Operations, and vehement Motions, is of
immediate Relation to its Being, simply considered. Now these Excellencies of
the Soul I have endeavored so to abstract, in the Discourse of them, that they
might appear (so far as is possible) in their so abstract and distinct
Consideration: and yet, as the very Thread and Nature of the Thing led me, I
have taken care to follow their close and inseparable Connection, or, (to speak
more truly) their perfect Union or Sameness with Intellect; and to observe the
Operations to be the same with Intellectual and Moral Operations, that flow
from an Understanding: To which purpose I have labored in this Assertion, That
such a Being as the Soul of Man is, must be an Understanding; and such
Operations as those proper to Man's Soul, must be Intellectual Operations,
however clouded and obscured, while in the Body.

But I shall now address my self more fully to treat of the Soul, as it is this
Intellectual Spirit, in its Intellectuality or Intelligency it self; and of its
Intellectual and Moral Operations, wherein it is universally acknowledged to be
made in the Image of God: So that the former Parts of the Discourse described,
what a kind of Being, and of what exalted Motion this Intellect or
Understanding is; and that an Intellect can be no less than such a Being; or,
no less a Being than such a one, and of such a Motion, can be an Understanding;
and that such a Being, so moving, must be, can be no less, can be no other than
an Understanding. What now follows, shall be designed more closely to discover
what the Intellectuality of this Great Being, and its Self-motion are; or what
Understanding it self, and the Motions of Understanding are. In which pursuit,
I will first make some display upon this great Matter, in that frequent
Resemblance of it by Light, the Scripture so much delights to use concerning it.

The Spirit of a Man is the Candle Prove. 20. 27.
of the Lord, shining into and searching the innermost parts of the Belly. The
Soul of Man, as it is an Understanding, is a great Light reflected upon it self.

This is the Soul, a Beam from the Sun, a Candle lighted from the Light of
Heaven; and the Light of this Candle is ever streaming out, and reflowing upon
it self; like a Diamond always playing with, and in its own Light: It may be
covered over, and hid; it may be masqued with the thickness and grosness of
Earthly Vapors from Body: but it is inseparable from its Nature, to be Light:
It cannot but in some degree shine, and send out it self, though its Beams be
but pale and wan; but when it has any greater freedom, or when it
industriously and resolvedly moves it self, there is a Circle of Rays about it,
that have broken out from it self. In its Creation, in its Native Splendor, to
allude to that of the Prophet, It was an anointed Cherub upon Ezekiel. 28. 13, 14.
the Holy Mountain of God; it walked up and down in the midst of the Stones of
Fire, and every Precious Stone was its Ornament: It was of an Angelical
Brightness, near to God; and Divine Glories, and all the Excellencies of
Understanding, were its proper Luster: and in Eternity it will again rend all
its Clouds, and shine without interruption, and For Ever.

The Soul of Man is a Light begotten of the Father of Lights, and the James 1.
17. Heb. 12. 9.
Father of Spirits. Lights and Spirits explain one another; for Rational and
Intellectual Spirits, and their Intellectual Accomplishments, are all Lights.

The Increated and All-creating Spirit is the Father of them, with whose
perfect Light there is no variation, nor shadow of turning. He is Light, as
well in that as he is All-understanding, as All-pure; and in him is 1 John 1. 5.
no Darkness at all, either of Ignorance, or Unrighteousness.

The Son of God is The Light. To the All-knowing Spirit the Light shines John
1. 7, 8. Psalm. 139. 12.
as the Day: The Darkness and the Light are both alike to him, because Himself
is All Light.

The Angels are Seraphims, shining and burning Lights; He makes his Angels
Spirits, his Ministers a Flame of Fire.

The Life of the Souls of Men, that is, their Life of Reason, is Light lighted
from the Son of God; for his Life communicating it self, is the Light of Men;
He is that True Light, John. 1. 9.
that inlightneth every Man that comes into the World.

Light then being chosen by the Divine Wisdom, as the most easy and familiar
Conveyance of the Nature and Excellency of Spirits in general, as they are
Intellects; and particularly, of Man's Soul, as it is an Understanding: Let us
consider the principal Sense and Intention, avoiding the Notices of lower and
collateral Similitude, between Light, and the Soul of Man.

That which will best conduct us to our main purpose, is the Description the
Apostle gives us of Light, That it makes manifest; For whatever (says Ephesians. 5.
13.
he) makes manifest, is Light: To which our own Experience fully agrees; for we
can make no Discovery nor Judgment of Things, but by Light, that expounds all
things to us, and is the first and plainest Commentary upon Nature. When we
therefore say, Man's Soul is a great Light reflected upon it self, we speak
this Sense.

The Understanding of Man manifests, and lays open, and makes known within the
Soul, and within it self (for it self is the Soul) whatsoever is known to the
Soul; or the understanding of man is that, which discovers and discloses to it
self all that is known to it; for thus our Savior says, The light of the body
is the Eye, because it receives the light, and sees by it; so the Understanding
is the Eye of the Soul; and further it is its own light, so that it is its own
Eye and its own Light; but the manner and way how this is to be understood, and
by which the Understanding discharges this great Function, is of further
enquiry.

There can be no doubt of the thing it self, for besides the great proofs the
Soul of man has given hereof in those many successful Experiments it has made
in all kinds of knowledge, even those that have denied a Soul distinct from
Body and Matter, in its Essence, yet cannot but acknowledge, There is some
excellent motion in man, by which he understands and perceives more than the
Beasts of the Field. There is in some sense or other A Spirit in man, and the
breath of the Almighty gives them understanding.

This then being out of doubt, let us consider the infinity of Divine
Knowledge, and so attain the measures of Humane Understanding in the
resemblances of him, in whose likeness it was made. We read of the Son of God
the true Light, that he perceived Mark 2. 8.
in his own Spirit the thoughts of men. The Son of God, an omniscient Spirit
knows all things in the light of his own Spirit, in that infinite understanding
essential to him; created Spirits, the Souls of men, having a measure of this
perfection, a communication of it, though not as Christ, may also in a degree
perceive in and by their own Spirit.

God then understands all things within himself, he being all Eye, all Light,
able perfectly to see into, and comprehend all things, that either are, or are
possible to be, or that can possibly stand in the place of Object, and all this
within himself. For himself being fully known to himself, as an infinitely
seeing and self-reflected eye; other things that are or may be, are also within
himself, as the original of all Being and Motion: And as his own Understanding
and Contrivance what they should be, and his pleasure they should be what he
contrived them, gave them being and motion; and there is no other way of being
and motion; thus and on this account, and infinitely beyond what we can
conceive and express, God knows what is, what is done by the virtue that is in
himself, and continually goes out of himself; so that by virtue of himself
perfectly known to himself, all other things are perfectly known to himself
also, Thus known to God are all his Works from the foundation Act. 15. 18.
of the World: Even to him who is all Eye, all Light, all Object, and before
whose infinite eye all things stand present at once, as one single point, so
naked and open that they are all perfect surface and outside, while it self
rests on them.

The Soul made in this Image, is in its degree Eye and Light, an intellectual
Eye, an intellectual Light. The motions of the reasoning contemplating Soul are
like the motions of the Sun, an illuminating motion, light and sparkles fly
out: the openings of its faculties are like the openings of the Eyelids of the
morning, like some Eyes that see in the dark, by their own fire; for what can
the motions of an Understanding, Conscience, Reason, intellectual Memory be,
but moral and intellectual Light? Its very self is its Eye, and its motion its
enlightened air. Thus it bears the Image of the Divine Understanding in its
visive power. And that it may in some lower degrees perceive in its own Spirit,
we may very rationally suppose; there are some fundamental Ideas, some Images,
some Notions or Verities pourtrayed upon, and given to the Soul, that are as so
many rays from the Father of Lights and Truth, and make it like the Eye full of
Light; and it being natural to the Soul to move it self, (at least as soon as
ever it is excited by Object from without) it first makes a survey upon things
abroad, with the observation of which it immediately retires into it self, to
find what is within, and when ever the Soul thus moves through the intimacy of
these to it, they move also, and result to the Soul; upon this their appearance
to the Soul, the Soul reasons about them, judges of them, and finding their
close connection with it self, establishes, and settles them, as assured
principles, of which it cannot doubt, having an immediate native power to
discern, and approve them upon their appearance to it self, and its own
actuation of it self upon them; and so they become to it in speculation and
enquiry foundations to build all further knowledge and assurance upon. By these
the Soul takes its measures, and finds out the proportion of things at further
distances from it, and reduces them under its own cognizance and jurisdiction;
it makes its searches into those Objects that strike it from without, according
to those Tests of Truth it has within; and these are the (...) so much spoken
of in speculation or science, and in things that pertain to practice, and that
(...), that Law written in the Heart, the Law of Romans 2. 14, 15.
Nature, the Soul hereby becoming a Law to it self.

The Soul then encompassed with these Beams trys all things in the Light of its
own Countenance, and judges of them there, in some lower proportions of
likeness to God; I say in some lower proportions, for whereas the Divine
Understanding comprehends all things within it self, in the Souls of men we do
not suppose these Notions to extend further, than to those things that do
intimately concern the perfection and happiness of man's Being, being either
such as do immediately fit it for the enjoyment of God, the true estimation of,
and care for it self, the Duties of intrinsic goodness toward men; or are the
necessary foundations of all Knowledge, and so prepare it for intellectual
advances. So that as to the perfection of Divinity pertains Omnisciency,
resulting from his Nature or Universal Being; so to the perfection of man's
Being is required a Science, though of a much narrower sphere than Gods; even
as the Being of Man is infinitely narrower than the Being of God.

And although it be allowed to Humane Understanding to examine and search into
all other things, that are beyond the Confines of it self, yet exposed to it by
God, either in his Word or Works, and to aspire to some imitation of the
Knowledge of God, it can notwithstanding do it only by pursuits of Reason,
knitting one principle to another, and deriving one thing from another, and all
this in a way of treaty with the things, and reflecting them within that great
mirror of it self, to it self, and so understanding them as far as it can; not
as God, who sees all things as in one view, and within himself, yet to the
perfection of Knowledge, even to the utmost that things can be known.

In the second place, Although I cannot see, how the Soul can judge of things
without such a standard, such a principle, connatural to it, by which it may
examine all things, if there be not something within, that answers to the
offertures from without; and what can that be so well, as certain hidden
Characters of Truth, created with the Soul, that immediately leap up at the
first salutation of Things from abroad, and do more plainly discover themselves
upon farther Treaties? Yet if any will allow no more, than a power of
discerning and judging of things, of which I have already spoken, and will have
it, that all the Soul has to work by is this only, and all it has to work
upon are the Objects offered from without to it by sense; from which it
receives in all appearances, and by its motions upon them searches and finds
out their Natures, and stays the Images of them in it self, as Sense has taken
them, till it can understand them; we will not dispute, but suppose, that as
God brought before Adam the several Creatures to see what he would call them,
therein recommending them to that Soul he had so newly breathed from himself,
that, in that yet unstained and unsullied Light, they might be discerned and
pronounced of; so are the several things in the world first exposed to the
Senses, and by them recommended from hand to hand, till they are brought into
the very presence of the Soul, and there, though not with that speed, ease,
clearness, and certainty, as at first, yet are perceived, comprehended, and
judged of by it; and from this considering and understanding things arise
speedily some standard principles of Truth, which being settled, advance it in
its aspirings to further knowledge and notices of Things.

3. The Soul is a great Receptacle of all that Light, that is offered to it
from without, it is prepared in its nature to be kindled and illustrated by all
Rational Proposes, either from God the highest Understanding, from Angels by
Divine Appointment, from representations of Reason, proposed by one man to
another, either by speaking or writing; so that all the Knowledge former Ages
have derived upon these that come after, and all the Monuments of Learning that
have been set in any time or part of the World, and the mutual Conversation
that Learned men have one with another, increase this Light: Thus the
Understandings of men are as so many Torches enlightening and enflaming one
another.

This way of exciting Reason and Understanding to its proper motion, and
action, and so heightening it to its native splendor, seems the most plain,
general, and experimental: and though all such addresses suppose that inward
power and virtue of the mind, and by their success prove there is such a one;
yet it must be confessed, the Understanding of Man does commonly lie dead, till
it be in this manner raised: And therefore it may be acknowledged, that the
great Learning and Knowledge that is in the World, has been at first by
instruction, or inward representation from God to Man's Soul, and from Men so
instructed to those that have received from them by the same way of discipline
and instruction.

Yet this derogates no farther from the inward and native power of Man's Soul,
than to acknowledge that the motions of it are suppressed by Bodily
obstruction, and slumbred by that ignorance which is fallen as an unnatural
dimness upon it, degrading it because of sin, from which it is yet vindicated
by earnest and vehement stirring it self; but this dimness is also accompanied
with a lothness to stir at all, or at least not with such an earnestness as is
necessary, except it be some way incited, awakened, and encouraged; and the
most usual and fit way is that of Instruction; which does at the same time lay
together the hidden, and almost buried sparks, and also blow them up into a
light flame; for which reason we commit the minds of Children early to Masters
and Tutors, who may draw out and sharpen this Understanding. And yet to show
Understanding has its force from it self, and not from Instruction, Teachers
are often exceeded by those whom they have taught. Sometimes Instruction is but
a short hint or intimation to the Soul, quick of apprehension, that presently
enlarges much further upon it; and many Instances there are of those, who have
cut their own way to Knowledge, and such a one as has been altogether
untrodden before them. Notwithstanding this, the advantage of Instruction is
evident, and most evident in that part of Knowledge, which concerns us toward
God, the Knowledge of his gracious Intentions toward us, and our Duty to him;
wherein Divine Revelation has been always the first, and is ever the most sure
and undoubted Guide.

Yet even in this the Spirit of Man is the Candle of the Lord: For God does
not, that he may make known himself, create any new Understanding; but applies
himself in Grace to his first Creation, the Soul of Man, of which there is no
abolition by Divine Illumination; but, as the Scripture speaks of the Sun, the
Light of it grows sevenfold: The Candle that burnt dim, and was even choked
up, is trimmed, and becomes Light on all sides, and sends out its Beams from
every part.

The Sum then is this: The Soul of Man is the same Candle of the Lord, whose
Natural Power of Understanding is raised and made more clear by the Irradiation
of Instruction, whether the Power be an innate Force of Trying and Judging of
Things by it self, as it is a Faculty able to try and judge by the Nature of
its Being, or by some implanted Sentiments given to it with its Being, or by
Maxims to be collected by it self through the ministry and mediation of Sense.

However these things be, it is always of the Nature of Understanding, that
there be a Resentment and Feeling of the agreeableness of Truth to it self:
There must be a Knowing in its own Spirit, by every Intelligence, the
Reasonableness and Verity of the Things proposed, or there can be no
Understanding.

Even Faith it self is an Intellectual, that is, an Explicit, not an Implicit
Act; else it would be but a mere childish Memory of what has been received, as
Catechism: But all true Acts of Understanding have a Taste and Relish; and what
is proposed to Mind, must have a Gustfulness to it: Knowledge and Faith not at
all differing in this, but only that in things of Knowledge, the Understanding
arrives at that Knowledge, or at least acquiesces in it, upon Grounds more its
own; in things of Faith, by Assurances more out of it self, yet having
Instruments of its own for the acceptance of such, when so offered; Characters
and Tests within it self, of what is offered, whether it be worthy to be
believed; Resentments within it self of Pleasure or Trouble, according to the
Quality of what it has received, when so offered.

To draw all this that has been spoken, to what is mainly to be intended, that
is, That the Understanding is the Candle of the Lord, especially lighting us to
himself: Let us therefore inquire after some Principles that are Standards in
the great Concernments we have with God; which whether they are settled in the
Soul by the Hand that created it, or do immediately result from the Observation
of Things without, improved by the Mind, running through its own Circuits and
Trains of Reason concerning them; or whether it is led into them by the
Instructions God is still giving into the World; or whether all these concur to
their establishment in the heart of Man; yet they are such, as are universally
consented in, and are the Foundation of Religious Practice, and also such a
Receptacle for supernatural Revelation, that there it may be tasted,
acknowledged, and savoured as Divine; with these, as with a Helm, the great
Governor of Spirits turns them whither soever he lists, either for
Conviction or Conversion, Repentance and Reformation; or (as he pleases) to
Self-condemnation: And all the boisterousness of their contrary affections are
overrul'd and controlled hereby. Such Principles I esteem these Four.

be an Understanding in Motion and Activity, but there must be a sight, a
conception, an apprehension of such a Being as God; as the Eye cannot open, but
it sees the Light; or if it seems to lie hid, yet upon the least collision, as
between the Flint and Steel, upon any conflict of Thought with it self, or with
the Propose of this Truth from without, this Light breaks forth: It is manifest
in men, because God has showed it to them; Romans 1. 19.
that is, In the very making them Souls he has set it in them: In the first
solemn action of the Understanding, the acknowledgment of a Supreme Being
rebounds and leaps up to them; the Soul no sooner sees any thing by inward
sense, but it sees God the Author, as a Man that sees the impression in the Wax
presently thinks of the Seal: Many Men endeavor to reject and disannul this
Principle, but they cannot deface it, much less wear out the apprehension. And
when the Soul has considered further, and more vehemently, the more it
reasons, the more it confirms, and settles it self in the assurance of the
Divine Being; even when it endeavors to Reason out this Belief of it, it
prevails the more: And besides what it has within concerning God, The
invisible Things V. 20.
of him from the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by
the Things that are made and done; even his eternal Power and Godhead. So that
the Soul can neither consider without nor within but it sees God.

that teaches us more than the Beasts of the Field: Every man must say, There
is a Spirit in Man above any other Creature, a force and excellency of Motion,
the Motion of Reason and Understanding: No Man can stir, but he finds, There is
a Breath of the Almighty that gives him Understanding.

Now these two Principles, as they do mutually enlighten one another, so they
give great and illustrious light to all holy Practice; they enlighten
themselves; for he that apprehends a God, whose very Being is absolute
Perfection, retires out of all things bodily and weak, to conceive aright of
him, and find him out; and when he is thus understood, the Notion of an
inferior and subordinate Spirit that yet has a likeness to him, is easy: And
whoever finds out in himself a diviner part than Body, has an easy ascent to
God, in whom all the lesser Perfections of his own Being are transcended, and
at the height. And how do they both shine upon holy Practice, seeing God is the
great both Exemplar and Argument of all Goodness! And no Man can suppose
himself to have received such great powers of Understanding for mean, much less
unworthy ends, but that he should be holy, and like God by them.



the Images of these can never be wiped out, but even when it seems to be
persuaded otherwise, yet it is still encountered with these appearances: The
Soul is so imprinted with these Notions, that it can never look into it self,
but it finds them, and they are the very light of its Countenance, which it
cannot but see, and see by, whenever it acts it self.

And by these Principles, either created with Man, or further communicated to
him, he tryes and searches, and is able to discern the things offered to him by
God; for I am fully persuaded, there is no greater trial, nor assurance of
Revelation, than the Principles of Natural Religion, cleared and confirmed by
that Revelation, giving a lasting and settled assurance to the mind in its
coolest and most quiet debates, after it has been alarmed, and approached by
Miracles.

By these a Man is able to move yet further, into the concatenations and
connexions of Truth with Truth, and judges by them, as a Touchstone within it
self; and being aided and assisted by the Spirit of God, the Spirit of Man
becomes a much higher Light: For by that higher illumination of the Supreme
Light, the Spirit of God, It judges (as the Apostle 1 Cor. 2. 15.
says) all things; searches into all points of Knowledge, tryes and examines,
determines and pronounces of every Thing proposed to it either by God or Men;
Yet it self is judged by no Man; that is, No Man is able to give a clear and
perfect account of it in this life, either in its Nature as a Spirit, or its
gracious state, as renewed by the Spirit of God. But in Eternity, this Lamp,
thus enlightened by Grace, shall perfectly shine out and break forth; It shall
be as the Stars of the Firmament, full of greatest Glory and most comfortable
Influence: They that be wise, shall shine Dan. 12. 3.
as the Firmament and Stars, and as the Sun; that is, This Lamp shall shine out
with all the addition of Light and Luster, Oriency and Beauty, both of
Knowledge and Purity, Glory and Happiness. If it be not thus; it will be as a
Firebrand, as a Furnace of enraged Fire, as a flaming Torch tormented with its
own Light, and tortured without end in its own Flame.

For this Light of the Soul is the very Light of Heaven; it is a Light that is
Divine, and can never be put out; It is a Beam of that Light, and cannot be
quenched. The Soul in its own Essence is a Spark from Heaven, like the Light of
a Diamond, a substance so solid, that it cannot corrupt nor moulder. The Light
of Truth shining in these Principles is Divine, and of Eternal Truth: These
with their Consequences are always true; even as those acknowledged Principles
of Science, which all Understandings do, and must acknowledge.

The Soul then being a Light so unquenchable, (more lasting than those Lamps of
ancient Times, that have been found burning many Ages after) and the Principles
of Truth inlaid into its very Essence, being as lasting as it; there must be
ever a luster of Glory and Happiness about it, or a Blaze of Torment, according
to the sense the Soul has of its friendship with God, and the Light he has
enlightened it with, or the enmity and resistance it has made thereunto; for
accordingly this Light is again friendly, and the God of it gracious to the
Soul; and, in the just indignation of that God, the Light also, seeing it can
neither be friendly nor extinguished, must needs vex and amaze, like an angry
Light that scorches and dazles together.

Thus I have discovered the first part, That the Soul is a Light. The second
part is, That this Light is reflected; It is the Candle of the Lord, searching
the innermost parts of the Belly; that is, Turning it self inward upon all the
secrets and retirements of a Man.

This Light is a Light not only shining forward, and looking into things
without, but shining backward, and looking upon it self: So far as the Soul
goes back, so far this Light goes back upon, and into it self.

The Soul may be resembled to that Breast Plate of Vrim and Thummim, upon
Aarons Heart; the Vrim, as Lights, discerning Things abroad; and the Thummim,
as perfection or sincerity, judging the goodness and integrity of it self.

This Light is not only reciprocated with it self, after the manner of an
Understanding, but after the manner of a Conscience.

Both ways it differs from the Sun and Stars; they shine, but they do not know
upon what they shine, they bring home no light or observation, concerning all
those things upon which they shine: Herein the Soul differs as an
Understanding; for it confers with it self concerning all things, upon which
its Light shines.

Again, The Sun and Stars they shine, but do not know they shine, nor can
reflect upon themselves, as such Bodies of Light and Glory; nor can they at all
judge of themselves, or what they do, how glorious they are, or what spots are
upon them, when they are shadowed or eclipsed, or when they shine in their full
Luster: Herein they differ from the Soul, as a Conscience.

The Soul knows it knows, as well as what it knows, it cannot but know and feel
it knows, and is especially knowing of it self, and its own Motions: Thus it
excels Natural Light, yet Light gives some resemblance hereof; Light comes into
a Room, it comes in at one end of the Room and leaps to the other, it leaps
back again, and shines in its own face: The Soul is this through-light, which
meets it self, and reciprocates with it self, incircles it self within it self.
This is the Soul which shines upon, and back, into and within, and round about
it self.

As to instance first in the Light of Direction it gives: It knows that it
knows what is to be done. When the Soul has shined to it self concerning doing
good, and avoiding sin, it knows it has done so; and God will challenge men
upon their own Knowledge, and they will never be able to deny their Knowledge:
No man can deny his Knowledge to God, or to himself, even as a man cannot deny
his Knowledge to another man, that knows his Knowledge together with him; much
less to God, or to himself, who are so perfectly acquainted with him, and all
his ways: For the Soul in all cases is made to shine in its own Face, and the
secrets of it are in the greater Light of Gods Countenance.

2. For Conviction of what a man is and has done: Every man must confess, and
cannot deny his own Actions; a man must confess, and cannot deny his own
Actions to himself, nor a general Character of himself to himself; every man is
accused or defended by his own Knowledge: Every man knows his own sincerity,
good intention, good action, and is conscious of the contrary: Hence the
condemnation and the horror a man receives within himself, and so the comfort
and joy of a man, is clear and certain; The heart knows its own sickness Prove.
14. 10.
and its own joy, and a stranger cannot intermeddle with either, he cannot
interpose against the judgment of the Soul upon it self; This is our 2 Cor. 1.
12.
rejoicing, the testimony of our Conscience. A man proves himself, and Galat.
6. 4.
his own work, and has rejoicing in his own good sense of himself, or trouble
in his own Censure, and not in that of another.

As a man knows, and finds himself in himself, in a natural sense; so in a
moral, The Spirit of a Man knows the things that are within him. We may say in
this case, as in things of secrecy, I know what I know; and as in things of
certainty, what I know I know.

The sum is this: In things that are under direction, no man can refuse, deny,
or resist the presence of his own Knowledge, in what he does know, any more
than he can resist the day, To him therefore that knows it is sin, and commits
it, or good, and omits it, to him it is sin of a deep dye.

In things of sentence and judgment upon a man's self, if a man's heart condemns
him, God is greater than his Heart. His Knowledge and purity are greater, and
therefore condemns him more; but yet God knows a man together with his heart,
and condemns him together with it, and most of all within it: If a man's heart
condemn 1 John 3. 20, 21.
him not, he has confidence, and just ground of it, toward God; because the
very witness of a man's heart concerning him is true and is no lie.

There may be some very particular cases, in which a man may be so clowded, as
to deem more severely of himself, than his state deserves; and there may be
some dreams, in which a man fancies himself better, than he is; but not such as
deserve to abate from this general account of man's Soul; for these mistakes are
but temporary, and by close attention it may vindicate it self from them.

But the great objection against the Soul being such a Light, is this:

a Candle of the Lord, how comes it to pass, that men are so ignorant of
things, and of themselves?



2. There fell indeed a great dimness upon this Light by the sin of Man, and
there need Lights from without, and much Exercise from within, to recover it;
so in great Judgments, the Sun has been turned into Sackcloth, and the Moon
into Blood.

3. There is much to be attributed to its present state, as thrust down into a
gross Body, where it is covered, like a Diamond enclosed in Clay, or like those
Lamps that burnt in Vaults, and under ground.

4. How much is to be imputed to those Steams and Vapors of Lust, and Fogs of
Sensual Appetite, that rise up and obscure the Soul, like the Sun in a Cloud or
Mist?

5. There is a freedom of the Soul and Understanding, like that of the Eye,
though some things dart in upon it, that it must see; and though turning it
self every way, it must also see what it would not see; yet it can endeavor,
and in part effect the turning it self, from the observation of things most
proper to it, and consider those that pertain only to the present life, whither
with all its vehemence it carries its Light.

But lastly, and especially: There is much more a Man knows of himself, and
Things, than he seems to know. How many things that are not found, nor can be
drawn into the discourse of some ignorant men, much less into their practice,
that yet, when you tell them of, they receive not as things they never knew,
but only as such they have not dealt with, or usually conversed with; and upon
more notable occasions, they break out from them, in whom they were not
suspected to have a place.

And concerning men themselves, though in their careless demeanor toward
themselves, they flatter their own hearts, and do not bring their full Eye and
Light upon themselves; yet they have a secret notice of themselves, a private
mark of their own condition; which, they know, is much more true, than that
forced or false Opinion they endeavor to breed and nurse up of themselves.

In sum therefore; I think the most ignorant man has this Light in his Soul,
however covered; he has it, though it does not outwardly show it self, but
lies still now, as it does in Children, without the notable discoveries of what
it notwithstanding truly is, and will one day appear to be.

We should all therefore seriously consider what we are, what Souls we have:
There is such a Lamp in us, though it be but as under a Bed or Bushel. As it is
most necessary to consider, what Dust we are in our Bodies, so to apprehend
what Spirit we are in our Souls; it is a great degree of wisdom to know the
frail condition of our Mortality, but it is a far greater to know the
Immortality of our Souls. As Princes in their Glory, and in whom Mortality was
advanced to the highest, were admonished by Remembrancers chosen on purpose,
that they were of the same Clay with other men, capable of the same Corruption,
Disease, Death; so they that carry their Souls lowest, should be put in mind by
Men of greatest Understanding, Piety, serenity of Conscience, and others of
quickest Anguish, and trouble of mind, what Souls they have. Every man may see
in them what themselves are, and that those Spirits within them will be at last
either shining Suns, or flaming Torches For ever: For in Eternity God will
certainly call out all Souls to their Office and Function in Light; whether it
be to Life and Happiness, or to Condemnation and Misery.

How great is the Mercy then, when God calls out and uncovers this Light now,
and puts it into Motion, and enlightens it far higher, with the Knowledge of
himself in Christ; so making it directive, consolatory, healing light, from the
healing wings of the Sun of Righteousness, so making us Lights Burning, Burning
and Shining Lights in his Light, which always makes happy.

Let us continually ascend to the Father of Lights in Christ, That Light, that
we may be Seraphims dwelling in that Everlasting Light, and Love, wherein God
and Christ inhabit.

Let us fear, though this Light shall indeed always burn, yet lest it burn
black, lest it cast the Darkness of Misery in the midst of Knowledge, and the
Blackness of utter Disconsolateness, while it blazes with conviction; that we
become not wandering blazing Stars, full of the Light of conviction, but which
turns us out as Fugitives from God, and our selves, like Cain having no peace,
no rest in our Knowledge; Wandering Stars, for whom is reserved the blackness of
darkness, For Ever. For so as this Candle of the Lord shall burn, such as this
Light is, holy and comfortable, or condemning and tormenting; so shall our
state be, and that to Everlasting.

I am now come down as low in the Description I first gave of the Soul, as to
speak of it as it is the Source and Fountain of all the Actions of a man; for
so it is, whether they are natural or moral.

And as for natural, It is the most easy description of the Soul to say, it is
the Author of them; even as when we would describe God with greatest easiness
to be understood, we call him the Creator of Heaven and Earth, the Preserver of
all things; that gives to all their Being, Breath, and Motion; so we understand
the Soul with least difficulty, when we speak of it, as that which guides, and
conducts, and gives spirit to all the motions of Body, all the powers of that;
That which a lower Soul does in Beasts, that the higher does in Man, but in a
more noble way.

For when God made Adam, and formed him of Earth, and prepared all the
Instruments of Motion and Action in the Body; when this excellent and curious
Machine lay dead before him, he breathed into it the Soul, to stir and move it,
and to carry all the Action of it.

Or as a Musicians Instrument, exactly made and strung, the Musicians Art comes
as a Soul upon it; stirs it, and tunes the sound of it, and then strikes it
into Harmony and Melody: The first Body given to Man, was (...), a Body
subsisting, acted by a Soul; as the Body given in the Resurrection is called
(...), a Body that shall subsist and be acted by a Spirit, that is, A Soul at
the highest exaltation.

What is that then, that sees in the Eyes? That hears in the Ears? That touches
in the Hand, and feels in the whole Body? This is no other than the Soul, and
it does all this with the superiority of a Rational Agent, much otherwise than
the Soul of a Beast can do: for there is a vein of Reason and Understanding,
that is, Rational Reflections, directions to Rational ends, running along in
the Souls acting the Body.

When this Soul leaves this Body, though all the Instruments remain, yet the
power ceases.

But of this I will no further enquire, because it is not to the main purpose.

In the second place, As we rise higher concerning God, we express him an
Infinite Wisdom and Understanding; an Infinite Justice and Mercy; a Holiness
and Purity unspotted, governing the World in Righteousness and Truth, and
exercising compassions in it, which are nearer approaches to the Being of God;
so has the Soul Powers of its own, Senses, and Affections, that closely
describe it.

What is it that Understands? That Reasons? That designs and contrives? Whence
are the Notions of Right and Wrong, Good and Evil, and the several Tendencies
and Operations either way? Whence are rational and moral Joys? Desires and
Delights? Whence are intellectual Sorrows and Complaints? All these are
evidently and apparently from such a Spring, as the Soul, and to these it is we
must now attend; and that we may do it with better advantage, let us observe
that Oracle of Solomon, given us in the way of Counsel: Keep thy heart with all
Diligence, for out of it are Prove. 4. 23.
the Issues of Life: viz. Those lively Motions and Actions, wherein the
peculiar life of a Man is discovered, and which tend if steered, and directed
aright, to endless life.

To discourse hereof, I must again reflect upon the Spirit of a Man, the Candle
of the Lord, in regard of whose Light it is said to Man, Keep thy Heart; for it
is more than if the Heart of Man were only bidden to keep it self: But to this
higher act of the Spirit of Man are all the directions of the Word of God
addressed, that it would bear up it self, and control all the lower Motions of
the Soul. This therefore I conclude upon, That from the Spirit of a man, as it
is the Candle of the Lord, shines a Ray, that is by God preserved according to
its Nature, distinct from all the Interest and Intrigues of the Soul, as it is
corrupted, that it may always bear witness to himself, and be a Law within a
Man; being not only a Witness and a Judge, but a Receiver of the Divine
Displeasure in the notices of it, and an Executioner of it upon the Soul; and
so in Men finally rebellious and disobedient, it becomes an Instrument of
punishment.

And this Light it is a certain necessary, and immediate act of an
Understanding, that cannot but be always the same, that can never be altered,
it being always for God and Goodness against Sin, and the very Sinner in whom
it dwells, and must and will be the same, even in Hell it self, where the
Devils believe and tremble, Jam. 2. 19.
and know they are justly punished.

For as the Sun looking upon things most impure, always declares and discovers
them, as they are, and can do no otherwise; thus the Candle of the Lord cannot
but lay open all the foulness that is in a Man; all the love a Man has to
himself, and the compassion of his own Being, cannot bribe it: All the rage
against God and Holiness that is in Hell, can never alter this; else the sting
of guilt, and horror of conscience, so great a part of Hell, would be taken
away.

The Light of the Soul, as we have before discoursed, is the highest Director
of a Man to all that is good, and is ever ready to be consulted with; if the
Good it proposes be embraced, it rejoices in it, applauds, praises, and
congratulates the Soul, and derives joy, pleasure, and happiness upon it: But
if that Good be not embraced, or the contrary Evil entertained, which is
dissuaded; it then chides, upbraids, and afflicts a man; and if there be no
Repentance, it extremely afflicts, and afflicts for ever, enforcing
self-abhorrence, and condemnation upon the Soul.

And this untainted part, which is no other, but the pure result of Reason and
true Understanding, is always in Glory, applauding the Justice of God against
the sinful Soul, in which it lives, and is the very instrument of Misery upon
it, as depraved; for this Light being but a single Act of the Understanding,
and not obeyed, but a solitary Verdict of the Mind, from which the rest
dissent, it can derive no happiness upon the Soul, but on the contrary anguish
and affliction.

This being then preconsidered, let us now more pressingly search the nature of
Man's Soul, as it is in Scripture styled, The Heart; and the Heart out of which
are the Issues of Life; first drawing the powers of Reason themselves, and
their motions, and then showing them, as they are derived, (for so they are
always) into one of those two Channels, Good or Evil.

In the Heart then are all the powers of Motion.

1. Here is the immediate directive Understanding or Judgment, which determines
to Action; and this is a different thing from the Light of the Candle of the
Lord, which is always the same; for this may be debased and corrupted; it may
mix it self with lower Considerations; and in the generality of Men it does so,
even to the eclipsing and darkening the higher Light, not in it self, but in
its oriency and brightness upon the Soul; as the Sun is the same, although its
Light may be shadowed from us.

But this practical Understanding, however it may be corrupted, yet has the
more immediate conduct of all the actions, and contains in it self the Gust,
Taste, and Motion of the whole Soul, and immediately foreruns Action; for it
determines things with their Circumstances, it balances diviner Reasons and
Temptations on the contrary part together; the Love and Fear of God on one
side, Inticements from Flesh, and Blood, and the World on the other.

Now there is a great difference between these two; It is best to be holy and
virtuous in it self, and in general; and, It is best for me in particular, and
in this particular Action to be holy: Between these two; An Act of Judgment, as
it resides in the Understanding; and an Act of Judgment, as it inclines the
whole Soul, Motion and Action unto it.

This very practical Understanding is in Scripture called The Heart, Let Prove.
23. 15.
thy Heart be wise: It is this Wisdom of the Heart that denotes a man Good; not
that most clear Light that shines from above, and down upon the Heart, not
within it, but so without it, that it does not reside in it, and change it into
it self.

2. Here are the Will and Affections, which are the resolution, vehemence, and
keenness of the Judgment, and carry the notion of the nearest and next Powers
of Action.

3. Here is the Memory presenting anew the Images of Things past, and offering
what has been observed of them heretofore, either as to their chuseableness or
undeservingness: Here is the Imagination displaying things new and old; and so
displaying them, that in things of lesser importance, their appearance is
greater than themselves; in Things of truest, and greatest Importance, by the
help of Imagination well imprinted, they come nearer to their own greatness,
and appear much greater than they would do else; which is the great benefit of
sanctified Imagination: in regard of which David prays, That God would keep it
always in the imaginations 1 Chronicles. 29. 18.
of the people, to fear the Lord, and keep his Laws.

4. Here is the resort of all outward Objects, with their several Characters of
Commendation or Dispraise; as Embassies in the Court of a Prince, so are the
several Proposes made, and addressed here, from those several Regions; the
Region above, which makes Offertures of greatest Happiness; and the Region
below, which sends also the glozed Tenders of Good.

5. Here are the Habits rising up by the degrees of propensions, inclination,
temper, and readiness to Action, till by repeated Action they are so settled,
that they become the Treasure of the Heart, out of which it freely expends Mat.
12. 35.
every moment, and at a minutes warning, as occasion calls it out.

And from all these arise restless motions, moves, and removes of the Soul it
self, and of the Things within it self, about which it treats; endless
Thoughts, Imaginations, Remembrances, Willings, Hatings, Desirings,
Aversations, and Abhorrencies; and these in infinite mazes cutting one another:
some weaving one with another, and mutually strengthening themselves; others
contracting cool, and suspend the Soul to either part; sometimes the Prints
that have prevailed are defaced, and new ones take; and these again thrust out,
and the former returning in continual vicissitudes; sometimes the Understanding
encourages the Affections and other Powers, and they it, as several Artificers
in a Building; at other times there is a Confusion of Languages among them, and
they bring forth only a Babel.

But at all times is found here, that great contest between the higher Soul,
and the Reasons and Dictates of that, and the contrary struggles of the lower,
through its correspondencies and intelligences with the Body, and its
Sensualities; the encounters between the Law of the Mind and the Members, which
cause great distractions and rollings of the Soul, this way and that way,
according to the liveliness of the one, or the violence of the other.

Lastly, From the Heart arise both sudden, and every way formed and contrived
Actions, accomplished, perfected, and fledged; for all the forming and beating
out of actions to this or that shape, are upon the Anvil of the Heart, and
those that break out on the instant, had yet their first motion from thence;
even as all the Arteries and Veins are from the natural Heart, and it has its
Pulses every where; so this Heart we speak of, has in this Life Moral and
Intellectual.

Now that which makes the Consideration of all we have spoken in this
particular great, is, that according to these Issues of life is the state of a
Man in Holiness or Sin, and so he is in an order for Happiness or Misery hereby.

For by these and all these, and no other thing whatever, is a Man what he is;
with these a Man is holy, with these he is wicked, nothing else gives him his
Temper, his Character; and when these are twisted together, and holily moved by
the Grace of God, and incited by heavenly motions, the Soul is then drawn with
the Cords of Hos. 11. 4.
a Man, but when they are united in Evil, it is drawing Iniquity with a Isa. 5.
19.
Cart-rope, and sin with the Cords of Vanity, that is, of a Vain Heart.

For these being neither the higher Reason alone, necessarily resulting from
the motion and excellency of an Understanding, nor being only the mere
sensuality or inclination of Body, but truly the substance, bulk, and
substantial powers and motions of a man; what a man is in these he truly is.
Further, the true genuine and sincere motions of these are they that try him;
for which ever Sin or Holiness have the Balance, and cast the Scale, that a
Man is.

For on one side, the cunning Heart sends out some actions out of choice and
inclination, only in compliance with the higher Soul; (for which it cannot but
have a reverence) and again, sometimes, however it be in its own native state
corrupt, yet it is forced to receive, or rather suffers the strongly agitated
impressions of enlightened Conscience upon it: But this is not accounted of
with God, who sees and trys the Heart, and knows the ground and motion of all.

There is also that unworthier way of the Heart, when merely to contrive its
easier passage to sensual Enjoyments, it only counterfeits some agreeable
actions to the higher Soul, and pays its Vows, to those ignoble ends, that it
may have some greater advantages to Voluptuousness, Riches, or Honor; which is
the grossest kind of Hypocrisy.

On the other side there are many Infestations and troublesome Inrodes of
sensuality upon a man, that are truly preponderated by the Diviner Principle,
that yet do not debase him in account with God; such as the Apostles Thorn in
the Flesh, as it is interpreted 2 Cor. 12. 7.
by some, and the Law of the Members in contest against the Law of the Mind,
that yet does not prevail into the Character of a Man, whose Heart is upright
with God.

The keeping then of the Heart is of greatest moment, and it must be our care,
that the Treasure and Temper of it be good; our observation must be ever awake
upon all, that passes out of it, that we may take its true Character: Our
endeavor must be earnest to reform all we find out of order, to get it swayed
by Holiness, to stop the evil Motions of it, till we have so discouraged them,
as to alter the very Temper of it; to incline it continually upon all holy and
good Actions, till we have endeared them to it; to take heed of all Proffers
and Proposes to it, that we may not suffer it to be tempted, to guard it, to
offer it to all holy and gracious Converses, to chastise it continually in all
it does ill, to encourage it in all it does well; and that we may do all this,
we must devocare mentem supremam e Coelo, we must bring that highest Mind,
enlightened by Grace, into the Government and Command of it, and detrudere
Corpus in imas Terras, we must thrust down Body, the love of which seduces and
corrupts the Heart, as low, and as much into subjection, as may be: and above
all, we must commit it continually unto God; for the safety, and all the power
of even this Supreme Mind is the Free Princely Spirit of Ps. 51. 12.
God establishing it, and always joining it self with it; as wickedness is kept
a-foot, by being acted by the Spirit of wickedness.

This Heart now let us consider, It is always a beating, the Pulses of it are
every minute and every where; the motion of it is vehement, as Fire; to what a
boundless measure of sin and iniquity will it rise, if suffered? But to what
vast degrees of good might it also rise, if its Motions were improved to good?
And so consequently, to what degrees of Happiness or Misery may it rise or fall?

We must use therefore all our care to be always with it, that we may guide its
Motion; that in respect to Evil we may restrain and suppress its Motion, as we
do that of Fire; that in relation to Good, we may promote and advance it; that
in regard of it self we may always provide it enough of true good to feed upon,
that it may not inflame nor break it self, by grinding it self.

Yea we must take care of the very Rest of it, for even that is accounted equal
to Action. Rest in any sinful Action, till we have removed from it by
Repentance, is a continuation of that Action; even as Gods Rest from Creation,
yet upholding and preserving all Things, is expressed by Working, as our
Savior speaks, My Father works hitherto, and I work. So men uphold sin by
their acquiescence in it without Repentance, though they do not proceed to new
Acts.

The nature of the Soul being now thus far expressed, It remains as the top and
sum of all, to show that it is made with great and large Receipts for Happiness
or Misery: Whether we consider it immediately in the substantial Nature, or
whether we consider it in the Faculties and Motions of it.

1. In the immediate substantial Nature of it, as has been already made plain;
It is immortal, made to continue for ever. Whatever melts away from its misery,
the misery of that is not considerable. If a Prince would put an Assassinate to
death with an extreme, but leisurely torment, and he dies at the very first
approach of it, he deceives his punishment: So that Happiness is not desirable,
that smothers the Being, that should enjoy it by the greatness of it self; but
the Soul made for For Ever, is great in either of these, the Happiness of it
infinitely desirable, the Misery of it most formidable, because it can abide
and survive in either.

2. It is Immaterial, and of such a Fineness and Purity of Substance, that it
pierces far into all Reasons of Joy or Trouble, and is penetrated by them: The
sympathies of it in Happiness or Misery are sudden and universal; as the Light
spreads it self through the Air in a moment, it receives in all parts the Light
the Sun gives, and instantly; thus the Soul, the Favor or Indignation, the
Smiles or Frowns of God, when they indeed break out upon it; it is most
sensible, presently sensible, all over and most intimately sensible.

But of these things I have already spoken: Let us further consider the
Faculties themselves, whereby it is fully fitted to take in Happiness or
Misery, and to execute them in it self. The Faculties indeed compared with Gods
Favor or Displeasure, are but the Instruments and Organs; God gives the Breath
and the Power, yet they are fearfully and wonderfully made by God to these
great ends, both in their Capacities and Activities.

1. The Understanding is that great Receipt of all Principles of Light and
Truths, as may conduce either way; and this is such a capacity, as must receive
whatever God offers so plainly to it, as he will have it received: Thus God
manifested himself in the Hearts of the Gentiles; however prejudiced against
the Knowledge of the true God, they could not resist it, but that they must
needs be without Excuse: For that which might be known of God was still
manifest in them, for God had showed it to them. So the work of the Law was
written in their Hearts, and they showed it by their thoughts accusing, or
excusing; and this they could not help: A Table must receive what is written
upon it; and in the accounts of being Happy or Miserable upon these Principles
of Truth, through the Apologies or Accusations of Conscience, and the Motions
of the Favor or Displeasure of God upon them, the case is the very same.

Now this Understanding first entertains, and then lodges Truth; and when that
Truth is enlivened and stirred up, suitable impressions of Pleasure or Grief are
made, and from thence stream down with all their force into the Rest of the
Soul; the Understanding being indeed so much the Soul, that all the rejoicings
and complaints of it are presently heard and resented through the whole; and
the Soul so much it self under several names, that what is in one Faculty of
it, is immediately in all, if the impression be indeed to the life; saving only
that since the degeneracy of Mankind there remains (as I have already shown) a
single Light in the higher Understanding, that may be refused in its dictates
by the rest of the Soul.

Suppose then the Understanding beyond the possibility of Resistance, convinced
by such a manner of Demonstration, that it cannot but receive of those things
that are the true and perfect Reasons of Joy or Sorrow, and in their perfection
also, the Soul must needs be in the same manner affected it is now, when we
plainly and undeniably find our selves within the embraces of any great good,
or the gripes of Evil; but with this difference, that so much as the
perceptiveness of the Understanding surmounts at any time, or the Good and Evil
themselves surpass, so much must the Joy or Grief surmount and surpass also.

Although therefore it be true, that the multitude of Men and Women are but
half persuaded of those Things, wherein Heaven and Hell consist, yet this is
only because God is not yet pleased to excite the Understanding after that
powerful manner of Conviction he can use; but still every man is at the Mercy
of Divine Power and Pleasure, when he will do it: He may do it now, but in
Eternity he will do it, and with such a clear representation, as rises up into
immediate Bliss or Woe.

2. The next Faculty to be considered is the Great Will, that is the Spring of
all Affections and their Motions: How endless are the Motions of this Will?
With what a great Covetousness does it covet Good? and how long? What an
immense aversation and abhorrence of Evil has it? Let then this Will be denied
Good, or pressed upon with Evil; or let it be gratified with Good, and secured
from Evil; what either joy or pain will follow?

Yet further, Let us weigh the Active part of both these Faculties, and then
the Enjoyment or Suffering will rise much higher.

1. First then apprehend but Thought mightily set on work, which is the
Understanding in its natural Motion; and if this be but earnestly moved, though
it be without tormenting matter, yet how painful is it? When there is not an
Oil, a pleasantness and sweetness dropping down upon Thought, it is like
stretching the Joints and Sinews of the Body by immoderate motion, which, if
moderate, would have been refreshing; or like a great blow that carries the
whole force along with it, and falls into the Air only, upon which all the
weight of the Body is ready to follow, with a violence most ungrateful to
Nature: When a man has a multitude of Thoughts, he had need have the comforts
of God to delight his Soul: A Man had need have good bounds for his Thoughts,
else he loses himself in the Wild of them; he had need of good matter to feed
them with, else they inflame, like Millstones, feeding on themselves; make but
this good, a Man may think For Ever, and it will easily appear, he may be happy
or miserable For Ever. For let these thoughts be such as interest a Man in the
Reasons of Torment, Pain, and Horror, and how grievous may be his state? What
experience may every one have of the trouble and turmoil, of the anguish of
Thoughts? a Man may lie easier upon a Rack, than upon some disquieting
vexatious Thoughts. On the other side, how sweet and pleasant are Thoughts full
of the Ravishment of Divine Consolations? How delightful is the entertainment
they give without tediousness or satiety?

2. Imagination is something beyond Thought; for Thought runs upon things
nearer to what they are in themselves, but Imagination makes them something
beyond themselves, or aggravates according to their true circumstances, with
greatest life. Indeed Imagination cannot exceed in Divine or Everlasting
Things, yet it is of use to bring in, and represent to, and fill the Thoughts;
it reflects things with a multiplicity of Images, like the Parelii of the Sun,
and stays those Images with great Effect; and so it is of great use in Comfort
or Discomfort.

3. The Memory, which does revive and call things together, and present them
anew to the Thoughts and Imaginations, summoning and congregating, and staying
Things their due time for consideration. This is a great Instrument too of
Happiness, or Misery: I will remember the Years of the Right Hand of the most
High, was the Relief of, and Recovery of David's Spirit: Remembering my
affliction and Lam. 3. 19, 20.
my misery, the wormwood and the Gall, my Soul has them still in remembrance,
and is bowed in me. Remembering this Vale of Tears, exalts the lightsome state
of the Holy Hill of God, and Remembering the Good things of this Life an
inflammation of misery.

4. The Conscience is a high and most curious Engine, fitted by God to these
ends. What Joy like the Testimony of Conscience, good and serene? The very
office of which is to applaud the Soul, and give it greatest Joy in its
acceptance with God, and likeness to him; and on the other side, to make
acclamations to the Justice of God, and condemn the guilty and impure Soul,
within it self, to its greatest horror and amazement.

Come we now to the Active part of the Will, that is, the Affections, which are
but the Will boiling up with great love to its Happiness, or abhorrence of its
Misery; and according as the Affections are stirred with desire of Good and
flight from Evil, so are they either unexpressibly gratified in an union with
that Good, and the utmost distance of the Evil, or enraged with the despair of
the Good, that is at an infinite remove from its enjoyment, and detestation of
the Evil so abhorred, yet pressing and forcing on it self to be endured; from
which different Motion of the Affections spring plainly and sensibly those
different conditions of Happiness or Misery.

Lastly, When the Understanding has been both the Theater and Spectator of all
these Motions, it comes to examine over again, whether there because for them;
and when upon strictest enquiry it finds, the cause deserves the whole that
has passed; and being by the Divine Power held close to this Observation, it
then passes it self into that grand Act of the Soul, we call Judgment; upon
which all the powers of the Soul either everlastingly triumph, and shout in
loud praises to infinite Mercy; or the Veins of Conscience open and bleed
afresh, and as by a most undoubted authority, the Heart renews and continues
its everlasting Plaints.

The fundamental capacities of the Soul for Happiness and Misery being now
settled, I come now to discourse the correspondent fundamental accounts of that
Happiness or Misery, as they are united with the Soul, and its actuations of it
self: And these first in relation to its eternal condition.

1. The first and most essential account of Happiness is the Favor of God in
Christ; his Frown, Wrath, and Rebukes are the most fundamental reason of
Misery: His Favor and reconciled Face on one side, his Wrath for sin on the
other. We are not able yet to understand the absolute dependence of the Soul
hereupon, because the present course of Providence allows men in their seeming
subsistencies upon the Comfort they receive from the Creatures of this World;
God himself in the mean time retiring from their Observation: But this is
certain, the smiles of God unexpressibly enliven, encourage, and bear up the
Soul; his Rebukes daunt, deject, and amaze it. However these are now for the
most part closely conveyed under the appearances of the Creatures, for us or
against us, yet God is indeed under them; but it is much more plain and
manifest in the more immediate angry or gracious touches of God upon the
Conscience, and will be far more evident in the state of the World to come; His
loving kindness is better than life; and when he with rebukes corrects Man for
iniquity, he makes his beauty to consume away like a moth; whatsoever seems
most flourishing, being so blasted, withers immediately: All the horrors we
have heard, or read of, have received their sting from this Wrath; and all
Consolations from his Favor; for in his Favor is life; the Eyes of all
Creatures are upon God: Every created Thing in its proper way turns its Eye
upon the Creator, much more the Soul, the Spirit immortal, turns upon God, the
Father of Spirits, that it may live. It is not consistent with the Glory of
God, that he should allow any Thing to be Happiness, but Himself and his
Favor: Even all the inward Rectitude of Mind cannot be this Happiness
immediately; For as if there were a Goodness, of which Gods Nature were not the
Rule and Measure, and that Will, which always stands just with that Nature,
that would be above God; and so God would not be the Supreme Righteousness,
that is, Not God: So if there were any implanted Happiness in any Creature, and
that it needed not God, as to the Essence of its Happiness, God would not be
God to it; or if its happiness were in any Thing out of it self, and not in
God, that would be a God to it.

This Consideration presses to this, That Happiness is in the Light of Gods
Countenance, shining out upon the Rational Soul: There is nothing necessary, as
the Fountain of Happiness, but God; nothing can supply his place, In thy
presence is fullness of Joy, at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore; with
thee is the Fountain of Life; In thy Light shall we see Light, but if thou
hidest thy Face we are troubled, if banished and driven from thy everlasting
presence, we are for ever miserable; for whom can we have in Heaven but thee?
and there is none upon Earth besides thee.

2. Subordinately to this, there can be no peace, but in the Heart made truly
and inwardly Good; besides all storms from without, there is an estuation, a
tide from corruption within, full of trouble and vexation: Every sin loved and
delighted in, is a secret hollow where an Earthquake is bred; it is a wound
that secretly disquiets it. All impure Affections, Passions of Dishonor in the
Soul, make it like the troubled Sea, that cannot rest; Peace and Joy in the
Holy Ghost make their repose in Righteousness: The effect of Righteousness, is
quietness and assurance Isa. 32. 17.
for Ever.

Even as the Favor of God never embraces any, but a holy Soul; so has he
ordained, that the Evil and corrupt Heart should be in it self unpeaceful, and
full of turmoil within, both in regard of the foulness and deformity, very
horrible to the Thoughts, whenever understood; as also in regard of the great
distraction, and horrible convulsion the mind is forced into, when it comes to
any thing of true Sense.

3. The actuation or gracious motion of the Favor of God toward the Soul, and
the actuation of his Holy Spirit upon the Soul, made inwardly Holy and Good,
are highly necessary for the making the Spirit of a Man truly sound and
vigorous in encountering Evil, happy and comfortable in it self; for else the
Soul may be becalmed (if these Motions of Grace from God lie still) and not
able to bear up it self: And therefore Men sincerely good are often in great
discomposures, when God withdraws himself from them; In the cloudings of his
Face they are troubled, in retreats of his Grace not exciting them, they
languish, and cannot stir up themselves to take hold of him; and then their
sinful Calm ends in trouble.

On the other side the reasons of horror and amazement are not seen by
senseless and secure Men, till Conscience enlightened discovers them, and the
flamings of Divine Displeasure make them boil up.

These then are the true, substantial, solid, and natural Reasons of Happiness
or Misery, rejoicing or tribulation to the Soul, and the Soul is plainly the
Sense of them: And as for the lesser and smaller interests of this present
World, and the life of it, the observation of these two following Principles
will determine, and state the case of the soul in relation to them, and so,
that it will further appear, that all the touches of Good and Evil upon Man,
are originally and principally in his Soul.

1. The first is, That if God is pleased to let out his Favor in any of these
outward Things, and to moderate the desires and motions of the Soul, so that
there is a proportion between those motions and desires, and the condition in
which a Man is, there is nothing further of necessity to him, he is well
enough. But whenever the desires run out, beyond the measures and proportions
of his Condition, it is with great disquiet and incredible restlesness of Mind,
though the thing, beyond what he has, be but small in it self, and nothing
compared with what is enjoyed: When Haman had that abundance of Esth. 5. 13.
Glory, yet his desires running out to a very little thing, beyond what he had,
a very nothing to it, the obeisance of poor Mordecai, yet it made a nothing of
all he had, for it all availed him nothing.

2. When the goodness of God is pleased to restrain outward Evils in fit
degrees, and to preserve the mind from engaging it self by too close reflections
upon any disadvantage; or to bend it so close, upon better considerations to
lessen and make tolerable that disadvantage, the Spirit of a Man thus guarded
will bear any infirmity; but when the Spirit is let out to a continual
pondering, and aggravating to it self a very small Counter-accident, and the
Reasons that should abate it, are hidden, and carried off from it, a very
little thing becomes unappeasably vexatious; and the Spirit so wounded is it
self its own insupportable burden. Who can, when God gives a sting to such a
Cross, bear it? And when the Spirit of a Man runs forcibly upon it, that Man
may turn back, and recoil with highest Rage and Cruelty upon himself: As we see
Ahitophel, though but 2 Samuel 17. 23.
an ordinary thing befell him, yet his Spirit being wounded with it, he went,
and hanged himself; whereas David 1 Samuel 30. 6.
besieged with outward Distress on every hand, and finding the surges of Grief
within, yet was upheld by Divine Reasons: He at the same time both diverted his
own Spirit from the Evil, qualified the Evil it self, and fortified his mind,
encouraging himself in the Lord his God.

Thus all Contentation and Pleasure, Enjoyment and Happiness, and the contrary
Discontent, Vexation, Suffering, and Misery, both here and in Eternity, are
laid in the disposes of God upon the Spirits of Men, filling those capacities
he has therein contrived with such infusions of his Favor or Displeasure, as
in Wisdom, Righteousness, and Goodness, he has and shall determine to them;
and also putting themselves upon such Exercise and Motion, and that upon such
principles within themselves, as must perfectly own, acknowledge, and agree
with those his Divine Attributes, and the determinations he makes upon the
Souls of men according to them.

Yet there is always this difference between this present state, and the things
pertaining properly to it; and that of Eternity, and the things proper to that;
that the former are altogether indifferent, and nothing more needs, but that
the Mind be in an equal posture toward them: But the things of an eternal
consideration are of a perfect necessity, so that Happiness and Misery will be
for ever in act according to them.

Upon these Grounds thus laid, we may judge of many cases of ordinary and
evident experience, that concern both Natural and Religious Affairs.

1. We see some Men in a low and mean condition, with a little of the World,
much more contented than those in a higher; the desires of the one being no
larger than their Condition, but the minds of the other running out beyond
their greater Estate; from whence it is evident, that man lives not by bread
alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God, nor by the
abundance of any thing they have, but by God giving a suitableness between the
Desire and the Enjoyment; when God lets out the desire beyond that, all else is
as nothing at all.

2. Again, Some men bear far greater Crosses with much more ease, than others
do far lesser; the Spirit of one man centring upon the grief and inconvenience,
and the other gliding off from it.

3. The generality of men having their minds level, and but equal at best with
their Bodies, are very sensible of all the disadvantages and inconveniences of
Body.

Some more heroic and singular persons are far above them, and little
concerned in them; and some strangely insensible and unactive in their Souls,
bear them without any more than the just pressure upon the Body requires; lumps
of Clay, their Souls are so sheathed in their Bodies, that they discover no
Soul, give no sign of a Spirit; they live and dye like Beasts; they bear all
with the strength of sensitive Nature, they show no Spirit at all, till at last
they split into innumerable and endless Complaints and Cries; except we suppose
a loathsome stupidity, and fearful darkness of utter want of Consolation and
Enjoyment to be the second death of such persons

On the other side, Some that have great force of Mind, and yet are deeply
affected to Body, exasperate and inflame any bodily Distemper, and aggravate it
by their terrible impatiences; and the same thing falls out to them in Infamy,
Disgrace, Loss, or great Disappointment; according to the measure, business,
and activity of the Spirit about them, so is the thing great or small in men's
own account and resentment.

4. From an Overbalance of Mind it comes to pass, that upon several accounts
Men become wholly inattendant to their Bodies.

Some separating themselves, with desire Prove. 18. 1.
to intermeddle with all Knowledge, have been wholly careless of all things
else: Others engaged in motions of great Valor and Enterprise, have so little
valued the Fate of a present life, that in the heat of Valor and Fight, they
have not so much as felt the wounds they have received, their Minds being as it
were separated from their Bodies.

Some plunged in deep sorrow and trouble, have without the least relenting and
compassion done the greatest cruelty upon themselves.

Some under great disappointment of their Designs have revenged it with
greatest rigor and resolution upon their own Flesh, as Scaevola with an
undaunted constancy burnt the hand that missed in killing Porsenna, and so
deprived him of the Glory, he so earnestly designed himself in that Action.

Others touched with the Conscience of a great Offense, through the vehemence
of that, have thought all other pains of Nature worthy only of neglect, as
Cranmer held that hand in the Flame, that had signed his Recantation.

Yea very Debauchees, in the Risque of their Vices, though their name, even
their Flesh and their Body have been consumed, mourn not, while they are in
their Carrier, but at last, they are so restless and importunate in wickedness,
plotting and performing it, doing it with both hands, that they have no leisure
to think of any thing else, and are afraid indeed to offer any such leisure to
themselves; and to avoid it are always driving on in wickedness; they prolong
their days Eccl. 8. 12.
in, and, as it seems, by it, thus far, that their earnestness bears them up;
so that they do not fall into reflections upon the sad end of it; their Spirits
are carried so whole and together to it, that they have no interruption. And if
their pursuit be crossed, and vexed with hindrances, and contrariety of
accidents, it becomes very outrageous, and is a continual sickness; for so it
is said, Amnon was 2 Samuel 13. 2.
sick for his Sister Thamar.

All these, and multitudes of the like, are plain Instances of the Mind
governing our Contentment, or Discontent, in these Affairs; and however it
inslave it self, as it seems, to the Body, and its satisfactions, yet still it
is indeed the Vigor, Force, and mighty action of this Mind, that is ever
superior, when it does most debase it self; and it is not the Body of Flesh,
but it self in that Body, or that Flesh, (or as the Apostle calls it, a Fleshly
Mind) that thus designs and acts, with a high hand, for its own satisfactions:
And if it be thus in things wherein it seems to be fleshly, how much more in
those things wherein Body has no Feeling, no Interest?

From these Grounds we may also discern the several states of Men in Religion.

1. The great Insensibleness of it in the minds of most men, makes them without
any desire or motion after it, they see no beauty in it, why they should desire
it.

2. Hereupon also, though Men have the greatest reason of trouble in relation
to their state toward God, yet having no reflections, they are wholly
untroubled, even those, who, if Religion be true, have no ground of peace, but
the greatest of horror and amazement.

This is indeed from a Patience of God to the world, and a Judgment also upon
it: for so far as it would lead only to the Terrors of Despair, so it is a
long-suffering; but as Insensibleness consigns men over to Irreligion, and the
consequent Damnation, so it is an exceeding great Judgment.

And yet it is an Indulgence too of common Providence, that Mankind enjoys a
general peace, and quiet of condition, and are not in immediate hellish
despairs.

3. Hence formality in Religion gives many men satisfaction: they cannot be
satisfied without it, their Mind being so far awakened concerning it; and yet
there being some part dark, they take up with a Shadow in the place of true
substantial Goodness.

4. Hence a just and sober demeanor in the World has that strength to compose
the Mind, we may ordinarily observe. For all degrees of Innocence and
Integrity, all Freedoms from Guilt, and not being privy to things unworthy our
selves, are a great defense to the Thoughts; and these things are so espoused
to Christianity, that where they are found indeed, and in the due Heights, they
are never found divided the one from the other: but there may be semblances or
some degrees of these; as is very plain in the Instance of the Young Man in the
Gospel; he had a truly ingenuous sense of Things, and so well natured, that
when Christ proposed to him a Precept above his Orb, he did not sourly reject
it, but was sorrowful, Mark. 10. 22.
he could not rise to it, yet still he was at a distance from true Christianity.

But so far as a man attains in the semblances, and degrees of these, he has
also answerable semblances and degrees of tranquillity of Mind, of loveliness
and worth; our Savior loved the Young Man, for so much as v. 21.
he had. This made those great Spirits among the Heathen, whose generous
Actions we read of.

To this Head may be referred all high and notable Actions and Undertakings,
all worthy Studies and Employments, which derive a virtue from that intrinsic
value of Goodness, and participations of the Favor and approbation of God,
that is upon them, and uphold the Mind, and further so entertain and employ it,
that it does not fall into disturbances.

Yet so far as these things however excellent, are not universal and uniform in
all things, or not endued and ennobled with true Piety, Love of God, adherence
to him in the Mediator, so far they come short of the sincere and perfect
satisfaction of the Mind.

Hence most men are but in an equal poize between the Comforts and Fears, that
arise from a true sense of Religion, between the Heroic temper of
Christianity, and the danger of an unconverted Estate; God not seeing good to
give so high a sense of the Danger, nor so triumphant a sense of the Happiness,
as that the one should in regard of trouble of Mind, the other in regard of
surpassing joy make, all Things in the World, nothing, as either would do.

Yet notwithstanding from the high sense of Religion, there has been at some
times so high an action, and so triumphing a Comfort, that as the Martyr said,
A Bed of Flames was no other than a Bed of Roses, many have offered themselves
to death, not accepting Deliverance, they have altogether abandoned all the
Pleasures, Profits, and Advantages of Bodily Sense and worldly State, that they
might obtain a better Resurrection; and on the other side, some under the
horrors of Despair, have as much cast away from them, all the comforts and
enjoyments of the present life, and have seized upon Hell, as it were before
they went out of the World, or hastened to it as Judas. Again, some good men
not having the communications of the Favor of God, have fallen into horrid
Agonies of Mind, and have been restored anew to Comforts, according as God has
shone out, or withdrawn himself.

And through the non-actuation of Grace into their Hearts have fallen into some
great sins, and under spiritual desertions, abating from the excellency of a
Holy Life, and consequently into discomforts, or want of spiritual Consolation.

And contrariwise, Men not sound in Christian Obedience bear up betwixt some
conformities to religious Action, and the hopes they derive from thence,
without sinking down into great despondencies. All which cases plainly and
sensibly may be resolved into the former Grounds and Principles laid concerning
the Government of God, ordering and disposing the state of Men's Souls here in
the World.





Again, Sometimes the Spirits are aerie and soaring, even into Rapture, and
then the Soul disports it self among them, in that we call Wit, and highly
exalted Fancy; as the Sun reflects its Beams into that beautiful variety, and
pleasant mixture of Colors in the Rainbow, when it finds a Clowd prepared.

In these cases the Motion is greater than agrees with the order of the Soul in
the Body, and so it is violent, and sometimes furious, yet still it argues the
greatness of the Soul, and its activity, showing it self to the utmost
advantages it receives from the Bodies Motion, whether it be orderly or
disorderly, wherein the activity is the Souls, and the disorder chargeable upon
the Body only; the Soul, even as the Sun, is always the same in it self.

But besides all this, It is most evident, that the Mind has considerations of
Peace and Disquiet, some in which the Body is not concerned at all, further
than the Mind concerns it; and some that first come into the Mind, by
representation from without, yet having made no dint at all upon the Body, are
considered and judged of first by the Mind, and so by degrees affect the Body,
according to the apprehensions the Mind entertains of them, either with vigor,
or languishment; yea there have been Examples, wherein the Soul being it self
surprised, with excess of Joy or Sorrow, has in a moment surprised the whole
Animal Power also, and extinguished that Life; and how often the Soul gives a
Constitution to the Body, we know not; but this is certain, however the case be
otherwise, The Comfort or Discomfort of a Man is seated in his Soul; and
whencesoever the Causes of them arise, or through whatsoever Conduits they
pass, they please or afflict according to the settled Judgment the Mind makes
of them.

But for the further clearing and confirming these things, let us make this
account of them.

1. From the Nature of Man's Soul, it is certainly to be concluded, The Soul is
the Man, which way soever the Soul goes, that way certainly the Man goes; and
when the Soul is in a high concern any way, it values the Body no more, than
the Body does a Garment: For though it is true in the generality of men, and in
general Cases, the Soul does willingly subordinate it self to the Body, or
rather it self to it self, as in the Body, and makes the service, the safety,
the pleasure of it self in the Body, to be its whole pleasure, safety, and
satisfaction; yet there are particular persons by whom, particular cases in
which, the Body is slighted, as of smallest consideration. We see good men use
the service of it in Study and Contemplation to such a height, that it is
macerated, weakened, discouraged, and speedily worn out; they subdue it by
daily mortification, they 1 Cor. 9. 27.
offer it up in Martyrdom, deliver and resign it to the Flames, submit it to
the Torturer. Bad Men enslave it to vicious affections, lavish it out upon
their Lusts; and in their Rage sometimes destroy it by violence upon themselves.

From all which it is plain, how much the Body is at the service of the Soul,
when the Soul is excited to the exercise of its own power.

2. The great Mystery of the Soul is, That whereas in its own Nature it is thus
great and commanding, was made in the Image and Similitude of God, has a
resemblance of his Liberty and even of his infinite Motion, in the displays of
Understanding, Will, and Affections; yet notwithstanding it may be as it were
silenced and slumbered, and the Motion of it so suppressed, that it seems to
have nothing so considerable, as such a Being imports: In this state it is like
a strong Man asleep, but that will awake; it sleeps its sleep now, but when God
awakens it, it shakes its self, and throws off all its Manacles, or like a
strong man that sho^^s by reason of Wine, then its strength and vigor appears.
It lies still, as Samson, when his Locks were cut off, it re-enforces it self
hereafter, as Samson, when his Locks were grown again; like Water running
softly, and in a very weak, and indiscernible Current, afterward like an
Inundation of Water; like a Spark under Ashes, but afterward like the whole
Element of Fire, in fiercest motion; so that there is no judgment to be made of
its influences into the Comfort or Discomfort of a Man, when it is in its
duller and more stupefied condition, but in its highest Flights now, and in its
Everlasting State.

3. God has the great power of moving the Soul, he that formed the Spirit of a
Man within him, he that made it what it is, that gave it his own likeness, he
will show when he pleases that he made it such as it is indeed; and it must
needs be plainly in his power to do it, who is the Supreme and All-working
Spirit; so that all the state and condition of it from the first moments of its
Being, throughout Eternal Ages, is a Government and Ordination of God upon it:
Nothing then is to be concluded, but by and upon his declarations of himself,
and of the manner of his Government he has prescribed to himself; which is in
part made known to us in the Nature, Frame, and Constitution of the Soul it
self, and the daily Experiments of it, but most especially in his Word; which
describes both the deplumed and low estate of Souls, and the certain
exaltation, the lifting them up whether to Salvation or Destruction.

4. The things the force and strength of the Soul move upon, as descriptive and
constitutive of its own state and condition, give temper to its Satisfactions
and Disquiets. When it moves upon such things, as have truly the Springs of Joy
and Comfort in them, as its own, it has an exceeding Joy, that carries it
above all things. Again, when it moves upon those things, that have indeed the
reasons of Sorrow and Affliction, and that it must acknowledge it has an
unhappy Right to; there is an excess of Sorrow and Vexation. If there are but
apprehended reasons of either, or lower degrees of them aggravated by that
apprehension, the force of the Soul may yet make them great, till it be
undeceived; for when there is nothing worthy either way to work upon, yet its
very deceived and deluded Imagination are in the room of a great Object to it,
and either very pleasing, or afflictive. Thus it is till Reality takes place of
Appearance; and Eternity finds so much employment for all the Powers, upon
things so grand, that they have nothing of leisure, either for Appearances, or
lesser Things, or to spend their strength in vain.

Thus far I have argued the Motions of the Soul unto Happiness or Misery,
immediately from the Nature of the Soul it self; in the next place, let the
account of these things be drawn from the Ordination and Government of God in
relation to himself, and the eternal condition of the Soul.

1. There is an Absolute Will, and Determination of God, that it shall appear,
that Himself and Holiness, and the enjoyment of Himself for ever, are the true
Happiness of the Soul, and the only Happiness of it; on the other side, That
Sin, his Wrath, and Disfavour are the greatest Evils; as God says, I will
famish all the Gods of the Earth, so he will all that the Earth calls Good,
besides himself, which is a worshipping of the Creature, besides, or in
preference to, the Creator, blessed For Ever: Else Men, who are in Covenant
with seeming Goods, and in Union with them, would think themselves well enough
without God, and without any enjoyment of him; God therefore has appointed a
time, wherein all the Idols of the World shall be smitten, as Dagon before the
Ark, and all little Evils, that are so reputed here, shall shrink into none,
compared with his Wrath and Displeasure. Then shall Men reflect upon all the
Fatigues they have undergone for worldly Pleasure, Profit, and Honor, as so
much lost and misplaced labor; and their so earnest recoil from present Evils,
though with their eternal hazard, shall be reputed as basest Cowardice; then
Religion and Holy Walking, which had so mean an allowance of Deference from
them, shall be esteemed of greatest worth and value.

2. God has determined to draw out Souls to their own Greatness and Extent,
that his Workmanship in them may not be always hid and concealed. The
similitude with himself he at first enstamped them with, shall be plainly
discovered. It shall then be seen, what Understandings, Wills, Affections,
Consciences he has given them; and that a Soul is not so small a Thing, as it
seems to be in the Worlds History of Beings.

And these two things are very subservient to the discovery of one another, the
Excellency of God, and the Valuableness of the Soul; for God revealing himself,
and his own Holiness and Happiness, in their full Beauty and Greatness, the
Soul that was shrivelled up in ignorance of true Good, opens and stretches out
it self, as the Eye to the Sun, or as the Appetite to the most gustful, or
delicious meat; and when the Soul is drawn out to its own Largeness, then will
it know the vanity of all things besides God, and that its great Affections and
Desires cannot be satisfied by any thing Lower, or Lesser, than he is; but
shall feel the extremities of want, the necessities of enraged and unsatisfied
desire in the loss of him; and the great Motions of Mind will make fiercest
reflections on the Evil of Sin, and the Righteous Displeasure of God: But on
the other side, Happiness, in the Favor and Enjoyment of God, shall flow in
upon the extended Desires and Affections, and the excellency of the Mind shall
adore and admire the greatness of Divine Glory, and the blessedness of enjoying
it.

3. God has resolved upon Degrees of Happiness and Punishment: Now the more
the Soul is enlightened, and its Faculties heightened, the more capable it is
of Glory; Thus one Star differs from another in Glory; having a greater Orb for
the reception of Light, having a purer and quicker Light: So also the more the
Faculties are enlarged, the more capable they are of Woe and Punishment, and to
be beaten with more stripes. The more therefore any one finds his Faculties now
quickened and opened, the more he may apprehend, and so be the more excited to
fear the danger, and lay hold on the Happiness.

4. Seeing all depends upon the Actuation either of the Mercy and Goodness of
God, or his Indignation; from hence appears both the Freeness of his Grace and
Mercy in Christ, in the glorification of his Saints, and the Liberty of his
Indignation and Wrath in the Punishment of wicked men: For though all things
that God does in these things, are contrived into the greatest Conveniences and
Aptness to their several Ends, yet if he did not continually move them, in whom
all things live, move, and have their Beings, that do live and move or have any
being, all would lie still, and there is no other Power that could excite them;
for who can move before him, or besides him, seeing he moves all himself? and
he who is moved only by himself, and from himself, can receive no Motion from
any other: The Apostle therefore thus expresses both sides of these things;
What if God willing to show his Wrath, and Romans 9. 22.
make his power known, and that he might make known the Riches of his Mercy: So
then he has mercy on V. 18.
whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens.

These things being thus fixed, let us further enlarge upon them, by way of
Consectary: And first, we are led by them to these three Petitions.

1. Let us pray, that God would keep and contain our Desires and Reflections
within due bounds, that we may not exceed our Condition, by unruly Appetite;
nor pore too much upon the Disadvantages and Vexations of our Condition: For if
our Souls are let out above due measure, how full of Torment and Agony may we
be? He fashions the hearts of Men alike, or to an equality, to their Condition;
for he as the Potter moulds the Clay, and fits it to this or that Figure; The
Father of Spirits forms the Spirit of Man within him; and he does it in Mercy,
or Judgment, as he pleases, yet with righteousness, and plenty of Justice: Most
necessary it is therefore, that into his Hand we at all times commend our
Spirits, not only when we are going out of the Body into those unknown Regions,
but while we are here in the Body, that we may be kept within due Measures.

Further, It is most necessary to pray, That God would feed us with Food Prove.
30. 8. 1 Chronicles. 4. 10.
convenient for us, that he would bless us indeed, and enlarge our Border to
just proportions, and that he would keep away Evil from us, in such a degree,
that it may not grieve us, piercing us too deep, that we may not fall into
Temptations, murmurings and discontents against God; into Rages and Fury
against our selves: This is to bless us indeed, when our Minds and our
Condition are equally poised; when Divine Providence proportions our Condition
to our Minds, and our Minds to our Condition.

When God does not thus preserve Men's Souls, how do they fall, as Saul under an
Evil Spirit, forsaken of God? They fall first upon the edge, and point, of
their own edged, pointed Thoughts, and then upon their Sword. And thus it would
be with all Men, did not God sweeten their Spirits with his Blessings of
Goodness, as with the joys of Harvest, and sustain them with his benign
Influences, as with the gladness of Corn, Oil, and Wine.

God gives us many Documents of the force and vehemence of our Souls, in the
examples of some transported with Divine Joy, even to Ravishment; another
falling into greatest Agonies of Mind and Thought; in the dark and sad part of
whose condition, we are not to think, that they had greater sins, or sharper
thoughts, than others; but they are our Examples, and teach us, what we should
be, if God did not qualify us now; and what we shall be in Eternity, if not
reconciled to God, and thereby also to our selves; we shall fall with greatest
Fury and Rage upon our selves: For it is but a little thing, what a Man
executes with his own Hand upon his Body now, in comparison of those Rages,
wherewith he will fall upon himself in Eternity.

2. We have need to pray, That God would draw out our Souls now, that we might
see them, and know them; for we do not enough understand our Souls, we consider
them not, because we lie still. But why should it be hard to conceive? That as
Men's Souls are now awakened by Study, Observation, Action, so much more by
entering into another World, the most stupid Soul may be awakened, being let
loose out of the Body: It should be therefore our most earnest Prayer, that God
would open us to our selves, that we may not make provision for our selves
only, as so little, as we seem to be, and lest when we come to dye, we fall
into those horrible amazes, that will arise from being mistaken in our selves;
but that seeing, and knowing what we are, we may make so great a provision for
our selves, as our case requires, and so not be for ever miserable, through our
not so much as half measures of our selves, and provisions accordingly.

3. We have need to pray, That God would draw out our whole Minds upon himself,
and Christ our Lord, in a way of Desire and Affection, of Joy and satisfaction;
and that we may be replenished with such assurances of the love of the Father
in his Son, that we may have no occasion to be cruel to our selves: For as
extremity of want and hunger turns men, as Tigers, upon their own Flesh, so the
Horrors arising from the Wrath of God, and the unappeasable want of him,
enrage the Soul against it self; but the enjoyment of him infinitely blesses
and satiates it with pleasure, sweetens it into greatest love and kindness to
its own self. And the Spirit thus supported will bear any other infirmity; as
David, having God for his Light and Salvation, feared nothing; Habakkuk
deprived of all favorable appearances, neither the Fig Tree blossoming, nor
any Fruit on the Vines, the labor of the Olive failing, the Flock cut off from
the Fold, and no Herd in the Stalls, yet he rejoiced in the Lord, and gloried
in the God of his Salvation.

In the second place, We may upon this Head of Discourse, make these doctrinal
Recollections.

1. There is a high pitch of Happiness, or a very low degree of Misery, to
which every Man is prepared: For the further description of which, let us
consider the two great Orders of Spirits, Happy, and Miserable, Spirits; to one
of which we shall ever have a likeness.

The Head, the Supreme, the Prince of the first Order, is Jehovah himself, who
in the highest and most perfect Act of his own Infinite Understanding and Will,
and the highest Satisfaction in Himself, and enjoyment of Himself, lives from
Eternity to Eternity, the most Happy and only Potentate, with his Eternal Son,
and Spirit; without any Dissatisfaction, Discomposure, Weariness, or
Tediousness to Himself, or the least Shadow of impression upon him from Without.

This is infinitely clear concerning God; In his Presence is fullness of Joy, at
his Right Hand are Pleasures For Evermore.

If we could imagine, as indeed we cannot, because Experience so mightily
contradicts it, that any Prince should live in all those Delights and Pleasures
the most splendid Court affords, without any tediousness or satiety ten
thousand years; what a dark representation were this of God? though he could do
and enjoy all he would.

Let us then imagine higher, That a Prince of wisest, most refined, and
delightful Speculation, could live in the Height and perfect Rest of a most
pleasurable Contemplation, without the least disquiet; how lowly an Emblem
would this be of the infinite Blessedness of God? Now God made Man in his own
Image and likeness, so that the Soul of Man is capable of a communication of
this Blessedness, in the perfection of his Understanding and Will, enjoying God
with unexpressible Joy, and Peace, and yet in the highest Life of Action.

Under God are the Blessed Angels, of whom the Scripture speaks, both of their
Knowledge, Perfection, and Power, joined with Holiness and Obedience to God,
who have been Participants of the Glory and Blessedness of God, from the first
Dawn of Creation, and in all this time have not had least tiredness or
satiation, but highest Bliss and Joy. Next to these are the Spirits of Just Men
made perfect; who are by succession, as they go out of the World, taken into
this Happiness.

Now in all these Instances it plainly appears, to what a height of Happiness
Holy Men are designed, being made like God, equal to Angels, in the assurance
of which good Men's Souls enjoy the Consolations of that better state in this,
and are daily removed into it, when they dye.

For the Order of Spirits Miserable and Unhappy, Spirits, of which the Devil is
the Prince, although indeed there cannot be such a Misery, as should stand a
counterpoise to Gods Happiness; for Misery is but a retreat from God and his
Happiness, from his Favor and Grace, as Darkness is from Light, and being
under the Executions of his Wrath; yet all this is within the enclosure of a
Finite Being, and were there not an unchangeable Will of God, and a Decree of
his Justice, that he will not reverse, all Misery might be removed off from the
most Unhappy of Beings, and taken quite away.

But as things are, The Misery of Spirits may be thus understood in the great
Exemplar of it, the Misery of Fallen Angels, and the Prince of them, the Devil.

1. There is a Height and utmost stretch of Action. The Devil is represented as
always in Motion, from the first beginning of Misery he has no Rest, even
while he is in Chains, as fierce Mastives, he moves as far as he can, and rages
at the shortness of his Chain; he has had no sleepy moments of Non-action,
since the day of his fall, no Breathing Time, no Truce: Thus the Soul in Misery
is extended, as we now speak, day and night, that is perpetually, without
intermission, with an endless Action and Motion. Consider, what is Rest and
Sleep to a Man of a tormented Mind, and wearied Thoughts; a Sleep wherein he is
not scared with Dreams, and terrified with Visions, how unhappy does he think
himself in the want of it? how unwilling is he to be awakened out of it? And
from thence understand the Misery, of being perpetually awake in Misery.

2. There is an ignobleness, a baseness in all his Motions, he goes upon his
Belly, and eats Dust; he has no Motion that can give him comfort from any
glimmering of worthiness, or generosity in it; in all the multitude of his
Motions, he has none that can in the least cool the Furnace of his tormented
Thoughts: Any Degree of Worthiness in his Action would abate his Unhappiness.
All is full of Cruelty, Envy, Black and Malicious Design, breathing the Fire
and Smoke of Hell: He goes up and down, Angry, Fierce, Malecontent, Cruel to
himself, and full of Rage against others; as a Ravening roaring Lion seeking
whom he may devour. This is the state of miserable Souls, There is a continual
gnawing and scorching of wickedness, without any thing to cool the tip of the
Tongue, any the least intention and motion of Goodness, that might cool one
flaming hellish Thought: There is a Rage against God, an Envy at the
Blessedness of Heaven, returning with unexpressible Misery, upon those
unhappiest of Beings, a Hatred, an Execration of themselves.

3. There is a Horror, Amazement, and trembling Sense of the Supreme Justice,
Holiness, and Power of God over him, with the Conscience of his own Guilt; The
Devils believe Jam: 2. 19.
and tremble. The Fountain of Life, Beauty, and Happiness is Hell from Heaven
to them; because they find nothing in themselves, but distance, and
contrariety, horrid enmity and hatred: They are convinced of that High Justice
and Righteousness in the midst of so great Wrath and Vengeance upon them; and
this without leisure or intermission, and therefore perpetually shake with Fear
and Horror, while they are most Daring against God. Thus also the Souls of
Damned Men lie for ever trembling under the Justice of God. Now we know by
experience, that some Diseases exercising Men with a continual Trepidation, are
therefore most dreadful and dismal; and some Men's Consciences being all in an
Agony, put them into a most lamentable Trembling. What then is the condition of
those, who fall into the extremity of these things, and that For Ever? Into
which yet insensible Men hasten in great numbers.

2. Hence we may learn the more general state of Good and Bad Men here in the
World, and the Reasons of both: The state of Good Men not full of the
Consolations of God; of wicked Men not full of the Horrors, and Torments of
Hell.

In Good Men, there is a poize between the discomforts of bodily inconvenience,
and of the present life, the fears and sad apprehensions that pertain to their
state toward God, and the great danger of Hell, on one part; and the Favors
of God to them, in the gracious supports of this life natural, inlaid with the
more blessed Tokens of his love to them in Christ, the immediate Divine
Comforts he gives them, the hopes they have escaped that greatest of dangers,
on the other part.

In Bad Men, there is a poize between the pleasures and enjoyments of Life
present, the great inapprehensiveness of Eternal Things, yea foolish Hopes and
Dreams of the Blessedness and Happiness of it, giving greater scope to
sensuality to play its part; these in one Scale: The many Troubles, Disquiets,
and Disappointments they meet with in this World, the sudden Blows of
Conscience, and qualmy forethoughts of another World, lying in the other Scale.

Now all this is a low state of Souls, and a dispensation of God for holy and
wise Reasons, intending such a kind of state for the time being; like that of
the Jewish Worship, and Promises, which were only outward, and terrene, till
the time of Reformation; so is the state of the Souls of Men here in the World,
both of good and bad Men.

This state of Good Men in the World, is both in Mercy and Judgment upon the
World.

In Mercy, For there being such a mixture of the Interests and Concerns of Good
Men, with the general Affairs and Interests of the World, there is for their
sakes a great care and heed of Providence over the course of this World; and as
it is usually said, If there were never a Righteous Man in the World, the whole
World would be destroyed; so if their Interests were taken out of it, there
would be a present Ruin upon the Affairs of it; their Persons and Interests
are of great advantage to the World, that it might not be managed by Evil Men
only.

Now if their Affections were so highly moved after God, Eternal life, and the
Things of that Life, and the Consolations received from them were answerable,
all the Things of this Life would be of such an undervalue, that they would not
mind the care of Things below, nor have any Interests here, as the Primitive
Christians, that were negligent of all Things, but the Better Resurrection.

Again, It is in severity to the World, for if there were such an illustrious
presence of Religion, and the Life of it, it would certainly draw many more in
to it, as many in those first Times, that had never considered Christianity
before, ran into the embraces of it, though upon the Sword, into Flames, and
present Death; but now Religion appearing so despicable, not only in regard of
its address, carried off from Sense, but much more in the want of the Power,
Life, and Luster of it self, it comes to pass so very few are invited into it.

It is also in chastisement upon Good Men, and the remaining corruption of
degenerate Nature, that they are not more exalted in the Heights and Glories of
Christianity, and its Consolation.

In the second place, That Men unconverted to God are not for the generality
more affrighted, and affected with the Fears of eternal Wrath and Punishment,
and only moved with the present Evils, according to the degree of impression
they make upon them, is in long-suffering, it being much better for Men
themselves, and all they have to do with, that they are not in those horrible
conditions of Saul, Judas, and Cain, who were not promoted to Repentance by
those Terrors, and became a Terror to all round about them: For if Men have
not that only use of them, that can countervail their pain, it is a Mercy to be
out of this Hell, while they are here upon Earth. Taking then the state of the
World, as it is, it is a great Argument of the Patience of God toward Men, and
without which the condition of the World could not stand: For Men in those
Terrors mind not the World, while they are in it, and violently hasten out of
it; so that if the generality of Men unreconciled to God were in such a case,
there would be no management of Humane Affairs, no enjoyment of them, but an
universal distraction, and disconsolateness.

And yet there is a Justice in it also, That Men in a Dream of Peace, and deep
Ignorance of their Souls, and an Eternal Condition, should move to the Misery
of it, and not consider whither they move; their Souls and the Eternal
Condition being so much concealed from them. And that great Atheism,
Wickedness, and general sensuality of the World, takes advantage and
encouragement from hence, and Godliness hereupon becomes not a matter of
necessity, but of the Grace of God, and the holy choice of Good Men.

3. Yet in the third place, God may raise the Soul to a great Degree of the
Consolations of Eternal Happiness, and impose a great Degree of the Terrors of
Hell upon it, if he pleases.

Of the first, David's expressions are a Testimony; They shall be abundantly
Psalm. 36. 8, 9.
satisfied with the bounties of thy House: Thou shall make them drink of the
River of thy pleasures: For with thee is the Fountain of life: In thy Light
shall we see Light: Because Psalm. 62. 3.
thy loving kindness is better than life, my lips shall praise thee. S. Paul's
challenge of all things, and defying them, as not able to separate from the
love of God in Christ. These are, Romans 8.
with innumerable others, high expressions of a fully satisfied assurance of
the Favor and Grace of God, and the Happiness that is to be found in it.

Of the latter, What dreadful instances are Cain crying out, My sin is Genesis 27.
38.
greater than can be forgiven; Esau yelling out so dreadfully for the Blessing;
Saul under an evil Spirit, going to the 1 Samuel 28. 7.
Witch, because God had forsaken him, and at last falling upon the point of his
Sword; Ahitophel hanging himself; 1 Samuel 31. 5.
and Judas strangled with his melancholy Horrors?

If a Man's Understanding, Affections, Thoughts, Desires, with all their
Retinue, were extended, and run high upon God, and Holiness, and the eternal
enjoyment of him, and the comforts of God delighting all these, and the Oil of
Grace gliding along upon them, even down upon the Body, like the precious
Ointment on the Head of Aaron, going down to the skirts of his Garments; how
sweet would these interweavings of the Soul and its truest and everlasting Joys
be, even unspeakable and full of Glory?

On the other side, when a Man is first racked, and stretched into vast and
insatiable Desires, without satisfaction, and rolled up and down upon a
thousand uneasy Thoughts concerning them, and, instead of mitigation, and
cooling allays, has the guilt of his unworthy Actions, and the fears of a
Justice to disquiet him; how uneasy must such a Man's Soul of necessity be to
him? and if these are wreathed close about him, and pressed home upon him by
the Indignation of God, let out against him; as the former is a little Image of
Heaven, so is this of Hell.

Now it is certain, No man has power over his own Spirit, either to damp the
gracious and merciful movings of his Divine Spirit, or to keep out and forbid
the angry entrances of Divine Displeasures, and Revenges: God is the God of the
Spirits of all Flesh, and acts them as he pleases. No man can imprint upon
himself the reasons of Comfort or Disquiet, or flash into his own Soul, Joy or
Sorrow, but under the guidance and supreme government of God, who gives
quietness, so as none can make trouble, and so hides his face that none can
behold him: As he pleases he casts down, and raises up, and none can stay his
hand, so much as within themselves, or say unto him, What do thou?

So great is his Freedom herein, that he sometimes answers Men, that are
strangers to him, in the joy of their hearts, all their lives; and his word of
Blessing goes along with the ordinary favors he does them, so that the Fears
of Wrath to come are hid from them; and on the other side, those whom he has
made his Friends, and will use so for ever, are covered with a Cloud, nay
sometimes he sets them as a mark for his arrows, and even cuts them off with
his Terrors.

For he is the great Actuator of Men's Spirits, without whom, as the first
Mover, the whole Motion of Nature would stand still; and he disposes them so,
that a Man does, nor can to any satisfactory account find out himself; and he
therefore feels his greatest security in resting upon God, and being guided by
him.

4. But Eternity is that vast season, in which God brings all to a righteous
certainty, and which he has appointed for Happiness without allay, or Misery
without mixture, which may be made out three ways.

1. In that in Eternity the whole power of the Soul runs together one and the
same way: In this life the holiest Men have great allays of their holiest and
best Motions, and countermotions of Discontent, and Unbelief to their greatest
Comforts; Evil men have generally at least some pleasures, hopes, motions to
their advantage, notwithstanding all the crosses they meet with in the World,
or the secret sounds of horror they have at certain times in their Consciences.

In this World the Soul sends out parties of it self, diverse ways, or to
several ends. The Judgment may be pleased in the main, and yet the Affections
disturbed; or these more still, and yet the Judgment dissatisfied and
disturbed: One Thought goes out in high discontent, another flies after it,
recalls, and reconciles it: On the other side, one Thought leaps out of the
Soul with pleasure, another reproves, daunts, and dejects it with a correction
of its haste. But in Eternity the Soul is united in its Motions, which way one
Faculty goes, all go; and the Thoughts are all concentred as in one whole and
entire Thought of Joy or Torment.

2. In Eternity there is but one state of the Soul, and the prospect of the
Soul is but one. In this World change of place, conversation, difference of
Events raise different Affections and Motions of Mind; varieties of businesses,
occasions, and tempers upon them, do so distract and move all sorts of Men up
and down, that there is nothing pure and unconfounded: In Eternity there is one
state of Soul, and so one action; there is nothing to mix with either
condition: It is one Happiness, or one Misery.

Even the most sad and dismal prospect, the prospect upon Hell and Eternal
Misery, gives to the Saints reason of admiration, and highest adoration of God,
in their deliverance from it: On the other side, the most glorious Blessedness
and Happiness of Heaven, is to Men in Hell, when they look up to it, their
highest Amazement, and inflames their Torment, by reason of their envy against
God, and those that dwell with him in Heaven, their reflections upon their own
Misery, and Rage against themselves. Thus one State, one Action, one Happiness,
one Misery, and all to the height, fill Eternity.

3. Then it is that God proceeds to the highest actuation of the Soul, drawing
out all the powers of it, and setting open all the Windows of Heaven upon it,
pouring into it all the always full, and ever flowing Vials of his Love, Grace,
and Mercy; or of his Power, Wrath, and Justice; which as they are unintermitted
themselves in their streams, so it is impossible, the Soul that is moved, or
driven by them should rest from an action answerable to them.

4. In Eternity there is a Body fitted to the Happiness or Misery of the Mind.
In this World Happiness is dulled by the stupidities, or clogged with the
slowness of the Bodies Motion, or grows cloying by its incapacity to receive
more. The pains and griefs of it call the Mind from its enjoyments, to take
pity on it, so that the inconveniences of the Body allay the happiness of the
Mind; on the other side, this Body submits it self to speedy dissolution, if
its own pains are extreme; and its griefs if leisurely and tolerable are abated
by being so, as, if over burdensome, they destroy: The troubles of the Mind are
much blunted by the grossness of Body, in which the Mind cannot feel perfectly
its own sentiments; and the pleasures and divertisements of that Body do often
allay the anguish of Conscience; as Cain grew to some quiet with himself, by
building a City: But in Eternity Genesis 4. 17.
the Body is also spiritual, that is, wholly prepared to the use and service of
the Spirit, and to receive, and attend, and display its Motions, and condition,
to feel its pleasures and pains, to bear its Glory or Deformity openly; all
kinds of these present bodily Pleasures and Pains, Beauties or Deformities
being then wholly removed. For either the Happiness or Misery of mere Body is
neither worthy of God, nor of the Soul, but would be on the one side a sottish
Pleasure, on the other side like the tormenting of a Beast, and so not
agreeable to God, or the discourse of Scripture, however things may be
represented to our sense, and however the display of these things may pass into
the Body, and be all seen there; yet we know, the most excessive pleasures of
Body interrupt the proper motions of Soul, in which true Happiness or Misery
lie, for neither is a man drenched in an irrational pleasure, nor tormented,
and he knows not why; but there is an orderly motion, a sense of sin and guilt,
of the supreme Justice of God in his righteous Executions of Judgment; in
Happiness an adoring of Infinite Grace and Mercy, a Rational Taste of Holy and
Divine Pleasures.

I shall now, as a Conclusion, draw up all this Discourse into these practical
Conclusions flowing from the whole.

1. Hereby I understand I have an immortal and everlasting Soul, to take care
of; we look upon our selves as Flesh and Blood, but we do not consider these
Immortal Spirits, and their great Powers, Understanding, Imagination, Will,
Conscience, Affections, and the motion of these to be Everlasting: We do not
examine, whether our Souls have a true Health, Peace, and Safety, and a good
Provision made for them? Whether our Consciences are quiet, and upon good
grounds? Whether our Affections are purified and holy? For a man to consider
his Soul thus, is indeed to consider a man's self; What shall it Luc. 9. 2^.
profit a man, if he gain the whole World, and lose himself? The Soul is a true
Self, and how dreadful will the mistake appear to men? who have counted the
Body, and the Interests of that, the only Self; and this other true, the
greatest Self starts out: A Self, that now lies under as many Covers, as a Body
under a multitude of Garments, and so is concealed: But then it breaking out,
and not being provided for, that great principle of self preservation, finding
now its greatest Object, will force a man to cry out with a most dreadful
Ejulation and Complaint, Oh this false Self that I have labored for, how has
it deceived me? My very Self I never thought of, and so have lost it: What
shall I give now in exchange for this my true Self?

2. I hereby understand, I am made for Holiness, as the true Peace and
Greatness of my Spirit, for a converse with God, for an attendance upon him,
for an observation of his Favor and Countenance toward me, and that herein is
the Life of my Spirit; and on the other side, I am very apt to be tempted to
sin, and drawn away from God, to live at a distance from him, to lose him, and
herein at last will be found the Torment and Hell of Souls; and therefore I
have greatest reason to be awakened about these things, and earnestly to pray
to God, that he would put me into a high and vigorous action concerning them,
and to be extremely unsatisfied, when I find my self insensible concerning
them, and therefore to labor earnestly to be in a good state and condition in
relation to them.

3. I hereby understand, I am made and designed, and shall certainly be
unexpressibly Happy or Miserable to extremity; and who can say this to himself,
without highest concern upon his own Soul? If any one should tell us, we were
ordained to be one of these, extraordinarily happy and prosperous, or
deplorably unhappy, and were about to read our Fate or Doom to us, and that we
had considerable Reasons to believe such a one, who would not with a most
trembling suspense of mind wait what it should be? When any one is to receive
the Issue of his Cause from a Judge or Jury, how high and impatient is his
expectation? But how much more should our Thoughts wait for this Issue of
Things? and God has placed it in the motions of these our own Thoughts; for
when they move, enlightened with his Countenance, cleansed and anointed with
his Grace, ennobled with his Spirit, delighted with his Consolations, this is
Heaven begun, this is Happiness growing up: When they are base for want of his
Spirit, impure with Lust and dishonorable Affections, full of rancour and
bitterness, and all spotted and stained with guilt; this is Hell in the
Foundations of it laid.

And however my Soul lie still now, yet when I see how many things draw out
men's Souls, even in this Life, Education, better Converse, Solitude, some great
danger or loss in the world, higher Condition, Sickness, some notable
Discourse, as in Foelix; how much more must I needs think the change into
Eternity will do it? and therefore no silence of my Soul now can encourage me
upon serious consideration to be careless of it.

4. I hereby understand my unspeakable dependence upon the Grace of God, and
his Free Favor, and hence learn to humble my self before him to nothing;
seeing my Happiness consists in those free Beams of his Favor, in the light of
his Countenance, in his setting my Soul into a gracious Motion by his Spirit,
and raising the Motions of my Spirit to a high communion with him in Bliss; for
seeing I can so little yield my self the accounts of Happiness, and receive
them all from him, and can so little move my self upon them, when they are
offered by him, I am inconceivably bound and beholden to him, both to open the
Fountain of Life (that is himself) to me, and to move me by his Spirit, that I
may move.

On the other side, If he leaves me to my self, what Evils shall I run into?
and treasure up torment, and sharpen stings against my self by it; and how can
he inflame my Soul with his Indignation? and to what degrees he pleases, both
now and for ever: For if he hide the face of his Mercy, who can behold him?
What Reason have I therefore to reverence him with Godly Fear, and to
acknowledge him with greatest dependency! I humbly therefore say, as the
Apostle, not only, by the Grace of God, I am what I am; but by the Grace of God
alone, I hope, what I hope to be.

5. I hereby understand, what a great necessity I have of Jesus Christ my Lord,
the Son of the Wisdom, Glory, Power, and Holiness of God, the Son of his Love;
for he is the Atonement, His Blood offered by the Eternal Spirit, is the most
excellent Thing in Heaven or Earth, and that only which can purge the
Conscience; the most excellent and divine Instrument of Pacification with God,
and within the Conscience it self: Through him the Holy Spirit is given, by him
is there an entrance into that Holy of Holies, that Heaven within the Veil; for
as the value of Souls for which our Lord gave himself exalts his Redemption,
the greatness of the Misery from which they are rescued, the greatness of the
Happiness to which they are exalted, all glorify the Savior of Souls; so do
these Souls, of a Nature so supreme, require so great a Ransom and Mediator, no
lower, no lesser a Price can countervail them; and it argues them to be a
Nature so supreme, that so great a Mediator undertook so infinitely for them.

6. Hereby I understand, the great and extreme Evil of sin; for if the breaches
and disorders of the Creation are so great arguments of the Evil of sin; how
much more the breaches, the wounds, the horrors of Conscience! There had never
been such a Thing as a wounded Spirit, had it not been for sin: There had been
only perfect Peace, Glory, and Honor, Happiness, Pleasure, Joy and Blessedness
of Spirit; sin introduced Debasement and Misery.

7. I hereby understand, what a worthless inconsiderable Thing the World is, if
truly estimated, because it is neither that which can be, or ought to be the
Happiness of a Man, because not the Happiness of the Soul; and if God be
pleased to raise any Soul above it, what can it be now? Indeed a Man may be
quiet with it for a time, but the Soul set upon God, and Christ, and Eternal
things, is set where it may rest for Ever; and it may be so highly set, and
raised upward, that it may have no need of the World, nor of any thing in it;
for in the greatest want of it, even now in this life, the Spirit, born up by
God, and Christ, by sense of and interest in him, and Eternal Happiness, will
bear its infirmity; but because this World can do nothing to help in the
amazements of Conscience, in the Agonies of Death, in the Terrors of Eternity,
wherein can it serve us? But Godliness has the promise 1 Timothy 4. 8.
of this life, and of that which is to come; Now our meat and drink may be to
do Gods will, much more will it be the perfect enjoyment of Eternity.

This World then, and the life we live in it, is only of use to make friends
of, that we may be received into everlasting Habitations, to sow to the Spirit
with; to cast this life, and all the interests of it, as a Corn of Wheat into
John 12. 24, 25.
the ground; for except it dye into a higher, and more excellent life, it
abides alone; we know the utmost can be made of it, it can never rise higher,
than it is, and all that can be made of it, the total account is but dying,
unhappy man, but being thus sown, it rises in a flourish much more excellent,
and brings forth fruit unto Eternal life.

8. Hereby I understand the state of this World, and of all men in it, and
their Motion, even as I understand how the Happiness or Misery of Eternity
lies: For when I think of Thoughts, Memory, Affections, Conscience, always and
for ever in act and motion; either upon the Consolations, or Terrors of God;
and those Powers or Motions inwardly Good and Holy, or Evil and Wicked, so is
Happiness or Misery.

So when I see in the World such an even poise, as there is between the
vigorous life of Grace and Comfort, and the suppressions of it, through so
great concernedness either in the pleasures, or afflictions of this present
life, in Good Men; I herein see, and understand, God does not call out the
Spirit to those high and illustrious Motions of Grace, that are proper to so
excellent a state as Grace is; and hence I conclude, the strength and enjoyment
of Good Men is not comparable to what it might be upon so excellent Principles.

Again, On the other side, when I see a like poise in the state of Evil Men,
between the Trouble and Disquiets of this World, and the Pleasures of it,
between some secret Fears of a future State, and the insensibleness of it; I
plainly apprehend, the Patience of God preserves Men from those Horrors they
are so every way capable of.

And when either of these Conditions are brought near to an agreement, or full
correspondence with those Principles, upon which they are fixed; that is, to
those Joys unspeakable and full of Glory, or to those Woes and Agonies of Mind
that cannot be eased, they approach nearer to what they shall be For Ever. And
from both these I collect the certainty of a Future and Everlasting State.

9. I hereby understand, what it is to lose a Soul: It is not to be discharged
and acquitted from a Soul, to be as the Beasts, as the Israelites desired to be
as the Heathens about them. How glad would wicked men be at last, if this could
be? if their Spirits might go downward, if they could be rolled up into utter
senselesness, or become nothing; if Rocks might fall upon them, and the
Mountains cover them. But this cannot be, Men cannot be Beasts, though they
desire it; God has known them above all the residue of this lower Creation,
and brings them to a reckoning so exact, that none can be lost in this sense:
The number of Souls cannot be lessened or wanting.

The loss then of a Soul is to be lost from true Beauty, Excellency, and
Goodness, to have an abhorred Deformity, so that they cannot endure to behold
themselves, who have lost the Image of God. If ever any Man did recoil from
himself, beholding an ugliness, where naturally should be a Beauty; or did
abhor himself, being confounded with the sense of his own unworthy Actions; the
height hereof is in Hell, both the Deformity, and the Apprehension of it: And
this is one degree of the loss of a Soul, its horrible degradation from it self.

Further, It is to be lost from Life and Blessedness, into an Eternity of Woe
and Misery; as a Man is lost that is taken Captive, and made a Slave, that is
condemned to the Mines or Galleys; to be for Ever the Captive of Justice, the
Slave of the Wrath and Justice of God. This is the loss of a Soul; and it is
the greatest loss, like the loss of the Eyes to the Body, or the loss of Life
it self; in comparison of which Riches are nothing; a loss that a Man would
redeem with a thousand Worlds, and the Pleasures of so many Worlds heaped
together, and instead thereof undergo the severest mortification of many Ages
of life, and suffer Martyrdoms repeated without number, that he might recover
the lost Jewel, his Soul.

And to conclude, It is the worst way of losing, by which a Soul is lost, it is
a losing it by sin and wickedness; not like losing life in a Noble Cause,
wherein a Man perishes with Grandeur and Majesty. Hoc tantum nobile feci, quod
perii. Not so well as losing what we value by mere misfortune, but as a Man,
that by Gaming and Debauchery loses his Estate, or by Treason and abhorred
wickedness, loses both Life and Honor together.

There is no way of losing a Soul, but by wickedness, which makes it always a
most accursed loss: And they that are so lost are an abhorring of God, Good
Angels, Holy Souls, and even of themselves; like the Carcases spoken of by Esaias
the Prophet, Whose Worm, bred out of themselves, dies not, and the fire
prepared to consume them is not quenched; and they are for Ever an abhorring of
all Flesh.

Lastly, From these just Measures I have in the former Discourse given of a
Soul, I find very satisfactory solutions to those Pretenses, that are thought
so mighty, against the Doctrine of the Resurrection. For when I consider, that
Body and Matter are always flowing, and in a continual variation, that they are
not stable enough to be much valuable in making up the person of a Man, I
easily adjudge that Honor due to a more noble and excellent Being within; for
if we respect a Body distinctly, who can give an account of the daily Decays
and Reparations, the Accessions and Diminutions of it, the alterations of it in
its ascendency from Infancy to Youth, from Youth to Manhood, the gradual
declinations of it into Old Age? Yet we still account it the same Person,
though it cannot be in a distinct sense the same Body; therefore it must be the
conjunction with the same never growing, never decreasing Soul, that makes it
esteemed the same. I then collect, whatever of Matter is assumed into a Vital
Union with the Soul, and fitted for its operations, is truly called its Body;
and do we not find, the Soul has the same love for the new parts of Matter,
that daily accrue to it, so long as they continue in conjunction with it? and
that it loses its love to those parts of Matter, before united with it, as soon
as they are loosed, and fly from it: It imprints rationality upon them by its
own use of them, and they become wild, irrational, and insensible again in
their departure from it; they are as guilty, as Matter can be, when the Soul
vitiously inspires them; and as virtuous, as Bodily parts can be, when it uses
them in virtuous Motions; the Soul is punished, when they being united with it
are in disorder, and finds pleasure in their ease, and good condition. It is
yet indifferent to Matter it self, whether the parts of it burn in a Fever, or
are in the most equal temper, and so throughout all the varieties of Bodily
State; and it is as indifferent to the Soul, whether these material particles
are of its older or newer assumption into the participations of its own life,
and resentment; its care for, and concern in them is all one. This then being
laid, as a certain ground, (for I think it cannot be denied) that the sameness
of the Soul retains with it self the whole account of the sameness of the
person, no man need entangle himself in unnecessary scruples concerning the
Resurrection, or think the Wounds of Atheism deep, and incurable, upon this
point of Christianity.

For first, Let us take that, which seems the most natural sense of the
Apostles Discourse of this point, 1 Cor. 15. 36, 37, 38. That the dying Body is
as Seed thrown into the Earth, which Joh. 12. 24.
dies, that is dissolves, and melts as it were into the Earth, and communicates
its seminal virtue to it, and from thence it rises in the very same kind of
Body, though with much advantage, and flourish of Nature; we may then conceive
a great part of the whole lump or universe of Matter, communicated with the
seminal virtue of Humane Bodies, full of that Vis plastica, which lies hid and
dead now. But as God does, according to the several Seasons of his own
appointment, raise out of the Earth the ordinary Seeds, so does he, in that
great Period, or Harvest of the World, draw out of the whole Plot of Nature,
the Bodies of every Man, Woman, and Child, the seminal virtue of which remain
all along, though concealed; And as the rising again of Seeds in common Nature,
in the main follows the kind of Seeds dying into the Earth, so it is in this
higher and proper Resurrection: Yet there are very great variations of
circumstances too, between the Seeds sown, and their rising again, so there is
in this Resurrection; insomuch that, though there is certainly so much as to
distinguish and appropriate every man's Body to himself, and so much, that a
vicious, unclean, and unsanctified Body sown rises the same; and a holy
purified Body, made the Temple of the Holy Ghost, rises such; and this latter
with advantage, and that so great, that the Apostle tells us, We know not what
we 1 John 3. 2.
shall be, only this we know, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he
is: And the Apostle Paul resolves it into this, God gives a Body as it pleases
him; a Body spiritual, incorruptible, and immortal, conformed to the glorious
Body of the Son of God, and so united with the Soul for Ever.

And further than this, to approach in a more strict and literal sense to the
Article of the Resurrection. In all the revolutions of Matter, out of one shape
into another, or the vicissitudes of it in the Bodies of Men, entering first
into the Body of one Man, then of another, there is yet no loss of Matter, the
Omnisciency of God keeps it all under a strict account, distinguishes it all;
his Omnipotency preserves and disposes it, he knows how, and is able, to summon
it from every corner; there can then be no want of any particle of any man, and
however some of the same Matter may have been common to many Men, yet we may
with ease conceive some substantial parts of all Humane Bodies kept so distinct
by God, as to make up out of them to every Man his own Body, at the
Resurrection, in as full a sense, as Eve was made of the Rib of Genesis 2. 22.
Adam, and taken out of Man; for we cannot suppose that done without any
addition, but that God made that the Foundation, and built upon it by his own
Omnipotency; and yet the whole was so like Adam, that he knew Eve was Bone of
his Bone, Flesh v. 23.
of his Flesh; even so the Soul shall know its own Body, notwithstanding any
alteration or addition: And how little an addition needs in the making up a
spiritual Body? Resurrection is too great a Mystery to search into; but this is
plain, The same Soul with so much the same Body, much eases the Doctrine of the
Resurrection to our Thoughts.

Nor do I intend this should be understood, as the least intimation, that there
is not further proof from Scripture, reconcilable with the principles of true
Reason, to ascertain this Article of Christian Faith, in the utmost latitude it
is asserted by the Church; but I have only taken advantage from the greatness
of the Soul, to show how far the Doctrine of the Resurrection may be verified
against the boldest infidelious Sadducee.

There remains nothing then, but a general review of the state of the Soul in
these Bodies of the Resurrection; upon which I have made frequent remarques
already, and shall only give now this brief Recapitulation.

The Bodies of that future state are so proportioned and qualified, that they
do not at all damp the lively operations of a blessed, and for ever appeased,
or, the enraged motions of a disturbed and tormented Mind. The Bodies of the
Saints are fitted to the choice and beatifying Action of their Souls; and those
of the Condemned, have such kind of Bodies, as give way to the play of a
Conscience, full of the stings of guilt, and rebukes of Justice; of the
horrors of sin, and restless Exagitations of it self; for could these motions
be dulled by Bodies, there would neither be scope for Divine Mercy, nor
Justice, in the other World: But then it is, that the Bodies of Men are
prepared for the greatest capacities of Pleasure or Pain, Fine to take in every
intimation of either, of freest reception and strength to endure, and bear, in
a state of immortality and incorruption to last; which is the difference
between the present state of Bodies, and the future; for even an Excess of
Pleasure here gluts and overcharges Bodily Nature, and oppresses it; from pain
and pressure it vanishes, or is ground to Powder by it: But this immortal state
of Bodies is filled with Happiness, Pleasure, and Delight, and yet those Bodies
not surcharged; and full of Unhappiness and Misery, yet they abide by it,
shrink not from, but rejoin themselves to all they endure, having put on
immortality.

Now this Misery and Unhappiness of the Body arises first from the guilt, and
confusion of the Soul, that falls upon it; even as we see the sorrow of the
Mind here in the World, prints it self upon the outward Man; and the shame and
secret confusions of guilt, of which the Mind is full, diffuse themselves upon
the whole surface of exterior Nature, and make the aspect mean and confounded:
On the other side, the Peace, Righteousness, and Heavenly Joy of the Saints
break out, and illustrate their Bodies; even as we see now a cheerful Heart
makes a Countenance full of Light, and a good frame of Soul beautifies the
whole Man; A Man's Wisdom now makes his Face to shine, and in Eternity the
clearness shall not be only doubled, but in endless degrees grow brighter, even
to the brightness of the Sun, for so they shall shine out in the Matt. 13. 43.
Kingdom of their Father.

2. The Bodies of Saints have a distinct Happiness and Glory, besides that
which flows from the Soul; and it is that by which Almighty Goodness and Wisdom
fits them to the state of the Soul; a Fashioning there is of Bodies like to the
Glorious Body of Christ, which returns with greatest delight and satisfaction
upon the Soul: On the contrary, the Bodies of wicked Men not accomplished with
that Glory, but punished with a deformity, increase the unhappiness and torment
of the Soul. We see the Soul now takes pleasure in the grace and happy order of
its Body, and is dejected by any thing loathsome, and to be abhorred in it: This
will be much more in the unchangeable state; God so disposing, that the Soul
and Body lie closer, and nearer one to another; and the passes and
reciprocations of Good and Evil are much freer, and more penetrating; and
therefore Heaven and Hell are so often described in Scripture by things proper
to Bodies, because they are most sensible to us now; and because too the
Happiness or Misery (though it be for the Souls sake alone, originally and
principally, yet) as far as the Nature of Body united to the Soul extends, do
fully and on every side inclasp, and encompass Bodies, as well as Souls for
Ever.

FINIS.

