THE PROPOSAL OF Edw. Backwell, Esquire; TO HIS CREDITORS.
THE said Mr. Backwell having through all the course of those unhappy
Calamities which fell upon the Bankers and their Creditors by the stop of
Payments in the Exchequer, showed a more than common zeal and care for his
Creditors, by continuing the Payment of their Interest when others stopped, and
when he could receive none for that vast Debt due unto him from his Majesty;
Has reaped none other benefit from this his care, than an unfortunate Opinion
in his Creditors, That his Estate (which has been indeed for the most part
morgaged or sold to enable him to pay such Interest,) is sufficient to pay his
Debts, without any part of the sum granted to him by his Majesty's Patent
payable out of the Excise; By means whereof very few of his Creditors have
taken Assignments from him for their Debts, and even some who have taken such
Assignments from other Goldsmiths, have refused to accept them from him; So
that there is no one of the Bankers has so great a Debt due to him from his
Majesty as the said Mr. Backwell, or does owe so much to his Creditors.

But now being no longer able to continue the constant payment of his Interest,
but exceedingly desirous to manifest the continuance of his care for their
satisfaction to the utmost of his power, Does hereby Propose, To pay unto his
Creditors, one fifth part of the Principal (due to them) in Money, and the
other four fifth parts of their said Principal with all Interest due for their
whole Debt by Assignments of proportionable parts of the yearly Sum granted
unto him by his Majesty out of the Hereditary-excise.

The said Assignments to be made, and the one Moiety of the said fifth part to
be paid in Money (by the sale of such part of the Estate as will be soonest
sold) within three months after all his said Creditors Subscriptions to accept
this Proposal, and upon their discharging such Securities as they have for
their respective Debts: And the other Moiety with Interest for the same within
six months then next following, by the sale of the Residue of the said Estate
(which is conveyed to Trustees who are to raise the said fifth part by such
sale, together with such Money as they are to receive from his Majesty and the
Friends of the said Mr. Backwell for that purpose,) and in the mean time to be
secured by Bond from the said Edward Backwell and by the said Estate, in the
hands of the Trustees, (if they may safely proceed in raising the said fifth
part in manner aforesaid by the general consent of the Creditors.)

Wherefore this Proposal is upon condition that all his Creditors shall to the
satisfaction of his Trustees agree to accept and subscribe the same before
Christmas next, by such Writing as is left with Mr. Richard Snagg at Mr.
Valentine Duncomb's Shop in Lumbard-street, London, and to be there subscribed,
and in case of such as are absent, by some other Writing of the same tenure, to
be delivered herewith.

And the said Edward Backwell does with all imaginable Integrity assure his
Creditors, that he has no reserve, and that his whole Estate (the Patent for
perpetual Interest on the Excise excepted) will not be sufficient (when the
Engagements thereon which were made to enable him to pay their Interest are
discharged) to raise the said fifth part, if what is due from his Majesty be
not paid; but he relies on some of his Friends who have promised to assist him
in it, if it so fall short. And to the end his Creditors may not altogether
take his Word, he desires them to receive satisfaction herein from Sir William
Pritchard, Sir Benjamin Newland, Sir John Buckworth, John Bathurst and
Christopher Boon, Esquires; Persons of known Worth and Integrity, in London;
who have inspected and know the posture and truth of his Estate.

And in this assurance he hopes his Creditors will rest satisfied, and that
none of them through any vain hopes of making their Condition better than the
Rest, will proceed to any violent course, especially when they shall consider
that this is the utmost satisfaction they can ever receive from him or his
Estate; and that he has dealt with them in all candor and integrity, and that
the Interest which he has paid them in Money since the stop has amounted to
above 50 l. per cent. of their Principal Money, and is more by 50000 l. than he
ever received in Money from his Majesty. Which is the reason his Estate will
extend no further now than to one fifth part of the Principal in Money.

And he desires his Creditors will please to hasten their Subscriptions and to
take notice that the Payments of their fifth parts in Money shall be made in
course according to the Dates of their respective Subscriptions, which shall be
duly numbered, and the numbers of Payments shall be continually published in
the Gazette or otherwise as is usual; But the Subscriptions of such as are
absent above 20 Miles from London shall have the same preferrence as if they
had subscribed in London fourteen days sooner.

And the said Edward Backwell is the more instant and pressing with his
Creditors, to accept of this his utmost endeavor for their satisfaction, and
to be speedy in it, because finding his Estate growing daily less, he cannot be
without fear of having the same Fate attend his, as has done his Neighbor's,
to wit, That what would have paid five per Cent. by perpetual Interest, and was
so offered; by being refused, became not able to pay three, after almost that
value was spent to get a better satisfaction: And this he instances merely out
of the true desire he has (whilst he is living) to give his Creditors the best
Payment he is able.

And he humbly desires his Creditors to take notice that he pays by this
Proposal one fifth part of his whole Debt in Money, whereas others have paid
the greatest part of their's by Assignments only.

And as the great Losses and Damages he has sustained, and the Discouragements
he has lain under by and since the stop of Payments in the Exchequer (which
has reduced him to this Proposal) have never lessened his Care and Industry for
obtaining the Payment of the Perpetual Interest for the benefit of his
Creditors, so he assures them that their ready acceptance of this Proposal,
will be of great use to them not only by adding the interest of so many
Friends for the better obtaining the continuance of that Payment, but by
obliging the said Mr. Backwell to the continuance of his Care for that purpose;
which he hopes they will believe, since whatever will remain unto him for his
subsistence, will be part of that Fund.


