Binnings Miscellany Sermons.

August 23. 1670.
IT is Ordered by the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
That none shall Re-print, or Import this Book of Miscellany Sermons, by Mr.
Hugh Binning, nor any other of the said Authors Books, for the space of 19.
years to come, without license of the Printers hereof.

A. G.

HEART-HUMILIATION: OR, Miscellany Sermons Preached upon some choice Texts, at
several Solemn occasions: Never before Printed.

By that eminent Preacher of the Gospel, Mr. Hugh Binning, late Minister at
Govan.

Jer. 4. 14. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be
saved, etc.

EDINBURGH, Printed by James Glen, Anno DOM. 1676.

Christian Reader,
THis holy Preacher of the Gospel, had so many convictions upon his spirit of
the necessity of the duties of humiliation and mourning, and of peoples
securing the eternal interest of their souls for the life to come, by fleeing
in to Jesus Christ for remission of sins in his blood, that he made these the
very scope of his Sermons in many public Humiliations, as if it had been the
one thing which he conceived the Lord was calling for in his days. A clear
evidence whereof thou shall find manifested in these following Sermons upon
choice Texts, wherein the Author endeavors, not only to lay before thee, the
necessity of these duties of soul-humiliation, but also shows thee the
Gospel-manner of performing them, the many soul-advantages flowing from the
serious exercise of them, and the many soul-destroying prejudices following
upon the neglect of them: But above all, thou shall find him so fully setting
forth the sinfulness of sin, and the utter emptiness of self, as may convince
the most Pharisaically, elated spirits, and make them cry out with Ezra, Chap.
9. 6. O my God, I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to thee my God, for
our iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespass is grown up unto
the Heavens. Here thou may read such pregnant demonstrations of the
righteousness and equity of the Lords dealing even in his severest punishments
inflicted upon the children of men, as may silence every whisperer against
providence, and make them say, as Lam. 3. 22. It is of the Lords mercies we are
not consumed, even because his compassions sail not. And lastly, thou shall
perceive the inconceivable fitness and fullness of Christ as a Savior, and his
never enough to be admired tenderness and condescending willingness to accept
of humble, heart-broken, and heart-panting sinners after him, with such
plainness of speech demonstrat, as may enable the most bruised reed to quench
all the fiery darts of the devil, whereby he labors to affright them from
making application to Jesus for salvation. Now that the Lord would make those
and such like labors of his faithful servants useful and advantageous to thy
soul (Christian Reader) is the prayer of

Thy Servant in the Gospel of our dearest Lord and Savior, A. S.

At a public Fast in July, first Sabbath, 1650.
SERMON I.
Deuteronomy. 32. 4, 5, 6, 7. He is the Rock, his Work is perfect: for all his ways
are judgment: etc.
THere are two things may comprehend all Religion, the knowledge of God and of
our selves: these are the principles of Religion, and are so nearly conjoined
together, that the one cannot be truly without the other, much less savingly;
It is no wonder that Moses crave attention, and to the end he may attain it
from an hard hearted deaf People, that he turns to the Heavens and to the
Earth, as it were to make them the more inexcuseable. The matter of his Song is
both divine and necessary, throughout it all he insists upon these two, to
discover what they were to themselves, and what God was to them; he paralels
their way with his way, that they finding the infinite distance, might have
other thoughts of themselves and of him both. It is a Song it is true, but a
sad Song: The people of Gods mourning should be of this nature, mixed, not pure
sorrow. Its hard to determine, whither there be more matter of Consolation or
Lamentation, when such a comparison is made to the life: when God's goodness
and our evils are set before our eyes, which may most work the heart to such
affections. Nay, I think it is possible they may both contribute to both these.
Is there any more abasing and humbling principle then Love? How shall the
sinner loath it self in his glorious presence? will not so much kindness and
mercy so often repeated, as often as it is mentioned, wound the heart in which
there is any tenderness? And again, when a soul beholds its own ingratitude
and evil requital of the Lords kindness, how vile and how perverse it is, how
must it loath it self in dust and ashes? yet is not all ground of hope removed,
such a sad fight may make mixed affections: if we be so perverse and evil, then
he is infinitely good, and his mercy and goodness is above our evils; if we
have dealt so with him, yet is he the Rock that changes not, he is a God of
Truth and will not fail in his Promise. Nay, though it be sad to be so evil,
void of all goodness, yet may the soul bless him for evermore, that has
chosen this way to glorify his Name, to build up his praise upon our ruin;
May not a soul thus glory in sad infirmities, because his strength is perfected
i^ them and made manifest? May not a sou^ choose emptiness in it self, that it
may be behold en to his Fullness? How refreshing a view might the sadest look
on our misery and emptiness be, if we did behold his purpose of manifesting his
Glory in it? Ye see here a comparis^ instituted between two very unequal
partie^ God and Man, there is no likeness, let be equality in it, yet there is
almost an equality in unliknesse. The one is infinitely good and perfect; well,
what shall we compare to him, who is like thee O God among the gods? Angels
goodness, their perfection and innocence, has not such a name and appearance
in his sight; so then, there can be no comparison made this way, let no flesh
glory in his sight in any thing, but, let him that glories, glory in the Lord,
for in the sight of the glorious Lord, all things do disappear and evanish. But
surely nothing, though most perfect, can once come within terms of reckoning
beside him for any worth: Moses sees nothing to set beside God, that will
appear in its own greatness and native colors, but the Creatures evil and
sin, and if this be not infinite absolutely, or equal to his goodness, yet it
comes nearest the borders of infiniteness: so then, is God most perfect? is he
infinite in Goodness, in Truth, in Righteousness, etc? And so infinite, that
before him nothing appears good? none good save one, that is God. Yet we may
find another infinite, and it is in evil sinful man; and these two contraries
set beside other, do much illustrate each other. Its true that his Grace
super-abounds, and his goodness is more then the creatures sinfulness; yet I
say you shall not find any thing that comes nearer the infiniteness and
degrees of his goodness, then the sinfulness of men; How much the more
glorious he appears, so much the more vile and base does it appear.

If ye did indeed ponder and weigh these two Verses in the balance of the
Sanctuary, would not your heart secretly ask this question within you, do I
thus require the Lord, O foolish and unwise? yea, would ye not account your
selves mad to forsake the fountain of living waters and dig broken cisternes to
your selves. O! of how great moment were this to humble your souls to day? This
day ye are called to mourning and afflicting your souls. Now I know not a more
suitable exercise for a day of humiliation, or a principle that may more humble
and abase your souls, then the serious and deep consideration of these two,
what God is, and has been to us, and what we are and have proved to him; what
has made so many formal humiliations that have provoked him to anger?
certainly we do not either seriously think on any of these, or if on one of
them, yet not on both; the most part of you know no more in such a day, but a
name and ceremony of a little abstinence. Is this to sanctify a day to the
Lord? when ye do not so much as the people, who bowed down rheir head for a day
and spread sackloth under them. I wonder how ye think to pacify his Wrath, and
are not rather afraid of adding fuel and oil to the flame of his indignation.
Ye come here and sit as in former times, and what do ye more either here or at
home? There is no soul-affliction, no not for a day; the most part of you are
no more affected with your sins and his judgments, then if none of these
things were. Now I pray you, what shall the Lord say to us, when he speaks to
the Jews in such terms Isai. 58. 5. Is it such a fast that I have chosen, a
man for a day to afflict his soul? And do ye so much as afflict it for a day,
or at all? Is this then the Fast tha^ he will chose, to abstain from your
breakfast i^ the morning, and at night to compense the want of it and no more?
Is this an acceptable day to the Lord? the Lord upbraides the Jews, will thou
call this a fast? and what reason have we to ask you, is it possible ye think
ye do indeed fast to the Lord? I cannot think that the most part of you dare
say, that ever ye fasted or afflicted your souls.

Always here is the way, if we consider it, to spend a day acceptably to the
Lord, enter in a serious consideration of his Majesty, and your selves; study
on these two, till ye find your hearts bear the stamp of them, enlarge your
hearts in the thoughts of them; both are infinite, his goodness and power and
mercy, and your sin and misery, no end of them; what ever ye find good in God,
write up answerably to it, so much evil and sin in your selves and the land:
and what evil ye find in your selves and the land, write up so much goodness
and mercy in his account. All the names of his praise would be so many grounds
of your confusion in your selves, and would imprint so many notes of reproach
and disgrace upon the Creature, found so contrary to Him. This is even the
exercise God calls us to this day, to consider his ways to us, and our ways
to him, how he has walked, and how we have walked; because ye lose the sight
of these two, he sends affliction, because in our prosperity and peace we
forget God, and so our selves; as ye find this people did, when ihey waxed fat
they kicked against him, and forgot that he was their rock; we are so much
taken up with our own ease and peace, that we do not observe him in his
dealings; therefore does the Lord trouble our Peace, removes these things we
are taken up with, makes a public proclamation of affliction, and blessed be
his Name whose end is gracious, he means this, it is the proclamation of all
his Judgments, turn your eyes off your present ease here, consider what I am,
and what your selves are. No Nation so soon buries the memory of his Mercies, O
how soon are they drowned in oblivion, and we forget our own provocations, as
suddenly, therefore must he write our iniquities upon a rod, that we may read
them in great Letters, and he writes his former goodness in the change of his
Dispensations, when his way to us changes, that we may know what is past. This
is the great design that God has in the World, to declare himself and his own
Name, that it may be wondered and admired at by men, and this cannot be but by
our ruin, a basing us in the dust; He therefore uses to stain the pride of all
glory, that his alone may appear without spot. This is then the great
controversy of God with men and nations in all generations, they will not see
him alone exalted, and will not bow before him, and see their own vileness.
Why does he overturn Kingdoms and Thrones? why does he shake Nationes so
often? here it is, Gods controversy will never cease, till all men acknowledge
him in his highness and holiness, as the sole Fountain of all Life, and find
themselves vile, less then nothing, nay worse then nothing and emptiness. If
ye would then have God at peace with the land and your selves; here is the
compendious way, set him up a Throne of eminency in your hearts, and put your
selves in the dust, take with your own guiltiness and naughtiness, and
impossibility to help your selves, in your selves; hold these two still in your
eyes, that he may be alone exalted.

Look how unequal a match, Ver. 4. 5. He is the Rock, a Rock indeed, if we
speak of strength, lo, he is strong; if of stability, he is the Lord and
changes not, the ancient of days. Has not thou heard and considered this,
that the Almighty faints not, and wearies not. He holds forth himself in such a
name to his people, a ready, all-sufficient, perpetual and enduring refuge to
all that trust in him, and fly unto him as a Rock higher then they; and this
is the foundation that the Church is builded on, against which the gates of
hell shall not prevail. Gods Omnipotency for defense, his eternity,
faithfulness and unchangeablenesse to make that sure, his mercy and goodness
makes a hole in that Rock to enter in, a ready access for poor shipwrakt and
broken men, who have no other refuge. This is our Rock on which the Church is
builded, Jesus Christ, I Cor. 10. 4. Matthew. 16. 18. God were inaccessible in
himself, an impregnable Rock; how would sinners overcome him, and enter into
him, to be saved from Wrath? Nay, but Jesus Christ has made a plain way and
path, out of the waves of sin and misery, into this Rock higher then we; and so
the poor soul that is lost in its own eyes, and sees no refuge, is forced to
quite the broken ship of created confidence, for fear of perishing; how does it
find a door in this Rock to enter? and there is water to drink of, a fountain
of living waters comes out of it, and that is Christ.

Now all these Names of his praise rub so many marks of shame on his people; O
how sad is the secret reproof and expostulation contained in this commendation
of God, he has been a Rock to us, our refuge that we fled unto, and found
sure; for as in our straits, we mounted upon his power and were supported, when
the floods lifted up their waves, yet have we left our Rock, gone out from our
strength; He offers himself a Rock unto us, his fullness and all sufficiency for
us, and yet we leave the fountain of living waters and digs broken Cisterns,
had rather choose our own broken ship to toss up and down into. He abides for
ever the same; though we change, he changes not. How may it reprove our
backslidings, that we depart from our Rock, and where shall we find a refuge
in the day of indignation? Is there any created mountain but some floods of the
time will cover; therefore it is folly and madness to forsake this Rock that is
still above the floods, be is mightier then the noise of many waters. It may
reprove our unbelief, we change our Faith according to his Dispensation, our
Faith ebbs and flows as the Tide of his Providence, and thus we are as sticks
fleeting in the water, tossed up and down; but would ye be established as Mount
Sion? would ye be unmovable in the midst of great waters, that they shall not
come near unto you? then by all means get upon this Rock, that abides unmoved
in the midst of the waves, though they should beat on it, and the wind blow,
yet it is proof of all tempest; all things might be driven up and down about
you with the Lords dispensation, but ye should abide the same, and might look
round about you on the troubled sea of men's minds, of lands and estates. If you
come here, ye may make shipwreck, but ye shall not drown, though ye loss the
creatures comfort and defense, yet ye are on your Rock, which is established
before the rocks and mountains: you may be sure of salvation, he that made the
rocks and winds and seas, is your Rock.

His Work is perfect] As he does not trouble himself when all is troubled
about him; so he keeps him also in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on him,
so also what he does among men, though it cannot pass without man's censure, yet
it is in it self perfect, complete, without spot or defect. What is the subject
of all men's questions, doubts, complaints, censures, expostulations and such
like, of which the World is full? Its some one Work of God or other; there is
no Work of his Providence, but some man finds a fault in it, and would be at
the mending of it. neque Deus cum pluit, omnibus placet, if he give rain he
displeases many, if he withhold it again, we are as little pleased. The reason
of all this misconstruction is, we look on his Work by parcels, and takes it
not whole and entire, so it is perfect and cannot be made better. His Works
are perfect in relation to the beginning and original of them, his own
everlasting purpose; men often bring forth works by guess, by their purpose,
so no wonder it answer not their desire; but known to him are all his works
from the beginning, and so he does nothing in time, but what was his
everlasting pleasure; often we purpose well, and resolve perfectly, but our
practice is a criple, execution of it is maimed and imperfect; but all his
Works are carved out, and done just as he designed them, without the least
alteration; and if it had not been well, would he have thought on it so, and
resolved it before hand? His Works are perfect in relation to the end to which
he appointed them. It may be it is not perfect in it self, a blind eye is not
so perfect as a seeing eye, nay, but in relation to the glory of his Name, who
has a purpose to declare his power by restoring that sight, it is as perfect.
And in this sense, all the imperfection of the Creatures and Creation, all of
them are perfect Works, for they accomplish the end wherefore they were sent;
and so the night declares his Name and utters a speech as well as the day, the
winter as the summer, the wilderness as the fruitful field, for what is the
perfection of the Creature, but in as far as it accomplishes his purpose and
end, as the maker of it serves himself with it, and therefore all his Work is
perfect, for it is all framed in Wisdom, to his own ends, in number, measure
and weight; it is so exactly agreeing to that, that you could not imagine it
better. Again, his Work is perfect, if we take it all together, and do not cut
it in parcels, and look on it so. Is there any workmanship beautiful, if ye
look upon it in the doing, while the Timber lies in one part, and the Stones in
another? is that a perfect building when ye see one arm here, another there,
and a leg scattered beside them? has that image any comeliness? certainly no;
but look upon these united, and then they are perfect; Letters and syllables
make no sense, till ye conjoyn them in words, and words in sentences. Even so
is it here, if ye look on the day alone; the light of it being perpetual would
weary us, the night alone would be more so; but the interchange of them is
pleasant, day and night together make a distinct language of Gods praise; So
God has set prosperity and adversity the one over against the other, one of
them it may be, seems imperfect, nay, but it is a perfect Work that is made up
of both; Spots in the face commend the beauty of the rest of it.

If ye would then look upon Gods Work aright, look one it in the Sanctuaries
Light, and ye shall say, He has done all well. Join the end with the
beginning, and behold, they agree very well; Many things among us seem out of
order, many things uncompleat; The reformation of England, how great
obstruction was in the way of it? Is that now a perfect work? Yes certainly;
for if we knew his end and purpose, it is very well, and could not be bettered
by the Art of all men; His thoughts are far above our thoughts. The prosperous
and uninterrupted success of that party in England, is it a perfect work? yes
certainly, for if ye could behold their end ye would say so, they are set in
slippery places, their foot shall slide in due time.

Entertain in this thought in your heart, that he has done all well, let not
your secret thoughts so much as call them in question, if once ye question, ye
will quickly censure them; hold this persuasion, that nothing can be better
then what he does, nothing can be added and nothing diminished from them, he
does all in number, weight and measure, its so exactly correspondent to his
purpose and design, as if it were weighed out and measured out for that end.

Let this secretly reprove your hearts, the perfection of his Works stains our
works, O how imperfect are they? And which is worse, how impudent and bold are
we to censure his, and absolve our own? If he have a hand in our work, yet
these imperfect works, are perfect in regard of him, as we have a hand in his
perfect Works, yet his perfect Works are imperfect in regard of us.

SERMON II.
Deuteronomy. 32. 4. 5. He is the rock, his work is perfect; for all his ways are
Judgment: a God of truth, and without iniquity, Just and right is he. 5. They
have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the spot of his Children, etc.
THere are none can behold their own vileness, as it is, but in the sight of
Gods glorious holiness: Sin is darkness, and neither sees it self, nor any
thing else, therefore must his light shine to discover this darkness. If we
abide within our selves, and men like our selves, we cannot wisely judge our
selves; our dim sparkle will not make all the imperfections and spots appear;
but if men would come forth in the presence of his Majesty, who turns darkness
into light, and before whom hell is naked, O how base and vile would they
appear in their own eyes? Is it any wonder that the multitude of you see not
your selves, when holy Esaias and Job, had this lesson to learn? Esaias gets a
discovery of his own uncleanness in the sight of Gods glorious holiness, Chapter
6. 5. which I think made all his former light darkness; He cries out unclean
as if he had never known it before; And so Job, since I saw thee I abhored my
self in dust and ashes; Ye hear much of him, and it does not abase you, but if
ye saw him, ye would not abide your selves; you would prefer the dust you trade
on to your selves. Ye who know most, there is a mystery of iniquity in your
hearts, that is not yet discerned, ye are but yet in the coast of that
bottomless Sea of abomination and vileness. Among all the aggravations of
sin, nothing does so demonstrate the folly, yea, the madness of it, as the
perfection, goodness, and absolute unspottednesse of God. Its this that takes
away all pretense of excuse and leaves the famine nothing, no place to hide its
confusion and nakedness and shame into. And therefore is it that Moses, when
he would convince this people of their ways and make them inexcusable, he draws
the parallel of Gods ways and their ways, declares what God is, how absolutely
perfect in himself and in his works, had given no cause of provocation to them
to depart from him; And then how odious must their departing be? When both are
painted on a brod before their eyes; it makes sin become exceeding sinful, When
the Lord would pierce the hearts of his people, and ingrave a challenge with
the point of an Diamond he uses this as his pen, Have I been a wilderness to
Israel, a Land of darkness, why say my people, we are Lords we will come no
more to thee, Jer. 2. 31. What iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that
they are gone from me and walked after vanity, Jer. 2. 5.

There are two things in sin that exceedingly abuse the creature, the iniquity
of it, and folly and madness of it: Its contrare to all equity and reason to
depart from him that has made us, and given us a Law, to whom we are by so
many obligations tied. But what is the folly and madness of it? to depart from
the fountain of living waters, and dig broken Cisterns that can hold none. Ver.
13. This is a thing that the heavens may be astonished at, and if the earth had
sense to understand such a thing, the whole fabric of it would tremble for
horror at such a madness and folly of reasonable souls: And this evil has
two evils in it, we forsake life, and love death, go from him, and choose
vanity. It Is great iniquity to depart without an offense on his part; He may
appeal all our consciences and let them sit down and examine his way most
narrowly, what iniquity have ye found in me? what cause have ye to leave me?
But when withal he is a living fountain, he is our glory, he is a fruitful
land, a land of light, our ornament and attire, in a word, our life and our
consolation, our happiness and our beauty; what word shall be found, to express
the extreme madness of men to depart from such an one? and change their glory
into that which does not profit? If either he were not a fountain of living
waters, or if there were any fountain beside, that could yield water to
satisfy the unsatiabledesires of men, it were more excusable, but what shadow
shall be found, to cover such an iniquity, that is both infinite sin and
incomparable loss? Its the Scriptures style given to natural men, fools and
simple, all sin has folly in it, but the people of Gods departing from him
has extremity of folly in it, beside iniquity, because they do embrace a
dunghill in instead of a Throne, they make the made exchange that can be
imagined, glory for shame, life for death, at least consolation and peace, for
vanity and vexation and anguish of spirit.

If ye would be duly affected with the sight of your own evils, look upon them
in this consideration, and in the view of God your large portion, ye will be
forced to confess your selves beasts in his sight, Psalm. 73. 22. Oh that men
would consider how good and blessed the Lord is, how he is alone, and nothing
beside him in heaven and earth, all broken cisterns, all dung and unprofitable,
all vanity and vexation, he only self-sufficient, all others insufficient, and
therefore a proportioned good for our necessity and desires, and I am sure ye
would be constrained to cry out with David, Whom have I in heaven with thee, or
in earth beside thee? It is good for me to draw near to God. Ye would look on
drawing near, and walking with him, and before him, not only as the most
reasonable thing, but the best thing, most beautiful for you, most profitable
for you, and all other ways would be looked on as the ways of death.

His work is perfect] The Lord looked and behold all was good that was made; so
it was at first, the fabric of this world was an exquisite and perfect work, a
suitable demonstration of his infinite wisdom, wonderful in all the parts of
it, and in the unity and harmony of the whole: But so also his work of
providence is perfect. Divine wisdom has framed and contrived all, and it
cannot be better. If any thing seem imperfect in it self, yet it is perfect, in
relation to his glorious ends he directs it unto; and so would we look on all
the works among us; ^f any thing seemed a spot and disgrace of the creation,
certainly the sin of men and Angels; Nay, but even that is so ordered by his
holy sovereignty, that in relation to his Majesty, it may be called a perfect
work. If ye do but consider what a glorious high Throne he has erected to
himself for justice and judgment to be the habitation of it, and mercy and
truth to go before it, upon the ruins of defaced man, what a Theater of Justice
he has erected upon the Angels falls, ye would call it as perfect a work as is
in the world. His work is one in the world, subordinate to one great design of
manifesting his own glorious justice and mercy, omnipotency and wisdom. Now
what do ye see of it, but parcels, though ye comprehend all your time in one
thought, yet certainly ye cannot judge it aright, for it is but one work that
all the several buildings and castings down, all the several dispensations of
his providence from the beginning to the end make up; and when we think upon
these disjoined, limit our consideration within the bounds of our own time; can
we rightly apprehend it? Nay, which is worse, we use to have no more within the
compass of our thought, but some present thing, and how much more do we err
then? What beauty, what perfection, can such a small part have? But its present
to him, who beholds with a glance all these parts, though succeeding in many
generations, he sees it altogether, joins the end with the beginning, sees the
first mould, the first foundation-stone, and the last completing, all flowing
from himself, and returning thither, and ending in himself: He has made an
interchange in nature, which might teach us; the night alone has no beauty,
nay, but it beautifies the day; Your darkest hours and tempests, public and
personal, are they perfect works? Yes certainly, if ye compound them with your
Sun-shines, and calms; several colors make Pictures beautiful: the one is as
needful as the other. And if ye did consider your profit more then your honor
and pleasure, ye would say so. He does not model his works according to our
fancy to please us, but our good to profit us, and he is wiser then we, and so
then it is the most perfect work in it self, that possibly displeases us most.
Therefore ye would judge of his dealing by another rule, nor your satisfaction;
for please you and perish you. If he spared the rod, he should hate us indeed;
fond love is real hatred. Christians, if ye would judge his works by his word,
and not by your sense, by your well, and not by your will, certainly ye would
say as the men did of Christ, he has done all well, the world would discover
to you a perfection, even in imperfection, a perfection in infirmities, that ye
should not only rejoice in them, but glory in them: most gladly therefore will
I glory, etc. says Paul. Are infirmities a perfect work? Or is the suffering
of Paul to be buffetted and tempted a perfect work? What comfort is in it? Yes
much, infirmities alone are infirmities indeed; nay, bu^ infirmities in me, and
strength in Jesus, weakness in me, and strength dwelling in me, these make up
one perfect work; that could as little want the infirmities as the strength;
the glory of God and our well and consolation require the one, as well as the
other; it could not be complete without any of them. What do ye think of the
times now, are Englands apostasy and Irelands desolation perfect works? That
great work of Reformation, that seemed to be above our shoulders, it is now
razed to the ground, and the very foundations removed. I^ deformation a perfect
work? Certainly, if w^ look on these things in the Scriptures light, and
consider them in relation to him who is the chief builder, and does in heaven
and earth what he pleases, that deformation is a perfec^ work, though not a
perfect reformation, thoug^ we could not inform you of the perfection of it yet
the general might silence us, all this shall be no miss, no mar in the end.
His work at the end of accounts shall appear so complete, as i^ it had never
had interruption. He is wise, an^ knows what he does, if this were not for his
glory and his peoples good, certainly it should no^ be. Was not the peoples
wandering in the wilderness 40. years a most strange work? ^ longer
interruption of the expected and begu^ voyage out of Egypt? What humane reason
would have styled this work with perfection ^ Did they not often murmr
against it? yet Moses calls this a perfect work also. What if the Lord be
diging the ground deeper in England, that the foundation may be the surer? What
i^ he be on a work of judgment, filling the cup of many deluded blasphemers,
that he may have another cup of wrath prepared? What if this be his great
purpose, to execute vengeance upon a profane generation, that will not abide
the very name and form of godliness, by these who pretend to the name of it as
their honor? What if the Lord has defaced all that this Kingdom was
instrumental in building of in England, that he alone may have the glory in a
second Temple more glorious? Many things there may be in his mind, and he is in
one mind, and who can turn him? and what his soul desires, even that he does;
and this may be enough to satisfy us: He sees and knows all his works from the
beginning, and without all controversy he has provided it so, that the
reproach of his Name shall be made up with the more shining of his glory, and
the afflictions of his people shall be compensed with songs of deliverance. May
ye not give him so much credit as ye would give to a skilful man in his own
Trade? Ye know it is his Name, Excellent in counsel, and wonderful in working;
then take his work, expound it according to his Word, and not your
apprehension. It may be his work appears not excellent, nay, but if ye knevv
his counsel, ye would think it so. His wonderful counsel makes all his works
excellent, and therefore do not take upon you to judge his works, unless ye
could vvade the depth of his counsels, else ye declare your selves to be both
ignorant and presumptuous. There is a time to build, and a time to cast down, a
time for every thing, says the wise man; now I say, he knovvs the time and
season, he does every thing in his time. If ye come by a Workman that is
casting down a house that in your appearance seems good, would ye condemn him
presently? No, but stay till ye see what he will do next, vvait till the due
time, and when ye see a better piece of workmanship, on that ground ye shall
absolve him. Though God often change his work, do not think he changes his
Counsel and Purposes as men do. No, he is in one mind and who can turn him,
therefore he had that change in his mind when he made the work, when he erected
such a throne, he had this in his mind to cast it down within such a space, and
so his change, his throwing down, is as perfect in his mind as his building up.
Ye have large and big apprehensions of temporal Kingdoms and Crowns of
Government and such like as if they were great yea only things: but they are
not so to him: all this world and its standing, all the Kingdoms and their
affairs are not his great work and business; he has an great work, the
bringing of many sons to Glory, and completing of Jesus Christ, building of
that glorious mystical building, the holy Temple made up of living stones, of
which Christ is the foundation and chief corner stone both; and its this that
he attends to most; other works among men though they have more noise, they are
less concerned; all these are but in the by, and subservient to his great
design, and like the Scaffolds of a building, that are, it may be, sometime
very needful, Nay, but when the building is completed, he shall remove all
these, he has no more use of them; Kings shall he thy nurse-fathers, Kings
shall bow to thee. He is not much concerned in government nor in Governors;
but for his little flocks sake; and if these were gathered, all these shall
have an end, and the flock alone abide for ever.

And all his ways are Judgment This is to the same purpose, his ways and his
works are one, and this is the perfection of his work, that it is all right and
equal, whether they be in Justice or mercy, they are all righteous and holy, no
iniquity in them, his ways are straight and equal, exact as if they were
measured by an exact even rule; but because we make application of a crooked
rule to them, we do imagine that they are crooked; as the blind man judges no
light to be, because he sees it not. How may the Lord contend and plead with us
as with that people. Ezekiel. 18. 25. Is it possible that any can challe^ge him
and clear themselves, Who will be Justified of all when he is judged, and
before whom no flesh can be Justified? and yet behold the iniquity of men's
hearts, there is a secret reflection of our spirits upon his majesty, as if his
ways were not equal; when ever we repine against them; and when we do not take
with our iniquity, and stop our mouth with dust. Behold, the Lord will assert
his own ways, and plead with all flesh this controversy, that all his
proceedings are full of equity, he walks according to a rule though he be not
tied to a rule, he walks according to the rules of Wisdom, Justice and Mercy,
though his illimited sovereignty might be a sufficient ground of clearing of
all his proceedings. But we walk not according to a rule, though we be bound to
a rule and a rule full of equity.

Here is the equity and justness of his ways, the Gospel holds it forth in a
twofold consideration, First, If any man turn from his iniquity, and fly unto
my Son as the City of refuge, he shall live, he has eternal life, iniquity
shall not be his ruin, although he has done iniquity; O who is a God like
unto thee that pardons iniquity? Is not this complete mercy? whatever
iniquity has been, aggravat it as ye can, though it could have ruined a world,
yet it could not have ruined thee, that turns in to Jesus Christ from iniquity.
What exception can all the world have against this, or his walking according to
it. And on the other hand whosoever continues in sin, though he appear to
himself and others never so righteous, if he entertain and love any known sin,
and will not part with it for Jesus Christ, shall not he dye in his iniquity?
Is there any iniquity in this, that he receive the wages of his works his
reward? that he eat of the fruit of his own ways? and drink of his own
devices? But how many hearts censure this way as a rigid and strick severe
dealing: the multitude think it cruelty to condemn any Christened soul, to put
so many in hell; the civil man will think it is too hard measure that he should
be ranked in hell with the profane. But certainly, all mouths shall be stopped
one day, and he shall be justified when he judges; Ye that will not justify
him in his sayings and set to your seal to the truth of the word, you shall be
constrained to justify him, when he executs that sentence, ye shall precipitat
your own sentence and rather wonder at his clemency in suffering you so long.

This way of the Lord is equal and right in it self, but it is not so to every
one, the just man shall walk in it and not stumble, as in an even way, nothing
shall offend him. Hosea 14. last V. Yet for as equal and straight as it is,
many other transgressors shall fall therein; they stumble even in the noon day,
and high way where no offense is, It Is true often his own people stumble in it
as David, Psalm. 73. and 94. David's foot was slipping, yet a secret hold was by
mercy. It often requires a wise and prudent man to understand it, because his
footsteps are in the deep waters. Psa. 77. 19. his way is in the depths of the
sea, his paths in great waters, so that men must wait till the Lord expound his
own ways, till he come out of the waters and make them a dry plain, and this
is our advantage, the word says he is near thee in thy mouth, and neither
above nor beneath in the depths that thou needs neither descend nor ascend to
know it, Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 12, 13, 14. But his way is in the depths, and his
footsteps are not known, so that we ought to hold us by the word till he
expound his work, his word will teach us our duty and we may commit unto
him his own way, the word is a commentary to expound his vvays. David lost
the sight of Gods footsteps and was like to wander, till he came to the
Sanctuary, and this shined as a Candle in a dark place, he learned there to
know the unknown footsteps and to follow them. By all means embrace the Word
and be satisfied with it, when ye do not comprehend his Work, it teaches as
much in general, as may put us to quietness, all his ways are Judgment, Just
and True in all his Ways is the King of Saints. If I do not comprehend how it
is, no wonder, for he makes darkness his covering, he spreads over his most
curious Engines and Pieces of Workmanship, a vail of darkness for a season,
and who can behold him when he hides himself says Job, and though he withdraw
the Covering, yet what am I; Who can by searching find out God? If I shall
examine his way, what rule shall I take to try it by? If I measure by my
shallow capacity, or by my crooked way, shall I have any just account of it?
will my Arm measure the Heavens as his does? If I examine it, or try it by
himself, He is high as Heaven and unsearchable. Therefore it becomes us to
hearken to his Word, and believe its sentence of his Work, when reason cannot
comprehend it.

One thing (if it were deeply engraven on our hearts) would be a principle of
settling our spirits, in all the mysteries and riddles of providence, the
knowledge and faith of his Sovereignty, of his Highness and of his Wisdom;
should he give account of his Matters to us? He is wise and knows his Works,
but is he bound to make us know them? His ways are above our thoughts and
ways, as Heaven above the Earth, Is. 55. And therefore O Grasshopper in the
Earth, that dwells in Tabernacles of Clay, do not presume to model his ways
according to thy conceptions. One thing is certain, this is enough for Faith,
all his ways are mercy and truth to these that keep his Covenant and his
Testimonies, Psalm, 25. 10. And there is no Way or Path of God so far above our
reach, and unsearchable as his Mercy in pardoning sin, and this is only the
satisfying answer to all your objections and scruples, in these ye do but vent
your own thoughts but says the Lord, my thoughts are above you^ thoughts, as
Heaven above Earth. Ye but speak of your own ways, but my ways are far above
yours, they are not measured by your iniquity; and therefore, David subjoyns,
Psalm. 25. Verse 11. pardon my iniquity for it is great.

SERMON III.
Deuter. 32. 4, 5. He is the Rock, his work is perfect: for all his ways are
Judgment: a God of truth, and without iniquity, Just and Right is he. 5. They
have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the spot of his Children, they are
a perverse and crooked generation.
ALL his ways are Judgment, both the ways of his Commandments and the ways
of his Providence, both his Word which he has given as a Lanthorn to men's
paths, and his Works among men. And this were the blessedness of men, to be
found both walking in his ways, and waiting on him in his ways, having
respect to all his Commandments, and respect to himself in all his Works: We
all know in general that he does all well, and that all his Comandments are
Holy and Just; ^ay, but our practice and affections belie our knowledge, and
for the most part, we stand cross in our humors and affections, and
conversation both to his Word and Providence, and this is our misery; Great
peace have they that love thy Law. What peace then can keep that heart and
mind, that is daily at variance with his Statuts and Judgments? when the heart
would wish such a Command were not, when it is an eye sore to look upon it.
Blessed are the meek, it is good for a man, both quietly to wait and hope and
keep silence. How then must that spirit be miserable, that stands cross unto
Gods Dispensations, and would limit the Holy One? Do not often our hearts say,
I do well to be angry, why is it thus with me? But, who has hardened himself
against him and prospered? his counsel must stand; and you may vex your self,
and disquiet your soul in the mean time by impatience, but you cannot by your
thought add one cubit to your stature, you may make your case worse nor
Providence has made it, but you cannot make it better by so doing; so that at
length, you must bow to him or be broken; Oh then that this were engraven on
our hearts with the point of a Diamond! All his ways are Judgment, that ye
might be overcome with the equity of his Command and Dispensation, and your
heart and tongue might not move against them. It was enough of old with the
Saints, It is the Lord, let him do what seems good in h^s eyes, Gods
Sovereignty alone pondered, may stop our mouth, but if ye withal consider, it
is perfect Equity that rules all, it is Divine Wisdom tha^ is the square of
his Works, the^ how ought we to stoop cheerfully unto them One thing ye would
remember, his ways and paths are Judgment, and if ye judge aright of him, ye
must judge his Way and not his single Footsteps; ye will not discern Equity and
Judgment in one step or two, but consider his Way, join adversity with
prosperity, humbleing with exalting, take along the Thread of his Providence,
and one part shall help you to understand another. There is reason in all, but
the reason is not visible to us in so small parts of his Way and Work:

A God of Truth] Strange it is that his Majesty is pleased to cloth himself
with so many Titles and Names for us. He considers what our necessity is, and
accordingly expresses his own Name. I think nothing does more hold forth the
unbelief of men and Atheism of our hearts, nor the many several Titles God
takes in Scripture; There is a necessity of a multitude of them to make us take
up God, because we staying upon a general notion of God, rather frame in our
imaginations an Idol then the true God. As there is nothing does more lively
represent the unbelief of our hearts, then the multitude of Promises: Men that
consider such frequent repetitions of one thing in Scripture, so many diverse
expressions of one God, may retire into their own hearts, and find the cause of
it, even the necessity of it; But while we look so slightly on these, we must
judge it superfluous and vain. Needed there any more to be said, but I am your
God, I am God, if our spirits were not so far degenerated unto Atheism and
unbelief. Certainly that word Jehovah holds forth more to Angels then all the
inculcated Names and Titles of God to us; because we are dull and slow of
heart. Therefore wonder at these two when ye read the Scriptures; Gods
Condescendency to us, and our Atheism and Unbelief of him; they are both
mysteries and exceeding broad. There is not a Name of God but it gives us a
Name, and that of reproach and dishonor; so that for every one, some evil may
be written down; and it is to this purpose, Moses draws them out in length,
that in the Glass of his glorious Name, the people might behold their own ugly
face. This Name is clear, He is a God of Truth, not only a true God, but Truth
it self; to note his Excellency and Eminency in it. It is Christ's Name, I am
the Truth, the substantial Truth, in whom all the Promises are Truth, are Yea
and Amen. His Truth is his Faithfulness in performing his Promises, and doing
what his Mouth has spoken: And this is established in the very Heavens, Psalm.
89. 2. His everlasting purpose is in Heaven where he dwells; And if any man can
ascend up to Heaven, if any creature can break through the Clouds, then may his
Truth be shaken. His Word comes down among men; Nay, but the foundation of it
is in Heaven, and there is his Purpose established; and therefore, there is
nothing done in time can impare or hinder it. Ye think this World very sure,
the Earth hangs unmovable, though it hang upon nothing; All the tumults,
confusions and reels has been in the World, have never moved it to the one
side. Heaven goes about in one Tenure perpetually, keeping still the same
distance. Nay, but his Truth is more established then so. Heaven and Earth
depends but upon a word of Command, he has said, let it be so, and so it is.
Nay, but his Word is more established. of it says Christ One jot or title of
it cannot fail, though Heaven and earth should fail. He may change his Commands
as he pleases, but he may not change his Promise, this puts an obligation on
him, as he is Faithful and true to perform it; and when an Oath is superadded,
O! how immutable are these two? When he promises in his Truth and swears in his
Holiness. Is there any power in Heaven and Earth can break that double cord?
Matthew. 5. 18. Heb. 6, 18. There is no name of God but it is comfortable to
some, and as terrible to others. What comfort is it to a godly man that trusts
in his Word, He is a God of truth? An honest man's word is much, his oath is
more. What shall his Word be who is a God of Truth? Who, though all men should
be liars, yet God is true. Ye who have ventured your Souls on his Word, ye have
an unspeakable advantage, his truth endures for ever, and it is established in
the Heavens, the ground of it is without beginning, the end of it without end.
Ye are more sure then the frame of Heaven and Earth, for all these shall wax
old as a garment. We speak of a naked word of truth; Indeed it is no naked word
that is Gods Word; His Works of Providence, and his Dispensation to you, is a
naked and bare foundation, nay, a sandy foundation, and ye who lean so much to
them, is it any wonder, ye so often shak and waver? All other grounds beside
the Word, are uncertain, unstable, this only endures for ever; The creatures
goodness and perfection is but as the Grass and the Flour of the Field;
Venture not much on your dispositions and frames, thou knows not what a day may
bring forth, but his Truth is to all generations, and it is well tried, as Gold
seven times; all generations have tried it and found it better then pure Gold.
His Dispensations are arbitrary, no rule to you; he loves to declare his
Sovereignty here, and to expatiat in the creatures sight, beyond its
conceiving; but he has limited himself in his Word, and come down to us, and
laid bonds on himself. Will he then unty them for us? Give him liberty where he
loves it; take him bound where he binds himself. How may God expostulate with
this generation, as these of little faith? How long shall I be with you says
Christ? How long will Christians tempt the Lord in seeking signs? And will not
rest upon his only Word and Promises? O Adulterous generation, how long shall I
be with you and ye will not believe? Is it not righteousness in him, either to
give you no sign at all, or to give you a sign darker then the thing it self,
as he did to the Pharisees. Ye will give credit to a man's word, and will ye not
believe Gods? An honest man will get more trust of us, then the True and Living
God; Shall he not be offended with this? We declare it unto you that he is
Truth it self, and will not fail in his promise; let that be your Castle and
Refuge to enter into. Mercy and Truth are two sweet companions to go along with
you in your pilgrimage, David prayed for them, Psalm. 61. 7. O prepare thy mercy
and truth to preserve me; Who will not ly safe within these everlasting Arms?
what power can break through? And this he promised to himself, Psalm. 57. 3. God
shall send them out, etc. Mercy made so many precious Promises, and Truth keeps
them. Mercy is the Fountain and Sourse of all our Consolation, and Truth and
Faithfulness conveighs it to us, and keeps it for us; It is these two that go
before his Face, when he sits on a Throne of Majesty and makes himself
accessible to sinners, Psalm. 89. 14. and so they are the path way he walks in
toward those who seek him, Psalm. 25. 10.

But this sweet and Precious Name, that is as Ointment poured forth to these
who love him; how does it smell of death to those who walk contrair to him? He
is a God of Truth, to execute his Threatenings on those who despise his
Commands, and though ye flatter your selves in your own eyes, and cry peace
peace, even though ye walk in the imagination ^^ your heart; yet certainly he
is a God of Truth. I pray you read that sad and weighty word, that will be like
a Millstone about many men's necks, to sink them in Hell, Deuteronomy. 29. 20, 21: Ye
who add drunkenness to thrist; whose rule of walking is your own lust, and
whatsoever pleases you without respect of his Commands, and yet flatter your
selves with a dream of peace, know this for a truth, the Lord will not spare
thee, he that made thee will not have mercy on thee, his jealousy will smoke
against thee, and all the eurses written in this Book shall ly upon thee, and
thy name shall be blotted out from under Heaven. It was unbelief of Gods
Threatening, that first ruined man, ^^ is this still that keeps so many from the
remedy, and makes their misery irrecoverable. The Serpent brought them to this
question, Has God said ye shall die? And then presently the question
entertained becomes a conclusion, ye shall not surely die. Thus ye see how the
liar, from the beginning, was contrair to the God of Truth: And he murdered us
by lying of that God of Truth: And it is the same that shuts out all hope of
remedy. Ye do not as yet believe and consider that curse that was pronounced
against Adam, but is now also inflicted upon us; Therefore there is no solid
belief can be of the promises of the Gospel: And ye who think ye believe the
Gospel, do but indeed fancy it, except ye have considered the true curse of God
on all flesh. But if any man have set to his seal that God is true in his
Threatening, and subscribed unto the Law; Then I beseech you add not the
unbelief of the Gospel unto your former disobedience. He is a God of truth, in
Promises and Threatenings. It is strange how untoward and froward we are, a
perverse generation, we do not believe his Threatenings, but fancy we receive
his Promises, or else believeing his Threatenings, we question his Promises. But
know this for a truth, his last Word is more weighty, and the unbelief of it is
most dangerous. Ye have not kept his Commands, and so the curse is come upon
you, do ye believe that? If ye do, then the Gospel speaks unto you, The God of
Truth has one word more, He that believes shall be saved, notwithstanding of
all his breaking of the Law; if ye do not set your Seal to this also, then ye
say he is not a God of Truth, ye say he is a liar. And as for you who have
committed your Souls to him, as to a faithful keeper, and acquiesced unto his
Word of Promise for Salvation, think how unsuitable it is, for you to distrust
him in other lesser things. Ye have the promise of this life, whoever has the
Promises of the life to come. Therefore do not make him a liar in these, He is
a God of Truth, and will let you want no good thing. Say to the righteous it
shall he well with him, what ever be; Let Heaven and Earth mix through other,
yet ye may be as Mount Sion unmoved in the midst of many floods, because of the
Promises.

Without iniquity: who doubts of that, say ye? What needs this be added, who
charges him with iniquity or sin? Nay, but stay and consider, and you shall
find great weight in this. It is true none dare charge him openly, or speak in
express terms against his Holiness, yet if we judge of our own and others
practices and dispositions, as the Lord uses to construct of them; if we
resolve our murmurings, impatience, self-absolutions and excuses to hold off
convictions, into plain language, if we would translate them into a
Scripture-style, certainly it will be found, that the most part of men, if not
all, use to impute iniquity to God, and accuse him rather, then take with
accusations laid against themselves. And therefore the Lord uses to go to Law
with his people, he who is the Judge of the world, that cannot do
unrighteously, he who is the potter, and we all the clay, yet he so far
condescends to us for convincing us, as sometimes to refer the controversy
between him and his people, to other creatures, as Micah 6. 12. He calls the
mountains and the foundations of the earth to judge between him and his people,
and sometimes he appeals unto their own consciences and is content though
judge, to stand and be judged by these who were guilty, as verse. 3, and Jer. 2.
verse. 5, and 31. All this supposes that when the Lord would endeavor to
convince them of iniquity, they did rather recriminat and took not with their
own faults. This is a truth generally acknowledged by all. He who is the judge
of the world does no iniquity, But O! that ye considered it, till the
meditation of it were engraven on your Spirits, the seal of Gods holiness,
that ye might fear before him, and never call him to account for his matters.
Who can say I have purged my heart from iniquity? Among men the holiest are
defiled with it, and so are all their actions. But here is one that ye may give
him an implicit faith (so to speak) he is a God of truth, and can speak no lie,
be does no iniquity, and cannot do wrong to any man. Would there be so much
impatience amongst you, and fretting against his dispensations, if ye believed
this solidly? Would ye repine against his holy and just ways, were it not to
charge God with iniquity? Your murmuring and grudging at his dispensations is
with child of blasphemies, and he who can search the reins sees it* and
constructs so of it: You say by interpretation, that if ye had the government
of your own matters, or of Kingdoms, ye would order them better then he does;
how difficult a thing is it to persuade men to take with their own iniquity? O
how many excuses and pretenses, how many extenuations are used that this
conviction may not pierce deeply? But all this speaks so much blasphemy, that
iniquity is in God. Ye cannot take with your own iniquities, but ye charge his
Majesty with iniquity.

Just and right is he:] Is this any new thing, was it not said already, that he
is without iniquity, and his ways judgment? But alas, how ignorant are we of
God, and slow of heart to conceive him as he is, therefore is there line upon
line, and precept upon precept, and name upon name, if it be possible that at
length we may apprehend God as he is: Alas, our knowledge is but ignorance, our
light darkness, while it is shut up in the corner of our mind, and shines not
into the heart, and has no influence on our practice. And the truth is, the
belief of divine truths is almost no more but a not contradicting them, we do
not seriously think of them as either to consent to them, or deny them. Is
there any consideration amongst us now of Gods justice and righteousness,
though it be frequently spoken of? And what advantage shall ye have if ye do
not consider them? O how hard is it to persuade men's hearts of this, that God
is just, and will by no means acquit the guilty, there are so many delusions
drunk in in men's hearts, contrary to his truth; Let no man deceive you, be not
deceived with vain words, know ye not, says our Apostle, these are strange
prefaces, would ye not think the point of truth subtle, that there needed so
much prefacing unto, and yet what is it? even that which all men grant, Gods
wrath comes on the children of disobedience, but alas, few men consider but
deceive themselves with dreams of escaping it, though men know it, yet they
know it not, for they walk as if they knew no such thing.

Always however this is of little moment to affect our spirits now, yet in the
day that God shall set your iniquities before your face, and set his justice
also before your eyes, O how sad and serious a thing will it be then? If these
two verses were engraven on our hearts, Gods justice and holiness, our
corruption and vileness, I think there would be other thoughts among us then
there are.

SERMON IV.
Deuteronomy. 32. 5. They have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the spot of his
Children, etc.
WE doubt this people would take well with such a description of themselves, as
Moses gives: It might seem strange to us, that God should have chosen such a
people out of all the nations of the earth, and they to be so rebellious and
perverse, if our own experience did not teach us, how free his choice is, and
how long-suffering he is, and constant in his choice. His people are called to
a conformity with himself. Be ye holy, for I am holy. Lev. chapter 19. and 20. and
to a difformity and separation from the rest of the world in their conversation
from whom God had separated them in profession and privileges: Lev. 18. 24 But
behold what unlikenesse there is between God and his people. If ye were to
paint out to the life a heathen people, you needed no other image or pattern to
copy at but this same description of this people. It is this that makes Moses
in the preface turn to the heavens and earth, and call them to hear his song:
And Isaiah begins his Preaching thus, Hear O Heavens, and give ear, O Earth
etc. A strange thing it must be, that senseless creatures are called to wonder
at. It must surpass all the wonders and prodigies of nature and art: And what
is that? I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled
against me, etc. If we consider what this people seemed once to be, and thought
themselves to be, we may easily know how they corrupted themselves. If ye look
on them at one time. Exodus 19. 8. and Deuteronomy. 5. 27. Ye would call them Children.
There was never a fairer undertaking of obedience then this, All that the Lord
has spoken, we will do. So that the Lord commends them for speaking well. v.
28. They have well said all that they have spoken. v. 29. O that there were
such an heart in them. But compare all this peoples practice with this
profession, and you shall find it exceeding contrary; they indeed corrupted
themselves, though they got warning to take heed of it: Take ye therefore good
heed unto your selves lest ye corrupt your selves, Deuteronomy. 4. 15. 16. But alas,
it was within them that destroyed them; there was not such a heart in them, as
to hear and obey; but they undertake, being ignorant of their own deceitful
hearts, which were desperately wicked. And therefore behold what corruption
ensued and followed upon such a professed resolution, They never sooner
promised obedience, but they disobeyed, they did abominable works, and did no
good, and this is to corrupt their way, Psa. 14. 1, etc. we need not instance
this longer in this people, we our selves are a sufficient proof of it. We may
make this song our own, we have corrupted our selves. Once we had a fair show
of zeal for God, of love and desire of reformation of life, many solemn
undertakings were that we should amend our ways and doings. But what is the
fruit of all? Alas, we have corrupted our selves more nor they. Israel
promised, but we vowed and swore to the most high, Reformation and amendment of
life in our conversations and callings. Lay this Rule to our practices, and are
we not a perverse and crooked generation. Oh that we were more affected with
our corruptions, and were more sensible of them, then we could not choose out
mourn for our own and the lands departing from God. Did not every man vow and
swear to the most high God to endeavor reformation of his life, even a
personal reformation? But alas, where is it? He that is filthy is filthy still,
nay, which is worse, the evil man waxes worse and worse; There is a great
noise of a public reformation of ordinances and worship, but alas, the
deformation of life and practice outcryes all that noise. Nay, certainly all
that is done in the public, must come to no accomp^ before God, since our
practices outcry it. Public reformation is abomination where pe^^onal
^orruptions do not cease: This made the Je^^s so^emn days hateful, their hands
were full of blood. Isai. 1. all that ye have spent on the public will never
be reckoned, since ye will not consecrat your lives to God, will not give your
lusts up to him. Ye are his enemies in the mean time, though you account your
selves Religions friends. I beseech you consider your ways; would any of us
have thought to have seen such prosanity, mocking of Godliness and ignorance in
Scotland in so short a time; Nay, it is to be feared that the day is not far
off, when ye will corrupt your selves and do abominable things, yea, defile
your selves as ill as the nations that know not God.

Every man uses to impute his faults to something beside himself; ere men take
with their own iniquity, they will charge God that gave no more grace: But if
men knew themselves, they would deduce their corruption and destruction both,
from one fountain, that is from themselves. Ignorance of our selves makes us
often undertake fair, and promise so well on our own head. What was the fountain
of this peoples corruption, and apostarizing from their professions? The Lord
hints at it, Deuteronomy. 5. 25, etc. Oh that they bad such a heart. Alas, poor
people, ye know not your selves, that speak so well, I know thee better then
thou do thy self; I will declare unto thee thy own thought, thou have not
such a heart as to do what thou say, there is a desperate wicked heart within
thee, that will destroy thee by lying unto thee. If thou knew this fountain
of orig^^al corruption, thou would despair of doing, and say, I cannot serve
the Lord. Now here is the fountain of the Lands corruption this day: why is our
way corrupted? because our hearts within were not cleansed, and because they
were not known. If we had dried up the fountain, the streams had ceased: but we
did only damn it up, and cut off some streams for a season: we set up our
resolutions and purpose^ as an hedge to hold it in; but the sea of the heart^
iniquity, that is above all things, has overflowed it, and defiled our way
more then in former times. Ye thought upon no other thing but that presently ye
would be all changed people, and would reform without more ado. And thus it is
with you in all your public repentances. But alas, you know not your selves;
it i^ still within you, which will yet corrupt you* and it was within us that
has undone us. W^ were too confident of our selves, and it is n^ wonder that
the Lord suffer us to prove our selves that we may know what is in our heart
Now therefore since ye have so often tried it, I beseech you, follow not such a
way again. Ye are called to deny your selves, and to follow Christ; and this is
a great part of it, that ye may never expect for any good within your selves,
or the helping of any evil. In me is thy help found. Look to the fountain of
Life Jesus Christ, and despair of your own hearts, for they are desperately
wicked, so wicked, that if ye knew them, ye would despair of them, and give
them over to another hand, who can crea^ a new heart within you. Ye use to
impute you^ backslidings to the times, to temptations, t^ company and such
like. This is the way tha^ men shift the challenges of sin: The drunkar^ puts
it on his companion, the servant on his master that led him wrong, ye people
put Rulers in the fault, and absolve themselves, and Rulers put one another in
the wrong, and absolve themselves. But alas! all of us are ignorant of our
selves: It is not times nor temptations that corrupt us, but our selves. No man
is tempted (says James) of God, but every man is tempted when he is drawn
away of his own lust and enticed, James. 1. 14. Temptation were no temptation,
if our hearts were not wicked hearts. Nay, many of us are ready to tempt
temptations, to provoke the devil to temptations: we cast our selves open to
temptations. Temptation finds lust within, and lust within is the Mother to
conceive sin, if temptation be the father. Times do not bring evils along with
them, they do but discover what was hid before: all the evils and corruptions
you see now among us, where were they in the day of our first love, when we
were as a loving and beloved child? have all these risen up of late. No
certainly, all that you have seen and found were before, though they did not
appear: before they were in the root, now you see the fruit. All the Apostasy,
and profanity that has been vented in these days, it was all shut up within
the corners of men's hearts at the beginning: time and temptation has but
uncovered the heart and made the inside out; has but opened a sluice to let out
this sea of corruption, Its not bred since, but seen since.

Now so it is with us, we have corrupted our selves, and so we corrupt our
selves still more. Backsliding comes on as gray hairs, here and there, and is
not perceived by beholders. Nemo repent fit turpissimus. No man becomes worst
at first; There are many steps between that and good. Corruption comes on men^
way as in fruits, some one part begins to alter, and then it grows worse,
and putrifieth, and corrupts the rest of the parts. An Apple rotes not all at
once, so it is with us; men begin at leisure, but they run post or all be done.
In some one step of our way we take liberty, and think to keep the rest clean:
But when that part is corrupted, a little leaven leaveneth the wholl lump, and
all follows; And then he that corrupted himself, is ready to corrupt others.
Children that are corrupters, Isa. 1. 4. Every one by his example corrupts
another; and by corrupting others, they again corrupt themselves more. O! how
infectious an evil is sin, of a pestilentious nature; And truly our hearts are
more ready to receive such impressions, then either a World, or a Devil is to
make them.

Their spot is not] Why does the Lord take pleasure to reckon their sins, to
describe so abominable a People. Is not this Jacob in whom he saw no iniquity?
Is not this Israel, whose transgressions are not known? Certainly if this
people would have charged themselves so, he would not have done it. He loves to
forget, when we remember our sins; But he must remember them, when we forget
them. What is the Lords great controversy with men, here it is, how can ye say
or think that ye are not polluted? Or if ye take with such a General; Yet, why
is not the conviction of your sin and misery so deeply engraven, as to pursue
you out of all hope of remedy in your selves, Jer. 2. 22, 23. And therefore is
thine iniquity marked before me, says the Lord. God has determined not to
wrong his Justice. If men should go away unpunished and unjudged both, where
were his Righteousness? If there were no record of men's transgressions, were he
a righteous Judge? Therefore, those who do not judge themselves, must leave
judgment to him; For once the mouth of all flesh must be stoped, and all
become guilty before God. Why pleads the Lord with man? Because man says I am
innocent, I have not sinned, his anger will turn away, Jer. 2. 35. Will any
speak so in terms? No indeed, but the Lord constructs so of the most part;
because they do more consider the wrongs done to them, nor their own wrongs
done to God: All men confess the general; that they are sinners; but who
searches and tryes his way to find out particulares, and in as far as ye do not
charge your selves with particular guiltiness, until ye be afraid of his
anger, as long as the consideration of your sins is so superficial and shallow,
that ye apprehend no danger of wrath, or immunity from it, certainly God will
plead with you. Justice must so far be glorified, as once to conclude you under
the sentence of death; If ye do it not now, then ye leave God to be your Judge
and Party. But if any man shall take with his guiltiness, till his mouth be
stopped, and condemn himself in Gods sight; I say Mercy and Grace in God must
not be wronged, he that judges himself, shall not be judged of the Lord. What
a fair offer is this to you all? The Lord offers to you, if ye will in time be
your own judges, I will resign my judgment to you; If ye will but in earnest
pass the sentence, I will nathe^ pass it nor execute it. If ye come to the
Mediator Christ Jesus, to escape from the wrath o^ a Judge, you shall meet with
a reconciled Father, and with such love in him, as shall hide a multitude of
offenses. O! the depth and height, and breadth of that Love! Well then, it
shall be a Sea to cast your offenses into, that shall drown them. Had not his
people many spots? Is there any man can say, I have cleansed my heart from
iniquity? No, not one. Ye^ behold, he sees no spots in his people: He does not
make them his people because spotless, but he sees them spotless, because he
makes them his people* There is no covering that can hide men's uncleanness
from his piercing eye, but one, even Jesus Christ his Righteousness; And blessed
is he whose sins are covered: If this covering were spread over the mouth of
all Hell, then Hell should have a covering from his Eyes. If ye therefore strip
your selves naked of your own pretenses and leaves, and think not your self
secure under any created shelter; if ye hide not your iniquity, then it shall
be hid indeed; Here is a covering that shall hide it from his Eyes. There is no
spot so heinous, none so ingrained, but the Blood of Jesus can wash it as
perfectly out, as if it had never been, Isai. 16. 17. Though your spots were
such as are not incident to his Children, yet this Blood cleanses from one and
all, it is of an infinite nature. But though it be so, that the Blood of Christ
cleanses from all sin, that there is a fountain opened in the house of David
for sin and for uncleanness, for sin and separation, for such heinous offenses
as may separat people, even from the Congregation of the Lords people. Yet
there are some sins, some spots that ordinarily his people are not defiled with,
and in this respect they may be called holy and undefiled in the way. There are
some Ma^ks and Characters of unregenerated men, so legible and express, that
we may even read from men's Conversation, that they are not the Children of God.
Though the blood of Christ wash from all, yet the child of God ordinarily is
kept from some kind of spots, so that if a man shall be spotted with them, its
no marvel he question if he be a child or not. There are two, which I think so
gross and unclean spots, that I cannot conceive how a soul washen by Jesus
Christ, can be defiled with them; one is, a course of profanity; the common
walk of the multitude is so gross and profane, so void of God and godliness,
that it witnesses to their face that they are not the sons of God: He that is
born of God sins not; he makes not sin his way and trade to walk into, and
please himself into. What are the most part of you, I pray you? Is your spot
like the spot of his children? Do not ye declare your sin as Sodom, ye
drunkards, who wallow in it daily, and though ye profess repentance, yet never
amend? Ye who have a custom of swearing and blasph^ming his holy Name, do not
ye carry in your forehead a spot that is not like his children? The child of
God may fall in many particulars, but it is not the spot of a child to continue
in them, to add drunkenness to ^hirst, and yet to dream of escaping wrath. I
pray you consider it; for it is of great moment. Do ye carry such a black mark,
the devils mark? O! do not think your selves safe. May not this persuade you?
Do but compare your selve^ in your converse and walk with an heathen without
the Church, set aside your public profession of coming to the Church and
hearing the word and Church privileges: And is there difference visible
between you and them? Many o^ you pray no more in secret, or in your familie^
nor they; ye curse and swear as they, ye are covetous and worldly as they; And
if ye can, do b^ draw a line of difference? and if ye cannot then I ask what
are ye? Is not this the spot o^ Bastards? Another spot is, hatred of Godlines^
and the Godly, this is indeed the most livel^ image of the Devil; who hates his
brother is of the Devil. He that hats the Son can he love the Father He that
hats him that is begotten, hats also him that begat him: And he that loves him
that begat, loves him that is begotten. Now how ca^ he be begotten of God, who
hates that nature h^ is said to partake of, who hats him that is begotten? I
wonder that many of your conscience are not touched with this? how can ye
imagine ye are children of God, when there is non^ of your neighbors that your
heart rises mo^ against, that ye can least abide, nor those wh^ seek God most
diligently, whose conversation different from the worlds. Do not flatter you
selves, as if it were Hypocrisy ye hated? No no, ye can agree with
profanity, and how ca^ ye hate Hypocrisy? ye can agree with a pr^fane
hypocrite, with a profane man, the feigns and dissembles repentance, but if
once were so thoroughly changed, as to hate his fo^mer way and forsake it, then
your antipathy begins. What a ridiculous thing is it, for profanity to take
upon it to censure hypocrisy? Certainly if profanity cast out with hypocrisy,
it must be because it has a form of godliness, which it so much detesteth. It
is a strange hatred at godliness that a profane man has, that he cannot abide
the very shadow of it. I beseech you who love not holiness in your own
persons, who hate to be reformed your selves, do not add this hight of sin to
it, as to hate it in others also. If ye be not godly your selves, do not add
this declared manifest character of a child of the devil to it, to hate
godliness in others. There were some hope of you, if ye held it in reverence
and estimation where ye saw it. There are many other spots not incident to his
children, as this, that men will not take with their sin and the curse; it is a
great difficulty to convince the most part of men how miserable they are, how
void of God: all the world will not put them out of a good opinion of
themselves: And I think this has been the spot of this people; they would not
take with their guiltiness, a stubborn-hearted people, whole-hearted. There
needs no more to declare a number of you not to be Gods children, but this, ye
have lived all your time in the opinion and belief that ye were Gods children,
that ye believed in him; ye never saw your selves lost and miserable. This was
the spot of this people, that they esteemed themselves children, though they
had many spots that testified to their face that they were no children; they
waxed worse and worse, neither mercies nor judgments amended them: when be
slew them, it may be, they sought him, and flattered him with their mouth, but
their hearts were no^ right with him, neither were they steadfast in his
Covenant, Psalm. 78, 34. Ye would have thought them a godly people while under
the rod for a season, but all that was but extorted and pressed out by violence
of affliction, as the groans of a beast under a burden; but a little time
declared that i^ was but flattery, though they thought themselves ingenuous,
and therefore they returned to their old provocations, as a sow to the puddle,
or ^ dog to his vomit. And is not this our spot, eve^ the spot of great and
small; If any would loo^ upon us in our ingadgements and vows under trouble, we
appear like his people, a praying repenting, and believing people. But how
quickly does all this prove flattery? Do we not still return to our old ways,
that we have been examplarly punished for, and which we so solemnly engaged
against. The ^eat of the furnace dies out, and they wax colder and harder, a
little time wears away all their tenderness: every man to his own things, and
no man seeks the things of Jesus Christ. This was this peoples sin and spot.
Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked, and lightly esteemed the Rock of their
Salvation. When their heads were lifted up to Government, when they were
raised out of the waters of affliction and poverty; Then they forgot God, they
oppressed the poor and needy, eat up his people a bread, and could not abide to
have their faul^ told them, they said to the Seers, see not, and ^ the Prophets
prophecy not unto us right things, etc Isai. 30. 10. I think likewise, that
oppression is not the spot of his Children, whoever use it And covetousn^sse
presses men to it, when power is in their hand to compass it: This is a vile
spot, unworthy of any Ruler, let be a Christian: It was abhored among Pagans.
O! but it cries to heaven, (says the Scripture) it has a double cry when
other sins cry once. The heinousness of it cries once, and the poor people
cry again, and both these come up to the Ears of the Lord of Hosts; Nay, it
has the cry of Murder and another beside. He that is greedy of gain, is said
to take away the life of the owners thereof, Pro. 1. 19. So he is a Murderer
before God, and the poor man's blood cries for vengeance, and then himself
seconds it either by prayer, or crying out for misery, Job. 35. 9. All men's
prayers and professions will not outcry these two. The peoples many prayers
could not be heard, Isai. 1. 15. because their hands were full of blood, which
had a louder cry then their prayers. The poor also oppressing the poor, is like
a sweeping rain that leaves nothing behind it.

It is read in the Margin, that they are not his Children, this is their blot.
And indeed it is so; It is a great blot and stain in the face of any man
whoever he be, that he is not born of God, that he can reckon kindred to none
but Adam; But what indignity is it and disgrace for a people ^rofessing his
Name, yet to have no other Ge^eration, to reckon no higher then the Earth ^d
the Earthly. What is now the great blot ^ our visible Church? Here it is, the
most ^rt are not Gods Children, but called so; And is the greater blot that
they are called so, and ^e not. O poor Saints esteem your honor and high
privilege, ye have received this to be the sons of God. It is no blot to you,
that ye are poor and despised in the World: But it is and shall be an eternal
blot, to the great and rich and wise in the World, that they are not the
Children of God. Christianity is no^ blot, though it be in reproach among men,
bu^ it is really the glory and excellency of a man but the want of it, alas,
how does it abase many high and noble, empoverish many rich, an^ infatuat many
wise? Ye think all of you a^ the Children of God, because ye are in the Church,
and partake of the Ordinances and Sacraments: and so did this people. But Moses
did not flatter these Jews, but told bo^ Princes and People in their face, that
they we^ not Children of God, because only Israel in the letter, they had not
childrens manners. Oh that it might not be said of the most part of yo^ that ye
are not children of God, and that that your blot and shame. It is the shame of
Ru^ers, not to be the Children of God. They a^ Wise, they are Active, they are
Noble, b^ one Spot disgraceth all, one fly makes the Ointment stink, they are
not gracious, man of them but sons of men at the farthest recko^ing, are not
begotten again to a lively Hop^ Not many Wise, not many Noble, not many Ri^ The
scantnesse of gracious men, is the Spot^ Judicatories, that there are many
Children the World, but few Children of Light in the^ O! how beautiful and
glorious would Judi^tories be, if all the Members were Children Light? What
glory would there be, if all them did shine and enlightened one another But
what beauty or comeliness, what Majesty can be in Rulers, or Judicatories,
when the Image of God is not in them? This is also the Spot of Assemblies,
Synods, Presbytries, that there are few godly Ministers. Alas that this
complaint should be, even among those, whose Office it is to beget many
Children to God, how few of them are begotten, or has the Image of their
Father? And thus Church Assemblies have no beauty, such as the Courts of Jesus
Christ should have. O! that we were in love with Christianity and Grace, that
it were our grand question, how shall I be put among the Children? The Lord
seems to wonder at it and make a question of it, How can such as we be put
among the Children? Jer. 3. 19. But he answers it himself, thou shall call me,
my Father, and shall not turn away from me. There is no more, but take with
your wanderings, and wrongs done to God; Embrace him in Jesus Christ, and he
becomes your Father, and if ye be Children, sure ye will resolve to abide in
your Fathers house, and turn no more to a present world, or your former lusts.

They are a perverse and crooked generation] What pleasure has the Lord in
speaking thus, when he upbraids none? Certainly, in a manner it is drawn out of
him. Would he ob^ect our faults, if we did not defend them by obstinacy.
Perverseness and crookedness is obstinacy and incorrigiblenesse against
Mercies and Judgments. That which is crooked, cannot ^e made straight, says
Solomon. Then does the Lord take notice of sins, when men refuse to return, and
so maintain their sins. It is thi^ which hightens provocations and makes ou^
the controversy, perverseness in sin. It is no^ ordinary common infirmities
that the Lord punishes, either in a Land or Person; bu^ when infirmities are
discovered by the Light o^ the Word, when the Lord uses means to reclaim men
in his Providence, and yet no mean^ prevail; then are they reckoned perverse
Now perverseness is not the spot of his Children: The Child of God daily bows,
an^ folds to him, receives challenges from him taks with iniquity, and yields
unto God. O^ that this Title might not be written above the head of this
generation deservedly. This is perverse and crooked generation.

SERMON V.
Psalm. 73. 28. But it is good for me to dra^ near to God: I have put my trust
in t^ Lord God, that I may declare all t^ Works.
AFter man's first transgression he was shut o^ from the Tree of Life, and cast
out of t^ Garden, by which was signified, his seclu^ on and sequestration from
the presence of Go^ and communion with him: And this was a manner the
extermination of all mankind one, when Adam was driven out of Parad^ Now this
had been an eternal separation for any thing that we could do (for we can do
nothing, but depart by a perpetual backsliding, and make the distance every day
wider) except it had pleased the Lord of his infinite Grace, to condescend to
draw near to us in gracious Promises and offers of a Redeemer. If he had not
made the first journey from Heaven to Earth, by sending his only Son, we should
have given over the hope of returning from Earth to Heaven. But he has taken
away the greatest part of that distance, in drawing near to our Nature; yea, in
assuming our Flesh into the fellowship of his glorious Divinity. He has
stooped so low to meet with us, and offered himself the trysting place between
God and us, a fit meeting place, where there is an conjunction of the interests
of both Parties. And now there is no more to do, but to draw near to God in
Jesus Christ, since he has made the great journey to come down to us. We have
not that infinite gulf of satisfaction to Justice to pass over, we have not
the height of Divine Majesty, as he is infinitely above us, and offended with
us, to climb up unto. Certainly we could not but fall into the Lake that is
below us, if we were to aim so high. But the Lord has been pleased to descend
to us, in our mean capacity in the Flesh, and fill up that immensurable gulf
of Justice, by the infinite merits and sufferrings of his Son in our Flesh. And
now he invites us, be requests us to come to him in his Son and have life. We
are not come to Mount Sinai, that might not be touched, that burnt with Fire
and Tempest, where there were terrible sights and intolerable noises. I say,
such a God we might have had to do with, ^ consuming fire, instead of
instructing light; A devouring fire, instead of a healing Sun of
Righteousness, considering that there is nothing in us, which is not fit and
prepared fuel for everlasting burnings. But we are come (and that is the
eternal wonder of Angels) unto Moun^ Sion, to be Citizens in the City of God,
and fellow citizens with blessed Angels and glorified Spirits, to Peace and
Reconciliation with him who was our Judge. And if you ask how this may be? I
answer, because we have one Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant t^ come to,
whose Blood cries louder for pardon of sinners, then all men's transgression
can cry for punishment of sinners, Heb. 12. 18, 19. 20. etc.

Let us then Consider the first step and deare^ of Union with God, it consists
in Faith in Jesus Christ. This is the first motion of the Sou^ in drawing near
to God; For, as there is n^ remission without Blood; So no access to Go^
without a Mediator. For if you consider wha^ is in Jesus Christ, you will find
that which will engage the desire of the heart; as also, tha^ which will give
boldness and confidence to ac^ that desire. Eternal Life is promised and
proposed in him, he offers rest to weary souls, an^ has it to give. That which
we ignorantly an^vainly seek elsewhere, here it is to be found For Personal
Excellencies, he is the chief infinitely beyond comparison; And for
Sutablenesse to us and our necessities, all the Gospel an expression of it: So
that he is presented the most attractive drawing manner that can be imagined.
And then when the desires are inflamed, yet if there be no Oil of hope to feed
it, it will soon cool again. Therefore take a view again, and you may have
boldness to enter into the Holiest, by the Blood of Jesus. There was some kind
of distance kept in the Old Testament, none but the High Priest might enter
into the Holiest Place; But the entry of our High Priest into it, that is into
Heaven, has made it patent to all that come to him and apply his Blood. There
is a new and living way by the holy flesh of Christ, consecrated and made of
infinite value and use, by the Divinity of his Person: And therefore, having
such a one of our kindred so great with God, we may draw near with a true
heart, and full assurance of faith, having our consciences sprinkled, etc. Heb.
10: 18. 19, 20. etc. Now, since the way is made plain to you, and the entry is
opened up in the Gospel; Do you not find your hearts stir with in you to draw
near to him? Do you not find a necessity of making peace by such a Mediator? O!
that you knew the great distance between God and your Natures, and what the
hazard is: Lo, they that are far from thee shall perish: Then certainly, you
would take hold of this invitation, and be easily drawn unto Jesus Christ. But
unto you who have adventured to draw near for pardon of sin in Christ; I would
recommend unto you, that you would draw yet nearer to God. After that the
partition wall of wrath and condemnation is removed; yet there is much
darkness in your minds, and corruption in our natures that separats from him.
I mean intercepts and disturbs that blessed communion you are called unto.
Therefore I would exhort you, as James, draw near to God, and he will draw near
to you, chapter 4. 8. And that, wherein this most consists, is in studying that
purification of our natures, that cleansing of our hearts from guile, and our
hands from offenses, by which our Souls may draw toward a resemblance of God.
This access and drawing near to God in assimilation, and conformity of nature,
is the great design of the Gospel, Be ye holy, for I am holy. Now ye are
agreed, walk with him, Amos 3. 3. As Enoch walked with God, Genesis 5. 24. That
is, labor in all your conversation, to set him before your eyes, and to study
to be well pleased with him in all things, and to please him in all; to conform
your selves to his pleasure in every thing. And this Communion in walking,
especially consists, in that Communication of the Spirit with God in prayer:
This is the nearest and sweatest approach, when the Soul is lifted up to God,
and is almost out of it self in him: And this being the ordinary exercise and
motion of the Soul, it exceedingly advances in the first point of nearness,
that is, in conformity with God. Drawing often near in Communion with him in
prayer, makes the Souldraw toward his likeness, even as much converse of men
together, will make them like one another.

Now for the commendation of this, It is good; What greater evil can be
imagined then separation from the greatest Good? And what greater good, then
accession to the greatest Good Every thing is in so far happy and well, as it
is joined with and enjoys that which is convenient for it. Light is the
perfection of the Earth, remove it, and what a disconsolat and unpleasant thing
is it? Now truly there is nothing suitable to the immortal Spirit of man, but
God; And therefore, all its happiness or misery must be measured by the
access or recesse, Nearness or distance of that infinite Goodness.
Therefore, is it any wonder, that all they that go a whoring from him, perish,
as every man's heart does: For we are infinitely bound by Creation, by many
other bonds stronger then wedlock, to consecrat and devote our selves wholly to
God, but this is treacherously broken: Every man turns aside to vanity and
lies, and is guilty of heart whoredom from God and spiritual idolatry, because
the Affection that should be preserved chaste for him, is prostitute to every
base object: So then, this divorcement of the Soul from God, cannot but follow
thereupon, even an eternal eclipse of true and real life and comfort. And
whoever draw back from the Fountain of Life and Salvation, cannot but find
elsewhere perdition and destruction. Heb. 10. ult. My beloved, let us set this
aside all other things which are the pursuites and endeavors of the most part
of men. Men's natural desires are carried toward Health, Food, Raiment, Life
and Liberty, Peace and such like. But the more rational sort of men, seek after
some shadow of Wisdom and Virtue. Yet the generality of men, both high and low,
have extravagant, illimited desires toward Riches, Pleasure, Preferment; And
all that we have spoken, is enclosed within the narrow compass of men's abode
here, which is but for a moment; so that if it were possible, that all these
forementioned desires and delights of men, could attend any man for the space
of an hundredth years, though he had the concurrance of the streams of the
Creatures to bring him in satisfaction, though all the world should bow to him
and be subject to the beck of his authority, without stroke of Sword, though
all the Creatures should spend their strength and wit upon his satisfaction;
yet do but consider what that shall be within some few years, when he shall be
spoiled of all that attendance, denuded of all external comforts, when the
fatal period must close his life, peace, health and all; and his poor Soul
also, that was drowned in that guif of pleasure, shall then find it self robbed
of its precious Treasure, that is, Gods favor, and so remain in everlasting
banishment from his presence. Do ye think, I say, that man were happy. Nay! O
happy Lazarus who is now blessed in Abraham's bosom, who enjoyes an eternity of
happiness, for a moments misery. But my beloved, you know that it is not
possible, even to attain to that imagined happiness here. All the gain that is
found, is not able to quit the cost and expense of grief, vexation, care,
toyling and sweating that is about them.

But if you would be persuaded, there is that to be found easily, which you
trouble your selves seeking elsewhere: And believe me, though the general
apprehension of men be, that peace, plenty, preferment and satisfaction in this
life, to compense their pains, is more easily attainable then fellowship and
communion with God; Yet I am persuaded that there is nothing more practicable
then the life of Religion. God has condemned the World under vanity and a
curse, and that which is crooked, can by no art or strength be made straight;
But he has made this attainable, by his gracious Promises, even a blessed
life, in approaching near to himself the Fountain of all Life. And this is a
certain Good, an universal Good, and an eternal Good. It will not disapoint you
as other things do, of which, you have no assurance for all your toylings. This
is made more infallible to a soul that truly seeks it in God. It is als
certain, that they cannot be ashamed through frustration, as that he is
faithful. And then it is an universal Good, one comprehensive of all, one
eminently and virtually all things created, to be joined to the infinite
all-fulnesse of God: This advances the Soul to a participation of all that is
in him. This is health, Psalm. 42. last, Prove. 3. 8. This is light, Jo. 8. 12.
It is life, Jo. 11. 25. Liberty, Job. 8. 36. Food and Raiment, Isai. 61. 10.
And Jo. 4. 14. And what not? It is profit, pleasure, preferment in the
superlative degree, and not scattered in so many various streams, which divide
and distract the heart, but all conbined in one. It is the true Good of both
Soul and Body, and so the only Good of man. And lastly it is eternal, to be
coaetaneous with thy Soul: Of all other things it may be said, I have seen an
end of them, they were and are not: but this will survive time, and all the
changes of it, and then it will begin to be perfect, when all perfection is at
an end. Now from all this, I would exhort you in Jesus Christ, to ponder those
things in your hearts, and consider them in reference to your own Souls, that
ye may say with David, It is good for me to draw near to God.

That which all men seek after, is happiness and well being. Men pursue
nothing but under the notion of Good; And to complete that which may be called
Good, there is required some excellency in the thing it self, and then a
convenience and sutablenesse to us; And these jointly draw the heart of man.
But the great misery is, that there is so much ignorance and misapprehension of
that which is truly Good; And then when any thing of it is known, there is so
little serious consideration and application of it to our selves; And this
makes the most part of men wander up and down in the pursuit of diverse things,
which are not that true Good of the Soul, and set their hearts on that which is
not, until they find their hearts fall down, as wanting a foundation, and then
they turn about again to some other vanity. And so the wanderings and strayings
of men are infinite, because the by-ways are innumerable, though the true way
be but one: Yea, the turnings, and toylings of one man are various and
manifold, because, he quickly losses the sent of happiness in every way he
falls into, and therefore must turn to another. And thus men are never at any
solid setting about this great business; never resolute wherein this
happiness consists, nor perremptor to follow it; But they fluctuat upon
uncertain apprehensions, and diverse affections, until the time and date of
Salvation expire, and then they must know certainly and surely, the inevitable
danger and irrecoverable loss they have brought themselves to, who would not
take notice of the sure way, of escaping both wrath, and attaining happiness
while it was to be found.

Well then, this is the great business we have here to do; yea, to make the
circle the larger, it is that great business we have to do in this world, to
know wherein the true well being and eternal welfare of our Souls consists,
and by any means to apply unto that, as the only thing necessary, in regard of
which, all other things are Ceremonies, Circumstances and indifferent things.
And to guide us in this Examination and Application, here is one man who having
almost made shipwreck upon the Rocks which men commonly dash upon, and being by
the Lord led safely by, and almost arrived at the Coast of true Felicity, he
sets out a Beacon, and lights a Candle to all who shall follow him, to direct
them which way they shall stir their course. Examples teach more effectually
then Rules; It is easy for every man to speak well upon this Point in general,
and readily all will acknowledge, that here it is, and no where else: But yet
all this is outcryed by the contrary noise of every man's practice. These
general grants of Truth, are recalled in the conversations of men; Therefore
they cannot have much influence upon any man: But when we hear one speak, and
see him walk so too; when we have the example of a most wise man, who wanted
not these worldly expectations, which other men have; So that he not only
propones it to us, but after much serious advisement, after mature
consideration of all that can be said, of the wickeds best estate and the
godlies worst, setting down resolute conclusions for himself. It is good for me
to draw near to God; Yea, so determinate into it, tha^ if none of the world
should be of that mind, he would not change it; Though all should walk in other
ways, he would choose to be rather alone in this, then in the greatest crowd of
company in any other. Now, I say, when we have such a Copy cast us, a man of
excellen^ parts in sobriety and sadness, choosing that way, which all in words
confess to be the best, should not this awake us out of our dreams, and raise
us up to some more attention and consideration of what we are doing? The words
you see, are the holy resolution of a holy heart, concerning that which is the
chiefest Good. You see the way to happiness, and you find the particular
application of that to David's Soul, or of his Soul to it. We shall speak a word
of the thing it self, then of the commendation of it, then of the application
of it.

For the thing it self, drawing near to God, it gives us some ground to take a
view of the posture in which men are found by nature, far off from God. Our
condition by nature, I cannot so fitly express, as in the Apostles words, Ep^.
2. 12. Without Christ, Aliens from the common wealth of Israel, strangers from
the Covenant of Promise, having no hope, and without God in the World. A
deplorable estate indeed, hopeless^ and helpless: No hope in it, that is the
extremity of misery, the refuse of all conditions. Without Christ, and without
God. O! these are words of infinite weight: Without those, without whom i^ is
simply impossible to be happy: and without whom it is not possible but to be
miserable, without the Fountain of Light, Life and Consolation, without which,
there is nothing but pure darkness, without any beam of light; Nothing but
death, without the least breathing of life; Nothing but vexation, without the
least drop of consolation. In a word, without these, and wanting these, whom if
you want, it were good to be spoiled of all being, to be nothing, if that
could be, or never to have been any thing. Men will seek death, and cannot find
it. O! what a loss and deprivement is the loss of God, which makes death more
desirable then life; and not to be at all, infinitely preferable to any being.
Now it is true, that the bringing in of multitudes within the pale of the
Visible Church, is some degree of access and nearness to God; for then they
b^come Citizens (as to external right) in the Commonwealth of the Church, and
have the offers of the Promises made to them, in respect of which visible
standing, the Apostle speaks of the whole Church of Ephesus. But now ye are
made near who were far off, v. 13. notwithstanding, that many of them were
found afterward, to have left their first Love, Rev. 2. But yet, Beloved, to
speak more inwardly, and as your Souls stand in the sight of God. The
generality of those who are near hand in outward Ordinances, are yet far off
from God in reality, without God and without Christ, as really as touching any
Soul feeling, as those who are altogether without. The bond of Peace and Union
was broken in Paradise, sin dissolved it, and broke off that nearness and
friendship with God, and from that day to this day, there has been an infinite
distance and separation betwixt Man and God: The steps and degrees of it are
many; There is darkness and blindness in men's minds: Such ignorance naturally
possesses the multitude, so that it wholly Alienats them from the Life of God,
Ephesians. 4. 18. For what fellowship can Light, that pure Light, have with such
gross Darkness as is among us? This certainly, is the removal of that Sun of
Righteousness from our Souls, or the imposition of the Clouds of
transgression, that makes it so dark a night in the Souls of Men. And then
there is nothing but enmity and desperate wickedness in the heart of man, and
this keeps the strong hold of the Affections, Romans 8. Jer. 17. There cannot be
a further elongation or separation of the Soul from God, then to turn so
opposite in all inclinations and dispositions to his Holy Will: For the
distance between God and us, is not local in the point of place; For whither
shall we go from him who is every where? And thus he is near hand every one of
us; but it is also real in the difformity and repugnancy of our Natures to his
Holy Will. But add unto this, that being thus separated in Affection, and
disjoined as it were, in natural Dispositions, we cannot draw near to God in
any Ordinance, as the Word, Prayer, etc, Though we may, as that People, draw
near with out lips, and ask of him our duty, and seem to delight to know him;
Yet there is this natural incapacity and crookedness in the heart of man, that
it cannot truly approach unto the Father of Spirits, with any Soul desire and
delight. But their hearts are removed far from me, Isa. 6. 9. Mat. 4. 12. I
think men might observe, that their Souls act not in Religious business as
they should; but that they remove their Souls many Miles distant from their
Bodies, and they cannot keep any constancy in this approach of Prayer to God,
cannot walk with him in their Conversation, or carry him along in their
Meditation. But there is one point of estrangement and separation superadded to
all, that there is no man can come near to God, without an Oblation and
Offering of Peace; That there is no approaching to him, but as to a consuming
Fire, except we can bring a Sacrifice to appease, and a Present to please him
for our infinite offenses: There the difference stands, we cannot draw near to
walk together, till we be agreed. And truly, this unto man is impossible, for
we have nothing so precious as the Redemption of our Souls, nothing can
compense infinite Wrongs, or satisfy infinite Justice. Now this seems to make
our nearness again desperate, and to put men furthest off from Hope.

Notwithstanding, this is the very purpose of the Gospel, Preached from the
beginning of the World, to remove that distance, and to take impediments of
meeting out of the way; For that great obstruction, the want of a Sacrifice,
and Ransom, the Lord has supplied it, he himself has furnished it: And it
was the great design carried on from the beginning of the World: But as the
Sun, the nearer he is, the more the Earth is Enlightened, so here, first some
dawning of Light appears, as a Messenger of Hope, to tell that the Redeemer
shall come, that the True Sacrifice shall be slain; then still the nearer his
own appearing, the clearer are the Manifestations of him, and the great design
is more opened up, till at length he breaks out in Glory, from under a Cloud,
and shows himself to the World, to be that Lamb of God that should take away
the sins of the World. And now as the Apostle to the Hebrews speaks, Chap. 7.
19. The Law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did, by
the which we draw nigh to God. All the Sacrifices and Shadows that were under
the Law, did but point at this perfect Ransom, and the way of access to God
through a Mediator was not so clear, but now the matter is made as hopeful as
is possible, the partition wall of the Laws curses, the hand-writting against
us is removed one the Cross, the enmity slain, the distance removed by the
Blood of the Cross, being partly filled up by his descent into our Nature,
partly by his lower descent in our Nature to suffer Death. And this is the
savoury Oblation that we have to present to God, and may have boldness to come
nigh because of it. And when once our access is made by the Blood of Jesus
Christ, then we are called and allowed to come still nigher, to cleave and
adhere to him as our Father, to pray unto him, to walk with him; Then we should
converse as Friends and Familiars together, then draw nigh to his Light for
Illumination, and to him as the Fountain of Life, for quickening, to place our
delight and desire in him, to forsake all other things, even our Wills and
Pleasures, and to lose them, that they may be found in his, to converse much in
his Company, and be often in Communication with him, and Meditation upon him.
This is the very design and substance of the Gospel, it holds forth the way of
making up the breach between Man and God, of bringing you nigh who are yet afar
off, and nearer who are near hand. Oh let us hearken to it.

SERMON VI.
Prove. 27. 1. Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day
may bring forth.
THere are some peculiar Gifts that God has given to man in his first
Creation, and endued his Nature with, beyond other living Creatures, which
being rightly ordered and improved toward the right Objects, do advance the
Soul of man to a wonderful height of Happiness, that no other sublunary
Creature is capable of. But by reason of man's fall into sin, these are quite
disordered, and turned out of the right Channel; And therefore as the right
improvement of them would make man happy: so the wrong employment of them,
loadens him with more real misery, then any other creature: I mean, God has
given to man two notable Capacities, beyond other things, one is; to know and
reflect upon himself, and to consider what convenience is in any thing toward
himself, what goodness or advantage redounds to himself from them, and in that
reflection and comparison to enjoy what he has. Another is to look forward,
beyond the present time, and as it were, to anticipat and prevent the slow
motions of time, by a kind of foresight and providence. In a word, he is a
Creature framed unto more understanding then others, and so capable of more joy
in present things, and more foresight of the time to come; He is made mortal,
yet with an immortal Spirit, of an immortal capacity, that has its eye upon
the morrow, upon eternity. Now herein consists either man's Happiness or
Misery, how he refl^cts upon himself, and what he chooses f^r the matter of
his Joy and Gloriation, and what providence he has for the time to come. If
those be rightly ordered, all is well; but if not, then woe unto him, there is
more hope of a beast then of him.

Man's Nature inclines to boasting, to glorying in something, and this arises
from some apprehended excellency or advantage, and so is originated in the
understanding power of man, which is far above beasts: Beasts find the things
themselves, but they do not, they cannot reflect upon their own enjoyment of
them; And therefore they are not capable of such pleasure: for the more
distinct knowledge of things in relation to our selves, the more delight
ensues upon it. Many Creatures have singular qualities and virtues, but they
are nothing the happier; For they know them not, and have no use of them, but
are wholly destinated to the use of man, who therefore is only said to enjoy
them, because he only is capable of joy from them. And this, I suppose, may
give us a hint, at the absolute incomprehensible Blessedness, self-complacency
and delight of God; It cannot but be immeasurably great, seeing the knowledge of
himself and all creatures is infinite, he comprehends all his own Power and
Virtue and Goodness; And therefore his Delight and Rejoicing is answerable.
There is a glorying and boasting then that is good, which man is naturally
framed unto: And this is that which David expresses, Psa. 34. 2. My Soul shall
make her boast in God; And Psalm. 44. 8. In God we boast all the day long, and
praise thy name for ever. When the Soul apprehends that All Sufficiency, and
self-sufficient fullness of God; What infinite Treasures of Goodness, and
Wisdom and Power are in him, and so how suitable and covenient he is to the
condition of the Soul; What a sweet correspondence there is between his
fullness and our emptiness; His Mercy and our Misery; His Infiniteness and
our unsutablenesse, that there is in him to fill and overflow the Soul. The
apprehension of this, cannot but in a manner perfume the Soul with delight. You
find how the senses are refreshed, when they meet with their suitable Object;
How a pleasant smell refreshes the ^ent; How lively and beautiful colors are
delightful to the eye. But much more here, God is the proportioned Object of
the immortal Spirit, he corresponds to all its capacities, and fills it with
unconceivable sweetness. But, my beloved, boasting and glorying in him, arises
not only from the proportionableness and convenience of him to our Spirits: but
this must be superadded, propriety in him. Things are loved, because excellent
in themselves, or because they are our own. But we boast in nothing, we glory
in nothing but because it is both excellent in it self, and ours besides. It is
the apprehended interest in any thing, makes the Soul rise and lift up it self
after this manner, to have such a one to be ours, such a Lord to be our God,
one so high and sublime, one so universally full to be made over to thee; Here
is the immediate rise of the Souls Gloriation. And truly as there is nothing
can be so suitable a portion, so there is nothing that can be so truly made
ours as God; Of all things a believer has, there is nothing so much his own as
God, nothing so indissolubly tied unto him, nothing so inseparably joined. See
Paul's Triumph upon that account, Romans 8. Nothing can truly be said to be the
Souls own, but that which is not only Coaetaneous with it, that survives
mortality, and the changes of the Body; But likewise is inseparable from it.
What a poor empty sound, is all that can be spoken of him, till your Souls be
once possessed of him? It cannot make your hearts leap within you, but it
cannot but excite and stir up a Believers heart.

Now there may be a lawful kind of Gloriation Rejoicing in the Works of God,
consequent to the first, which is a little stream from that greater River which
runs out from it, and flows in to it again. A Soul that truly apprehends God,
will take delight to view the Works of God, which make such an expression of
him, and are a part of the magnificence of our Heavenly Father: But this is all
in reference to him and not to our selves, for then it degenerats and loses
its sweetness, when once it turns the Channel toward the adorning of the
Creature. True boasting in God has necessarly conjoined with it, an humble and
low esteem of a man's self, Psalm. 34. 2. The humble shall hear thereof, and be
glade. As humility and self-emptiness made David go out of himself, to seek
satisfaction in God, and having found it, he boasts and triumphs, so there were
none capable of understanding his triumph, or partaking with him in his
delights, but the humble Souls. Now you may perceive, how far this boasting
here spoken of, is degenerated from that, and so how far man^ nature is
spoiled. Boast not thy self, etc. The tru^ boasting we were created unto, has
^ sufficient foundation, even such as will bea^ the weight of triumph, but that
which men^ spirits are now naturally set upon, cannot carry, cannot sound such
Gloriation; And therefore this boasting makes men ridiculous. If you saw a man
glorying in rags, setting forth himself to be admired in them, or boasting in
some vain despicable and base thing, you would pity him, or laugh at him as one
distempered. The truth is, Natural man is mad, has lost his Judgment, and is
under the greatest distraction imaginable since the fall: That fall has
troubled his brains, and they are never settled, till the new Creation come to
put all right again, and compose the heart of man. I say, all other
distractions are but particular, in respect to particular things: But there is
a general distraction over all mankind, in reference to things of most general
and most eternal concernment. Now fools and mad persons, they retain the same
affections and passions that are in men, as anger, love, hatred, grief, joy,
etc. but it is so much the worse, since the judgment, which is the only
directive and guide of them is troubled: Now they are set on wrong Objects,
they run at random, and are under no kind of Rule, and so they hurry the poor
man, and put him in a pitiful case. Now indeed so it is with us, since sin
entered, the Soul is wholly turned off God, the only true Object of delight, in
which only there can be solid gloriation. The mind of man is blinded, and his
passions are strong, and so they are now spent upon empty vanities, and carried
headlong without judgment. Oftentimes he glories in that which is his shame,
and boasts in that which is his sin, and which will cause nothing but shame,
the more weight be laid upon it. There is in man an Oblivion and forgetfulness
of God, and in this darkness of the ignorance of God, every thing is
apprehended or misapprehended as present sense suggests, and as it fancies a
convenience or excellency, thither the Soul is carried as if it were something,
and then it is but the east Wind; There is nothing beside God that is a fit
matter of boasting, because it laikes one of the Essential Ingredients; Either
it is not suitable to the Soul, or it is not truly our own; There wants either
proportion to the vast capacity and void of our desires, and so cannot fill up
that really, but only in a deluding dream or imagination, and therefore will
certainly make the issue rather vexation then gloriation; Or there wants
property and interest in them; For they are changeable and perishing in their
own nature and by Divine appointment, that they cannot be conceived to be the
proper Good of the immortal Soul; They cannot be truly our own, because they
will shortly cease to be, and before they cease to be, they may in a moment
cease to be ours; Tha^ tie of Interest is a draw-knot, whatsoever catches hold
of the end of it, loses it.

The Object of degenerat and vicious boasting is here held out; Boast not thy
self, o^ of thy self. Whatsoever be the immediate matter of it, this is always
the ultimat and principal Object. Since man fell from God, se^ is the center of
all his affections and motions: This is the great Idol, the Diana, tha^ the
heart worships, and all the contention labor, clamor, and care that is amon^
men, is about her Silver Shrines, so to speak something relating to the
adorning or setting forth of this Idol. It is true, since the Hear^ is turned
from that direct subordination to God, the Affections are scattered and parted
into infinite Channels, and run toward innumerable Objects; for the want of
that Original Unity, which comprehends in its bos^^ universal plenty, must
needs breed infinite variety, to supply the insatiable appetite of the Soul.
And this might be enough to convince you, that your Souls are quite out ^
course, and altogether wandered from the wa^ of Happiness, because they are
poured out o^ such a multiplicity of unsufficient, unsatisf^ing things, every
one of which is narrow, limited and empty, and the combination and concurrance
of all, being a thing either impossible or improbable to be attained. But we
may conceive, that men's Affections part themselves into three great heads of
created things: One of which, runs toward the Goods or Perfections of the
Mind; Another toward the Goods or advantages of the Body; And a third toward
those things that are without us, hona fortunae, Riches and Honor, etc. Now
each of these send out many Streams, and Rivulets as so many Branches from it;
But all of them, though they seem to have a direct course toward other things,
yet they wind about and make a circular progress to the great Ocean of self
estimation, whence they issued at first. You may find all of those, Jer. 9. 23.
falling under a Divine Interdiction and Curse, as being opposite to glorying in
God. While men reflect within themselves, and behold some Endowments and
Abilities in their minds beyond other men, of which, Wisdom ^^ the Principal,
and here stands for all inward advantages or qualifications of the Soul; In
that secret reflection and comparison, there is a tacit Gloriation, which yet
is a loud blasphemy in Gods Ears. It is impossible almost for a man to
recognosce and review his own Parts, such as Ingine, Memory, Understanding,
Sharpness of Wit, Readiness of Expression, Goodness and Gentleness of
Nature; But that in such a review, the Soul must be puffed up, apprehending some
excellency beyond other men, and taking complacency in it, which are the two
Acts of Robery, that are in gloriation and boasting: Commonly this arise^ from
unequal comparisons, we please our selve^ that we are deterio^ibus meliores,
better then the worst, and builds self-estimation upon the ruins of other men's
disadvantages, as if it were any point of praise in us, that they are worse
like men that stand upon a height, and measure their own Altitude, not from
their just intrinsic quantity, but taking the advantage of the bottom, whereby
we deceive our own selve^ I remember a word of Solomon's, that impo^ how
dangerous a thing it is for a man to refle^ upon, or search into his own Glory,
Prove. 2^ 27. It is not good to eat much honey: So for me to search their own
glory, is not glory. To su^fet in the excess of Honey or Sweet things drives
to vomit and cloyes the Stomach, ver^ 16. Though it be sweet, there is great
need yea, the more need of Caution and Moderation about it; So for a man,
either to searc^ into his own breast, and reflect upon hi^ ow^ excellencies to
find matter of Gloriation, or studiously to affect it among other and enquire
into other men's account, and steem of him, it is no Glory, it is a dang^rous
and shamful Folly. Now this is not only incident to Natural Spirits upon their
considerations of their own advantages; but ^ven to the most gracious, upon the
review ^^ Spiritual Endowments and Prerogatives. It is such a subtle and
insinuating Poison, th^^ it spreads universally, and infects the mo^^ Precious
Ointments of the Soul, and as were Poisons the very Antidot and Cou^terpoyson;
So forcible is this that was first dropped into man's Nature by Satan's envy,
that it diffuses it self even into Humility and Humiliation it self, and makes
a man proud, because of Humility. The Apostle found need to caveat this, Romans
11. 18, 19, 20. Boast not, be not high minded, but fear, thou stand by
faith. And Chap. 12. 16. Mind not high things, Be not wise in your own
conceits. And 1. Cor. 8. 2. If any man think that he knows any thing, he
knows nothing as he ought to know. All which, gives us a plain demonstration
of this, that self gloriation and complacency in reflection upon our selves, is
both the greatest Ignorance, and the worst Sacrilege. It is an Argument of
greater ignorance for a man to think he knows, then not to know indeed; It is
the worst and most dangerous Ignorance, to have such an opinion of our
Knowledge, Gifts and Graces; For that puffes up, swells with empty Wind, and
makes a vain tumor: And then it is great Sacrilege, a robbing of the Honor
that is due to God. For what have thou that thou have not received. That
appropriating of these things to our selves as ours, is an impropriating of
them from their right Owner, that is God, 1 Cor. 4. 7. For if thou did
apprehend that thou receivedst it, where then is glorying? I would desire then,
that whenever you happen to reflect upon your selves, and observe any advantage
either natural or spiritual in your selves, that you may think this word sounds
from Heaven, Let him that glories, glory in the Lord. Let not the wise man
glory in his wisdom; And so not the Learned man in his Learning, nor the
Eloquent man in his Speaking, nor the Ingenious man in his Quickness, nor the
Good man in his Goodness: All these things though sweet, yet will surfeit;
Gloriation in them is neither Glory, nor Gain, neither Honorable nor
Profitable.

Then the Stream of Gloriation flows in the Channel of Bodily Gifts, as Might,
Strength of Body, Beauty and Comeliness of Parts, and other such Endowments;
which besides that it is as Irrational as the former, in Sacrilegious
Impropriation of the most free and Arbitrary Gifts of God to our selves; It is
with all absurd, in that it is not so truly our selves: These bodily Ornaments
and Indowments do not perfect or better a man as a man. They are but the
alterable qualities of the Vessel or Tabernacle of a man, in which other-baser
Creatures may far excel him. How many comely and beautiful Souls, are lodged
within obscure and ugly Cottages of Bodies of Clay, which will be taken down:
And the great advantage is, that the Soul of a man, which is a man, cannot be
defiled from without, that is, from the Body though never so loathsome or
deformed: The vilest Body cannot mar the Souls beauty; But then on the other
hand, the most beautiful Body is defiled and deformed, by the filthiness of
sin in the Soul: And O! how many deformed and ugly Souls dwell into beautiful
and comely Bodies, which truly is no other thing, then a Devil in an Image
well carved and painted. Christians, you had need to correct this within you,
even a self-complacency, joined with despiseing of others in the consideration
of these external Gifts God has given you. What an abominable thing is it to
cast up in reproach, or in your hearts to despise any other for natural
Imperfections? Such as Blindness, Lamenesse, Deformity, or such like. Let that
word sound always in your Ears, Who made thee to differ from another? Boast
not thy self, etc. But there is as strong a Stream runs in the third Channel,
as in any; Gloriation arising from these outward and extrinsick differences,
that the Providence of God makes among men, such as Riches, Honor, Gain, etc.
You find such men, Psalm. 49. 6. Prove. 18. 11. And 10. 15. That which a godly
man makes the Name of the Lord, that is, the ground and foundation of his
confidence for present and future times, that, the most part of men make their
Riches; That is their strong City, and their high Wall, their Hope and
Expectation is reposed within it. This is the Tower, or Wall of Defense against
the Injuries and Calamities of the Times, which most part of men are building,
and if it go up quickly, if they can get these several Stones or pieces of gain
scraped together into a heap, they straight way imagine themselves safe, as
under a high Wall; But there is no truth in it, it is all but in their
imagination, and therefore it comes often down about their Ears, and offends
them instead of being a Defense. Let a man c^eep, as it were, from of the
ground where the poor lie, and get some advantage of ground above them, or be
exalted to some Dignity or Office, and so set by the shoulders higher then the
rest of the People, or ^et grow in some more abundance of the things of this
life, and strange it is, what a vanity or tumor of mind instantly follows: He
presently thinks himself some body, and forgeting either who is above him, to
whom all are Worms creeping and crauling on the Footstool; Or what a sandy
Foundation he stands upon himself, He begins to take some secret complacency in
himself, and to look down upon others below him; He applauds, as it were, unto
himself, and takes it in evil part to want the approbation and plaudite of
others; Then he cannot so well endure effronts and injuries as before; He is
not so Meek and condescending to his Equals or Inferiors: While he was poor,
he used entreaties, but now he answers roughly, Pro. 18. 23. As Solomon gives
the Character of him. How many vain and empty Gloriations are there about the
point of Birth and Place, and what foolish contentions about those, as if it
were Children struggling among themselves, about the order and rank; There is no
worth in these things, but what fancy and custom impose upon them, and yet poor
Creatures boast in these empty things. The Gentle Men despise Citizens, the
Citizens contemn the poor Country Men, and yet their Bloods in a Basin have no
different Colors; For all this hot contention about Blood and Birth. Boast not
of thy self. Nay; to speak properly, this is not thy self. Qui genus laudat
suum, aliena jactat. Such Parents, and such a House is nothing of thy own,
these are mere extrinsick things, which neither be a honor to unworthy men,
nor a disgrace to one who is worthy.

You see, Beloved in the Lord, what is now the natural posture or inclination
of our Souls in this degenerat and fallen Estate, as the Rivers of Paradise
have changed their Channels and Course since the fall, so has man's Affections,
and so has his Gloriation, so that it may be truly said, that our Glory is
our Shame, and not our Glory. Many glory in Iniquity and Sin, Psalm. ^0 3. And
94 4. But that shall undoubtedly be their shame, and confusion before Men and
Angels. How many godless persons will Glory in swearing heinous and deep Oaths,
and some have contended about the victory in it, you account it a point of
gallentry, but this Triumph is like the Devils in Hell upon the devouring of
Souls. Some boast of drinking, and being able to drink others under the Table:
But we should be humbled and mourn for such Abominations. Certain I am, that
many boast of wicked designs, and mal^tious projects against their Neighbors;
If they can accomplish them; They account their Glory, not to take a wrong
without giving a greater; Nor to suffer an evil word, without twenty worse in
recompense. Alas, this Boasting will one day be turned into gnashing of Teeth,
and this Gloriation into that gnawing and ever-tormenting Worm of Conscience.
And what will ye do in the day of that visitation, and where shall be your
glory? But the most part Glory and boast in things that profit not, and will
become their shame, because they glory in them, that is, these Gifts of God,
outward or inward, Temporal or Spiritual, wherein there is any advancement
above others; Unto whom, I would seriously commend this Sentence to be pondered
duly, Boast not of thy self. Whatsoever thou art, or whatsoever thou have,
boast not of thy self for it, think not much of thy self because of it: Though
there be a difference in Gods Donation, yet let there be none in thy
self-estimation: Has thou more Wisdom and Pregnancy of Wit, or more Learning
then another; Think not more of thy self for that, then thou think of the
Ignorant and Unlearned who want it: Have that same reflection upon thine own
unworthiness, that thou would think reasonable another that wants these
Endowments should have: Is there a greater measure of Grace in thee, boast not,
reckon of thy self as abstracted and denuded of that: And let it not add to thy
value or account it thy self, put not add to thy value or account it thy self,
put not in that to make it down-weight, and to make thee prefer thy self
secretly to another. Whither it be some larger Fortune in the World, or some
higher Place and Station among Men, or some Abilities and Perfections of Body
or Mind, which may entice the secretly to kiss thy ^and, and bow down to thy
self, yet remember that thou boast not, glory not in any thing but in the Lord:
Let nothing of that kind conciliat more affection to thy self, or more contempt
toward others. Let not any thing of that kind be the rule of thy
self-judgeing, but rather intertain the view of the other side of thy self,
that is the worst, and keep that most in thy Eye, that thou may only glory in
God. If thou be a Gentl^ Man, labor to be als humble in Heart, as thou
think a Country Man or poor Tenant should be; If thou be a Scholar, be als
low in thy own sight, as the unlearned should be; If Rich, count not thy self
any whit better then the poor. Yea, the higher God set the in place or parts,
the lower thou ought to set thy self: Boast not of thy self, for any thing in
thy self, or belonging to thy self, for the property of all Good is taken from
us since the fall, and it is fallen in Gods Hand, since we forefeited it, and
there is nothing now properly ours, but evil, that is our self.

SERMON VII.
Prove. 27. 1. Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day
may bring forth.
AS man is naturally given to Boasting and Gloriation in something (for the
Heart cannot want some Object to rest upon and take complacency into, it is
framed with such a capacity of employing other things) so there is a strong
inclination in man toward the time to come, he has an Immortal appetite, and
an appetite of Immortality; and therefore his desires usually stretch farther
then the present Ho^^. And the more Knowledge he has above other Creatures,
the more Providence he has and foresight of the time to come. And so he often
anticipats future things, by present Joy and Rejoicing in them, as he
accelerats in a manner by his earnest desires and endeavors after them: Now if
the Soul of man were in the Primitive Integrity, and had as clear and pearcing
an Eye of Understanding as once it had, this Providence of the Soul would reach
to the furthest period in Time; that is, to Eternity, which is the only just
measure of the endurance of any Immortal Spirit. But since the Eye of man's
Understanding is darkness, and his Soul disordered, he cannot see afar off,
nor so clearly, by far: He is now as you say Sand-blind, can see nothing at
such a distance, as beyond the bounds of Time, can see nothing but at hand, to
morrow, this is the narrow Sphere of poor man's comprehension; All he can attain
unto, is to be provident for the present Time: I call it all present, even that
which is to come of our Time; because in regard of Eternity it has no part, it
has no flux or succession, it is so soon cut off as a moment, as the
twinkling of an Eye: And so though a man could see the end of it, it is but a
short and dim sight, it is as if a man could only behold that which is almost
contiguous with his Eye. These then are the two great ruins and decays of the
Nature of man; He is degenerated from God to created things, and seeks his Joy
and Rest in them, in which there is nothing but the contrair; that is,
vexation. And then he is fallen from apprehension of Eternity, and the poor
Soul is confined within the narrow bounds of time; So that now all his
Providence, is to lay up some perishing things for some few revolutions of the
Sun, for some few morrows, after which, though an endless morrow ensue, yet he
perceives it not, and provides not for it; And all his Glorying and Boasting is
only upon some presumptuous confidence, and ungrounded assurance of the
stability of these things for the time to come; which the Wise Man finding much
folly in, he leaves us this Counsel, Boast not thy self of to morrow, with a
most pungent reason, taken partly from the instability and inconstancy of all
these outward things, in which men fancy an Eternity of Joy, and partly from
the Ignorance we have of the future events, For thou know not what a day may
bring forth.

This Boasting is an evil so predominant among men, that I know not any more
universal in its Dominion, or more hurtful to us, or displeasing to God. If it
could be so emboweled unto you, as that you might truly discern the many
monstrous conceptions of Atheism and Irreligion that are in it, it were worth
the while. But I shall not digress upon the general head, I had rather keep
within the limits of the Text. Self-boasting you see, is that which is here
condemned, and the very Name is almost enough to condemn the Nature of it. But
there is another particular added to restrict that, Of to morrow. Of all
Boastings the most irrational and groundless is that which arises from
presumption of future things, which are so uncertain both in themselves and to
us.

It is worth the observation, that whatever be the immediate and particular
matter and occasion of men's Gloriation, yet Self is the great and ultimat
Object of it: It is Self that men Glory into, whatsoever created thing be the
reason or occasion of it. Boast not thy self of tomorrow. Here we might stand
and take a look of the crookedness and perverseness of man's Spirit, since his
departure from God; Self-love and Pride were the first poison that the malice
of Satan dropped into man's Nature, and this is so strong and pestilent, that it
has spread through the whole of mankind, and the whole in every man. Every one
is infected, and all in every one. What are all the disordered affections in
men, but so many Streams from this Fountain? And from these do men's Affections
flow next: So that there is nothing left uncorrupted, and free of this
abominable and vile ingredient; All flowing from Self and returning to it
again, which is both sacrilegious and unnatural. There is heinous Sacrilege in
it, the spoiling of the Glorious Divine Majesty, of his Indubitable Prerogative
and Incommunicable Right of all the Glory and Honor of his Creature: There is
no usurpation like this, for the Worm that crawls on the Footstool, to creep up
to the Throne, and as it were to King it there, to Deifie and Adore it self,
and gather in all the Tribute of Praise and Glory and Love, that is only due to
the Lord God Almighty, and invert and unpropriat these to our selves; which is,
as if the Axe should boast it self, as if it were no Iron, or the Staff, as if
it were no Timber. Hence it is, that of all evils in man's Nature, God has the
most perfect Antipathy, and direct Opposition against Pride and Self-love,
because it is Sacrilege and Idolatry in the highest manner, it striks at the
Sovereignty and Honor of Gods Name* which is dear to him as himself, it sets
up a vile Idol in the choicest Temple of God, that is in the Heart: And this is
the Abomination of Desolation: Other evils strike against his Holy Will: But
this peculiarly points at the very Nature and Being of the most High God, and
so it is with Child of Blasphemy, Atheism is the very heart and life of it. And
then it is most unnatural, and so monstrous and deformed. For, consider all the
Creation, though every one of them have particular Inclinations toward their
own proper ends, and so a Happiness suitable to their own Nature; yet how
diverse, how contrary soever they be, there is no selfishnesse in them; They
all concur and conspire to the good of the whole, and the mutual help of each
other. If once that Poison should infect the Material World, which has spoiled
the Spiritual, let once such a selfish disposition or inclination possess any
part of the World, and presently the Order, Harmony, Beauty, Pleasure and
Profit of the whole World should be Interrupted, Defaced and Destroyed. Let
the Sun be supposed to boast it self of its Light and Influence, and so disdain
to impart it to the lower World, and all would run into confusion. Again I
desire you but to take a view of this Humor in another Person; (For we are
more ready to see others evils then our own) and how deformed is it? So vile is
self-seeking and self-boasting, that all men loath it in others, and hide it
from others: It disgraces all Actions, how beautiful soever; It is the very
bane of Humane Society, that which looses all the Linkes of it, and makes them
cross and thwart one another.

But, alas, how much more easy is it, to paint out such an evil in a deformed
Visage, then to discern it in our selves? And how many will hate it in the
Picture, who love and entertain it in their own persons, such deceitfulness is
intermingled with most desperate wickedness. I verily believe that is the
predominant of every man good and bad, except in as far as it is mortified by
Grace. O! the turnings and windings of the Heart upon it self, in all the most
apparently direct Motions toward God and the good of men? What serpentine and
crooked Circumgyrations, and reflections are there in the Soul of man, when the
outward Action and Expression seems most regular, and directed toward Gods
Glory and others Edification? Whoever of you have any acquaintance with your
own Spirits, cannot but know this, and be ashamed and confounded at the very
thought of it. Self-boasting; Self-complacency, selfseeking, all those being of
Kin one to another, are insinuated into your best Notions, and in fect them
with more Atheism before God, then the strongest pious Affection can instill of
goodness into them. How often will men's Actions and Expressions be outwa^^ly
clothed with a habit of Condescendency and Self-denial? And many may declaim
with such Zeal and Vehemence against this evil, and yet Latet anguis: The
Serpent is in the bosom, and his venom may be diffused into the Heart, and
the poison of Self-seeking and Self-boasting, may run through the Veins of
humble like Carriage and Passionate Discourses for Self-denial. Oh that we
could above all things, establish that Fundamental Principle of Christianity in
our Hearts, even as we would be his Disciples, truly and sincerely, and not in
outward resemblance, to deny our selves, to renounce our selves and our lusts,
to make a whole Resignation of our Love, Will, Glory and all to him, in whom to
be lost, it is only truly to find our selves.

But though man have this strange Self-idolizing Humor, and a Self-glorying
Disposition, yet he is so poor and beggarly a Creature, that he has not
sufficient matter within himself, to give complacency to his Heart; therefore
he must borrow from all external things; And when there is any kind of
Propriety in, or Title to them, then he Glories in himself for them, as if they
were truly in himself. We are Creatures by Nature most indigent, yet most
proud, which is unnatural. No man is satisfied within himself (except the Good
man, Prove. 14. 14.) but he goes abroad to seek it at the Door of every
Creature; And when there are some Plumes or Feathers borrowed from other Birds,
like that foolish Bird in the Fable, we begin to raise our Crists and boast our
selves, as if we had all these of our own, and were beholden to none. But as
things that are truly our own, will not be sufficient to feed this Flame of
Gloriation, without the accession of outward things: So present things and the
present time will not afford Aliment enough or Fuel for this Humor, without
the addition of the morrow.

Boast not thy self of to morrow. No man's present possession satisfies him,
without the addition of hope and expectation for the future. And herein the
poverty of man's Spirit appears, and the emptiness of all things we enjoy here,
that our present Revenue, as it were, will not content the Heart: The present
Possession fills not up the Vacuities of the Heart, without the supply of our
imaginations, by taking so much in upon the head of the morrow, to speak so: As
one Prodigal and Riotous Waster, who cannot be served with his yearly incomes,
but takes so much on upon his Estate, upon the next years income, before it
come, begines to spend upon it, before it come it self, and then when it comes
it cannot suffice it self; So the insatiable and indigent Heart of man cannot
subsist and feed its Joy in Complacency upon the whole World, it it were
presently in its possession, without some accession of hopes and expectations
for the time to come. Therefore the Soul, as it were, Anticipats and Forestals
the morrow, and borrows so much present Joy and Boasting upon the head of it,
which when it comes it self, perhaps it will not fill the hand of the Reaper,
let be pay for that Debt of Gloriation that was taken on upon its name, or
compense the expectation was in it. See Job. 11. 18, 20. and 8. 13. Hope is
like a man's house to him, but to many it is no better then a Spidders Web, We
have then a clear Demonstration of the madness and folly of men, who hang so
much upon things without, and suffer themselves to be Molded and Modelled in
their Affections, according to the variety of external Accidents; Frst of all,
consider the independence of all things upon us and our choice, there is
nothing more unreasonable, then to stir our passions upon that which falls
not under our deliberation, as the most part of things to come are: What shall
be to morrow, what shall come of my Estate, of my places, what event my
Projects and Designs shall have, this is not in my hand; These depends upon
other men's Wills, Purposes and Actions, which are not in my power; And
therefore, either to Boast or Glory upon that which depends upon the
concurrance of so many Causes Unsubordinat to me, or to be vexed and disquieted
upon the fore Apprehension of that which is not in my hand to prevent, it is
not only Irreligious, as contrary to our Saviouts Command, Matthew. 6. But
unreasonable also, as that which even Nature condemns: Take not thought for to
morrow, and so by consequent, Boast not of to morrow. And there is one Argument
from the vanity of such Affections, Thou can not make one hair black, nor add
one cubit to thy stature, etc. To what purpose then, are either these Vexations
or Gloriations, which cannot prevent evil, nor procure good? Why should our
Affections depend upon others Motions? This makes a man the greatest Slave and
Captive, so that he has not the Dominion and Power of himself. But the vanity
of such. Affections is the more increased, if we consider that Supreme Eternal
Will, by which all these things are Determined; And therefore, it is in vain
for Creatures to make themselves more miserable, or put themselves in a Fools
Paradise, which will produce more misery after wards, and that for these
things, which are bound up in that fatal Chain of his eternal purpose. Then in
the next place, the folly of men appears from the inconstancy of these things;
there is such an infinite variety of the Accidents of Providence, that it is
folly for a man to presume to boast of any thing, or take Complacency in it,
because many things fall between the Cup and the Lip, the Chalice and the Chin
as the proverb is. There is nothing certain, but that all things are uncertain,
that all things are subject to perpetual Motion, Revolution and Change; To day
a City; to morrow a Heap. And there is nothing between a great City and a Heap
but one day; Nothing between a Man and no Man but one hour: Our Life is subject
to infinite Casualities: It may receive the Fatal Stroke from the meanest
thing, and most unexpected; it is a Buble flotting upon the Water; For this
World is a wattery Element, in continual Motion with Storms, and in these, so
many poor dying Creatures rise up, and swime and float a while, and are tossed
up and down by the Wind and Vave, and the least puff of Wind, or drop of Rain
sends it back to its own Element: We are a Vapor appearing for a very little
time, a Creature of no solidity, a Dream, a Shadow and appearance of something;
And this Dream, or Apparition is but for a little t^me, and then it evanisheth,
not so much into nothing, for it was little distant from nothing before, but it
disappears rather. All humane Affairs are like the Spaiks of a Wheel, in such a
continual Circumgyration, as a Captive King who was drawing Sesostris Chariot,
said, when he was looking often behind him, the King of Egypt Sesostris
demanded, for what end did he look so often about him; Says he, I am looking
to the Wheel, musing upon the Vicissitudes and Permutations of it, how the
highest parts are instantly lowest; And this word repressed the Kings vain
Glory. Now in this constant Wheeling of outward things, which is the Soul, that
enjoyes true quiet and peace? Even that Soul, that is fixed, as it were in the
Center, upon God, that has its abode in him: Though the parts without be in a
continual violent Motion, yet the Center of the Wheel is at much peace, is not
vioiently turned, but gently complyes to the changes of the other. And then
consider the madness of this, Thou know not, etc. There are two Reasons in
the things themselves, Inconstancy, and Independency on us; But this is al^
pressing as any, our ignorance of them: They are wholly in the dark to us, as
it were, in the lower parts of the Earth. As there is no more in our power, but
the present hour, for to yester-day we are dead already, for it is past and
cannot return, it is as it were buried in the Grave of Oblivion: And to morrow,
we are not yet born, for it is not come to the Light, and we know not if ever
it will come; So there is no more in our knowledge, but the present hour. The
time past, though we remember it, yet it is without our practical knowledge, it
admits of no Reformation by it: And the time to come, it is not born to us, and
its all one as if we were not born to it. And indeed in the Lords disposing of
all Affairs under the Sun, after this Method, there is infinite Wisdom and
Goodness both, though at the first view, men would think it better, that all
things went on after an uniform manner; And that men knew what were to befall
them; Yet I say, God has herein provided for his own Glory and the Good of
men: His own Glory, while he has reserved to himself, the absolute Dominion,
and perfect knowledge of his Works, and exercises them in so great variety,
that they may be seen to proceed from him; And for our good, for what place
were there for the exercise of many Christian Virtues and Graces, if it were
not so? What place for Patience, if there were no cross Dispensations? what
place for Moderation, if there were no Prosperity? I^ there were not such
Variety and Vicissitude, how should the evennesse and constancy of the Spirit
be known? Where should Contentment and Tranquillity of Mind have place? For it
is a Calm in a Storm properly, not a Calm in a Calm, that is no Virtue. If the
several Accidents of Providence were foreseen by us, what a marvelous
Perturbation and disorder would it make in our Duty? Who would do his Duty out
of Conscience to Gods Command, to commit Events to him? Now there is the trial
of Obedience, to make us go by a way we know not, and Resign our selves to
All-seeing Providence, whose Eyes run too and fro throughout the earth.
Therefore, that no Grace may want matter and occasion of exercise, that no
Virtue may die out, for want of Fuel, or rust for lack of Exercise, God has
thus Ordered and Disposed the World. There is no Condition, no Posture of
Affairs, in which he has not left a fair Opportunity, for the exercising of
some Grace: Has he shut up and precluded the Acting of one or many through
Affliction, then surely he has opened a wide Door, and given large matter for
Self denial, Humility, Patience, Moderation; And these are als precious, as any
that look fairest. In a word, I think the very Frame and Method of the
disposing of this Material World, speaks aloud to this purpose. You see, when
you look below, there is nothing seen but the outside of the Earth, the very
Surface of it only appears, and there your sight is terminated; But look above,
and there is no termination, no bounding of the Sight, there are infinite
spaces, all are Transparant and Clear without and within. Now what may this
represent unto us: One says, it shows us that our Affections should be set
upon things above, and not on things below, seeing below there is nothing but
an outward appearance and Surface of things, the Glory and Beauty of the Earth
is but skin deep; But Heavenly things are alike throughout, all Transparent,
nothing to set bounds to the Affections, they are infinite, and you may enlarge
infinitely toward them. I add this other Consideration, that God has made all
things in Time, Dark and Opake, like the Earth: look to them, you see only the
outside of them, the present hour, and what is beyond it, you know no more then
you see, the Bowels of the Earth. But Eternity is both Transparent and
Conspicuous throughout, and infinite too. Therefore God has made us blind to
the one, that we should not set our heart, nor terminat our eyes upon any thing
here; But he has opened and spread Eternity before us in the Scriptures, so
that you may read and understand your Fortune, your everlasting Estate in it.
He has shut up Temporal things and Sealed them, and wills us to live
implicitly, and give him the Trust of them without anxious foresight; But
Eternity he has unvailed and opened unto us. Certain it is, that no man till
he be fully possessed of God, who is an All-sufficient Good, Psalm. 4. Can find
any satisfaction, in any present Enjoyment without the addition of some hope
for the future. Great things without it will not content; for what is it all to
a man, if he have no assurance for the time to come, and mean things with it,
will content: Great things with little hope and expectation, fill with more
Vexation instead of Joy, and the greater they be, this is the more increased.
Again, mean and low things, with great hopes and large expectations will give
more satisfaction. Therefore, all mankind have a look toward the morrow, and
labor to supply their present defects and wants with hope or confidence of
that. I would exhort you who would indeed have solid matter of Gloriation, and
would not be befooled into a golden Dream of vain expectations of vain things,
that ye would labor to fill up the Vacuities of present things, with that
great Hope, the Hope of Salvation, which will be as an Helmet to keep your head
safe in all difficulties, 1 Pet. 1. 3. Heb. 6. 18, 19. Romans 5. 5. It is true,
other men's expectations of Gain and Credit, and such things; Do in some
measure, abait the torment and pain of present wants and indigencies: But
certain it is, that such hope is not so Sovereign a Cordial to the heart, as to
expel all grief, but leaves much vexation within: But then also, the frequent
disappointment of such projects and designs of Gain, Honor and Pleasure, and
the extreme unanswerablenesse of these to the Desires and Hopes of the Soul,
even when attained, musts needs breed infinite more anxiety and vexation in the
Spirit, then the hope of them could give of satisfaction; Yea, the more the
expectation was, it cannot choose, but the greater shame and confusion must be.
Therefore, if you would have your Souls truly established, and not hanging
upon the morrow uncertainly, as the most part of men are, get a look beyond the
morrow, unto that everlasting Day of Eternity, that has no morrow after it;
And see what foundation you can lay up for that time to come, as Paul bids
Timothy counsel the Rich Men in the World, who thought their Riches and
Revenues, their Offices and Dignities, a Foundation and VVell-spring of
Contentment to them and their Children, and are ready to say with that man in
the Parable, Soul take thy rest, thou have enough laid up for many years.
Charge them, (says he,) etc. 1 Timothy 6. 16, 17, 18, 19. O! a Charge worthy to
be engraven on the Tables of our hearts; worthy to be written on the Ports of
all Cities, and the Gates of all Palaces. You would all have a Foundation of
lasting Joy, says he; But why seek you lasting Joy in fadeing things? And
certain Joy in uncertain Riches, and solid Contentment in empty things, and not
rather in the Living God, who is the inexhausted Spring of all Good things?
Therefore, if you would truly boast of to Morrow, or sing a solid Requiem to
your own hearts; There is another Treasure to be laid up in store against the
time to come; The Time only worthy to be called Time, that is Eternity; And
that is, study to do good, and be rich in good Works, in Works of Piety, of
Mercy, of Equity, of Sobriety. This is a better Foundation for the Time to
come; Or rather receive and embrace the Promise of eternal Life, made to such,
that free and gracious promise of Life in the Gospel; And so you may supply all
the wants and indigencies of your present enjoyments, with the precious hope of
eternal Life which cannot make ashamed. But what is the way that the most part
of men take to mitigate and sweeten their present hardships? Even like that of
the fools in the Parable, Luke 12. They either have something laid up for many
years, or else their projects and designs reach to many years: The truth is,
they have more pleasure in the expectation of such things, nor in the real
possession, but that pleasure is but imaginary either. How many thoughts and
designs are continually turning in the heart of man, how to be rich, how to
get greater gain, or more credit: Men build Castles in the Air, and fancy to
themselves, as it were, new Worlds of mere possible beings, and in such an
employment of the heart, there is some poor deceiving of present sorrows, but
at length they recurre with greater violence. Every man makes Romanses for
himself, pretty fancies of his own Fortune, as if he had the disposing of it
himself; He sits down, as it were, and writes an Almanac and Prognostication
in his own secret thoughts, and designs his own Prosperity, Gain and
Advantage, and Pleasures or Joys; And when we have thus ranked our Hopes and
Expectations, then we begin to take complacency in them, and boast our selves
in the confidence of them, as if there were not a Supreme Lord who gives a Law
to our Affairs, als immediately, as to the Winds and Raines.

Now that you may know the folly of this, Consider the Reason which is
subjoyned, For thou know not what a day may bring forth. There is a
concurrence of inconstancy in all things, and ignorance in us, which might be
sufficient to check our folly of confident and presumptuous expectation from
them, and gloriation in them: So that whether we look about us to the things
themselves, or within us to our selves, all things proclaim the folly and
madness of that which the heart of man is set upon. And this double
consideration the Apostle James opposes to the vain hopes and confident
undertakings of men, Chap. 4. 13. etc, Which place is a perfect Commentary upon
this Text: He brings in an instance of the resolutions and purposes of rich
men, for the compassing of Gain by Merchandise, whereby you may understand all
the several designs and plots of men, that are contrived and ordered, and laid
down in the hearts of men, either for more Gain, or more Glory, or more
Pleasure and Ease. Now the Grand Evil that is here reproved, is not simply men's
Care and Diligence in useing Lawful means for their accommodation in this life,
or yet their Wise and Prudent foresight in ordering of their Affairs for
attaining that end, for both these are frequently recommended and commended by
the Wise Man, Prove. 6. 6. and 24. 27. But here is the great Iniquity, that men
in all these contrivings and actings, carry themselves as if they were absolute
Independents, without consideration of the Sovereign Universal Dominion of God.
No man almost reflects upon that Glorious Being, which alone has the Negative
and Definitive Sentence in all the Motions and Affairs of the sons of men, or
considers, that it is not in man that walks, to direct his paths, that when all
our thoughts and designs are Marshalled and Ordered, and the compleatest
preparation made for reaching our intended ends, that yet the way of man is not
in himself; That all these things are under a higher and more absolute Dominion
of the most High God. Whose heart does that often sound unto? A man's heart
devises his way, but the Lord directs his steps: And so is not bound by any
rule to conform his Executions to our Intentions; For he works all according to
the Counsel of his own Will and not ours; And therefore no wonder that the
product of our Actions do not answer our intentions and devices, because the
Supreme Rule and Measure of them is above our Power and without our Knowledge.
And therefore, though there were never so many devices in the heart of man,
never so wisely or lawfully Contrived and Ordered; Though the Mine be never so
well prepared, and all ready for the fireing of it: Yet the Counsel of the
Lord, that shall stand, Prove. 19. 21. and 16, 9. That higher determination may
blow up our best consultations or drown them, for man's goings is of the Lord,
how then can a man understand his Paths, Prove. 20. 24. And yet the most part of
men in all these things loss the remembrance of this fatal and invincible
Subordination to God, and propose their own Affairs and Actions, as if
themselves were to dispose of them; And when their own resolutions and projects
seem probable, they begin to please themselves in them, in the forethought of
what they will do, or what they may have or enjoy to morrow afterward: There is
a present secret Complacency and Gloriation, without any serious reminding the
absolute dependence of all things upon the Will of God, and their independence
upon our Counsels, without fore-casting and often ruminating upon the perpetual
fluctuation and constant inconstancy of humane Affairs, but as if we were the
Supreme Moderators in Heaven and Earth, so we Act and Transact our own
business in a deep forgetfulness of him who sits in Heaven and laughs at all
our Projects and Practices. And therefore, the Holy Ghost would have this
secret but serious thought to season all our other Purposes and Consultations,
If the Lord will, etc. Whereas we ought to say and think this, it is scarce
minded: And then we know not what shall be to Morrow, for our Life it self is a
Vapor. Herein is a strong Argument, you lay your designs for to Morrow, for a
Year, for many Years, and yet ye know not, if ye shall be to Morrow. How many
men's Projects are cast beyond that time that is measured out in Gods Counsel:
And what a ridiculous thing must that be to him, if it be not done with
submissive and humble dependence on him. In a word, Time is with Child of
innumerable things, conceived by the Eternal Counsel of God; Infinite and
inconceiveably Various are these Conceptions which the Womb of Time shall at
length bring forth to Light; Every Day, every Hour, every Minute is traveling
in pain, as it were, and is delivered of some one Birth or another, and no
Creature can open its Womb sooner, or shut it longer then the appointed and
prefixed Season; There is no miscarying as to him whose Decrees do properly
conceive them, t^ough to us they seem often Abortive. Now join unto this to
make the Allusion full, as long as they are carried in the Womb of Time, they
are hid from all the World; The Womb is a dark Lodging, and no Understanding
nor Eye can pierce into it, to tell what is in it, till it break forth; And
therefore, Children born are said to come to the Light: for till then, they are
to us in a Cloud of darkness, that we cannot tell what they are; So then;
every Day, every Hour, every Moment is about to bring forth that which all the
World is ignorant of, till they see it; And Oh that then they understood it. We
know not whether the Morrows or next Hours Birth may be a proportioned Child,
or a Monster, whether it will answer the Figure and Mould that is in our mind,
or be misshapen and deformed to our Sense. Man's desires and designs may be said
to conceive, for they form an inward Image and Idea within themselves, to which
they labor to make the Product and Birth of Time conformable; And when it
answers our preconceived form, then we rejoice as for a Man-child. But for the
most part it is a Monster as to our Conception, it is an Aberration from our
Rule; It is either mutilate and defective of what we desire, or superfluous or
deformed, which turns our expectation into vexation, and our boasting into
lamentation. But the truth is, Time brings forth no Monsters as to the Lords
Decrees, which are the only just measures of all things: It may be said of
every thing under the Sun, as David speaks of himself in the Womb; My substance
was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret and curiously formed in the
lowest parts of the Earth, etc. Psalm. 139. 15. His Eyes see all their
substance: Yet being imperfect and in his everlasting Book all their Members
are written; The Portraicture of every thing is drawn there to the Life, and
these in continuance are fashioned, just as they were written and drawn, and so
they exactly correspond to his pre-conception of them, whatever deformity they
may have as to us, yet they are perfect Works and beautiful to him.

SERMON VIII.
Isaiah 1. 10, 11. etc. Hear the Word of the Lord ye Rulers of Sodom, give ear
unto the Word of the Lord ye People of Gomorrah.
IT is strange to think what Mercy is mixed with the most Wrath-like Strokes
and Threatenings; There is no Prophet whose Office and Commission is only for
Judgment: Nay to speak the truth, it is Mercy that premises Threatenings. The
entering of the Law both in the Commands and Curses, is to make sin abound that
Grace may superabound; So that both Rods and Threatenings are the Messengers of
Jesus Christ to bring sinners to him for Salvation: Every thing should be
measured and named by its end; So, call Threatenings Promises, call Rods and
Judgments Mercies; Name all good, and good to you, if so be ye understand the
purpose of God in these. The shortest Preaching in the Bible uses to express
it self what it means, though it be never so terrible. This is a sad and
lamentable beginning of a Prophets Ministry; The first word is to the Heavens
and to the Earth. A weighty and horrible regrate of this People, as if none of
them were to hear, as if the Earth could be more easily affected then they. The
Creatures are taken witnesses by God of their ingratitude, and then who shall
speak for them: If Heaven and Earth be against them, who shall speak good of
them? Will their own Conscience? No certainly, it will in the day of Witnessing
and Judging precipitate its sentence, and spare the Judge the labor of
probation; A man's enemy shall be within his own house, though now your
Consciences agree with you: Nay, why does the Lord speak to them? Because the
People consider not, because Consciences have given over speaking to them;
Therefore the Lord directs his Word to the dumb Earth: Yet how gracious is he,
as to direct a second word even to the People, though a sad word. I^ is a
complaint of iniquity and backsliding, and such as cannot be uttered: Yet it is
Mercy to challenge them, yea, to chasten them. If the Lord would threaten a man
with pure and unmixed Judgments, if he would frame a threatening of a Rod of
pure Justice, I think it should be this, I will no more reprove thee, nor
chasten thee; And he is not far from it, when he says, why shall ye be
stricken any more, etc. verse. 5. As if he would say, it is in vain now to send
a Rod, ye receive no correction; I sent the Rod that it might open your hearts
and ears to the Word, and seal your instruction, but to what purpose is it? Ye
grow worse and worse: Well, the Prophet campares here Sin and Judgment, and
the one far surmounts the other. Ye would think a desolate Country, burnt
Cities, Desolation made by Strangers, a sufficient recompense of their
corruption and misorders, of their forsaking and backsliding. Ye would think
now, if your present condition and the Lands pressed you to utter Jeremiahs
Lamentation, a sadder then which is not almost imaginable, ye would think I
say, that you had received double for all your sins: And yet alas, how are your
iniquities of infinite more desert: All that were Mercy, which is behind
infinite and eternal punishment: that there is room left for complaint, it is
Mercy: that there is a remnant left, it is Mercy.

Now to proclaim unto this People and to convince them that their Judgment was
not severe; He gives them one word from God. And indeed it is strange, that
when the Rod is sent, because of the despising of the Word, that after the
despising of both Word and Rod, another word should come. Always this word is
a Convincing Word, a Directing Word, and a Comforting Word; These use to be
conjoined, and if they be not always expressed, we may lawfully understand
them: We may join a Consolation to a Conviction, and close a Threatening with a
Promise, if we take with a Threatening: Jonahs Preaching expressed no more but a
Threatening and Denounciation of Judgment, but the people unde^stood it
according to Gods meaning, and made it a Rule of Direction, and so a ground of
Consolation. How inexcuseable are we who have all these expressed unto us and
often inculcated, line upon line, and precept upon precept, and yet so often
divides the Word of Truth, or neglects it ^^together. Most part fancy a belief
of the Promises, and neither consider Threatenings nor Commands: Some believing
the Threatenings, are not so wise for their own Salvation, as to consider what
God says more, but takes it for his last word. Shall not Niniveh rise up in
Judgment against this Generation; They repented at one Preaching, and that a
short one, and in appearance very defective: And yet we have many Preachings of
the Son of God, and his Apostles in this Bible, both Law and Gospel holden
forth distinctly, and these spoken daily in our audience, and yet we repent not.

This is a strange Preface going before this Preaching, and more strange in
that it is before the first Preaching of a young Prophet, He speaks both to
Rulers and People, but he gives them a name, such as certainly they would not
take to themselves, but seeing he is to speak the Word of the Lord, he must not
flatter them, as they did themselves. Is not this the Lords people, his Portion
and Inheritance which he chose out of the Nations? Are not these Rulers the
Princes of Judah and the Lords Anointed? Were they not both in Covenant with
God, and separated from the Nations both in Privileges and Profession? How
then are they Rulers of Sodom, and People of Gomorrah? Likned to the worst of
the Nations; And not likened to them, but spoken off, as if they were indeed
all one. When ye hear the Preface, ye would think that the Prophet were about
to direct his speech to Sodom and Gomorrah: But when ye look upon the
Preaching, ye find he means by Judah and Jerusalem, and these are the Rulers
and People he speaks of. Certainly according as men walk, so shall they be
named and ranked; External privileges and profession may give a Name before
men, and separate men from men before the World: But they give no Name, make no
difference before God, if all other things be not suitable to these. He is not
a Jew, (says Paul) who is not one inwardly, but be who has that Circumcision
in the heart in the Spirit and not in the Letter. Outward profession and signs
may have praise of men, but it is this that has praise of God, Romans 2. 28, 29.
Circumcision and uncercumcision, baptism or unbaptisme avails nothing but a
new creature. A baptiz^d Christian and an unbaptized Turk are alike before God,
if their hearts and ways be one, Gal. 6. 15. All Christians profess Faith,
and glory in Baptism, but it avails nothing except it work by love; Gal. 5. 6.

Now what Name shall we give you? How shall our Rulers be called? How shall ye
the People be called? If we shall speak the truth, we feat it instruct you not,
but irritate you; Yet the truth we must speak, whether ye choose, or whether ye
refuse. Ye would all be called Christians, the people of God: But we may not
call you so, except we would flatter you, and deceive you by flattering, and
murder you by deceiving. We would gladly Name you Christians in the Spirit,
Saints chosen and precious. Oh that we might speak so to Rulers and people: But
alas, we may not call you so, except ye were so indeed: We may not call you
Christians, least ye believe your selves to be so: And yet alas, ye will think
your selves such, speak what we can: Would ye know your Name then? I perceive
you listen to heat what it is. But understand that it is your Name before God,
which bears his account of you: What matter of a Name among men? It is often a
shadow without substance, a Name without the thing. If God Name you other
ways, you shall have little either Honor or Comfort in it: When men bless
you and praise you, if the Lord reckon the among the beasts that perish, are ye
honored indeed? Well then, hear your Name before God, what account has he of
you? Ye Rulers, are Rulers of Sodom, and ye people, are people of Gomo^rah. And
if ye think this a hard saying, I desire you will notice the way that the
Prophet Isaiah takes to prove his challenge against them and the same may be
all^dged against Rulers and people now. We need no proof but one of both. See
Verse. 23. Thy Princes are rebellious, because, though they hear much against
their sins, yet they never amend them, they pull away the shoulder: If they
hear, yet they harden their heart. Is there any of them has set too to pray in
their Families, though earnestly pressed? Well, what follows? Every one loves
Gifts. Covetousness then and Oppression proves Rulers to be Rulers of Sodom.
Shall their houses stand, Shall thou reign, because thou closest thy self with
cedar, Jer. 22. 15. No certainly, men shall one day take up a proverb against
them, woe to him that encreafes that which is not his, and loadeth himself with
thick clay, they shall be for booties to the Lords spoylers, Hab. 2. 6. VVoe to
them, for they have consulted shame to their houses, and sinned against their
own Soul. Their design is to establish their House, and make it Eminent, but
they take a compendious way to shame and ruin it. Alas it is too public that
Rulers seek their own things, for themselves and their friends: And for Jesus
and his Interests, they are not concerned? But are ye the people any whit
better? Oh that it were so. But alas, when ye are involved in the same
guiltiness, I fear ye partake of their plagues. What are ye then? People of
Gomorrab. Is not the Name of God blasphemed daily because of you? Are not the
abominations of the Gentiles the common disease of the multitude, and the very
reproach of Christianity. Set apart your public services and professions, and
is there any thing behind in your Conversation, but Drunkenesse, Lying,
Swearing, Contention, Envy, Deceit, Wrath, Covetousness, and such like? Have
not the multitude of them been als civil, and carried themselves als
blamelesly, and without Offense, as the throng of our Visible Church? What have
ye more then they? It is true, ye are caled Christians and ye boast in it. Ye
know his will, and can speak of points of Religion, can Teach and Instruct
others, and so has, as it were, in your minds a form and method of Knowledge,
the best of you are but such: But I ask, as Paul did the Jews in such a case,
Thou that teach another teach thou not thy self, thou that make a boast
of the Law; throw breaking of it, dishonourest thou God, Romans 2. 17. etc. 23.
Why then, certainly all thy profession and baptism avails nothing, and will
never extract the from the Pagans, with whom thou art one in Conversation; Thy
profession is so far from helping thee in such a case, that it shall be the
most bitter ingredient in thy Cup of Judgment, for it is the greatest
Aggravation of thy sin, for through it, Gods Name is Blasphemed; If they had
not known, they had not had sin. Pagans sin is no sin in respect of Christians:
If ye consider Christ's Sermon, Matthew. 11. Ye will say, Isaiah is a meak and
moderate man in regard of him; Isaiah calls them people of Gomorrah, but Christ
will have them worse, and their Judgment more intolerable then theirs. And that
not only the profane of them, but the civil and Religious like, who believed
not in him: Well then, here is the advantage ye get of your Name of
Christianity, of your privilege of hearing his Word daily; Ye who never
ponder it, to tremble at it, or to rejoice in it, who cannot be moved either to
joy or grief for Spiritual things; Neither Law nor Gospel moves the most part
of you; I say here is all your gain, ye shall receive a reward with Gentiles
and Pagans; Yea, ye shall be in a worse case nor they in the Day of the Lord.
The civil Christian shall be worse then the profane Turk, and ye shall not
then boast that ye were Christians, but shall desire that ye had dwelt in the
place where the Gospel had never been preached: It is a Character of the
Nations, that they call not on God, and of Heathen Families, that they pray not
to him, Jer. 10. 25. And wrath must be poured on them. What then are the most
part of you? Ye neither bow a Knee in secret, nor in your Families to God, your
time is otherwise employed, ye have no leisure to pray twice or thrice a day
alone, except when ye put on your Clothes ye utter some ordinary b^blings; Ye
cannot be driven to Family worship, shall not God rank you in Judgment with
these Heathen Families? Or shall it not be more tolerable for them nor for you?
And are not the most part of you, every one given to Covetousness, your heart
and eye after it, seeking Gain and Advantage more then the Kingdom of Heaven?
Does not every one of you, as you have power in your hand, oppress one
another? wrong one another? Now our end in speaking thus to you, is not to
drive you to desparation: No indeed, but as there was a word of the Lord sent
to such by Isaiah, so we bring a word unto you. That which ruins you, is your
carnal confidence; Ye are presumptuous as this people, and cries, the Temple of
the Lord, the Work of the Lord, etc. as if these would save you: Know
therefore that all these will never cover you in the day of wrath; Know there
is a necessity to make peace with God, and your righteousness must exceed the
righteousness of a profession and external privileges and duties, or else ye
shall be as far from the Kingdom of Heaven as Sodom and Gomorrah. We speak of
Rulers sins, that ye may mourn for them, lest ye be Judged with them; If ye do
not mourn for them in secret, know that they are your sins; Ye are Companions
with them: Many fret, grudge, and cry out against Oppression, but who weeps in
secret? Who prays and deprecats Gods wrath, least it come upon them? And while
it is so: The Oppression of Rulelers, becomes the sin of the oppressed
themselves.

Hear the Word of the Lord] It were a suitable preparation for any Word that is
spoken, to make it take impr^ssion, if it were looked on as the Word of the
Lord and Law of our God. And truly no man can h^ar aright, unless he hear it
so. Why does not this Word of the Lord return with more Fruit? Why does not men
tremble or rejoice at it? Certainly because it is not received as Gods Word:
There is a practical Heresy in our hearts, which rather may be called Atheism,
We do not believe the Scriptures. I do not say, men call it in question, but I
say, ye believe them not. It is one thing to believe with the heart, another
thing not to doubt of it: Ye doubt not of it, not because ye do indeed believe
it, but because ye do not at all consider it. It is one thing to confess with
the Mouth, and another thing to believe with the Heart; For ye confess the
Scriptures to be Gods Word, not because ye believe them, but because ye have
received such a Tradition from your Fathers, have heard it from the womb
unquestioned. Oh that this were engraven on your Heart, tha^ these Commands,
these Curses, these Promises are Divine Truths, the Words and the Oath of the
Holy One. If every word o^ Truth came stamped with his Authority, and were
received in the Name of God himself what influence would it have on the Spirits
and the practices of men; This would be a great Reformer, would Reform more in
a Month, then Church and Sta^e has done these many Years. Why are Rulers and
People not Converted and Healed for all that is spoken? Here it is, Who
believes our report; Who believes that our report is thy own Testimony, O
Lord? When Ministers threaten you in Gods Name, if his Authority were stamped
on the Threatening, if men did seriously apprehend it were Gods own Voice, would
they not tremble? When the Gospel and the joyful Sound comes forth, if ye
apprehended that same Authority upon it, which ye who are Convinced, believes
in the Law, would ye not be comforted? Finally, I may fay, it is this point of
Atheism, of Inconsideration and Brutishness that destroys the multitude,
makes all Means Ineffectual to them, and retards the progress of Christians.
Men do not consider that this word is the word of the Eternal and True and
Faithful God, and that not one Jot of it will faill. Here is a Point of
Reformation I would put you to; If ye mind indeed to Reform, let this enter
into your Hearts and sink down, that the Law and Gospel is the Word of God, and
resolve to come and hear Preachings so, as the Voice of Jesus Christ the true
and faithful witness: If ye do not take it so now, yet God will Judge you so
at the end. He that despises you, despises me, and he that hears not you,
hears not me. If ye thought ye had to do with God every Sabbath, would ye come
so carelessly, and be so stupid and inconsiderate before the Judge of all the
Earth: But ye will find in the end, that it was God whom ye knew not.

SERMON IX.
Isai. 1. 11. To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices to me, says
the Lord? etc.
THis is the Word he calls them to hear, and a strange Word. Isaiah asks, what
means your sacrifices? God will not have them. I think the people would say in
their own hearts, what means the Prophet? What would the Lord be at? Do we any
thing but what he Commanded us? Is he angry at us for Obeying him? What means
this Word? Is he not repealing the Statute and Ordinance he had made in Israel?
If he had reproved us for breach of Commands, for Omission and Neglect of
Sacrifices, we would have taken with it; But what means this reproof for well
doing? The Lord is a hard Master, if we neglect Sacrifices and offer up the
worst of the Flock, he is angry; If we have a care of them, and offer them
punctually, and keep appointed days precisely, he is angry: what shall we do to
please him? I think many of you are put to as great a Nonplus., when your
prayers and repentance and fasting is quarreled: Do ye not say in your hearts,
we know not what to do, Ministers are angry at us if we pray not and ou^
praying they cry out against; They command us to Repent and Fast, and yet say,
that God will abhore both these. This is a Mystery, and we shall endeavor to
unfold it to you from the World. It concerns us to know how God is pleased with
our public Services and Fastings: For the most part of people have no more
Religion. Ye all, I know, desire to know what True Religion is: Consult the
Scriptures and search them, for there ye shall find Eternal Life. We frame to
our self a wrong Pattern and Copy of it, and so we judge our selves wrong. Our
narrow Spirits do not take in the Latitude of the Scriptures Religion, but
taking in one part, it excludes another, and thinks God rigid if it be not
taken of our hand so. But I pray consider these three things, which seem to
make up the good Old Way, the Religion of the Old and New Testament. First,
Religion takes in all the Commands, it is universal, has respect to all the
Commandments, Psalm. 119. 6. It carries the two Tables in both-hands, the first
Table in the right hand, and the second in the left. These are so entirely
conjoined, that if ye receive not both, ye cannot receive any truly. Secondly,
it takes in all the man, his Soul and Spirit als well as his Body: Nay, it
principally includes that which is principal in the man, his Soul and Spirit,
his Mind and Affections. If ye divide these, ye have not a man present but a
body: And what fellowship can bodies have with him who in a Spirit: If ye
divide these among themselves, ye have not a Spirit indeed present; If the mind
be not present, surely the heart cannot, but if the mind be, and the heart
away, Religion is not Religion, but some empty Speculation; The mind cannot
serve but by the heart: Where the heart is, there a man is reckoned to be.
Thirdly, it takes in Jesus Christ as all, and excludes altogether a man's self.
He worships God in the Spirit, but he rejoices not in himself and in his
spirit, but in Jesus Christ, and has no confidence in himself or the flesh
phil. 3. 3, 8. It includes the Soul and Spirit, and all the Commands, but it
denies them all, and embraces Jesus Christ by Faith, as the only Object of
glorying into, and trusting into. All a man's self becomes dross in this
Consideration. Now the first of these is drawn from the last, therefore it
appears first; I say, an endeavor in walking in every thing Commanded, of
conforming our way to the present rule and pattern, is a stream flowing from the
pure heart within: A man's Soul and Affections must once be purified, or it send
out such Streams in Conversation. And from whence does that pure heart come? Is
it the Fountain and Original? No certainly; The heart is desperately wicked
above all things, and how will it cleanse it self? But this purity proceeds
from another Fountain, from Faith in Jesus Christ: And it is this, that lies
nearest the uncreated Fountain Christ himself, it is the most immediate Conduit,
the Mouth of the Fountain, or the Bucket to draw out of the deep Wells of
Salvation: All these are conjoined in this order, 1 Timothy 1. 5. The end of the
Command is love. Ye know Love is said elsewhere to be the fulfilling of the
Law: And when we say Love, we mean all Duties to God and man, which Love ought
immediately to principle. Now this Love proceeds from a pure Heart, cleansed
and sanctified, which pure heart proceeds from Faith unfeigned. So then, we
must go up in our searching from external obedience all alongs, till we arrive
at the inward Fountain of Christ dwelling in us by Faith: And then have ye
found true Religion indeed. Now ye may think possibly, we have used too much
circumlocution; What is all this to the present purpose? Yes very much. Ye
shall find the Lord rejecting this peoples public Worship and solemn
Ordinances, upon these three grounds, either they did not join with them the
observation of weightier Commands, or they did not worship him in them with
their Spirits, had not Souls present, or they knew not the end and use for
which God had appointed these Sacrifices and Ceremonies, they did not see to
the end of all, which was Jesus Christ.

First then, I say, the people was much in ex^ernal Sacrifices and Ceremonies,
Commanded of God, but they were ignorant of the end of ^is Commands and of the
use of them: Ye now in themselves they had no goodness, but ^nly in relation to
such an end as he pleased they ^ould lead to: But they stayed upon the Ce^emony
and shadow, and were not led to use it ^s a means for such an end; And so
though ^ey fancied that they obeyed, and pleased God, ^et really they wholly
perverted his meaning and intention in the Command: Therefore does the Lord
plead with them in this place for their Sacrificeing, as if it had been
Murder. They used to object his Commands. What, says the Lord, did I command
these things? Who required them? Meaning eertainly, who required them for such
an end, to take away your sin; who required them but as a shadow of the
substance to come? Who required them but as signs of that Lamb and Sacrifice
to be offered up in the fulness of time? And for as much as ye pass over all
these, and think to please me with the external Ceremony, was that ever my
intent or meaning? Certainly ye have fancied a new Law of your own, I never
gave such a Law. Therefore it is said, Psalm. 50. 13. God pleads just after this
manner, Will I eat the flesh of Bulls, or drink the blood of Goats? etc. And
Micah 6. 7. Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten
thousands of rivers of oil? He who has no pleasure in sinful men, what
pleasure can he have in beasts? Therefore, it was to signify to them (who
thought God would be pleased with them for their offering,) that he could not
endure them, it was worse to him to offer him such a recompense, then if they
had done none at all; H^ is only well pleased in his well beloved Son And when
they separat a Lamb or a Bulloc^ from the well beloved, what was it to him more
nor a dogs neck or swines flesh? It was his Creature as these are, and no more,
Isai. 66. 3. No^ that they looked never beyond the Ceremonies it is evident,
because they boasted in them, the^ used to find out these as a remedy of their
sins, and a mean to pacify Gods Wrath, Micah 6. 6. Paul bears witness of it,
2 Cor. 13. 14. Moses had a Vail of Ceremonies over his Face, and the Children
of Israel could not steadfastly look to the end of that Mystery Christ Jesus,
but their minds were blinded, and is so to this day in the reading of the
Scriptures: And this Vail of hardness of heart shall be done away when Christ
returns them again. Now I say it is just so with us, there was never a people
liker other, nor we are like the Jews: We have many external Ordinances,
Preaching, Hearing, Baptism, Communion, Reading, Singing, Praying in public,
Extraordinary Solemnities of Fasting and Thanksgiving, Works of Discipline and
Government, public Reproof to sinners, Confessions and Absolutions. What would
ye think if we should change the terms of Sacrifices and new Moons, and speak
all this to you? To what purpose is the multitude of your Fasts and Feasts, of
your Preachings and Communions, of your Praying in secret, and in your
Families, of Conference and Prayer with others, of running to and fro to hear
Preaching, ^o partake of the Lords Table? I am full of them, ^ delight not in
them; When ye come here on ^he Sabbath, who required at your hand to read my
Courts? Come no more to hear the Word, run no more after Communions, seek ^o
more Baptism to your Children, call no ^ore Solemn Assemblies, it is all
iniquity. Oh ^ay ye, that is a strange Preaching indeed, must ^e Pray no more?
Hear no more? Sing no more? Did not God command these; Why do ye discharge
them? We do not mean so, that these should not be, but they should be in
another way: All these want the Soul and Life of them, which is Jesus Christ in
them. Do ye not think your selves religious, because ye frequent these? The
multitude of the people think that these please God and pacify his Wrath: Ye
have no other thing in your mind but these. If ye can attain any sorrow or
grief for sin, or any tears to signify it, presently you absolve your selves
for your repentance; The scandalous who appear in public, thinks the paying of
a penalty to the Judge, and bowing the knee before the Congregation, satisfies
God. Ye miss nothing when ye have these: I speak to the professors of Religion
also, who pretend to more knowledge then others, when ye have gone about so
many Duties, ye are well satisfied, if ye get liberty in them; If ye can
satisfy your self, ye doubt not of Gods satisfaction; And if ye do not satisfy
your selves in your Duties, ye cannot believe his satisfaction; Ye get the
Ordinance, and misses nothing. Now, I say, in all this ye do not reac^ to the
end of this Ministry Jes^s Christ, ye d^ not steadfastly behold him, to empty
your selve^ in his bosom, to turn over all the unrighteousness of your holy
things upon him who bear^ it; That which pleases you, is not he in whom the
Father is well pleased, but the measure o^ your own Duty. O! the Establishing
of ou^ own Righteousness is the ruin of the Visibl^ Church: This is the grand
Idol, and all Sacrifice to it. Know therefore, that the most part of your
performances are abomination and iniquity, because ye have so much confidence
in them, and puts them not upon Christ as filthy rags, or do not cover them
with his Righteousness, as well as your wickedness. I know ye will say, that ye
are not satisfied with them, and that is still the matter of your Exercise.
Well, I affirm in the Lords Name from that ground, that ye have confidence in
them, for if your diffidence and disquietness arise from it, your confidence
and peace must come from it also. Is there any almost that maintains Faith,
except when their own conditions please them well; And that Faith I may call no
Faith, at least not pure and cleanly entire Faith. As for the multitude of you,
you must know this, that God is not pleased with your prayers and fasting and
hearing, etc. Because ye have such an esteem of them, because ye can settle
your selves against all Threatenings, and never once remember of Jesus Christ,
or consider the end of his coming into the world: Because ye find no necessity
of pardon for your prayers and righteousness, but stretches the garment of
these over the uncleanness of your practices; What delight has the Lord in
them, when they are put in his Sons place? Will he not be jealous that his Sons
Glory be not given to another?

In the second place, the Lord rejects their performances, because there was
nothing but a mere shadow of service, and no worshipping of God in the Spirit.
Ye know what Christ says; God is a Spirit, and he that worships him must do it
in spirit and truth Jo. 4. 24. It is the Heart and Soul that God delights into;
M^ son give me thy heart, for if thou give not hy heart, I care for nothing
else: The heart i^ the whole man; What a man's Affection is, that he is. Light
is not so, it brings not the man alongs with it: Christ Jesus has give^
himself for us, and he requires that we offer ou^ selves to him; If we offer a
Body to frequen^ his House, our Feet to tread in his Courts, ou^ Ears to hear
his Word, what cares he for it, a^ long as the Soul does not offer it self up
in Prayer or Hearing. And this was the sin of thi^ people, Isai. 29. 13. They
draw near with the lips, and their heart is far from the Lord. Now are not we
their Children, and have succeeded to this. Is there any thing almost in our
public Services, but what is public? Is ther^ any thing but what is seen of
men? Ye com^ to hear, ye sit and hear, and is there any more? The most part
have their minds wandering, no thoughts present: for your thought^ are removed
about your Barns and Corns, o^ some business in your head; And if any have
their Thoughts present, yet where are Affections? Which are the Soul and Spirit
of Religion, without which, it is no true fire but wild^ fire, if it be not
both burning and shinning Are ye serious in these Ordinances? Or rathe^ are ye
not more serious in any thing beside: And now especially when Gods Providenc^
calls you to earnest thoughts, when it cries to al^ men to enter into
consideration of their ow^ ways. I pray you, is there any Soul-affliction in
your Fasts even for a day? Is there any real grief or token of it? Not a Fast
in Scripture without weeping; We have kept many, and have never advanced so
far. Shall the Lord then be pacified? Will not his Soul abhore them? How shall
they appease him for your other provocations, when they are as Oil to the
Flame, to increase his Indignation? The most part of Christians are guilty
here: We come to the Ordinances, as it were to discharge a Custom, and perform
a Ceremony, that we may have it to say to our Conscience, that it is done, and
there is no more intent and purpose. We do not seek to have Soul communion with
God: We come to Sermon to hear some new thing, or new truth, or new fashion of
it. To learn a Notional Experience of Cases; But alas, this is not the great
purpose and use of these things; It is to have some new sense of these things
we know: We know already, but we should come to get the Truth m^re received in
our Love, to serve God in our Spirits, and to return to him our selves in a
Sacrifice acceptable. This is the greater half, if not the whole of Religion,
Love to Jesus Christ who loved us, and living to him, because he died for us,
and livihg to him, because we love him. Now all our Ordinances and Duties,
should be Channels to carry our Love to him, and occasions of venting our
Affections.

Thirdly, the Lord rejected this peoples services, because they were exact and
punctual in them, and neglected other parts of his Commandments; And this is
clearly expressed here. I will not hear your prayers, though there be many of
them: Why? Your hands are full of blood. Ye come to worship me, and pray to me;
and yet there are many Abominations in your Conversation, which you continue
in, and do not challenge in your selves. Ye have unclean hands, and shall your
prayer be accepted, which should come up with pure Hands? They took his
Covenant in their mouth, and offered many Sacrifices, but what have ye to do
with these things (says the Lord) since ye hate to be reformed, since ye hate
personal Reformation of your Lives, and in your Families? what have ye to do to
profess to be my people, Psalm. 50, 19, 17? The Lord requires an universality,
if ye would prove sincerity: If ye have respect to any of his Commands, as his
Commands, then will ye respect all. If ye be partial, and choose one Duty that
is easy and refuse another harder; ye will come to the Church and hear, but ye
will not pray at home; Ye will fast in publck, but not in private: Then (says
the Lord) ye do not at all obey me, but your own humor; ye do not at all fast
unto me, but unto your selves; As much as your interest lies in a Duty, so much
are ye carried to it: And I take this to be the reason, why many are so Eager
in pursuing public Ordinances, following Communions, and Conferences with Gods
people, ready to Pray in public rather then alone: If ye would follow them
into their secret Chamber, how much indifferency is there? how great
infrequency, how little fervency? Well (says the Lord) did ye pray to me when
ye prayed among others? No, ye prayed either to your selves, or the company, or
both. Did ye seek me in a Communion? No, (says the Lord) ye sought not me,
but your selves: If ye sought me indeed with others, ye would be als earnest if
not more, to seek me alone, Zech. 7. 6. And again, the Lord especially requires
the weightier matters of the Law to be considered; As it was among the Jews,
their Ceremonies were commanded, and so good, but they were not so much good in
themselves, as because they were means appointed for another end and use. But
the Moral Law was binding in it self, and good in it self, without relation to
another thing. And therefore Christ lays this heavy Charge to the Pharisees; Ye
tithe mint and anise, Mat. 23. 23. Woe unto you, for ye neglect the weightier
matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy and Faith, these ye ought to have done,
and not left the other undone. Are there not many who would think it a great
fault, to stay away from the Church on the Sabbath or Week day, and yet will
not stick to swear, to drink often; VVoe unto you, for ye strain at a gnat and
swallow a camel. Therefore are the Prophets full of these Expostulations: The
people seemed to make Conscience of Ceremonies and External Ordinances, but
they did not order their Conversation aright; They did not execute Judgment and
relieve the oppressed, did not walk soberly, did not mortify sinful lusts, etc.
Alas, we deceive our selves with the noise of a Covenant, and a Cause of God,
we cry it up, as an Antidot against all evils, use it as a charm, even as the
Jews did their Temple; and in the mean time, we do not care how we walk before
God, or with our Neighbors: Well, (thus says the Lord) Trust ye not in lying
words, Jer. 7. 4, 5, 6. If drunkenness reign among you, if filthiness,
swearing, oppression, cruelty reign among you, your Covenant is but a ly, all
your professions are but lying words, and shall never keep you in your
Inheritances and Dwellings. The Lord tells you what he requires of you, Is it
not to do justly, and walk humbly with God? Mic. 6. 7. This is that which the
grace of God teaches, To deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
soberly, righteously and godly toward your God, your neighbor and your self,
Tit. 2. 11, 12. And this he prefers to your public Ordinances, your Fasting,
Covenanting, Preaching and such like. Is not this to know me (says the Lord)
Jer. 22. 15. 16. You think you know God, when you can discourse well of
Religion, and intertain conferences of practical Cases; You think it is
knowledge to understand Preachings and Scripture. But thus says the Lord, To
do justly to all men, to walk humbly toward God, to walk soberly in your
selves, is more real knowledge of God, then all the Volumes of Doctors contain,
or the heads of Professors. Is this knowledge of God, to have a long
flowrishing discourse, containing much Religion in it? Alas no; to do justly,
to oppress none, to pray more in secret, to walk humbly and soberly, this is to
know the Lord; practice is real knowledge indeed, it argues, that what a man
knows, he receives in love, that the Truth has a deep impression on the heart,
that the Light shines into the heart, to inflame it. What is knowledge before
God? As much as principles Affection and Action, as much as has Influence on
your Conversations: If you do not, and love not what you know, is that to know
the Lord? Shall not your knowledge be a Testimony against your practice, and no
more?

SERMON X.
Isai. 1. 16. Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from
before mine eyes, cease to do evil, etc.
IF we would have a sum of pure and undefiled Religion, here it is set down in
opposition to this people^ shadow of Religion, that consisted in External
Ordinances and Rites. We think that God should be als well pleased with our
service as we our selves; therefore, we choose his commands, which our humor
has no particular antipathy against, and refuse others. But the Lord will not
be so served; As he will not share with the world and divide the Soul and
service of man with Creatures, so as M^mmon should get part, and he his part.
No, if we choose the one, we must refuse the other, for so will he not suffer
his Word and Commands to be divided; There must be some universality in respect
of the Gospel and the Law, and a conjunction of these two, or we cannot please
him.

If Religion do not include the Gospel, we are yet upon the old Covenant of
Works, according to which, none can be justified; If it do not include the Law
in the Hands of a Mediator, then we turn the Grace of god unto wantonness, If
it shut out Jesus Christ and have no use of him, how can either we or our
performances stand or be accepted before his holy eyes. If it exclude the Law
that Christ came to establish, how can he be pleased with our religion: Both of
these offer an indignity to the Son of God. The Sum then of Christian Religion
is Believing and Sanctification of the spirit unto obedience, that is the root
and fountain; this is the fruit and stream: Justification of our persons, and
sanctification of our lives and hearts. This is pure Religion and undefiled.
And therefore Isaiah says, Wash you, make you clean, Cleanse in the only true
fountain of Christ's blood. It is not your purifications of the Law, your many
washings with water, and hysope, It is not the blood of bulls and goats can
purge your consciences from dead works: they do but purify your flesh, but
cannot wash your souls worse defiled. This blood of Jesus Christ is that clean
water that he must sprinkle on you; if you would be clean. If you take any
other water, any other righteousness but his, and wash thy self therewith,
suppose it be snow water that washes cleanest, thy most exact conversation,
yet he will plunge thee in the mire, till thy own clothes abhore thee Job 9.
30, 31. Now when ye have washed your persons, ye need not save to wash your
feet, (says Christ) your daily conversation, reform it in the virtue of that
blood, for we are not called to uncleanness but unto holiness. And therefore,
Put away the evil of yoor doings, etc. God has put away the guilt of your
doings by Justification; now put ye away the evil of your doings by
Sanctification, etc. And if ye would know what Sanctification is? Cease to do
evil; do not return to the old puddle to wallow in it. Ye that are cleansed by
this blood, O! think how unbeseeming it is to you, to defile your selves again
with these things ye are cleansed from: But now, learn to do well: ye are given
up to Christ, ye must be his Disciples, and he will teach you: Learn of me
(says Christ) you need no other law almost but his example; he is a visible
and speaking law, yet seek Judgment, As ye ought to look on my example; so
especially ponder that word and rule of practice and behavior that I have left
behind me and given out as the lawgiver of the redeemed: have I redeemed you?
And should not I be the redeemmed and ransomed ones King? Is there any society
in the world wants a law, order and government? neither must ye who are
delivered from bondage, enfranchised, and made free indeed. Now ye should of
all men most live by a law. And when ye know that rule, then apply it to your
several vocations and callings: let the Magistrate act according to it, and
every man according to it: Religion consists not in a general notion, but
condescends to our particular practice, to reform it. You see then what we
would press upon your Consciences. It is true religion that we would have you
persuaded unto. All men have some kind of Religion, even Heathens who worship
Idols; but the true religion respects the true and living God. Now what is it
to worship the true and living God? what is the service of him, that may be
called Religion indeed? Should we be the prescrivers of it? No certainly, he
must carve solely in that or else it cannot please him. Therefore To the Law
and to the Testemony: if ye speak not according to this, and worship not
according to this word of God, it is because there is no light into you. Ye may
have a religion before men pure and undefiled, but if it be not so before God
and the father, I pray you to what purpose is it? I am sure it is all lost
labor, nay it is labor with loss, instead of gain. O that ye were persuaded
to look and search the Scriptures: Think ye to have eternal life out of them?
and think ye to have eternal life by them, who do not labor to know the way of
it set down there? Every on of you have a different model of religion according
to your fancies and breedings, according as your lusts will suffer you: The
rule that the most part walk by is the course and example of the world. Is not
this darkness, and gross darkness? Others model their duties according to
their ability, they will do all they can do with ease, and without troubling
themselves, and they think God may be well pleased with that. I pray you
consider and hear the word of the Lord, and Law of your God; has he set down
here the rule and perfect pattern of true Religion, and will ye never so much
own it, as to examine yours according to it? the scriptures are the
touchstone; If you would not have a counterfeit Religion deceiving you in the
end when ye have trusted to it, I pray you try it by the word of God. Oh that
this principle were once sunk into your hearts, I may not walk at random, if I
please my self, and satisfy my own will, if that be not also Gods will, I shall
have neither gain nor comfort of it, his will is manifested in his word, I will
search and find what God has required of me, for if I be not certain of his
will, I may be doing all my days, and sweating out my life, and yet loss my
pains and oil. I say this word of the Lord that Isaiah calls to the people to
hear V. 10. will at length judge you. Your Religion will be tried in the day of
accounts according to it, not according to your rules and methods ye have
prescribed unto your selves. Now if ye in the mean time shall judge your selves
according to another rule, and ab^olve your selves, and in the end God shall
judge you according to this word and condemn you, were ye not fools in
neglecting this word.

The whole will of God concerning your duty may be summed up in two; John has
one of them, 1 Jo. 3. 23. And this is his Commandment, that we shoud believe on
the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave us
Commandment. And Paul has another to the Thessalonians. 1 These. 4. 3. This is
the wiil of God, even your sanctification. And these two make up this text, so
that it units both Gospel and Law. The Commandment of the Law comes forth, and
it is found that we have broken, and are guilty, that we cannot answer for one
of a thousand; the Law entering makes sin abound, our inability, yea
impossibility of obedience is more discovered: well then, the Gospel proclames
the Lord Jesus Christ for the Savior of sinners, and commands us under pain of
damnation to believe in him, to cast our souls on him, as one able to save, as
one who has obeyed the Law for us; so that this command of believing in Christ
is answerable to all the breaches of the Law, and tends to make them up in
Christ. When he proclaimed the Law on Mount Sinai with terror, that which ye
hear expressed is not his first Comandment, which ye are in the first instance to
obey, for all these we have broken; but it has a Gospel-command in its bosom,
it leads to Jesus Christ: and if ye could read the mind of God in it, ye would
resolve all these commands which condemn you and curse you, into one command of
believing in the Son, that ye may be saved from that condemnation: And if ye
obey this command, which is his last command, and most perremptory, then are
the breaches of all the rest made up, the intent of all the rest is fulfilled,
though not in your obedience, yet in Christ's, which is better then ours.
Believing in Christ presents God with a perfect righteousness, with an
obedience even to the death of the Cross. When a sinner hears the holy and
spiritual sense of the Law, and sees it in the light of Gods holiness, O how
vile must he appear to himself, and how must he abhor himself? What original
pollution, what actual pollution, what a fountain within, what uncleanness in
streams without will discover it self? Now when the most part of men get any
sight of this, presently they fall a washing and cleansing themselves, or
hiding their filthiness. And what water take they? Their own tears or sorrows,
their own resolutions, their own reformations. But alas, we are still more
plunged in our own filthiness, that is still marked before him, because all
that is als foul as that we would have washen away. What garment do men take to
hide themselves ordinarily? Is it not their own righteousness? Is it not a
shirt of some duty that is spread over transgressions? Do not men think their
sins hid, if they can mourn and pray for a time? Their consciences are eased by
reflection upon this. But alas, thine iniquity is still marked; Shall
filthiness hide filthiness? Thy righteousness is as a vile garment, as a
menstruous cloth, Isa. 64. 6. as well as thine unrighteousness, how then shall
it cover thy nakedness? Seeing it is so then, what is the Lords mind concerning
our cleansing: seeing stretched out hands, and many prayers will not do it, what
shall I do? The Lord has showed thee what thou shall do, and that is, that
thou do nothing in relation to that end, that thou should undertake to wash
away the least spot by all thy repentance; yet must thou wash and make clean,
and the water is brought new unto you, even the blood of Jesus Christ that
cleanses from all sin: wash in this blood, and ye shall be clean. And what is
it to wash in this blood? It is to believe in Christ Jesus, to lay hold on the
all-sufficient virtue of it, to trust our souls to it, as a sufficient ransom
for all our sins; to spread the covering of Christ his righteousness over all
our righteousneses and unrighteousness, as having both alike need to be hid
from his holy eyes. Jesus Christ came by water and by blood. 1 Jo. 5. 6. by
water to Sanctify, and by blood to Justify; by the power and cleansing virtue
of the Holy Ghost to take away sin in the being of it, and by the virtue of
his blood to take away sin in the guilt and condemnation of it.

Now I conceive he presses a twofold exercise upon them in this washing, and
both have relation to the blood of Jesus Christ, to wit, repentance and faith.
If they be not all one, yet they are in this point inseparably conjoined.
Repentance waters and saps the roots of believing, which otherwise would dry
up. Therefore in stead of outward forms and ceremonies of Religion, he presses
them to inward sorrow and contrition of heart for sin, that they might present
an acceptable sacrifice to God, a contrite heart. This is more pleasing then
many specious duties of men without, Psalm. 50. 7 etc. But when I press upon you
repentance, do not conceive that we would have it preparatory to faith, that ye
should sit down and mourn for your sins for a time, till your hearts be so far
humbled, and then ye might come as prepared and fitted to Jesus Christ. This is
the mistake of many Christians, which keeps them from solid settling. We find
it ordinary, souls making scruples and objections against coming to Jesus
Christ because of want of such preparations, of measures of humiliation and
contrition, which they prescribe to themselves, or do behold in others: and so
they sit down and apply themselves to such a work, applies their consciences to
the Law and curse; and they find in stead of softning, hardness, in stead of
contrition of spirit, more dullness and security; At least they cannot get
satisfaction to themselves in that they seek, and thus they hang their head
over their impenitent hearts, and lament not so much that repentance is not, as
that they cannot find it in themselves. Alas there are many diseases in this
one malady. If it were imbowelled unto you, ye would not believe that such a
way were so contradictory to the Gospel: For first, ye who are so, have this
principle in your hearts which is the foundation of it. I cannot come to Christ
so unclean, I must be a little washen, ere I come, the most gross uncleanness
and hardness of my heart must be taken away, and so I shall be accepted: Alas,
what derogation is this to the blessed Savior? What absurdity is it, I am too
unclean to come to the fountain, I must be a little purged before I come to
this fountain that cleanses from all Sin. I pray you, why was the fountain
opened, was it not for sin and uncleanness* And this thou says by
interpretation, If I were so and so humbled, then I might come and be worthy to
come; when the want of such a measure debars thee as unworthy, Does not the
having of it in thy estimation make the worthy? And so ye come with a present
in your hand to Jesus Christ, with a price and reward to him who gives freely.
Again thou denyest Christ to be the only fountain of all Grace, and so it is
most dishonorable to him. If thou would have repentance before thou come to
him, where shall thou have it? will thou find it in thy heart, which is
desperately wicked? will thou seek it of God and not seek it in the Mediator
Jesus Christ? God out of a Mediator will not hear thee. In a word there is both
extreme sin, and extreme folly in this way: great sin because it contradicts
the tenure of the Gospel, it dishonours the Lord Jesus, the exalted Prince, as
if he were not the fountain of all grace, it is contrary both to the freedom of
his grace, and to the fullness of it also. it is great folly, for thou leaves
the living fountain, and goes seeking water in a wilderness; thou leaves the
Garden, where all herbs grow, and wanders abroad to the wild Mountains; And
because thou can not find what thou seeks, thou sits down and weeps beside
it. Repentance is in Christ, and no repentance so pleasing to God as the
mournings and relentings of a pardoned sinner: but thou seeks it far from him,
yea, refuses him for want of that which thou may have by choosing him.
Therefore we declare this unto you, that whatever ye be, whatever ye want, if
ye think ye stand in need of Jesus Christ, embrace him: If ye be exceeding vile
in your own eyes, and cannot get repentance as ye would, to cleanse your
selves, here is the fountain opened, and ready to wash into. Yet this we must
tell you, that no sinner can believe but he that repents, not because
repentance is required as a preparation to give a man a warrant and right to
believe; I know no ground of faith but our necessity, and the Lords promise and
command unto us, but because no soul can truly fly in to Jesus Christ to
escape sins guilt, but he that desites to be delivered from sin it self: And
therefore the most part of you fancy a faith which you have not, because there
is no possibility that men will come out of themselves, till they be pressed
out by discovered sin and misery within: your woulds and wishes after Christ
and salvation, that many of you have, are not the real exercises of your souls
flying unto him for salvation. If ye did indeed turn in to Jesus Christ, your
hearts would turn the back upon sin, and these sins ye seek remission of. Now
all the defire that many men have of Christ, is this, I would fain have his
salvation, if I might keep my Sin: I would gladly be delivered from the guilt
of sin, if he would let me keep still the sin. But will Christ make any such
bargain?

I^ this blood only wash from sin, oh, how many ly in their sins, and wallow in
their filthiness. There is a generation clean in their own eyes, and yet are
not washed from their filthiness. Prove. 30. 12. Oh that ye believed this: If ye
be not now washed, eternity shall find you unclean; And woe to the Soul that
enters eternity with all the pollution of its sins: Can such a soul enter into
the high and Holy place, the clean City? No certainly, it must be without among
the Dogs and Swine, it must be kept in darkness for ever. It is then of great
importance that ye be washen from your filthiness. Now I ask you. Is it so or
not? are ye made clean and washen from the guilt of your sins? every one of
your almost will say so, and think so, and yet says the Scripture, There is a
generation pure in their own eyes, and yet are not washed. Is there a
generation such? Is there any such? Oh then, think its possible you may be
mistaken in the opinion of your own cleanness: do any conceive themselves
pardoned, and yet are not so, think it is possible you may have deceived your
selves, espccially since ye have never examined it: but are there so many so, a
whole generation, the most part of m^n, then as you love your souls, try; for
it is certain that most part of you must be deceived. Is there a generation in
the visible Church not washen, and yet every one thinks himself clean, then
certainly the most part are in a great delusion, will ye then once examine
whether or not ye be deluded with them. It shall be your peace to know it,
while it may be amended. But how comes it to pass that so many hearing of the
Gospel, and lying near this fountain, are not cleansed? I think ccrtainly,
because they will not have a through cleansing, they get none at all: All men
would love Christ's blood well to pardon sin, but who will accept of the water
to sanctify them from sin, but Christ came with both. Shall this Blood be
spent upon numbers of you who have no respect to it; but would still wallow in
your filthiness? Would ye have God pardoning these sins, ye never thoroughly
resolve to quite? But how is it that so many men are clean in their own eyes,
and yet not washed? I think indeed, the reason of it is, they make a kind of
washing, which they apprehend sufficient, and yet knows not the true Fountain.
We find men taking much Soap and Nitre, when convinced of sin, or charged with
it, and thereupon, soon absolving themselves. If ye ask their grounds, they
will tell you, they ^epent and are sorry for it, they purpose to make a mends,
and they think amendment a goo^ compensation for the past wrong; They will it
may be, vow to drink no more for a year afte^ they have been drunk; They will
confess their sin in public, and all this they do without having any thought
of Jesus Christ, or the end o^ his coming, and can absolve themselves from such
grounds, though in the mean time, Christ come not so much as in their mind. And
therefore, are they not really washed; All thy righteousness is unclean before
God, and thy repentances defile thee, and yet because of some suc^ Duties thou
deceivest thy self, and art clean i^ thine own eyes: These have some beauty in
the eyes, and thou puts them between thy filthines^ and thy eye, and so
conceives that thou a^ clean. I think a reason also why many me^ are clean in
their own eyes, and conceive tha^ God has pardoned their sin, is because they
have forgotten it; It is not recent in their memory, and makes no present wound
in their Conscience. And therefore, they apprehend God such as themselves, they
think he has forgotten it also. But Oh! how terrible shall it be, when God
brings to remembrance, and sets our sins in order before us: Ye think God cares
not for your sins, that he forgives them because he is silent at them, Psalm.
50. 21. But the Lord shall one day set them before thee, and thou shall know
they were still marked before him.

Ye who have washen in this Blood, ye may rejoice* for it shall make you clean
every whit. Your iniquities that so defiled you, shall not be found. O! the
precious virtue of that Blood that can purge away a souls spots: All the Art of
Men and Angels could not reach this. This Redemption and Cleansing was
precious, and would have ceased for ever. But this Blood is the Ransom, this
Blood cleanses, and so perfectly, that it shall not appear, not only to men's
eyes, but also Gods peircing Eye. Sinners quite your own righteousness, why
defile ye your selves more? When your eyes are opened, ye will find it so, here
is washing, apply your selves to this Fountain; And if ye do indeed so, if ye
expect cleansing from Jesus Christ, I pray you return not to the puddle. Ye are
not washen from sin, to sin more, and defile your self more: If ye think ye
have liberty to do so, ye have no part in this Blood.

SERMON XI.
Isai. 1. 16. Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from
before mine eyes, cease to do evil, etc.
THere are two evils in sin, one is the Nature of it, another the Fruit and sad
Effect of it. In it self it is filthiness, and contrair to Gods Holiness, and
abasing of the immortal soul, a spot in the face of the Lord of the Creatures,
that has far debased him under them all: Though it be so unnatural to us, yet
it is now in our fallen estate become as it were natural, so that men agree
with it, as if it were sunk and drunk into the very soul of man. The other is
the guilt and desert of punishment and obligation to it. All man hate this, but
they cannot hold it off: They eat the Tree and Fruit of Death, they must eat
Death also: They must have the wages of sin, who have wrought for it. Now the
Gospel has found a remedy for lost man in Jesus Christ; He comes in the Gospel
with a twofold blessing, a twofold virtue, a pardoning virtue and a sanctifying
virtue, Water and Blood, 1 Jo. 5. 6. He comes to forgive sin, and to subdue
sin; To remove the guilt of it, and then the self of it. Gods appointment had
inseparably joined them; And Christ came not to dissolve the Law, but to
establish it. If he had taken away the punishment, and left the sin in its
being, he had weakened the Law and the Prophets. That conjunction of sin and
wrath, which is both by divine appointment, and suitable also unto their own
natures must stand, that Divine Justice may be entire. And therefore, he that
comes to redeem us from the curse of the Law, has also this Commission, to
redeem from sin and all transgressions of the Law, Romans 11. 26. and Gal. 3. 13.
He that turns away the wrath of God from men, turns also ungodliness from them
which provoked his wrath; And so he is a complete Redeemer, and a complete
Redeemer he had not been otherwise. If he had removed Wrath only, and left us
under the bondage of sin, it had not been half redemption, he that commits sin,
is the servant of sin. But this is perfect freedom and liberty, to be made free
from sin, for it was sin that subjected us to wrath, and so was the first
Tyrant and the greatest. The Gospel then comes with a joyful sound unto you,
but many of you mistake it, and apprehends it to be a Doctrine of Liberty and
Peace, and that unto sin; But if it were so, it were no joyful sound. If there
were proclaimed a liberty to all men to do as they list, no punishment, no
wrath to be feared, I would think that Doctrine no glade news, it were but the
perpetuating of the bondage of a reasonable soul. But this is glade news, a
delivery and freedom proclaimed in the Gospel, but what? Not unto sin, but from
sin, and this is to be free indeed. We ought more to Jesus Christ for this,
then for redemption from Wrath, because sin is a greater evil then wrath; Yea,
wrath were not so, if sin were not. Therefore he exhorts to wash, and wash so,
that they may make clean: Take Jesus Christ for Justification and
Sanctification, employ both the Water and the Blood, that he has come with.
But, because all men pretend a willingness to have Christ their Savior, and
their sins pardoned through his Blood, who, notwithstanding hate to be
reformed, and would seek no more of Christ: Therefore, he branches out that
part of the Exhortation, in several particulars: All men have a general likeing
of remission of sins, but renouncing of it, is to many a hard Doctrine, they
would be glade that God put their evils out of his sight, by passing them by,
and forgetting them; But they will not be at the pains of putting away their
evils from his sight: And therefore, the Gospel which comprehends these two
united, is not really received by many, who pretend to be followers of it. This
is his Command, that ye believe. Some pretend to obey this, and yet has no
regard of that other part of his Will, even their Sanctification. And
therefore, their Faith is dead, it is a fancy. If ye did indeed believe and
receive Christ for pardon of sin, it were no^ possible, but your Souls would be
engaged and constrained, to endeavor to walk in all well-pleasing: But it is
an evident token of one that is not washed from his sin, and believes not in
Christ, if he conceive within his heart, a greater latitude and liberty, to
walk after the flesh, and be imboldened to continue in sin, because of his
Grace and Mercy. And yet such are the most part of you. Upon what ground do ye
delay repentance? Upon what presumption do ye continue in your sins, and puts
over the serious study of holiness, till a more fit time? Is it not from an
apprehension of the Grace and Mercy of God, that ye think, ye may return any
time, and be accepted, and so ye may in the mean time, take as much pleasure in
sin as ye can, seeing ye may get leave also for Gods Mercy; I pray you consider,
that you have never apprehended Gods Mercy aright, ye are yet in your sins, and
certainly as yet, are not washed from them.

Put away the evil, etc.] When the Spirit convinces a Soul, he convinces a man,
not only of evil doings, but of the evil of his doings; Not only of sin, but of
the sinfulness of sin; And not only of those actions which are in themselves
sinful, but also of the iniquity of Holy things. I think no man will come to
wash in Christ's Blood, till this be discovered. If he see much wickedness, many
evil doings, yet he will labor to wash away these by his own tears and
repentance and well doing. As long as he has any good Actions, as Prayers,
Fasting and such like, he will cover his evil doings by them; He will spread
the skirts of such righteousness over his uncleanness: and when he has hid it
from his own eyes, he apprehends that he has hid it from Gods also: He will
wash his bloody hands with many Prayers, and thinks they may be clean enough:
We see blasphemers of Gods Name, use to join a prayer for forgiveness with
their oath and curse, and they never trouble themselves more: Oh what mocking
of God is this? Now als long as it is thus, there is no employment for the Son
of Gods Blood, they can do their own turn: Men will not come to Christ, because
it is the best way, if they see any else beside. None will come till he see it
is the only way. None can wash in Christ except they wash all. If ye have any
thing that needs not washing, his Blood is not for you: his righteousness is
not known, when ye establish all, or a part of your own. I fear the most part
of you have no employment for Christ; Ye have extreme need of him, but ye know
it not; For there are many things which ye will not number among your sins,
your Prayers, your Hearing, Reading, Singing, public and private Worship,
giving Alms, etc. How many of you were never convinced of any sin in these; Do
ye not conceive God is well pleased with you for them. Your Conscience has
convinced you, it may be of gross sins, as drunkenness, filthiness,
swearing, etc. But ye are not convinced for your well doing; Ye find not a
necessity of a Mediator for these: I think many of you never confessed any such
thing, except in a general notion. Alas, how ignorant are men of themselves? We
are unclean, how can any thing we do cleanse us? Are not we unclean, and do not
our hands touch our own works? Shall not then our own uncleanness defile our
good Actions, more then they can cleanse us? Hag. 2. 13. The ignorance of this,
makes men go about to build up their old ruined righteousness, and still seek
something in themselves, to make up wants in themselves. Always, when the Light
of God has discovered you to your selves, so that ye can turn your eye no
where, but uncleanness fills it, though your Conversation be blameless in the
world, so as men can challenge nothing, yet ye have found within and without,
nothing but matter of mourning; I say, this is an evidence that the Spirit has
shined and enlightened thy darkness. Now when thou has fled unto Jesus Christ
for a covering to thy righteousness, als well as unrighteousness, it remains
that thou now put away the evil of thy doings; Put not away thy doings, but the
evil of them. We challenge your Prayers, Services, and public Duties, even as
the Prophet did; We declare unto you, that God is as evil pleased with them, as
your drunkenness, whoreing, intemperance, etc. The most part of you, are no
more acceptable when ye come to the Church, then when ye go to the Tavern, your
praying and cursing is almost all one. What shall we do then, say ye? Shall we
pray no more, and hear no more? No, say I, put not away your Prayers and
Ordinances, but put away the evil of them, from before his sight. Rather
multiply your doings, but destroy the evil and iniquity of your doings. And
there is one evil or two above all, that makes them hateful to him; Ye trust to
much in them: Here is the iniquity, ye idol of jealousy set up, ye make your
doings your righteousness, and in that notion, they are abomination. There is
nothing makes your worship of God so hateful, as this, ye think so much of it,
and justifies your self by it: And then God knows what it is, that ye so
magnify, and makes the ground of your claim to Salvation; it is even an empty
ceremony, a shadow without substance; a body without a Soul; You speak and look
and hear, you exercise some outward Senses, but no inward Affections: And what
should that be to him, who is a Spirit?

They did not observe the Iniquity of their Holy things: and therefore are they
marked by him, they are in his sight: They did not see so many faults in their
Prayers and Services; They wondered why God did chide them so much; But God
marks what we miss, he remembers when we forget: We cover our selves with a
Vail of External Duties, and think to hide all the Rottenness of our Hearts,
but it will not be hid from him, before whom, Hell has no covering, all hearts
are open and naked before him. Your secret sins are in the sight of his
Countenance. Men hear you Pray, see you present at Worship, they know no more,
at least they see no more. Nay, but the form^lity of thy Worship, the
wanderings of thy Mind are in his sight. And O! how excellent a Rule of walking
were this, to do all in his sight and presence. Oh that ye were persuaded in
your hearts of his All-seing, All-searching Eye, and All-knowing Mind. Would
ye not be more sollicitous and anxious anent the frame of your hearts then the
liberty of your speech, or External gesture? Oh how would men retire within
themselves, to fashion their Spirits before this All-searching, and All-knowing
Spirit. If ye do not observe the evils of your hearts and ways, they are in his
sight, and this will spoil all acceptance of the good of them: If ye observe
the evils of your well doing, and bring these also to the Fountain, to wash
them, and be about this earnest endeavor of perfecting Holiness, of
perfecting well-doings in the Power and Fear of God; then certainly, he will
not set your sins in the Light of his Countenance, the good of your way shall
come before him, and the evil of it Christ shall take away.

Cease to do evil, etc. These are the two Legs a Christian walks on; if he
want any of them, he is lame and cannot go equally, ceasing from evil, and
doing good. Nay, they are so united, that the one cannot subsist without the
other. If a man do not cease from evil and his former lusts, he cannot do well,
or perfect Holiness. There are many different Dispositions, and Conditions of
men; There are generally one of two. Some have a kind of abstinence from many
gross sins, and are called civil honest men, they can abide an inquest and
censure of all their Neighbors, they can say no ill of them; But alas, there
is als little good to be said: He drinks not, swears not, whores not, steals
not. Nay, but what does he well? Alas, the World cannot tell what he does, for
he prays not in secret, nor in his family, he is void of some offenses toward
men, but there are many duties called to, toward both God and men, he is a
stranger to. He oppresses not the poor, nay, but he is not charitable either,
to give to them; He defrauds no man, but whom helps he by his means? Again,
there are others, they will boast of some things done; they pray, they keep the
Church well, they do many good turns, and yet for all that, they do not cease
to do evil; They were drunkards, so they are; They can swear for all their
prayers, are given to contention, to lying, to filthiness, etc. Now I say,
neither of these Religions is pure and undefiled. Religion is a through and
entire change; It is like a new Creation, that must destroy the first Subject,
to get place for that which is to come; It is a putting off old Garments, to
put one new; The putting off an old form and engraven Image, to make place for
a new engraving. Men do not put a Seal above a Seal, but deface the old, and so
put on the new; Men do not put new Clothes upon the old, but put the old off,
and so they have place for the new: Religion must have a naked man; Godliness
is a new Suit, that will not go on upon so many Lusts; No, no, it is more meet
and more conformed unto the inwards of the Soul then so: The cold must go out
as the heat comes in: Many men do not change their Garments, but mends them,
puts some new pieces into them; They retain their old lusts, their heart idols,
and they will add unto these a patch of some External Obedience; But alas, is
this godliness? Hypocrisy will be content of a mixture, sin is the harlot,
whose heart could endure to see the Child parted, It can give God a part, to
get leave to brook the most part; Sin will give God liberty to take some of the
outward man, if it keep the heart and soul. But God will not reckon on these
terms, he will have all the man or nothing, for he is the Righteous Owner. True
godliness cannot mix so, but false and counterfeit may do it well. Other men
again, possibly uncloaths themselves of some practices, but they put on no new
clothing; They reform some passages for fear of censure, or shame, or such
like; They are found, it may be, blameless, either because so Educated, or
their Disposition is against particular gross sins. But they are not clothed
upon with Holiness and well doing, and so they are but naked and bare in Gods
sight, not beautiful; They have sweept their house, and some Devil put out or
kept out, but because the good Spirit enters not, ordinarily seven worse enter
again into-such men.

There is a great moment of persuasion in this order of the Exhortation, Wash
you, and then, put away the evil of your doings, and cease to do evil. Do not
continue in your former customs. It is strange, how contrary our hearts are to
God; We use to turn Grace unto wantonness; We use to take more liberty to sin,
when we conceive we are pardoned: But I do not know any more strong and
constraining persuasion to forsake sin, then the consideration of the forgiving
of it might yield. Oh what an inducement and grand Argument, to renouncing of
evils, is the consideration of the remission of them. This is even that ye are
now called unto, who have fled to Jesus to escape Wrath: What should ye be
taken up with, in all the World but this, to live to him henceforth, who died
for us? To forsake our own old way, and that from the constraining principle of
Love to him, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Oh, that ye would enforce your own hearts with
such a thought, when there are any solicitations to sin, to former lusts.
Should I that am dead to sin, l^ve any longer therein? Romans 6. Should I who am
washed from such pollutions, return again to the pollutions of the World?
Should I again defile my self, who am cleansed by so precious Blood? And forget
him that washed me? Should I return with the dog to the vomit, and with the sow
to the puddle? God forbid. I pray you consider, if you be Christians indeed,
give a proof of it. What has Jesus Christ done for you? He has given himself,
his own precious Blood a Ransom for us, will ye not give up your selves to him?
Will not ye give him your sins and lusts, which are not your self, but enemies
to your self? Will not ye put away these ills, that he came in this world to
destroy? Art thou a Christian, and are there yet so many sins, and works of the
Devil reigning in thee, and set up in Gods sight? What an inconsistency is
this? If thou be his follower, thou must put these away. Give them a bill of
divorcement, never to turn again. Many a man parts with his sin, because it
leaves him, he puts it not away; Temptation goes, and occasion goes away, but
the root of it abids within him. Many men have particular jarrs with their
corruptions, but they reconcile again, as differences between married persons;
They do not arise to hate their sin in its sinful Nature. But if thou hate, it
then put it away. And who would not hate it, that Christ so hated, that he came
to destroy it? 1 Jo. 3. 5. What a great indignity must it be to the Gospel, to
make that the ground of living in sin, which is pressed in it, as the grand
persuasion to forsake it? Seeing we are washed from the guilt of it, Oh let us
not love to keep the stain and filth of it. Why are we washen? Was it not
Christ's great intendment and purpose, to purify to himself a Holy People? We
are washen from the guilt of our sins, and is it to defile again? Is it not
rather to keep our selves henceforth clean, that we may be presented holy and
unblameable in his sight? That we may seek to be als like Heaven as may be, But
who ceases to do these evils, that he says are pardoned? Who puts away the
evils of these doings, the guilt whereof, he thinks God has put away? Could ye
find in your hearts to intertain those evils so familiarly, to pour out your
Souls unto them, if that Peace of God were indeed spoken unto you? Would not he
reflex of his Love prove more constraining on your hears? Were it possible,
that if ye did indeed consider, that your lusts cost Christ a dear price, to
shed his Blood, that your pleasures made his Soul heavy to death, and that he
has laid down his Life to Ransom you from Hell; were it possible, I say, that
ye would live still in these lusts, and choose these pleasurs of sin, which
were so bitter to our Lord Jesus? I beseech you be not deceived, if ye love the
puddle still, that ye cannot live out of it, do not say that ye are washed? Ye
may have washen your selves with Soap and Nitre, but the Blood of Christ has
not cleansed: For if that Blood sprinkled your Conscience once, to give you an
answer to all challenges, it could not but send forth Streams to purify the
heart, and so the whole man. The Blood and Water might be joined, the
Justifying Savior, and the Sanctifying Spirit; For both these are in this
Gospel washing. 1 Cor. 6. 11. 1 Jo 5. 6. This is be that came by water and
blood, even Jesus Christ, not by water only, but by water and blood. Not by
water only, but by blood also, and I say, not by blood only, but by water also.
The very purpose of forgiveness, is not to lay a foundation for more sin, but
that men may sin no more, but break off their sins. It is indeed impossible for
a man to amend his ways, till he be pardoned, for his sin stands betwixt him
and God, God is a consuming fire, the guilt of it hinders all meeting of the
Soul with God, at least, all influence from him; But when an open Door is made
in Christ, that men may come and Treat with God, notwithstanding of rebellions,
and have the Curse relaxed: O now he may go about his Duty comfortably. Am I
escaped from Hell, why should I any more walk in the way to it? And now he has
the Spirit given for the asking. There are some Cessations from sin, that are
not real forsakings of it, and ceasings from it: You know men will abstain from
Eating for a season, that they may be made ripe for it another time: Some do
not cease from sin, but delays it only, they put it not away, but put it off
only for another time, till a fitter occasion and opportunity. And this is so
far from ceasing from it, that it is rather an deliberat choice of it, and
Election of convenience for it: There may be some pure and simple ceasings from
sin, mere abstinence, or rather mere absence of sin for a season, that is not
ceasing from doing evil. The Christians ceasing has much Action in it: It is
such a ceasing from doing evil, that it is a putting away of evil; It has the
Soul and Spirit joined in that Cessation. Sin requires violence to put it out,
where it has haunted, it is an intruding Guest, and an usurping Guest: It
comes in first as a supplicant and beggar, prays for a little lodging for a
night, and promises to be gone, the temptation speaks but for a little time,
even the present time, for a little one, it seeks but little at first, least it
be denied; but if once it be received into the Soul, it presently becomes
Master, and can command its own time, and its abode: Then ye will not so easily
put it out, as ye could hold it out, for it is now joined with that wicked,
desperate party within you, the heart, and these united Forces are too strong
for you. According as a lust is one with a man's heart, or has nearer connection
with his heart and Soul, it is the worse to put away: for will ye drive a man
from himself, it is the cuting off an right hand, or plucking out of an right
eye. To make a man cease from such evils, it requirs that a stronger power be
within him, then is in the world. Men may cease for a time, for want of
occasions or temptations to sin; when there is no active principle in them,
restraining or keeping their Soul from such sins as appears after, when no
sonner occasion is offered, but they run as the Horse to his course, or the
Stone falls downward, they conceive Fire as easily as dry Stubble: That is
not Christian ceasing, which is that which the Soul argues it self to, from
grounds of the Gospel. Should I who am dead to sin, live any longer therein?
This is a principle of Cessation, and this is true liberty, when the Soul can
abstain from present temptations, upon such grounds and persuasions of the
Gospel, then it is really above it self, and above the world, then has it that
true victory. Many men cease only from sin, because sin ceases from them, they
have not left it, but it has left them. The old man thinks himself a changed
man, because he wallows not in the lusts of the flesh, as in his youth. But
alas, no thanks to him, for that he has not ceased from his lusts: but
temptations to him, or power and ability in him to follow them has ceased,
there is no change in his Spirit within, for he can talk of his former sins
with pleasure, he continues in other evils as bad, but more suitable to his
age. In a word, he is so inwardly, that if he were in his body, and occasions
offering as before, he would be just the same. Some again cease from some
evils, from some principles, but alas, they are no Christian principles: What
restrains the multitude of Civilians from gross scandals? Is it any thing but
affectation of a good Name and report in the world? Is it not fear of reproach
or censure? Is it not because possibly they have no particular inclination to
sueh evils? And yet there are many other evils of the heart als evil, though
more subtle, that they please themselves in, as Pride, Covetousness, Malice,
Envy, Ambition, etc. What shall all your abstinence be accounted of, when it
is not love to Jesus Christ, or hatred of sin that principles it? It is not the
outward abstinence that will commend you. Such it is, as the principles of it
are. And these only are the true Christian principles of Mortification, love of
Jesus Christ, which constrains men to live no more to themselves, but to be new
Creatures, 1 Cor. 5. 14, 15. And hatred of sin in its Nature as sin: A
Christian should have a mortal hatred at it, as his mortal enemy. It is not
Christianity, to abstain from some fleshly lusts, if ye consider them no^ as
your Souls enemies, 1 Pet. 2. 11. Ye that love the Lord, hate evil, Psalm. 97.
10. These are chained together: David's hatred was a Soul hatred, an abhorency,
Psalm. 119. 163. I hate and abhore lying, it is like the natural Antipathies,
that are among Creatures. The Soul hates not only the person of it, but the
nature of it also. Men often hate sin, only as it is circumstantiate, but
Christian hatred is a hatred of the Nature, like the deadly feuds, which are
enimities against the kind and name. I will put enimity between thy seed, etc.
It is a perfect hatred, Psalm. 139. 22. And so it cannot endure any sin because
all is contrary to Gods Holiness, and offensive to his Spirit. I would think
it easier to forsake all evil, and cease from doing any evil I mean
presumptuously, with a willing min^ and endeavor, then indeed to forsake one;
for as long as ye entertain so many lusts like it, they shall make way for it.
It were easier to keep the whole Commandments in an Evangelical sense, then
indeed to keep any one, for all of the^ help another, and subsist they cannot
one with out another, so that ye take a foolish course, wh^ go about particular
reformations. Ye scandalous sinners profess that ye will amend the particular
fault ye are guilty of, and in the mea^ time, ye take no head to your Souls and
Lives; Therefore it shall be either in vain, or not acceptable: How pleasant a
life would Christians have, if they would indeed be persuaded to be altogether
Christians; The halfing of it neither pleases God nor delights you; I^ keeps
you but in continual torment between God and Baal: your own lusts usurp over
you; and that of Christ in you challenges the Supremacy so ye are as-men under
two Masters. each striving for the place, and were it not better to be under
one settled Government. If there be any tenderness of God in your hearts, or
light it your Consciences, they cannot but testify against your lusts, these
strange Lords; Your lusts again, they drive you on against your Conscience;
Thus ye are divided and tormented betwixt two, your own Conscience and
Affections. You have thus the pain of Religion, and know not the true pleasure
of it: You are marred in the pleasures of sin, Conscience and the love of God
is a worm to eat that Gourd, it is Gall and Vinegar mixed in with them. Were it
not more wisdom, to be either one thing or another. If ye will have the
pleasures of sin for a season, take them wholly, and renounce God, and see if
your heart can endure that. If your heart cannot condescend to that, I pray you
renounce them wholly, and ye shall find more exquisit and sure pleasures in
godliness, at his Right Hand: O what a noble entertainment has the Soul in
God; The Peace and Joy of the Holy Ghost is a Kingdom indeed.

SERMON XII.
Isai. 26. 3. Thou shall keep him in perfect Peace, whose mind is stayed on
thee, because he trusts in thee.
ALL men love to have privileges above others. Every one is upon the design
and search after some well-being, since Adam lost that which was true
happiness: We all agree upon the general notion of it, but presently men
divide in the following of particulars. Here all men united in seeking after
some good, something to satisfy their Souls, and satiat their desires. Nay,
but they scatter presently in the prosecution of it, because, according to
every man's fancy and corrupt humor, they attribute that good unto diverse
things; And when they meet with disappointment, they change their opinion of
that, but are made no wiser, for they turn from one to another of that same
kind, in which their imagination has supposed blessedness to be: And
therefore, they will return to that which they first loathed and rejected. Is
there then no such thing in the world as blessedness? Is it not to be found
among men? Are all men's unsatiable desires in vain? Is a Creature made up and
composed of desires, to keep it in continual torment and vexation of spirit?
No certainly, it is, and it is found by some; All the world strive about it,
but the man only who trusts and believes in God, he it is who carries it away
from them, who has this privilege beyond the world. And why do so many miss
it? Because they do not see nor suspect that it is blessedness indeed which he
injoyes: But on the contrair, their corrupted imaginations represent
godliness, and a godly man's self-indigency and dependence on God, as the
greatest misery and shame. The godly man hids not his blessedness from the
world. No, he proclaims it when he has found it; He would that all enjoyed it
with him. And if there were no more to declare, that it does not consist in
worldly things, this might suffice; they are not communicable to many, without
the prejudice and loss of every one. But none will believe his report, of his
own Estate.

If ye would consider, here is that which men toil for, compass Sea and Land
for, here it is, near thee, in thy mouth: It is not in Heaven, that thou should
say, How shall I ascend to it? It is not in Hell below, that thou should
say, Who shall descend? It is not in the ends of the Earth; No, it is near
thee, in thy mouth: It is not beyond the Sea, but it is near, in thy mouth,
even the word of faith, which Christ preached, Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. And what says
that word? Believe with thy heart and thou shall be saved; Trust in God and
depend on him, and ye shall have peace, and that perfect peace: and this peace
shall be kept by God himself. Blessed then is the man that trusts in the Lord,
Psalm. 40. 4. Ye make a long journey in vain, ye spend your Labor and Money in
vain, all the pains might be saved, it is not where ye seek it; ye travel about
many creatures, ye go to many doors, and enquire for Happiness and Peace, but
ye go too far off, ye need not search so many Coasts, it is nearer hand, in
this word of the Gospel, the joyful sound; It is this that proclaims peace.
Peace is a comprehensive word, especially in Scripture. It was the Jews
salutation, Peace be to you, meaning happiness and all good things: It is
Christ's salutation, Grace and Peace. Grace is Holiness, Peace is Happiness,
and these are either one, or inseparably conjoined as one. This was the Angels
Song, Glory to God, peace on earth, Luke 2. 14. Bleslednesse was restored, or
brought near to be restored, to miserable man by Jesus Christ, and upon the
apprehension of this, Angels Sing. It was this, Christ came in the world with,
and when he went away, he left this Legacy to his Children, My peace I leave
you, Jo. 14 27. We lost happiness, and all men are on a vain pursuit of it
since, but it is found, and found by one of our Kin, our Lord Jesus, our Elder
Brother, he has found it, or made it, and brought it near us in the Gospel,
for the receiving, and who so receives him by Faith, and trusting in him,
receives that privilege, that peace. He endured much trouble to gain our
peace, he behoved to undergo misery, to purchase our Blessedness, and so it is
his own, and who so receives him, receives it also.

The news of such a peace might be seasonable in the time of war and trouble,
if we apprehended our need of it. It is not a peace from war and trouble, but
a peace in war and trouble. My peace I leave you, in the world ye shall have
trouble, Jo. 14. 27. and 16. at the end. What a blessed Message is it, that
there is a peace, and a perfect peace, attainable in the midst of wars,
confusions and calamities of the times public and personal, a perfect peace, a
complete peace, even complete without the accession of outward and worldly
peace, that needs it not, nay, appears most perfect and entire in it self, when
it is striped naked of them all. Behold what a privilege the Gospel offers
unto you; Ye need not be made miserable but if you please. This is more then
all the world can afford you, there is no man can promise to himself immunity
from public dangers, or personal, from many griefs and disappointments: But
the Gospel bids you reckon up all your troubles and miseries that ye can meet
with in the world, and yet in such a case, if ye hearken to wisdom, there is a
peace that will make you forget that trouble; Her ways are ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths are peace, Pro. 3. 17. I will undertake to
make thee blessed, says Wisdom, the Fathers Wisdom. When all the world has
given thee over for miserable, when thou have spent thy substance on the
Physicians, and in vain, come to me, I can heal that desperate Disease by a
word, I create peace, when natural Causes have given it over, I create it of
nothing, I will keep you in perfect peace.

You have then here, three things of special concernment, in these times and
all times, ^ blessedness, a perfect peace attainable, the way of it, and the
Fountain of it: The Fountai^ of it, the preserver of it, is God himself; The
way to attain it, is trusting in God, and stayin^ on him. This sweetness of
peace, is in Go^ the Tree of Life, Faith puts to its hand, an^ plucks the Fruit
of the Tree; Hope and Dependence on God, is a kind of tasting of tha^ Fruit and
eating of it, and then follows thi^ perfect peace, as the delightful relish
and sweetness that the Soul finds in God, upon tastin^ how gracious he is. God
himself is the life o^ our souls, the fountain of living waters, the life an^
light of men. Faith and trusting in God, draw^ out of this Fountain, out of
this deep well o^ Salvation, and staying on God drinks of it, til^ the soul be
refreshed with peace and tranquillity, such as passes Natural Understanding*
Christ Jesus is the Tree of Life, that grows i^ the Ga^den of God, trusting in
him by Faith implants a Soul in him, roots a Soul in him, b^ virtue of which
Union it springs up and grow into a living Branch, by staying and depending
upon him, we live by him, and hence spring this blessed and sweet Fruit of
peace of soul an^ conseience, which grows upon the confidenc^ of the soul
placed in God, as the stalk by which it is united to the Tree. Trusting and
stayin^ upon God, is the souls casting its Anchor upon him, in the midst of the
waves and storms of sin, wrath and trouble. The poor beaten sinner casts an
Anchor within the Vail, on that sure ground of immutable Promises in Jesus
Christ. And then it rests and quiets it self at that Anchor, enjoyes peace in
the midst of the storm, there is a great calm, it is not moved, or not greatly
moved, as if it were a fair day: David flies unto God as his refuge, Anchor's
upon the Name of the Lord, Psalm. 62. 1, 2. And so he enjoys a perfect calm and
tranquillity, I shall not be moved, because he is united to the Rock, he is
tied to the firm Foundation Jesus Christ, and no storm can dissolve this Union;
not because of the strength of that Rope of Faith, it is but a weak Cord, if
Omnipotency did not compass it about also: And so we are kept by the power of
God, through faith unto salvation. The poor wearied Traveller, the Pilgrim
sits down under the shadow of a Rock, and this peace is his rest under it.
Faith lays him down, and peace is his rest and sleep. Faith in Jesus Christ is
a motion toward him, as the soul^ proper place and center; and therefore it is
called a coming to him, flying to him as the City of refuge: It is the Souls
flight out of it self, and misery and sin within, to apprehended Mercy and
Grace, and happiness in Christ. Now Hope is the Conjunction or Union of the
Soul with him, the Soul then staying and resting on him, as in its proper
place; And so it enjoys perfect peace and rest in its place: so that if ye
remove it thence, then ye offer violence to it.

These two things are of greatest importance to you to know: What this perfect
Peace is, and what is the way to attain it? The one is the Privilege and
Dignity, the other is the Duty of a Christian, and these two make him up what
he is.

I would think that man perfectly blessed, who is at peace with two things, God
and himself. If a man be at peace with Creatures without him, and be not at
peace with himself, but have war within his own Mind, that man's Peace is no
Peace, let be perfect peace. A man's greatest enemy is within his own house. And
within indeed, when it is in his bosom and soul; When a man's Conscience is
against him, it is worse then a world beside. Conscientia mill testes, so, I
say, it is mill hosts. It is a thousand witnesses, and a thousand enemies. It
were better to endure condemnation of any Judge, of many Judges in the world,
then to sustain the conviction of a man's own Conscience: When it accuses, who
shall excuse? Joh. 8. 9. Rom 2. 15. A merry spirit (says Solomon) is a
continual feast, Prove. 15. 15. And what must a heart be, which has such a
gnawing worm within it, as an accusing Conscience, to eat it out? This is the
worm of Hell that dies not out, which makes H^ll, Hell indeed. This indeed will
be a painful Consumption, a broken spirit dries up the bones, it will eat up
the marrow of the spirit and body, Pro. 17. 22. What infirmity is there which a
man cannot bear? Poverty, Famine, War, Pestilence, Sickness, name what you
will, but a wounded Spirit who can bear? Prove. 18. 14. And there is reason for
it, for there is none to bear it: A sound and whole Spirit can sustain
infirmities, but when that is wounded, which should bear all the rest, what is
behind to bear it? It is a burden to it self: If a man have trouble and war in
this world, yet there is often escaping from it; A man may fly from his enemy,
but when thy enemy is within thee, whither shall thou fly? Thou cannot go from
thy self, thou carries about thee thy enemy, thy tormenter.

But suppose a man were at peace within himself, and cried peace, peace to
himself, yet if he be not at peace with God, shall his peace be called peace?
Shall it not rather be named supine security? If a man be at variance with
himself, and his Soul disquieted within, there is more fear then danger, if he
be at peace with God; It is but a false Alarm, that shall end well: But if he
have peace in his ow^ bosom, and yet no agreement with God; then destructions
are certainly coming, his dream of peace will have a terrible wak^ning. A man
may sleep soundly, and his enemies round about him, because he knows no^ of
it; but he is in a worse estate* ^or he that is in great fear, and his enemies
either none, or far distant: The one has present dang^r, ^^d no (...) the
other present fear* and no da^ge^, and which of these think ye b^st? Sudden
destruction awakes the one from sleep, Ez^k. 7 25. Their fear and destruction
come both at once, when it is now in vain to fear, because it is past Hope,
Prove. 1. 27. Therefore the Lord swears, tha^ there is no peace to the wicked,
Isai. 48. 22. What? Do not they often cry peace to themselves, and put the evil
day far off? No men are so without Bands in life and death as they, they have
made ag^eement with Hell and Death and their own Consciences; Yet for all that,
Thus sait^ the Lord, there is no peace to the wicked. If God be against us,
what is the matter who be with us; For he can make a man's friends his enemies,
and he can make a man's enemies to be at peace with him: He makes peace and
create trouble, Isai. 45. 7. Men can but destroy the body, but he can destroy
both body and soul for ever. O what a Potent and Everlasting Enemy is he? There
is no escaping from his All-seeing Eye, and powerful Hand, Psalm. 139 7, 8. A
man may fly from men, but whithe^ shall he fly from his Presence? To Heaven* He
is there: To Hell? He is there. The darkness of the night has been a covering
under which many have escaped, and been save^ in Armies, but darknesss is no
covering to him it is all one with Light; He is near hand every one of us: The
Conscience is within us, bu^ he is within the Conscience; And how much God is
above the Creature, so great and dreadful a party is he above any enemy
imaginable Therefore I conclude, that that man only has perfect peace who is
at peace with God, and with his own Conscience. If a man be at peac^ with God,
and not with himself, he wants bu^ a moments time of perfect peace; for, or it
be long, the God of it will speak Peace unto him. But if he be at peace with
God and himself, I know not what he wants of the perfect peace, of the Peace,
Peace: For it is a man's Mind that makes peace or war, it is not outward
things; but in the midst of peace, he may be in trouble, and in the midst of
trouble, in peace, according as he has satisfaction and contentment in his own
breast: For what is all the Grace of a Christian? It is Godliness with
Contentment: It is not Godliness and Riches, Godliness and Honor, or Pleasure,
Godliness and outward Peace. No, no, Contentment compenseth all these, and has
in it eminently, all the gain and advantage of these. A man in Honor, a Rich
man, having no contentment in it, is really als poor, als ignominious, as the
poor and despised man. If Contentment then be without these things, certainly
they cannot be missed; For where Contentment is not with them, it only is
missed, and they not considered. Contentment is all the Gain that men seek in
Riches and Honor and Pleasure; If a Godly man have that same without them, he
then has all the Gain and Advantage, and wants nothing, but some trouble that
ordinarily attends them: Outward Peace cannot add to inward peace, and so the
want of it, cannot diminish.

We must begin at the Original, if we would know rightly this peace that
passes knowledge. The Fountain head is peace with God; a stream of this, is
peace of Conscience, and peace with the Creatures. There is a peace of
friendship, when persons were never enemies, and there is a peace of
Reconciliation, when parties at variance are made one. Innocent Adam had peace
once with God as a friend, Angels continue so to this day; but now there is no
such peace between men and God, for all are become enemies to God, and aliens
from the common wealth of Israel. That peace was broken by rebellion against
God his Maker, and all the posterity are born with the same enimity against
God: On our part are hearts desperately wicked, whose imagination is only evil
continually: One Gods part is holy and spotless Justice, that is of purer eyes
then to behold iniquity, and therefore, must destroy it or the sinner. On our
part are so many rebellions, Adams actual transgression, and all our own sins
and breaches of the holy Law, as so many breaches of peace. On Gods part, are
so many Curses answerable to the breaches of the Law: Cursed is every one that
abides not in every thing* etc. This Curse is even the proclamation of men to
be traitors, and an intimation of the righteous Judgment which will come upon
them. Adam was in a Covenant of peace with God. Do, and thou shall live, if not
thou shall die. Adam brake this Covenant, so the peace is dissolved, and God is
no more oblidged to give Life, but to execute the pain contained in the
Covenant: And in sign and token of this, look how Adam fled from Gods
presence, to hide himself when he heard his Voice, it was a poor shift, for
whither should be go from his presence? But alas, seeking more Wisdom, he lost
that he had, seeking Divine Wisdom, he lost Humane. Now there is no more making
up this peace on such terms again: We have no capacity to treat with God any
more. But blessed be his Majesty, who has found out the way of Agreement and
Reconciliation. Oh that ye were once persuaded of your enimity against God: Ye
are not born friends, though ye be born within the Visible Church. How dreadful
a thing is it, to have the most High and Terrible God against you, to do to you
according to your deservings. Ye all know this, we are enemies to God by
Nature, I pray you, is it but a name? Is it not worthy deep consideration? But
who considers this matter? If ye loss a friend, ye will be troubled, and the
more behoveful your friend was, the more troubled you will be. If a great and
potent Nation proclaimed War against us, we cannot but be sensible of it: But
alas, who considers the great breach that is between God and all Men,
occasioned by the first man's transgression and rebellion. It is one of the
degrees of health, to know the disease, and I may call it a degree of peace, a
kind of preparation to peace, to know the enimity, and not generally to know
it, but to ponder it till the heart be affected with it; To call a Council of
all the Faculties and Affections of the Soul, to consider the great imminent
danger of man's commonwealth. What is it, I pray you, that is the greatest
obstruction of men's making peace with God, that makes the breach irreparable,
and the wound incurable? It is this, certainly; No man apprehends it aright;
We intertain good thoughts of our friendship with God, or that it is easy to be
reconciled. Who sees such a wide breach between God and man, that all the
Merits of Angels and Men could not make it up? Who sees the pr^ce of
Redemption so precious, as it must cease for ever, for all that Men and Angels
can do? Is not every man offering God satisfaction, either his Tears, or
sorrow, or amendment in time coming, or all of them? Do not men undertake to
pacify God with External Ordinances, and think it may suffice for their sins?
Certainly ye are ignorant, of the infinite separation between God and man, that
imagines a Treaty with him your self, or that ever ye can come in speaking
terms. And therefore is this War and Enimity perpetual; therefore, there is
no peace, when ye cry peace, peace. When ye have peace within you, and say that
ye have peace with God; Yet certainly, the Lord thy God is against thee, and
will not spare thee, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. Many of you bless your selves in your own
hearts; when ye hear the Curse and Threatening of the Law, ye say, God forbid,
or all that were true. Well, thus says the Lord, all these Curses that are
written in this book, shall ly upon thee, and the Lord shall separate thee unto
evil, because ye take not with your enimity, there can be no treaty, a Mediator
can have no employment from you:

How shall the breach of peace be made up? Since the first Covenant cannot be
made up again where shall the remedy be found? God is just and righteous, Men
are rebellious and sinful; Can these meet, and the one not be consumed? Will
not God be a consuming Fire, and men as Stubble before the Lords presence?
Therefore, there must be a Mediator between them, a Peacemaker, to make of
two, one, to take up the difference. And this Mediator must be like both, and
yet neither wholly the one, nor the other. He must therefore be God and Man,
that he may be a fit Days man, betwixt God and man. And this is our Lord Jesus
Christ. In his Divinity, he comes near to God, in his Humanity he comes near to
man; In his Person, he is between both, and he is fit to make peace; And
therefore, he is a Prince of Peace, Isa, 9. 6. And that he may be a Prince of
Peace, he must be both An Everlasting Father like God, and a young Child like
unto man: God to prevail with God, and a man to engage for man; And therefore
he is called our Peace, Ephesians. 2. 14. Our Lord Jesus Christ enters in a Covenant
with the Father, wherein he undertakes to bear our Curse, and the chastisement
of our Peace; he is content to be dealt with as the Rebel, upon me, upon me be
the iniquity, and so there comes an interruption, as it were; of that blessed
peace he had with the Father, he is content that there should be a Covering of
Wrath, spread over the Fathers Love, that he should handle the Son as an Enemy;
And therefore it is, that sinners are admitted as Friends, his Obedience takes
away our Rebellion; The Cloud of the Lords Displeasure powers down upon him,
that it might be fair weather to us: The Armies of Curses that were against us,
Encounter him, and he by being overcome, overcomes; By being slain by Justice,
Satan and Sin, overcomes all those, and kills the enmity on the cross,
making peace by his Blood, Col. 2. 14, 15. Ephesians. 2 15. And it is this Sacrifice
that has pacified Heaven, the sweet smell of it has gone above, and made
peace in the High places.

Here then is the privilege of a Believer, to be at peace with God, to be one
with him: And this indeed is Life Eternal, to be united unto the Fountain of
Life, in whose favor is Life, and whose loving kindness is better then Life:
Is not this a blessed Estate? Whatever a man has done against God, it is all
forgiven and forgotten, shall never come in remembrance. Are not Angels blessed
who are friends with God? Such is the Soul whose sins are pardoned through
Christ, their sins are as if they never had been; The Soul is not only escaped
that terrible wrath of God, but being at peace with God, all the goodness that
is communicable to Creatures, it shall partake of. That they may be one, as we
are one, that they may be perfect in one, Joh. 17. This Christ prayed for, and
this was the end of his Death, to make of two, one; So then, the Glory that
Christ is partaker of with the Father, we must be partakers of with him, and
all this, by virtue of that peace with God by him. Oh if ye knew what enimity
with God is, how would it indear and make precious peace with him? The one
engages all that is in God, to be against a man: the other engages all that
is in him, to be for a man. And is not he then a great One, whither he be a
Friend or an Enemy? Is he not the best Friend and worst Enemy? Who has most
power, yea, all power to employ for whom he will, and against whom he will.
What a blessed change is it, to have God, of a consuming Fire, made a Sun, with
Healing and Consolation? That the Righteous, Holy and Just God, before whom, no
flesh can stand, should accept so rebellious sinners, and dwell among them. He
had not only power to destroy, but Law against us also: What a perfect peace is
it then, that the Judge becomes a merciful Father, and the Law of Ordinances
is cancelled, and that power employed to keep Salvation to us, and us to
Salvation. Ye who have made Peace and Atonement through Christ's Blood, rejoice
in the Hope of the Glory of God; There wants nothing to make you completely
blessed, but the clear and perfect sight, and knowledge of your Estate before
God.

Now when this peace, which is made up in Heaven is intimated unto the
Conscience, then all the Tempests and Clouds of it evanish, and this is the
peace of believing, which is the Souls resting and quieting it self upon the
believed favor of God. There may be a great Calm above, goodwill in God
tomards men, and yet great Tempests in this lower Region, no peace on earth.
There is a peace of Conscience, which is a disease of Conscience, a
benumednesse of Conscience, or a sleep of Conscience, when men walk in the
imagination of their own hearts, and flatter themselves in their own eyes, will
not trouble themselves with the apprehension of the wrath of God, when Souls
will not suffer their sin, or the curse to enter in. This is that no peace,
which the Lord speaks often of, it is but a dream, and when a man awaketh,
alas, what a dreadful sight meets he with first, sudden destruction; Sin enters
in the Conscience, and the Law, the strength of sin, and so that peace ends
in an eternal disquietnesse. But what is the reason, that notwithstanding of
Gods Justice and men's Sins, so many are not afraid of him, so many pass the
time, without fear of Wrath and Hell? Is it not because they have taken hold of
his Strength and made peace with him? No indeed, but because they know not the
power of his Anger, to fear him according to his Wrath: Who will spend one hour
in the examination of his own ways, in searching out sins, in counting his
debt, till he find it past payment? No, men intertain the thoughts of sin, and
hell and wrath, as if it were coals in their bosom, they shake them out, they
like and love any diversion from them. Oh, ignorance makes much peace, I would
say, security, which is so much worse then fear, because it is so far from the
remedy, that it knows not the evil and danger. It is not the rising of the
Sun of Righteousness, shining into the Soul, that has cleared them: but their
perpetual darkness that blinds them. I say then, in the Name of Jesus
Christ, that ye never knew the peace of God, who knew not war with God: Ye
know not love, who have not known anger. But this is the Souls true peace and
tranquillity, when it is once awakened to see its misery and danger; How many
Clouds overspread it, what Tempests blow, what Waves of Displeasure go over its
head? But when that peace, which is made in the High Places, breaks through
the Cloud with a Voice, Son, be of good comfort, thy sins be forgiven thee,
when that Voice of the Spirit is uttered, presently at its command the Wind and
Waves obey; the Soul is calmed as the Sea after a Storm; It is not only
untroubled, but it is peaceable upon solid grounds, because of the word which
speaks peace in Christ. The peace of the most of you, is such as ye were born
and Educated withal: It is not a created peace, a spoken peace, the fruit of
the lips, and so no true peace. Ye had not your peace from the word, but ye
brought it to the word; Y^ have no peace after trouble, and so it is not the
Lords peace.

The Christian may have peace, in regard of his own Salvation and eternal
things, and in regard of all things that befalls in ^ime: The first is, when
the Conscience is sprinkled with the Blood of Jesus Christ, and gets a good
answer to all the challenges and accusations of Conscience, and of the Law and
Justice, 1 Pet. 3. 21. when the Spirit of God shines into the Soul, with a new
Light to discover these things that are freely given, 1 Cor. 2. 12. And this is
the Sealing of the Spirit, after believing, Ephesians. 1. 13. When a Soul has put to
its Seal by believing Gods word, and has acknowledged Gods Truth and
Faithfulness in his word, the Spirit Seals mutually the Believers Faith,
both by more Holiness, and the knowledge of it. And how great peace is this,
when a Soul can look upon all its iniquities, when they compass about a man,
and outward trouble sharpeneth and sets on edge inward challenges, and yet
the Soul will not fear, it has answers to them all in Christ's Blood, Psalm. 49.
5. This is a greater word then all the world can say. Many men's fearlesnesse
proceeds from ignorance of sin, their iniquities were never set in order
before them, but if once they compassed them about, and wrath like a fiery wall
compass them about also, so that there were no escaping: Oh it would be more
terrible, then all the Armies of the world; Ye would account little of a
Kingdom, ye would exchange it for such a word as David has upon good grounds.

Now I say again, the Soul that has thus committed it self to him as a
faithful keeper, may have peace in all Estates and Conditions: And this peace
flows from that other peace. There is a peace which guards the heart and
mind, Phil. 4. 6, 7. Opposed to carfulness and anxiety, and this Paul is
Examplar for, I have learned in every estate, therewith to be content, to want
and abound, etc. verse. 11. The Soul of a Believer, may be in an equal even
Tenur and Disposition in all conditions; It may possess it self in patience;
Impatience and Anxiety, makes a man not his own man, he is not himself, he
injoys not himself, he is a burden to himself, and is his own tormenter. But if
Souls were stayed upon God, certainly they would possess themselves, dwell
securely within their own breasts. We may find that the most part of men, are
exposed to all the floods and waves of the times: They move inwardly, as things
are troubled outwardly: Every thing adds moment to their grief, or joy: Any
Dispensation casts the Balance, and either weights them down with
discouragement, or lifts them up with vanity and lightness of mind. But the
Believers privilege is to be unmoved in the midst of all the Tossings and
Confusions of the times, Psalm. 128. 1, 2. Ye would be as Mount Zion, if ye
trusted in God; No Dispensation should enter into the Soul, to cast the
Balance upon you; Ye might stand upon your Rock Jesus Christ, and look about
the Estates, Persons, Affairs and Minds of men, as a troubled Sea, fleeting,
tossed up and down, and ye stand and not be moved, or not greatly moved, Ps.
62. 2. And this is to be wise indeed. If I would describe a wise man, I would
say, he is one man, beside him, no man is one with himself, but various
inconstant, changeable. He is unwise, who is unlike himself, who changes
Persons according to Dispensations: Wisdom is the stability of thy times, and
Faith is Wisdom, it Establishes as Mount Zion, so as a man comes out still
one, in prosperity not exalted, in adversity not cast down, in every Estate
content: and this is the man who is blessed indeed. This were wisdom, to will
the same thing, and nill the same thing, Semper idem velle, atque idem nolle. I
need not (says Seneca) add that exception, that it be right which you desire,
for no one thing can universally and always please, if it be not good and
right. So I say, he were both wise and happy, who had but one grief, and one
joy. Should not a Believers mind be calm and ^erene, seeing the true Light has
shined, it should be as the upper world, where no blasts, no storms or clouds
are to ecclips the Sun, or cloud it. while our peace and tranquillity is
borrowed from outward things, certainly it must change; But a Bel^evers peace
and tranquillity of mind having its rise from above, from the unchangeable word
of the Lord, it needs not to change according to the vicissitudes of
Providence. He needs not to care before hand, because there is one who cares
for him; And what needs both to care? He needs not be disquieted, or
troubled after, because it shall turn about to his good; All things shall do
so, Romans 8. 28. He needs not be Anxious about future Events, because he has
all his burden cast upon another, by prayer and supplication; What needs he
then take a needless burden? Prayer will do that, which Care pretends and
cannot do, and that without trouble. He needs not be troubled when things are
present, for he cannot by his thought, either add or diminish, take away or
prevent. There is one good and necessary thing, that his heart is upon, and
that cannot be taken from him; And therefore, all things else are indifferent,
and of small concernment to him.

Now what wants such a man of perfect peace, who is reconciled to God, and at
peace within himself? When peace guardeth the Heart and Mind within,
compasses it as a Castle or Garrison, to hold out all the vain Alarms of
External things. May not all the world be troubled about him; What though the
Floods lift up their Voice, if they come not into the Soul? If he be one and
the same in Peace and Trouble, Prosperity and Adversity, do not lament him in
the one more then the other. It is the Mind that makes your Condition good or
bad. But yet, I say, the Believer has likewise peace with all the Creatures,
which the world has not, and even in this he is a privileged man. He is in
league with the stones of the field, and in peace in his tabernacle, Job. 5.
23. All things are his, because he is Christ's, and all are Christ's, who is the
possessor of Heaven and Earth, at least the Righteous Heir of both, 1 Cor. 3.
21. The Unbeliever has no right to the Creature; Though there be a Cessation
for a time, between them and him, yet that is no peace, for they will at length
be armed against him, they are witnesses already against him, and groan to God
for the corruption, that man's sin has subjected them unto. His Table is, it
may be, full, yet it is a snare unto him: He gets ease and quietness
outwardly: Nay, but it slays the fool and destroys him. But the godly man
is at peace through Christ's Blood, with all Crosses and Comforts; The Sting and
Enimity of all evils is taken away by Christ. Poverty is made a friend, because
Christ was poor. Hunger and Thirst is become a friend, because Christ was
hungry and thirsty: Reproach and Contempt is at peace with him, because Christ
was despised: Afflictions and Sorrows are reconciled to him, because Christ was
a man of sorrows and acquainted with griefs: In a word, Death it self is become
a friend, since Christ subdued it, by tasting of it. I may say, the worst
things to a Natural man, are b^come best friends to the Believer; The Grave
keeps his Body and dust in Hope: Death is a better friend then Life, for it
ministers an entry into Glory: It is the Door of Eternal Life, it takes down
the Tabernacle of Mortality, that we may be Clothed upon with immortality. In
Sum, whatever it be, Christ has stamped a new quality on it, it comes
through his hand, and so, if it be not good in it self, yet it is good in the
use, and in his appointment, Romans 8. 21. If it be not good, yet it works
together for our good: It contributeth to our good, because it is in his
Skillful Hand, who can bring good out of evil, peace out of trouble. Oh that
ye were persuaded to be Christians indeed, to love his Law, and trust in him,
^reat peace have all such: This were more to you, nor peace in the world: Your
peace should be as a River, for abundance and perpetuity, no drought could dry
it up; it should run in time as a large River, and when time is done, it would
embosome it self in Eternity, in that Ocean of eternal peace, and joy which
the Saints are drowned in above: Other men's peace is but like a Brook that
dries up in Summer.

SERMON XIII.
Isai. 26. 3. Thou shall keep him in perfe^ Peace, whose mind is stayed on
thee, because he trusts in thee.
CHrist has left us his peace, as the great a^ comprehensive Legacy, My peace
I lea^ you, Joh. 14. 27. And this was not peace in the world that he enjoyed,
you know what his li^ was, a continual warfare; but a peace above the world,
that passes understanding In the world you shall have trouble, but in me y^
shall have peace, says Christ, a peace that sha^ make trouble no trouble: You
must lay you accounts to have such a life, as the Forerunner had; But withal,
as he has left us hi^ trouble, so has he left us his peace; The trouble will
have an end, but the joy can n^ man take from you: We have this sure Promise to
rest upon, in behalf of the Church, pea^ shall be on Israel; A peace that the
worl^ knows not, and so cannot assault it, or tak^ it away. Oh that you would
hearken to thi^ word, That you would trust in the Lord, and sta^ upon your God,
then should your peace be as a River, Isai. 48. 18. There is nothing more
desired in time of trouble, then peace; but all peac^ is not better then war:
Some necessary war is better, then evil grounded peace. The Kingdoms have
been long in pain, laboring to bring forth a safe and well-grounded peace. But
alas, we have been in pain and brought forth wind, when we looked for peace, no
good came; and for healing, behold trouble. But how shall we arrive at our
desired Haven? Certainly, if peace be well grounded, it must have Truth for its
Foundation, and Righteousness for its Companion; Truth must spring out of the
earth, and righteousness look down from heaven. This were the compendious way
for public peace, if every man would make his own peace with God: There are
controversies with God, between King, Nobles and People, and therefore, God
Fomenteth the wars in the Kingdoms; If you would have these ended, make peace
with God in Christ, by flying in unto him, and resting on him; more trusting in
God would dispatch our wars; Trusting in the arm of flesh continues them.
Allways what ever be, peace or war, here is the business that more concerns
you, your eternal peace and safty; And if ye were more careful of this, to save
your own Souls, you would help the public more. If you could be once persuaded
to be Christians indeed, we needed not press many duties in reference to the
public, and until you be once persuaded to save your selves, by flying from
the wrath to come, it is in vain to speak of pub,lick Duties to you. We do
therefore, declare unto you the way of obtaining perfect peace, peace as a
River, if you will quite all self-confidences, fly from your selves as your
greatest enemies, and trust your Souls unto the Promise in Jesus Christ, and
lean all your weight on him, we assure you, your peace shall run abundantly and
perpetually. Whoever trusts in Creatures, in uncertain Riches, in worldly
peace, in whatsoever thing, beside the only living and glorious Lord, we
persuade him, that his peace shall fail as a Brook: All things in this world
shall deal deceitfully with you, as a Brook which is blackish, by reason of
Ice, what time it waxes warm, it shall evanish; you that looked and waited for
water in it, shall be confounded, because you hoped and are ashamed because of
your expectation, Job 6. 15. etc. The Summer shall dry up your peace, and what
will you do? But if you pour ou^ your Souls on him, and trust in the Fountain
of Living Waters, you shall not be ashamed, for your peace shall be as a River.
The Elephant is said to trust, that he can drink out a River, but he is
deceived, for he may drink again, it runs, and shall run for ever. If any thing
would essay to take your peace from you, it is a vain attempt, for it runs like
a River; it may be shallower and deeper, but it cannot run dry, because o^ the
Living Fountain it proceeds from. There is no other thing can be made sure,
all besides this, is uncertain, and this only is worthy to be made sure;
Nothing besides this, can give you satisfaction.

Are your hearts asking within you, how shall this peace be attained? If you
desire to know it, consider these words, whose heart is stayed on thee, because
he trusts in thee. It concerns you much to know well, what this is, that your
eternal peace depends on.

Trusting in God, is the leaning of the Souls weight on God, the Soul has a
burden above it, heavy and unsupportable, and this the truster casts upon
God; And so he is a loadened and weary man, whom Christ exhorts to come to
him, and he shall find ease for his Soul, Matthew. 11. 28. Prove. 3. 5. Leaning to
our self, and trusting in God are opposed* Psalm. 22. 10. Trusting is exponed,
to be a casting upon God, Psalm. 25. 1. It is called, a lifting up the Soul to
him. This one thing is included, in the bosom of Trusting and Believing, that
a man has many burdens, too heavy for him, which would sink him down: The
Believer is such a one as Jehosaphat. 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. O Lord we have no might
against this great company, neither know we what to do. O Lord, I have an Army
of iniquities against me, a great company compasses me about; An Army of
Curs^s, als numerous as mine iniquities, both are innumerable as the Sand of
the Sea, I have no might against them, neither know I what to do: Nay, the Lord
is against me, his wrath is like the roaring of a Lion, what can I do against
him? The first beginning of trusting in God, is distrusting our s^lves: And
until a man see his duty and burden beyond his strength, his burden greater
then he can bear, you will never persuade him to come to Jesus Christ, and lean
on him. We will not preac^ any such Doctrine, as to discharge any to co^ to
Christ, till they be wearied and laden For, when a man conceives that he
wante^ that weariednesse, whither shall he go to fi^ it? Is there any Fountain,
but one Jes^ Christ, both of Grace and preparations to it, any such be? But
this we preach unto yo^ that un^^l you be wearied and laden, you wi^ not cast
your burden on Jesus. We need n^ discharge you to come till you be such, for
ce^tainly you will not come. This is the desper^ wickedness of our hearts,
that we will never forsake our selves, till we can do no better: Utill men be
as David, I looked on the right han^ and there was none would know me, refuge
fail^ me, certainly they will not cry to God: M^ will look round about them,
before they wi^ look up above them, they will cast the burden of their Souls
upon any thing, upon their ow^ sorrow and contrition, upon their resolution ^
amend, upon external Duties and Privilege upon civil Honesty, until all these
succumb under the weight of their Salvation, and then, i^ may be, they will ask
after him who bare o^ griefs. I would not willingly speak of preparations to
Faith, because it puts men upon searching something in themselves, upon
fashioning their own hearts, and trimming them t^ come to Christ; whereas there
is nothing ca^ be acceptable to him, but what comes from him. But I think all
that men intend, wh^ speak of preparations, may be gained this wa^ by holding
out unto men, the impossibility o^ ^oming to Christ, till they be emptied of
themselves; Not that the one is a thing going before, to be done by us, but
because they are all ^ne, it is one motion of the Soul to come out of ^t self,
and in to Jesus: It is one thing really to ^istrust our selves, and to trust in
him; And by this means, when the true Nature of Faith it ^elf is holden out,
men might examine themselves ^ather by it, whither they have it, nor by the
preparations of it.

But to come to our purpose, when the Soul is pressed under burdens of sin and
misery, of duty, and insufficiency, and inability to do it, then ^he Gospel
discovers unto the wearied Soul, a place of reposing and rest. The Lord has
established Christ Jesus an ensign to the people, these who seek unto him
shall find his rest glorious, Isa. 11. 10. When there is discovered in us, all
^mptinesse and inability, yea impossibility to save our selves or perform any
duty, then are we led to Jesus Christ, as one who is come with grace and truth,
in whom it has pleased the father all fullness should dwell; And the turning of
the Soul over upon him, is trusting in him. You would not mistake this,
trusting in the Lord in its first and most native acting, is not always
persuasion of his good will and love in particular; No, the Soul meets first
with a general promise, holding out his good will in general, and the Soul
closes with this, a thing both good and true, as faithful in it self, and
worthy of all acceptati^n. This is it that we must first meet with, an
^ll-sufficient Savior able to save to the u^^ost all that come to him, and the
Souls ac^epting of that blessed Savior on the terms he is offered, this is
believing in him and trusting to him, as a complete Savior.

Now when the Soul has disburdened it se^ upon God, and set to it^ seal to the
truth o^ t^ promises in the Gospel for Salvation; If t^ Light of the Spirit
shine to discover this un^ it, that it has laid hold on his strength, who^
able to save to the utmost, then it becomes pe^swaded of his love in
particular, and this is r^ther the Sealing after believing, then believing
^self.

When once men have hazarded their So^ upon his word, and trusted in him, then
the may trust in him for all particulars: He the has given his Son for us,
will be not with him g^ all things: This therefore, is the continual ^course of
a Believer, from discovered emptine^ and insufficiency in himself, to travel
unto t^ fullness and strength of Jesus Christ, that h^ strength may be
perfected in weakness: Y^ when all things seem contrary, and his dispe^sation
writes bitter things against us, yet ou^ we to trust in him, Job 13. 15. There
is a pe^ of wilfulness and violence in Faith, that will lo^ allways toward his
word, whatever be thre^ned to the contrary.

Now from this Faith in God, flows a c^stant dependence and stayedness on
him, T^ are stayed on him, because they trusted in him: ^ Faith discovers in
God, such grounds, t^ it may lean its weight upon him without w^vering and
changing. It considers his po^er, his good will and his faithfulness; H^ able
to perform, he is willing to do it, and he is faithful, because he has
promised. His greatness and power is a high Rock, higher then we, that Faith
leads us unto: His love and good will in Jesus Christ, makes an open entry,
and ready access to that Rock; And faithfulness ingageth both to give a shelter
and refuge to the poor sinner. Would a Soul be any more tossed, would there be
any place for wavering and doubting, if Souls considered his excellent loveing
kindness and great goodness laid up and treasured with him, for these that
trust in him? Psalm. 36. 7. Who would not put their trust under the shadow of
his wings, and think themselves safe? Again, if his eternal power were
pondered, how he is able to effectuat whatever he pleases, what everlasting
Arms he has, that by a word supports the frame of the world, what he can do,
if he stretch out his Arm: And then, if these two immutable things, Heb. 6. 18.
His Promise and his Oath were looked upon, how he has engaged himself in his
Truth, and sworn in his Holiness; Would not a Soul ly safely between these
three? what strong consolation would such a threefold consideration yield?
Would any wind or tempest blow within these Walls mounted up to Heaven?

Stayedness on God is nothing else, but the fixedness of believing and
trusting, Psalm. 112. 7, 8. His heart is fixed, trusting in God, hi^ ^eart is
established. It is even the mature and ripe age of Faith: Faith while it is yet
in infancy, in its tender years, it neither can endure storms, nor can it
confirm us in them; But when it has sprung up and grown in that root of Jesse,
when it is rooted and established in Jesus Christ, then it establishes the
Soul: Faith abiding in him and taking root grows confirmed, as a Tree that
cannot easily be moved, and if you establish Faith, you shall be established.

There are two particulars which I conceive the trusting Soul is stayed on,
First, in the meditation of God, Secondly, in expectation from him of all good
things. When I say the Meditation of God. I take in both Contemplation and
Affection. The most part of men have but few thoughts of God at all, even those
who trust in him, do not consider sufficiently, what a One he is in whom they
believe. If Faith were vigorous and lively, it would put men to often thinking
on him, seeking to know him in his glorious Names, the mind would be stayed
upon this glorious object, as the most Mysterious and Wonderful One. How throng
are men's minds with their vanities? When they awake, they are not still with
God; The Meditation of him is a burden to them; Any other thing geteth more
time and thoughts. But Meditation adds Affection to Contemplation; Men may
think long upon the Heavens and their Course, but their Affections are not
ravished with them: But this is the Soul stayed on God, when the Souls desires
are toward the remembrance of his Name, then Affection stays the mind upon
what it pitcheth one: And certainly, the mind gives but passing looks,
constrained thoughts where the heart is not: Here is David's Meditation, Psalm.
1. My delight is in the law of the Lord. The Soul of a Believer should be
constant and fixed in the consideration of God, till he be wholly engaged to
admiration and wondering. O Lord how excellent is thy Name, Ps. 8. 1. And who
is like unto thee? You all say that you believe in God, and know his Power, you
know he is Good, he is Merciful, Just, Long suffering, Faithful, etc. But what
is all this knowledge but ignorance, and your light darkness, when it does not
press you to put your trust in his Name? You know; Nay, but you consider not
what you know: This is trusting, when the mind is stayed on what it knows,
when all the scattered thoughts and affections are called home, and united in
one, to be exercised about this comprehensive Object, The Lord our God. It is
not want of knowledge destroys you, but want of consideration of what you
know, and this is brutishness. Men's hearts do not carry Seal and Stamp of their
knowledge, because thoughts of God and his word are but as passengers that go
through a Land, as lightning going through the mind, but warms it not: And so
their practice carries no impression of it either. How base is it for those
who have God for their God, to be so ignorant of him. Would not any man
willingly travel about his own possessions Have you such a large portion
Believers, and should you be taken up with other vanities? Should your hearts
and minds be stayed on them more then the living God? There is a great vanity
and levity in men's minds. The Lord knows the thoughts of men that they are
vanity. There is a^ unsetledness of Spirit, we cannot pitch upon that on which
we may be stayed: And so all the spirits of men are in a continual motion from
one thing to another, for nothing gives complete satisfaction, and therefore
it must go and try one after another, to see if it can find in it, what i^
found not in the former: And such is the inconstancy of the Spirit, that it
licketh up its vomit and what thing it refused, it eats it up as it^ meat:
The time is spent in choosing and refusing, rejecting one thing, and taking
another and again returning to what you have rejected Thus are men tossed up
and down, and unstabl^ in all their ways, as a Ship without ballasting. Now
Faith and trusting in God is the ballas^ and weight of this inconstant Ship: It
is the Anchor to stay it from being driven to and fro. once men would pitch
upon this one Lord, wi^ has in himself eminently all the scattered perfections
of Creatures, and infinitely more if you would consider him, and meditate on
him, till your Souls loved him, would you not be ravished with him? Would you
not build your house beside him, and dwell in the meditation of his Name? This
would fix and establish you in duties, when I awake, I am still with thee. A
little searching and experience discovers emptiness in all beside, and
therefore is it, that the Soul removes sooner from such a particular Creature,
then it expected; but here is one that is past finding out; The more I search
and find, I find him the more above what I can search and find. The Creatures
are but painted and fair in men's apprehension and at a distance, but the near
enjoyment of them discovers the delusion, and sends a man away ashamed,
because he trusted. But the Lord God is, and there is no other, he is not as
waters that fail no liar, he is an everlasting Fountain, the more you dig and
draw, it runs the faster, he will never send any away ashamed that trust in
him, because they shall find more then they expected.

Therefore the Soul that is stayed on meditation of God, and knows him
certainly, will be fixed in expectation from him. Our expectation from the
Creatures changes, because it is often frustrat, disappoyntment meets it, it is
above what is in the Creature, and so it must meet with disappoyntment; But as
he is above our meditation, so is he far above our expectation: And if a man's
experience answer his hope, he has no reason to change his hope. The Lord has
often done things we looked not for, but we never looked for any thing
according to the grounds of the word, but it was done, or a better then it. He
does not always answer our limitations, but if he give Gold, when we sought
Silver, are we not answered? Are we disappoynted? There are three things that
use most to disquiet and toss men's spirits, sin and wrath, future events, and
present calamities: Faith establishes the Soul on God in all these, and
suffers it not to be driven to and fro, with these winds; It finds a harbor
and refuge in God from all these. If he be pursued by the avenger of blood,
Gods Wrath and Justice, here is an open City of Refuge that he may run to, and
be safe. If iniquities compass me about, yet I will not fear, but oppose unto
that great company, the many sufferings and obedience of Jesus Christ. My
conscience challenges and writteth bitter things against me, yet I have an
answer in that blood that speaks better things nor Abels. If sins prevail,
he will purge them away: His Mercy is above all my ^^n, and his Virtue and
Power is above my sin, He has promised and will he not do it? Oftimes men's
Souls are perplexed and tossed about future Events, careful for to morrow; this
is a great torment of spirit, it cutteth and divides it, puts a man to his
own providence as if there were no God. But he that trusts in God, is
established in this, his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord, he has committed
his Soul to him, and why may he not his body? He has nothing but his promise
for eternal Salvation, and may not that same suffice for temporal? He cares
for me (says Faith) why then should we both care about one thing? He has
given his Son for me, the most precious gift, which the world cannot match, and
will he not with him give all these lesser things? And thus the Believer
incloseth himself within the fathers love and providence, and i^ fixed, not
fearing evil tidings: For what tidings can be evil, seeing our Father has the
Sovereign disposing of all Affairs, and knows what is best for us? Present
dispensations often shake men and drives them to and fro: their feet slip, and
are not established, thou bid thy face, and I was troubled. But if you trusted
in God, and considered what is in him to oppose to all difficulties and
calamities, you would say, I shall not be moved, though the floods lift up
their voice. If you believed his love, would not this sweetten all his dealing?
He makes all work together for good. Sovereignty, Righteousness and Mercy, are
sure and firm ground to stand upon in all storms. You may cast Anchor at any of
those, and ly secure. It is the Lord, let him do what be pleases. This was
enough to quiet the saints in old times. Should he give account of his matters
to us? Sball the clay say to the potter, why is it thus? His absolute right by
Creation, makes him beyond all exception, do what he please. But beside this,
he is pleased and condescendeth to reason with us, and give account of his
matters, to testify to our Conscience, that he is righteous in all his ways. It
was the ground of Jeremiahs settling. Lam. 3. It is of the Lords mercy that we
are not consumed: It should have allayed and stayed Job, know this, thou art
punished less then thy iniquities deserve, who will set a time to plead with
him? Shall any be found righteous before him? And this might stop all men's
mouths, and put them in the dust to keep silence, seeing he has Law to do
infinitely more then he does, why should not we rather proclaim his Clemency,
then argue him so very hard? If to both those, you shall add the consideration
of his Mercy, that all his path^ are Mercy and Truth unto you, even when he
corrects most severely, so that you may bless him as well for Rods, as for
Meat and Clothing, and count your self blessed when you are taught by the Rod
and the Word the one speaking to the other, a^ the other sealing its
instruction: If you believ^ that it were a fruit of his Love, He chasteneth
^very son whom he loves, that because he will n^ let you depart from him, will
not let you sett^ upon a present world, and forget your Countre^ above;
therefore he compasses you about wit^ Hedges of Thorns to keep in your way:
And therefore he makes this world bitter and unpleasant, that you may have no
continuing City; If all this were believed, would not the soul triumph with
Paul, What can separat me from the love of God, not past things, for all my
sins are blotted out, and shall be remembered no more: not present things, for
they work to good, and are a fruit of his Love: not things to come, for that is
to come which shall more declare his love then what is past. Would not a Soul
sleep securely within the compass of this Power, this Love, and Faithfulness of
God, without fear of dashing or sinking.

Now judge whither a perfect peace may not flow from all this, may it not be a
perfect calm, when the Mountains that inviron, go up to Heaven? Not only does
the Soul trust in God, but God keeps the trusting Soul in peace. He is the
creator of peace, and the preservator of it, I creat peace, I keep him in
peace: The same power and virtue is required to the preserving of a thing, and
the first being of it. Our Faith and Hope in God, is too weak an Anchor to
abide all storms: Our cords would break, our hands faint and weary, but he is
the everlasting God who fail^^^ not, and ^^arieth not, he holds an invisible
grip of us, we are kept by his power to salvation, and we are kept by his power
in peace: Thy right band holds me, says David, and this helps me to pursue
thee. What makes believers inexpugnable, impregnable, is it their strength? No
indeed, but salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks: Almighty Power
is a strong wall though invisible, this power works in us and about us.

Now Believers, pity the world about you, that knows not this peace: when
they ly secure, and cry peace, peace; Alas, they are a City open without walls
as the plain field, there is no keeper there, nothing to hold off destruction.
Entertain your own peace, do not grieve the Spirit who has sealed it: If you
return to folly after he has spoken peace to you, I persuade you, you shall
not maintain this peace, there may be peace with God, but no peace in thy
Conscience, as long as the whoredoms of thy heart are to the fore: Thou may be
secure, but security is worse then fear. Know this, that continuing in a course
of sin, entertaining any known sin, shall trouble thy peace. If God have spoken
peace to thee, thou shall not lodge that enemy in peace, great peace have they
that love thy law. Obedience and delight in it does not make peace, but it is
the way of peace, and much meditation in the blessed word of God, is the most
excellent mean to preserve this peace, if it be secured with much
correspondence with Heaven by prayer, Phil. 4. 6, 7. If you would disburden
your hearts daily at the Throne of Grace, peace should guard and keep your
heart, and then your peace would be perfect indeed. But because your Faith is
here imperfect, your requests few and infervent, your follies and iniquities
many, therefore is this promised perfection a stranger to the most part of
Christians. Always what we want here, we must expect to have made up shortly:
Heaven is a Land of peace and all things are there in full age: Here all are in
minority, it is but yet night, but when the day shall break up, and the shadows
fly away, and the Prince of Peace shall appear and be revealed, he shall bring
Peace and Grace both with him, and both perfect. To him be praise and glory.

SERMON XIV.
Isai. 59. 20. And the Redeemer shall come unto Sion, to them that turn, etc.
DOctrines, As things have their Seasons and Times, every thing is beautiful in
its Season; So there is no word of Truth, but it has a Season and Time in
which it is beautiful: And indeed that is a great part of Wisdom, to bring
forth every thing in its Season, to discern when and where, and to whom it is
pertinent, and edifying, to speak such and such Truths. But there is one
Doctrine that is never out of Season; And therefore, it may be preached in
season and out of season as the Apostle commands. Indeed to many hearts it is
always out of season, and especially in times of Trouble and Anguish, when it
should be most seasonable, when the opportunity may commend the beauty of it;
But in it self and to as many as have ever found the power of it on their
hearts, it is always the most seasonable and pertinent Doctrine, I mean the
very subject matter of this Text; The news of a Redeemer to Captive sinners, it
is in it self such glad tidings and shines with so much beauty and splendour to
troubled sinners, that it casts abroad a luster and beauty on the feet of the
Messengers that carry it, Isai. 40. It is a Cordial in Affliction, whither
outward or inward, and it is withal the only true comfort of prosperity, it
allayeth the bitterness of things that cross us, and fills up the emptiness
of things that pretend to please us. It gives sweetness to the one, and true
sweetness to the other. Reason then, that should always be welcome to us,
which we stand always in need of, that it should always be new and fresh in our
Affection, which is always recent and new in its Operation and Efficacy toward
us. Other news, how great or good soever, suppose they were able to fill the
hearts of all in a Nation with Joy, yet they grow stale, they lose their virtue
within few days. What footsteps or remainder is of all the Triumphs and
Trophies of Nations, of all their Solemnities for their victorious success at
home and abroad. ^hese great news, which once were the subject of the discourse
of, and delight of many thousands, who report them now with delight; So these
things that may cause Joy and Triumph to some at this time, as they cannot
choose but make more hearts sad then glad, so they will quickly lose even that
Efficacy they have, and become tasteless as the white of an Egg to them that
are most ravished with them. But my Beloved, here is glade tidings of a
Redeemer come to Sion, to save sinners, which have no occasion of sadness in
them to any, but to them who are not so happy as to consider them or believe
them, and they are this day after many hundred, I may say thousand years since
they were first published, as green and recent, as refreshing to wearied Souls
as ever they were; Yea such is the Nature of them, and such an everlasting
spring of Consolation is in them, that the oftener they be told and the more
they be considered the sweeter they are, rhey grow green in old age, and bring
forth fruit, and are fat and flowrishing, and indeed it is the never dying
virtue, and everlasting sape of this word of life, that makes the righteous
so, Psalm. 92. 14. This word of a Redeemer at the first publ^shing, and for a
long time, was but like waters issuing out from under the threshold, and then
they came to the Ankles when it was published to a whole Nation, but still the
longer it swells the higher above Knees and Loins, till it be a great
inexhausted River, and thus it runs at this day through the world, and has a
Healing Virtue and a Quickening Virtue, Ezekiel. 47. And a Sanctifying Virtue,
verse. 9. 12. Now this is our errand to you, to invite you to come to these
Waters; If ye thirst, come to be quenched, if ye thirst not, ye have so much
the more need to come, because your thirst after things that will not profit
you, will destroy you; and your unsensibleness of your need of this is your
greatest misery.

That the words may be more lively unto us, we may call to mind the greatest
and deepest design that has been carried on in the world, by the Maker and
Ruler of the world, is the Marriage of Christ his Son with the Church: This was
primely intended when he made the world, as a Palace to Celebrat it into; This
was especially aimed at, when he joined Adam and Eva, in the beginning of time
together in Paradise, that the second Adam should be more solemnly joined to
the Church at the end of time, in the Paradise of Heaven. And this the Apostle
draws out as the Samplar and Arch-coppy of all Marriages and Conjunctions in the
Creatures, Ephesians. 5. Now this being the great design of God, of which, all other
things done in time, are but the footsteps and low representations. But the
great Question is, how this shall be brought about, because of the great
distance and huge disproportion of the Parties. He being the brightness of the
Fathers glory, and we being wholly ecclipsed and darkened since our fall; He
higher then the heaven of heavens, and we fallen as low as Hell into a dungeon
of darkness and misery, led away by sin and Satan, lying in that abominable
posture, represented in Ezekiel. 16. Not only unsuitable to engage his Love, but
fit to procure even the loathing of all that pass by.

Now it being thus, the words do furnish us with the noble resolution of the
Son, about the taking away of the distance, and the royal offer of the Father,
to make the Match hold the better, both flowing from infinite Love, in the most
free and ablolute manner can be imagined. The Sons Resolution, which is withal
the Fathers Promise, is to come into the world first, to Redeem his Spouse, and
so to Marry her, And the Redeemer shall come unto Sion, etc. The Fathers Offer
(that he might not be wanting to help it forward) is to Dispone by an
irrevocable Covenant, having the force of an absolute Donation; His Word and
Spirit to Christ and his Seed, to the Church even to the end of the world,
verse. 21.. As for me, this is my Covenant. The Son has done his part, and is
to express his infinite Love, infinite Condescendency, and stooping below his
Majesty: Now as for me, I will show my good will to it, in my infinite Bounty
and Riches of Grace to the Church, he has given himself for her, I will give
my Spirit, and thus it cannot but hold.

We shall speak a word then of these three; First, what Estate and Condition
Christ finds his Church into, out of which, she must be taken to be his
Spouse; Then what way and course is laid down by the Counsel of Heaven, to fill
up the infinite distance between Christ and sinners; and to close all, we shall
show you the suitableness of these Promises, and the wonderful fitness of this
Doctrine, to the Church at this time Isaiah Preached it, and at all times.

The first is supposed in the words, Redemption supponeth Captivity or Slavery,
Redemption of persons imports Captivity and Slavery of these persons, and
Redemption of other things that belong to persons, imports Sale, or
Alienation of our right to them. Of both, Personal Redemption is the greatest
and most difficult; Yet both we have need of, for our Estate and Fortune (so to
speak) is lost, For all men have sinned and come short of the glory of God,
Romans 3. 23. That inheritance of eternal Life, we have morgaged it, and given
away our right to it; the favor of God and the blessedness of Communion with
him, was Adams Birth^ right, and by a free Donation was made hi^ proper
Inheritance and possession, to be transmitted to his Posterity. But O how, for
how small a thing did he give it away, for a little taste of an Aple, he sold
his Estate; And both he and we may lament over it, as the King that was
constrained to render himself and all his Army for want of Water, when he
tasted it, for how small a thing (says he) have I lost my Kingdom? Then our
persons are in a state of Bondage, in Captivity and Slavery. Captives under the
Wrath of God, and Slaves or Servants to sin. There needed no greater difference
and difformity between Christ and us, then this, our servitude and bondage to
sin, which truly is the basest and most abominable Vassallage in the World.
The abasement of the Highest Prince, to the vilest servitude under the basest
Creature^ in his Dominion, is but a shadow of that loathsome and ugly posture
of our Souls. This servitude does in a manner unman us, and transform us into
Beasts. Certainly it is that, which in the Holy Eyes of God, is more loathsome
then any thing beside; He sees not that deformity in Poverty, Nakedness,
Sickness, Slavery, let a man be as miserable as Job on his Dung hill, it is
not so much that, as the unseen and undiscerned Posture and Habit of their
Souls, that he abominateth. Now what a Match is this, for the Highest and
Holiest Prince, the Son of the greatest King and Heir of all things? But if you
add to this Slavery, that Captivity under the Curse and Wrath of God, that all
men are shut up and enclosed in the prison of Gods faithful and irrevocable
Sentence of Condemnation, and given over by the righteous Judgment of God, to
be kept by Satan in everlasting Chains of Darkness: He keeps men now, by the
invisible Cords of their own sins, but these Chains of Darkness are reserved
for both him and men. Now indeed, this supperaddeth a great difficulty to the
business, the other may be a difficulty to his Mind and Affection, because
there is nothing to procure Love, but all that may enforce Hatred and Loathing:
But suppose his infinite Love could come over this stay, could leap over this
Mountain by the freedom of it; Yet there is a greater impediment in the way,
that may seem difficult to his Power, and it is the Justice and Power of God,
enclosing sinners and shutting them up for eternal Wrath, till a due
satisfaction be had from, or for them. You see then, how infinite the distance
is betwixt him and us, and how great the difficulty is, to bring about this
intended Union. Angels were sent with flamming Swords to encompass the Tree of
Life, and keep it from man, but man is environed by the Curse of the Almighty
God, the Justice, the Faithfulness, and the Power of God do Guard or set a
watch about him, that there is no access to him to save him, but by undergoing
the greatest danger, and undertaking the greatest Party that ever was dealt
withal, and the strictest and severest too.

This being the case then, the distance bei^ so vast, and the difficulty so
great, the d^stance being twofold, between his Nature a^ours, and between our
quality and his: an i^finit distance between his Divine Nature a^ our flesh,
and besides an extreme contrarie^ between the Holiness of his Nature, and the
finfulness of ours; Such a repugnancy, as the^ is no reconciliation of them.
You know wha^ Paul speaks of the Marriage of Christian with Idolaters: How
much more will it hol^ here? What communion can be between ligh^ and darkness,
between God and Belial? I^ it possible these can be Reduced to Amity, and
brought to so near an Union* Yet for all this it is possible; But Lo^ and
Wisdom must find out the way. Infinite Love, and infinite Wisdom consulting
together, What distance can they no^ swallow up? What difficulty can they no^
overcome?

And here you have it, the distance undertaken to be removed, both by the
Father an^ the Son, (for all this while we can do nothing to help it forward;
Whill the blessed Plot is going on, we are posting the faster to ou^ own
destruction) and this is the way condescended upon. First, to fill up that wide
gap between his Divine Spiritual Nature, and our Mortal fleshly Nature, it is
agree^ upon, that the Son shall come in our Flesh, and be made partaker of
Flesh and Blood with the Children. And this is meaned by this Promise; Tbe
Redeemer shall come to Sion. Which is plainly expressed by his own Mouth, Joh.
16. 28. I come forth from the father, and come into the world. There being such
a distance between his Majesty and our baseness, Love makes him stoop down and
humble himself to the very state of a ^ervant, Phil. 2. 7, 8. And thus the
Humiliation of Christ fills up the first distance, for Love and Majesty
cannot long dwell together, Nec in una sede morantur, Majestas and amor: But
Love will draw Majesty down below it self, to meet with the Object of it. This
was the great Journey Christ took to meet with us, and it is downward below
himself, but his Love has chosen it, to be like us, though he should be unlike
himself. How Divinely does the Divine Apostle speak of it, and the word was
made flesh, and he dwelt among us. Jo. 1. 14. And therefore the Children of
Adam, may in verity say of him what the Holy Trinity, in a Holy Irony spoke of
man, Lo he is become as one of us. It was a singular and eminent Privilege
conferred upon man in his first Creation, that the Trinity in a manner
consulted about him, let us make man after our image; But now when man has
lost that Image, to have such a result of the Counsel of the Trinity about it,
let one of us be made Man, to make up the distance between man and us; O what
Soul can rightly conceive it without Ravishment and Wonder, without an Ecstasy
of Admiration and Affection, that the Lord should become a Servant; The Heir of
all Things, be stripped naked of all; The Brightness of the Fathers Glory, be
thus Ecclipsed and Darkened: And in a word, that whi^ comprehends all Wonders
in the Creation who made all things, he himself made of Woman. And God became a
man, and a^ this out of his Infinite Love, to give a D^monstration of Love to
the world; So hig^ a Person abased, to exalt so base and low ^ we are; There is
a Mystery in this, a gre^ Mystery, a Mystery of Wisdom, to swallo^ up the
Understanding with Wonder; And Mystery of Love, to ravish the hearts of me^
with Affection, Depths of both, in the Empt^ness of the Son of God. The Prophet
doub^ing what was commanded, to seek a Sig^ whither in Heaven above, or in the
Depth beneath, but what he would not ask, Go^ gave in his great Mercy; Behold a
Virg^ shall conceive a son, and they shall call his na^ Immanuel: A sign indeed
from Heaven, at the height of Heaven, because he is God, and sign from the
Depth beneath too, because he ^ man, God with us, and so composed to u^^ Heaven
and Earth together: God with us, the he might at length bring us to be with
God. He became Immanuel, that he might make us Immelanu. If that was given as
Tidings of gre^ Joy, and as the highest and deepest sign of Lov^ and Favor, at
that time to uphold the fainting Church, O how much more may it now comfort us,
when it is not a Virgin shall conceive, but a Virgin has conceived; Man not
the Joy be increased, that the Redeemer not to come, but come already, and has
made up that wide separation, which was between us and him, by his low
condescendency to his Union with our Nature. This is one step of Advancement
toward that happy Marriage, that the whole creation seems to groan and travel
for, Romans 8. 22. But yet there is a great Difficulty in the way. We are in a
state of Captivity, we are prisoners of Justice, have sold our selves and our
happiness; And now our Natural Inh^^itance lies in the Lake of Fire and
Brimstone, heirs of Wrath, concluded under the Curse of God. And indeed this
was insuperable to all flesh; Nether Men nor Angels could ransom us from this:
The Redemption of the Soul of man is so precious, and the Redemption of the
Inheritance of man, (that is Heaven;) is so precious too, that none in Heaven
or Earth can be found, that can pay the price of them, so that it would have
ceased for ever; And here the great Design of Christ's Union with sinners, would
have marred and miscarried, if himself had not undertaken to overcome this too:
And indeed, as there could none be found to open the Seals of the Book of Gods
Decrees concerning his Church, none worthy in Heaven or Earth, but the Lamb,
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah: He prevailed to open it, and loose the Seals
thereof, Rev. 5. 3, 4, 5. So there could none be found in Heaven or Earth,
neither under the Earth, worthy to undertake or accomplish this work, or able
to open the Seals of the Book of Gods Curses, or to blot out the hand-writting
of Ordinances that was against us, or to open the prison of Death, into
which-man was shut up. None I say, has been found worthy, ^ prevailed, but the
Lamb of God and Lion ^ the Tribe of Judah: And therefore, the for and twenty
Elders that sit round about t^ Throne, and the four Beasts, or innumerab^
company of Angels, and Spirits of just m^ made perfect, fell down before the
Lamb, ev^ry one of them with Harps, and they sung new Song, worthy is the Lamb
that was slain receive power and riches and wisdom and streng^ and honor and
glory and blessing; For thou h^ redeemed us to God by thy blood. And every
Cre^ture says Amen to this, and consents to this, ^ do him homage: To him who
alone w^ worthy, and als willing to it, as worthy so it. I think the 16. Verse.
of this Chapter giv^ us a sensible representation of this. The pr^ceeding
Discourse from the beginning, holdin^ out the sinful and deplorable condition
of the people, and in them as a Type of the desper^ wickedness of all mankind,
and withal their d^sperat misery, for Paul Romans 3. makes the Application for
us; and from this, concludes a^ under sin, and so all under wrath, all guilt^
that every mouth may be stopped: Men wai^ing for Light, and behold Obscurity, for
Brigh^nesse, but walking in Darkness, groping for the Wall, like the blind
stumbling at noon day, as in the night, and in desolate places as dead men, all
roaring like Beasts, and mourni^ like Doves, when ever the apprehension of the
Terror of God enters. Now it is subjoyne^ Verse. 16 And he saw that there was
no man, etc* as if he had waited and looked through all the world, if any would
appear, either to speak or ^o for man, if any would offer themselves, and
^nterpose themselves for his Salvation. Therefore his own arm brought
Salvation, and his righteousness it sustained him. Therefore, the Son of God
steps in and offers himself, as if God had first assayed all others, and when
Heaven is full of wonder and silence, he breaks out in this, ^o, I come to do
thy will, Psa. 40. Since I have gotten a Body to be like sinners, I will also
come in their place, and I will give my Life a Ransom for them. And therefore
it is sub^oyned, The Redeemer shall come to Sion. He shall come Clothed with
Vengeance and Indignation as a Garment, against the enemies of his Church, Sin
and Satan, in Zeall and burn^ng Love to his designed Spouse; He shall
strengthen himself, and stir up his Might and Fury, against all that detain
her Cap^ive.

Now indeed, he is the only fittest Person for ^his Business in Heaven or
Earth, for he has ^oth right to do it, and he has only Might and Power to
accomplish it. He has right to the Redemption of sinners, because he is our
kinsman, nearest of blood to us. Now you know ^he right of Redemption belonged
to the kins^an, Lev. 25. 25.

And therefore, when the nearest kinsman ^ould not redeem Naomi and Ruths
parcel of ^and, Booz he did it as being next: And ^uitable to this, our Lord
Jesus when others as ^ear could not, and were not able: He has ^one it and
taken Men and Angels to witness, that he has first Redeemed us, that he mi^
Marry us, as Ephesians. 5. That he has purch^ed us to be his Wife; And indeed the v^
word imports this. Goel a Redeemer ^ Kinsman, passing under one word: So I^ I
know that my redeemer, or my kins-man live And because our Kins-man, therefore
n^ interested in our Redemption; For, for end he became partaker of flash and
blood with children, that be might destroy our greatest en^ Satan, and redeem
us, Heb. 2. 14. And besi^ he has right to Redemption, as the Church Husband,
because he must mediat between and all others, none can reach her, except
please, or prosecure a plea against her, as in case of the Wifes making a vow,
if her ^band consented not, it was void, Number. ^ But if he heard of it and held
his peace, it ^ confirmed. Now the Lord Jesus has kn^ this Deplorable Estate
we are Captives i^ And he has testified his utter dislike, of binding over our
selves to Death, and re^ing our selves to Satan: And therefore, ^ bondage in
which we are detained, is not, ^firmed and ratified, but he has right rem^ing
to Redeem us from the hand of all our ^mies. But then, he alone has Might ^
Power to do it, for God has laid help on ^ and made him able and mighty, to
save ^ the uttermost. It was not Gold or Silver, ^ Corruptible things; Suppose
the whole ^^ were turned into Gold or precious Stones ^ must give person for
person, and one person quivalent to all, his own Life, his own Bl^ for us; And
the value of this was infinitely raised by the stamp of his Divinity put upon
it: the King for the Servant, one that knew no sin for sinners, yea God for
man; This superads infinite Worth, and makes it an over-ransom, and
over-purchase, a ransom to buy our persons from Hell, a purchase to redeem us
to our Inheritance, Heaven that we had lost, and these two styles it gets;
(...).

Now you see the great Difficulty is overcome and taken out of the way, Christ
being made a Curse, has purchased a redemption from the Curse of the Law, Gal.
4. 13. But yet, there is another point of vast distance, I may say, con:
trariety and enmity between us and him; he is Holy and undefiled, all fair and
no spot in him; We are wholly defiled and depraved by sin, our Souls are become
the habitation of Devils, and a Cage of every unclean and hateful Bird; In a
word, he has not only our Enemies to overcome, but our own hearts to conquer,
and our Enmity to take away. This makes the widest separation from him. Now he
filled up much of the Distance, with his taking our flesh, and he removed the
great Difficulty, by dying in our flesh, his Humiliation to be a Man brought
him nearer us: And his further Humiliation, to be a Dying, Crucified and Buried
Man, brought him yet a step nearer us. But nearer he cannot come, for lower he
cannot be, except he were a sinner, which would mar the whole design, and take
away all the Comfort of his liknesse to us; Therefore, since he has come so
low down to us, it is suitable we be raised up one step to meet him: And so the
Exaltation of sinners shall make up all the Distance, and bring the two parties
to that long since designed, and long desired meeting. Now for this end and
purpose, the Son undertakes the Redemption of his Church, from sin and
ungodliness als well as wrath; And therefore you have that, which is expressed
as the Character of the redeemed in this Verse. It is exponed as the great point
or part of the Redemption it self, by the Apostle, Romans 11. The Redeemer shall
come to Sion, to turn all ungodliness from Jacob. And so his end was not only
to be partaker of our Nature, but to make us partakers of the Divine Nature;
And therefore the Father out of his Love to this business, he promises to
send his Spirit to dwell in our hearts, to make the Word sound in our Mouths
and Ears, and the Spirit to work in our hearts, and this Exaltation of sinners
to the participation of the Holy Spirit, together with Christ's Humiliation, to
partake of our Flesh makes up the full Distance, and brings Christ and his
Church to that holy patient Impatience, and longing for the day when it shall
be Solemnized in Heaven. The Spirit within us, says come, and the bride says
come, even so come Lord Jesus. And he waits for nothing, but the Completing
and Adorning of all the rest, that there may be one Jubilee for all and for
ever. Now I wish we could understand the Absolute and free Tenor of Gods
Covenant: There is much controversy speculative about the Condition of the
Covenant, about the Promises, whither Absolute, or Conditional; And there is
too much practical Debate in perplexed Consciences about this, how to find
something in themselves to fit and fashion them for the Redemption. But truly
if we would not disjoyn and dismember the Truth of God, but take it all
entirely as one great design of Love and Metcy revealed to sinners, and so
conjoyn the Promises of the Covenant into one bundle, we would certainly find
that it has the Voice of Jacob, though it seem to have the Hand of Esau; we
find an absolute, most free and inconditioned sense, when there is a
conditional strain and shadow of words in some places. The truth is, the
turning of souls from ungodliness, is not properly a Condition exacted from us,
as a Promise to be performed in us, and the chiefest part of Christ's
Redemption. And though some abuse the grace of God, and turn it into wantonness
and liberty: Yet certainly, this Doctrine that makes the greatest part of the
glad news of the Gospel, to be Redemption from sin and the pouring out of the
Spirit, is the greatest persuasive to a godly Conversation, and the most deadly
enemy to all ungodliness.

I thought to have spoken more of that third thing I proponed, but take it in a
word. This was always proponed to the Church, as the strongest Cordial, it was
given here as the greatest Consolation in all their long Captivity, that this
Redeemer was after wards to come, whose Virtue was then living, and present to
the quickening and comforting of souls. It was thought enough to uphold in a
most desperate strait. To us a child is born, Isai. 8. I wish we could take it
so; Certainly it was the Character of a Believer before Christ's coming, that he
was one that was looking and waiting for the Salvation of Israel, by this
Redeemer. But now we are surrounded with Consolation before and behind, Christ
already come, so that we may in joy say, lo this is our God, we have waited for
him; others waited and longed, and we see him: and Christ shortly to come again
without sin, to our Salvation. And what could be able to take our Joy from us,
if we had one Eye always back to his first coming, and another always forward
to his comeing again?

SERMON XV.
Isai. 64. 6, 7. But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our
righteousnesses as filthy rags, etc.
THis peoples condition aggreeth well with ours, though the Lords dealing be
very different. The Confessory part of this Prayer belongs to us now; And
strange it is, that there is such odds of the Lords Dispensations, when there
is no difference in our Cohditions: Always, we know not how soon the complaint
may be ours also. This Prayer was prayed long before the Judgment and Captivity
came one, so that it had a Prophesy in the bosom of it: Nay, it was the most
kindly and affectionat way of warning, the people could get, for Isaiah to pour
forth such a prayer, as if he beheld with his Eyes the Calamity, as already
come: And indeed it becomes us so to look on the Word, as if it gave a present
being to things als certain and sensible, as if they were really. What strange
stupidity must be in us, when present things, inflicted Judgments, committed
sins, do not so much affect us, as the forefight of them did move Isaiah.
Always, as this was registrat for the peoples use, to cause them still look on
Judgments threatened, as performed and present, and anticipat the day of
Affliction by repentance: and also to be a Pattern to them, how to deal with
God, and plead with him from such grounds of Mercy and Covenant Interest; So it
may be to us a warning, especially when sin is come to the Maturity, and our
secure backsliding Condition is with Child of sad Judgments, when the harvest
seems ripe to put the sickle in to it.

There is in these two Verses, a confession of their own sinfulness, from which
grounds they justify Gods proceeding with them; They take the cause upon
themselves, and justify him in his Judging, whither Temporal or Spiritual
Plagues were inflicted. In this Verse, they take a general survey of their
sinful Estate, concluding themselves unclean, and all their performances and
commanded Duties, which they counted once their righteousness: And from this
ground, they clear Gods dealing with them, and put their mouth in the Dust, and
so from the Lords Judgment they are forced to enter into a search of the Cause,
so much sin, and from discovered sin, they pronounce God righteous in his
Judgment: perceiving a great difference in the Lords manner of dealing with
them and their fathers, they do not refound it upon God who is righteous in all
his ways, but retort it upon themselves, and find a vast discrepance between
themselves and their fathers, Verse 5. And so it was no wonder that Gods
Dispensation changed upon them; God was wont to meet others, to show himself
gracious even to prevent strokes; But now he was wroth with them, Nay, but
there is good cause for it, They rejoiced and wrought righteousness, but we
have sinned. And this may be said in the general, never one needs to quarrel
God for severe dealing. If he deal worse with one then with another, let every
man look into his own bosom, and see reason sufficient, yea, more provocation
in themselves then others. Always in this Verse, they come to a more distinct
veiw of their loathsome condition. Any body may wrap up their repentance in a
general notion of sin, but they declare themselves to be more touched with it,
and condescend on particulars, yet such particulars as comprehend many others.
And in this Confession, you may look on the Spirits work, having some
Characters of the spirit in it. First, they take a general view of their
uncleanness and loathsome Estate by sin: Not only do they see sin, but sin in
the sinfulness of it and uncleanness of it. Secondly, They not only conclude
so of the Natural Estate they were born into, and the loathsomeness of their
many foul scandals among them: But they go a further length, to pass als
severe a sentence on their Duties and Ordinances, as God has done, Isai. 1.
and 66. The spirit convinces according to Scriptures Light, and not according
to the dark spark of Natures Light; and so that which Nature would have busked
it self with as its Ornament, that which they had covered themselves with as
their Garment, had spread their Duties as robs of Righteousness over their
sins to hide them, all this now goes under the name of filthiness and sin;
They see themselves wrapped up in as vile rags as they covered and hid;
Commanded Duties and manifest Breaches come in one Category: And not only is it
some of them which their own Conscience could challenge in the time, but all of
them and all kinds of them, Moral and Ceremohial, Duties that were most
sincere, had most Affection in them, all of them are filthy rags now, which
but of late were their righteousnesle. Thirdly, there is an universality; not
only of the Actions, but of Persons, not only all the Peoples or Multitudes
performances are abomination, but all of them, Isaiah and one and other, the
holiest of them come in, in this Category and Rank: we are all unclean, etc.
Though the people, it may be, could not join Holy Isaiah with themselves, yet
humble Isaiah will join himself with the people, and come in in one prayer: And
no doubt, he was als sensible of sin now, as when he began to prophecy; and
growing in holiness, he must grow also in sense of sinfulness: Seeing at the
first sight of Gods Holiness and Glory, he cried unclean, etc. Isai. 6. 5.
Certainly he does so now, from such a principle of access to Gods Holiness,
which makes him abhore himself in Dust and Ashes. Fourthly, They are not
content with such a general; but condescend to two special things, two
spiritual sins, to wit, Omission, or shifting of spiritual Duties, which
contained the substance of Worship: None calls one thee, few or none, none to
count upon, calls on thee, that is, cares for immediate access and
approaching unto God in prayer, and meditation, etc. Albeit External and Temple
Duties be frequent, yet who prays in secret; or if any pray, that cannot come
in count, the Lord knows them not, because they want the Spirits stamp on
them. This must be some other thing, nor the general conviction of sin which
the world has, who think they pray all their days; Here people who though they
make many prayers, Isai. 1. Yet they see them no prayers; and no calling on
Gods Name now. But Fifthly, to make the challenge the more, and the confession
more spiritual and complete, there is discovered unto them this ground of their
slacknesse and negligence in all spiritual Duties, None stirs up himself to
take bold one thee. Here is the want of the exercise of Faith: Faith is the
Souls hand and grip, Jo. 1. 12. Heb. 6. 18. 1 Timothy 6. 12. Isai. 27. 5. No body
a waketh themselves out of their deadness and security, to lay hold on thee:
Lord thou art going away, and taking goodnight of the Land, and no body is like
to hold thee by the Garment: No Jacobs here, who will not let thee go, till
thou bless them; None to prevail with thy Majesty, every one is like to give
Christ a free Pasport and Testimonial to go abroad, and are almost Gadarens, to
pray him to depart out of their Coasts. There is a strange lousnesse and
indifferency in men's spirits concerning the one thing necessary: Men ly by and
dream over their days, and never puts the Souls Estate out of question: None
will give so much pains, as to clear their interest in thee, to lay hold on
thee, so as they may make peace with thee. Now can there be a more ample and
lively Description of our Estate, both of the Land and of particular persons of
it. Since this must not be limited to the Nation of the Jews, though the
Prophet spoke of the generality of them: Yet no doubt, all mankind is included
in the first six-Verses; And any secure people may be included in the seventh
Verse, for Paul applies even-such like speeches, (Romans 13.) that were spoken,
as you would think, of David's enemies only; Yet the Spirit of God knowing the
mind of the Spirit, makes a more general use of their condition, to hold out
the Natural Estate of all men out of Christ Jesus.

But there are in these two Verses, other two things, beside the acknowledgment
of sin: First, the acknowledgment of Gods Righteousness in punishing them, for
now they need not quarrel God, they find the cause of their sading in their own
bosom, they now join sin and punishment together, whereas in the time of their
prosperity, they separated punishment from sin, and in the time of their
security in adversity, they separated sin from punishment; at one time making
bare confession of sin, without fear of Gods Justice, at another time, fretting
and murmuring at his Judgments, without the sense of their sin; But now they
join both these, and the sight and sense of Gods displeasure makes sin more
bitter, and to abound more, and to appear in the loathsome and provocking
nature of it, so that their acknowledgement has an edge upon it. And again,
the sight and sense of sin makes the Judgment appear most righteous, and
stops their mouth from murmuring. In the time of their impenitency under the
Rod, their language was very indifferent, Ezekiel. 18. 2. The fathers have eaten
sour graps, and the childrens teeth are set on edge. They have sinned and we
suffer; they have done the wrong and we pay for it: But it is not so now, verse
5. The Fathers have done righteousness in respect of us, and thou was good unto
them, but we are all unclean, and have sinned, and so we are punished.
Secondly, they find some cause and ground in God of their general defection,
not that he is the cause of their sin, but in a righteous way he punished sin
with sin. God hid his Face, denied special Grace and Influence; and so they ly
still in their security, and their sin became a spiritual plague. Or this may
be so read, none calls on thy Name, when thou hid thy Face from us, and when
thou consumed us because of our iniquities; And so it serves to aggravat their
deep security, that though the Lord was departing from them, yet none would
keep him and hold him; Though he did strike, yet they prayed not, Affliction
did not awake them out of security, and so the last words, Thou have consumed
us, etc. Are differently exponed and read; Some make it thus, as it is in the
Translation, Thou have hid thy face, and left us in a spiritual deadness, that
so there might be no impediment to bring on deserved Judgment; If we had called
on thee, and laid hold on thee, it might have been prevented, we might have
prevailed with God, but now our defense is removed, thou have given us up to a
spirit of slumber, and so we have no shield to hold of the stroke, thou have
now good leave to consume us for our sins: Another sense may be (Thou have
suffered us to consume in our iniquity, thou have given us up to the hand of
our sins:) And this is also a consequent of his hiding his Face, because thou
hid thy Face, thou lets us perish in our sins; There needs no more for our
Consumption, but only help us not out of them, for we can soon destroy our
selves.

First, sin is in its own nature Ioathsome and makes one unclean before God:
Sins nature is filthiness, vileness, so does Isaiah speak of himself, Chap. 6.
5. when he saw Gods Holiness; So does Job abhore himself, which is the
Affection which turns a man's face off ^ loathsome object, when he saw God,
Job 40. 4. and 42, 6. Look how loathsome our natural condition is holden out by
God himself, Ezekiel. 16. You cannot imagine any deformity in the Creature, any
filthiness, but it is there. The filthiness and vileness of sin shall appear,
if we consider first: Sin is a transgression of the holy and spiritual Command,
and so a vile thing; The Command is holy and good, Romans 7. And sin violateth
and goes flat contrary to the Command, 1 Job. 3: When so just and so equitable
a Law is given, God might have exacted other rigorous duties from us, but when
it is so framed, that the Conscience must cry out, all is equity, all is
righteous and more then righteous, thou might command more and reward none: It
is Justice to Command, but it is Mercy to Promise Life to obedience, which I
owe: What then must the offense be, against such a Just Command and so Holy. If
Holiness be the Beauty of the Creation, sin must be the Deformity of it, the
only spot in its Face.

Secondly, look upon sin in the sight of Gods Holiness and Infinite Majesty, and
O how heinous will it appear; And therefore no man has seen sin in the
vileness of it, but in the Light of Gods Countenance. As Isai. 6. 5. Job 40.
and 42. God is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity, he cannot look on it,
Hab. 1. 13. All other things beside sin, God looks on them as bearing some
mark of his own Image, all was very good, and God saw it, Genesis 1. and 2. Even
the basest Creatures God looks on them, and sees himself in them: But sin is
only Gods Eyesore, that his Holiness cannot away with it is most contrary unto
him. And as to his Sovereignty, it is an high contempt and rebellion done to
Gods Majesty, it puts God off the Throne, will take no Law from him, will
not acknowledge his Law, but (as it were) spitteth in his Face, and
establishes another God. There is no punishment so evil, that God will not own
as his work, and declare himself to be the Author of it, but only sin; his Soul
abhors it, his Holy Will is against it, he will have no fellowship with it:
It is so contrary to him, contradicts his Will, debaseth his Authority,
despises his Sovereignty, vilipendeth his Truth. There is a kind of
infinitness in it: Nothing can express it, but it self, no name worse then it
self to set it out; The Apostle can get no other Epithet to it, Romans 17. 13.
Sinful sin, so that it comes in most direct opposition unto God. All that is
in God, is God himself, and there is no Name can express him sufficiently; If
you say God, you say more then can be expressed by many thousand other words; So
is it here, sin is purely sin. God is purely Good and Holy, without mixture,
Holiness it self: Sin is simply evil, without mixture, unholiness it self;
Whatever is in it, is sin, is uncleanness: Sin is an infinite wrong, and an
infinite and boundless filthiness, because of the infinite Person wronged, it is
an Offense of infinite Majesty: and the Person wronged aggravateth the Offense;
If it be simply contrary to infinite Holiness, it must be in that respect,
infinite unholinesse and uncleanness.

Thirdly, look upon the sad Effects and Consequences of sin, how Miserable, how
Ruinous it has made man, and all the Creation, and how vile must it be? First,
Look on man's Native Beauty and Excellency, how Beautiful a Creature? But sin
has cast him down from the top of his Excellency: Sin made Adam of a Friend an
Enemy, of a Courtier with God, an open Rebel: was not man's Soul of more price,
nor all the world, so that nothing can exchange it? Yet has sin de based it,
and prostitute it, to all vile filthy pleasures, has made the Immortal Spirit
dwell on the Dunghill, feed on Ashes, catch vanities, lying vanities, pour out
it self to them, serve all the Creatures, where as it should have made them
servants, yea a slave to his own greatest enemy, to the ground he treads
upon: O what a degenerat Plant! It was a noble Vine once in Paradise, but sin
has made it a wild one, to bring forth sour Graps. What is there in all the
world could defile a man? Mat. 15. 20. Nothing that goes out or comes in, but
sin that proceeds out of the heart. Man was all Light, his Judgment shined in
to his Affections, and through all the Man: But sin has made all Darkness,
closed up the poor captive Understanding, has built up a thick Wall of gross
corrupted Affections about it, so that Light can neither get in nor out. The
Soul was like a clear running Fountain, which yielded fresh clear streams of
holy Inclinations, Desires, Affections, Actions, and emptied it self in the Sea
of Immense Majesty, from which, these Streams first flowed. But now it is a
standing putrified Puddle, that casts a vile stinck round about, and has no
issue toward God. Man was a Glorious Creature, fit to be Lord over the work of
Gods own Hands, and therefore had Gods Image in a special manner, Holiness and
Righteousness; Gods Nature, a piece of Divinity was stamped on man, which
outshined all Created Perfections; The Sun might blush when it looked on him;
For what was material Glory, to the Glory of Holiness and Beauty of Gods
Image? But sin has robbed poor man of this Glorious Image, has defaced man,
marred all his Glory, put on an hellish likeness on him: Holiness only
puts the differenc between Angels in Heaven and Devils in Hell: And sin only
has made the difference, between Adam in Paradise, and sinners on the cursed
ground, Romans 3. 23.

Secondly, sin has so redounded through man unto all the Creation, that it
has defiled it, and made it corruptible and subject to vanity, Romans 8. 20.
etc. So that this is a spot in all the Creatures Face, that man has sinned,
and used all as weapons of unrighteousness, so that now the Creature groaneth
to be delivered.

Thirdly, It has brought on all the Misery that is come on man; or that is to
come; It has brought on Death and Damnation as its wages, and the Curse of the
Eternal God, Gal. 3. 13. Romans 6. 23. How odious then an evil must it be, that
has so much evil in it, yea all evil in the bosom of it: Hell is not evil in
respect of sin, for sin deserves Hell: it has ruined man, and made all the
beautiful order of the Creation to change.

Fourthly, It separateth man from God, which is worst of all; And this is
included in the Text, We are all as an unclean thing, or man, as a leprous man
set apart, because of pollution, that may not come to the Temple, or worship
God, so has iniquity separated between God and us, Isai. 59. 2. And O how sad
a Divorcement is this, it makes men without God in the world, in whom we live
and move and have our being, in whose favor is life, and at whose right hand
are pleasures for evermore. Now poor man is made Miserable, deprived of his
Felicity, which only consisted in enjoyment of God: Sin as a thick partition
Wall is come in between; Enimity also is come in, and divides old friends,
Ephesians. 2. 14, 15, 16, 17. And now no heavenly, or comfortable Influence can break
through: The Night of Darkness is begun, which must prove everlasting, except
the partition Wall be removed, all must wither and decay as without the Sun.

Fifthly, Look on the Price paid for sin, on the cleansing that washes it
away, and you may see unspeakeable deformity and vileness in it: The
Redemption of the Soul is precious, Silver and Gold and precious Stones will
not do it, that would be utterly contemned: What (says God) presumptuous
sinner, will thou give me a farthimg in payment of a sum, which all the world
sold at the dearest, would not discharge, Psalm. 49 7, 8. 1 Pet. 1. 18. It is no
corruptible thing, but the blood of the son of God. O what must the Debt be,
when the price is so infinite? The Son of God must die; Nay, It is not sacrifice
or offering, lo, I come to do thy will, it is Christ himself that is the
Ransom, Psalm. 40. 6, 7. And it is not much Soap or Nitre, it is not much
repentance and tears that will wash away this filthiness, No; it is of a
deeper die, it is crimson ingrained filthiness, Jer. 2. 22. And Isai. 1. 6.
Blood of bulls and goats cannot do it, but only the blood of the immaculat
Lamb, offered up by himself, Heb. 10. 4, 5. the blood of him who, by the
eternal Spirit offered up himself without spot unto God, Heb. 9. 14. What must
sin be, that must have such a Fountain opened for it? It must be strange
uncleanness, when the Blood of Christ only can cleanse it, Zech. 13. 1.

We all, etc.] Mark, Secondly, sin has gone over us all, and made all mankind
unclean, Romans 3. 22. and 10. Every one of Adams posterity is born unclean, For
who can bring an clean thing out of an unclean, Job 14. 4: Consider first, how
sin defaced innocent Adam, how one sin made him so vile, and spoiled him of the
Divine Nature, and so the root was made unclean, and the branches must follow
the root, and so are we all born and conceived in sin, Plal. 51. 5. We carry in
us Original Corruption, flowing from the first actual sin of Adam, and this
makes poor Children before they do good or evil, to be abominably vile in Gods
sight, even as the Child is set out, Ezekiel. 16. Every one comes of evil
Parents, all come of Adam the Rebel: What a loathsome sight would a Child be to
us so described, cast out in the open field to the loathing of its person in
the day it is born: And what must it all be before God, who is of purer eyes
then to behold sin? Secondly, Unto all this we have added innum^rable actual
transgressions, as so many filthy streams flowing out at the menbers, from the
inward puddle of Original Corruption; And so how much more vile are we all, nor
infants can be, or Adam was in the day he was cast out of Paradise? And thus
Romans 3. from verse. 10. are the Branches set down, in Word, Thought and Deed, so
that all the Incli^ations and Motions and Actions of the man are only evil
continually. Every man shall find his Count past counting: One days faults
would weary you, but what will your whole life do? Known sins are innumerable,
what must unknown be? Every man's heart is like the troubled Sea, that casts
up mire and dirt daily, and cannot be at rest. The heart is daily flowing and
ebbing in this Corruption, it comes out daily to the borders of all the
Members; And there are some high spring Tides, when sin abounds more. When in
one Member of the Tongue a world of evil is, What can be in all the Members?
And what in the Soul, that is more capable then all the world? Well then, every
man has sinned in Adam, and has sinned also in his own person, and sealed
Adams first rebellion, by so many thousand Actions like it: Every man has
approven the sin that first ruined man, and made himself much more loathsome
nor Adam was: Therefore all mankind may say, we all are as an unclean thing.
Now from all this, we we would gladly discover unto you, what yo^ condition is
by sin; If the Lord would shin^ how vile would you be? Always we m^st declare
this unto you in the Lords name, you a^ all unclean, not only born in sin and
iniquit^ not only have you a body of Death Within you^ that has all the
Members, but all these Members have one time or other acted and broug^ forth
fruit unto Death: How vile then mu^ you be in Gods sight? It is a strange love
the you have to your selves, that you cannot apprehend how God can hate you?
But if h^ find sin in you, wonder rather how he can loo^ upon you: We would
then have you to kno^ this, that there can be no fellowship betwee^ God and you
in your Natural Esta^e: Amen cannot inhabit a vile persons house, ^ more can
God enter in your Souls. There is a^ absolute necessity of washing, before you
can ^^ his House and Temple. Has that one sin o^ Adam made that Glorious
Person so deformed, that he could not look on himself, bu^ cover himself; And
has it been of so defiling a Nature, that it has redounded in all the
Posterity: And as unclean things under the Law, defiled all they touched, so
has tha^ sin subjected all the Creatures to Corruption? O then imagine what an
unspeakeabl^ defilement must be on us all, who are no^ only guilty of Adams
sin, but of many thousands beside. If one sin have so much loathsomnese in it*
what must so many out ^^ number, united in one person, even as in u^ all? No
unclean thing can enter in Heaven above: Know this for a truth, you cannot see
God^ Face in the case you are born into. You know nothing of sin, who wonder
that any should go to Hell. No, if you knew any thing of sin, you would wonder
that ever God should look on such cast out in the open Field, in their blood.

Next, You must know the insufficiency of all things imaginable, to wash away
sins filthiness, except the Blood of Christ. Since you are unclean, do you not
ask, how shall we be washed? Indeed many have an easy answer, and pass it
lighty. The multitude know no way to cleanse in, but the Tears of Repentance
and Mourning; And so, many think themselves clean, when they run and pour out a
Tear as Esaw did for the blessing. But what says the Lord? Though thou wash
the with Nitre, and take thee much Soap, yet thine iniquity is marked. Can such
an ingrained uncleanness, can such an infinite spot in the immortal Soul, be
so lightly dashed out? Many think Baptism cleanses them, but was not this
people Circumcised, as ye are baptized? And Peter tells us, it is not the
washing of Water, 1 Pet. 3: 21. Sacrifice and Offering will not do it: This
people thought sure they had satisfied God, when they brought a Lamb, etc. but
all this is abomination. Would not many of you think your selves cleansed from
sin, if you offered all your Substance and the Fruit of your Body for the sin
of your Soul? Nay, but you must see an absolute necessity of the opened
Fountain, of Christ's Blood, that cleanses from all sin.

Then we would have you abhor you^ selves in Dust and Ashes, see nothing in
all the Creation so vile, as you; Look o^ sin in the sight of Gods Face, and
how unholy will it appear? There are many sins, little ones, that in our
practice pass for venial and uncontrolled: But look on the filthy loathsome
Nature of all sin, and hate the least offense, for it has a kind of
infiniteness in it, and blotteth the Soul, defiles the person. How great a
necessity is there of continual application to the Fountain, of dwelling beside
it, that you may wash daily. David's so often repeated, and inculcated prayer,
Wash me, cleanse me, etc. Psalm. 51. Declares that he has apprehended much
uncleanness in sin, that it needs so many applications of the precious
Blood. And you who have come to Jesus and are clean, O how much owe you to free
Grace, that past by you in your blood, and said, Live, it is a time of love.
How strange is it, that Glorious Majesty comes to own Deformity, and comes to
cloth it with his own Garments: Praise the virtue of that Blood, that is more
precious nor the Blood of Bulls and Goats, that can so thoroughly purge, as you
shall have no more Conscience of sin.

Unclean sinners wash you, make you clean, there is a Fountain opened, though
sin were as Scarlet, it can perfectly change the color of it. If you wash not
while the Fountain is open, it will quickly be sealed on you, and then it shall
be said, when the Angel swears by him that lives for ever, that time shall
be no more, then shall it be said, let him that is unclean, be unclean still.
Now cleansing is offered in the Gospel, if you will love your loathsomeness so
well, as not to dip your selves in this Fountain, then let the unclean be so
still: Your repentance will never change your color, though you should melt in
sorrow: And therefore you who have found a way to be saved otherways nor by
Jesus Christ, you shall be deceived; Your Tears and Mourning that you might
have had, though Christ had never come in the world, is all you use to speak
of, and build your hope on: and if you speak of Christ, it is in such terms as
to buy him by such repentance, so that the truth is, you use but Christ's Name
as a shadow, you make no use of him: He needed not to have come in the world,
for many of you could have done als well without him. But as many of you as
cannot find cleansing, who see filth increase by washing, come to Christ Jesus,
and say, If thou will, thou can make me clean, Math. 8. 2. Nothing beside
Jesus can do it, believe his sufficiency; nothing beside him Will do, believe
his willingness; for, for this cause he is an opened Fountain that all may
come and draw.

SERMON XVI.
Isai. 64. 6, 7. -- All our righteousnesses are as filthy rags, and we all do
fade as a leaf, and our iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away.
NOt only are the direct breaches of the Command uncleannesle, and men
originally and actually unclean, but even our holy Actions, our commanded
Duties: Take a man's civility, religion and all, his universal inherent
Righteousness, all are filthy rags: And here the Church confesses nothing,
but what God accuses her of, Isai, 66. 3. and Chap. 1. Verse. 11, 12, 13. etc.
This people was much in Ceremonial and External Duties, and therefore they
cried, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, as if this would have
outcryed all their other sins: therefore were they proud, and lords in their
o^wn estimation and innocent, Jer. 2. 31, 35. They thought the many good
services they did to God, might compense all their wrongs Mic. 6. 6, 7. They
gave a price to Justice for their sins, even a confeslion of it by offering a
Lamb, etc. and a purpose to amend. But lo, what sense the Prophet has of all
this, Lord all our righteousness is filthy likewise; Albeit we have paid the
Debt of sins with Duties, yet now we see all these are sins themselves, and
must have another sacrifice, so that all matter of boasting is now removed, and
we are stripped naked of all righteousness; We covered our filthiness before,
with Duties, now both the one and the other is filthy. We would look upon two
sorts of righteousnesses, the natural man's and the converted man's, upon the
ones Civility and fair Profession, and upon the others real or true Grace in
discharge of Duties, and we shall find good reason to conclude both the one and
the other under filthiness, so that there is no ground of boasting, no
inherent righteousness can make us accepted before God.

First then, whatever men can do from Natural Principles, all the flower and
perfection of men's Actions, both civil and religious, is but abominable before
God, as long as their persons are unjustified. Every performance is defiled by
the uncleanness of the person. And therefore God hears not sinners, Joh. 8.
That is unjustified sinners, though they pray much, yet God hears them not.
And this is lively expressed by Hag. 2. 12, 13, 14. As the Priests Holy
Garments and Flesh could not make Bread or Pottage holy, but the unclean body
could make these unclean; So this Nations and Peoples performances and Holy
Duties, could not make them Holy, and their Persons clean; But their unclean
persons and actions made all their performances unclean: The solemn meeting and
sacrifice, etc. could not make them accepted, but their unclean persons, made
their solemn meetings and religious Duties vile and abominable in Gods sight:
And thus to the unclean all things are unclean, even their mind and conscience,
Tit. 1. 15. The unbelieving man who is born unclean, and defiled with so much
original corruption, and so many actual transgressions, defiles all things he
touches; As a dead body, or a leprous garment under the Law, made all unclean
it touched, and nothing could make it holy by touching of it. So all your
Civility, all your Profession will never contribute to the cleansing of your
Person; And your persons shall defile all your most clean actions. God loves
not that stock of Adam, and all that grows on it, must be hateful; He is only
well pleased in Jesus Christ, and with those who are transplanted out of rotten
Adam, into the true Vine Jesus, it is such fruit only that can be acceptable:
Therefore until you be sprinkled with clean water, and made clean according to
the new Covenant way, you cannot please God. Believe this, your sins and your
duties are one, your Oaths and your Prayers are in the same account with God.
What have you then to build upon, when all this is removed? You must once be
stripped naked of all coverings; and will not your nakedness then be great: The
Pharisee went away unjustified, and the poor repenting sinner justified. What
was the reason? There are not many of you have such a fair venture for Heaven
as he had, so many Prayers, Fastings, Alms, to ground your Hope on. Nay, but
all this would never justify his person, because once he was unclean, come of
Adam, and had contracted more uncleanness, and all that is like the leprous
Garment defiling all that comes near it; So that whatever has any dependence
on a son of Adam, must contract filthiness. Now I ask your Consciences, have
you so many specious coverings to adorn your self with? Is not your outside
spotted, and not so clean, as the young civil Man and the religious Pharisee?
Certainly, no, and yet you have no other ground to plead the acceptance of
your persons upon, but only this, your Prayers and Tears, or some such Duty
performed by you. Well, all is uncleanness, since your persons were once
unclean, no Soap nor Nitre can wash it, no holy flesh make it holy, no good
wishes nor duties can make it acceptable. Did not this people think of their
Duties as much as you do? And had more reason so to do; for our Congregations
have not so much form of godliness as they had, and yet God solemnly
protests to them, that all their works were defiled, even these which they
took to wash themselves with, so your repentance and tears must be als filthy,
as the ^^n you would wash by it.

Secondly, the uncleanness of men's practice makes unclean performances,
unclean hands make unclean prayers, Isai. 1. 15. When men go on in sin, and use
their members as instruments of unrighteousness against God, and guiltiness
is above their head unrepented of, and unpardoned, then whatever the members
act for God in religious Duties, it must be also abominable, for will God take
prayers from such a mouth, tha^ cursing comes out of? Isai. 3. 10, 11, 12
Shall sweet water come out of one Fountain with bitter? Or can a Fig Tree bear
both Thistles and Graps: Certainly, profane Conversation must make unclean
profession. And therefore your coming to the Church and Ordinances, your
praying in your Families or such like, must of necessity be defiled, since out
of the same mouth comes cursing, railing, lying filthy speeches: Your tongues
are so often employed in Gods dishonor, to blaspheme his Name; to slander your
Neighbors, to reproach the Saints, that all your prayers must be of the same
stamp, and als bitter as the other stream of your actions: When you stretch
forth your hands to make many prayers, to take the Bread and Wine, shall not
God hide his Face from such hands, as are unclean with many abominations, some
murdering, some abusing their Neighbors, some Sabbath-breaking, some
filthiness, how often have your hands and feet served you to evil turns; And
therefore your good turns will never come in remembrance. Nay, believe it, you
cannot be heard of God while you cover any offense. And this I may say in
general, even to the Saints; any known sin given way to, and entertained
without controlment, without wrestling against it, hinders the acceptance of
your solemn approaches. If your heart regard iniquity, shall God hear? Ps. 66.
18. No, believe it, the least sin that you may judge at first venial, and then
give it toleration and indulgence, shall separat between Gods Face and you:
Your prayers are abomination, because of such an idol perked up in the heart
beside God, that gets the Honor and Worship due to him, and God must answer
you according to it, Ezekiel. 19. 1, 3, 4. God will not be enquired of such as
give allowance to sin, Ezekiel. 14. 2, 3, 4. And on the other hand, no sin how
great and heinous soever can hinder Gods gracious acceptance, when Souls fly
unto Jesus and turn their back upon sin, or gives it no heart allowance: And
to the multitude I say, all that you do or touch in a Duty must be defiled,
because your whole way is unclean, Hag. 2. 12, 13, 14. Think you to sin all the
week through, and worship God on the Sabbath, will you lie, swear, commit
adultery, rail and curse, and come and stand before me, says the Lord? No
certainly, you cannot be accepted; And will you hate reformation in your lives,
and yet take his Covenant in your mouth, and call your selves by his Name,
Christians? And shall not God challenge you for that als much, as for your
swearing, and cursing, and lying, etc. Indeed the Lord puts all in one Roll,
and you need not please your selves in such things, Psalm. 50. 16. Jer. 7. 9,
10. For it is all one to you to go to Tavern to drink, and come to the Sermon,
to blaspheme Gods Name, and call on it, because the profanity of the one
defiles the other, and the holiness of the other, cannot make you holy.

Thirdly, the natural man's performances want the uprightness, reality and
sincerity that is required, it is but a painted Tomb, full of rottenness
within, it is but a shadow without substance, for he wants the spiritual part
of worship, which God cares for, who will be worshipped in spirit and truth,
Joh. 4. 23. Now what is it that the most part of you can speak of, but an
outside of some few duties, soon numbered. You hear the preaching, and your
hearts wander about your business: You hear, and are not so much affected, as
you would be to hear some old story, or fable told you: A stage play acted
before this generation, would move them more then the Gospel does: So that
Christ may take up this Lamentation; We have piped to you, and you have not
dan^ed, lamented to you, and you have not mourned. You use to tell over some
words in your prayers, and are not so serious in any approach to God, as in
twenty other things of the world. Whatever you plead of your hearts rightness,
and have recourse to it, when your conversation cannot defend you, yet your
hearts are the worst of all, and have no uprightness toward God, for you know
that what Duties you go about, it is not from an inward principle, but from
Education or Custom, or constraint. Are you upright, when you are forced for
fear of censure to come here, or to pray at home? Is that sincerity and
spiritual worship? And for the more polished and refined professors, you have
this moth in your performances, and this flea to make your Ointment to stink,
that you do much, to be seen of men, therefore what little fervor of spirit is
in secret Duties; There you may measure your altitude and your life. And O how
wearisome, how lifeless are secret approaches, you would not have many errands
to God, if you thought no body looked upon you. And for spirituality, it is a
Mystery in all men's practice: Who directs his Duty to Gods Glory? If you get
some flash of liberty, you have your desire; But who misseth Gods presence in
Duties, which a world will approve? Who go mourning as without the Sun, even
when you have the Sunshine of Ordinances and walks in the light of them?

And fourthly, though your performances had uprightness of heart going alongs,
and much affection in them, yet all are filthy, because of want of Faith in
Jesus Christ. When you make your Duties a covering of your sins, and think to
satisfy Gods Justice for the rest of your faults, by doing some point of your
Duty, then it cannot choose but be polluted in his sight. And this very thing
was the cause of Gods rejecting the Jews righteousness, even because they did
not look to the end of the Mystery, Christ Jesus: Did not pull by the vail of
Ceremonies, to see the Immaculat Lamb of God slain for sin. And therefore does
the Lord so quarrel with them, as if he had never commanded them to do such
things, Isai. 1. 12, 13. Who has required these things at your hands? bring no
more vain oblations, all is Abomination. Even as God should say to you, when
you come to the Church; who required you to come? Who commanded you to come to
hear the Preaching? What have you to do to pray? What warrant have you to
communicate? All your Praying, Hearing, Communicating, is Abomination; who
commanded you to do these things? Would you not think it a foolish Question?
You would soon answer, that God himself commanded you, and will he not let us
do his bidding. Indeed this people, (no doubt) have said so in their heart, and
wondered what it meant. Nay, but here is the Mystery, you go about these
commanded Duties not in a commanded way, and so the Obedience is but Rebellion:
You bring Offerings and Incense, and think that I am pacified when you bring
Alms, you judge you have given me a recompense, whereas, all that is mine, and
what pleasure have I in these things? I never appointed you Sacrifices for this
end, but to lead you in to the knowledge of my Son, which is to be slain in the
fullness of time, and by one offering to perfect all. I commanded you to look on
Jesus Christ slain, in the slain Lamb, and so to expect Remission and Salvation
in him; But you never looked to more nor the Ceremony, and made that your
Savior and Mediator: And therefore it is all Abomination: When you slay a
Lamb, and offer Incense, it is all one thing, as to cut off a Dogs neck, or
kill a Man; So may the Lord say to this Generation, I command you to pray, to
repent and mourn for sin; to come and hear the Word, but withal you must deny
all these, and count your selves unprofitable servants, you must singly cast
your Souls burden on Christ Jesus. But now, (says the Lord) who commanded
your repentance, for when you sit down to pray, or come in public to confess
sin before the Congregation, you think you are washen; When you have said, you
have sinned, and if you come to the length of Tears and Sorrow, Oh then sure
you are pardoned, though in the mean time you have no thought of Jesus Christ,
and knows no use of him. Therefore, faith the Lord, who commanded you to do
these things? You think you have satisfied for your sin, when you pay a
penalty, but who requires this? I will reckon with you for these, als well as
the sins you pray and mourn for, because you do not singly look to Christ
Jesus, Now, if he had never come to the world, your ground of confidence would
not fail you; For you might have prayed als much, mourned and confessed, and
promised amendment, and so you past by the Son of God, in whom only the Father
is well pleased. Think then upon this, whatever you make your righteousness,
there needs no other thing to make it filthy, but to make it your
righteousness: Your confidence in your good heart to God, prayer day and
night, and such like, is the most loathsome thing in Gods Eyes: Except you come
to this, to count your prayers, as God does, among your oaths, to count your
solemn Duties, among profane scandalous Actions, as the Lord does, Isai. 1.
and 66. 3. Then certainly, you do adorn your selves with them, and cover your
nakedness of other faults, with such leaves as Adam did, but you shall be more
discovered; Your Garment is als filthy, as that it hides, even because you
make that use of it to hide your sin, and cover it.

Next, The Lords Children have no ground of boasting either, from their own
righteousness; The holiest Saint on Earth must abhore himself in Dust and
Ashes, and holy Isaiab joyneth himself in with a p^ofane people: When he comes
to God to be justified, he comes among the ungodly, he brings no
righteousness with him, he comes in among them that work not. Now you shall
find good ground why it must be so. First, There are ordinarily many blemishes
in our holiest Actions* spots on our cleanest Garment, often formality eats
up the life of Duties, and presents a Body without a Soul in it: You sit down
to pray out of custom, morning and evening: And if there were no more to prove
it, this may suffice: When pray you but at such times? You have an ordinar, and
goes no^ by it, no advantage is taken of Providence, no nec^ssity constrains
when occasion offers; and so it is like the worlds appointed hours. How
great deadness and indisposition creeps in, so that it is the ordinary
complaint, yea, all prayers filled with it, scarcely any room for other
petitions, because of the want of frame for prayer it self: The word is heard
as a discourse, and on whom has it operation to stir up Affections, either of
joy or of trembling? Christians, you come not to hear God speak, and so you
meet with empty Ordinances, God is not in them. How often do crooked and
sinister ends creep in, and bias the Spirit; Men ask to spend on their lusts,
and to satisfy their own ambition; Some would have more Grace to be more
Eminent; or to have a more pleasant Life; And this is but the seeking to spend
on your lusts. If Affection run in the Channel of a Duty, it is often muddy,
and runs through our Corruptions: Liberty in Duties is principled with carnal
Affection and Self-love. Will not often the Wind of Applause in company, fill
the sails, and make your course swifter and freer, nor when you are alone. And
often much love to a part^cular, makes more in seeking it. And that which is a
Moth to eat up and consume all our Duties, is conceit and self confidence in
going about them, and attributing to our self after them. It is but very rare,
that any man both Acts from Jesus Christ as the principle, and also puts
over his work on Christ singly as the end. Alas too often do men draw out of
Christ's Fullness and raise up their own glory upon it, and adorn themselves
with the spoils of his honor; For we use to pray from a habit of it, and go to
as men acquainted with it, and when we get any satisfaction to our own minds, O
how does the Soul return on it self, and goes not forward as it goes; It is
so well pleased with it self, when it gets liberty to approach, that it does
not put all over on Jesus, and take shame to it self. As long as there is a
body of Death within, holiness cannot be pure and unmixed; Our Duties run
through a dirty Channel, and cannot choose but contract filth; While sin lodges
under one roof so near Grace, Grace must be in its exercise marred, and
therefore the holy Apostle must cry, Romans 7. 19. The good that I would, I do
not, but the evil which I would not, that I do. And Verse 24. O wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?

Secondly, Though there were not such blemishes, and spots in the face of our
righteousness, yet it is here in a state of imperfection, and but in its
minority, and so must be filthy in the Lords sight. It was perfect Hol^nesse
according to the perfect Rule of Gods Law, that Adam was to be justified by,
according to the Covenant of works, exact obedience, not one wanting, or else
all that can be done, came short of righteousness: One breach brings the
curse on. All obedience (if there be a failing in a little) will not bring the
blessing on; He that does all, lives; and he that does not all, is cursed. And
therefore Christians, all you do cannot commend your persons to God, for if he
examine you by the rule of the Law, O how shor^ will the holiest come? Paul and
Isaiah dare not come in such a reckoning: Neither is all obeyed, nor any in the
measure and manner commande^. And therefore, you might cry down all your
performances, when you could challenge them with no particular blot, with this,
All is short of the command, and infinitely short. I have been aiming at
holiness so long, I have stretched out my strength, and what have I attained?
It may be, I have outstriped equals, and there seems to be some distance
between me and others; Nay, but the command is unspeakably more before me, nor
I am before others. I have reached but a span of that boundless perfection of
holiness; It is but a grain weight of the eternal weight of grace, and I must
forget it, and stand before God, as if I had Iost mind of duties, appear in his
presence, as if I had attained nothing; for the length that is before my hand,
drowneth up all seize.

Thirdly, Nay, but put the case man were perfect, yet should he not know his
soul, but despise his life; The Lord puts no trust in his servants, and his
Angels he charge with folly, and the Heavens are not clean in his sight, how
then must man be abominable, that has his foundation in the dust, and drinks
in iniquity like water? How should God magnify him? or he be righteous that is
born of a woman? Job 25. 4, 6. and 15. 14, 15. and 4. 18, 19. Job was a great
length in the sight of his own vileness, and Gods holiness, when he saw this,
Though I were perfect, yet I would not know it, but despise it, I would not
answer him, though I were righteous, Chap. 9. 14, 15, 21. So unspeakably pure
and clean is his Holiness, that all created holiness has a spot in it before
his, and evanisheth, as the Stars disappear when the Sun rises, which seem
something in the darkness. The Angels holiness, the Heavens glory, is nothing
to him, before whom the Nations are as nothing, so that it is all the wonder of
the world, that ever God stooped so far below himself, even to righteous Adam,
as to make such a Covenant with him, to account him righteous in obedience.
What is man that thou should magnify him? When I look to the Heavens, and the
Sun, the work of thine hands, Lord, what is man? What is innocent man in his
integrity, that thou should magnify him, to give him a place to stand before
thee, magnify him to be a party-contracter with thy glorious Majesty? Psalm. 8.
4, 5, 6. But now when this Covenant is broken, it is become impossible to a son
of Adam, ever to stand before God in his perfection, for how should man be
righteous that is born of a woman? Job 14. 15. Since we once sinned, how should
our righteousness ever come in remembrance? Therefore has God chosen another
way to cover man's wickedness and righteousness both, with his own
righteousness, his Sons Divine-humane righteousness, which is so suited in his
infinite wisdom for us: It is a man's righteousness, that it may agree with men,
and be a fit garment to cover them; It is Gods righteousness, that it may be
beautiful in Gods eyes, for he sees his own image in it. And it is not the
cr^ated inherent righteousness of Saints glorified, that shall be their upper
garment, that shall be their Heaven and glory-suit, (so to speak,) they will
not glory in this, but only in the Lambs righteousness for evermore.
Saint-holinesse must have a covering above, for it cannot cover our nakedness:
And all the songs of them that follow the Lamb, make mention of his
righteousness, even of his only. The Lamb is the light and Sun of the City,
the Lamb is the Temple of it, in a word, he is all that is beautiful and
glorious: Every Saint has put on the Lord Jesus, and is perfect through his
comeliness: At least, if the holiness of spirits of just men made perfect, be
the glorious habit above; yet all the beauty and glory of it is from Christ
Jesus whose image it is, and the Spirit whose work it is. It shall be still
true, All our righteousness, as ours, is filthy, and all holiness, as it has
a relation to us, cannot please God, it must be spotted before his pure eyes,
but only it is accepted and clean, as it is Christ's and the Spirits, as it is
his own garment put upon us, and his own comeliness making us perfect. It is
not so much the inherent cleanness of the Saints robs that makes them
beautiful in his eyes, as this, That they are washed in the blood of the Lamb,
Rev. 7. 14.

Now from all this we would speak a word to two sorts of you: There is one
great point of Religion that is the principal and foundation of all other, even
free Justification by Faith in Jesus, without our own righteousness. And the
most part stumble here in the entry: It is the greatest obstruction of souls
coming to Christ Jesus, even the ignorant and blind conceit and fancy that
almost every man has of himself, and his own performances: The world will not
make many believe the half of the evil of themselves, that is spoken in the
Word. If you have a general conviction of sinfulness and misery, yet you think
to help it. If you sin, you use to make an amends, run to your prayers, and
repentance, to give God a recompense, and satisfy your own Consciences: Speak
now, is not this the way you think to be saved? I shall do what I can, pray and
mourn for sin, and what I am not able to do, God must forgive, you will do all
you are able, or can, and Gods mercy must come in to supply the want of your
righteousness; But this is to put a new piece of cloth in an old garment, to
make the rent worse: Many of you have no other ground of confidence in the
world, nothing to answer the challenge of Conscience, or satisfy Justice but
this, I repent, I am sorry, I mourn, I shall amend, I resolve never to do the
like again. Now then from this ground we would declare unto you in the Lords
Name, you are yet unclean, both in persons and actions unjustified, because you
have no other covering but your own duties and performances: And let these be
examined, and weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary, and they will be found
light. All your righteousness (says the Lord) is filthiness: You are
unclean, you cannot deny, both by birth and education, you have often defiled
your selves with sins, you must confess: Now I ask you, How will you cover
that uncleanness and nakedness? How will you hide it from Gods eyes, and your
own Conscience? You know no way but this, I will pray, I will repent, and
amend. So then you cover your self with prayer, with sorrow and tears, and a
resolution of amending, this then is all your covering and ornament, something
done by you; as many will make the wings of two good works stretch themselves
out so far, as to cover and hide a multitude of offenses between them.
Therefore I declare in the Lord Jesus his Name unto you, whose Conscience must
go alongs in the acknowledgment and owning of your case, that you have covered
your selves with your own righteousness, that you have taken as filthy rags to
cover your nakedness and sin with, as your sins are, and so, you have made an
addition to your uncleanness, you are more unclean by your prayers and
repentance then before: And so God is of more pure eyes, then to look
graciously on such as you are. You have gone about to establish your own
righteousness, and has not known the righteousness of God, and so you have
come short of it; you are yet persons in a state of enmity, God is your Judge,
you are rebels: It concerns you much to heed this well, to judge of your own
actions and persons as God judges of them, for if God shall judge one way, and
you judge another way, you may be far mistaken in the end. If you have so good
an opinion of your selves and your duties, that you can plead interest in God
for them, and absolve your selves from such grounds: And if God have not the
same judgment, but rather think as evil of your prayers, as of your cursing,
and abhor the thing that satisfies you, will it not be dreadful in the end?
For his judgment shall stand, and you will succumb in judgment, since you
crossed Gods mind. Therefore we would have you solidly drink in this principle
of Religion, That man is so unclean, and God so abhors him, that whatever he
does, or can do, it cannot make him righteous, that no good action can make him
acceptable, and take away the uncleanness of the evil actions; and that any
sinful action takes away all the cleanness of the good actions. Once believe
this, If I should sweat out my life in serving God, and never rise off my
knees, If I should give my body to the fire for the truth, If I should melt
away in tears for sin, all this is but filthy rags, and I can never be
accepted of God for all that, but the matter of my condemnation grows: If I
justify my self, my own mouth proves me perverse: God needs no more but my
good deeds to condemn me for, in all justice: And therefore it is a thing
impossible, I will never put forth a hand, or open a mouth upon that account
any more. I will serve God, because it is my duty, but life I will not expect
by my service, when I have done all, it is wholly mercy that I am accepted; my
good works shall never come in remembrance, I resolve to be found, not having
my own righteousness, I will appear among the ungodly sinners, as one that
has no righteousness, that I may be justified only by faith in Jesus Christ.
I say, drink in this truth, and let it settle in your hearts, and then we would
hear numbers cry, O what shall I do to be saved?

Now as for you who have fled unto Christ's righteousness only, and have cast
away your own as dung and dross, as filthy rags, as you have done right in the
point of Justification, judge so likewise after it. We would exhort you to
judge so of your best actions that are the fruits of the Spirit, judge so of
them as you have a hand in them.

All our righteousness: Mark, Isaiah a holy Prophet joyneth himself in with the
multitude. And the truth is, the more holiness the more humility and
self-abasing; for what is holiness, I pray you, but self-denial, the abasing of
the creature, and exalting of Christ Jesus. This is the Cross that the Saints
must all bear, Deny your self, and follow me. Grace does not swell men above
others, it is gifts, such as Knowledge that puffs up; Charity or Love puffs
not up. Men are naturally high-minded, for pride was the first sin of Adam, and
grace comes to level men, to make the high mountains valleys for Christ's
Chariot; It makes men stoop low to enter the door of the Kingdom. Therefore
if you have attained any measure beyond others, if you would prove it real
grace and holiness, do not exalt your selves above others, be not high minded,
come down and sit among the ungodly, among the unclean, and let not grace given
diminish the low estimation of your self in your self: There is a growing that
is but a fancy, and men's conceit, when men grow above Ordinances, above other
Christians, and can see none or few Christians but themselves, such a growth is
not real, its but fancy, its but swelling and wind, and must be pricked to let
it out. A holy Prophet came in among an unclean people, he did not say, Stand
by, I am bolier then thou. Such a man as can find no Christian about him, even
though to the judgment of all others, they seek God more then he, such a man
has not real solid grace, his holiness is profane holiness, and proud
holiness; for true holiness is humble holiness, and in honor pr^ferreth others.

There is a great fault among those who have fled to Christ's righteousness in
Justification, that they use to come full from duties, as a stomach from a
honey comb. Often times we make our liberty and access to God, the ground of our
acceptance, and according to the ebbings and flowings of our inherent
righteousness, so does the faith and confidence of Justification ebb and flow.
Christians, this ought not to be. In so doing, you make your own righteousness
your righteousness before God: for when the unsatisfaction in the point of
duty, makes you question your interest so often, is not the satisfaction of
your minds in duties, made the ground of your pleading interest. Give you
liberty and access, you can believe any thing, remove it, and you can believe
nothing. Certainly this is a sandy foundation, you ought to build nothing on
performances, you should be as vile in your own eyes, and think your nakedness
as open, when you come nearest God, when you have most liveliness, as when he
hides his face and duty withers; will filthy rags be your ornament? No
Christians, be more acquaint with the unspotted righteousness of the Immaculat
Lamb of God, and find as great necessity of covering your cleanest duties with
it, as your foulest faults, and thus shall you be kept still humble and vile in
your own eyes, and have continual employment for Christ Jesus: your best estate
should not puff you up, and your worst estate should not cast you down.
Therefore be much in the search of the filthiness of your holy actions; This
were a spiritual study, a noble discovery to unbowel your duties, to divide
them, and give unto God what is Gods, and take unto your selves what is your
own: The discovery of filthiness in them, needs not hinder his praise; And
the discovery of grace in them, needs not mar your sham^. God has most
glory when we have most shame, these two grow in just proportion, so much is
taken from God, as is given to the creature.

Thirdly, we would also press you from this ground to long much to be clothed
upon with immortality, to put off the filthy rags of time, and
earth-righteousness, and to be clothed upon with the white robs of the
righteousness of the Saints. As you would dwell near the fountain here, and be
still washing your garments, and offering all your sacrifices in him who
sanctifies all, so would you pant and thirst for this spotless garment of
glory: Glory is nothing but perfect holiness, holiness washen and made clean in
the Lambs blood: your rags are for the prison and for so journing: when you
come to your fathers house, your raiment shall be changed. Therefore
Christians, every one of you aspire higher, sit not down in seize, forget
what is behind, and press forward: let perfect holiness be in your eye and
purpose, sit not behind it: All our time-duties have much filthiness; long for
the pure stream that waters the City above: Grace is not in its native place,
it is corrupted and mixed here: Heaven is the own Element of it, and there is
grace without mixture. Undervalue all your performances, till you be above,
where that which is in part, shall be done away, where no unclean thing
enters.

Fourthly, This likewise holds out to you a continual necessity of washing.
You must take up house beside the fountain opened in the house of David; and
never look on any piece of inherent righteousness, but see a necessity of
dipping it in the Lambs blood. And therefore should you pray always in Christ's
Name, that the prayer which of it self, would be cast as dung on our face, may
have a sweet favor from hi^ Cover your holiness with Christ's righteousne^ and
make mention of it only.

SERMON XVII.
Isaiah 64. 6. -- And we all do fade us ^ leaf, and our iniquities, like the
wind, have taken us away.
HEre they join the punishment with the deserving cause, their uncleanness and
their iniquities, and so take it upon them, and subscribeth to the
righteousness of Gods dealing.

We would say this much in general, First, No body needs to quarrel God for
his dealing he will always be justified when he is judged. If the Lord deal
more sharply with you then with others, you may judge, there is a difference
between your condition and theirs, as well as in the Lords dispensation, even
as this people do, verse. 5. 6. It is a strange saying, Lam. 3. 31. The Lord
does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men. That is, (as we
conceive,) the Lord has not such pleasure in trampling on men, as he might do
on the dust of his feet: Though he be absolute sovereign Lord of the Creature,
and men be but as the dust of his feet, and he may do with his own what he
pleases, and none ask, What do thou? Yet the Lord uses not to walk
according to his own absoluteness, he has another ordinary rule whereby he
works, a rule of justice and equity; especially in the punishing of men; he
uses not to ^fflict men for his pleasure, as tyrants use to destroy their
people. The Lord exerceth his sovereignty another way, and if he be absolute
and illimited in any thing, it is in showing mercy o^ men: But in judgment
there may be still some reason gotten for it in the creature beside the will of
God; So that (to speak with reverence of his Majesty) strokes are often drawn
out of his hands, he gets so much provocation ere he strike, and holds off
so long, threatens, and gives warning thus before strokes, as if it were
against his will to lay on, as if his heart were broken with us.

Secondly, if men knew themselves and their own sinfulness, they would not
challenge God with unrighteousness, but put their mouth i^ the dust and keep
silence. And it is from thi^ ground, that this people do not charge God. Sin is
of such infinite desert and merit, because against infinite Majesty; that God
cannot go beyond it in punishment: And therefore Jeremiah when he is wading out
of the deep waters of sore temptation and sad discouragement, he pitcheth and
casts Anchor at this solid ground, It is of the Lords mercy that we are not
consumed Lam. 3. 22. What do I mean, thus to charge God, as if he dealt
rigorously? No, no, It is his mercy that a remnant is left, our strokes are not
pure justice, our cup is mixed, mercy is the greatest part: what ever is behind
utter destruction, whatever is below the desert of sin, which is hell and
damnation, all this must be reckoned up to mercy That I am yet alive, and so
may have hope this is mercy, For why should a living man complain, verse. 39,
That a rod is come to awake ^ out of security, this is mercy, for we might ha^
slept to death. And this wholesome counsel g^ Job of his friends to stay his
murmuring an grudging at Gods dispensations, Job. 11. 6. Wh^ do thou complain
Job? Know but thy sins, an there shall be no room for complaint; look b^ unto
Gods secrets of wisdom, and his Law, a^ see it is double to what you have
known, yo^ obligation is infinite more then you thoug^ upon, and then how great
and numberless mu^ iniquities be? Know therefore, says Zoph^ God exacteth of
thee less then thine iniquiti^ deserve, God exacteth not according to Law he
craveth not according to the obligation, b^ bids write down fifty in his bill
of affliction when an hundred are written in our bill of deserving. So then
complain not, it is mer^ that life is saved. Are you men, and livi^ men? wonder
at this, and wonder not the you are not wealthy, are not honorable, sein^ you
are sinners: All that came on Jerusale^ makes not Ezra think God out of bound^
Chap. 9. 13. As we are less then the least o^ Gods mercies, and all our
goodness deserves none of them, so is the least sin greater then the greatest
of all his judgments, and deserves still more: Nay, if there were no more but
original corruption common to men, and the filthiness that accompanies men's
good actions, ye^ is God righteous in punishing severely, and this people
acknowledge it so. You use to enquire what sin has such a man done, when so
terrible judgments come on? Nay, enquire no more, he is a sinner, and it is
mercy, there is not more, and it is strange mercy that it is not so with you
also. You use to speak foolishly when Gods hand is upon you, I hope I have my
punishment here, I hope to suffer here for my sins: Poor souls, if God make you
suffer for sins, it will be another matter, though now your punishment be above
your strength and patience, yet it is below your sin: As sin has all evil in
it, so must hell have all punishment in it: The torment of a Gravel, racking
with the Stone, and such like, are but play to Hell, these are but drops of
that Ocean, that you must drink out, and you shall go out of one Hell into a
worse; eternity is the measure of its continuance, and the degrees of it self
are answerable to its duration. There is much impatience even among Gods
children under the rod: you vex and torment your selves, and does well to be
angry. Any piece of thwarting dispensation, that goes cross to your humor and
inclination, embi^ters your spirit against God, and makes you go cross to his
providence: How often do your hearts say, Why am I thus? What aileth the Lord
at me? But Christians, learn to study your own deservings, and stop your mouth
with that, that you may not speak against Heaven. If you knew sin well, you
would not wonder at judgments, you would rather wonder that you are out of
hell: know what right God has over you, and how li^ use he makes of it
against you: when you ^pine at a little, shall it not be righteousness wi^ God
to exact more, and let you know your d^serving better. He that thinks it
rigor in Go to exact fifty, it is justice that God crave ^ hundred. If the Law
require forty stripe and he give but one, will you not rather commend and
proclaim his clemency, then speak ^ his cruelty? Wonder that God has spared ^
so long. Sin is come to great maturity, as pri^ is said to blossom and bud
into a rod, so all s^ are blossomed and budded into the very harvest that the
sickle may be put in. If we shou^ have City, desolate, and our Land consume^
if we should take up Jeremiahs lamentation, an our case be made parallel to
theirs, we ha^ then been punished less then our iniquities deserved.

There are some godless people so black mouthed, as to speak against Heaven
when God corrects them, they follow the counse of Jobs wise, Curse God and
die, if God but tou^ them a little in that which is dearest unto the^ they kick
against the pricks, and run hard-head with God. As we have known some-foolish
women when their only child has been removed, blaspeeme, saying, What can God
d^ more to me, let him do what he can? O madness and wickedness of men! Cannot
God do more, when he casts them in hell? Thou shall acknowledge that it is
more. Some have left off to seek God and turned profane because of the Lords
correction. But you would know ^^at all that is here is but Arles. If God had
done his worst, you might think your selves out of his common, nay, but he has
yet more to do, the full sum is to be paid. It were therefore wisdom yet to
make supplication to thy Judge.

But thirdly, Sins and iniquities have a great influence in the decay of
Nations and Persons, and change of their outward condition, when it is joined
with the wind of Gods displeasure. The calamity of this people is set down in
excellent terms, alluding to a tree in the fall of the leaf: We (says he,)
were once in our Land as a green tree busked round about with leaves and fruit:
our Church and State was in a flourishing condition, at least, nothing was
wanting to make outward s^lendor and glory, we were immovable in our own Land,
as David said in his prosperity, I shall never be moved, so did we dream of
eternity in earthly Canaan* But now Lord, we are like a tree in the fall of the
leaf: sin has obstructed the influence of Heaven, has drawn away the sap of
thy presence from among us, so that we did fade as a leaf before its fall: we
were prepared so by our sin^ for judgment, visible draughts and prognostics
of it were to be read upon the condition and frame of all spirits and people:
And then did our iniquities raise the storm of thy indignation, and that like a
whirlwind has blown the withering leaves off the tree, has driven us out of
our own Land, and scattered us among strangers. Sin and uncleanness and the
filthiness of our righteousness prepared us for the storm, made us light matter
that could resist no judgment, made us matter combustible; And then
iniquities, and sin rising up to iniquities, ^oming to such a degree, has
accomplished the judgment, put fire among us, made us as the Birk in Yule-even.

First, It is familiar in the Scripture, that people in a prosperous condition
are compared unto a green tree flourishing, Psalm. 37. 35. The wickeds
prospeting is like a green Bay tree spreading himself in power, spreading out
his arms, as it were, over more Lands to conquer them, over more people to
subject them. And this is often the temptation of the godly, and so does the
Lord himself witness of this people. Jer. 11. 16. I have called thy name a
green Olive tree, fair and of goodly fruit. This was once their name, though it
be now changed. Now they are called a fading withering tree without both leaves
and fruit. Now their place does not so much as know them, they are removed as
in a moment, Psalm. 37. 36. And this comparison gives us to understand
something of the nature of humane glory and pomp. The fairest and most
beautiful excellency in the world, the prosperity of nations and people is but
like the glory of a tree in the spring or summer: yea, the Scripture uses to
undervalue it more then so, and the voice commands to cry, Isa. 40, 6. 7, 8.
All flesh is grass, and the goodliness thereof as the flower of the field, the
one withers, and the other fades, because the Spirit of the Lord blows
upon it. A tree has some stability in it, but the flower of the field is but
of a month or a weeks standing; Nay, of one days standing, for in the morning
the grass is green, and the Sun scorcheth it ere night, so that one Sun's
course shall see it both growing green and fadeing: So is the goodliness, the
very perfection, the quintessence (so to speak) and the abstract of creatures
perfections: Outward accommodation in a world is as fading a thing as the
flower is, as smoke is, it is so vanishing that it bides but a puffed of his
breath to blow i^ to nothing. Job has a strange expression, Thou looks upon
me, and I am not, Job 7. 8. The Lord needs no more but stare on the most
durable creature, and look it not only out of countenance, but also look it
into its first nothing, look it out of glory, out of being. And therefore you
would not trust in these uncertain things, that can take wings and leave you.
When you have accommodation outwardly to your mind, do not build your nest in
it: these leaves of prosperity will not cover you always, there is a time when
they will fall. Nations have their winter and their summer, persons have them
likewise, as these must change in nature, so must they do in their lot. Heaven
only is one day, one Spring perpetually blossoming and bringing forth fruit:
There is the Tree of Life that brings forth fruit every month, that has
both Spring and Harvest all the year over. Christians, sit not down under the
green tree of worldly prosperity: If you do, the leaves will come down about
you; The Gourd you trust in, may be eaten up in ^ night: your Winter will come
on, so as you shall forget the former days, as if they had never been. We
desire you to be armed for changes: Are not matters in the Kingdom still going
about? All things are subject to revolution and change, and every year has its
own Summer and Winter, so has it pleased the Lord to set the one over against
the other, that man might find nothing after him, Eccles. 7. 14. Therefore we
would have you cast your accounts so, as the former days of darkness may
return, and the Land be covered with mourning clothes.

But would you know what is the original of the creatures vanity, what is the
moth that eats up the glory and goodliness of creatures enjoyments? Here it is,
Sin and iniquities. It was sin that first subjected the Creation to vanity,
Romans 8. 19, 20. This inferior world was to have been a durable house for an
immortal soul, but sin made man mortal, and the world corruptible: And from
this proceed all the tempests and disorders that seem to be in the Creation. It
is this still: It is sin that raises the storm of the Lords wrath, which
blows away the withered leaves of men's enjoyments. Sin dries up all the sap
and sweetness of the creature comforts, it makes the leaves of the tree
wither, drives the sap away to the root, hinders the influence of Gods
blessing to come through the veins of worldly prosperity: For what is the virtue
and sap of Creatures? It is even Gods blessing, and therefore the bread
nourishes not, but the Word and Command of God, Matthew. 3. 4. That is a right
unto the Creatures by Jesus Christ, when possession of them is entered into by
prayer and thanksigiving, for all rightis sanctified by these, and it is the
iniquities of men, that separateth between God and them, Isa. 59. 2. And when
God is separated and divided from enjoyments, they must needs be empty shells
and husks, no kernel in them, for God fills all in all, is all in all; And
remove him, and you have nothing; your meat and drink is no blessing, your
table is a snare, your pleasures and laughter have sadness in them, at least
they are like the vanishing blaze of thorns under a pot. And therefore when God
is angry for sin, men's beauty consumes as before the moth, Psalm. 39. 11. When
God begins to show himself terrible, because of sin, poor man, though of
late spreading his boughs out, yet all falls, and like Ice melts as before
the Sun, which just now seemed as solid as stone. O but David was sensible of
this, and could speak from much experience, Psalm. 32. 3, 4. The anger of the
Lord did eat him up, and dried his moisture; It might be read in his
countenance, all the world could not content him, all the showers of creatures
dropping fatness could not keep sap in him, Gods displeasure scorcheth so, nay,
is within him, that no hiding place is to be found in the world, no shadow of a
rock among all the Creatures in such a weary Land. Moses and the people knew
this well, Psalm. 90. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. The Lords displeasure carried them away, as
a flood coming down carries all headlong with it, it scorched them, and made
them wither as grass. When God sets iniquities before him, that which is the
souls secret, begins to imprint it in visible characters on the rod, and
writes his sin on his punishment, then no wonder that daye^ be spent in vanity
and grief, since they are past over in his wrath, Job 13. 25. Then does a soul
loath its dainty meat, and then does the Ox low over his fodder, meat is laid
before, and he cannot touch it, because of the terrors of the Almighty; And
that which before he would not once touch, would not enter in terms of
communing with, as the Lords threatenings, he must now sit down, and eat them up
as his meat; how sorrowful soever, Job 6. 5, 6, 7.

But Secondly, when sin has prepared a man for judgment, then if iniquity be
added to sin, this raises the storm, and kindles the fire to consume the
combustible matter: when sin has given many blows by preparatory corrections
at the root of a man's pleasure and credit, it will at length bring on a fatal
stroke that shall drive the tree to the ground. There are some preparatory
judgments and some consummatory; some withers the leaf, and some blows it
quite off. some make men like the Harvest, ripe to put the sickle of judgment
into it. The Corrruption of a land, the universality of it, and formality in
worshipping of God, ripeneth a land for the harvest of judgment, exposes it to
any storm, leaves it open to the Lords wrath, so that there is nothing to hold
his hand and keep off the stroke. But when the wind arises, and iniquities
have made it tempestuous, then who may stand, it will sweep away Nations and
people as a flood and make their place not to know them, so that there shall be
neither leaf nor branch left. There is often a great calm with great
provocations, and iniquities cry, Peace, peace. But when once the cry of it is
gone up to heaven, and has engaged Gods anger against a people or person, then
it raises a whilr-wind that takes all away. Now all this belongs to you, we
told you the acknowledgement of sin was yours already, and a wonder it is that
the complaint is not ours also: Always this ought to be an admonition and
example to us on whom the ends of the world are fallen. Therefore we would
declare this unto you, that sin and iniquities have judgment in the tail. Now
you sit at peace, every one in his own dwelling, and spread forth your
branches. But is there not much uncleanness among you? We would have you
trouble your carnal peace and security, trouble your ease with thoughts of
this. And we have ground to give this warning, because if there were no more
but the iniquity of our holy things, the formality of our service, the
commonness of Spirit in worship, this might be enough to raise the storm. You
know not for what reasons to be afraid of judgment, look but on original
corruption, look on the defilement of your religious actions, and then find
ground sufficient of fading away. Though now you sit still and seem to be so
settled, as you would never be moved: you dream of an eternity here, you cleave
in your hearts to your houses and lands: you stick as fast to the world, and
will not part with it, as a leaf to a tree: yet behold, the wind of the Lord
may arise, that shall drive you away, take your soul from these things and then
whose shall they be? If you will not fear temporal judgments, yet I pray you
fear eternal, fear hell. May not the Lord shake you off this tree of time, and
take you out of the land of the living, to receive your portion. There is not
only an universal deadness of spirit on the land, but a profane spirit,
Iniquities, abominable sins abound. Every Congregation is overgrown with
scandals; and for you, None may more justly complain: we are all unclean, sin
is not in corners, but men declare their sin as Sodom, sin is come to the
Maturity, Defection and Apostasy is the temper of all Spirits, and above all
the general contempt and slighting of this glorious gospel, is the iniquity of
Scotland, so that we wonder that the withered leaves yet stick to, that the
storm is not yet raised, and we blown away. Now you are like stones, your
hearts as Adamants and cannot be moved with his threatenings, the voice of the
Lords word does not once move you: you sin and are not afraid; Nay, but when
Gods anger shall join with iniquity, and the voice of his rod and displeasure
roar, this shall make the mountains to tremble, the rocks to move, and how much
more shall it drive away a leaf. You seem now mountains, but when God shall
plead, you shall be like the chaff driven too and fro. O how easy a matter
shall it be to God to blow a man out of his dwelling place: sin has prepared
you for it, he needs no more but blow by his Spirit, or look upon you, and
you will not be. You who now are lofty and proud, and maintain your self
against the word, when you come to reckon with God, and he enters in
judgment, you shall not stand: you will consume as before the moth: your
hearts will fail you, Who may abide the day of his coming? It will be so
terrible, and so much the more terrible, that you never dreamed of it. If the
example of this people will not move you, do but cast your eyes on Ireland, who
all do fade as a leaf, and their iniquities have taken them away out of their
own Land. Shall not the seeing of the eye, nor the hearing of the ear teach
you? What security do you promise to your selves? Have not we sinned as much as
they? Were not they his people as we? Certainly since God waits longer on
you, the stroke must be the greater: provoked patience must turn fury. If you
would then prevent this peoples complaint, go about such a serious
acknowledgement of your sins, search your ways and turn again to the Lord. And
let not every man sit down in a general notion of sin, but unbowel it until you
see uncleanness, go up to the fountain head, Original corruption, go down to
all the streams, even the iniquity of holy things: let every man be particular
in the search of his own provocations personal, and every one be public in the
general sins of the Land, that you may confess out of knowledge and sense, we
are all unclean, etc.

SERMON XVIII.
Isai. 64. 7. And there is none that calls upon thy Name, that stirs up
himself to take hold of thee, etc.
THey go on in the Confession of their sins: Many a man has soon done with
that: A general notion of sin, is the highest advancement in repentance that
many attain to. You may see here, Sin and Judgment mixed in through other in
their complaint: They do not so fix their eyes upon their desolat estate of
captivity, as to forget their provocations. Many a man would spend more
affection, and be more pathetick in the expression of his misery when it is
pungent, nor he can do when he speaks of his sins. We would observe from the
nature of this confession something to be a pattern of your repentance. And it
is this. When the spirit convinces, and men are serious in repentance, then
the soul is more searching, more universal, more particular in acknowledgement
of sins. These are characters of the Spirits work. First, The Spirit
discovers unto men, not only sin but the loathsomeness of sin, its heinous
nature, how offensive it is to Gods holy eye; Many of you know abundance of
evil deeds, and call them sins, but you have never taken up sins ugly face,
never seen it in the glass of the holy Law, uncleanness it self, because you
do not abhore your selves; poor and low thoughts of God makes mean and shallow
thoughts of sin. You would be as Job vile chapter 40. 4. And abhore your selves in
dust and ashes, chapter 42. 6. As Gods holiness grew great in your eyes, Sins
uncleanness would grow proportionably Is. 6. 3. 5. And here your repentance
halteth in the very entry.

But Secondly, The Spirit discovers not only the uncleanness of men's natures,
and leads them up to original corruption, but the Spirit also leads men
alongs all the streams, not only these that break out, but those who go under
ground, and have a more secret and subtle conveyance: It concludes not only
open breaches of the command under filthiness, but also all a man's own
righteousness, though never so refined, it concludes it also a defiled
garment, so that the Soul can look no where but see sin, and uncleanness in its
ornaments and duties. And thus it appears before God without such a covering,
opens up its Soul, hides not sin with the covering of duties, but sees a
necessity of another covering for all. Now therefore let the most part of you
conclude that you have never yet gotteh your eyes open to see sin or confess
it, because when you sit down to count your sins, there are many things that
you call not sin, you use not to reckon your praying and repentance among sins:
Nay, because you have so much confidence in your repentance and confession, you
have never repented: you must see a necessity of a covering of Christ's
righteousness above all; Faith in Jesus must cover repentance and it self both,
with the glorious object of it. But alas how soon are many at an end of
confession; some particular gross actions may come in remembrance, but no
more. Sum up al your confessions, they have never yet pitched on the thousand
part of your guiltiness, no not in kinds, let be in number.

But thirdly, The Spirit convinces spiritually and particularly both, it
convinces of Spiritual sins, as we said last, of the iniquity of holy things,
and especially of the most substantial duties faith and prayer. John 16. 8, 9.
there are not many of you have come this length to see your want of prayer. No,
your own words do witness against you, for you use to say, I pray day and
night, I believe in God with all my heart. Now therefore out of your own mouth
shall you be condemned, when the spirit convinces you of Sin, you will see no
faith, no prayer at the first opening of the eyes. But I add, there is no true
confession but it is particular, the Spirit uses not to be wilder men's spirits
in a general notion only, and a wild field of unknown sins: And such are many
of your convictions: You mourn for sin (as you say) and yet you cannot
condescend on a particular that burdeneth your conscience; you grant you have
many sins, but sit down to count them, and there is a short count of them, Now
do you not reflect back upon former humiliations in public, and former
acknowledgements of sins in private? do you not yet return upon your own hearts
to lay home this sad challenge. I have never repented, I do not yet repent:
must not all your solemn approaches be iniquity, and abomination, while your
souls are not afflicted for sin, while you can see so few sins etc. The fasting
days of Scotland will be numbered in the roll of greatest provocations,
because there is no real and spiritual conviction of sin among us: Custom now
has taken away the solemnity, and there remains nothing but the very name.
Is this the fast that the Lord chooses? No, believe it, this shall add to your
provocation, and rather hasten lingering judgment, then keep it off, we would
beseech you this day, pray for pardon of former abused fasts. If you had no
more to mourn for, this might spend the day and our spirits both, and exhaust
all our present supplications, even the wall of partition that stands between
God and Scotland, which all our former solemn humiliations has built up, a
great deal higher then other sins could reach.

There is none that calls upon thy Name,] Did not this people make many
prayers, Isai. 1. 15. before the captivity? And did they not cry, which notes
some fervency in it? And fast a little before it in Jeremiahs time, Chap. 11.
11. and 14. 12. in the time of it, Ezekiel. 8. 18. Mic. 3. 4. Zech 7. 3. How then
is it that the Prophet now on the watchtower looking round about him to take
up the peoples condition, and being led by the Spirit so far as to the case of
the captives in Babel, can find no prayer, no calling? And was not Daniel so
too, Dan. 9. 13. Lo, then here is the construction that the Spirit of God
puts on many prayers and fastings in a Land, There is none calls on thy
Name; there is none that prays faithfully and fervently, few to count upon
that prays any. It may be there are many public prayers, but who prays in
secret, and mourns to God alone? There are many prayers, but the inscription
is, To the unknown God, to a nameless God, your praying is not a calling on his
Name as a known God and revealed in the Word.

This then we would say unto you, that there may be many prayers in your
account* and none in Gods. There are many prayers of men that God counts no
more of, then the howling of a dog. First, The cry of men's practices is often
louder then their prayers, and goes up to Heaven, that the cry of prayer
cannot be heard. When men's conversation is flat contrary to their
supplications, supplication is no calling on his Name, but charming rather.
Sodoms abominations had a cry up to God, Genesis 18. 21. So Ahels blood had a cry
for vengeance, which Cains prayers could not outcry. Thus the Lord would not
hear many prayers Isa. 1. 15. because hands and practices were polluted: you
that know no worship of God, but in such a solemn duty; your religion is summed
up and confined, within the limits of Temple-worship, Family exercise and
prayer; Certainly the rest of your conversation must speak more: God will not
heat but such as worship him and do his will. Joh. 4. 31. Your prayer is a dark
parable, if your conversation expone it not. This I speak for this end, to put
many of you out of your false ground of Confidence: you have nothing but your
prayers to trust unto, And for your conversation, you never go about it
effectually to reform it but goes on in that which you pray against: we
declare unto you the truth your prayers are Abomination Pro. 28. 9. The wicked
may have prayers, And therefore think not to please God and flatter him with
your mouths, when your conversation is rebellion: since you hear not him in his
commands, God will not hear you in your petitions Pro. 1. 24. 28. You stopped
your ear at his reproof, God will stop his ear at your request. If you will go
to heaven by your own righteousness, I pray you, follow more after it, make the
garment more to cover your nakedness: the skirt of a duty is not sufficient.

Secondly, When iniquity is regarded in the heart, (and idols set up in Gods
place,) God will not own such a worship, but sends a man to the Idols he
serves Psa. 66. 18. Ezekiel. 14. 3. 4. Do you not often pray to God against a
corruption, when your heart cleaves unto it, and what your mouth says, your
heart contradicts? Light and Conscience often extort a confession of beloved
sins, while the temper of the heart has this language, Lord grant not my
request. And therefore if there be a prayer for pardon of guilt, yet there is
no through resolution to quite the sin; And as long ^^ a soul is not resolved
to quite the sin, there can be no ingenuous confession of it, and no prayer for
removing the guilt can be heard, You cannot employ Christ in his office of
Mediatorship as a Priest to interceed and offer sacrifice for sin, unless you
as sincerely employ him as a sanctifier and Redeemer. And therefore prayer that
separateth Christ's offices, and calls not on whole Christ calls not on his
name, for his name is Lord Jesus Christ. How can the Lord be inquired of by
such a one who comes to mock him, puteth up an Idol in the heart, and yet
prays against it, or some other sin, while he is not resolved to quite it.
Shall God be resolute to help, when we are no^ earnest in seeking it. No wonder
God answer you according to the Idol: No wonder you be given up to serve Idols,
and your sin grow upon you as a plague for your hypocrisy, when you ingadge
your heart too much to any creature and comes to pray and inquire of the Lord
in your necessity, shall it not be righteousness with him, to send you to your
God when thou cryest let thy companies deliver thee, Isa. 57. 13. O man cry
unto thy bosom idol, and let it help thee, since thou trustest to it and
spends thy heart on it, Deuteronomy. 32. 37, 38. Where is the God that drunk the
Wine of your offerings, and eat the fat of your sacrifices? where is the
creature that you have made your heart an altar to, to send up the flames of
your choicest thoughts and affections to it? let this rise up, and help you
now, says the Lord. Therefore we exhort you, if you would have your prayers a
delight, be upright in the thing you seek, and see that you intertain no known
sin, give it no heart allowance.

Thirdly, There are many prayers not heard, not known, because the mouth
outcryeth the heart. It is the sacrifice of the contrite heart that God
despises not. The prayers of this people were such, Isai. 29. 13. They drew
near with the mouth, but the heart was far away. It is worship in spirit and
truth that God loves, Joh 4. 23. Since Prayer is a communion of God with the
Creature, a meeting of one with God, and speaking face to face; God who is a
Spirit and immortal, must have a spirit to meet with, a soul to speak to him.
Now do you not find your hearts gading abroad even in duty? Is it not most
about your Corns and Lands in the time of solemn worship? Therefore God gets
no more but a carcass to keep communion with; He may have as much fellowship
with the stones of the wall, and timber of the house, as he can have with your
ears and mouths, while you remove your hearts to attend other things. And I
would say more, if your mind be present, yet your heart is gone, sometimes, yea
often, both are gone abroad: Sometimes the mind and thought stays, but the
affection and heart is not with it, and so the minds residence is not constant:
Your thought may come in as a wayfaring man, but tarrieth not all night,
dwells not. Now speak to it, even Christians, may not your Prayers often have
a contrary interpretation to what they pretend? You pray so coldrifely and
formally, as God will interpret, you have no mind to it: we ask as we seemed
indifferent whether our petition be granted or not. Should the Lord be affected
with your petitions, when you your selves are not affected much? Should his
bowels of zeal sound within him, when yours are silent? It is fervent prayer
avails much, Isai. 5. 16. A heart sent out with the petition, and gone up to
Heaven, cannot but bring back an answer. If Prayer carry not the seal of the
heart and soul in it, God cannot own it, or send it back with his seal of
acceptance.

Fourthly, Many Prayers are not calling on Gods Name: And no wonder that when
people pray, yet the Spirit say, None calls on thy Name, for Prayer is made,
as to an unknown God, and God is not taken up according to his Name, which are
his glorious Attributes, whereby he manifests himself in his Word. To call on
Gods Name, is so to pray to God, as to take him up, as he has revealed
himself. And what is the Lords Name? Hear himself speak to Moses, Exodus 33. 19.
and 34. 6, 7. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering and
abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity, and transgression, and sin, and that will by no means clear the
guilty. Now to call on this Name, is for the soul in Prayer, to have a suitable
stamp on it: every Attribute of God taking deep impression in the heart. And so
Gods Name to be written on the very petitions: And shortly, we may say, the
Spirit should have the impression of Gods greatness and Majesty, of his
goodness and mercy, of his terriblenesse and justice. This is the order that
God proclaims his Name into. In the entry the supplicant should behold the
glorious Sovereignty and infinite distance between God and the Creature, that
he may have the stamp of reverence and abasement upon his spirit, and may speak
out of the dust, as it becomes the dust of the balance and footstool to do to
him, who sits on the circle of the Heaven as his Throne. And this I must
say, there is little Religion and Godliness among us, because every man is
ignorant of God. Even Gods children do more study themselves, and their
condition, then Gods greatness and absoluteness. Who searches Gods
infiniteness in his Word and Works till he behold a wonder, and be drowned in a
mystery? O but the Saints of old did take up God at a greater distance from the
Creatures, they waded far into this boundless Ocean of Gods Majesty, till they
were over head and ears, and were forced to cry out, Who can find out the
Almighty to perfection? All these are but parts of him, his back-parts. There
is more real Divinity and knowledge of God in one of Jobs friends discourses,
one of David's prayer^, then now in twenty Sermons of gracious men, or many
prayers or conferences of Saints. But withal you must study his goodness and
mercy, and this makes up the most part of his Name; The definition of God has
most of this, so that it may be said truly, that mercy is his delight, mercy as
it were, swells over the rest: God were not accessible, unless mercy did
temper it. Behold then greatness to humble, and goodness to make bold, that
you may have access. As greatness should leave the stamp of reverence on your
petitions, so should mercy and goodness imprint them with faith and
confidence; And that the rather because as Christ is said to be the Fathers
Face, and t^ image of his Person, 2 Cor. 4. 6. and Heb. 1. ^ So may he be
called the Fathers Name, and ^ does God himself call him, Exodus 23. 20, 21. T^
Angel that went before them in the wilderness, w^^ voice they ought to obey,
his Name is in him, a^ this Angel is Christ Jesus, Acts 7. 37, 38. ^ then
Christ Jesus is Gods Name: God as ^ reveals himself in the Word, is God in
Ch^ reconciling the world unto himself, 2 Cor. 5. ^ And therefore Christians,
you ought to pr^ always in Christ's Name, and this is to call ^ his Name. Not
only encourage your selves ^ come to God, because of a Mediator, beca^ he is
God in Christ, but also offer up all yo^ prayers in Jesus his Name, that his
Name called on them may sanctify them, otherwise yo^ affection at prayers
cannot be acceptable ^ God, for he loves nothing but what com^ through the Son;
Prayer must have an evil s^vour, when it is not put in the Golden Cens^ that
this Angel has to off^r up incense with t^ prayers of the Saints. And likewise
you wo^ know Gods justice and wrath, that you m^ serve in fear and trembling:
And when tre^bling is joined with the rejoicing of faith, the is acceptable
service. You ought to fear to ^fend his holiness, while you are before him. L^
Gods terribleness have a deep impression ^ your spirit, both to make sin
bitter, and to man mercy more sweet. Thus should Prayer asce^ with the seal of
Gods Attributes, and then is a calling on his Name. Now is there any c^ling on
his Name among us? Who makes ^udy to take up God in his glorious Names?
therefore you call not on a known God, and ^nnot name him. Now all of you take
this ^le to judge your prayers by. Think you not ^at you make many prayers? You
both think and say it, as you use to say, I pray both day ^d night. Nay, but
count after this rule, and ^ere will be found few prayers in Scotland, al^it
you reckon up both private and public. ^nce scrape out of the count the prayers
of the ^ophane and scandalous, whose practice de^eth their prayers; And again,
blot out the ^ayers of men's tongues and mouths when ^arts are absent: And
again, set aside the ^ormal, dwyning, coldrife, indifferent suppli^tions of
Saints, and the prayers that carry no ^eal of Gods Name and Attributes on them,
^rayers made to an unknown God, And will ^ou find many behind? No certainly any
of ^ou may take up the complaint in behalf of the ^and, There is none that
calls on thy Name, or ^ew to count upon. You may say so of your ^elves if you
judge thus, I have almost never ^rayed, God has never heard my voice, and ^ou
may say so of the Land. This would be a ^ell spent day, if this were but our
exercise, to and out the sins of our duties in former humilia^ions: If the
Spirit did so convince you, as to ^ot out of the roll of Fasts all the former.
If ^ou come this length as to be convinced solidly ^at you have never yet
prayed and mourned for ^. I have lived this long, and been babbling ^ll this
while, I have never once spoken to God, ^ut worshipped I knew not what, fancied
a God like my self, that would be as soon please^ with me, as I was with my
self. If the Lord wrought thus on your hearts, to put you ^^ your own
righteousness, you should have mo^ advantage in this then in all your Sabbaths
an^ Fasts hitherto.

Secondly, Although the Lords hand be upon them, and they fade as a leaf, and
are drive^ into another Land, yet none calls on his Name* This makes the
complaint more lamentabl^ and no doubt is looked upon as a dreadful sig^ and
token of Gods displeasure, and of sor^ strokes. Daniel an eyewitness
confirms the foretold truth, Chap. 9. 13. All this is come upon us, yet have
we not made our prayer to the Lord o^ God. Well may the Lord make a supposition
and doubt of it, Lev. 26. 40, 41. After so many plagues are come on, seven
added to seven, and again seven times more, and yet they will not be humbled.
And when it is even at the door ne^ to utter destruction and consumption, he
adds* If then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they take with the
punishment of sin, etc. We need ask no reason of this, for bray a fool in a
morte^ his folly will not depart from him, Prove. 27. 22: Poor foolish man is a
foolish man, folly is born with him, folly is his name, and so is he. He has
not so much wisdom as to hear the voice o^ the rod, and him that appoints it.
Poor Ephraim is an undaunted heifer. Nature is a bullock unaccustomed with the
yoke, and so it is chastised more and more, Jer. 31. 18. Man is like a^ untamed
beast, as the horse, or as the mul^ Threatenings will not do it, God speaks
once, ye^: twice, and man perceives it not; Job 33. 14. God instructs by the
Word, and men receive no instruction: All the warnings to flee from the wrath
to come, are as so many tales to make children afraid. He says in his heart, I
shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of my own heart. Since
therefore he will not incline his ear to the Word, God sends his rod to seal
the Word, and yet men are so wild that they sight with Gods rods, and will not
submit to him: A yoke must be put on Ephraim, a bridle in men's mouths, Psalm.
32. 9. They will put God to more pains then speaking, and it shall cost them
more pain: For he that will not be drawn with the cords of a man, love and
entreaties, must be drawn with the cords of a beast, and yoked in a heavy yoke.
Yet men are unruly, and the yoke grows the heavier, and sorer, that they
strive to shake it off. An uncircumcised heart cannot be humbled, How can the
Leopard change his spots, no more can my people return to me, Jer. 13. 23. It
is strange that a people so afflicted, will not take with the punishment of
their iniquity, but will say in their heart, Wherefore come these things upon
me? But here it is, how can an uncircumcised heart be humbled? God may beat on
men with rods as on a dog, but he will run away from him still the more Isai.
9. 13. Nay, it may be, there will be more stirring after God, and more awaking
by the first stroke of affliction, then when they are continued and multiplied:
The uncouthness of rods may affect people something but when his hand lies on
but a little, custom breeds hardness, a^ more and more alienateth spirits
from him.

Now we need no more to seal this truth, ^^ our own experience. I think never
peop^ might speak more sensibly of it. It has be^ the manner of the Lords
dealing with us, to ^ fair means to gain us, to threaten before he la^ on, to
give a proclamation before his stroak^ And yet it has been our manner from o^
youth up to harden our selves against him, an^ go on in our own way. Therefore
has the Lord after long patience laid on sad strokes, an^ smitten us, yet have
we not turned to him. ^ may be when the chastisement was fresh a^ green, some
poured out a prayer, and in trouble visited God, Isai. 26. 18. but the body of
the La^ has not known him that smote them, and never ran into their hiding
place, but the tempt^tion of the time like a flood has carried them aw^ with
it. And for the Lords children, how so^ does the custom of a rod, eat out the
sense ^ it, and prayer does not grow proportionably ^ the Lords rods. The Lord
has expected the some might stand in the gap and interceed, yet f^ or none
called on his Name. General correction of the Land have made general apostasy
from God, not a turning in to God; So that we man say, we never entered a
furnace, but we have come out with more dross, contracted dross i^ the fire.
Men's zeal and tenderness has bee^ burnt up, reprobate silver may God call us:
We have had so much experience of the unprofitableness of former afflictions,
that we kno^ not what the Lord shall do with us. We thin^ it may be the Lords
complaint of Scotland, Why should you be afflicted any more? you will revolt
more and more, Isai. 1. 5. What needs another ro^? You are now all secure, it
is true, because you are not stricken; Nay, but what needs a rod? for it
cannot awake you, all the fruit of it would be not to purge away sin, but to
increase it: General judgments will prove general tentations, and will
alienate you more from me, and make you curse God and the Covenant. And indeed
the truth is, we know not, what outward Dispensation can fall on that can
affect this generation; We know not what the Lord can have behind, that can
work on us: Judgment has had as much terror, Mercies as much sweetness, and
as much of God in the one and the other, as readily has been since the
beginning of the world. Only this we know, all things are possible to him,
which are impossible to us; And if the Spirit work to sanctify the Rod, a more
gentle Rod shall work more effectually; his Word shall do as much as his Rod.

The case we are now into, is just this; None calls on thee. It is a terrible
one, whither our condition be good or bad outwardly, our peace has put us
asleep, and the Word cannot put men to prayers: Now the Lord has begun to
threaten, as you have been still in fear of new troubles, and a revolution of
affairs again, yet I challenge your own Consciences and appeal to them, whom
has the Word prevailed with, to put to prayer? Whom has the rumor of
approaching trouble, put to their prayers? Whose spirit has been affected with
Go^ f^ouning on the Land? And this yet more a^ gravateth your laziness; In the
time that Go^ does show terrible things to his people in Irela^ gives them a
cup of wormwood, and to drink ^ wine of astonishment: Are not you yet at e^^
when your brethren and fellow saints are sca^tered among you as strangers? yet
your hea^ bleed not. Well, behold the end of it, you case is a sad prognostic
of the Lords hideing hi^ Face and consuming us. Nay, it is a sure token that
his Face is hid already. When J^ friends would aggravate his misery, they sum^
it up in this, thou restrainest prayer from God. I^ is more wrath to be kept
from much praying nor to be scattered from your own house Therefore, if you
would have the cloud of God^ anger that covers the Land with blackne^ go over
you, and pour out it self on others, you would prevent the Rod, hearken to the
Word and stir up your selves to much praye^ that you may be called his
remembrancers? O^ how long shall prayer be banished this Kingdom? The Lords
controversy must be great with us, for since the days of our first love, ther^
has been great decay of the spirit of prayer The Children of God should be so
much in it as they might be one with it. David was so much in prayer, as he in
a manner defined himself by it, Psalm. 109. 4. I gave my self unto prayer. In
the original, there is no more, but, ^ prayer. I was all prayer. It was my
Work, my Element, my Affection, my Action. Nay, to speak the truth, it is the
decay of prayer that has made all this defection in the Land. Would you know
the original of many a public man's Apostasy and backsliding in the cause of
God, what makes them so soon forget their solemn engagements, and grow
particular, seeking their own things, untender in seeking the things of God?
Would you trace back the Desertion up to the Fountain head? Then come and see.
Look upon such a man's walking with God in private, such a man's praying, and you
shall find matters have been first wrong there. Alienation and estrangement
from God himself in immediate Duties, and secret approaches, has made m^ns
Affections cooll to his interest in public Duties. And believe it, the reason
why so few great men, or none are so cordial, constant and through in Gods
Matters, is this, they pray not in secret; They come to Parliament or Council,
where public Matters, concerning the Honor of God, are to be debated, as any
Stas-man of Venice, would come to the Senate. They have no dependence on God to
be guided in these Matters; They are much in public Duties, but little in
secret with God. Believe it, any man's private walking with God, shall be read
upon his public carriage, whither he be Minister or Ruler.

There is yet another thing we would have you consider, to endear this Duty
unto you, and bind upon your Consciences, an absolute necessity of being much
in it, and it is this. Prayer and calling on his Name is often put for all
immediate Worship of God, especially, the more substantial and moral part of
Service. This people was much in Ceremonials, and they made these their
righteousness. Nay, but there was little secret conversing with God, walking
humbly with him, loving him, believing in him. Well then, prayer is, as it
were, a compend and sum of all Duties. It contains in it, Faith, Love,
Repentance, all these should breath out in prayer. In a word, if we say to you,
be much in prayer, we have said all, and it is more then all the rest, because
it is a more near and immediate approach to God; having more solid Religion in
it. If you be lively in this, you are thriving Christians; if you wither here,
all must decay, for prayer sappeth and waters all oaths Duties with the
influence of Heaven.

That stirs up himself to take hold on thee] This expresses more of their
condition under the Rod, and while God was threatening to depart and leave them,
none took so much notice of it, as to awake out of his dream, to take a fast
hold of God. It was but like the grip a man takes in his slumbering, that he
soon quiteth in his sleep. None awaketh himself, as a bird stirs up it self
with its wings to flight: None do so spread out their sails to meet the wind:
This imports a great security and negligence, a careless stupidity. To take
hold, to grip strongly and violently, imports both Faith acted on God, and
Communion with God, so that the sense is, no body cares, whither thou go,
there is none that stirs up himself to take violent hold of thee; Men ly
louse in their interest, and indifferent in the one thing necessary, do not
strongly grip to it. No body keeps thee by prayer and intercession, so that
there is no diligence added to diligence, there is no stirring up of our selves
in security.

First, when the Lord seems to withdraw, and when he is angry, it is our
duty, to take hold the more on him, and not only to act Faith, and call on him
by prayer, but to add to ordinary diligence, it should be extraordinary. First
then, I say, when the Lord is withdrawing and seems angry, we ought not to
withdraw from him by unbelief, but to draw near, and take hold on him. And the
Lord gives a reason of this himself, Isai. 26. 4* 5. because fury is not in
me. It is but a moments anger, it is not hatred of your persons but sins, it is
not fury that has no discretion in it, to difference between a friend and an
enemy: It is but at least a fathers anger, that is not for destruction, but
correction. The Lord is not implacable, come to him and win him, let bim take
hold of me, and let him make peace with me, if he will make peace. He is a God
whose compassions fail not; and so he is never so angry, but there is room left
for manifestation of Mercy on those that come to him. Gods anger is not an
humor and passion as ours is, he can take the poor Child in his Arms, admit it
into his bosom, when outward Dispensations frown. Men's anger is like the sons
of Belial, Briers and Thorns that none may come near to, lest they be hurt,
but God angry is accessible, because his anger is still tempered and mixed with
Clemency and Mercy, and that mixture of Mercy is so great, and so predominant
in all his Dispensations here, that they being rightly understood, might rather
invite to come, then scarre from it, there is more Mercy to welcome, then Anger
to drive away.

Secondly, Look upon the very end and purpose of Gods hiding himself, and
withdrawing, it is this; that we may come and seek him early, Hos. 5. 15 When
God is angry, Mercy and Compassion principleth it, for anger is sent out to
bring in wanderers: His anger is not humor, but resolute and deliberate,
walks upon good grounds. Because David in his prosperity missed not God. When
all things went according to his mind, then he let God go where he will.
Therefore, the Lord in mercy must hide his own Heart with a frowning
countenance, and cover himself with a Cloud, that David may be troubled, and so
take hold on God, Psalm. 31. 7, 8. Since then, this is Gods purpose, that you
may come nearer to him, and since he goes away that you may pursue, certainly,
he will never so run away as you may not find him out, nor will he run further,
nor he strengthens thee to pursue him; Thus, Ps. 63. 8. God was flying, and
David pursuing; Nay, but the flyer gives legs to the pursuer, he upholdeth
him, as it were against himself. So did the Angel strengthen Jacob to overcome
himself. Now shall it not be pleasant to God, that you lay hold on him as your
own, even when he seems to be clothed with vengeance, seeing he changes his
outward Countenance for this very end, he seems to go, that you may hold,
because when you think he stays, you hold not, as the Child, while the nurse
is near, will look about it, and take hold of any thing, but when she
withdraws, the Child cleaves the faster to her.

But Secondly, we ought to stir up our selves more now, then any other time:
Times of Gods withdrawing, calls for extraordinary and doubled approaches. So
Hab. 5. 15. they will seek me early. And therefore the Lords Children in
Scripture, have made great advantage of such Dispensations. The truth is, as
long as we are well dealt with, security creeps on, and Religion is but in a
decaying condition: Duties are done through our sleep: We are not as men
awaking and knowing what we do, and whither we go. But when the Lord begins
to trouble us, and hides his Face, then it is a time to awake out of sleep,
before all be gone: And there ought to be first, more diligence in Duties and
approaching to God; because your case furnishes more matter of supplication;
And as matter of supplication grows, prayer should grow. If necessity grow,
and the cry be not according to necessity, it is ominous. And therefore David
uses to make his cry go up according to his trouble. In a prosperous
Condition, though every thing might call a tender hearted loving Christian to
some nearness to God; yet ordinarily, if necessity press not, prayer
languisheth, and grows formal. Sense of need puts an edge on supplication,
whereas prosperity blunteth it. The heart missing nothing, cannot go above
sublunary things; but let it not have its will here, and the need of Heaven
will be the greater. Now I say, if you sit so many calls, both from a Command,
and from your own necessities, you do so much the more sin. Affliction will
make even a hypocrite seek him, and pour out ^ prayer and visit him, Psalm. 78.
And Isai. 26. And if you do not take advantage of all these pressures, you must
be so much the more guilty: And therefore, God as it were, wondereth at their
obstinacy, They return not to him that smites them: All this is come upon us,
yet have we not prayed. And secondly, it is sent for that end, that you may be
more serious, and therefore you ought so much the more to awake, to lay hold on
him. This is the way the Lord uses with his secure and wandering Children,
Psalm. 119. 67. For the Lord finds us often gripping too strongly to a present
world; and taking it in our arms, as if we were never to part with it: Men's
souls cleave to outward accomodations. Therefore the Lord uses to part us and
our idol, that we may take hold of him the faster. It is Union with himself,
that is our felicity, and it is that which God most endeavors. When he
removes beloved Jewels, it is because they were a stumbling block, and
divorced the Soul from God: When he seems to withdraw himself, his going
proclaims so much, Oh follow or perish.

Thirdly, it is a very dangerous thing, when he withdraws and you follow not,
when he is angry, and you care not, does not fly in to make peace with him,
certainly his anger must wax hotter, and desertion will become a spiritual
plague, Rods must be tempered with much bitterness. What mixture of Mercy can
be in such a Dispensation, where the fruit of it is to harden. But if the Lords
hardest dealing wrought you to more nearness and Communion with himself, then
certainly you have a fair advantage against the present trouble, and you have
your Cup mixed. You shall at length bless God for such Dispensations, they may
be reckoned for good to you. Next, there ought to be more exercise of Faith,
and laying hold on the grounds of Consolation in God, in such a time. 1. For as
difficulties grow, Faith should fortify it self against them so much the more.
The greater the storm be, it should fly the more into the Chalmbers. Faith in
the time of a calm day gets no trial; Faith bulketh much, because it has
not much to do. But except there be some fresh and new supplies, it cannot hold
out in a temptation: But it is a singular proof of a Noble and Divine Faith,
that can lay hold on him, and keep him, when he would go, that can challenge
kindness on a miskening Jesus, that can stand on the ground of the Promises,
when there is not a foot breadth of a Dispensation to build on: While all
things go with you, ye have no difficulty to maintain your Faith; Nay, but when
the Lord seems to look angry, then awake and gather strength, take hold on
his strength; Look what is in your Condition, or his Dispensation, what is good
or omnious, then take hold on the other hand on him, and look what is in him to
answer it, and swallow it up: Ye ought to be well acquaint with the grounds of
Consolation that are in God, in the worst case, and then ye might lay hold on
him, though he seemed a consuming fire. It is then a time that calls most for
secureing your interest in him, a time when there is no external advantage to
beguile you, a time when the only happiness is to be one with God. Therefore,
the man who in such Calamities and Judgments, is not a waked to put his
eternal Estate out of question, he is in a dangerous case: For do not most part
drive over their days, and have no assurance of Salvation, they dare not say,
either pro, or contra. It may be, and it may not be. And this is the length
that the most part come, a negative Peace; No positive Confidence. No clear
concluding on sure grounds an Interest. Always ye are most called to this,
when God afflicts the Land, or you: If ye do not then make Peace, it is most
dangerous. 3. The Lord loves Faith in a difficulty best, it is the singlest
and the cleanliest, it is that which most honors him, and glorifieth his
Truth and Faithfulness, and Sufficiency and Mercy; for then it is most purely
Elevated above Creatures, and pitcheth most on God; And therefore brings men
to this, No help for my soul, but thou art my portion. And this commends God
most; when he is set alone. Prosperity brings him down among Creatures, and
secure Faith, makes little distinction; But awakening Faith grippeth strongly
and singly, puteth God alone:

Secondly, Oftentimes, when God is departing, none stirs up himself to lay
hold on him: Although there may be praying and doing of many duties, yet there
is nothing beyond ordinary. The varieties and accessions of new grounds of
supplications does neither make greater frequency, nor more fervency. This our
experience may clear unto us both in duties and faith. First, There is very
little diligence in seeking of God in the way and means appointed, even when
God seems to bid farewell to the Land and go away: No body comes in as an
intercessor. Men keep on their old way of praying, and never adds to it, come
what like. Who is it that rises above his ordinary as the Tide of Gods
dispensation is? There ought to be such an impression made by the changes of
Gods countenance, as might be read on the duties of his people. There should be
such a distance between your ordinary and such times, as between a sleeping man
and a waking man, that whatever your attainment of access to God be, ye might
stir up and go beyond it, according as matters call. Will God count your
public Fasts a performance of this duty? Alas, we fast sleeping, and none
stirs up himself to these things. Is there any difference betwixt your
solemn Humiliation and another Sabbath? And is there any difference between a
Sabbath and a week day, save the external duty? Is not this palpably our case?
Is there any wakening among us? No, security is both the universal disease and
complaint; And it is become an incurable disease, since it became a complaint.
Does any of you pray more in private then ye used? Or what edge is on your
prayers? Alas, the Lord will get good leave to go from us; It fears me, that
we would give Christ a Testimonial to go over Seas. Hold him, hold him. Nay,
the multitude would be gladly quite of him, they cannot abide his yoke, his
work is a burden, his word is a torment, his discipline is bands and cords; And
what heart can ye then have to keep Christ? What violence can ye offer to him
to hold him still? All your entreaties may be fair complements, but they would
never rent his garment. Secondly, There is no up-stirring to faith among us,
and laying hold on Jesus Christ, albeit all his dispensations warn us that it
is now high time. There are not many who are about this point effectually, to
stir up their faith, or to secure their interest. Think ye that conjectures
will carry you through difficulties. The multitude think they believe much, but
any temptation proves their mistake. The most part of Scotland would deny God
and his Son Jesus Christ, if they were put to it. Always it is a time ye would
not ly out from your strong hold faith only uniteth you to Christ, and if ye
would be kept in any trial stir up fait^.

Thirdly, Prayer and Faith, diligence and laying hold on God must go together,
and help one another. Not calling on his Name, and not laying hold on him go
together, and have influence o^e upon another. First, Faith has influence on
Prayer. Laying hold on God in Christ, will make right calling on his Name, it
learneth men how to call God, to call him Abba, Father. Faith uses to vent i^
self in Prayer; I say, much consideration of God, and claiming in to him, and
to the grounds of confidence in him, must both make Prayer acceptable, and
carry the stamp and impression of Gods Name, or Christ^ N^m^ o^ it, and also
make much prayer: for when a soul has pitched on God, as its only felicity,
and thus made choice of him, it finds in him all sufficiency, all things for
all things; There is no necessity, but it finds a supply in his fullness for
it; And therefore it applies a man to the fountain, to draw out of the wells
of salvation. There is nothing can be so sweet and refreshing, as for such a
soul to pour out it self every day in him, to talk with him face to face. Faith
ingageth the heart to come to God with all things; whereas many difficulties
would have been, and the secure or unsettled heart would have gone as many
different ways to help them: Faith laying hold on God, knows but one, and
brings all here. And therefore access to God is a fruit of it, access unto
the grace wherein we stand by faith, And again, how can Prayer be acceptable,
as long as Faith does not principle it; It is but like a beasts groaning under
a burden. Laying hold on God himself makes a man's duties acceptable, because he
speaks and asks, believing that he shall receive, he trusts God, and does not
tempt him. Where lively faith is not entertained, there cannot be much
affection, which is the oil of the wheels. There may be in some bitterness of
spirit much vehemence, but that is not a pure flame of divine love that burns
upward to him, and it is soon extinguished, and lasts no longer nor present
sense, and then the soul grows harder, as iron that had been in the fire.
Secondly, when there is not much prayer and calling, faith cannot be strong and
violent; for prayer is even the exercise of faith, if you wear out of that,
faith rusteth. There may be much quietness with little prayer, but there cannot
be much and strong and lively faith; for where it gets not continual
employment it faggs. And indeed prayer is a special point of holding God fast,
and keeping him, Therefore join these, if ye would thrive in any one of them.
Your unbelieving complaints are not prayers and calling on his Name, because
they are not mixed with faith. As the Apostle said of the Word, so may it be
said of Prayer, your prayers are not profitable, are not heard^ because not
mixed with faith. Ye use to doubt that ye may be fervent, to question your
interest, that ye may stir up your spirits to prayer: But alas, what a simple
gross mistake is that? Poor soul, though thou get more liberty, shall it be
counted access to God? Though you have more grief, and your bitterness does
indite more eloquence, shall God be moved with it? Know ye not that you should
ask without wavering, and lift up pure hands without wrath and doubting? and
yet both are there.

Fourthly, The duty we are called to in such a time when God is angry, is to
lay hold on him. We would speak a word more of it: And first, we ought to hold
a departing Lord, by wrestling with him in supplication, not to let bim depart
till he bless, Hos. 12. 3, 4. The application of Jacobs victory over the Angel
is thus, Turn ye to the Lord, and wait on him, etc. How had Jacob power over
the Angel? By supplication and weeping. So that prayer is a victory over God,
even the Lord God of Hosts. We ought (as it were) to strive against outward
dispensation; when it says, He is gone, when our condition says, He is gone,
or going, we ought to wrestle with it: No submission to such a departing, I
mean, no submission that sits down with it, and is not careful how it be.
Now this time calls you to such an exercise. The Lord seems to be angry
with us, there is a strong cloud over the Land, and like to pour down upon us,
the Lord is drawing a sword again, and beginning now to lay on: Many
threatenings would not put us to supplication; Now what will the laying on of
the rod do? If the former days be returning wherein ye saw much sorrow, Is it
not then high time for the Lords remembrancers, and for the Lords children to
wrestle with God. As Esau was coming on Jacob, so has God armed men, and such
desperate men, as he has made a rod to us before. If we be twice beaten with
it, it is very just, for before we did not seek in to him who smote us. You
would know this, that the Lord is but seeking employment, and if ye would deal
with him, ye may make advantage of the present and future calamities. And look
to this laying hold on him: This is the chief thing ye should now heed. It is
God himself that should be your principal object. Praying should be a laying
hold on God, it should meet with himself. For the most part in the time of
prosperity, we cannot meet with God singlely, we have so much to do with
creatures, we keep trysts so punctually with them, so that we cannot keep with
God:: We have so many things in our affections and thoughts, that God cannot
get place, he cannot get us at leisure for the throng of our business: we loss
God by catching at shadows. Well then, we are called in such a time of
difficulty to come in to God himself. to draw by the vail of Ordinances, that
we may have Communion with God himself. And this is right praying when the soul
gets such immediate access to God, as it were, to handle him, and see him,
and taste him, to exercise its senses on him. Ordinances have been of a long
time a covering of his face, and he uses not now to unvail himself in the
Sanctuary, and let us see his glory: God is departed from preaching and
praying, and the solemn meeting, so that we meet not with God, we lay hold on a
shadow of an outward Ordinance but not on God himself. Therefore Christians
make advantage of this time, you may be brought to want Ordinances, then lay
hold on himself, who is the substance and marrow of them: you may be denuded of
outward comforts and accommodation here, then lay hold on himself in much
prayer. If affliction would blow away the cloud on his face, or would scatter
our idols from us, and make us single alone with God, as Jacob was, it were
well sent.

Secondly, Your exercise should be to take hold on God by faith. And first ye
would make peace with God, be much in direct acts of apprehending God himself
in Jesus Christ. And this is according as ye take up your selves in your own
misery and n^c^ssity. Do but travel continually between your own misery and
something answerable in God.

The first thing we would have you do now when God frowns upon us, find out
your own lost condition, and how great strangers you have be^n to him, even
when ye have app^oached in many O^dinances: And find a necessity of making
peace with God and atonement. Now from this, lay hold on Christ as the hope set
before you, look upon that in him which will answer all your nec^ssities, and
be suitable to them. It is not matters of outward lot that should go nearest
your heart: Let the world go where it will, that which concerns you most in
such a time, is the securing your soul: for if ye loss it what gain you? What
keep you? Your houses and lands and lives may be in hazard: Nay, but one thing
is more worth then all these, and in more hazard. Begin at spiritual things,
and ask how matters stand between God and thee.

Secondly, Not only would ye be much in immediate application unto Jesus Christ,
but ye would so take hold of him, as ye may be sure ye have him. Make peace,
and know that ye have made it, and then shall ye be kept in perfect peace. You
would never rest until you can on solid grounds answer the question. And this
duty is called for from you at such a time, for the just shall live by faith,
in a troublesome time, Hab. 2. 4. And as ye ought to keep and hold fast
confidence, and not cast it away in such a time, so should ye all seek after
it: Do not only rest in this, I know not but I may belong to Christ, I dar not
say against it. O no Christians, you should have positive clear grounds of
assurance. I am his, and he is mine. I know that my Redeemer lives. God is my
portion. And if ye conclude this solidly, I defy all the world to shake and
trouble your peace: this is perfect peace, peace, peace, double peace. How can
you choose but be shaken at every blast of temptation, when you are not thus
solidly grounded, when you hold not at your Anchor.

And Thirdly, Having thus laid hold on Christ, as your own, lay hold on all in
him as yours, and for your use. Whatever difficulty the present time, or your
own condition afford, search but as much in God, as may counterballance it.
Answer all objections, from his Mercy, Goodness, Power, Wisdom,
Unchangableness: And this shall be more nor the trouble: God himself laid hold
upon, and made ours, is more nor removing a temporal Calamitv. It is an eternal
weight, to weigh down all Crosses and Disapointments. For what can present
things be? Is there not in the favor of his countenance, that which may drown
them in Oblivion? Are ye like to sink here? Is not God a sure Anchor to hold
by? And if you do not this, your trouble is nothing in respect of the danger of
your Soul, Secure and loose lying out of God, not putting this matter to a full
point, is worse nor all your outward fading. Therefore we exhort you in the
Lords Name, to fly in to this Name of the Lord, as a strong tower to run to and
be safe. When the Lord seems now to be angry with us, run not away from him,
though he should yet cloth himself with vengeance as a Garment.

But First, O ye poor people who have never asked this Question, whether have I
any Interest in Jesus? Ask it now, and resolve it in time. If trouble come on,
if scattering and desolation come on, and our Land fade as a Leaf, certainly
the Lords anger will drive you away. What will ye do in the time of his
Indignation? All of you put this to the trial, how matters stand between God
and you?

And Secondly, if ye find all wrong, do not sink in discouragement; All may be
amended, while it is seen wrong in time. Nay, God takes away outward
Accommodation, to make you more serious in this. And it is the very voice of
Rods, every one fly in to your hold, every one make peace with me. You may take
hold and do it feckfully.

Thirdly, You who have fled to Jesus, take more hold of him, you are called
also to renew your Faith, and begin again: Make peace with God, let your
confidence be kept fast, and thus shall ye be immovable, because he changes
not. God will not go from you if ye believe, hold him by Faith. Christ could
not do great things in Galilee, because of their unbelief, and so be departed
from them. As unbelief makes an evil heart, to depart from the God of all Life
and Consolation: So does it make Go^ depart from us. But Faith casts a knot
upon him (to speak with reverence) it fasteneth hi^ by his own Word and
Promise, and he cannot go by it. It is a violent hand laid o^ God. I will not
let thee go till thou bles^ me.

Fourthly, Faith and Prayer, or holding o^ God, by believing in him, and much
employing him, needs much stirring up unto, and awaking. That stirs up
himself to take hold o^ thee. Security is the moth of both these, and eats
out the life of Faith and Supplication: It makes Prayer so coldrife, that it
it cannon prevail, and Faith so weak, that it cannot us^ violence. F^^st,
security apprehends no evil no need. A secure condition is a dream, that one
is eating, and yet his Soul is empty. Loo^ how the people of Laish were quiet
and secure apprehending no evil; Destruction comes then on as an armed man.
Always, it is much necessity that administers fuel to a man's Faith, and
Supplication. David, Psalm. 30. 7. I sai^ in my prosperity, I shall not be
moved. Nay, but many say in adversity, and cry peace, peace, where no peace is.
Security pleads innocence, and then believes immunity. I am innocent,
therefore shall his anger turn away, Jer. 2. 35. Security applies not sin, and
so refuses the curse of sin, and wages of it. And thus is a man in his own
eyes, a lord, and then he will come no more to God, Jer. 2. 31. It is almost
impossible to awake men by general Judgments, ^o apprehend personal danger, and
men never stir out of their nest, till it be on fire. We can behold, or hear
of our neighbors spoiling, and violence done to them, but till the voice of a
cry be heard in our own Streets and Fields, no body will take the Judgment to
themselves. It is well said, that which is spoken to all, is spoken to none, so
what is done to all in general, is done to hone. The voice of a general Rod,
speaks not particularly, and makes not men apprehensive of sad things, and
thus men are not pressed unto prayer, are not put out of themselves; It is
only necessity that sapps the roots of it, and makes it green. Secondly,
Security is lazy and not active, puts not forth its hand to work, and so
dies a beggar, for, only the hand of the diligent makes rich. Laying hold on
God is a duty that requires much spirit in it: Men do not grip things well in
their slumbering. There is no Duty that needs so spiritual and lively
Principles. If a man do not put on such a piece of resolution and edge upon
him, he cannot come to the wrestling of Prayer, and violence of Faith. Although
the exercise and acting of Grace depends more upon the Spirit of God, his
present Influence, then upon the Soul of man, yet this is the way the Lord
communicates his Influence, by stirring up and exciting the Creature to its
duty, as if it could do it alone. Grace is one thing, and the stirring up of it
is another thing: For when we ly by and sleep over our time, and go not about
t^ matter so seriously, as it were life a^ death, it is but a weak hold we can
taken God. According to the measure of a m^ apprehending necessity, and
according the measure of his seriousness in these thin^ so will the hand of
Faith grip, and lay ho^ with more or less violence. As a m^ drowning, will be
put from sleeping, a^ when one is in extreem hazard, all his streng^ will unite
together in one, to do that whi^ at any ordinary time it could not do, so oug^
it to be here. A Christian assaulted wi^ many temptations, should unite his
streng^ and try the yondmost. O but your who^ spirits would run together, to
the saving ^ your self, if ye were very apprehensive of necessity. The exercise
of Faith is a dead gri^ that cannot part with what it grippet^ Therefore first,
we must say to you, it is (...) so easy a thing as you believe, to lay hold ^
God, there must be stirring up to it. A^ when the Lord speaks of our stirring
our selves, certainly he means this like waye^ that he must stir us, ere we
stir our selve^. Secondly, above all be afraid of a secure condition: It is
the enemy of Communion with God and spiritual Life; therefore look about you,
and apprehend more your necessity, and then give no rest and quietness to your
self, till you have employed and engaged him; Be as men flying, to lay hold on
the refuge set before you. Thirdly, It must be a time of little access to God,
and little Faith, when we are all secure, and no body goes about Religion as
their work and business. We allow our self in it. Therefore we do exhort you
first, to purpose this as your end to aim at, and purpose by Gods Grace to take
more hold of God. There is little minding of Duty, and that makes little doing
of it: Once engage your hearts to a love and desire of more of this, come to a
point of resolution. I must know him more, and trust more in him, be more
acquant with him. And Secondly, Put your self in the way of Duty. It is God
that only can stir you up, or apply your hearts to the using of violence to
God: But ye would be found in the outward means much, and in these ways God
will meet with you, if you wait on him in them.

For thou have bid thy face from us] Here is the greatest plague, a spiritual
plague. The last Verse was but the beginning of sorrows, We all do fade, etc.
But lo, here the accomplishnent of Misery, God hiding his face, and consuming
them in the hand of their sins. First, The Lords hiding of his Face, and giving
up a people to melt away in their sins, punishing with judicial blindness and
security, is the worst Judgment, it fills the Cup full. This complaint goes
on still worse. And certainly, it is worse, nor their fading as a leaf, and
exile out of their Land. It is not without reason, that great troubles and
afflictions are so expressed, thou hid thy face. As David said, thou hidst thy
face and I was troubled; importing as much, as it ^ not trouble that does
trouble, but Gods hideing of his Face that makes trouble troubl^ It is in so
far trouble, as it is a sign of his displeasure, and as the frowns of his
Countenance are upon it. Therefore, the Saint aggravating their Affliction say,
thou hide^ thy face. You know the face is the plac^ wherinto either kindness,
or unkindness appears. The Lords Countenance, or Face is a refreshful sweet
manifestation of himself to a Soul; It is the Lord using familiarity with a
spirit, and this made David more glad nor Corn and Wine. Now the hideing of the
Face, the withdrawing of his Countenance is, when the Lord in his Dispensation
and dealing does withhold the manifestation of himself, either in life or
consolation: When he covers himself with Clouds round about, that neither can
a soul see in to the backside of it, into his own warm heart, nor can the
Sunbeams shine through, to quicken and refresh the soul. The Lord draws over
his Face, a Vail of a crossing dispensation or such like.

There is a desertion of the soul in the point of life and spiritual action,
and there is a desertion in regard of consolation. The varieties of the Lords
desertions run upon these two. As a Christians life is action or consolation,
and the Lords influence is either quickening or comforting, so his withdrawing
is either a prejudice to the one or the other. Sometimes he goes mourning all
the day, nay, but he is sick of love: Sometime he is a bottle dried in the
smoke, and his moisture dried up. The Christians consolation may be
subtracted, and his life abide, but he cannot have spiritual consolation, if
he be not lively. This life is more substantial, comfort is more refreshful;
life is more solid, comfort sweet, that is true growing ^olid meat, ^his but
sauce to eat it with.

The hiding here meant is certainly a spiritual punishment. The Lord denying
unto this people grace to understand the voice of the rod, he appearing as a
party against them, leaving them to their own carnal and lazy temper, and thus
they lay still under Gods displeasure. Now there is nothing like this, first,
because it is a spiritual punishment, and estates are not to be valued and laid
in the balance with the soul. Albeit men are become so brutish as to abase
their souls, and prostitute them to any thing, yet all a man has, is not
considerable to it. Secondly, It is a more excellent thing is removed by it, In
his favor is life: all felicity and happiness is in Gods countenance. If a man
have not this, what has he else? Losses are according as the thing is. Nay,
but here is more, My Lord is taken from me, my God has forgotten me. And
indeed, if man's true happiness be in communion with God, certainly, any
interruption coming in must be sad, and make a man more miserable then the
world knows. There is a greater emphasis in that word. Thou have bid thy
face, then if he had said, All the world hides their face and makes a scorn
o^ us:

Therefore first, know, what is the wors^ thing of the times. Many of you think
sword and pestilence, and the burdens of the time, the worst things, and if you
were now to complain, the saddest complaint would be, Affliction is laid on our
loins. But know this, if your Cities were desolate, if your Land were made a
wilderness, and we captives in another Land, there is yet a worse thing then
all these, and think you not this strange? Nay, I say, there is something worse
already in us, that we know not of, and it is this, Make the hearts of this
people hard, A spirit of slumber and deadness from the Lord upon the Land:
There are multitudes he will never show his face unto; it is still veiled from
them, and they know him not. Ye that think all were well, if ye had peace and
prosperity, and know no hiding of Gods countenance, no anger but when he
strikes, certainly you know not what his countenance is, by all these things
men neither know love nor hatred. Secondly, Whatever calamity come upon you
outwardly, deprecat most spiritual plagues, and Gods deserting. If you have
Gods countenance, it may make you glad in much sadness. You would be most
careful lest any partition wall come in, lest his countenance change on you, if
you grieve his spirit and break his heart. Seek to have his face to shine, and
this shall be a Sun with healing under his wings. O but Christ's

countenance is comely, when it is seen without clouds; but often it is
overclouded with much provocation.

Secondly, The Lords hiding of his face has influence on the temper of
spirits, and disposition in duties. The truth is in general, In him we live,
and move, and ^ave our being: And more especially, in many things that is
spiritual* we are of our selves able to do nothing. The creatures holiness, and
especially our life, is but as the rays that the Sun of Righteousness sends
forth round about him, and if any thing come between, it evanisheth: As the
Marigold that opens it^ leaves when the Sun rises, and closes when it goes
down again, so exactly does our spiritual constitution follow the motions of
his countenance, and depend wholly on them, Thou hides thy face, and they are
troubled, Psalm. 104. 9. The Lord needs no more but discountenance us, and we
are gone.

Always first, be more dependent creatures; we use to act as from habits
within, without any subordination to the Lords grace without us, but we find
that our sufficiency is not of our self. How often does your spiritual
condition change on you in an hour? You cannot command one thought of God, or
act from any habit of grace even then when you can bring forth other gifts in
exercise. Ye find that grace finds more difficulties, more interruptions,
therefore learn to attend the changes and motions of his countenance.

Secondly, When you find your heart dead, and you concluded under an
impossibility of taking hold on God in a lively manner, then I pray you, look
unto the Lords suspending of his influence, and let your whole endeavors be at
the Throne of Grace to help it: It will not be vour own provoking of your self
to your duty, but you must put your self upon God, that he may cause his face
to shine.

Thirdly, Though the Lords hiding his face be often a cause of our deadness,
and his desertion makes all to wither, yet we have often a culpable hand in
it: And he hides his ^^ce, being provoked so to do. One thing we may mention;
Grieving of the Holy Ghost whereby we are sealed, quenching the motions of the
Spirit, makes the Spirit cover his face with a vail, and hide it. There is
here ordinarily a reciprocal or mutual influence. Our grieving him, makes him
withdraw his countenance, and his withdrawing his countenance, makes us to
wither and grow barren.

Fourthly, The most sure and infallible token of the Lords hiding his face, is
security, and a spirit of deadness and laziness; when folk go about duties
dreaming, and do all, as it were, through their sleep. Therefore we may conclude
sad things on this Land, that the Lord hides his face from us. And therefore
arise and do not settle and quiet your selves in such a condition: The Lord is
angry, needs any more be said? No more needs to kind children: but the rod
must follow this to make anger sensible.

FINIS.

