AN ANSWER BY Doctor Black: TO A LETTER WRITTEN To a Friend in the Country,
concerning Dr. Broun's Vindicatory Schedule, etc. By Philander.
MUch has been talked by some two or three young Physicians, Dolphingtouns
Disciples (for through all Scotland they do not exceed that number) of his
Answer to the Survey of the Vindicatory Schedule: It was said to be a piece,
that would so Nettle the Physicians his supposed Antagonists, and so confound
them; that they should wish never to have meddled in the Matter. Now it
appears, and so Silly a piece of Stuff is again obtruded upon the World, that
it should not be thought worth the while to Answer it, were it not to invite
these Gentlemen to enter the Lists; for better than this cannot be expected
from Dolphingtoun, or from any of his Abilities.

The greatest part of the Survey being spent in exposing the Author, and his
Schedule, about the end, the Hypothesis, and the method are seriously Refuted.
It might have been expected that Dolphingtoun's Counsel should have suggested
to him, to say something in Vindication of himself with respect to those
matters of Fact, with which he stands branded; and something for the
Hypothesis, which really is contrary to the circulation of the Blood, and to
the mechanical structure of the Heart and Arteries; and somewhat like ways in
favor of his method from reason; as also in defense of the many passages of
his Book, which are taxed with Nonsense, or Contradiction. But all these he
has industriously avoided, judging it fitter to amuse the World with general
Terms, (which every Blockhead that meets with opposition, may say in his own
defense) and reflections upon the Author of the Survey, whom he will not allow
to be one; but through all his Letter he speaks of him in the Plural Number; I
suppose it is because having in the 9th page called himself a Champion, he
thinks one too few to grapple with him. The truth is the greatest part of the
Survey admits no Answer, it being either his own in Terminis, or most natural
consequences drawn from it, intermixed with matters of Fact, which he has left,
as he found them, not thinking it convenient to rip up old Sores.

Before I enter upon examination of his Letter, it is to be observed that he
has got some good by the Survey; for his Friends have helped him to wipe his
Style, though not to any great degree: and under the covert of this, and the
personating another, he expects to hide himself: Yet in spite of this artifice,
his Synonima, which without doubt he has learned at the Letren, and his
perplexed Banter discover him perpetually.

He begins his Letter with a ridiculous story of Grief, and Pleasure, which
many have with relation to him and his method: They have grief, says he, when
they consider that their Friends, who dyed of Fevers, were not treated by the
purging method; since so much can be said for that method from reason, and
experience. But for all this fair flourish he says never a word for it either
from Reason or experience, except in the end, where he gives some instances of
Cures (of which in their due place) and he leaves unanswered, what was said in
the Survey against the method both from reason, and experience. In the next
place he tells us that least the Physicians should be branded with over sight,
or negligence because they have not been the first Discoverers or Entertainers
of this method, therefore they suppress it. Which is a gross Calumny: I know no
Physician either so wicked, or foolish, as to refuse a better method, than what
at present he practices, so he can be convinced, that there is any such: But I
think no wise Physician will quite the method he has found succesful, for a new
one established only upon the practice of one or two inconsiderable Physicians,
and these as unsuccesful as others; especially since Reason has formed so many
prejudices against it, that it is impossible for a judicious Person following
the dictates of his Reason, to determine himself that way. Besides it is
disingenous in Dolphingtoun to say that any foul means have been used to
suppress this his method: I know some foul ones have been used to advance it,
and its admirers; whereof some stand unanswered in the Survey.

The 2d. Parag. Is stuff't with Dolphingtoun's kind sentiments of pleasure,
that he is become an Author. For says he The inquisitive are not a little
delighted to find a concern so important handled so ingeniously, and a Design
so profitable, prosecute so plausibly. Tho the medical Art be truly, if it
contain any thing of certainty or reality, hid so deep from the eyes of Men,
that the world is much in doubt whether it be an Art or Artifice: Yet I find as
ye likewayes observe, that the Author in his Book has done prettily to prove it
an Art. Truly Fool- Andrew (for I cannot otherwise decipher this Philander)
what you have said here may give the world a sufficient Character of your
Vanity. for sure I am; was never more Incense burnt to Self-conceit, than is
done here: I must say Medicine has little to say for it self, it depend upon
Dolphingtoun's prettily done Book to prove it an Art.

What he talks of the Physicians faults in 3d, parag. I know none so guilty as
himself of these faults for which he blames Others; neither do I know any
Physician troubled about his charging them with faults, nor grudging at it; so
he might have had spared his pains.

'Twas no wonder if the Physicians humors had been raised, as he tells In the
4th, parag. To find an original piece of Banter obtruded upon the World, in
defense of a new method in Medicine, Stuff't with a Collection of things pick's
up here, and there, at Random; which have no more relation to one another, then
his Schedule has to Learning, or Sense: But they have neither breathed out
Malice, nor Spite against him; they have only told the truth to his Shame, were
he Capable of any.

The 5th, parag. Must be Ushered in with Revolutions, Reformations, Strugle,
and Commotion, Changes, and Earthquakes. One would think the Cat of Smalholm
were prophesying that the whole course of Nature should be in danger to be
dissolved, when Dolphingtouns new method were introduced into the World. His
Messenger of Satan did not succeed with him so well, to abuse the Scriptures
again. As his Friend, I would advise him to quite his Tub-preaching to others.

As to the 6th, parag. To bring in himself upon other men's practice, is as
notable an instance of his Envy, as any thing I know. Of Pride he has
arraigned himself already, acknowledging he needed Buffetting for his loftiness
of mind.

All that is said in the 7th, parag. about Splendor, and brightness of Truth,
and light of raising Dirt and Mist to throw upon the Propagators and Advancers
of Truth, is as far out of his road, as are his ridiculous stories of Luther,
and the Devil; Sir, Satan, and Dr. Sherlock, But in his Schedule he gives us a
Specimen of his reading in Medicine: Now he gives us one in Pamphlets. As for
his Book, it has got a more solid Answer, than it deserved: So he seems to be a
false Prophet.

For Answer to the 8th, parag. I know none that thought the debate in hand of
great importance: The method was Doctor Sydenham's, and the Schedule was
published to strengthen the Doctors Reasonings; but by ill luck it weakened
them: Solid reasons were given for the not using the method, but nothing can
convince a headstrong Fool enamoured with the productions of his own brain:
Neither is the Survey ridiculous, but so much of it as is his. And for the
personal reflections, they are all very true, and are in relation to his
practice; so that Merry Andrew has acquit himself like a man of parts, in
giving an answer, such as the subject deserved, or could bear; like a man
Probity, in exposing one, whose design is to Cozen the World: And were Fool-
Andrew a man of parts, he might Blush for his Book; but how it should Blush I
do not understand. If he will not be advised to leave off his Tub-preaching,
at least he would take care to cite the Scriptures right, for Faith is here set
down for Hope.

For Answer to the 9th, parag. I shall not condescend upon these men he charges
with Impudence, and Folly, since he thought it not fit to name them; but sure I
am, they have a larger share of both, than any of my acquaintance, if their
Impudence or Folly come near his. The ancient practice in Fevers has been
more succesful than his new practice, my assertion is as good as his denial,
and much better grounded. If it be delusion to think to put off the world with
Banter, etc. In such a weighty matter as this is, why has he wrote a Book of
Banter in this matter? and this very Letter of his is not free of it; for here
is a new Essay of that kind, though the petulancy of some superficial Pates
like the Authors, may be tickled, and Palats tinged with the same virulence of
Malice with the Libellers, may be gratified with such scurrilities: So natural
is this style to him, that in spite of his Feigned Person, and other endeavors
to conceal himself yet his speech still bewrayes him.

There is nothing in the 10th, parag. That deserves observation.

For Answer to the 11th, parag. The Survey sent him to Purgatory to Refine him
from his Dross; but he, ever fertile of new methods, has found out a new way
of Refining himself, which is to Snuff him, as they do a Candle, that his
virtue may shine more bright. Here we have a new Essay something in kin to
Banter, to Enconter Malice cartel Envy, and to defy detraction and defamation.

For Answer to the 12 parag he knows that D, Dal. and D, Dav. Entreated him not
to publish his Schedule, yet out it came, so impossible is it to persuade Fools
who are ever Fond of their own Productions And since he subjected his Schedule
to the consideration of all Ingenious Physicians, he has got the sentiments of
some of them about it little to his satisfaction; but nothing but applause will
please him, which no Ingenuous Physician can give.

For Answer to the 13th parag. here is another Instance of his Fondness of his
offspring. I shall allow him to compare himself to the Fattest fruit (he means
the Apples of Sodom) or to the Fattest Dear Horns and all together for I shall
not deny him a vegetable or sensitive Life: But to prefer himself to
Themistocles who can endure this? That loftiness of mind has yet need of the
Messenger of Satan.

For Answer to the 14th parag. All the sober and serious Men here are
comprehended within the number of two or three young Physicians, who think to
be taken notice off by pretending to something new, and out of the common road;
but if they have nor much honor of their Master, I leave it to every
indifferent Person to judge. He did well not to end his Latin verse, least he
should fall into the same Soloecismes he did last. A ridiculous piece ought to
be treated inridicule, which is not so sham a way of reasoning. If the Survey
had been such Merry Andrew stuff, it might have been the more easiy answered by
those who have so much Affinity to that kind of People; but it is a Pamphlet
stuff't with so much reason and truth, that Dolphingtoun has not found it
convenient to attaque any particular part of it. But of all men alive why
should Philander challenge Dr. Black for concealing his name.

The rest of his Letter, is taken up in performing what the Schedule first
prompted to be done. But were it not for fear to give offense to some Persons
who do not desire their Relations to be named, the public should get a
counterlist of those that have died under Dolphingtouns new method. I shall not
question but some have escaped under this method, which only proves, that
People though ill Treated may recover. But it is not at all reasonable that I
should believe all those People had truly we Fever, since Dolphingtoun had
the impudence to call that a Fever which two of the most eminent Physicians in
Edinburgh said was none, what will he not say where he is sole Physician, and
can meet with no contradiction. Upon the whole, that part of Hip. First Aph.
may be very well applied here, Experientia Fallax.

The Letter wrote by Malthus to Dr. Pitcarne came never to the Doctors hands,
and was never seen by any but Dolphingtoun, so not to be Credited, but said
upon design: But let is be so as he would have it, will the Testimony of an
Apothecary interessed upon Sydenham's Account, ruin a method approved by
Thousands for many Hundred of Years, to establish a new one with such manifest
contradiction? I think 'twill not.

Though Dolphingtouns ridiculous Hypothesis was sufficiently refuted before in
few words, yet finding some of our young Physicians applauding it, I thought it
would not be amiss to touch it again. I do not think it strange for one of
Dolphingtoun's Education to have such a confused notion of things, he having
never been Abroad at any University to follow the study of Medicine by the
advice and direction of able Professors appointed for that end: And having
received his Degrees only at Aberdeen, where there is no profession of
Medicine. Nothing less could have been expected from one who had never read the
Institutions, had never seen any dissections, courses of Chemistry, nor heard
any Colleges upon the practice of Medicine. But for others to pretend to have
had a more liberal Institution, and yet robe Proselites to Doctor
Dolphingtouns; who can think they have any regard to their Reputation?

There is nothing more absurd in all his Schedule than the, 7th and 8th,
Sections about His Hypothesis of the Essence and cause of Fevers. Every
Physician knows that the heart is a Muscle endued with spiral Fibers fitted for
Contraction; that it has two Ventricles for reception of the Blood in its
dilatation; that it has valvules of two kinds to hinder the return of the
Blood from the Arteries to the heart again; that the Arteries have transverse
Fibers, by which they contract themselves and press forward the Blood; It Is
certain that every part that is contracted has an innate faculty to perform
that Action, which is done by the influx of the animal Spirits into the Fibers
of whatever kind they are. On the contrary it is as certain that all parts,
that are dilated, can never dilate themselves, but when dilated they do ever
suffer Violence from the humors, or what ever else they contain ('It Is true the
Pharinx and the Cartilagines Aritenoides are dilated, not by any thing they
contain, but by reason of the Muscles joined to the outside of either, so is
the mouth dilated by the Muscles of the nether jaws.) It Is also certain that
the Ventricles of the heart (every one of which contains at least a Dragme of
Blood when dilated) are of the same substance with the inner Coats of the
Arteries and Veins, and are sensible of irritation; that in the dilatation of
the Heart, the Quantity, the Heat, the Weight, and the Distention through the
effervescence of the Blood do irritat it; that this irritation makes the heart
contract it self without respect to a final Cause (as this Dreamer Fancies to
himself; that at the same instant of the hearts contraction, the Blood is
thrust out with Violence into the Aorta and by Continuity into all the Arteries
of the Body, by which they are dilated, while the heart is contracted; and that
the Pulse that stricks our Fingers, is nothing else but the Dilatation of the
Arteries, occasioned by the contraction of the Heart at the same instant. For
Dolphingtoun then to allow, that in a Fever the pulses are more frequent, and
yet to say that the motion of the Blood is more slow, this is the greatest
Nonsense one can be capable of For at every pulse I suppose but adragme of the
Blood to bethrust into the Arteries by the contraction of the Heart, this Blood
can not return because of the Valvules, forward it must go, otherwise the
Arteries should burst asunder; and consequently the more frequent the pulses
are, the motion of the Blood must be the swifter.

It has been always a received Opinion, that heat in a Fever is the effect of
the rapide motion of the Blood Neither does Dolphingtoun's or Bontilo's
objection destroy this position, for though the Blood Stagnat in an
Inflammation, where the member is otherwise affected with more than ordinary
heat; yet there being such a quantity of extravased Blood, which does not
coagulat, but is still fluid, because of the few Spirits it retains; And the
capillary Arteries being distended with Blood, which is the cause of the pulse,
where there was none (...); it is no wonder if that part be affected ^^^h more
than ordinary heat, since it c^^^^ains more than ordinary Blood; for where
there is much Blood there Is much heat. I shall only send Dolphingtoun home to
Churn his Butter* to prove that there is heat in Fluids; after a few hours
motion of the Churn he will find the heat he denies; I use this Familiar
instance, because he never found the heat that is raised, when the spirit of
Vitriol is poured upon the Oil of Tartar, since he never saw the experiment.
In immoderate motion of the Body there Is a frequent motion of the Blood,
occasioned by the frequent motion of the Muscles, by this motion the heat is
raised before there be any Consumption or Waste. In this motion likewayes the
Blood is rarefied by the heat, the pores are opened, and sweat does for the
most part follow: But because of the separation of the serous part, the Blood
at length becomes more thick, which does not fall out till the pulse settle
again; But this Fool mistakes always the cause for the Effect.

His Diaphanous Blood, and his reflected, and refracted, rays of heat in the
Body are nonsense not worth the refuting.

After all, this ma^^^^ (...) not given us the definition of a Fever, (...)
which we may know its Nature, and E^^^^ce, and its difference from other
Diseases. But being weary to answer a Fool in his Folly, I leave this
Misanthrope to his own evil Genius, with this assurance, that whatever further
he writes, shall never be thought worthy of my Consideration.

FINIS.

