Britania Expirans OR, A BRIEF MEMORIAL OF COMMERCE Humbly Offered to the
Parliament,

LONDON, Printed. 1699.

Britannia Expirans.
TO the End there should be a Commerce amongst Men, it has pleased God to
invite, as it were, one Country to Traffic with another, by the Variety of
Things which the one has, and the other has not, which the Winds and Sea
proclaim; Quod and vento gentis locis dissipatas miscuit and sua omnia in
regiones ita descripsit, ut necessarium mortalibus esset inter ipsos comercium.
and this Seneca thought to be a principle Benefit of Nature, that there should
be a necessity of Commerce amongst Men.

IN what a miserable condition were the Netherlanders, if they received not a
Supply from other Nations; they have nothing of their own, and yet they abound
in all things by the Supply and Revenue they receive from other Nations.

IF any Kingdom under the Sun can subsist of it self, none has more reason to
bless God than this Island of ours, which is richly adorned with variety of all
things necessary for Man's Life and Welfare, as Corn, Cattle, Fish, Fowl, Sider,
Wool, Cloth, Leather, Tin, Lead, Iron, Hops, Timber, Flax, etc. whereby we have
not only sufficient for our Maintenance, but do abundantly supply the Wants of
other Nations, in a wonderful Variety of our Woollen Manufactures, Tin, Lead,
Leather, etc. and no one Commodity that can be named which we are under an
absolute Necessity of.

YET notwithstanding so many excellent and valuable Enjoyments, there is so
great a power in the Management and Contrivance of Commerce, that no Nation
has ever been under greater Declensions in Trade, at several periods of time
than ours; which by a Brief Survey of former Times, as well as by a due
Consideration of our present, seems to have been evidently occasioned By a too
great consumption of Foreign Commodities purchased with our Treasure; And by a
too great Indulgence of Foreign Merchants.

Edward III. laid the Foundation of our Riches, by the Establishment of our
Woollen Manufactures in England; Tricesimo septimo Ed. 3. cap. 9
to the carrying on of which Noble Design of his, he strictly enjoined the Wear
of our Woollen Manufactures, by several Ranks and Degrees of People by
Sumptuary Laws: He took exact care that Merchants Aliens, Tricesim. octavo Edw.
3. cap. 2.
who sold any Commodities in England, should invest the Money upon the Growth
of this Kingdom; And by his wise Conduct in these Affairs, he made a
considerable Advance in the Riches and Glory of England in a few Years.

Richard II. by the Neglect of his Grandfathers Rules lost ground as fast,
which made a great un-easiness amongst the Kentish Men (in which Parts the
Cloth-Trade was first established) even to a Rebellion. Anno quinto. Rich. II.
cap. 1.
He made England a Free Port, and gave a general Invitation by Act of
Parliament, to all Merchants Strangers to come with their Goods and Families,
cap. 2.
and Trade Freely in all Parts of his Dominions, as well within Franchises as
without, by Gross or Retail, to be under his safe Protection, and depart into
their own Countries as freely again: Anno undecimo Rich. II. cap. 7.
And if any Corporation gave them any disturbance, they should Forfeit their
Charter to the King; which mounted, in effect, to a general Act of
Naturalization; and upon Payment of their Customs beforehand, he made them a
considerable Abatement: He likewise gave them a liberty to Transport half their
Money. Decimo quarto, Rich. II. cap. 1.


BUT Alas! These mistaken Politics in few Years drained the Treasure of this
Kingdom to that low Ebb, that this Unfortunate Prince was denied a Loan of one
Thousand Pounds by the City of London and forced shamefully to resign the
Government. He married the Lady Anne Daughter to the Emperor Charles the
Fourth, who very much encouraged her Countrymen the Bohemians (to the
discontent of the English Nobility) and as the Historian tells us, she brought
in High-Head Attire, picked with Horns, and long-trained-Gowns for Women, a
Melancholy Omen in those days; and if we have any Plot carrying on amongst us
at this time, I persuade my Self it is in this particular; this being the
chiefest Seat of Treason at present. Sampson set the Philistines Cornfieldsd on
Fire with Foxes Tails, and if King Richard by this means was drove out of his
Kingdom I cannot tell but it may be a likely way to bring in -- or no -- Pride
and Luxury seems to bid fair.

Henry IV. Who succeeded him, Anno quarto Hen. IV. cap. 15.
soon perceived the mischief which his Kingdom sustained by this indulgence to
Foreign Merchants and in the Fourth Year of his Reign he obliged all Merchants
Strangers to bestow their whole Money upon the Commodities of this Realm; upon
forfeiture of any Gold, Silver or Plate which they should carry out, Excepting
their reasonable cost. And in the next Year it was Enacted, Anno quinto Hen. 4.
cap. 7
that Merchant-Strangers shall be entreated and demeaned within this Realm in
the manner form and condition as the Merchant-Denizens be or shall be entreated
or demeaned in the Parts beyond the Sea, upon pain of forfeiture to the King
the Goods and Chattels of such Merchant-Strangers. cap. 9.
he likewise obliged Merchant-Aliens to put in Sureties that they would employ
their Money upon Commodities of this Realm; and likewise appointed Officers to
inspect their buyings and sellings and in the Year 1406. he granted a Charter
to the Merchant-Adventurers of England.

Henry V. In the Fourth Year of his Reign confirms the aforesaid Laws. Anno
quarto Hen. V. cap. 5.
And in the Eighth Year of his Reign he obliged every Merchant-Stranger to
bring one ounce of Bullion of Gold to the Mint to be Coined for every Sack of
Wool which he bought, and one ounce of Gold or the vallue, Anno octavo, Hen. V.
cap. 2.
in Bullion of Silver for every three pieces of Tin upon forfeiture of the Wool
and Tin.

Henry VI. In the Second Year of his Reign strictly enjoined Merchant-Alliens
to put in Sureties in the Chancery, Anno secundo Hen. VI. c. 13.
every Company for them of their Company, that none of them should carry any
Gold or Silver out of the Kingdom, and if any Proof could be made beyond the
Sea upon any Merchant that went over, his Sureties was obliged to make it good
in England. Anno octavo Hen. VI. c. 24.
And whereas these Merchants-Alliens had obtained at this time a Credit with
many of their Merchandises whereby great losses fell upon the Manufacturers, it
was Enacted, That no Credit should be given by any Manufactuerer to such
Merchant-Alien upon forfeiture of his Goods. Decimo octavo Hen. VI. cap. 4.
In the Eighteenth Year of this Reign a farther Expedient was used to prevent
the Exportation of their Bullion, The Major, Bailif or Chief Officer of every
City where any Merchant-Alien should repair was ordered to Assign to every such
Merchant-Alien an Host or Surveyor, who was to survey all his Buyings and
Sellings and Register them into a Book and certify them into the Exchequer and
to have Two Pence in the Pound for all his Merchandises bought and sold; but in
this Act the Merchants of Almaine were Exempted which was a Company of Foraign
Merchants Established in England by Henry III. belonging to the Hans Towns in
Flanders and Germany, for some Extraordinary service they did in those days.

Edward IV. Took a more Effectual way to the cure of this evil after the
Example of Edward III. by appointing what kind of Apparel Men and Women of
every Vocation and Degree should wear, Anno tertio Edw. IV. cap. 5
which took away the Temptation of Exporting our Coin and Bullion. Anno tertio,
cap. 3.
He likewise Prohibited by Law the Importation of several wrought Manufactures,
particularly wrought Silk. If any Englishman or Welch-man shall bring in, Anno
tertio cap. 1.
or carry forth any Merchandise in Alien-Ships, if he may have Freight in a
Denizen-Ship, he shall Forfeit his Merchandise, which was an excellent step to
the safeguard of the Kingdom at that time. And in this Law a Penalty was laid
upon any Person that should wind up any Deceit in Wool. Anno quarto Ed. 4. cap.
1.
He likewise took exact Care that no Deceit should be used in making of Cloth,
that the Work People should not be imposed upon, with extraordinary Weight,
Paid with Commodities instead of Money.

HE made a Limitation in the Buying of Wool, Anno quarto cap. 3.
in favor of the Manufactures. He confirmed the Charter of the Merchant
Adventurers of England, and called in Question the Charter of the Foreign
Merchants of Almaine, or the Stillyard; which disgusted the Duke of Burgundy,
so far, that he put out a Proclamation, for the Banishment of English Cloths
out of his Dominion: Upon which a Law was made, that no Merchandises of the
Growth, or Workmanship, Anno quarto Ed. 4. cap. 5.
of any of the Countries subject to the Duke of Burgundy, shall be brought into
this Realm, until he revoke the Proclamation, in which, he was forced to
comply: And what Advance was made in this Kings Reign, from this just
Foundation of Trade, and Prudent Management, I leave to the more Judicious to
consider: He laid a strict Restraint upon Gamings; Anno decimo sept. E. 4. cap.
3.
and in the Twenty Second Year of his Reign, he made a new Sumptuary Law about
Apparel.

Richard III. who succeeded him, made many good Laws, in favor of his own
natural born Subjects, in direct opposition to the encroachments of Aliens, in
robbing them of their Employments, by the Importation of Foreign wrought
Manufactures, Anno primo Rich. 3. cap. 4.
and Settlement in England in our easy Handicraft Employments; leaving the most
laborious, as going to Plow, or Cart, etc. to our own Subjects, as is Expressed
in the said Law. The Italian Merchants were particularly Complained of at this
time, as Venetians, Florentines, Apulians, Cicilians, Lucaners, etc. by which
Law, no Alien could Exercise any Handicraft Trade, without being Servants to
our English Subjects, or depart the Realm.

Henry VII. was more exact in this particular than any of his Predecessors:
Anno primo Hen. 7. cap. 2.
By the Second Law he made, he enjoined Aliens made Denizens, by Letters
Pattents, or by Acts of Parliaments, to pay Aliens Duties; in the next place it
was Enacted, that no Goods should be Entered, but in the Name of the true
Owners of the Goods, upon Forfeiture of the Goods, Imprisonment, Tertio. Hen.
7. cap. 7.
and to be Fined at the Kings Pleasure; a Law (respecting the true English
Interest) which deserved to be wrote in Letters of Gold. cap. 11.
He suffered no Cloth to be Transported, until it was Barbed, Rowed and Shorn,
and Confirmed the Charter of the Merchant Adventurers of England. Anno quarto
Hen. 7. cap. 10.
For the Encouragement of our Navigation, it was Enacted, that no Person should
Freight in a Strangers Ship, to be brought into this Realm or carried out, Anno
undecimo Hen. 7. cap. 14.
if he may have sufficient Freight in the same Port in a Denizens Ship: And
after Ten Years Experience he renewed the Law, to oblige Aliens made Denizens,
to pay the same Duties as if they were Aliens. Trade being thus Settled in the
Reign of Edward IV. upon just and fair Grounds, and carried on with all
strictness, in the just Right and Favor of our English Merchants, until the
end of this Reign: It produced a strange alteration of Affairs; whereas Richard
II. was denied a Loan of a Thousand Pounds, there was now left in the Treasury,
One Million Eight Hundred Thousand Pounds, Anno secundo Hen. 6. cap. 13.
which made of our Money above Three Millions; a Pound Troy of Silver being
limited by Law, in the Second Year of Henry VI. not to be Sold above Thirty
Shillings.

Henry VIII. took quite contrary measures; and which is very remarkable,
Merchants Aliens became as much the Favorites of this Reign. Decimo nono Hen.
7. cap. 22.
At the death of Henry VII. a former Law which prohibited Men of Chalice, to be
Factors for Merchants Aliens living in England, was repealed; as likewise all
Laws, Ordinances, etc. made in derogation of the Merchants of the Stilliard, in
the First Year of this Reign. The Law made in the Third Year of Henry VII.
which obliged all Persons, to enter their Goods in the true Proprietors Name,
was likewise repealed. In the Fifth Year of this Reign, Anno primo Hen. 8. cap.
2.
a Liberty was obtained to Transport any Cloth, without being fully
Manufactur'd, under the value of Five Mark, which was a considerable Rate
according to the value of their Coin; upon this pretense, that when they were
brought beyond the Seas, Anno quinto Hen. 8. cap. 3.
and put into Colors, they must be new dressed, barbed, shorn and rowed; so
natural is it for Merchants of all Countries to Favor their own Subjects. In
the Fourteenth Year of this Reign, Strangers Artificers were allowed to
Exercise their Trades in England, contrary to the Law made in the Reign of
Richard III. which occasioned so great Discontent in England, that a Decree
made in the Star Chamber was put forth, 21 Hen, VIII.
to Prohibit all Strangers not made Denizens, to keep House or Shops: In the
Thirty Second Year of this Reign, Aliens Duties was taken off, for a certain
time, by the Kings Proclamation; which gave that Advantage to Merchants Aliens,
22 cap. 18.
that our English Merchandise was almost rooted out, and our English Navigation
very much sunk. Foreign Merchants of the Stilliard, Shipped off at this time,
above Forty Thousand Cloths a Year, and our English Merchants not Four
Thousand; and most that was Exported and Imported, was in Foreign Botoms,
which is Verbatim expressed in the Journals of Edward VI.

Edward VI. (of Blessed Memory) used all Endeavor to retrieve what his Father
lost, by Establishing Trade upon a just and honest Basis, in the right of his
own Subjects; and in the Year 1552. the English Merchants being brought to this
low Ebb in Trade, put in their complaint to the King and Council against these
Merchants Tutonicorum (as they styled themselves) and they gave in their Answer
to the said Complaint upon the Eighteenth Day of January, and upon the 25th
their Answer was delivered to some Learned Council to peruse it; upon the
Eighteenth day of February the Merchant-Adventurers put in their Replication to
the said Answer; and upon the Twenty Third a Decree was made by the Board, that
upon Knowledge and Information of their Charters, they had found, First, That
they were no sufficient Corporation; Secondly, That their Names, Numbers, and
Notions were unknown: Thirdly, When Edward the Fourth did restore them to their
Privileges, it was upon the condition that they should cover no Foreigners
Goods, which they had done: For these Considerations, Sentence was given, That
they had forfeited their Liberties, and were to be no more than Strangers. Upon
the 28th Day came Ambassadors from Hamburgh, Lubeck, and the Regent of
Flanders, to speak upon the behalf of these Merchants Tutonicorum. And upon the
Second of March the Answer for the Ambassadors was committed to the Lord
Chancellor, the two Secretaries Sir Robert Bows and Sir John Baker, Judge
Mountague Griffith, Solicitors Gosnald, Goodrick, and Brooks; it remained under
Consideration until the First day of May, and then the Merchants Tutonicorum
received their full Answer, confirming the former Judgment of the Council. This
gave great Encouragement to English Men to come into the Company of
Merchant-Adventurers. In October 3. following there met Three hundred
Merchant-Adventurers of that Company, and lent Edward the Sixth Forty thousand
Pounds to be paid in Flanders; and they Shipped off at that time Forty thousand
Cloths. Our Woollen Manufactures at this time were wonderfully debast, Anno
quinto and sexto Edw. 6. cap. 6.
as appears by the Preamble of the Statute made in the same Year. Gold was paid
at advance Prices at the same time; and I think there was never more effectual
Means used in any Reign, to discourage the Profuseness which this Kingdom was
led into, cap. 19.
in the long Reign of Henry the Eighth. To prevent the Abuses and Disorders in
Alehouses and Tippling-Houses, a Power was given by Law to the Justices of
Peace, to Remove, Discharge, and put away common selling of Ale and Beer, as
they shall think convenient; and none allowed without giving Bond and Surety
against using unlawful Games, Anno quinto and sexto Epw. 6. cap. 25.
and for maintaining good Order and Rule.

AND whereas at this time great numbers of Taverns were set up in back-Lanes,
Corners, and suspicious Places within the City of London, which produced many
Inconveniences, Anno septimo Edw. 6. cap. 5.
much Evil Rule, and common resort of misrul'd Persons. The Price of French
Wine was limited to Eight Pence a Gallon at the most.

AND the number of Taverns reduced to Forty in the City of London, and no
Persons to keep any Wine in their Houses under such Qualifications. These had
been the most effectual means to discourage Profaneness and Imorality, so often
recommended by His Majesty. Sine cerere and Bacco friget Venus. -- And I think
I may say we have had Forty new erected Taverns in the City of London, since
our Reformation, made out of English Merchants Houses: A very commodious
Accommodation to Merchant Aliens.

Queen Mary in the First Year of her Reign made a good step to regulate Persons
in their Habits, according to their Professions and Employments. Whosoever
shall wear Silk in or upon his Hat, Bonet, Girdle, Scabbard, Hose, Shoes,
Spurleather, shall be three Months imprisoned, and forfeit 10 l. except Mayors,
Aldermen, etc. If any Person knowing his Servant to offend, do not put him out
of his Service within Fourteen Days, or do retain him again, Anno primo Ph. and
Mar. c. 2.
he shall forfeit 100 l. This Counsel would never have consented to the vast
Charge and Hazard of our Fleet in the Straights, to bring home this Commodity.
There was an attempt made in this Reign by the Foreign Merchants of the
Stilliard to regain their Liberties by the Favor of King Philip, but it proved
ineffectual. In the Year 1557 we lost Calais, which of a long time had been the
chief Mart of English Goods.

Queen Elizabeth confirmed the Charter of the Merchant-Adventurers of England
and added Hambrough, East and West-Frizland to their Charter and upon
Stipulation with the Town of Hambrough, as large Privileges are granted to the
English Factory as they had in former Time at Calais a very commodious Place to
the Service of Germany. In the first Year of Her Reign she revived the Law made
by Henry the Seventh, Anno primo Eliz. cap. 11.
that no Person, Denizen nor Stranger, do take upon him to Enter or Do, or
Cause to be Entered, any manner of Goods coming In or going Out, in the Name or
Names of any other Person or Persons, than the very true Owner or Owners of the
Goods, upon Forfeiture of the Goods; and at this time Aliens Duties were called
the Ancient Revenue of the Crown.

In the next Place She made an effectual Law to preserve the Employment of our
Navigation, cap. 13.
by obliging all Persons, that Shipped any Goods upon Foreign Bottoms, to pay
Aliens Duties: In this Law She limited the Merchant-Adventurers to two
Shippings a Year and no more. In the Fifth Year of Her Reign a Law was made to
prevent any Credit which should be given with Foreign Goods, Anno quinto Eliz.
cap. 6.
appertaining to the Clothing or Adorning of the Body, by rendering the Person
that Sold them incapable to recover his Money. In the Thirteenth Year of Her
Reign, She obliged every Person above the Age of Seven Years to wear upon the
Sabbath Day upon their Head a Cap of Wool, Knit, Slick'd and Dressed in
England, Decimo tertio Eliz. cap. 19.
except Maids, Ladies, Gentlewomen, Noble Personages, and every Lord, Knight,
and Gentleman of Twenty Mark Land, and their Heirs and such as have bore Office
of Worship in any City, Borough, Town, Hamblet or Shire, and the Wardens of the
Worshipful City of London. upon pain to Forfeit for every Days not wearing,
Three Shillings and Four Pence: So careful was She to preserve the Employment
of Her own Subjects.

When each Woman in England, in King Charles the Second and King James's Reign,
was a standing Revenue to the King of France, by his Alamodes and Lustrings;
this was the last Sumptuary Law made in England, and what Figure England made
in the World, and how firm this Queen stood in the true Interest of the
Populacy, I need not multiply Words to relate.

King James I. in the First Year of his Reign, Repeals all sumptuary Rules,
Anno primo Jac. I. cap. 25.
and let loose the Reins to Excess in Apparel and Wine, in Favor of Scotland;
He likewise Repealed the Law against Hawkers and Pedlers, cap. 33.
made in the Reign of Edward the Sixth, and gave Liberty to Transport our Wool
under the Custom of Thirty three Shillings Four Pence of every Merchant born
Denizen for a Sack, which contained Eighteen Score; and Three Pound Six
Shillings Eight Pence for every Merchant Stranger not born Denizen. And I think
I need not spend time to show how this Physic worked by degrees amongst our
English Subjects, but am well assured by one Misselden a Merchant, that wrote
in the Year 1622 a little Tract upon the Decay of the Trade in England, That
Indian Commodities was got into England as much in those Days as in ours, which
he then urged as the chief Cause of the Scarcity of Money in England at that
time. In the Seventh Year of this Reign we had an English Parliament sat,
which gave a Subsidy to the King (out of all Goods and Merchandises) of Two
Shillings and Eight Pence in the Pound, to be paid by every Person born within
this Realm of England; and Five Shillings and Four Pence by every Alien and
Stranger born out of the King's Obeisance: Four Shillings in the Pound out of
all Land in the Hands of all Persons born under the Kings Obeisance; and Eight
Shillings in the Pound out of all Lands in the Hands of Aliens, Denizens or not
Denizens, born out of the King's Obeisance. How sar this distasted the Court at
that time I cannot tell, but no Parliament was called until Fourteen Years
after. Foelix quam faciunt, etc.

Charles the First did nothing in Trade for the good of his Subjects.

Oliver Cromwell put out a Proclamation upon the Thirteenth Day of May 1655, to
support the Merchant-Adventurers of England in their Trade, and particularly
Established a Staple for English Goods at Dordrecht in Holland, which place was
agreed upon between the Fellowship of the Merchant-Adventurers of England, and
the Magistrates of that City; he strictly forbad any English
Woollen-Manufactures to be carried to any other Parts of Holland; and at this
time our East India Trade was quite sunk. Lands in England was never higher
than at this time; nor ever a more general Employment for our Poor; which
brought much Riches in few Years into this Kingdom, and gave such satisfaction
to our Artificers, that those times are still remembered with Veneration to this
very day.

Charles the II. laid the Foundation of our Misfortunes in Trade, by the
Settlement of the Book of Rates so much in favor of France, and our East India
Company; particularly upon the Article of Linnens, which is a Commodity of
great Use in England, and our Plantations, and natural to be raised in France,
Flanders and Germany; which three Places stand in Competition with this
Commodity, and the least favor in Customs given to any one, must needs
distance the other, Flemish, Gentish, Isingam, Overisils, Rouse, Brabant,
Embden, Frieze-Cloth, Bag-Holland, Brown Holland, all Flanders Linnens was
charged at three pence per Ell Custom; Fine Broad Dowlas of France, the Piece
containing one hundred and six Else, was charged at Five Shillings, a little
above one halfpenny per Ell; and all other sorts of Linen in like proportion;
a piece of fine Lawns containing thirteen Else of Germany Linens, was charged
at six Shillings Custom, a piece of fine Muslin or Callico from the
East Indies, sixpence per piece. This impoverisht the Linen-Manufactures in
Flanders and Germany, and as much advanced the French, which made way to the
French Conquests in those Parts. As the Consumption of Flanders and Germany
Linnens lessened in England, the consumption of our Woollen-Manufactures sunk
in a like proportion in those Parts; which in the Year 1663, made the
Woollen-Manufacturers Petition the Parliament against the Merchant-Adventurers
having large Stocks of Cloth upon their hands which they could not Sell; the
Parliament at that time Addresseth the King to make a Trial of a Free-Trade,
which was then seconded by some other English Merchants who were not Free of
that Company, who prevailed, and with strained, false Cloth made some advantage
to themselves in Flanders and Holland at the first time; but this Gap being
opened to the Hollanders, the English Interlopers were totally rooted out by
the Dutch and other Nations, and Agents for them settled in England, which is
well in Memory: Wool sunk from twenty five shillings per Todd to fourteen, and
the other produce of Land in like proportion; and this un-easiness gained
another Advantage to the French and Dutch; In the twenty fifth Year of King
Charles II. a Law was procured to take off Aliens-Duties, which was the Fatal
Stroke to our English Merchandise and Navigation, which by this Means was
preserved from the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. It is well remembered how all
French Commodities were encouraged in England, Linen, Clarets, Brandy, Silks,
Gauzes, nay, Druggetts made of our own Wool, etc. The French could now turn
their Clarets and Brandy into Perpetuana's and Colchester Bays, and send them
to Spain upon as good Terms as any Englishman, and have Home Pieces of Eight in
Return, and Spanish Wool in a settled Course of Trade, which the King of
France improved to the very utmost, and upon a Modest Computation, above a
quarter part of the Wool of this Kingdom was carried into France.

James the II. did nothing relating to Trade in his Reign; His Martial Genius
led him to the execution of that which was prepared in the last. And upon this
foot we stood at the Revolution, at which time we could not reasonably promise
our selves any safety without lessening the power of France, who, by the
enjoyment of these advantages in Trade ever since the beginning of the Reign of
King Charles the Second, was come to a prodigious height. The stop of our
Wool, the Improvement of our Manufacture; English Merchandise and Navigation,
the natural supply of our Treasure to a thinking Politician, might have been a
good help to the attainment of this End; but nothing alas! of this could be
done without touching the Interest of Holland; and in the heat of these
Affairs, the Vogue of a free Trade, a free Trade! Lil-ly Bullero, a free Trade
-- so much prevailed, that instead of making up our Mounds which were pulled
down in K. Charles II's Reign, like the inconsiderate Trojans, we pulled down
our Walls to let them in, and ushered in a Clause by way of Rider, in a
pretended Bill to prevent the Exportation of Wool to the Destruction of our
Factories abroad; the Father destroyed his own Son, and all opposition to this
Interest in Trade, has hitherto proved ineffectual. A numerous Petition the
very next Year to prevent the Transportation of Wool by taking off the Felony,
and to redress some Grievances in Trade, from a County then declining in Trade,
but since miserable, was presented to the Parliament, and a Bill was ordered in
upon the Prayer of the Petition, which being framed to the disadvantage of this
Interest, was the First Year baffled; a second attempt made; a third, a fourth,
it still lay upon the Table, like the Lame Man at the Pool of Bethesday; and
when any Motion was made to bring it to a Hearing, some more important Affair
always stepped in -- A Bill for the Royal Lustring Company -- To Naturalize
Solomon Amey, a Frenchman (who has since cheated our Clothiers of a
considerable Sum, and wrote them from Holland, if they will not take Ten
Shillings in the Pound he will pay none) to out of an Entail -- to cut a River
-- O quanto plausu! quibus haec complectimur ulnis! and, which was very
remarkable, that Member which was most zealous for this foreign Interest,
seldom mist Preferment, Sr -- S -- Sr -- Y. -- Mr. C. -- or any other that the
Coat will fit. If the Disappointments in the Funds prolonged the War two Years,
had good Care been taken in this partilar, I am satisfied the War had ended
four Years sooner. Our Poor cost Seven Hundred Thousand Pound in Charity per
Annum, the French earned as much out of our Wool.

How often was the Consideration of Trade recommended by His Majesty's Most
Gracious Speech, which part of it was like the Rabbis Greek -- Non potest
legi. Our Savior, in a Parable, tells us of a Man that had two Sons, and he
came to the one and said, go work in my Vinyard, and he answered, (upon what
scruple I cannot tell) I will not, but afterward upon due consideration,
repented and went; he said likewise to the other, and before the Words were out
of his Mouth, he seems to Answer, I go Sir -- but never went. I think I may
fairly borrow the Words of Juvinal, and assert them in a great deal of Truth at
this time, with a little Variation; Et spes and ratio bonorum in Caesare
tantum: Solus enim artifices hac tempestate Egenos respexit -- Sat. 7. And true
Love of this kind always begat Love in England, which to Queen Elizabeth was a
better security than a Standing Army. War, we are told is now become a Trade,
and Management the Principle Art of War; and such Qualifications needful to our
Soldiery, as for Men set apart to the Gospel. I cannot but disagree with these
Qualifications from our late Experience, when the Army began to Preach as well
as Fight, we had soon no King. It must be confessed, that the Power of France was
so great, that it made up a full Apprentiship in War to bring this Potent
Prince within his due Bounds, and no Prince but ours, could ever have turned
the Tide of his Ambition. Notwithstanding which it does not follow, that
Soldiery shall be a standing Trade in England, because it was never thought to
be our Natural Strength; and if it be allowed, That France came to this
extraordinary Greatness by the advantages which he enjoyed by the Manufacture
of our Wool, the large consumption of his Linnens, Alamodes, Claret, Brandy,
Paper, etc. in England, the whole Reign of King Charles the Second, and King
James; and upon the other hand, that England, Germany and Flanders have been
impoverisht by a lessening the consumption of our Woollen Manufactures, and the
Linnens of Flanders and Germany, it does follow, that this Greatness of France
was purely accidental (Money being the Sinews of War) and if so, Landforces in
England are to be esteemed no more than accidental, and safely to be laid aside
when these extraordinary supplies of the French Treasure are intercepted, which
is now in our power to do, But France is at this time too strong a Match in
Flanders for any single Nation in Europe, not excepting England. Which may be
allowed, yet I doubt not, but Spain, the Emperor and Holland are able to
balance his Greatness, the Emperor being disengaged in his War with the Turks,
and the Dutch having obtained a Revenue out of Ergland since the War which
would hugely augment their Forces if need require. Our Soldiers being
disbanded, will fall into Employments, which will increase our Treasure; many
may come into our Militia, and thereby not only preserve their Exercise, but
encourage others; and if any thing extraordinary should happen, a small Reward
would gain many of them again; and an Army kept in England with our Beef, etc.
but few Years, I am of Opinion, would shrink at first time at the Hardships
abroad, as new-rais'd-Men has done; and supposing the Duke of Monmouth had been
a Frenchman, and our Western Manufacturers flusht in Employment, they had soon
made Dice of his Bones; this Gentleman, by his fondness of Alliances and
Confederacies abroad, seemed to be taken with the Vanity of the Stag, who fell
in love with his Horns, and despised his Legs. And this brings me to the Proof
of my Assertion.

And in the First Place I will consider our Coin, the artificial Matter of
Commerce, which is said to be the Sinews of War and of State, and I very much
doubt in this Point we are Expiring; a Commonwealth is like unto a Private
Family, where if the Expense is greater than the Revenue, he must needs come
behind-hand, which seems to be our Case at present, the quantum of our Coined
Silver out of our Clipt-Money and Plate, I think was about Five or Six
Millions, a very scanty allowance to carry on the Commerce of this Kingdom, and
if that Tale was to be made good at this time, I would not be the Security for
one Million -- Upon the consideration first of the Price of Bullion, ever since
the Coinage has been over, which has been from five shillings seven pence
halfpenny per ounce, to five Shillings three Pence, rising and falling, at
this time about five shillings six pence, and as the Exchange to Cales now
rules, there is no likelihood of any alteration. The Arrival of the Galeons nor
Flota has turned the Tide. The late Act of Parliament for consolidating our
Gold and Silver-Lace has had a very good effect in the increase of that Wear in
Occular Demonstration. The Exportation of our Bullion to the East Indies bears
an equal proportion to our consumption of Muzlins and Indian Commodities, which
is so great, that we are forced to ransack all Christendom for Silver, which
lately disturbed our rich Neighbors (who are the Pattern of a Free-Trade)
fearing that we were about to shake the Bank of Amsterdam, tho not half a
balance to what was Shipped hence to Holland, in the prime time of our
Clipping, as the Bills of Entry will demonstrate. When we have been so lately
in the Sudds by a general Clipping and Exchanging of Broad Money, to expect so
sudden an alteration, that twenty eight pound of Silver in Coin shall be paid
away to purchase twenty five pounds and an half of the same Commodity is too
great a presumption, I doubt, whilst the Refining-Pot knows no distinction.
Doctor Lock, in his Position, That an equal quantity of Silver is always of
equal value to an equal quantity of Silver, I think was scarce Orthodox on
either side. We may with less difficulty be slipped out of our Silver Coin than
we had to procure it, and the difficulty of former times will I hope, put us
upon Consideration in this matter in due time. The Banishment of all
Cotton-Linens out of Enrope was once proposed at a Treaty of Nimeguen, which
would be an excellent Expedient at this time, to increase the Treasure of
Christendom, to strengthen our Alliance by a profitable Commerce in our Woollen
Manufactures, and the Flaxen Linens of Flanders, Germany and Holland, which
will be the best Guard against France; establish a more solid Foundation for
Charity, and make our Habits more agreeable to our Profession. Had Dorcas's
Garments been made of Muslin, her Name had hardly been memoriz'd by the Tears
of the Poor. Solomon compares a Virtuous Woman to the Merchants Ships, Prove.
31. v. 14.
and I think, no Women were ever so exact to the Letter of the Simile as ours
in Flag and Sail, extended in levity a prora puppique, and if they do not so
fully answer the end of the Simile, as might be wished, in bringing home our
Treasure, as is seemingly intimated by the Wool, Flax, Spindle and Distaff, I
am sure they contribute very much by their Musling-Sails, to the carrying of it
out; had Solomon lived in our days, all his Wisdom had failed him in
distinguishing the Harlot by her Attire. And since these Indian Commodities has
made so little difference between Abigail and my Lady in Habits, the Master too
often took one instead of the other; which may have occasioned a greater
inconveniency than we are well aware of, in preventing the due reproofs of this
extravagancy, through fear of a closer application at Home. Lectures against
Pride were Jewels by their rarity in our late Reigns, and hereby this Monster
Pride has made her own Intrenchment.

The next Point to be considered is our Merchandise, in which we are evidently
expiring. Eight Parts in Ten of the Native Commodities of this Kingdom which
are Transported, I am well assured are bought in England by Foreign Merchants,
and our English Factories abroad sunk in a like proportion, and a very great
share of the profit of our easy, Retail Trades in England, is geting into the
hands of Aliens of a lower degree. Nay, we have Wooll-brogging Jews. It was
said in the Reign of Edward the Sixth, that their Names, Numbers and Nations
were unknown, and into what a Babel are we got into, an Englishman may soon
lose his own Language upon the East part of our Exchange. I cannot but wish the
Wind may vary from that Point, that we may carry our Merchandise out, and they
tarry at home. The reason which was urged in Henry the Seventh's Reign, was,
that when Foreigners had got Estates in England, they carried them into their
own Countries, which is very natural, as our Merchants brought their Estates
home; but here is the odds, there is a Seminary of Merchants still growing in
England out of the younger Sons of our Gentry, who have always Fortunes given
them by their Friends, when most of these Foreigners come very light into
England, wholly depending upon Commissions, which is now drove very low, and if
they take to drink high, instead of carrying an Estate home, in a fair way, they
many times make their Fortunes by the loss of our Manufacturers; get an Estate
over and never pay -- as Trade is now settled, in Advices twice a Week, how all
Commodities govern, a Dutch or German Merchant can manage a Stock in England by
an Agent of his lodging in a Garet at a Packer's House; or by some Englishman
for one per Cent. Commission, whilst his Stock is secure from any Taxes -- and
the whole benefit and influence thereof accrews to his own Countrymen. No Man
fixed in a good way of living in his Native Country, will be willing to leave
it, and if we must make them fat here, I cannot but think our own Subjects (by a
preservation of their Rights) will thrive best in our own Pastures. How much
per Cent. the profit of our Merchandise may be allowed to be, or what Concern
it is for us to secure this Employment for the youner Sons of our Gentry, I
shall not determine; only consider briefly the attendant inconveniences of
this alteration to the Public.

I. THE Government of Trade is hereby taken out of our hands, which gives
double advantage to the Alien in buying of our Goods, and selling of his own;
as likewise, in some measure the Government of the Exchange. No Person now
living, can remember the like loss that our Nation lately sustained in this
particular; twenty five per Cent. advantage in Remittance of Money to buy
Tallies at Five and Forty per Cent. and receive Eight per Cent. Interest, which
Money is now spent in Holland, a hard Article upon us, that so great a part of
the Revenue of our Kingdom is spent abroad. Madder is sold above double the
usual Price, Spiceries a third part advance, etc.

II. Since this Alteration vast quantities of our Wool has been Transported,
our Manufactures much debased, carried off without being fully manufactur'd,
and many Goods smuggled to the loss of the King's Custom.

III. THE strength of our Nation, in case of a War is hereby much lessened.
Supposing a War with Holland, and the Exeter Serge-Makers wholly depending upon
Dutch Merchants; they could not subsist long, when many instances may be
brought in the like Case, when the Merchant-Adventurers of England took off
vast quantities of Goods and laid them up to the outside of their Stocks, and
being Men of Interest borrowed much more for the same purpose, and the Service
they did this Kingdom Anno 88, is worthy to be remembered to their honor; when
they supplied the Navy-Royal with a whole Ships lading of Powder and Shot from
Hamburgh, which came luckily, even in articulo temporis, when there was a great
want thereof; and far greater quantities of Cloth has been Shipped off by this
Company than ever was in a loose, disorderly Trade, and larger English Ships
employed, which would be of Service in a War.

IV. Hereby the sharpest People of all Countries are let in upon us. After our
Coin was pared to the quick, it was admirable to hear the Logical Discourses of
our Coffee-Houses upon the intrinsic value of a Guinea, which by the strength
of Reason was brought up to Thirty Shillings, directly contrary to a Law made
in the Reign of Edward the Sixth; being settled a little time at this value,
and considerable Payments made to our Woollen-Manufacturers for large
quantities of Goods bought at little or no Advance; the Summer Crop of Wool
bought up, some for Holland, and another part by our Wooll-boggers; about
Michaelmas the danger of the Fall of Guineas begin to appear; those that had
Wool remaining upon hand, would not sell but at a proportionable advance, the
Jobbers held theirs at a like Rate, the Manufacturer is brought upon the Rack,
to take the Wool at this Price, or his Work-People starve; as soon as this is
done, and Goods came to Market early in the Spring, the Tide turned, all was at
Stake if the Price of Guineas was not brought down; the Manufacturers that had
the dear Goods upon hand, petitioned the Parliament to ward the Blow, but
ineffectual; the Guineas made a trip to Holland, which made a stop in Trade;
the Clothier sold that Cloth, which he could not afford under 15 l. at 10 l.
some at 9 l.

The last thing I shall mention to prove my Assertion is our Navigation, in
which particular we are come to a lower Ebb if possible; not one Ship in 40
employed in our Merchandise to Holland, Flanders and Breme, and very few to
Hambro and the East-Country, to which parts two thirds of the Native
Commodities of this Kingdom are Exported, and a greater share of our
Plantation-Goods; a very great increase of Shiping at Breme, where every Ship
which they have advanced, have sunk the Employment of a Ship in England. Most
Merchants are concerned in Shiping, and its natural to employ their own
Countrymen; how much the strength of our Nation is lessned in this particular,
I leave to the more judicious; the employment of as many Seamen as would Man a
Fleet for our Security, is hereby lost, who are always within the compass of a
Post-Letter twice a Week, our own Seamen are hereby become Strangers in our
home Seas, which would be of as good service, and as much to be depended upon
as if kept in the King's Pay, which Proposal I take to be the same with that of
building Workhouses for the Employment of our Poor, whilst at the same time
the Dutch and French get a quarter-part of our Wool.

Nothing in the eye of reason) but an effectual stop to our Pride and Luxury,
in a Foreign Consumption (as well upon a Politic as a Religious account) can
secure this Kingdom from ruin. The Dutch and Foreign Nations are actually in
the possession (in Merchandise and Navigation) of the profitable part of our
Commerce in respect to the Public. The Stock remaining in English hands -- is
chiesly employed in bringing home Materials to maintain this Pride and Luxury
-- and in engrossing all sorts of Materials to the greater Oppression of our
Poor, which Stock being stopped upon one hand, will naturally fall into the
other, by the Support and Enlargement of our Hambro, East Country and Russia
Companies, under due Regulations. And our Misery or Welfare resolving it self
by the actions of this great Council, I hope all true Englishmen will join in
hearty Prayers for a Blessing upon Your Undertakings, That no more of our
English Subjects may starve in our Streets.


