TO THE LORDS SPIRITUAL and TEMPORAL AND COMMONS in Parliament Assembled.
May it please Your Honors,
THE last Sessions of Parliaments, I presented You with Proposals for setting
up a National Land-Bank, and in order thereunto a Bill was brought in, by order
of the Honorable the House of Commons, and was referred to a Committee, who
made a considerable Progress therein: But the Bill not passing through the
House, for want of Time, I did not intend to put my Proposals in practice until
the next Sessions of Parliament, fearing it might be looked upon as a
Disrespect to Your Honors (wherein I have always been very cautious of
offending) to begin a Business of so great Importance, before I had an
Authority from Your Honors for my so doing: But some Gentlemen who pretended
they could not understand my Scheme, while the Bill was depending before the
House of Commons, have formed the Model of a Bank out of the Book I presented
to Your Honors; only, to make it look like a Novelty, have spoiled my Design
by some Alterations of their own.

It is doubtless a Duty incumbent upon all the Subjects (as I mentioned in my
Treatise, Entitled A Discourse on the late Funds, which I presented to both
Houses of Parliament) to propose to Your Honors whatsoever may occur to any of
them for the Service of the Public, and whosoever spends his Time and Estate
in so doing presumes he is safe, and under Your Honors Protection: if not, it
will certainly be a Bar to all future Ingenuity, and will for ever discourage
Persons from offering any thing to Your Honors that may tend to the Good of
the Nation. But I am well satisfied Your Honors will not countenance any, who
shall go about to deprive me of the Fruit of my Industry; and therefore tho I
have been often told, that the Persons who are engaged in setting up a Bank in
opposition to me, will certainly bear me down by an Interest too powerful for
me to withstand, yet I think my self secure in Your Honors Justice and
Impartiality, and in assurance thereof I shall (God willing) proceed upon what
I have undertaken, not doubting but with Your Honors Assistance to surmount
all those Difficulties, which the Ignorance of some, and Envy of others, may
lay in my way. I beg leave to subscribe my Self,

Your Honors most Humble and most Obedient Servant, John Briscoe.

ADVICE TO THE FREEHOLDER.
THOSE who have made an Estimate of the Yearly Estates, and Money of the
Kingdom, have computed the former to be worth above 300 Millions, and the
latter not above 5 Millions in value; and yet it is most certain and apparent,
That those who have the 5 Millions, have more Credit, and are of greater
account than those who are the Owners and Proprietors of the 300 Millions, and
the Landed-Men are Servants to the Monied-Men, so far as the Borrower may be
said to be a Servant to the Lender. Now forasmuch as this is most undoubtedly
true, and Matter of Fact, I shall endeavor (with as much Brevity as I can) to
show the Freeholder From whence this great Inequality arises. The
Unreasonableness of this Inequality. And Propose Proper Expedients to remedy it.


The First and Principal Reason of this great Inequality, proceeds from a
Mistake, in making Gold and Silver the only Medium of our Trade and Commerce;
and consequently a Living Stock to the Owners thereof, while the Land of
England is a Dead Stock to the Proprietors: For tho a Gentleman may have a
considerable Estate in Land, yet he receives no Profit or Advantage thereby,
but the bare accruing Income of such Estate, and if he wants 2000 or 3000 l.
although he have an Estate in Land worth 20000 l. yet he cannot be supplied out of
his own Estate, but is forced to borrow of others at high Interest, and with no
small expense of Time and Money, in examining his Title, drawing Writings, etc.
which eats into the very Heart and Bowels of his Estate. And for this Reason
Gentlemen whose Estates are in Land, have but little if any Credit; for their
Estates being (as has been observed) a Dead Stock, upon which they cannot
raise Money but with great Charge and Difficulty, none care to trust them,
because it does not appear how they shall be paid: For suppose a Gentleman be
superlatively honest, and willing to discharge his Obligations, yet the Nature
of his Estate (if it be in Land) is such, that if his Debts are greater than
his Yearly Income will discharge, he is incapable of paying them, unless he
engages his Land, which besides the Charge, does often terminate in the ruin of
him and his Estate.

Another Reason of this Inequality, is the different Tempers of the Landed and
the Monied-Men, occasioned, in some Measure, from the differing Circumstances
of their Estates: for Gold and Silver, tho Living Stocks, yet lying in the
Chest are Dead Estates; being no longer profitable than while they are
circulating, which puts the Monied-Men upon exercising their Wits, making them
sharp and quick-sighted, and ready to lay hold of any Thing that offers which
may tend to their Advantage. For Instance, when the Parliament passed an Act,
granting a Bank to the Subscribers of 1200000 l. no sooner were the Books laid
open to receive Subscriptions, but the same was filled up in 10 or 12 Days
space; not a Fund is settled by Parliament, but if a Million or more in Money
be wanting, it is presently raised, and paid in by the Monied-Men upon the
least Encouragement, and without asking many Questions; by which Means, several
of them have raised considerable Estates since the War began. On the other
Hand, the Landed-Men living commonly remote from, and consequently being
Strangers to Business, are contented with the Produce of their Land, and if
they can keep both Ends together they think they do well, and take little or no
care of further Improvements; which makes them commonly regardless of, and deaf
unto all Proposals that are made for the advancing their Estates. And tho they
ought not to be blamed for a prudent Cautiousness, how they embarass
themselves, or their Estates with Things they do not understand, being sensible
how difficult it is to get clear when they are once encumbered; yet I think
such again are very much wanting to themselves who reject every Offer that is
made them for their Advantage, without examining whether it be reasonable, or
whether they may safely close with it.

Having briefly enquired into the Causes, I shall proceed to show the
Unreasonableness of this Inequality, which I will do by a plain and familiar
Instance or Example.

Suppose then A has an Ingot of Gold worth 1000 l. B has a Bar of Silver
worth as much, and C has 100 Acres of Land of the like value; the Gold or
Silver in one entire piece is useless, and will yield no Profit or Advantage to
A or B, while the 100 Acres of Land which C has in one entire piece or parcel
yield him Pasture for Cattle, Timber, Firewood, etc. without any Charge
bestowed upon it. Now what Rational Man will not prefer the 100 Acres of Land
before the Gold or Silver, which will produce more Profit to the Proprietor
than 10000 such Bars or Ingots? the one being a living, the other dead Estates.
And therefore any Person who knew not to what uses Gold and Silver are
converted, would doubtless believe C to be out of his Senses, to borrow of A or
B one half of the said Gold, or Silver, and to make over his 100 Acres of Land
for a Security to restore the same, and to give 30 l. per Annum for the use of
it, besides other Charges; and yet this is the constant and daily practice of
all such, who take up Money upon the Security of their Estates. Now if we
examine into the Reason thereof, it is no more than this: The Legislative Power
has made Gold and Silver to be the only Medium of Trade and Commerce, and has
thereby turned those which before were dead Commodities into living Stocks,
which for the greater Convenience of 'Trade are carried to the Mint, where they
are divided into several needful Parts, and the Stamp of Authority impressed
upon them; While the Land which is a living Estate, for want of being made a
Medium of Trade and Commerce as Gold and Silver are, remains a dead Stock, to
the great Damage of the Owners and Proprietors.

To Remedy which I proposed to the honorable House of Commons the last
Sessions of Parliament, to make Land, as well as Gold and Silver, a Medium of
Trade and Commerce, and offered several Reasons for the same; showing how Land
may in all respects be made as useful as Gold or Silver for such Purposes, but
foreseeing I should meet with very great Difficulties to get an Act for making
Land a Medium of Trade, I thereupon applied my self to make it a Fund of
Credit, which was the Purport of the Bill that was under the Consideration of
the House of Commons, and is the Design of my present Proposals.

To accomplish which I have proposed, that since no single Man's Estate is a
Fund sufficient for a Bank,

1. That Gentlemen may subscribe their Estates to the Value of 100000 l. per
annum at least, by which Subscriptions they oblige neither themselves nor their
Estates. 2. That when such yearly Value is subscribed, the major Part of the
Subscribers should meet together to choose Trustees, Directors, etc. whom they
may also displace at pleasure. 3. That when the Trustees and Directors shall be
chose, the Methods of Management shall be declared, which if approved of, such
Subscribers as please may settle their Estates upon the Trustees of their own
choosing; and those who shall not settle their Estates, will be at no Charge
nor Trouble, but writing their Names, and meeting once to choose Trustees,
Directors, etc. 4. That no Estate which shall be settled shall be chargeable
for more than what the Party settling it shall take up of the Bank. 5. That any
Person who shall settle his Estate, may have up his Deed of Settlement on
demand, if nothing be owing upon it, or upon Payment of what is due to the
Bank. 6. That the Profits of the Bank shall be divided among all the
Subscribers in proportion to their several Subscriptions. 7. That any
Subscriber after the Settlement of his Estate, may have at any time 3 fourth
Parts of the Value of his Estate at 3 l. 0 s. 10 d. per cent. per annum, and
pay in all, or any Part of the same whenever he pleases. 8. That the Interest
paid by the Subscribers to the Bank, being part of the Profits of the Bank,
such Subscribers who pay Interest to the Bank, will have their proportionable
Part of the Interest paid them back again, which they paid into the Bank.
I might say much of the Advantages that will arise to landed-Men by this
proposed Method. But it may suffice to say, they will be accommodated with
Money at easy Interest for the supply of their Occasions, and tho their Estates
are not made a Medium of Trade, yet they will be a secure and certain Fund, and
will consequently raise them such a Credit, which without this Method it is
impossible they should ever attain unto: for tho a Tradesman may scruple to
take a Gentleman's Note for 1000 l. tho he knows the Gentleman is worth 1000 l.
per annum, because he knows the difficulty Gentlemen meet with to raise such a
Sum out of their Estates, yet none will question his Bill for 5 times such a
Sum, when he is satisfied he has an Estate settled, upon which he may have
15000 l. at an Hour's warning; it being an undoubted Truth, that none have so
much Credit as those who stand in least need of it; and therefore it was well
observed by the Poet, Quantum quisque sua nummorum servat in Arca
Tantum habet and fidei.


There being therefore so small a Matter required of the landed Men, as only to
subscribe their Names, and to meet once to choose Trustees, Managers, etc. by
which (as has been already said) they are put to no charge, nor lay themselves
nor their Estates under any Obligation by such their Subscriptions; and since
they are likely to receive so great Advantage by these Proposals, I hope they
will expedite the filling up the proposed Fund of 100000 l. per annum, by their
ready Subscribing. However there being Estates already subscribed to a Million
Value. I fully determine to give the Subscribers notice in the printed
Newspapers, to meet the 10th of September next at farthest, to choose
Trustees, Directors, etc. to whom I shall then communicate my Methods of
Management, and doubt not but to convince the World that there is no such great
Difficulty in raising Money to perform what I have proposed, as some, who are
Enemies to my Proposal, would suggest.

J. B.

The Subscription-Books continue to lie open at Thomas Gooding, Sergeant at
Law, his Chambers in Gray's Inn: At Philip Neve Esquire his Chambers, the second
Staircase of the Paper-Buildings in the Inner Temple: At Lawrence Braddon Esquire
his Chambers, Number 4. the Second Staircase at the New Square at
Lincoln's Inn: At the House of Robert West Esquire the Corner of Buckingham-Court
near Scotland-yard: At Mr. John Smith's in Exchange-Alley: At Mr. Humfry
Hackshaw's in Lothbury near the Royal Exchange: At Mr. Nicholas Hayward's
Public Notary in Threadneedle-street behind the Royal Exchange: And at Mr.
Samuel Briggs Scrivener in Guildhall-yard, London.


