A BRIEF Seasonable warning with some tymous remedies to ptevent the putrefing
maladies of pur oresent distemper amongst all ranks of professors in Scotland.
I. IF ground be givene hereby, to dissolve all Church communion, the
dreadfullest effects shall be seen that ever was hard in a Church, yea reduce
it to that period, not as to have the face of a judicatorie which is too patent
in neighboring churches yea alas, increase heart burnings animosities and so
mutually prove one another burriors, so that the adversaries game shall be
wrought to his hand and Satan shall gain his design to breaking up and
extirpating all Christian fellowship, the sad experience whereof is found in
our Land yea is it not well known to the greatest matter of grief and Pressage
of future strokes that ever, we were trysted with so that those meetings who
continued Instant servant in prayer wrestlings with the Lord has now given it
over some of them proven not only backsliders from some denties most to be
performed, but also all kind of Christian sympathy deutie void of a excitating
conscience to any such thing, some making the rule regulating even there own
judgment yea worse it not known of these that they did live more Atheistically
then Christianly yea has not our Dissentions been a woeful mean to break up a
conjugaltie raising fearful divisions betwixt man and wise, which in no church
entertaining family and society but does produce strange fruits, separatisme
but blessed be the Lord those forementioned have gotten such a blessed fruit of
this trial so as that Afflictione did run graces errands to them, and now
(aster they had desistned most brutal like from any such deutie) they have
lively recovered but not till the Lord in a great manner humbled them yea
temporal strokes. II. As to the hearing of many of those Godly men, (we
abstract from justifying any Kinds of Professions) If it shall be conceded that
they are not to be heard we shall not know well where to land the seall of some
of whose Ministry does rend the conscience of any man to hear the like, and
this not in the least (the Lord is the heart searcher, to comply with any
defectione alleged or favourities thereto) but to be as a Caveat to people to
keep them from splitting upon dangerous rocks, neither can we think the Cons.
of any godly tender faithful soul could assent thereto a who designs peace
with truth and do we not also know the woeful fruits of this also how many have
been rendered sceptick watering unstable in the way of God and so tostied with
are nothin ear, that they know not well where they should rest, so that the
sensible grouth of grace was utterly decayed as to the exercise thereof all the
time. III. 3. We could heartily wish that the way of God were walked in for
reclaming of any Brethren, so as to make them sensible of lapesss and to remove
that which might be a scandal to others of this by mutual submission of all to
the justitutions of Discipline in the church which did not a little conduce to
the Bohemans in there fiery debats the very representable or appearance of a
Governmen so that private Christians also of other might be brought to account
who are sinistrously Informitive others yea dropping in truths to ears of
worthy men to Authorize there fables to concease credit honout repute to them
which has been known to have been the way of to many and thereupon have
prevaild with them to publish it abroad what misrepresentations pretended
reflections of this nature have past. IV. All this does really argue Little or
nothing of a humbled Spirit ripinning for a delivery but rather for judgment.
V. Nor can no have peace nor ought any to have peace or think it shame in the
least to acknowled a our debording, from the Lord, tho uncharitably it may so
be thought by some) be they Ministers be thy people neither sole acknowledgment
bur further degrees of repentance and this to do in Christ's way with the Spirit
of meekness with out the Least respect to any thing displeasing to God or
brankling the peace of a good conscience. 6. As we are to pray so likewise to
study and Endeavor to promote a Love union Joh. 1^. prayed for by Chist
himself and shall, be accomplished the efficatie of Christ's prayer making it so
let all oppose as they please and then and never till then shall the day of
Jezreel be great but when Judah and Israel have appointed themselves oue head,
O sad matter that union should sound so harshily and digest so bitterly with
some who, are all professing to keep whole the gurments of Christ. VII. We
shall not stand to rehearse he Invasions Intrusions corruptions and fearful
Infections the Church has suffered thereby. VIII. But how are some brought of
the soul of religione and in searching of the vitals and Kernel do hunt rather
after the shel so that those who used formerly to have much soul exercise are
empty of the same as if they never had been tristed therewith yea poor things
pursuing this are ignorant of the very fundamentals of Religon it may be said
yet very zealous this we grant and dedesire to bless the Lord therefore yet
that ought to be temperate with Knowledge, neither upon the other extreme to
magniit as to derogat from the other extishinguish and put out the same. IX.
Know that some eminently worthy Ministers for piety and more particularly
zeal, and yet continuing in the same, inveig^t as much against this and stood
upon this controverted head before it ever was so sifted, and cannot now have
so much peace, in prosecuting the same, O but zeal is commendable being pure,
the temper of the person, having up physical Influx therein, but its evident
the Lord polities gradually even as young colts having mamy excrements and
exorbitancies to be cut of, if ye are critic ye may obj. I believe it, but now
the edge of zeal is lost; O would to the Lord be thou who thou wilt that thou
were endewed with the same measure. X. Tender loving Symphatizing Christians
would try before they crust, and the clashings of some particular private
Christians also would be quassat whose private Judgment of discretion, we gram
it to be honored, yet also we know vain idle childish pamphlets by way of
letters have gone so from some Christians, whose faculties we most say without
breach of charity the Devil miserably employed. XI. Does it quadrat to the
directions of the General Assembly in all former times that Ministers are not
to spend there time in Pulpit insisting upon controversies Irritaring he bating
stupesing the work of grace, O how palpably have it worn out our frame from
the most part, it may be replied when need calls its most convenient, yea when
the great necessity was all our Divines determine that they were, but a little
of speak to that seeing as many excellent men says out of one war springs
another, and so we shall fall into an endless labyrinth. XII. If those
eminently Godly Ministers be reflected upon who have continued suffering in the
h^zard of there live these many years by past me knows not who are enduring
hardship for, the name of Jesus, we speak not now concerning any Indul^ed men
tho we charitably Judge Sympathy in the spirit not to be wantin^, ^ea in some
we are sure for to our own hearing we can testify a wor^hy man, who upon
serious consideration of this diasmul day cried out, O for a pass from Jesus.
XIII. The Judgment of Luther to the Bohem. Churches is worthy of Imitatione
herein, since there be so many contentions its no new thing in the Church of
God notice that some shak not from the fundamentals. XIV. Remember if thou art
suffering for Presbytery, that it may be countenanced by thee, and so all
debates shall be soon decided. XV. If any has broken up fellowship because of
this, the Lord shall double his stripes we mean Christian society, and those
who give occasion thereto directly or indirectly for many? do not now narrowly
mark there, passions venting by indignatione upon some which cannot but hurt
and irritat strangers yea in prayer. XVI. Woe be to them who takes offense at
Christ's Person hereby hsi word worship Government or shameful cross and
Professors have as much to reckon for who do not, notice there carriage therein
for fear of giving offense. XVII. Dear Friends love the image of Jesus, we are
sure there are upon either hands many, whose heart if opened would be found,
the impression of each other, mutually. XVIII. Parishes Societies again we
alarm who do not join harmoniously to work, in entertaining the Gospel amongst
them the Lord shall remove it beyond the seas from you, and ye shall be
stigmatized of God a caster up thy heel against the holy one. XIX. Young
Christians would be sober and walk with a low sail, and all ranks as they
respect the mystical body of of Christ would shun irritating speeches. XX. O be
Cautions of railing against any man's person Michael could not bring a railing
accusatione against the Devil for one being tainted with the least tinctue
thereof we shall be brought at length to be empty of a republ. spirit in any
Kind of commerce. XXI. Let us as Melanchton honor the Judgment of the pious
worthy and learned, yet no further then its own sphereand station, for were we
never so dexterous in our Judgment we have ground to suspect. XXII. But we come
closely home O soul wha it is the mind of God to the in this Affair Ans. I find
God against it, grant it be so, that course to regain, some is not the mind of
God but obtest the to distinguish the harboring of tentations in the heart,
which are not nothing but suggestions persuasions allurements of Satan from
those weel grounded impulses of the Spirit of God, but surethese manifestations
that thou art tristed with of God does nevifer thouexamine right induce thee to
any such violent carriage which indeed breeds a great reluctance in the heart
of many godly to keep correspondency. XXIII. If men be other ways minded God
shall reveal it his is his promise stay upon the Lord do not haste thy own nay
rather roll all the burden on Christ's shouldiers. XXIV. If this had been
debated among our Reformers as to the matter of hearing, we are persuaded we
should have been esteemed in the categ one of lesuits, its true indeed, it may
be Ans the case is altered, and otherwise stated here Ans as to this point of
hearing its not nor can any sutuable pertinent or equivalent Scripture to this
effect for the contrary be adduced. XXV. It may be objected this is a
strengthening of the common adversary, this I deny since on either hand many are
wrestling against such oppositions. XXVI. Does not this clearly introduce a
Explicit Church Covenant and render all Scripturally called Ministers yea
Ministry, and all odious contemtible yea useless to make Presbyteries to be
included in and depend upon the people and so we shall have a well ordered
Church. XXVII. If that condition of the Covenant shalicease defense of
authority for as to discrepancy of persons we do not now discurse all the terms
thereof mutually shall fall to the ground, its true it being mutual did infer
a like obligations but yet the thing intrinsickly so considered does still
oblige the choicest acts of the soul. XXVIII. It may be objected where is the
life of religion to this ne^ answer as fear it measured according to our temper
for as much of the vigor of godl^ness have been seen amongst some of them as
many others. XXIX. Lastly if this shall be the fruit of our Christian commerce
at meeting me thinks it, it shall declare an unsavory spirit unedifying, take
us of the way of our Ancess^rs and withal, do freely invite yea as having the
mind of God to invite all Kinds to Repentance, and those who have decayed in
any measure to cry for restoratione this with Sympathy, Calvin used tho say to
Luther should he call me a Devil, yet he is a Godly Man.
FIN.

