The Humble Advice AND EARNEST DESIRES Of certain well-affected MINISTERS,
LECTURERS of BANBVRY in the County of Oxen, and of BRACKLY in the County of
Northampton, To his Excellency THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX, General of the Forces
raised by the Authority of PARLIAMENT; and to the General Council of WAR:
Presented January 25. 1649, by two of the Subscribers.

ALSO, A LETTER to the Reverend Ministers of the Gospel within the Province of
London, Dated the 21 of this instant January.

Imprimatur: James Crauford, Jan. 25. 1649.

LONDON, Printed for James Boler, at the Mary-gold in Fleet Street. 1649.

To his Excellency the Lord General FAIRFAX, and his General Council of WAR,
The humble Advice and earnest Desires of certain well-affected Ministers,
Lecturers of Banbury and Brackley.
MAy it please your Excellency, and You, Honored Gentlemen, Whereas by the
blessing of God upon your unwearied endeavors, subduing the common enemy more
then once, we were in a fair way of being restored to a long desired enjoyment
of our Religion in purity, our Persons and Estates in freedom; we accept at all
times, and this day acknowledge it with great thankfulness. Nevertheless, when
we compare the sacred and solemn Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, by Statute
Law, the Protestation and National Covenant by authority of both Houses of
Parliament (obliging us to the Reformation of Religion, preservation of his
Majesty's Person and just Power, the defense of the Privileges of Parliament
and Liberties of the Subject) tendered unto, pressed upon, and all or most taken
by us, and so considerable a part of this Kingdom: Together with some late
Petitions, Declarations and Representations to your Excellency and the General
Council of War, and your late Remonstrance to the Commons of England assembled
in Parliament, and some proceedings thereupon, both in relation to his
Majesty, and several Members of Parliament: And withal, our own Station and
Commission from God to be Watchmen and Seers to his people, to stand upon our
Watchtower and give warning either of approaching sin or ruin to the Nation:
We cannot without wounding our own consciences, and betraying the trust reposed
in us, sit down in silence; but are constrained, with all due respects to your
Excellency and your Council (and we hope, without the least offense) to
represent and desire as follows.

First, In reference to his Majesty.
That although we are not ignorant of, nor can in the least approve the
profanation and abuse of our solemn Covenant by the late unlawful Engagement
from Scotland; yet we cannot but represent to you, and manifest to the world
our utter dissent from all proceedings against his Majesty's Crown and Life:
and that upon these ensuing grounds of Conscience and Prudence.

1. The sacred Scripture (the only unerring rule for all undertakings) neither
by precept, or precedent, or other way does warrant or countenance such actings
of Subjects against their lawful Sovereign: But this remains upon divine
Record, That when the ten Tribes forsook their King, they also forsook their
God, and had neither a good King, nor scarce a good day afterward. And our own
Chronicles do sadly tell us of a Deluge of blood and calamities overflowing our
Ancestors upon the Deposition of Edward the Second, and Richard the Second,
both Kings of England.

2. Our Law Books (as we are informed by Parliament Declarations, and as has
been lately acknowledged by your Remonstrance) suppose the King can do no
wrong: If so, then (as we conceive) he cannot by any written Law forfeit his
Crown and Life to his people.

3. We have solemnly bound our selves by Oaths and Covenant (from which no
Authority on earth can absolve us) not to prejudice the Person, nor diminish
the just Authority of the King; and therefore, without manifest perjury (as we
conceive) we cannot consent either to the Deposition of his Majesty, or the
deprivation of his life. And here we humbly present to your most serious
consideration Gods remarkable avenge upon the House of Saul, of the breach of
Covenant made by Joshuah with the Gibeonites some hundreds of years before; and
that although the Scriptures tell us, he did it out of his zeal to the House
of Israel and Judah.

Fourthly, The way of proceeding against his Majesty will be so far from
speeding a Settlement, that we believe, it will unvaoydably tend to the scandal
and hazard of Religion, and loss of Liberty.

1. In the judgment of our enemies: This will be thought to verify those foul
aspersions so often abjured by the Parliament, us, and other their friends,
that the design in our late just Defense, was the ruin of his Majesty, and
the subversion of Regal Government.

2. It will hazard Religion, by rendering the Professors of it odious to the
Common Enemy without, by shaking the foundation of our Union with Scotland, and
by making an irreparable breach amongst men of the same pious and honest
interest at Home.

3. As for Liberty, (so much contended for) it cannot be denied but it must be
an invitation to foreign Princes to invade us; (their interest being the
same:) And the rather, considering the German-Peace so lately concluded, by
means whereof they cannot but be supplied with Armies of Mercinaries that gape
after such an opportunity.

But principally (we fear) this may give Life to the present design now on foot
in Ireland (which your and our Souls abhor) for the utter ruin of our Friends
there, and speedy invading of this Kingdom.

And finally, that this may tend to a perpetual engagement of the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland in blood, all being so deeply
interessed in the person of the King; and that inevitably, because the Prince
of Wales (the Heir apparent to the Crowns of all the three Kingdoms) is now at
liberty, and may probably be proclaimed and crowned in Scotland and Ireland,
and so not likely to want power to seat him on his Fathers Throne here in
England, yea, and that possibly without Conditions, to the utter ruin of all
that have adhered to the Parliament.

Fifthly, whereas it is said, That by his Majesty's departing from his
Parliament, setting up his Standard, and levying War against his People; they
are absolved from their allegiance to him, notwithstanding the Oaths before
mentioned: We well remember that those Oaths, together with the Covenant, have
been Constantly pressed upon several Members of the Parliament, and other
Subjects in this Kingdom, to the Time of the Late Treaty* if not since; and
that notwithstrnding the aforesaid particulars now charged against his Majesty,
and therefore must needs be either vain, (and so a High profanation of the
dreadful name of God) or else obligatory. And were they not so judged, we know
no convincing reason why they should be now suspended or abolished. As to the
execution of Justice upon Delinquents covenanted for, we protest that the
Dethroning or death of his Majesty, in prosecution of Justice, never entered
into our hearts: The same Covenant making special provision for the
preservation of his Majesty's Person, Honor and Authority.

Sixthly and lastly, His Majesty was not taken in Battle, but having a
Military power, and strong Garrisons in England, besides forces in Scotland and
Ireland, did (being invited and encouraged (as we think) by several joint
Declarations and Protestations of the Parliament of both Kingdoms, (promising
security to his Royal person) surrender himself to the Army of our Brethren of
Scotland, and by them was delivered to the Commissioners of the Parliament of
England, upon express promise (as we are in formed) that no violence should be
offered to his Person; and farther, when His Majesty went from Hampton Court,
we suppose him at Liberty to have gone for Scotland or Ireland, but in the
forementioned confidence in Parliamentary Declarations, and the reallity of the
Armies intentions toward him, (for we are ignorant of other sufficient cause)
he voluntarily betook himself to the Isle of Wight, then in your power.

Secondly, we declare in reference to the Parliament, and Privileges thereof;
That calling to mind his Majesty's attempt to seiz upon the five Members,
which was declared by the Parliament, and acknowledged by the King himself a
breach of Privilege, and withal the Ordinance of Parliament of the 20 of
August, 1647. declaring the accessitated absence of diverse Members of both
Houses, by reason of the horrid force upon them, to be a ground sufficient for
the making nul^ and void all votes passed in both or either House of
Parliament, from the 26 of July, to their return August 6; we cannot but
conceive the seizing and secluding of diverse Members (many of them being well
known to us to be faithful Patriots, and (we are confident) have not
apostatized to the contrary party) to be a breach of Privilege of Parliament,
which in our Covenant we are sworn in our places to defend; and do therefore
crave leave to dissent.

Thirdly, We declare in reference to Religion,
That although our souls abhor that grand design of the Devil and his
Agents, to decry all religious and zealous professors, under the name of
Sectaries and Independents; and although we do willingly grant, and heartily
desire that the interest of all Godly and honest men may be carefully provided
for, and secured as far as is consistent with the word of God, our Covenant and
public Peace, and that men of different apprehensions in matters of less
importance, may not therefore be rendered utterly incapable of all Offices of
power and trust; yet considering of what dangerous consequence an universal
Toleration in matter of Religion, so much labored after in the beginning of
Reformation, by the Jesuitical party, must needs prove to Church and State; we
presume timously to declare, That such a Toleration is no way consonant to the
Word of God, and is repugnant to our National Covenant.

And now having herein according to our consciences so fully and freely
discharged our duties to God and the Kingdom, and as much as in us lies, freed
our selves from the guilt of the blood, misery and ruin that threaten us and
the whole Kingdom, if not timely prevented: We most humbly desire as follows:

First, that your Excellency will be pleased (for the more speedy settlement of
the true Protestant Religion and public peace of the Kingdom, to improve your
utmost, That the imprisoned and secluded Members, that cannot justly be charged
for betraying their Trust, may be forthwith restored; and such as shall be
charged to be tried by Parliament, according to their Privilege.

Secondly, that weighing in a just balance the reasons before alleged, with
many more that may be added in relation to his Majesty, we humbly desire your
Excellency will be pleased by all lawful means to endeavor the suspending of
all proceedings against his Majesty's Crown and Life, until advice had (in
point of Conscience) with the Reverend Assembly of Divines, and the Church of
Scotland, touching the several Oaths that lie both upon us and them, and in
point of prudence, with the Kingdom of Scotland, who are jointly concerned with
us in his Majesty.

Thirdly, and lastly, that you will endeavor a right understanding, a good
correspondence and mutual confidence between King, Parliament, City, Army, and
all the well-affected persons of the Kingdom, as also between the two Kingdoms
of England and Scotland, thereby to frustrate the great expectations of the
Popipsh arty, who are high in their hopes, by reason of our present sad
divisions and distractions promising to themselves (and do not stick to
declare it) a greater advantage to them and their Religion now, then if the
King had prevailed by an absolute Conquest. As also to hasten relief to our
poor Brethren in bleeding and gasping Ireland, for whom England has kept the
solemn monthly Fast, near seven years together.

But (to draw toward a conclusion) we do here solemnly profess, That it is not
the least receding from our first sound principles upon which either with our
persons, prayers, purses, or al we engaged with the Parliament in the first and
second war; nor our own interest in Church patrimony or power, (God will
provide) or indeed any other bias of self ends, or respects whatsoever, did
move us thus to declare our selves, but the mere Conscience of the many Oaths
of God, in which the Parliament, You, We, and the generality of the
well-affected in the Kingdom indispensably stand bound before God, Angels and
Men, That we desire to wash our hands, as from the blood of all men, so
especially of our dread Sovereign; and to approve our selves innocent of all
that blood and misery the deposing and taking away his Majesty's life, will (in
our apprehension) involve us, our posterity, and all men professing godliness
in the three Kingdoms in. We do therefore from our soul beseech and importune
you, and every one of you, as Men, Gentlemen, and Christian Soldiers, by all
that is or can be dear to good men, as you desire to render a good account of
your actions at the great Day to the righteous Judge of heaven and earth, That
you will forbear doing ought in the premises, which may wound the conscience,
or pierce the hearts of any of Gods people (who are all alike with you, or any
of you, precious to him as the apple of his eye) which may rend and tear the
bowels of this your and our native Country, and occasion the common Enemy to
blaspheme the Majesty, Truth and Cause of our God and your God: And further to
contribute the utmost skill, study and endeavors of you and every of you in
your proper places, (and the great Counselor and mighty God direct you all)
to remove ours and the Kingdoms fears, to remedy the present abounding
distempers, and present and universal destruction; That we and the generations
to come may rise up and call you blessed, and so eminent a Preservation of the
Kingdom in such an extremity, may be had in everlasting remembrance.

Zach. Breedon Minister of Croton. William Palmer Minister of Rowsam. Josias
Bunn Minister of Turry-Weston. John Hoffman Minister of Wotton. Thomas Harris
Minister of Brackley. Robert Harris Minister of Shalston. Edward Whirley
Minister of Steeple-Aston. John Cave Minister of Middleton-Chynie. Samuel
Wells Minister of Banbury. Edward Archer Minister of Sommerton. Robert Wild
Minister of Ayenho. Tho. Hodges Minister of Souldern. Richard White Minister of
Wigginton. Stephen Sedgwick Minister of Tinswick. Creswell Whately Minister of
Tad-Marton. John Air Minister of Laurence-Marston. John Bailey Minister of
Frenhford. Timothy Perkins Minister of Evenly. Samson Smart Minister of
Gritworth.
Reverend, and Worthy in the Lord,
THe great breaches which now for some time have, and still are made upon those
public Endearments to us, (viz.) Religion, our King and Parliament, do sorely
press us, and wound us deeply; What shall we do? We cannot keep silence, we
dare not; if we should, our Consciences would not. Great are our fears, but
greater are our duties, for the performance of which, we have trampled down all
our fears, and through Gods mercy have met together, and resolved with one
heart and voice to own the Vows of God upon us, and according to their
obligation (if we can do no more, yet) at least to deliver our own souls. In
order whereunto, we, and some others of our Brethren have chosen and sent up
our Brethren, Mr. Samuel Wells Minister of Banbury, and Mr. John Bailey
Minister of Frenckford, to wait upon you at London: whose Labors in this very
thing also, according to the wisdom and zeal given you, we hear of, and rejoice
in, praying for you, that they may not be in vain in the Lord: They will
acquaint you with our Humble Advice to the Lord General and his General
Council; which (though of it self it be a poor nail hammered by us inferior
Workmen) yet being fastened by the hands of such Masters of the Assemblies as
your selves) may enter the deeper, and stick the faster. We beseech you to
peruse it, and to direct them in all things conducing to the right mannaging of
it; and to admit our few mites into the Treasury of your Religion and Loyalty.
And the God and Father of lights direct and assist you and us to shine as
lights in the midst of a froward generation. To his Mercies we commend you, and
rest

Your Brethren and fellow laborers in the Gospel of Christ, Thomas Hodges.
John Air. Timothy Perkins. Robert Harris. Zach. Breedon. John Cave. Josias
Bunn. Thomas Harris. Samson Smart. Edw. Archer. Rob. Wild.


FINIS.

