A brief Account of the Great Oppressions and Injuries which the Managers of
the East-India-Company have acted on the Lives, Liberties, and Estates of their
Fellow Subjects, as also of their unjust Dealings, not only with the
Adventurers themselves, but with the Natives in sundry Parts of India, whereby
they have exposed the Honor and Interest of the Nation, and hazarded the entire
Loss of that advantageous Trade; Humbly offered as Reasons for Establishing A
New Joint Stock.
1. THey did procure from the late King illegal. Commissions to execute Martial
Law on their Fellow Subjects, whereby they put to death Five Persons in S.
Helena, which has been voted Murder by the Honorable House of Commons; and
several in like manner have been hanged by such Commission at Fort S. George.
Moreover the Governor of S. Helena caused to be put to death two of the
Inhabitants of that Island, Subjects of this Realm, before any Commission was
obtained.

II. They did procure a Ship of the late King, called the Phoenix, to be sent to
India at the Companies Charge, with a Commission to seize or destroy all the
Ships and Goods of their Fellow Subjects in those Parts, and accordingly the
said Man of War did seize, and occasion the Destruction of three English Ships
and their Cargoes, to the Value of about 60000 l. sterling. And they did also give
order to the Commanders of their own freighted Ships to wear the Union Flag,
under which they seized several of their Fellow Subjects Ships and Cargoes in
India, carrying them to those places where they had erected unlawful Courts,
which they called Courts of Admiralty; and made Prize of them, to the very
great Loss and Damage of the Proprietors.

III. They did procure their late Majesty's Proclamations, prohibiting their
Fellow Subjects from Trading to India, and commanding all Persons from their
Employments and Settlements in those Parts, to repair to the Companies
Garrisons in India, or to return home, under severe Penalties, viz. Those who
had been in their Service to be punished as Deserters, and forfeiture of
Estates to all others.

IV. They did in the two last Reigns commence most vexatious and chargeable
Suits against several of their Fellow Subjects, in Actions of 100000 l. and
200000 l. and some were illegally fined upon Informations of pretended
Misdemeanors for Trading to India; which Informations were prosecuted in the
King's Name by the Companies Procurement.

V. They have caused several Ships, which were fitted and designed for India,
to be illegally stopped, whereby they have lost their Voyages; and one Ship,
after her return home, was, by their Procurement, forced to ransom her Cargoe
at the Cost of the Fifth part of its Value. For the carrying on of which
unlawful and exorbitant Oppression, they obtained a Letter from the late King,
to the Judge of the Admiralty, which was delivered by one of their Agents, and
read in open Court, commanding him to order the said Cargoe to be landed in the
Garrison at Portsmouth; whereupon, tho sufficient Bail was tendered, the same
was refused, contrary to the Practice of that Court, and thereby the
Proprietors compelled to the aforesaid Composition.

VI. For procuring these unlimited arbitrary Powers, which they have exercised
over their Fellow Subjects, They have expended great Sums of the Companies
Money, which stands charged in their Books under the Title of Secret Services;
besides the several 10000 Guineas which they did present to the two late Kings.

VII. Some of the prevailing Members in the Committee have lately introduced a
new way of Selling a very great part of the Companies Goods to themselves, by
private Contracts, to the great Prejudice of the usual Buyers at their public
Sales, and so in few Years have acquired vast Estates, by Defrauding all the
other Adventurers, contrary to their Oaths and the Trust reposed in them.

VIII. They have not for many Years past made up their Books, and valued their
Stock; although by the general Preamble, which is subscribed by every Adventurer
at his Admission into the Company, they stand obliged so to do every seven
Years; whereby the True Value of the Stock has been concealed from the
Adventurers and all other Persons; which has given opportunity to the late
Managers, to ingross so great a part thereof, and to set up an uncontrolable
absolute Power in themselves, for carrying on their own private Designs, in
opposition to the Interest of the Public, to the great Oppression and Damage
of all those who have had Dealing with them, and of the Adventurers themselves:
And from hence has sprung that fraudulent and mischievous Trade of
Stock-Iobbing.

IX. They have of late, without any Regard to a Real Increase of their Stock by
Trade; made such over-large Dividends as have exceeded what was formerly done
when their Affairs were most flourishing; for notwithstanding the great
Interruption of their Trade for several years past, They have divided since
September 1689. double the Sum which was paid into their Original Stock;
whereby it is evident they have not only divided their Profit, but also the
Stock it self. And an Argument urged in their public Court for so doing was
this, That it was the only way to put themselves out of the power of a
Parliament. By reason of which great and frequent Dividends, They have not left
a Fund sufficient to carry on a Trade of so large extent, and have therefore
been Necessitated to Farm it out to their Fellow Subjects, under the name of
Permission Ships; and not only so, but likewise to Armenians, Subjects to the
King of Persia, which in Time may be a means to induce those People to Import
the Goods of India in the Shipping of that Country, as our Laws allow them to
do, and so will prove of very fatal Consequence to our Navigation and Trade.
And further They have permitted the Jews to establish themselves in India, and
made them a part of their Government there, which has in a manner given them
the entire possession of the Diamond Trade, to the great Discouragement and
Loss of the English Subjects.

X. They have for many years past carried on Their Trade in an irregular
manner, contrary to the Experience and Practice of all former Times, in sending
out Ships at improper Seasons, and keeping them abroad much longer than the
Trade required. By which Mismanagement, together with their War, They have
occasioned the loss of several considerable Ships, and the mortality of some
Thousands of our ablest Seamen and Soldiers.

XI. Besides all these Their Arbitrary and Illegal Actions toward their Fellow
Subjects, and Their indirect proceedings to the Prejudice of the Joint Stock;
Their late Dealings with the Natives in India have been also most Unjust and
Scandalous; They having about six years past commenced an unjustifiable War
with the Great Mogul, and under that Pretense, committed many great
Depredations on the Subjects of that Prince, which has rendered the English in
all parts of India Odious and Contemptible, and made them to be esteemed rather
Pirates than Merchants; for They have made Prize of the Ships and Goods of the
Natives to the amount of above a Million Sterling, as appears by the
Depositions on Record in their Majesty's Court of Exchequer. And They have also
made Assaults on the Shore, and destroyed by Fire, several Houses, Goods and
Ships, and have killed great numbers of the Inhabitants; and as a further
Aggravation of Their unjust Proceedings, They have added a Notorious breach of
Faith, by making Prize of diverse Ships under the Protection of the Companies
Passes; as also by Seizing their Goods and Moneys which were laden on Freight,
on Board the Companies own Ships, for which the Bills of Lading are still
standing out. All which Outrages and Depredations have been committed without
any Provocation to justify them; nor did They ever make application to the
Great Mogul for redress of those pretended Grievances whereon They grounded
their War against so great a Prince, in all whose Dominions the Subjects of
England have always been received with the greatest Marks of Friendship and
Respect, and enjoyed greater Privileges than any other Europeans, and beyond
what the English have in any other part of the World.

XII. And preparatory to this designed Violence, They first contrived to make
an Advantage by the great Credit and Friendship, which till that time, our
Nation had with the Natives, by ordering their Agents in India to borrow all
the Money They possibly could, which They accordingly did, to the Value of
above 300000 l. Sterling at 9 per Cent. per annum in the Factory of Surrat. And
now after They have by occasion of the said Rash and Unadvised War expended
above 400000 l. Sterling, and lost above a Million more to the Crown and
Joint Stock, by the interruption of Their Trade for several years past; They
are at last become sensible of their unaccountable Folly, and having submitted
themselves by an humble acknowledgment of their Faults, They have supplicated
that great Prince for a Pardon, which he, out of his accustomed Clemency to the
English Nation, has condescended to grant them, upon condition that They
restore what They have taken from his Subjects, as appears by his Phirmaunds or
Patents, wherein their Miscarriages are Recorded to the great Dishonor of this
Nation.

XIII. They did also upon most unjust and frivolous Pretenses make War on the
King of Syam (a Prince who has always expressed a particular Favor for our
Nation) which occasioned the Massacre of diverse of their Majesty's Subjects,
and the Ruin of several Families.

These are brief Intimations of some of Their Illegal and Arbitrary
Proceedings, which have, in a great measure, been occasioned by the Power that
a small Number of the Committee have acquired to themselves, through that
pernicious Practice of Multiplying Votes according to their Stocks, which,
together with 34 years continuance of the present Joint Stock, has put the
entire management thereof into a very few hands, who have not only presumed to
act without the Concurrence of the Rest of the Committee, but directly contrary
to what has been agreed and appointed by their Court.

By all which the Abuses before mentioned, and many other Irregularities
practiced by the present East India Company, It Is evident that they are become
a Dishonor to this Nation, and a Great Grievance to their Majesty's Subjects;
And that any Conjoining or other Incorporating with them as has been proposed
in a Book lately written by Mr. George White, is both unsafe, and
impracticable; and nothing but a new National Joint Stock Established in
Parliament can retrieve and preserve that Trade from being utterly lost to this
Kingdom.

The PHIRMAUND or PATENT lately granted by the Great Mogul to the East India
Company for the Port of Surrat.
ALL the English having made an humble submissive Petition, That the ill Crimes
they have done may be pardoned, and requested a noble Phirmaund to make their
being forgiven manifest, and sent their Vakeels to the Heavenly Palace the most
illustrious in the World, to get the Royal Favor. And Ettimand Chawn the
Governor of Surrat's Petition to the famous Court, equal to the Skies, being
arrived; That they would present the great King with a Fine of 150000 Rupees to
his noble Treasury, resembling the Sun, and would restore the Merchants Goods
they took away to the Owners of them, and would walk by the ancient Customs of
the Port, and behave themselves for the future no more in such a shameful
manner.

Wherefore His Majesty, according to his daily Favor to all People of the
World, has pardoned their Faults, mercifully forgiven them, and out of his
Princely Condescension agrees, That the Present be put into the Treasure of the
Port, the Merchants Goods be returned, the Town flourish, and they follow their
Trade as in former times; and Mr. Child, who did the Disgrace, be turned out
and expelled.

This Order is rreversible.

FINIS.

