A BOOK OF VALUES OF MERCHANDISE IMPORTED; According to which, EXCISE is to be
paid by the First Buyer.

EDINBVRGH: Reprinted by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone Church, 1657.

A BOOK OF VALUES OF Merchandise Imported, According to which, EXCIZE is to be
paid by the first Buyer.
A
l. sh. d. AGgets small, the hundred dozen 00 13 04 Aggets large, the piece 00
00 06 Allom the Tun, 15 00 00 Amber the pound, 00 01 08 Aneil of Barbary, the
pound 00 01 08 Annotto the pound 00 01 06 Argal white and red, or Powder, the
hundred weight containing 112 l. 01 02 00 Ashes called potashes, the hundred
weight containing 112 l. 02 00 00 Ashes called Wood or Soap-ashes, the hundred
weight containing 112 l. 01 00 00

B
Babies heads of earth, the dozen 00 09 00 Balks great, the hundred containing
120 20 00 00 Balks middle, the hund. containing 120 06 00 00 Balks small, the
hundred containing 120 04 00 00 Balances called Gold Balances, the groce
containing twelve dozen pair, 04 00 00 Balances called Ounce Balances, the
groce containing twelve dozen pair, 02 00 00 Balances called the Sort,
containing four dozen 02 13 04 Balls called Tennis Balls, the thousand 01 10 00
Balls called Washing-Balls the groce containing twelve dozen, 00 10 00
Band-strings, the dozen knots 03 00 00 Barlings, the hundred containing one
hundred and twenty 12 00 00 Barrillia or Saphora to make glass, the hundred
weight containing 112 l. 01 10 00 Basket rods, the bundle 00 08 00 Baskets
called Hand-baskets or Sports, the dozen 00 04 00 Battery Bashrons or Kettles,
the hundred weight containing 112 l. 06 00 00 Beads of Amber, the pound 01 00
00 Beads of Bone, the groce containing twelve small groce 01 10 00 Beads of
Box, the great groce 01 10 00 Beads of Coral, the pound 01 10 00 Beads of
Crystal, the thousand 03 00 00 Beads of glass and wood, all sorts, the great
groce 00 10 00 Beads of glass, the pound 00 02 00 Beads the small groce
containing twelve Dicker 00 04 00 Beads of jasper square, the hundred stones 02
00 00 Bells called Hawks Bells French making, the dozen pair 00 12 00 Bells
called Dog Bells, the great groce 00 08 00 Blacking or Lamp-black, the hundred
weight containing 112 04 00 00 Boards called Clapboards, the hundred containing
120 boards 10 00 00 Bome-spars, the hundred containing 120 05 00 00 Bottles of
Earth covered with wicker, the dozen 00 01 06 Bottles of Glass covered with
wicker, the dozen 00 03 00 Bottles of Glass uncovered, the dozen 00 03 00
Bottles of Glass with vices covered with leather, the dozen 00 03 00 Bowling
stones the Bushel 00 10 00 Boxes, namely Nest-boxes, the groce containing
twelve dozen Nests 02 00 00 Boxes Money-boxes, the groce containing twelve
dozen 00 03 06 Boxes Drawing boxes the dozen 00 04 00 Boxes Round boxes, or
French boxes for Marmalade or Gelly, the dozen 00 02 06 Boxes Tobacco boxes,
the groce containing twelve dozen 00 12 00 Bracelets or necklaces of glass, the
small groce containing twelve bundles or dickers 00 04 00 Brass or Laver cocks,
the pound 00 01 02 Brick-stones called the thousand Brick-stones 00 13 04
Brick-stones called Flanders tile to scour with, the thousand 01 00 00
Brick-stones called Gally-tiles, the foot 00 00 06 Brick-stones called Paving
tiles, the thousand 05 00 00 Brimstone, the hundred weight, containing 112
pound 00 15 00 Bristles dressed the pound 00 01 00 Bristles undrest the pound 00
00 06 Buckrams of East Country, the piece 00 05 00 Buckrams of Roan, the dozen
03 00 00 Buckrams of Cane, the dozen 02 10 00 Buckrams of Hamborough black, the
piece 00 10 00 Bugle of glass, the pound 00 02 06 Bugle great, the pound 00 04
00 Bugle small or seed Bugle, the pound 00 06 08 Bugle Lace, the pound 00 08 00
Buttons of Brass, Steel, Copper or Lattin, the great groce containing twelve
small Groce, every Groce twelve dozen 01 06 08 Buttons of Crystal, the dozen
00 04 00 Buttons of Glass, the great groce containing twelve small groce 00 13
04 Buttons of Thread, the great groce containing twelve small groce 00 10 00
Buttons of Silk, the great groce containing twelve small groce 03 00 00 Buttons
of Bugle, the dozen 00 00 08 Buttons of Hair, the groce containing twelve dozen
00 04 00 Buttons of Handkerchiefs, the groce containing twelve dozen 01 00 00
Bulrushes the load 01 00 00 Burs for milstones, the hundred containing five
score 02 00 00

C
Cables tarred or untarred, the hundred weight containing 112 l. 01 05 00
Candle-week, the pound 00 00 06 Canes the hundred 00 10 00 Cans, the groce
containing twelve dozen 00 05 00 Cantspars, the Spar 00 10 00 Capers, the
hundred weight containing 112 l. 02 10 00 Cap-hooks, or hooks ends, the groce
containing twelve dozen 00 12 00 Cards called playing cards, the groce
containing twelve dozen pair 02 00 00 Carpets called Brunswick and Gentish
Carpets, stripped and unstript, the piece 00 08 00 Carpets called Carpets of
Turkey for chests, the piece 01 00 00 Carpets called Carpets of Turkey or
Venice short, the piece 01 15 00 Carpets called Turkey or Venice long,
containing four yards and upwards 06 00 00 Carpets called Carpets of Persia
short, the piece 02 10 00 Carpets called Carpets of Persia long, the piece 06
00 00 Chafing-dishes of Brass or Lattin, the pound weight 00 01 02 Chests of
Iron small or middle sort, the piece 04 00 00 Chests of Iron large, the piece
08 00 00 Chests of Ciprus Wood, the Chest 05 00 00 Cocheneal called Sylvester,
or Campeachea Cocheaneal, the pound 00 03 04 Cocheneal of all sorts of
Cocheaneal except Sylvester and Campeachea Cocheaneal, the pound 01 10 00
Coaches for children, the dozen 00 03 00 Compasses of Brass and Iron, the dozen
03 00 00 Copper, the hundred weight containing one hundred and twelve pound 06
00 00 Copperas green, the hundred weight containing one hundred and twelve
pound 00 10 00 Cork, the hund. weight containing 112 l. 01 00 00 Counters of
Brass, the pound 00 02 00

D.
Deals called Norway Deals, the hundred containing six score 05 00 00 Deals
called Burgendrop Deals, the hundred containing six score 12 00 00 Deals called
Spruce Deals, the hundred containing six score 60 00 00 Dials of Wood, the
dozen 00 00 06 Dials of Bone the dozen 00 05 00 Dimity, the yard 00 00 06
Dishes of China great and small under a quart, the dozen 01 00 00 Dishes of
China of a quart and upwards, the dozen 03 00 00 Drugs called Acacia, the pound
00 04 00 Drugs called Acorus, the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Adiantum Album,
the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Adiantum Nigrum, the pound 00 00 06 Drugs
called Agaricus, or Agarick trimmed or pared, the pound 00 10 00 Drugs called
Agaricus, rough or untrimmed, the pound 00 02 06 Drugs called Agnus Castus
Seeds, the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Alkanet Roots, the pound 00 00 09 Drugs
called Alchernes Syrrup, the pound 00 03 04 Drugs called Alchernes Confectio,
the pound 02 00 00 Drugs called Aloes Cicotrina, the pound 00 02 06 Drugs
called Aloes-Epatica, the pound 00 01 06 Drugs called Allom, Romish or Roach,
the hundred containing 112 pound 01 06 08 Drugs called Ambergreece, black or
gray, the ounce Troy 03 00 00 Drugs called Ameos Seed, the pound 00 00 06 Drugs
called Amomi the Seeds, the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Anacardium, the pound
00 00 00 Drugs called Angelica, the pound 00 00 10 Drugs called Antimonium
preparatum, or Stibium, the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Antimonium Crudum, the
pound 00 00 02 Drugs called Argentum sublime or limum, the pound, or
Quicksilver, 00 03 00 Drugs called Aristolochia longa and rotunda, the pound 00
00 08 Drugs called Arsnick white or yellow, or Rosalger, the pound 00 00 04
Drugs called Asarum roots, the pound 00 00 10 Drugs called Aspalathus, the
pound 00 01 04 Drugs called Assa-Foedita, the pound 00 01 02 Drugs called
Almonds bitter, the hund. weight, containing 112 l. 01 17 04 Drugs called
Alumen plume, the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Balaustinum, the pound 00 02 06
Drugs called Balsamum, the pound artificial 00 03 04 Drugs called Balsamum
natural, the pound 02 00 00 Drugs called Bay Berries, the 112 pound 00 13 04
Drugs called Barley huld, or French-barley, the hundred and twelve pound 01 00
00 Drugs called Bdellium, the pound 00 02 00 Drugs called Benalbum, or Rubrum,
the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Benjamin of all sorts, the pound 00 02 06 Drugs
called Bezar-stone of the East Indies, the Ounce Troy 01 15 00 Drugs called
Bezar-stone of the West, India, the Ounce Troy 00 04 00 Drugs called
Black-Lead, the 112 pound 01 10 00 Drugs called Blatta Bizantia, the pound 00
02 00 Drugs called Bolus communis, or Armoniacus, the 100 weight, containing
112 pound 00 05 00 Drugs called Bolus verus the pound, or fine Bole 00 00 04
Drugs called Borax in Paste or unrefined, commonly called Tinckul, the pound 00
01 00 Drugs called Borax refined, the pound 00 02 08 Drugs called Bunkins
Holliwortles, or Pistolochia, the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Caco Nuts, the
pound 00 00 09 Drugs called Callamus, the pound 00 00 03 Drugs called Camphire,
the pound refined 00 06 08 Drugs called Camphire unrefined, the pound 00 03 04
Drugs called Caneri oculus, the pound 00 03 04 Drugs called Cantarides, the
pound 00 04 00 Drugs called Caraway Seeds, the 112 pound 01 06 08 Drugs called
Cardomomes, the pound 00 02 06 Drugs called Carpo Balsami, the pound 00 02 06
Drugs called Carrabe, or Succinum, the pound 00 01 04 Drugs called Carthamus
Seeds, the pound 00 00 04 Drugs called Cassia fistula, the pound of all sorts
00 00 06 Drugs called Cassia lignea, the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Castorea,
or Beaver Cods the pound 01 00 00 Drugs called Cerussa, the 112 pound 01 10 00
Drugs called China Roots, the pound 00 03 00 Drugs called Ciceres, white and
red, the pound 00 00 04 Drugs called Ciperus longus and rotundus, the pound 00
00 04 Drugs called Ciprus Nuts, the pound 00 00 04 Drugs called Civet, the
ounce Troy 02 00 00 Drugs called Coculus Indiae, the pound 00 00 08 Drugs
called Coloquintida, the pound 00 01 06 Drugs called Coral, red or white, in
fragments, for Physical use, the pound 00 01 04 Drugs called Coral whole, the
pound 00 10 00 Drugs called Corfu-berries, the pound 00 02 06 Drugs called
Coriander-seeds, the 112 pound 00 12 00 Drugs called Cortex Guaci, the pound 00
00 05 Drugs called Cortex Caperum, the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Cortex
Tamarisci, the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Cortex Mandragorae, the pound 00 01
00 Drugs called Coscus dulcis and amarus, the pound 00 01 04 Drugs called
Cubebs, the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Cumminseed, the hundred and twelve
pounds 01 13 04 Drugs called Cyclamen roots, the pound 00 01 04 Drugs called
Citrago, the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Cetrach, the pound 00 00 08 Drugs
called Cinabrum, or Vermillion, the pound 00 03 04 Drugs called Copperas White,
the pound 00 00 05 Drugs called Copperas Blew of Dantzick or Hungary, the pound
00 00 02 Drugs called Cambogium or gutta Gambae the pound 00 01 04 Drugs called
Crystal in broken pieces for Physic uses, the pound 00 03 04 Drugs called
Carlina, the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Carolina, the pound 00 00 04 Drugs
called Cortext winteranus, the pound 00 01 04 Drugs called Cuscula, the pound
00 00 06 Drugs called Daucus Creticus, the pound 00 02 04 Drugs called
Diagredium or Scammony, the pound 00 12 00 Drugs called Diptamus Leaves, the
pound 00 04 00 Drugs called Diptamus Roots, the pound 00 01 04 Drugs called
Doronicum, the pound 00 01 08 Drugs called Eleborus albus and niger, the pound
00 00 06 Drugs called Epithemum, the pound 00 01 08 Drugs called Es ustum, the
pound 00 01 08 Drugs called Euphorbium, the pound 00 00 04 Drugs called
Fennel-seeds, the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Fenugreek, the 112 pound 01 10 00
Drugs called Flory, the pound 00 02 00 Drugs called Folium Indiae, the pound 00
03 04 Drugs called Fox Lungs, the pound 00 01 04 Drugs called Frankincense of
France, or Parrosin, the 112 pound 00 12 00 Drugs called Galbanum, the pound 00
02 00 Drugs called Galanga, the pound 00 01 04 Drugs called General, the pound
00 01 00 Drugs called Gentiana, the pound 00 00 04 Drugs called Ginny Pepper,
the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Grana Pinae, the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called
Green Ginger, the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Gum Animi, the pound 00 02 00
Drugs called Gum Armoniack, the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Gum Carannae, the
pound 00 10 00 Drugs called Gum Tragagant, the pound 00 00 09 Drugs called Gum
Elemni, the pound 00 02 06 Drugs called Gum Hederae, the pound 00 02 00 Drugs
called Gum Lack, the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Gum Opopanax, the pound 00 03
00 Drugs called Gum Sarcocol, the pound 00 01 04 Drugs called Gum Serapinum or
Sagapinum, the pound 00 01 06 Drugs called Gum Taccamahaccae, the pound 00 10
00 Drugs called Grana Tinctorum, the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Grains of
Guiny, or French-grains, the hundred and twelve pound 01 04 00 Drugs called Gum
Arabic, or Gum Senica, the hundred and twelve pound 01 15 00 Drugs called Gum
Sandrake, or Gum Juniperi, the hundred and twelve pound 01 10 00 Drugs called
Gum Guaiaci, the pound 00 03 04 Drugs called Gum Caramen, the pound 00 02 00
Drugs called Hermodactylus, the pound 00 01 02 Drugs called Hypocistis, the
pound 00 01 08 Drugs called Horns of Hearts or Stags, the hundred weight 02 10
00 Drugs called Incense or Olibanum, the 112 pound 03 12 00 Drugs called Ireos,
the 112 pound 03 00 00 Drugs called Ison-glass, the 112 pound 10 00 00 Drugs
called Jujubes, the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Jolop, the pound 00 04 00 Drugs
called Juniper Berries, the pound 00 13 04 Drugs called Labdanum, or Lapadonum,
the pound 00 01 04 Drugs called Lapis Calaminaris, the pound 00 00 02 Drugs
called Lapis Hematitis, the pound 00 02 00 Drugs called Lapis Judaicus, the
pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Lapis Lazuli, the pound 00 06 08 Drugs called Lapis
Tutiae, the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Leaves of Roses, of Violet, or Flowers,
the pound 00 00 10 Drugs called Lintiscus, or Xylobalsamum the pound 00 00 08
Drugs called Lignum Aloes, the pound. 00 10 00 Drugs called Lignum Asphaltum,
the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Lignum Rhodium, the 112 pound 00 06 08 Drugs
called Lignum Vitae, the 112 pound 00 10 00 Drugs called Litharge of Gold, the
112 pound 01 05 00 Drugs called Litharge of Silver, the 112 pound 01 00 00
Drugs called Locust, the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Lupines, the 112 pound 00
12 00 Drugs called Lentils, the 112 pound 01 17 04 Drugs called Lapis contrayer
va, the ounce 00 03 04 Drugs called Lignum Nephreticum, the pound 00 01 04
Drugs called Madder Roots, or Rubea Tinctorum, the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called
Manna, the pound 00 03 00 Drugs called Marmelade, the pound 00 01 00 Drugs
called Mastich white, the pound 00 02 08 Drugs called Mastich red, the pound 00
01 00 Drugs called Meochoacan, the pound 00 02 00 Drugs called Mercury
sublimate, the pound 00 04 00 Drugs called Mercury precipitate, the pound 00 05
00 Drugs called Mithridate Venetiae, the pound 00 06 08 Drugs called Millium
Solis, the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Mirabolans dry, the pound 00 00 06 Drugs
called Mirabolans condited, the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Myrtle berries, the
pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Mummia, the pound 00 01 06 Drugs called Musk, the
ounce Troy 01 10 00 Drugs called Musk-kods, the ounce 00 10 00 Drugs called
Myrrha, the pound 00 01 06 Drugs called Nigella, the pound 00 00 04 Drugs
called Nitrum, the pound 00 01 01 Drugs called Nutmegs condited, the piece 00
00 03 Drugs called Nux de Benne, the pound 00 00 09 Drugs called Nux Cupressi,
the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Nux Indica, the piece 00 01 00 Drugs called Nux
Vomica, the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Nardus Celtica, or Spica Romana, the
pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Nux pini or Grana pini the pound 00 00 08 Drugs
called Olibanum or Incense, the pound 00 00 11 Drugs called Opium, the pound 00
06 00 Drugs called Osippium Huerridum, the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Orcant
or Almiet, the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Orange-flower Ointment, the pound 00
02 00 Drugs called Orange-flower Water, the gallon 00 04 00 Drugs called
Origanum, the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Ossa de Cord Cervi, the pound 00 12
00 Drugs called Oil of Amber, the pound 00 12 00 Drugs called Oil of Rosemary,
the pound 00 03 04 Drugs called Oil de Bay, the 112 pound 02 16 00 Drugs called
Oil of Mace or Nutmegs, the pound 00 15 00 Drugs called Oil de Ben, the pound
00 05 00 Drugs called Oil of Spike, the pound 00 01 06 Drugs called Oil of
Almonds, the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Oil de Scorpions, the pound 00 02 00
Drugs called Oleum Petroleum, the pound 00 01 06 Drugs called Oleum Turpentine,
the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Orabus, the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Orpment
or Auripigmentum, the pound 00 00 05 Drugs called Panther, the pound 02 00 00
Drugs called Panis Porcinus, the pound 00 01 04 Drugs called Pearl-seed, the
ounce Troy 00 10 00 Drugs called Pellitorie, the pound 00 00 09 Drugs called
Pepper long, the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Perrosen, vide Frankincense, the
hundred weight 00 12 00 Drugs called Piony seeds, the pound 00 00 06 Drugs
called Piony roots, the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Pistachias, or Nux
Pistachiae, the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Pix Burgundiae, the 112 pound 00 15
00 Drugs called Polium Montanum, the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Polipodium,
the pound 00 00 03 Drugs called Pomegranate Pills, the pound 00 00 04 Drugs
called Poppy seeds, the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Precipitate, the pound 00
05 00 Drugs called Psyllium, the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Prunellas, or
Pruans of Brunelia, the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Quicksilver, the pound 00
03 00 Drugs called Rhapontilum, the pound 00 02 00 Drugs called Radix Esule,
the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Red-lead, the 112 pound 00 18 00 Drugs called
Rhabarbarum, or Rubarb, the pound 00 16 00 Drugs called Rosalger ( vide
Arsnick) the pound 00 00 04 Drugs called Rosset, the pound 00 00 06 Drugs
called Radex contra yerva, the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Radex Scorcionera,
the pound 00 02 00 Drugs called Radex Peonae, the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called
Sal Alkali, the pound 00 02 00 Drugs called Sal Armoniacum, the pound 00 00 09
Drugs called Sal Gem, the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Sal Niter, the pound 00
01 04 Drugs called Sandracha, or Gum Sandrick, the l. 00 00 04 Drugs called
Sandracha, or Gum Juniperi, the l. 00 00 04 Drugs called Sandiver, the 112
pound 00 09 00 Drugs called Sandguis Draconis, the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called
Sarsaparilla, the pound 00 02 00 Drugs called Sassafras Wood or roots, the
pound 00 00 02 Drugs called Saunders white, the pound 00 01 06 Drugs called
Saunders yellow, the pound 00 02 00 Drugs called Saunders red, alias Stock, the
pound 00 00 09 Drugs called Scammony, vide Diagridium, the l. 00 12 00 Drugs
called Scincus Marinus, the piece 00 00 03 Drugs called Scordium, the pound 00
00 06 Drugs called Scorpions, the hundred 00 03 00 Drugs called Sebestines, the
pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Seeds for gardens of all sorts, the l. 00 00 10
Drugs called Seler Montanus, the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Semen Cucumeris,
Cucurb Citral melon, the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Sena, the pound 00 04 00
Drugs called Soldonella, the pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Sperma Coeti fine, the
pound 01 00 00 Drugs called Sperma Coeti course oily, the 112 l. 04 00 00
Drugs called Spica Celtica, vide Nardus Celtica, or Spica Romana, the pound 00
01 00 Drugs called Sanguis Hirci, the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Spicknard,
the pound 00 04 00 Drugs called Spodium, the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called
Spunges, the hundred weight 00 05 00 Drugs called Squilla, the 112 pound 00 06
08 Drugs called Squinanthum, the pound 00 05 04 Drugs called Stechados, the
pound 00 01 04 Drugs called Staphisager, the pound 00 00 05 Drugs called
Stibium, vide Antimonium preparatum, the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Storax
Calamita, the pound 00 04 00 Drugs called Storax Liquida, the pound 00 01 00
Drugs called Succus Liquiritiae, the pound 00 00 09 Drugs called Sulphur Vivum,
the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Tamarinds, the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called
Terra Lemnia, the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Terra Sigillata, the pound 00 01
02 Drugs called Thlapsij Semen, the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Tornsal, the
pound 00 00 08 Drugs called Troscici de Vipera, the ounce Troy 00 02 06 Drugs
called Treacle common, the pound 00 01 04 Drugs called Treacle of Venice, the
pound 00 06 08 Drugs called Turbith, the pound 00 02 06 Drugs called Turbith
Thapsiae, the pound 00 01 00 Drugs called Turmerick, the pound 00 00 06 Drugs
called Turpentine of Venice, Scio, or Ciprus, the pound 00 02 00 Drugs called
Turpentine common, the hundred and twelve pound 00 13 04 Drugs called Talk
white, the pound 00 00 06 Drugs called Talk green, the pound 00 01 00 Drugs
called Verdigreese, the pound 00 01 08 Drugs called Vernish, the hundred and
twelve pound 02 00 00 Drugs called Vermilion, vide Cinabrium, the pound 00 03
04 Drugs called Vitriolum Romanum, the pound 00 03 04 Drugs called Umber, the
hundred weight containing 112 l. 00 11 00 Drugs called Viscus quercinus, the
pound 00 01 00 Drugs called White Lead, the hundred and twelve pound 01 06 08
Drugs called Worm-seeds, the pound 00 03 00 Drugs called Zedoaria, the pound 00
01 04 Drugs called Xylobalsamum ( vide Lentiseus) the pound 00 01 00

E.
Elephants Teeth, the hundred containing five score 08 00 00 Emerie Stones, the
hundred weight containing one hundred and twelve pounds 00 04 00 Ebony Wood,
the Tun 50 00 00

F.
Fans for Corn, the piece 00 03 00 Fans for Women and Children, French making
the dozen 02 00 00 Feathers of Russia, the hundred weight 01 15 00 Feathers of
France for beds, the 100 weight 04 00 00 Feathers of Ostriches black the pound
00 03 06 Feathers of Ostriches white the pound 00 10 00 Fiddles for children,
the groce 00 18 00 Files the groce, containing twelve dozen 00 08 00 Flax
called Spruce Muscovie and all Flax undrest, the hundred weight, containing 112
l. 02 00 00 Flax called Dressed or wrought Flax, the pound 00 00 09 Flower-roots,
the 100 containing five score 00 05 00 Furs called Armins, the timber
containing forty Skins 01 10 00 Furs called Badgers Skin, the piece 00 02 00
Furs called Bear skins Black, the piece 01 00 00 Furs called Bear skins White
or red, the piece 00 06 08 Furs called Beaver Skins whole, the piece 00 10 00
Furs called Beaver Wombs the piece 00 05 00 Furs called Budge White tawed, the
hundred, being five score skins 02 00 00 Furs called Budge White untawed, the
hundred containing five score skins 03 10 00 Furs called Budge Black tawed, the
dozen skins 01 06 08 Furs called Budge Black untawed, the hundred containing
five score 00 00 00 Furs called Budge Pouls, the Fur containing 4 pair 01 00 00
Furs called Budge Navern, the hundred legs containing five score 02 00 00 Furs
called Budge Rumny, the hundred legs containing five score 05 00 00 Furs called
Calaber Shubs of Calaber, the piece or Shup 02 00 00 Furs called Calaber
Untawed, the Timber containing forty skins 00 06 08 Furs called Calaber Tawed,
the Timber containing forty skins 00 08 00 Furs called Calaber Seasoned, the
Pain 01 00 00 Furs called Calaber Stag, the Pain 00 12 06 Furs called Black
Skins, the hundred containing five score 05 00 00 Furs called Cats Poults, the
hundred containing five score 01 00 00 Furs called Cats Poults, the Mantle 00
06 03 Furs called Cats Wombs, the Pain or Mantle 00 06 03 Furs called Dokerers,
the Timber containing forty skins 00 13 04 Furs called Fitches the Timber
containing forty skins 01 00 00 Furs called Fitches the Pain or Mantle 00 12
06 Furs called Fitches the black Fox-skin 10 00 00 Furs called Foxes the
ordinary skin 00 02 00 Furs called Foxes the Pain or Mantle 00 15 00 Furs
called Foxes Wombs Pouls, or Pieces, the Pain 00 10 00 Furs called Foyns Backs,
the dozen 01 05 00 Furs called Foyns Tails, the Pain or Mantle 00 12 06 Furs
called Foyns with Tails, the piece 00 03 06 Furs called Foyns without Tails,
the piece 00 04 00 Furs called Foyns Raw, the piece 00 01 00 Furs called Foyns
Pouts, the hundred containing five score 01 06 08 Furs called Foyns Wombs
seasoned, the Pain or Mantle 01 06 08 Furs called Foyns Wombs Stag, the Pain or
Mantle 00 15 00 Furs called Grays Untawed, the timber containing forty skins 00
08 04 Furs called Grays Tawed, the timber containing forty skins 00 12 06 Furs
called Jennets Black raw, the skin 00 12 06 Furs called Jennets Black seasoned,
the skin 00 16 08 Furs called Jennets Gray raw, the skin 00 03 00 Furs called
Jennets Gray seasoned, the skin 00 04 00 Furs called Letwis Tawed, the timber
containing forty skins 00 08 04 Furs called Letwis Untawed, the timber
containing forty skins 00 06 00 Furs called Leopards Skins, the piece 01 05 00
Furs called Leopards Wombs, the pain 05 00 00 Furs called Lewzerns Skins, the
piece 02 10 00 Furs called Martrons, the timber containing 40 skins 10 00 00
Furs called Martrons, the pain or mantle 09 00 00 Furs called Martrons, Pouts,
the pain or mantle 00 10 00 Furs called Martrons, Gils, the timber containing
forty skins 00 12 00 Furs called Martrons, Tails, the hundred containing five
score 02 00 00 Furs called Miniver, the mantle 00 13 04 Furs called Minks
Untawed, the timber containing forty skins 03 00 00 Furs called Minks Tawed,
the timber containing forty skins 04 00 00 Furs called Moul skins, the dozen 00
00 06 Furs called Otter skins, the piece 00 05 00 Furs called Ounces skins, the
piece 00 12 06 Furs called Sables of all sorts, the timber containing forty
skins 30 00 00 Furs called Weazle skins, the dozen 00 00 04 Furs called
Wolf-skins Tawed the piece 01 10 00 Furs called Wolfe-kins Untawed the piece 01
03 00 Furs called Wolverings, the piece 00 15 00 Fustians called Amsterdam,
Holland or Dutch Fustians, the piece containing two half pieces of fifteen
yards the half piece 05 00 00 Fustians called Barmillians, the piece containing
two half pieces 05 00 00 Fustians called Cullen Fustians, the piece containing
two half pieces 05 00 00 Fustians called Millain Fustians, the piece containing
two half pieces 05 00 00 Fustians called Naples sustians trape or velure plain
the piece containing 15 yards 05 00 00 Fustians called of Weazel, the piece
containing two half pieces 05 00 00 Gally Dishes, the dozen of all sorts 00 05
00 Gauls, the hundred weight, containing one hundred and twelve pound 02 15 00
Girdles of Cruel, the groce containing twelve dozen 01 06 08 Girdles of
Leather, the groce containing twelve dozen 01 00 00 Girdles of Silk, the dozen
01 00 00 Girdles of Velvet, the dozen 02 00 00 Glass for windows called
Burgundy white, the Chest or Case 01 10 00 Glass for windows called Burgundy
colored, the Chest 01 10 00 Glass for windows called Normandy white, the Case
01 10 00 Glass for windows called Normandy colored, the Case 01 10 00 Glass
for windows called Rhenish the Way or Web, containing sixty bunches 01 10 00
Glass for windows called Muscovia Glass or Slude, the pound 00 02 00
Drinking-glasses called Venice drinking glasses, the dozen 00 04 00
Drinking-glasses called Flanders drinking glasses, the hundred glasses
containing five score 02 10 00 Drinking-glasses called and French drinking
glasses, the hundred containing five score 01 10 00 glasses called Burning
glasses, the dozen 00 12 00 glasses called Balm glasses, the groce containing
twelve dozen 02 00 00 glasses called Viols, the hund. containing 5. score 00 10
00 glasses called Water-glasses of all sorts, the dozen 00 03 00 Looking
glasses Penny half penny ware, the groce containing twelve dozen 00 06 08 Looking
glasses of Steel small, the dozen 00 05 00 Looking glasses of Steel large, 00
10 00 Hour glasses of Flaunders making, course, the groce containing twelve
dozen 02 00 00 Hour glasses of Venice making, the dozen 02 00 00 Glass stone
plates for Spectales, rough, the dozen 00 06 08 Glass Pipes small, the pound 00
02 00 Glass Pipes great the pound 00 03 00 Globes small the pair 03 00 00
Globes large, the pair 06 00 00 Gold Foil, the small groce containing twelve
dozen 00 04 00 Gravers and Pincers, the pound 00 01 02 Ditto, the dozen 00 03
00 Grain or Scarlet powder, the pound 00 04 06 Grindle-stones, the Chaulder 01
10 00 Grocery wares called Almonds, the hundred weight containing 112 pound 03
00 00 Grocery wares called Anniseeds, the hundred weight containing 112 pound
02 10 00 Grocery wares called Cloves, the pound 00 06 00 Grocery wares called
Corrants, the hundred containing one hundred and twelve pound 02 00 00 Grocery
Wares called Dates the hundred, containing one hundred and twelve pound 03 00
00 Grocery Wares called Ginger Dry, the hundred weight containing one hundred
and twelve pound 01 10 00 Grocery Wares called Licorish the hundred weight,
containing one hundred and twelve pound 01 00 00 Grocery Wares called Maces,
the pound 00 10 00 Grocery Wares called Malaga Reysons, the hundred weight
containing 112 pound 01 06 08 Grocery Wares called Nutmegs, the pound 00 04 00
Grocery Wares called Pepper, the pound 00 01 00 Grocery Wares called Sinnamon,
the pound 00 03 00 Grocery Wares called Raisins Of the Sun, the hundred weight
containing one hundred and twelve pound 02 00 00 Grocery Wares called Raisins
Of Smirna black, the hundred weight containing 112 pound 01 05 00 Grocery Wares
called Raisins Of Smirna red, the hundred weight containing one hundred and
twelve pound 01 05 00 Grocery Wares called Figs, the hundred weight containing
one hundred and twelve pound 01 00 00 Grocery Wares called Prunes, the hundred
weight containing one hundred and twelve pound 00 12 00 Grocery Wares called
Sugars Of Barbary, the hundred weight containing 112 pound 02 00 00 Grocery
Wares called Sugars Candy Brown, the hundred weight containing 112 pound 06 00
00 Grocery Wares called Sugars Candy white, the hundred weight containing 112
pound 08 00 00 Grocery Wares called Sugars White of Lixborn the hundred weight
containing 112 pound 05 00 00 Grocery Wares called Sugars Muscovados de
Lisbone, the hundred weight cont. 112 pound 02 10 00 Sugars Refined double or
single in loaves, the hundred weight containing 112 pound 07 00 00 Sugars Saint
Thome and Pannellis, the hundred weight cont. 112 l. 01 05 00

H
Handkerchers the dozen 02 00 00 Hawks of all sorts, the hawk 04 00 00 Hawks
hoods the gross, containing twelve dozen 01 06 08 Hair called Elks hair for
Saddles, the l. 00 00 06 Goats hair, the pound 00 02 00 Heath for Brushes the
hundred, containing 112 pound 01 00 00 Hemp called Cullen and Steel Hemp, and
all other sorts of dressed Hemp, the hundred weight containing 112 l. 05 00 00
Item rough Hemp, the hundred weight containing 112 pound 01 00 00 Hides called
Buff-hides the Hide 01 10 00 Hides called Cow-hides of Barbary and Muscovia,
the hide in the hair 00 07 00 Hides called Cow or Horse-Hides tanned the piece
00 10 00 Hides called India-Hides, the Hide 00 07 00 Hides called Losh-Hides,
the Piece 01 00 00 Hides called Red or Muscovia-hides tanned, colored or
uncoloured, the Hide 00 09 00 Hoops of Iron for Pipes or Hogsheads, the hundred
weight cont. 112 pound 01 00 00 Horses and Mares, the Horse or Mare 20 00 00
Horses of Wood, the groce cont. 12 doz. 00 05 00 Honey, the Barril 04 00 00

I
Jars of China of all sorts, the pair 01 00 00 Incle Unwrought, the pound 00 01
06 Incle Wrought, the dozen pound 02 00 00 Indico of all sorts, the pound 00 02
06 Indico dust, the pound 00 01 06 Iron Amys Spanish, Spruce and Swethish, the
Tun 16 00 00 Juice of Limmons, the Pipe 04 00 00

K
Knives called Butchers Knives, the dicker containing ten knives 00 03 00
Knives called Carving Knives, the dozen 01 10 00 Knives called Collen Knives,
the groce containing twelve dozen 10 00 00 Knives called French Knives, the
groce containing 12 dozen 07 04 00 Knives called Glovers Knives, the bundle
containing six knives 00 05 00 Knives called Hommicides, the dozen 03 00 00

L
Lace called Silk Bone-lace, the small pound containing sixteen ounces of all
sorts 20 00 00 Lace called Silk Lace of all other sorts, the pound containing
16 ounces 05 00 00 Lattin Black and shaven, the hundred containing 112 pound 06
00 00 Leather hangings guilt, the piece 04 00 00 Linseed, the bushel 00 06 00
Linnes, the dozen 00 12 06 Linen Cloth, or Callico's fine or course, the piece
00 12 00 Linen Cloth, or Cambricks the half piece cont. 6 else 01 05 00 Linen
Cloth, or Cambricks the piece containing 13. else 02 10 00 Linen Cloth, or
Cambricks the Packet 02 00 00 Linen Cloth, or Canvas called Dutch Barras, and
Hessens Canvas, the hundred else containing six score 03 10 00 Linen Cloth, or
Canvas called French and Normandy Canvas, and line narrow brown or white, the
hundred else containing six score 06 10 00 Linen Cloth, or Canvas called Noyals
Canvas, the 100 else containing 120 08 00 00 Linen Cloth, or Canvas called
White French or Normandy Canvas broad, the hundred else containing 120 10 00 00
Linen Cloth, or Canvas called French Canvas and line broad for tabling, being
an ell and half a quarter and upwards, the 100 else cont. 120 15 00 00 Linen
Cloth, or Canvas called Packing Canvas, Guttings and Spruce Canvas, the hundred
else containing 120 03 00 00 Linen Cloth, or Canvas called Poledavies, Spruce
Elbing, or Quiesbrow Canvas, the Bolt containing 28 else 00 18 00 Linen Cloth,
or Canvas called Stripped or tufted Canvas with thread, the piece containing 15
yards 00 18 00 Linen Cloth, or Canvas called Stripped, tufted or quilted Canvas
with silk, the piece containing 15 yards 01 10 00 Linen Cloth, or Canvas called
Stripped Canvas with Copper, the piece containing 15 yards 02 00 00 Linen Cloth,
or Canvas called Vandalose or Vittry Canvas, the 100 else cont. 120 06 00 00
Linen Cloth, or Canvas called Working Canvas for Cushions narrow, the 100 else
cont. 120 03 00 00

Linen Cloth, or Damask Working Canvas Broad, the Hundred Else, containing Six
Score 05 00 00 Linen Cloth, or Damask Tabling of Holland making, the Yard 00
08 00 Linen Cloth, or Damask Towelling and Napkening of Holl. making, the Yard
00 03 00 Linen Cloth, or Damask Tabling of Silesia making, the yard 00 04 00
Linen Cloth, or Damask Towelling and Napkening of Silesia making, the yard 00
01 04 Linen Cloth, or Diaper. Tabling of Holland making, the yard 00 05 00
Linen Cloth, or Diaper. Towelling and Napkening of Holland making, the yard 00
01 08 Linen Cloth, or Diaper. Napkins of Holland making, the Dozen 01 10 00
Linen Cloth, or Diaper. Of Sletia making Tabling, the yard 00 02 06 Linen
Cloth, or Diaper. Towelling and Napkening of Sletta making, the yard 00 01 00
Linen Cloth, or Lawns The half Piece, containing Six Else and an half 01 05 00
Linen Cloth, or Lawns The piece containing thirteen Else 02 10 00 Linen
Cloth, or Lawns Callico Lawns, the Piece 01 00 00 Linen Cloth, or Lawns
French Lawns, the Piece 01 05 00 Linen Cloth, or Lawns Sletta Lawns the Piece,
containing between four and eight yards 00 10 00 Linen Cloth, or Flanders
Linen Cloth Oudnord Courtrey Gentish Isinghams Iper Ontual
and all other sorts of Flanders Linen white the Ell 00 03 06 Linen Cloth, or
Isinghams and Gentish Brown, and all other Brown Linen, the Ell 00 02 06 Linen
Cloth, or Bag Holland, of Holland making, the Ell 00 06 00 Linen Cloth, or
Holand Linen Acts Cloth Brabant Embden Freeze Gulick Overissels Rowse
Sheppards
and all other Cloth of Holland, the Ell 00 03 04 Linen Cloth, or British,
the hundred Else, containing five score 06 00 00 Linen Cloth, or Cowsseild
Cloth or Plats, the Ell 00 01 06 Linen Cloth, or Driling and Pack-duck, the
hundred Else, containing six score 02 05 00 Linen Cloth, or Elbing or Dansk
cloth double ploy, the Ell 00 01 00 Linen Cloth, or Hamborough and Sletia
Cloth, broad, the hundred Else, containing a hundred and twenty, white or brown
07 00 00 Linen Cloth, or Hamborough Cloth, narrow, the hundred Else,
containing six score 04 00 00 Linen Cloth, or Hinderlands, Middlegood,
Headlake and Muscovia Linen, narrow, the hundred Else, containing six score 02
10 00 Linen Cloth, or Irish Cloth, the hundred Else, containing six score 02
10 00 Linen Cloth, or Lockram, the piece broad 10 00 00 Linen Cloth, or
Lockrams, the piece narrow 06 00 00 Linen Cloth, or Linen Cloth Minsters,
the Roll, containing fifteen hundred Else, at five score to the hundred 47 10
00 Linen Cloth, or Linen Cloth Ozenbrigs the Roll, containing fifteen
hundredth Else, at five score to the hundred 60 00 00 Linen Cloth, or Linen
Cloth Soultwich, the hundred Else containing six score 04 00 00

L.
called Polonia, Ulsters, Hannovers, Lubeck, narrow Sletia, narrow Westphalia,
narrow Harford plain Napkening, and all other narrow Cloth of High Ducthland
and the East Country, white or brown and not otherwise rated, the hundred
Else, containing six score 05 00 00 called Strasborough or Hamborough Linen,
the Ell 00 03 00 Locks called Budget or Hanging-Locks, small the Groce
containing twelve dozen 01 00 00 Locks called Hanging-locks, large, the Groce,
containing twelve dozen 02 00 00 Lute-strings, called Catlings, the Groce,
containing twelve dozen knots 00 06 08

M
Madder called Crop-Madder, and all other Bale-Madder, the hundred weight
containing a hundred and twelve pound 03 00 00 Madder called Fat-Madder, the
hundred weight containing a hundred and twelve pound 01 05 00 Mul-Madder, the
hundred weight containing a hundred and twelve pound 00 15 00 Magnus, the
hundred weight containing an hundred and twelve pounds 01 00 00 Masks of
Velvet, the Dozen 01 04 00

M.
Masts For Ships, small, the Mast 01 00 00 Masts Middle the Mast 02 00 00 Masts
Great, the Mast 05 00 00 Mats of Russia, the Mat 00 00 06 Mats of Mats called
Dutch, the yard 00 00 06 Melasses or Rameals the hundred weight, containing an
hundred and twelve pounds 01 00 00 Moccado ends, the Dozen pounds 02 00 00
Mittins of Wadmol, the Dozen pair 00 09 00

N.
Napkins French making, the Dozen 00 12 00 Needles called Sewing Needles, the
thousand 00 01 08 Needles called Pack Needles, the thousand 00 06 00 Needles
called Sail Needles, the thousand 00 03 00

O
Oakham, the hundred weight, containing an hundred and twelve pounds 00 16 00
Oars, the hundred, containing six score 10 00 00 Oils called Rape and Linseed
Oil, the Tun 30 00 00 Oils called Sivil Oil, Majorca Oil, Minorca Oil, Apuglia,
Province Oil, and Portugal Oil, the Tun 35 00 00 Oils called Train Oil, of
Greenland, the Tun 08 00 00 Oils called Train Oil of Newfound-land, and the
like sort, the Tun 06 00 00 Olives, the Hogshead 08 00 00 Onions The Barrel 00
03 04 Onions The hundred Bunches 00 16 08 Onions Seed, the hundred weight,
containing an hundred and twelve pound 04 00 00 Orchal, the hundred weight,
containing an hundred and twelve pound 01 10 00 Oranges and Limons, the
thousand 01 00 00 Orsedew, the Dozen pound 02 00 00

P.
Pans called Dripping and Fryings Pans, the hundred weight, containing one
hundred and twelve pounds 02 00 00 Paper called Blue Paper, the Ream 00 10 00
Paper called Brown paper, the Bundle 00 03 00 Paper called Cap paper, the Ream
00 07 06 Paper called Morlax paper the Ream 00 02 06 Paper called Paper of Cane
and Roan, ordinary, the Ream 00 04 06 Paper called Ordinary printing and Copy
paper, the Ream 00 02 06 Paper called Painted paper, the Ream 01 00 00 Paper
called Pressing paper, the hundred leaves 01 00 00 Paper called Rochel paper,
as large as Demi paper, the Ream 00 09 00 Paper called Royal paper, the Ream
01 00 00 Paper called Demi paper, the Ream 00 12 00 Parchment, the dozen,
containing twelve sheets 00 05 00 Ditto, the Roll, containing six dozen, 01 10
00 Pinnes, the dozen thousand 01 12 00 Pincers, and Plyers, the dozen 00 03 00
Pintados or Callico-cup-board-cloathes, the piece 06 06 08 Pipe or
Hogs-head-staves, the hundred containing six score 10 00 00 Pipe or
Barril-staves, the thousand 10 00 00 Pipes for Children, the Gross containing
twelve Dozen 00 08 00 Pitch, great Band, or small Band, the last containing
twelve barrels 12 00 00 Plaster of Parris, the Mount containing 3000 weight.
01 10 00

P.
Planks of Ireland, the hundred Foot, containing five score 00 12 06 Planks of
Cedar, the Foot 00 01 00 Latin Plates called Single White, the Barrel 06 00 00
Latin Plates called Double White, the Barrel 12 00 00 Latin Plates called
Single Black the Barrel, containing three hundred Plates 03 10 00 Latin Plates
called Double Black the Barrel, containing three hundred Plates 07 00 00
Pumis-stones, the Tun 05 00 00 Pomegranates, the hundred, containing five score
00 05 00 Pots called Of Earth or Stone covered, the hundred Cast 05 00 00 Pots
called Of Earth or stone uncovered, the hundred Cast, containing a Gallon to
every Cast, whether in one pot or more 03 00 00 Pots called Gally pots, the
hundred, containing five score 02 00 00 Pots called Melting-pots for
Goldsmiths, the thousand 01 10 00 Pots called Of Iron, French or Flemish
making, the dozen 03 00 00 Pots called Pots and Kettles of Iron, the Dozen 02
00 00 Pullies, viz. Pullies of Iron, the Groce, containing twelve dozen 04 00
00 Pullies, viz. Of Brass, the dozen 00 04 00

Q.
Quails, the Dozen 00 08 00 Quills, called Goose quills, the thousand 00 02 06

R.
Rape of Grape, the Tun 06 00 00 Rattles for Children, the Groce, containing
twelve dozen 01 00 00 Ribband of Silk of all sorts, the pound 05 00 00 Rice the
hundred weight, containing an hundred and twelve pound 01 05 00 Rozen, the
hundred weight, containing an hundred and twelve pound 00 05 00

S.
Saflore, the hundred weight, containing an hundred and twelve pounds 04 00 00
Saffron, the pound 01 10 00 Salpeter, the hundred weight, containing an hundred
and twelve pound 02 00 00 Scales for Scabbarbs, the Bundle 00 01 00 Scamoty,
the Yard 00 00 08 Scamoty, the Piece, containing thirteen yards 00 08 08
Scissars the Groce, containing twelve dozen 03 00 00 Sea Holly Roots, the pound
00 01 00 Sheets old, the pair 00 06 00 Shirts old, the piece 00 01 06 Sider and
Perry, the Tun 04 00 00 Silk called Bolognia, Naples and Organsine Silk, the
small pound containing sixteen ounces 01 08 00 Silk called Bastan, Vincentia,
Orsoy and Messina thrown Silk, the small pound 01 04 00 Silk called Capiton
Silk double, the small pound 00 09 00 Silk called Ferret and Florret Silk, the
small pound 00 16 00 Silk called Naples thrown Silk, the small pound 01 02 06
Silk called Raw, Legee Silk, the great pound containing four and twenty Ounces
00 18 00 Silk called Raw Ardas Silk, the great pound 00 14 00 Silk called Raw
Belledine, Bias, and Messina Silk the great pound 01 00 00 Silk called Raw
Bengalia Silk, the great pound 00 15 00 Silk called Raw Morea Silk, the great
pound 00 09 00 Silk called Raw China Silk, the great pound of all sorts 00 18
00 Silk called Raw Capiton Silk, the great pound 00 10 00 Silk called Thrown
Silk dyed, the pound containing sixteen Ounces 02 10 00 Wrought Silks called
Barracoones Bombazines, the single piece, containing not above fifteen yards
the piece 03 00 00 Wrought Silks called Buffins, Moccado, or Lyle Grograms,
narrow, the piece not above fifteen yards 02 00 00 Wrought Silks called
Buffins, Moccado, or Lyle Grograms broad, the piece not above fifteen yards 03
00 00 Wrought Silks called Bridges or Leyden, Rashes, the single piece
containing about fifteen yards 03 00 00 Wrought Silks called Ditto, the double
piece 06 00 00 Wrought Silks called Chamlets, half hair, half silk, the yard 00
05 00 Wrought Silks called Chamlets of Turkey, the yard 00 04 00 Wrought Silks
called Cloth of Silver and of Gold, the yard 01 10 00 Wrought Silks called
Cloth Rashes, the piece 18 00 00 Wrought Silks called Grograms Of Turkey, the
yard 00 02 06 Wrought Silks called Grograms Of Naples Silk broad, the yard 00
15 00 Wrought Silks called or Mohair. Of Naples Silk narrow, the yard 00 07 06
Wrought Silks called or Mohair. Wrought Grograms, the yard 00 12 00 Wrought
Silks called Pudeswaies, and Towers, Grograin, the yard 00 07 06 Wrought Silks
called Prunellos, broad, the ell 00 15 00 Wrought Silks called Ditto, narrow,
the ell 00 07 06 Wrought Silks called Plushes, of all sorts, the yard 00 18 00
Wrought Silks called Sarcenets Of Genoa, the ell 00 09 06 Wrought Silks called
Sarcenets Ducape, the ell 00 09 06 Wrought Silks called Sarcenets Of Bolognia,
the ell 00 05 00 Wrought Silks called Sarcenets Of Florence, the ell 00 07 06
Wrought Silks called Sattins Plain and Wrought, of Genoa and Florence the yard
00 12 00 Wrought Silks called Sattins Of Bolognia, the yard 00 09 00 Wrought
Silks called Sattins Of China, the yard 00 04 00 Wrought Silks called Sattins
Of Luca, the yard 00 07 00 Wrought Silks called Sattins Of France, plain and
wrought, the yard 00 06 00 Wrought Silks called Tabbies Broad of Genoa, the
yard 00 15 00 Wrought Silks called Tabbies Broad of Florence, the yard 00 15 00
Wrought Silks called Tabbies Of France broad, the yard 00 12 00 Wrought Silks
called Tabbies Of France narrow watered, the yard 00 06 00 Wrought Silks called
Tabbies Of France wrought, the yard 00 12 00 Wrought Silks called Taffaties
Broad of all sorts, the Ell 00 10 00 Wrought Silks called Taffaties Of China,
the yard 00 03 06 Wrought Silks called Taffaties Of Towers or Alamodes, the
yard 00 04 00 Wrought Silks called Tersonella Broad, the yard 00 11 00 Wrought
Silks called Tersonella Narrow, the yard 00 05 06 Wrought Silks called Velvets
Of all sorts, the yard 01 00 00 Wrought Silks called Velvets Wrought the yard
00 12 00 Wrought Silks called Sipers, or Loves, half yard broad, the yard 00 02
06 Wrought Silks called Ditto, half ell broad, the yard 00 03 00 Wrought Silks
called Ditto, broad, the yard 00 04 00 Wrought Silks called Scum Ciprus, the
yard 00 01 00 Wrought Silks called Damask Of Genoa, the yard 00 12 00 Wrought
Silks called Damask Of Florence, the yard 00 12 00 Wrought Silks called Damask
Of Luca, the yard 00 09 00 Wrought Silks called Damask Of China, the yard 00 04
00 Skins called Buck-skins In the hair, the skin 00 02 06 Skins called
Buck-skins Dressed, the skin 00 05 00 Skins called Calf-skins Of Ireland raw, the
dozen 00 06 08 Skins called Calf-skins Of Ireland tanned, the dozen 00 15 00
Skins called Dog-fish skin, for Fletchers, the skin 00 00 06 Skins called Elk
skins, the skin 01 10 00 Skins called Fox skins dressed, the dozen 01 05 00 Skins
called Gold skins, the skin 00 00 06 Skins called Goat skins Of Barbery, or the
East-Country in the hair, the dozen skins 00 15 00 Skins called Goat skins
Tanned, the dozen 02 00 00 Skins called Husse skins for Fletchers, the skin 00
00 06 Skins called Kidds skins In the hair, the hundred, containing five score
01 00 00 Skins called Kidds skins Dressed, the hundred, containing five score 02
00 00 Skins called Lamb skins in the wool, the hundred, containing an hundred
and twenty 01 05 00 Skins called Portugal skins, the Dozen 02 00 00 Skins
called Seal skins, the skin 00 01 00 Skins called Shamway skins, the Dozen 01
10 00 Skins called Sheep skins in the Wool, the skin 00 00 09 Skins called
Sheep skins blue of France, the Dozen 02 00 00 Skins called Rabbet and Coney
skins of all sorts the hundred skins, containing five score 01 10 00 Skins
called Squirrel skins, the thousand 05 00 00 Skins called Spanish, Sivil, or
Cordovant skins, the Dozen 05 00 00 Skins called Spruce skins tawed, the Dozen
02 00 00 Slude the pound 00 02 00 Smalts the pound 00 01 06 Snouting, alias
Snait, or dressed Towe, the twelve pound 00 05 00 Sparres, the middle, the
hundred, containing six score 03 00 00 Sparres small, the hundred, containing
sixscore 01 00 00 Spangles of Copper, the thousand 00 01 00 Spectacles without
Cases, the Groce containing twelve Dozen 00 18 00 Steel called Steel Wisp or
Long, per Faggot or per hundred weight, containing an hundred and twelve pound
02 00 00 Steel called Gad Steel, the half Barrel 24 00 00 Stockings of Wadmel,
the pair 00 01 06 Stones called Cane Stones the Tun 00 10 00 Stones called
Dog-stones, the Last, containing three pair to the Last 40 00 00 Stones called
Millstones the Last, containing three pair 40 00 00 Stones called Millstones,
the pair 15 00 00 Stones called Quern-stones small, the Last 02 00 00 Stones
called Quern-stones large, the Last 12 00 00 Stones called Slick-stones the
Dozen 00 02 00 Stuffs of France all sorts mixed with Silk, Hare, or Worstead,
the yard 00 04 00 Succades from the English Plantations, the pound 00 01 00 All
other Succades, the pound 00 03 00

T
Tallow the hundred weight, containing an hundred and twelve pound 01 00 00
Tapistry with hair, the Flemish Ell 00 03 00 Tapistry with Caddas, the Flemish
Ell 00 06 00 Tapistry with Silk, the Flemish Ell 00 10 00 Tapistry with Wool,
the Flemish Ell 00 03 00 Tarras the Barrel 00 05 00 Tar, small and great Band,
the Last containing twelve Barrels 04 00 00 Tazels the thousand 00 03 00 Thread
called Black and Brown thread, the dozen pound 01 00 00 Thread called Lions or
Paris Thread, the bolt 00 03 00 Thread called Outnal thread, the dozen pound 03
00 00 Thread called Sisters thread, the pound 00 15 00 Thread called Whited
Brown, the dozen pound 01 16 00 Thrums Of Linen, or Fustian, the Pound 00 00
06 Thrums Of Woollen the pound 00 01 00 Tikes called Brizel Tikes, and
Counterfeit Brizel, the Tike or Turnel-tick 01 10 00 Timber, the load,
containing fifty foot 01 10 00 Tiles called Pantiles, the thousand 02 10 00
Tinglasse, the hundred weight, containing a hundred and twelve pound 10 00 00
Tinshore, the groce, containing twelve dozen 00 06 00 Tow the hundred weight,
containing a hundred and twelve pound 01 00 00 Treacle Flanders Treacle, the
Barrel 04 00 00 Treacle Of Jeane, the pound 00 00 10 Trees, the tree 00 00 06
Trumpets for children, the groce 00 08 00 Twine of Hamborough, the hundred
weight containing a hundred and twelve pound 02 10 00 Twist for Bandstrings,
the dozen knots 00 05 00

V.
Verditer, the hundred weight, containing a hundred and twelve pound 01 05 00
Verders of Tapestry, containing eight or ten Else a piece with hair, the
Flemish Ell 00 02 00

W.
Wadmol the yard 00 00 09 Wainscots, the piece 00 10 00 Wax The hundred weight,
containing a hundred and twelve pound 05 10 00 Wax Called hard Wax, the pound
00 02 04 Whale Fins, the Fin 00 03 06 Whetstones, the hundred stones,
containing five score 00 15 00 Woad the hundred, containing a hundred and
twelve pound 00 08 00 Whale-bone, the Tun 50 00 00 Wood called Box-wood, the
Tun 12 00 00 Wood called Braziel, or Farnambuck-wood, the hundred-weight,
containing a hundred and twelve pound 01 00 00 Wood called Brazeletto or
Jamaica-wood, the hundred weight, containing a hundred and twelve pound 00 14
00 Wood called Log-wood, the hundred weight containing a hundred and twelve
pound 03 10 00 Wood called Speckled-wood, the hundred weight, containing an
hundred and twelve pound 01 00 00 Wood called Touchwood, the pound 00 02 00
Wood called Fustick, the hundred containing a hundred and twelve pound 00 08 00
Wood called Bever-wool, the pound 01 05 00 Wool called Cotton-wool of English
Plantation, the pound 00 00 04 Wool called Cotton-wool the pound, Foreign 00
00 06 VVire called Iron-wire, the hundred weight containing a hundred and
twelve pound 02 10 00 VVire called Lattin-wire, the hundred weight containing a
hundred and twelve pound 06 00 00 VVire called Virginal and Cithren-wire, the
pound 00 04 00 Wine-Lees, the Tun 05 00 00

Y.
Yarn called Cable-yarn, the hundred weight containing a hundred and twelve
pound 01 10 00 Yarn called Camel or Mohair-Yarne, the pound, containing
Sixteen Ounces 00 03 00 Yarn called Cotton yarn, the pound 00 02 00 Yarn called
Grograin-yarn, the small pound, containing sixteen Ounces 00 03 00 Yarn called
Cotton-yarn, of Turkey, the pound 00 01 08 Yarn called Spruce or Muscovia yarn,
the hundred weight, containing a hundred and twelve pound 02 13 04

All other Goods imported, not herein mentioned, to pay Excise, according to
the true value, viz. Twelve pence in every Twenty shillings, as they are valued
to pay Customs.


