THE Case of the Dissenting Protestants of IRELAND, In Reference to a Bill of
Indulgence, Vindicated from the Exceptions alleged against it, in a late
Answer.
THE Author of the Case had mentioned two things desired by Protestant
Dissenters, in reference to a Bill of Indulgence, viz.

First, That it give 'em a full security for the free Exercise of their
Religion.

Secondly, That there be no such Clauses annexed to it as may disable 'em from
serving their King and their Country.

The Answerer undertakes to show, that tho the Author of the Case have truly
represented their desires, he has but weakly argued for granting of 'em. Now,
tho the Author is so conscious to himself of his own mean abilities, as to be
ready to suspect that so just a Cause may have suffered by being in so weak
hands; yet he does not see any such strength in the Answerer's Replys, as
should discourage him from the defense even of those weak Arguments, from any
thing the Answerer has alleged to take off the force of 'em. Whether this
opinion be founded on reason, or on that partiality to his own Cause (which all
men are prone to) must be left to the Reader's Judgment.

First, The Protestant Dissenters desire such a Bill of Indulgence as should
give 'em a full security for the free Exercise of their Religion.

As to this, the Answerer indeed tells us That he believes, there are few or
none but will agree to it; Tho he thinks it plain the Author's Arguments do not
evince the necessity of it.

I might therefore justly satisfy my self that there are some considerations or
other for which the generality even of those of the Established Church are
willing to grant to Protestant Dissenters the free exercise of their Religion.
But since the Answerer thinks the former Reasons alleged for it, to be
insufficient, and speaks of such a Toleration as rather in it self a very
inconvenient thing, which they are inclined to grant more out of compliance
with the importunity of those that desire it, then any sense of it is
reasonableness, as Parents humor their Children, in giving 'em things that are
pleasing to their palats, tho prejudicial to their health, only because they
eagerly desire 'em. I shall a little examine what he has offered against those
Arguments alleged for the Necessity and Reasonableness of it; and I do this
the rather, because those Answers of his suggest several common prejudices
against Protestant Dissenters, which are of late industriously spread, and I
fear very deeply rooted in the minds of many, tho founded on very unhappy
mistakes and misinformation about 'em; so that the Removal of them will probably
tend to promote a more charitable temper in Protestan^^ toward one another.
And this is a design fit to be pursued at all times, and never more seasonable
then now, when there are so earnest endeavors used to heighten our differences
in order to obstruct the happy effects of our mutual confidence and affection.

The First Argument alleged in the Case is. That since the security of the
Protestant Interest in this Kingdom consists in the Number and Union of
Protestants, this Bill will promote both, by drawing Protestant Dissenters from
abroad, by uniting all Protestants at home, and by giving the Government a more
rooted Interest in the affections of Protestant Dissenters.

(...) the guilt of many intemperate hearts? or should not any unchristian
severities that are chargeable (...) either in former times, serve as Sea marks
to warn both of the danger of relapsing into those excess^s o^ misguided Zeal,
which all unprejudic't and moderate persons condemn 'em for? And should not all
that wish for a better understanding between Protestants rather study to bury
such ungrateful passages o^ both hands if possible, in perpetual silence?

Answerer. 3dly, Whether those that are the most moderate among 'em can, with
any reason expect, but that with the same measure they have meeted to their
Brethren, the Episcopal Clergy in their own Country, It should be measured to
them again, when they come to settle in this Kingdom.

Reply, I perceive the Answerer did not well understand matters of Fact when he
proposed this dangerous Question. For if according to his own Rule, the
Dissenting Ministers from Scotland may expect the same measure here, that is
allowed to the Episcopal Clergy there, Then they might preach in
Parish-Churches, and enjoy the Revenues that belong to 'em, on no other te^^s
then the Oath of Fidelity to the King, and their behaving themselves worthily
in Doctrine, ^^^e, and Conversation, without ever declaring their Judgment in
the matters of Church Government.

For on these very terms, do all the Episcopal Clergy in Scotland that were
possessed of public Churches when the King accepted that Crown, continue and are
by Act of Parliament secured in the exercise of their public Ministry except
those that were turned out for crimes wherein their Judgment as Episcopal is
not concerned. But of these matters I shall have farther occasion to inform the
Answerer more fully who I perceive is under strange misapprehensions about 'em.
Whereby it will evidently appear how little occasion there was for the
Answerer's concluding this Paragraph with those sharp words. So that if any
Indulgence be granted, it is purely the result of our own Charitable
inclinations and a plain evidence to the World, that our just Resentment of
their severity to others, has not al^^nated our affectious from 'em. For he
will find it is not their severities in Scotland, but his mistakes about 'em
that have kindled these warm Resentments in the Answerer, and in too many
others that have been imposed upon by groundless reports.

Answerer, Neither will this Ind^lgence probably, tend to the uniting of
Protestants at home, as ^s too fully proved by Experience in England; where the
present Tollera^^on has not had that good effect; neither can we in reason
expect it should be more successful here. For if it equally extend to all
parties and denominations of Protestont Dissenters, their mutual jealousies of
one another, and their respective endeavors to propagate their opinions and to
promote then temporal interests will naturally create great heats and
animosities. But if the benefit of the Indulgence be unequally distributed, it
will be so far from being a means of supporting the^^t will considerably weaken
the Government by disobliging all but those that are particularly encouraged and
caress't.

Repl. The Author of the Case in his Argument evidently speaks of an union
between Conforming and Dissenting Protestants which he supposes this Bill would
promote. And herein he suppo^e^ no more then what the Parliament of England
did, who brought in this Bill there as the most effectual means to unite all
Protestants in affection: And sure this Bill must be a proper means to attain
that end, if men's affections be best united, when they have no reasonable
ground to apprehend any danger from one another.

But the Answerer seems to mistake him, as if he spoke of the union of
Dissenting Protestants among themselves. But let him understand it either way.
The contrary of this (he says) is fully proved by experience in England. If he
mean that the Bill of Indulgence in England has not united the affections of
Conformist's and Non Conformist's, it is easily replied, that tho it have not
wholly removed all the animositys between 'em, yet it had apparently lessened
'em. They can converse sociably, they live together more peaceably, and there
is no doubt, much more of mutual love among 'em, then when the protestant
Dissenters were every moment in danger of having their persons imprisoned and
their goods distrain'd and sold.

If he mean that the Bill of Indulgence in England has not united Dissenting
Protestants among themselves. I suppose the Answerer is much mistaken. For
those called Presbyterians and Independents never came nearer to an Union and
Accommodation of their differences then since the Indulgence. It Is true some
other heats have arisen at London about the Explication of the Doctrine of
Justification, as there have been no less warm disputes among those of the
Establ^ht Church about the Explication of a more Important Article, Viz. That
of the Trinity; but the Indulgence has no way contributed to the one more then
the other. And as for this Kingdom the Answerer must be a great stranger to it,
if he think the Bill of Indulgence here pleaded for would probably occasion any
jealouse among those for whom it is desired, or create any heat among 'em, They
have many years lived in entire mutual Friendship and as yet see no great
hazard in their smaller differences becoming the fuel of any new flames, if
others will not turn Incendiaries, and blow the Coals. So that this danger
seems only a Bugbear created by the Answerer's own Imagination.

Answerer. But. Secondly; Neither is this Indulgence so highly Reasonable as
the Author pretends, as may appear by a particular consideration of the
Arguments he makes use of to prove it.

For first, as the Early Zeal of the Dissenters in behalf of this Government,
may entitle 'em to it is protection, so it cannot be denied, but that they have
enjoyed it ever since the Revolution, and have Received more then ordinary
marks of Royal favor, partly by the free Liberty that is granted 'em throughout
the Kingdom, etc. as also by his Majesty's bounty in allowing Yearly hitherto,
a considerable Sum for the maintenance of their Ministers.

Repl. And does the Answerer think that he has refuted the Argument, by what
rather Confirms it^ If the King have hitherto protected 'em, and augmented to
their Ministers in Vlster, the Pension K. Charles the 2d. allowed 'em, as a
mark of the Respect he had for their Fidelity and Affection; ^s it not
reasonable that the continuance of the same Favor should be secured to 'em by
Law, when they have done nothing to render themselves unworthy of it? It must
doubtless appear so, unless the Answerer have a different Opinion of 'em, from
what his Majesty has so often expressed, by whose approbation a Bill of
Indulgence in their Favor (such as they now desire) was Transmitted to the
last Parliament here. But if there be any thing in this Answer to take off the
force of this Argument, it must be this, That the Toleration the Dissenters
have so long enjoyed, is as much as their Zeal and Fidelity can claim; So that
they would have no ground to complain of the Government, tho it should refuse
to give 'em any security for the Continuance of it. And this seems to be the
Answerer's sense, because in Reply to the second Reason draw'n from the
Indulgence granted to Foreign Protestants, he observes, It Is only granted for
7. Years, in hopes that after the Expiration of that Term, they would declare
themselves Members of the Established Church, But what if after those 7 Years
the French Churches in this Kingdom, choose rather to Adhere to the model of
their own Discipline and Worship; will the Answerer then think 'em unworthy of
a renewed Legal Toleration? If not, what signifies his Answer to the Argument,
That it is most reasonable to extend the same Favor to his Majesty's born
Subjects, that we do to Foreigners. If he think 'em in that case unworthy of
it. I would gladly know on what grounds he thinks so. What grand Crime would it
be, if after so many Years, those Faithful Confessors of Christ should still
prefer the model of their own Worship and Discipline, to any other? Would they
therefore deserve to be Treated here as they were in France* And whatever the
Answerer may think of the forward Inclination of the Fr. Protestants to their
Church Government and Worship, all the world knows to whose Discipline and
Worship their own is most conformable. And how far soever Temporal Interest
engages the compliance of some of 'em, yet there are few of 'em, but if left to
their free Liberty, would choose their own. And the most of their Ministers
swallow the Reordination required of 'em (how smoothly soever palliated) with
great reluctance, and not without some disgust against the Imposers of it.

Answerer Thirdly. The Papist are not in equal Circumstances of public Favor,
with our Dissenting Brethren; For as the Liberty they have in the Exercise of
their Religion, was extorted from the Government by the pressing necessity of
public Affairs, so its not Confirmed to 'em, by any Act of Parliament as this
Indulgence is expected, and I suppose designed to be to Protestant Dissenters.

Reply. It Is not easy to perceive where the ^orce of this Answer lies. For a
public Treaty is a considerable security to the Papists; and is it not then
Reasonable to grant, if possible, a fuller to Protestant Dissenters? When as
the Answerer himself insinuates, the one extorted it from the Government; in
order to the suppressing their Rebellion: The other deserved it by their
Assistance in the Reduction of this Kingdom. Is it not reasonable at least to
make this small difference between those who have Deserved so ill, and those
that have Deserved so well of the Government?

Answerer, Fourthly, The Experience that our Dissenting Brethren, have had of
our Tenderness toward 'em heretofore, is a sufficient Argument and Security to
'em of our future Kindness.

Repl. We must beg the Answerers pardon, if after so frequent Experience ^f the
renewed Storms that ^ell on our Brethren in England during the late Reigns, and
of what we sometimes felt here in Ireland, whenever any Court-turn was to be
served by the revival of penal severities, we do not think a general
Declaration of tenderness a sufficient Security to us from future persecution.
Especially when we know not what a change, many Turns in public Affairs may
make in the Passions and Interests of Men. So that we cannot but apprehend a
Legal Liberty more desirable and satisfying then an Arbitrary one, that is as
easily recalled as granted. Tho we must in Gratitude add, That none can repose
a more entire confidence in his Majesty, and the present Government then we do,
on whole Justice and Goodness we can cheerfully rely, tho some Men's Ill Will
should obstruct this Effect of it.

Answer, For we consider our mutual Agreement in the same Articles of Faith,
and are glad to find this Author is pleased to declare, That the suppressing of
Protestant Dissenters, by the strict Execution of Penal Laws, is a practice
that has a just Odium left upon it. But are sorry that the just Odium left upon
i^ among us, should be wholly confined to us, and that this practice should
have no Censure nor Reflection cast upon it among our Neighbors. And it is
strange the Author should say, that there is so apparent Contrariety in it to
the Mild and Merciful Genius of our Holy Religion, seeing he cannot but know
the time when 'twas an avowed doctrine, and a general practice among the
Presbyterians and Independents, to bar the members of the Church of England
from the free exercise of divine Worship according to their Consciences. And
it is strange that this practice should be so apparently contrary to our holy
Religion, and have so mischievous Effects upon the public peace here in this
Kingdom, and yet he thought so great an Evidene of (...)

But what does the Answerer mean by those Misdemeanors, which be would have it
in their Power to repress. If he mean Matters of mere Nonconformity, which he
would have still a Power left to repress; then we have but too just occasion to
suspect the Designs of those that would obstruct the Indulgence. If he mean any
other Misdemeanors, a Legal Indulgence will not disable the Civil Magistrate
from Repressing 'em, much less from securing the Established Religion from any
Danger that a Toleration of Protestants can expose it to.

Answerer, Lastly, As to what he says concerning His Majesty's Declaration, I
desire this Author to consider more seriously, whether there be not some others
in the Three Kingdoms, besides the Protestant D^stenters of Ireland, to whom
one great End of His Majesty's Declaration is yet unaccomplisht, and whether
there be a Law made to cover the Protestant Episcopal Clergy in Scotland from
Persecution, on the account of Religion.

Reply, I doubt not, the Answerer is by this time satisfied, to how little
purpose this Question is asked, and what Rep^y may be given to it. For no
Protestants are Persecuted in Scotland on the Account of Religion, either by
the Civil or Ecclesiasticals ^overnment. Nay, the Meetings of the Episcopal
Clergy have long been undisturbed tho they refused (...) own he King's
Authority. But sure our Answerer cannot expect there should be (...) Low to
Tolerate those, that will not own the Civil Authority, by which they are
Tolerated And were the Dissenter here so disaffected to the Government they
could have (...) presence to desire a Legal Toleration.

The Second ^^^^g desired by Protestant Dissenters is, That there be no such
Clause^ (...) next to this Bill, as would disable 'em from serving their King
and their Country.

As to this, The Answerer says, That in plain Terms, it is no more than this,
That where E^^e to Tender Consciences is the only thing they formerly desired,
They now claim it as their due to be ad^^^ed also into all honorable and
profitable Employments; and without these, whatever Ease be given to their
Consciences It Is to be (...) they will have no quiet in their minds.

Reply, The Protestant P^st^^^rs of Ireland do not (as the Answerer seems to
insi^nate here) seek any (...) Privilege or Favor, but only are unwilling to
have a New Yoke put upon 'em They claim nothing as their due, in Reference to
the Civil Government, but to be Treated at Dutiful Subject, without having any
Mark of public Infamy, and distrust put upon 'em by a New Law. And if any
should attempt to do so, they may well forgive the Protestant Dissenters, That
though they have ease to their conscience, yet they should have no great quiet in
their (...) for they have their Lives and Fortunes to Secure, of which it is no
wonder, if they should be fearful, when they see some ^^en so unwilling to
consult our common Sa^e^y, in a Kingdom liable to so frequent Returns of fatal
Irish Rebellions.

The Author of the Case proposed several Arguments, to show the ^expediency of
any such Test as shall disable Protestant Dissenters from serving their King
and their Country. As

First, The Sacrament Test in England was chiefly designed against the P^pists.
To which the Answerer Replies, "That the Dissenters a^e included in the Body of
the Act.

Reply, None doubts, but that Act enjoins the Sacramental Test. But ^^e Preface
as well as Title of the Act, shows That the End proposed, was the preventing
Dangers from Popish Recusants; which End would be sufficiently attained by the
Declaratory Test against Popery in that Act, though the Sacrament Test were left
out.

But the Answerer adds, If the Zeal of the English Dissenters against Popery in
the late times has not exempted 'em from a Sacramental Test, our Dissenting
Brethren in this Kingdom, cannot with modesty expect, that their late Services
should entitle 'em to any such Immunities.

Reply, Even the Zeal of English Dissenters, did in His Majesty's Judgment
deserve such a Favor, as the Removal of that Test there, which he moved his
first Parliament to, in his Speech to 'em: But the Protestant Dissenters of
Ireland who were no^ hampered with this Clog, as those of England were, had the
opportunity of showing their Zeal more Remarkably; And 'twere hard to put that
very Clog on 'em now, to our freedom from which, we must in part ascribe it,
that this whole Kingdom, was not then entirely lost.

Secondly. The Author of the Case Argues. That such a Test for disabling
Protestant Dissenters for any Public Services, is against the common
Protestant Interest of Ireland.

This Argument the Author more largely insisted on, than the Answerer seems
willing, either to Repeat or Consider. However, Let us hear what he Objects.

Answerer, Our Circumstances indeed vastly differ (as he says) from those of
England. For here the Established Church is more in danger then there by
Protestant Dissenters as well as by the common Enemy. In England one unmixt
People do compose the Body of the Nation, etc. Here we are made up of several
Nations, and there is a daily Accession of great Numbers from a Neighboring
Kingdom of whom the meaner sort are generally of a different Communion, tho the
Gentry, and Nobility, etc. are generally Conformists.

Reply. The Author of the Case Argues from the common Protestant Interest of
Ireland, That since the Papists in this Kingdom are Ten, or perhaps twenty to
one Protestant; it is therefore necessary to give the Protestant Interest the
widest Basis here, by excluding no Protestants from Public Service. That is,
if a thousand Men have ten or twenty thousand Enemies to secure themselves
against; It Is against their Interest to divide their Strength, by disabling
three hundred of 'em from being employed in any public Post for their common
Defense: But the Answerer, instead of making any Reply to this, only tells us
what he thinks to be most Conducive to the separate Interests of one party of
Protestants; As if the separate Interest of that party, were the Interest of
the whole Body of Protestants, or at least, were of far greater Value and
Consideration, then their common Interest.

But why may not those of the Established Church secure their common Interest as
protestants, without any Danger to their separate Interests, as a distinct
party?

While all protestants that deserve well of the Government meet with
Encouragement and Favor, Their united strength will be their Impregnable
security; And yet since all Employments are in the disposal of the Government;
And since the Established Church has so absolutely the Ascendant in England,
there is no ground to fear the Government here will be so Lavish and Imprudent
in bestowing their favors, as to encourage the Protestant Dissenters to any
degree, that can render them dangerous to the Established Church, or put it into
their Power to Act any thing to her prejudice. And yet it is most reasonable the
Government should encourage 'em so far, as is truly conducive to our common
Security; So that, there can be no difficulty in according the Common
Protestant Interest, with the particular Interests of the Established Church,
Nay those can be no other way so Effectualy secured unless they think their own
Strength alone a sufficient balance to that of the Irish Papists But I am
sorry to find, that the Answerer should reckon the Established Church to be in
so great danger of those, that have so lately helped to restore her to her
present safety and gr^u^ure: Why should he so soon mistake those as pernicious
Enemies who in the late troubles were ^ound to be so hearty Friends? I hope
these are only his own narrow Sentiments concerning the protestant ^^s^enters,
and that all moderate Conformists entertain a more just and Charitable Opinion
of 'em, having never in this Kingdom, had the least ground for such peevish
Surmises, as those of the Answerer.

Answerer, It Is possible indeed, as he observes, That the Irish may be more
numerous, if there should be a general peace; and I may add, The Papists will
probably grow much more numerous If there should be a general Indulgence; and
therefore notwithstanding our Authors Opinion, we cannot think fit to give the
Protestant Interest a wider Basis here then it has in Holland, etc. where all
protestants are not equally capable of Employments without Religious Tests.

Reply, The Answerer has been often told, It Is no General Indulgence the Author
of the Cast pleads for; and therefore, he reasons here to no purpose; unless he
imagine, That the Papists will grow more numerous by a Tolleration to those
Protestants, whose Faith is the same with that of the Established Church; And
does he think, That we can easily digest such a Paradox as this, upon his bare
Assertion? And for the Case of Holland, which the Answerer would here parallel
with our own; and where he tells us, There are Religious Tests. It Is easily
replied, there is a plain disparity. For besides, that their Tests run upon
Doctrinal differences; It Is evident that those who adhers to the Protestant
Religion as there Established, are a large Body, to which those that are
excluded from publ^q^^ service bear no proportions. And conseqently, There is
no great Danger to the State from such a Test: Whereas, here the Papists are a
hundred to Ten, in respect of the whole body of Protestants; so that to disable
all dissenting ones, were to cut off from the common Protestant Interest, about
a 3d part of its strength, when the whole is rather too little. And the
Answerer h^s as yet given as no other reason for doing so, but his own
groundless Fears of a Danger, which as I have showed him, If it more real (as
it is not) may be easily obviated by the Government.

The Author having put the Case of another Irish Rebellion; The Answerer tells
us, There is reason to believe the Consideration of the Common Safety, and the
gratitude of Dissenters for their Indulgence, would engage 'em to show an equal
Zeal as they did before; though they should not be wholly on equal Terms with
those of the Established Church, since they could not reasonably hope for so
kind a Treatment from the Papists, as from them.

Reply, The Protestant Dissenters are not so vain, as ever to expect in this
Kingdom, to be wholly on equal Terms with those of the Established Church. But
can he expect, That any Gentlemen among 'em in such a Case as is here proposed,
would raise Forces for others to Command 'em, or their Tenants cheerfully Rise
with those on whom they have no Dependence, and in whom they can as little
Trust, or can he think, that such Gentlemen will cheerfully Raise and Command
Forces in such an Exigency, when instead of any prospect of having their
Services considered or rewarded, they must rather expect to pay 500 l. for
their Presumption. What Encouragement is this to induce Men to venture their
Lives and Fortunes to save their Country, when they are in hazard of being
punished for endeavoring it: Nay, Who does he think would be tempted to stay in
a Country where his Danger from a common Enemy ^s so great, and where he is put
under such a disability of doing any thing considerable to prevent it?

Thirdly for the Argument drawn from the Parliament of England, the Author
urges it no farther then as a probable presumption that they thought no other
Te^^; needful to qualify men for Employments in this Kingdom then they there
Enjoin. And if they had thought the Sacrament Test needful here, they could
easily have added it as They have the Test against Popery mentioned in the same
Act. For they were not Ignorant, That it was not in force here. And against
this there is nothing to the purpose in the Answerers Reply.

Fourthly, For the Authors Argument to prove the Test unreasonable. Viz. That,
it will put the Protestant Dissenters into worse Circumstances then they are at
present The Answerer seems to grant it, but suggests on the other hand. That a
Tolleration without such a Test, will put the Members of the Established Church
into worse Circumstances then they are in at present; Therefore since the
Conformists appeared as early and with equal Zeal for this Government as the
dissenters The former (he thinks) will have reason to think themselves severely
dealt with, if no other way can be found of rewarding the service of
dissenters, without hazarding the most valuable Rights of the Conformists, by
admitting the dissenters into such office (...) may give them power and
oppotrunity to alter the whole frame of the present Church Government.

Answ. I cannot imagine how the granting dissenting Protestant 's what they now
desire should put the Established Church into worse Circumstances then they are
now in, when the Dissenters desire no more then that things may continue in the
same peaceable and amicable posture they are in, or (what is the same) that a
Legal Tolleration may secure to 'em what they now enjoy through the favor of
the Government. And I would fain know what Rights of the Church have been
hazarded since this Revolution, unless the Answerer supposes it the peculiar
Right of Conforming Protestants, that none should serve the Government but
themselves. But why may not the Government employ a few Protestant Dissenters
in a few inferior Offices, (as they now do) without admitting them into so many
and so Important ones as should give 'em any power or opportunity to alter the
present Church Government? These things are easily consistent; And the answerer
knows well enough, There is no ground to fear lest the Government here should
so fart Deviate from the measures of England, as to be guilty of so great a
mistake, as to put the Dissenters into any Capacity of overturning the
Established Church. Much less need the Answerer fear that the Conformist
Officers at Derry, Iniskillen, Crum, etc. should apprehend themselves wronged
that those who were embark't with 'em in the same Cause, should have some small
share with 'em in the Rewards of their Courage. None that are generous enough
to value true merit would envy the just recompense of it. And I perceive the
Answerer himself has so much of that good quality as not to think it altogether
inconvenient that such Persons should be excepted from the proposed Test. But I
am sorry that he should think it Convenient to disable all Dissenting
Protestants for the future from Imitating the Commendable Zeal and Courage of
their Brethren, as if he either envied the Reputation they have acquired, or
Imagined there would never be any more occasion for their assistance (...)
preserve their Country.

For the Argument drawn from the unfitness of the Sacrament Test; I need only
suggest the following particulars to invalidate the Answerer's Replys.

1. The Government may have occasion to employ many in public Offices
(especially military one^), and apparently does employ many, that should be
rather according to the Rubric, debarred from the Sacrament, then thus driven
to it.

2. If those be the fittest to be employed by the State, that give the greatest
Evidences of their Piety to Almighty God; Then I suppose the Answerer will
allow us to estimate the Piety of the Established Church, by that of those who
enjoy Civil and Military preferments in it, And then I hope also that such
should not be excluded from this Privilege who give equal Evidences of their
Piety with any of their Fellow subjects.

3. To make the different Mode of Receiving the Sacrament, such a Test is to
make it the Engine of a State-party, and consequently a means to divide the
affections of those whom the Sacrament it self should unite in mutual Love.

4. It will no way justify the reasonableness of making the different Mode of
Receiving the Test of all Offices in the State* because the Interest of
Religion is little concerned in it, and it is but comparatively a trivial thing.

For the more trivial it is. The less weight should any wi^e Government lay
upon it, and the more willing should they be to leave Men to their Liberty
about it.

But says the Answerer. Why should any separate for so trivial a matter, and
why should the State employ those that refuse to give so trivial and
inconsiderable a mark of their compliance with it is Orders?

Repl. The Answerer sure cannot be ignorant, that when these different Modes of
Worship, are called trivial, it is in respect of their Intrinsique Importance,
not in respect of the Consciences of those that scruple 'em. Now that may be in
it self an inconsiderable thing, which yet the Conscience of a wi^^ Man may for
fear of sinning, not dare to comply wi^h. For instance, The Eating or not
Eating of Blood, is comparatively a small and trivial matter. And yet many Men
no way inferior to the Answerer in either Learning or Wisdom, have thought the
Eating of blood unlawful among Christians themselves, Now let us suppose the
number of such were as considerable in the Kingdom, as that of Protestant
Dissenters is. Would it be any way becoming the prudence of the Government to
make this trivial difference the Test of a State-party^. Would it be a fit Law
for the wisdom of a Nation to enact. That none should be admitted to serve
their King and their Country, that scruples the Eating of a black Pudding. And
yet the Interest of the State would be as much concerned in the decision of
this Question as that of the Church, and of real Religion in the other. There
are indeed some, whose judgment has that latitude that they could Receive the
Sacrament, either Kneeling, Sitting, or Standing. But there are many no way
inferior for Wisdom or Integrity, (whatever the Answerer insinuates to the
contrary) who think themselves obliged to Receive in the posture most suitable
to a Religious Feast, and really scruple Kneeling in the Act of Receiving, tho
they either kneel or stand, at the solemn worship offered before and after. I
shall not here either espouse their Opinion, or examine the grounds of it, but
only infer how unreasonable a stress those lay on a dubious Rite, that is
comparatively of so small moment, who would render all those unserviceable to
their Country, and thereby debar 'em from the common Rights of all Dutiful and
Well-affected Subjects, who cannot comply with it. Whereas often the best of
Men are pronest to scruple what the worst can without any difficulty swallow.

Lastly, The Author argues, That the Established Church will be no way
endangered by the Indulgence.

To which the Answerer replys. That tho the Horors and Revenues of the Clergy
are secured to 'em, yet none can foresee the difficulties, the Conforming
Clergy may possibly contest with, in asserting the Rites of the Church, if Non
Conformist's were qual^fied for Civil offices.

Reply, the Non Conformist's have been both before and ever since the
Revolution qualified for 'em and yet the Clergy have met with no opposition in
asserting the Rites of the Church; and I agree with the Answerer that no wise
man can foresee any difficulties they are in danger of meeting with for the
future.

But the Answerer adds, besides we are far less concerned for the security of
our Temporal Interest then for the Establishment of our ancient, holy and
peaceable Religion.

Reply, If the Establishment of their ancient, holy and peaceable Religion be
the great matter the Answerer is concerned for. Those who desire the Toleration
will openly declare their embracing the same Religion and Faith with 'em. And
for the other matters in difference we must beg the Answerers pardon, if we
think that it is chiefly Temporal Interest has hitherto rendered some men so deaf
to all Proposals for an accommodation of 'em.

I am glad to find, that the Answerer not only owns the good services of the
Dissenters in this Kingdom, but declares he would not exclude 'em from a
capacity of concurring to preserve their Country again. But it is strange how
he should think they would be in the same circumstances (if a like juncture
should happen) to serve their King and Country tho not legally qualified for
Offices. For they did not then run any risque of severe penalties by commanding
the forces they raised, as now they would do. Their hands were then loose,
whereas now they will be tied up, and a Legal Padlock clapped on the swords of
all that have interest enough to bring men into the Field.

For what was said of the peaceable behavior of Protestant Dissenters in this
Kingdom, since the Answerer does not deny it; Why should he go about to detract
from it, by imputing it to their want of opportunity to show their turbulency
and disaffection to the Government? For Scotland, I have already shown him his
mistakes about their present practice there. For England, if he refer to the
Civil Wars, he has been often told, they were begun by Conformists, with whom
it was no wonder if the persecuted Non-Conformists did concur, to be sheltered
from their Persecutors. And for their Principles in reference to Civil
Government. I would desire the Answerer to show me any difference between those
contained in the 39 Articles, and in the Assemblys Confession of Faith.

The Answerer concludes, That no Motives ought to prevail on 'em to make such
large Concessions to the Dissenters, as will in all probability shake the
foundations of the Established Church.

Reply. Nor are any such large Concessions desired. But I hope the Answerer
does not take it for one of the foundations of the Established Church, that none
should serve the Government hu^ themselves. For if he do, nothing can in this
Kingdom so probably shake the Established Church, as the making its foundation
too narrow, and nothing can so effectually strengthen it, as the making it a
little wider, to comprehend those whom in this case, interest as well as
gratitude, will oblige to support it.

All I shall add in reference to the Answerer and all others that are of his
opinion in this matter is this, If what is here suggested, do not convince him
of the necessity and reasonableness of granting to the Protestant Dissenters a
Toleration without this Test, yet the Protestant Dissenters do at least desire
that a Toleration with it may not be obtruded upon 'em as a favor. For to
allude to the Answerer's Expressions concerning it; such a Toleration they
think would be as prejudicial to their health, as it is distasteful to their
palars; and to force it on 'em, would be to act like those churlish Parents,
that when their children ask for Bread, give 'em a stone; and when they ask for
fish, give 'em a serpent.

Since the writing this Paper, I have seen another, (which is only a Transcript
of the 2d part of the Answer, with Enlargements indeed, but little or no
amendments) Entitled, The Case of the Dissenters of Ireland considered, in
reference to the Sacramental Test. But since there is little occurs in it that
is material, more than what has been already examined in the Answer, I shall
only add the following Reflections on it.

1. The Established Church in Ireland can never be in any real danger from
Protestant Dissenters while Ireland is in such entire dependence on England,
and nothing can be done here, but under the conduct and control of the
Government there. Nay, the Established Church will be much more hazarded then
secured by narrowing the common Protestant Interest here. So that both the
Answerer and the Considerer from their eager concern to obviate an imaginary
and improbable, almost wholly overlook a real and certain danger.

2. The Considerer seems ill-employed in reviving these common but groundless
jealousies concerning Protestant Dissenters here. He does not indeed, as the
Answerer, call those he is jealous of, by their own name of Scots, but out of a
certain tenderness styles 'em British. But whereas he takes a peculiar
pleasure in repeating the out-worn story of the Solemn League and Covenant. (as
if the Answerer had not said enough of it). I would gladly, for once, ask him,
whether the most intemperate heats of the Scots Covenanters ever came to that
extravagant height as the zeal of the Episcopal Party in that Kingdom, when
they made it death to Preach, or even to Pray in a house with five more present
then those of the Family? And why should these Gentlemen then delight to rake
such matters as these out of the Grave of Oblivion in which they have lain so
long, when they know that Recriminations are so obvious, and may be made to so
great advantage? Since Time and Experience have done so much to mature the
Judgments, and mellow the Tempers of men on both sides to more of Wisdom and
Peace; Why should so much pains be taken to blow up those sparks that are
almost wholly extinct? And whereas the Considerer starts a new suspicion from
the Assemblys Catechism, which he tells us, declares That a false Worship is
not to be Tolerated, and that they account that of the Established Church to be
such.

To remove this bugbear also out of the way, I need do no more then acquaint
him, that it is only a Toleration of a false Religion, that the Assembly
accounts a breach of the 2d Command, But they never accounted that of the
Established Church to be such (as the Considerer here very groundlessly
asserts.) Nay, the Protestant Dissenters are ready to give the highest
assurance of the contrary possible by subscribing its doctrinal Articles of
Religion. Nor do the Dissenters desire any other Toleration for their own
Worship then what they would think themselves obliged in Conscience to give to
all their fellow-Protestants. So that this Stumbling Block is easily removed
out of the Considerer's way.

3. The Considerer has discovered the mystery of Church-politicks in the
Framing of that Act in England, which enjoins the Sacrament-Test, the specious
Title whereof is only to prevent dangers from Popish Recusants but it seems the
real intent was to choke the Dissenters as well as them.

4. The Considerer need not have followed the Answerer in boasting of the
inclination of French Protestants to their worship when in this Kingdom there
are 4 or 5 Churches that adhere to their own, tho under all possible
discouragements; and but one that embrace theirs, tho drawn to it by the lure
of public maintenance.

5. It Is a new way of mercy to Dissenters to cure the Errors of their minds, by
laying the dangerous Temptation before 'em of counteracting their Judgment or
their Interest. But sure the Established Church would have small ground to
boast of those proselytes who flee to her only to repair their broken fortunes.
If the Considerer, be for rousing us to the Consideration of our scruples by
new penalties. There is no Argument so awakening as the old one of Fire and
Faggot, or the modern one of French Dragooning

6. If the Sacrament Test be intended as such a happy Expedient to discriminate
the good from the bad, it seems to have been hitherto but in applied.

7. The Author of the Case is as much against making sitting as kneeling or
standing, the only posture of those that are admitted to the Lord's Table, and
thinks it should not come under any of those narrow Enclosures.

8. For the mode of receiving, the Considerers Arguments run all upon a wrong
Supposition, that whatsoever is accounted a thing of inconsiderable importance
in Religion should be therefore accounted indifferent. So that all this mighty
noise of the Churches power in determining indifferent things (which it seems
we must grant for fear of bidding farewell to all Government in Church and
State) will signify little. For there are many things that are comparatively of
small moment which yet a good man dare not counteract his Judgment in. And in
such things all prudent Church Governors should in imitation of the Apostles
advice, exercise forbearance and tenderness, See 14. Romans -- And such dubious
matters, are of all others most unfit to make such public Tests of. For those
Tests are only snares to keep out those whose Consciences are truly fearful of
sin, and to let in those whose Stomachs (as the Considerer speaks) are not so
tender and squ^amish. Tho on the other hand, I am sorry to find the Considerer
so severe on the doctrine of occasional Communion. For I take those Protestants
who can occasionally communicate both with the Established Church and with the
Dissenters, to be the most judicious, as well as the most moderate persons, and
most likely to be the happy instruments of healing those Breaches, which
persons of narrower judgments on either hand do unhappily wide^.

9. If the Considerer think the Dissenters separation so mischeivous to the
souls of men, and be more concerned to prevent their seduction, then to secure
the temporal Interest of the Clergy, He should be much more earnest against the
Indulgence it self then for the Sacrament-Test. Whereas he seems freely willing
to grant the former, that he may hook in the latter. But I hope he will find that
this Toleration will no way increase Errors or Irreligion among the People. Nor
need any that diligently feed their Flocks fear others stealing their hearts
from 'em. And if our Author be so Zealous to put a period to separation, he
need not reduce himself from Episcopal grandeur to Apostolical Poverty, it is
but making things necessary the only Terms of Communion, and leaving things
unecessary indifferent, and both Peace and Charity would easily be restored.
And all this may be done without retrenching either the dignity or Revenues of
any of the Clergy.

10. If the Considerer is not offended that a few Dissenters now enjoy the
Effects of His Majesty's favor he need not fear that the Toleration (as it is
desired) would open a door to let the whole Party in; he may very well trust
the prudence of the Government to dispense those favors to 'em with as
moderate and sparing a hand for the future as they have done hitherto

11. The Considerer should have been more Ingenuous then to suggest, that the
Author of the Case ascribed to Dissenters alone the preserving this Nation from
ruin, when he never speaks more of 'em, then that they concurred with the
Conformists in doing it.

Lastly, Since the Considerer very kindly professes that if a Medium can be
found to secure the Church and yet content the Dissenters, he will not be
against it, we thankfully own his moderation therein; for if we were not
persuaded that all the favor the dissenters desire is fully consistent with
the security of the Established Church, we should never presume to request or
expect it from a Parliament, whose Honorable Members are almost all of that
Communion. But if what we propose, will truly unite and Strengthen the
Protestant Interest, we may hope it will be favorably received by those who in
all other Cases express so hearty a Zeal for it.


