AN ANSWER TO THE QUAKERS PRETENDED CHARITY Above Ingratitude; Made manifest in
their Barbarous and unrighteous Dealings in the Case OF Thomas Boyce OF
HORSELYDOWN In the County of Surrey, Who had been one of them above Ten years:

And with the consent, and upon the earnest request of the said Thomas Boyce,
published to the World.

With Allowance,

October. 2. 1676. Roger L'Estrange.



LONDON: Printed 1676.

The Quakers Wickedness.
FOr the Readers clearer apprehension of the following Case, he is desired to
be informed, that this Thomas Boyce, by Trade a Tailor, living on Horselydown
in Southwark, was, many years since, seduced by the fair words, seeming
Innocence and Holiness, and high pretenses to Infallibility and Perfection of
the People called Quakers, to frequent their Assemblies and Company; and at
last his Innocent well-meaning Spirit was so far wrought upon by their specious
Insinuations, as to expose himself to the displeasure of his former
Acquaintance and Relations, so as to declare himself to be one of their Party,
and continued to be one of them above Ten years; during which time, through
those Clouds of Misapprehension which they had cast upon his Understanding, he
believed their ways to be the best, and accordingly walked conscienciously
amongst them, being strictly true to what he professed: but afterward finding
some of the Heads (or Leading-men) as well as others of them, acting contrary
to their declared Principles, he was willing in the Spirit of Meekness and
Righteousness, to tell them of their Errors, Backslidings, and Hypocrisy; who
instead of harkening to him, or reforming themselves, fell upon him by way of
threatening with great and terrible words; which caused a trouble upon his
mind; and about June 1673, he was suddenly taken in a strange manner, to the
amazement of them that saw him, it being amongst several hundreds of the said
people called Quakers; whereupon some of them most falsely and unjustly cried
out, Deceit; and others said, He was made a public Sign for his wickedness.
After which time his Speech was taken from him, and he continued wholly dumb
for the space of Three and thirty weeks together, only some few words he might
speak for a week or two, but so weakly and brokenly, that those that were with
him could not perceive what he meant; and for five weeks together he could eat
no food at all, only drank water; and as it was not perceived that he had any
sleep during all that time, so does he not know that in the whole Three and
thirty weeks he was at all sick. The cause of which his preternatural
Affliction he shall not rashly presume to judge of: But this he shall presume
to say, That the Quakers, in that his deplorable Condition, were not wanting to
add Affliction to Affliction, falsely declaring and suggesting, That the said
Thomas Boyce was a Dissembler by making himself dumb and lazy; one of their
chief Preachers saying, That he could both speak and work too, if he list,
while he was so speechless: Whereas, in truth, the said Thomas could not speak,
nor was able to work, as by the testimony of Two persons, chosen to judge
between the Quakers and him, does upon full inquiry appear; as likewise by the
attestation of all his Neighbors, ready on that occasion to be produced.

That the Quakers upon the occasions beforementioned, refused to employ the
said Tho. Boyce afterward in his Trade, which lay wholly amongst them; and by
such Lies, false Accusations, and Slanders, dispersed amongst all that knew
him, persuaded and hardened others against him, not to let him have any work
neither; thereby endeavoring as much as in them lay to starve him and his
Family; which so far took effect, that by means thereof, and his lamentable
Affliction, he is now reduced to extreme Poverty, who before did help to
relieve them Though true it is, three eminent Quakers did offer to allow him
Sustenance, but it was upon such a Condition as he could not in Conscience and
Honesty consent to and perform; for if he had, he believes he should be an
undone man for ever.

These People called Quakers pretend themselves to be the Seers, and all others
out of their form and manner of Dress to be blind; but we may easily prove
them Liars out of their own mouths, who tell people, They must be perfect, as
God is perfect; which State of Perfection must be witnessed in this life; and
all that preach against such their Doctrine, they say, Are the Ministers of the
Devil. Now whether these men themselves be in such a state of Perfection, and
whose Ministers they are, let the Christian Reader judge: For the tree is known
by its fruit. Now some of the best of these (called Quakers) in particular,
have threatened to vex the said Tho. Boyce, and called him Knave, Traitor, and
Judas, with other vile and opprobrious Terms, would have turned him headlong
down stairs. And at another time some of them took him by the legs and dragged
him down stairs with his head on the ground, and had him toward the street,
exposing him to the insolence of some rude Boys there, and then set him upon
his legs; who being searce able to stand, by reason of their Abuses, to excuse
themselves they gave out he was Drunk, and pretended to send for a Constable to
fetch him away; but were so barbarous, that they would not give him a little
water to wash off the blood they had drawn of him. From these Actions I would
inquire what is become of that Meekness, Patience, and stillness of Spirit
which the men outwardly pretend to? certainly the Quakers State of Perfection
is much like that which some men represent for the State of Nature, where men
may lawfully worry and prey upon one another.

Again, that these people are guilty of gross Hypocrisy is evident, for that
they pretend they cannot take an Oath for Conscience sake, nor swear at all in
any Case: And one of their Preachers, viz. Solomon Eccles says, Our Yea and Nay
is more than Swearing in a Court of Judicature: But if so, pray be pleased to
inquire, why they do not take one another's Yea and Nay without subscribing to
their form, that what they declare is the truth and no other.

The Form (or the Quakers Oath) is thus:

I A. B. do Declare in the Truth of my Heart, in the Fear of God, and before
these (meaning the Heads of the Quakers) his faithful Witnesses, That, etc. Or
otherwise, -- In the presence of God, or, of him that knows all things.

And without such or suchlike Declaration, they will not permit any one to
Marry (as they call it) among them; nor in some cases will lend Money without
such a Subscription. Now let the sober judge, how much this Form wants of an
absolute Oath, against which they pretend so great a tenderness.

Furthermore, the said Quakers are false Accusers and unjust Judges; for some
of the heads of them, pretending to be Judges, did cause to be brought before
them a Woman and her Son, being of their own Society, and accused them of Lying
together and being unclean (commonly called Incest) and did without sufficient
proof pass Judgment, that they were unclean. Whereupon the said Tho. Boyce
hearing thereof, went to the chief of the said Judges, desiring to hear what he
could say in the matter, being fully satisfied that he had given wrong
Judgment: But instead of regarding the said Tho. Boyce therein, the said Judge
rashly and without any shadow of proof, or color of Crime, adjudged and
pronounced him unclean also.

Yet afterward the Quakers preferred a Lass to this Young Man (the Son, who
was so judged unclean) and joined them together as Man and Wife, according to
their before expressed Form: But she afterward not behaving herself according
to the Place and Duty of a Wife, the said Tho. Boyce acquainting some of the
Heads of the Quakers therewith, one of them (chiefly instrumental in putting
them together) did acknowledge he had known her long to be a wild Lass; and
another of them said, She was of a bewitching spirit, and a depth of deceit,
and that she had deceived a Servant of his, who (he said) cried out she had
undone him, and soon after died; And further said, He feared she would prove a
Whore. And therefore they were willing to let her have a Husband, lest she
should bring a dishonor upon the Truth.

After all these Transactions, the Quakers published a Paper against the said
Tho. Boyce, charging him for disturbing them, with several other false and
scandalous Imputations, none of all which they could ever prove: For true it
is, after he had been at their private Houses and private Meetings, to know
what was the Deceit and Wickedness they had accused him of, and wherein he was
unclean, and finding no satisfaction, the said Tho. Boyce did at their public
Assemblies require the same thing. But instead of Christian Satisfaction, some
of the Quakers there met laid violent hands on him, some taking him by the
Throat, others thrusting their Elbows on his Breast, and some thrusting and
punching his Belly and Stomach, even ready to take away his Breath; so that he
could have no Right done him, either in Private or Public, but still they go
on to load him with Slanders and Reproaches, notwithstanding he has it
testified under the Hands of two judicious Men, who have examined the whole
matter, and whom the Quakers themselves at their Meeting in Gracious-street did
say, they believed were honest Men, and might be competent Judges therein: The
said Tho. Boyce, I say, has it under the said two Persons Hands, That he is
innocent of what the Quakers accuse him, and that they cannot find that he
has wronged the People called Quakers; but on the contrary, that he has been
much wronged by the Quakers scandalous accusation against him, to his great
loss of Credit and Trade, as by the said Certificate and Testimonial, dated
Jan. 20. 1674. ready to be produced, appears.

Nor has the Quakers Injustice and Partiality been less shown against the said
Tho. Boyce in another Case, wherein he came before them for Justice against one
of their Preachers, that had abused him; having met with nothing but Deceit,
Delays and wicked Dealing in that affair, as by the several Papers, under the
Hands of the persons concerned is manifest.

And now having thus oppressed and tyrannized over the poor man, withdrawn his
Custom and Livelihood, taken away his good Name, assaulted him in his Body,
ruined him in his Credit, and undone him in Estate, to stop Peoples ears
against his just Complaints, they every where publish and give out, that the
said Tho. Boyce is distracted, and out of his Wits, etc. But although true it
is, That Oppression, according to the Saying of the Wisest of Men, is apt to
make even a wise man mad; yet through the Mercy of God, the said Tho. Boyce is
in Sound Mind, and wishes all those that desire to continue so, to have nothing
to do with this deceitful Generation of Men called Quakers: Who say they are
infallible, and perfect, and a holy Seed, but are in truth Hypocrites and of
the Synagogue of Satan.

FINIS.

