Columbia University in the City of New York

SIGILLVM COLLEGII COLVMBIAE NOVI EBORACI
IN LVMINE TVO VIDEBIMVS LVMEN 1 PET 11 1 2 modern bookplate

THE SELIGMAN LIBRARY OF ECONOMICS

PURCHASED BY THE UNIVERSITY

1929

1656E B279

THE RELIEF OF THE POOR, And ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING Proposed.

By Humphrey Barrow, (during the War) a Member of the ARMY,

Qui cito dat, bis dat. Licensed according to Order.

Printed at London, by R. W. 1656.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY, The Lord HENRY CROMWELL, Commander in Chief of the Forces of
Ireland.
And the rest of the Honorable Commanders, and inferior Officers, now and
late of the ARMY.
THat Glorious Success with which God has crowned your honorable Actions, in
the rescue of this precious Land out of those hands that without cause were
imbrued in the blood of our Country; is yet so fresh and warm in every
ingenuous heart, that (I hope) a Proposal, tending to a sacrificious gratitude
to the Lord of Hoasts, (by whose Mercy and Mighty Arm, we are what we are) will
not b^ u^seasonably presented to any person concerned in this Address. Wherein
I have humbly assumed the confidence to mind You of the pious Customs of the
Soldiers and Servants of God in former Ages; nay, of the laudable (though
blind) Devotions of Pagans and Infidels, as Sacred, and other H^st^ries do
amply manifest: who no sooner could sound Victoria after a War, but up go the
Altars, and on go the Sacrifices, in retribution of thanks to that Deity each
held in veneration. It Is true, we have, in the progress of this War, afforded
God some D^ys of Thanksgiving; and he (at last) having given us the issue of
our hopes, the Blessing and Harvest of our Blood and Sweat: those would all
look like days of hellish Hypocrisy, if we should not now present him with
some Deeds of Thanksgiving; and Sacrifices being ceased, we have an Opportunity
to exercise what he loves better, which is, Mercy.

Not then to hold You any longer in the Porch of Expectation, I here present
You in one hand, the Aged, the Infirm, the Orphan, to be provided for by way of
Hospital: and in the other hand, that yet in its Morning (but hopeful) light of
this Land, the University of Dublin, for Addition of Revenue. To carry on both
which, I wish God would persuade each heart herein concerned, to allow one Acre
of Land out of each hundred due to him; which granted, there is little doubt,
but the Adventurers, to whom God has given so fair a Return of their pious
Loans: and Purchasers of Debentures, who have least reason to oppose, will do
the like: And the same deducted from each man's Proportion, to be cast into a
single, or what several Parcels, the wisdom of the Government shall think
convenient.

Perhaps some may object, That this Motion comes too late, much of the Land
being already disposed of, (and I grant, had it been thought of sooner, it had
been effected with less trouble, but) Volenti nil difficile, we should not in
the least pause at the difficulty, were it to serve our own particulars; and
indeed, considered in the best sense, it is so, if we expect a blessing upon
the rest of our Estates; or if there be any wisdom in laying up Treasure in
Heaven: for this shall be surer to your houses, than the brains of all the
Lawyers that ever trod Westminster Hall met in one scull, can make the rest.

For who knows how soon, prodigal H^irs (ordinarily the Issue of penurious
Fathers) shall make havoc of those Estates, the hundredth part whereof, might,
though not merit, have brought a blessing upon you to all eternity. A fair
warning for the observance of that precious inch of Scripture, Whilst you have
time do good; lest whilst you are ro^ting, your Heirs be revelling; and they
damned for spending upon their lusts, what you were damned for denying the
Lazar.

And if there be any (though I hope better things) that shall strain at this
Gnat, I wonder how they would have behaved themselves toward that Camel, laid
before the Young man in the Gospel, All that thou have. Remember the widows
mite, and the superlative testimony our Savior gave of it. Poor woman? it was
all she had, and this a fleece out of a fl^ck.

And I dare affirm Ananias and Sapphira (laying aside their lie) were Saints,
compared to such as shall say to this Proposol, I Will consider of it.

If we can pay the fourth part of our Rents to these Commonwealths, we may
blush before the Angels to d^ny the hundredth part to the Commonwealth of
CHRIST: For this is not to denude your wally of their hangings, to cover the
flesh of the poor; nor your Coaches of their leather to make them shoots; your
supernecess^i^ pampered Steeds of their Horse-cloaths, to make them Shirts; nor
your Mangers of their Provender, to fill their Ovens; though all these might
well be abated to relieve the meanest Member of CHRIST. God has given to many
amongst us vast Estates large possessions; he has given us the Land and labors
of our en^mies, beings that we neither built nor planted; may he has given us
our lives for a prey; when thousands as valiant, as precious, as worthy, as we,
lie now rotting in contemptible ditches. And shall we not help our Brethren to
live with us? That saying^ is as good as old, Non nobis solum natisumus, we are
not born only for our selves; and I hope we did not altogether sight for our
selves; but shall be tried by this trifle, though what is here urged as an act
of Charity, and as yet carries no other face, may to after ages be rendered an
act of Polity; and that thus sustenance and Science being the subject matters
here preast, who knows but that casting his bounty and bread upon the waters
now, he may after many days find them in the bellies and brains of bis needy
posterity.

Perhaps there may be some who set a low rate upon that Beauty and Glory of
Humanity, Learning, which sanctified restores us nearest to the Image of God:
but if there be, (as I hope few) they must give me leave to believe they are
such as would have the eye both of Church and Commonwealth put out, that they
might have the leading of them.

It was highly in question which was the saddest Persecution, that under
Dioclesian, or that under Julian ^h^ Apostate: the first laboring the
destruction of all the bodies of the Saints, and the last of all books, that no
memory of God or Religion might remain: but the last was concluded infinitely
transcendent, as a device that would have thrown the world into a deeper than
Aegy^ian darkness.

It Is true, there are many who (I have charity to believe) mean well, and much
mind the enlargement of the bounds of the Church, and opening a way for the
light of the Gospel in i^s purity to shine upon the freckled face of the
erroneous World: But alas! that is hard to be done by a language that has no
acquaintance abroad; nor could ever travel farther than the verges of our own
shores, save amongst our own Colonies; and not communicable to other Nations by
any universal Rule.

I must ne^ds grant, that Christ in the election of his Apostles, made choice
of poor ignorant laboring men; but I hope none will deny, that though he found
them such; yet (after the sealing of their great Commission to preach the
Gospel by the Holy Ghost, in cloven tongues) they went away the most sublimated
Scholars that ever were or shall be upon the world. That great Schoolmaster
(in a moment) dispelling the mist of dispicable ignorance, and filling them
with all Language and requisite Knowledge. And it is observable, that when God
had a purpose to stay the building of Babel, and scatter mankind into
fractions; he confounds their speech, and divid^s ^ongues to the Nations: but
when he resolves to build up his Church, he recollects them all into the mouths
of his Apostles. With some measure of which Qualification (immediate gift of
tongues being ceased) the most eminent Servants of Christ, and faithful
promoters of his truth, have from time to time, indefatigably labored by
Nurseries of Learning to endow the Ministry.

It Is true, Exhortations, Reproofs, Consolations and Directions in plain and
patent matters, are highly commendable in those of meanest parts; for they that
feared the Lord spoke often one to another: but Preaching, Expositions, and the
unfolding of hidden Mysteries, do modestly c^ll for sanctified Learning and
Authority. The mannagement of which Affertion, I humbly leave to those
Champions of the truth, whose Shields I am not worthy to bear.

And now craving pardon to my prolixity, glance once again upon the poor; and
wish the most obdurate wretch to lay his hand upon his heart, and confider, how
his ears will one day tingle to hear that Soul-crushing charge or unkindnesse
from the mouth of the Son of God, I was hungry, and ye fed me not.

Adding only this, if there be any heart so much adamant. brow so much brass,
or mind so void of Mercy as to set himself in positive Opposition to what is
here suggested; or that his evil Example or coldness, cause this great
business to fall to the ground; he must give me leave to tell him, he runs the
desperate hazard of eternally sinking under the weight of all the courses, that
shall (in bi^^ernesse of Spirit) fall from all the trembling Aged, Anxieted, in
firm persons, and friendless^ Orphans, that shall ever languish upon the face
of this fruitful Land, from this day of Judgment.

In regard the effecting of this great Work, may (to some dull Spirits) seem
difficult, the ensuing Suggestions are humbly offered to consideration: 1. That
Commissioners of active Spirits, and unbyassed Principles, be appointed to the
management and carrying on of this business. 2. That the Muster-Masters in the
respective Provinces of this Dominion, be ordered to offer it to the
Subscription of every Officer relating to that part of the Army, the next
Muster-day after he receives it from hence. 3. That whereas some are in parcel
possession of their Estates, and out of employment, the High Sheriff of every
respective County, be ordered by himself or his Substitutes, to tender it to
the voluntary Subscription of every such person, as also to all personally
possessed Adventurers, and Purchasers of Debentures; for the deduction of th
proportion out of the port remaining due unto him. 4. That whereas many are in
possession of their full proportion of Lands, and consequently no convenient
way left for contributing their proportions in kind; there are numerous
Precedents of persons so completed, that offer their return in money, rateably
as they received each Acre. 5. That whereas it may be objected, That many so in
possession of their full proportions, are not provided with ready money: the
High Sheriff of every County be ordered, by himself or his Substitues, to
tender it to the voluntary Subscription of every such person, for the sum and
time wherein they cheerfully consent to pay it. 6. That what Money shall so be
received, be paid into a Treasury appointed for that purpose in Dublin; and
laid out in purchase of Land for the Uses aforesaid. 7. That the Sheriffs of
every respective County, be ordered yearly to give in their account to their
Suceessors before a full Bench of Justices. 8. That the Sheriffs and Muster
Masters aforesaid, be ordered to return hither the names of all the Dissenters,
to the end that being here recorded there may be no mistake in the deductions.
9. That the Sheriffs do within twenty days, return all the Subscriptions to
the Commissioners before mentioned. 10. That his Highness Gouncel for the
Affairs of Ireland be moved for their countenance to, and assistance in the
promotion of it. 11. That his Highness the Lord Protector be moved to recommend
it the Adventurers in England, who are (ordinarily) cheerful Gontributers to
Works of this nature. 12. That the Chancellor of this University be moved to a
speedy rectification, and rescue of it from disorder.


FINIS.

