A SERMON Preached by Master Michael Bruice, IN THE Tolbooth of EDINBVRGH, The
immediate Sabbath after he received the Sentence of Exile for Virginia.
Text, PSALM 140. v. 12, 13. 12. I know that the Lord will maintain the Cause
of the afflicted, and the Right of the poor.

13. Surely the Righteous shall give thanks unto thy name, the upright shall
dwell in thy presence.


THere are three things of excellent worth to be known at such a time as this,
and I think ye should be laboring to know the worth of all these three things
in this your day. The first thing that is of excellent worth to be known, is
this, To know that though we do not maintain the Cause, yet, go the World as it
will, God will maintain it, says the Psalmist here, Though we be an afflicted
people that is during the Cause, and do not maintain it, yet it shall be
maintained; I know God shall maintain it, and I will never quit the knowledge
of that. The second thing here that is of excellent worth to be known, is,
Although we should be weeping all our days, under the sense of many Losses, yet
we shall win home over to God, and dwell at last in his presence; Therefore if
all things were well considered, the poor traitor Bodies that sells God for a
tippence, and their Consciences for a Livelihood, and their Souls for Goods and
Geer, are the most miserable Bodies in the World, for they shall never dwell in
his presence, but they shall geet their Letters of Exclusion, Depart from me,
under the Great Seal of Heaven, never to be ranversed again. There is a third
thing of excellent worth no be well read by you, in such a day as this, and
that is in the slippery sitting of the wickeds Case, though they flourish as a
Green Bay Tree, yet they shall soon be cut down. He has prepared Hunters to
hunt them to Death, will he not gar the people of God hunt them to death? No,
no, often times he will not let the people of God fill their Fingers on them. But
there are three Hunters that often times he sends to them wicked men to be their
Death. First, he sends their own wiekedness to them, and that is alse black a
Hunter as ever hunted wicked men, he makes their own iniquity to hunt them till
they be ruined; he makes wickedness slay them, and their own iniquity to be
their death; Mischief shall hunt the violent man till he be ruined. Secondly,
he makes the Creatures hund them to death, that was ane unk^ Hunter, that poor
Pharaoh met with; he made the Red Sea hunt him till he was ruined. Thirdly,
he will have their own will to hunt them to death, he will have that which they lay
as a Snare before the people of God, to hunt them to death; that which wicked
mendelights most in, and gloties most in, will be their Hunter or all be done.
I wot well they are great Fools then, to glory in that which will hunt them
from hole to hole, and from this Land to that Land, and never leave them till
it raive the throat out of them; What will be thought of those poor Bodies that
will be hunted to death with that they delighted most in? Now the Words that we
have read are the use that the Psalmist makes of all that he has been saying
through the Psalm, or rather ye may take it in the time of his tossings, his
casting of his Anchor on a sure Foundation, and there fixing, and on this he
composes his Spirit. Now would ye know the Anchorage of every true Christian?
Then come to the words that I have read, and ye will find three pieces of
Anchorages for a Christian to fix on. The first piece of Anchorage is this, The
Cause of the afflicted and the Right of the poor God will maintain; Anchor on
it sure, for it is sure enough, ey ye may anchor there, and bide all the Storm
over; The Cause of the afflicted, and the Right of the poor God will maintain;
that is a brave Anchorage, and in it we have three things considerable. First,
the designation of the persons that God will own in their biding by the Cause,
and that is the afflicted and the poor; well is our day for that, though we
cannot get our selves in owning with the rich, and great Folk, yet I wot well
we may get our names slipped in among the afflicted and poor, and it these that
lie nearest God's help, it is these that he will own, well is our day for that; Hes
he not a bonny pack of us think ye? Sirs it matters not, he will take our Cause be
the end feckless as we are. A second thing in this is the party that will own
us, and that is God himself, he will be our Advocate, he will be our Agent, he will be
our Maintainer, very good then, he will maintain the Cause: For my part I never
desire a better maintainer of a Covenant nor God himself, and I never desire a
better maintainer of the Cause and Work of Reformation nor the Lord himself;
though we were dead and rotten, such a Maintainer will gar the Cause and
Covenant speak for it self in Britain and Ireland. It Is a strange thing Sirs,
I Will warrant you the Philistines thought themselves brave Folk, when they had
gotten the Ark of God among them, but ere all was done they thought themselves
alse unhappy in having of it, as ever they thought themselves happy; for God
gart it speak with meekle black Vengance toward them, and all that they could
do could not answer the Arks Arguments, it spoke with such Judgment and Plagues
as ever ye heard tell of, as ye may read in the 1 of Sam. 5. chap. And I doubt
not but these poor Bodies that hes overthrown our Covenant and Work of
Reformation, shall wish as much that they had non overthrown them, as ever they
were bly that their overthrow, stay till God gar a work of Reformation plead
for it self with Vengeance, and stay till God gar Vengeance speak for a broken
Govenant, and then all the Prelates and all the Lords in Scotland will not
answer these arguments, let them try their parts against the Covenant as they
please; but all the Prelates in Scotland shall not be able to answer the
arguments of a broken Covenant, when it pleads with vengeance.

A second thing of this Anchorage is, the way how he brings it in; I know
(says he) God will maintain the cause of the afflicted: And it is not an
Outward and External, or bare Speculative knowledge, but a knowledge with a
persuasion, founded on an Infallible ground, and a piece of Anchorage for a
Christian to fix on, is this, Surely the Righteous shall give thanks to God: A
man cannot express his persuasion of a thing better, nor by this; Surely the
Righteous shall give thanks unto thy Name: It shall not be a thing only in the
Heart and Thought to do, but it shall be a done Turn, they shall think no shame
to praise their Master for what they have the Recept of. A third piece of
Anchorage for a Christian to fix on; is this, The Righteous shall dwell in thy
presence; I will not say but ye may have hard Battering if ye be Upright, but
in Gods presence shall be Lodging: The men of the World says they will gar us
take up our Lodging in Virginia to learn us to be more Loyal: They may do so,
but they will get no thanks for their pains: But I Will tell you News, if we be
Upright, the presence of God shall be our Lodging, Lodge where we will; and
think ye not but I may Lodge there, and have a Brave Life of it where I
Quarter, and get my Boarding Born me, and where I Will Quarter and pay no House
Male; where I Will Quarter in good Company: O then Sweet and Heartsome will my
House Quarters be: But I may not stand on preferring, really all these words
drops sweetness, as the Honey and the Honey Comb; if I had the Faith of these
three on my Spirit, I would go though all the world comforted. First, The Faith
of this, that the Cause of the afflicted, and the right of the poor, God will
maintain. Secondly, The Faith of this, that I and others should have ground and
reason to thank him yet for that is com'd and gone. Thirdly, That I and these
others should be Upright, and so should dwell in his presence; if I had these
three Purse-pennies, I would think nothing to go through all the world with
them: I shall now give you one Lesson from the Connection, and then come to the
words more particularly: O! but you may see David here is much busied in this
Psalm about his enemies that lays Grins and Snares for him; therefore he is in
great hazard to be taken with some of these, and yet ye see how he comes and
setles himself in the midst of all these waters and waves: Now the Observation
is this, that many times the people of God may be haden in hot water with
enemies, and meet with much to sling from them, and yet may win to Anchor, and
stay in the midst of them: Here are four things in Persecutors that troubles
the people of God very much. First, The persons of the Persecutors that some
times have been supposed to have been Friends and no Enemies, and to them to be
Persecuted by supposed Friends, there is a great business: If it had been an
enemy (says David in the 95 Psalm) that had done this, I would have known what
to have done, but it is a Brother that has done it; what shall be said of
that? If it had been Heathens or Pagons, or precis'd Papists that had so
Persecuted us, we would have kn^^n what to have done better; but is our
Brethren, Bastards as they are, not Strangers and Foraigners, that so guids us,
but our own Rulers that should have been our Nursing Fathers, Cruel and
Unhumain as they are; and it is those whose words are as Butter, many that put
the people of God to an Nonplus well: Then since it is so, that they have a
Sword in their heart, but speaks as their mouth were full of Butter; David says
the stress of this over upon God, that he would keep him from them. A second
thing in Persecutors that is very tossing to the people of God, and holds them
often times in hot water, is the Grins and Snares that they lay for them, and
poor bodies can never tell where the lie, and if we look not well about us, our
Feet will be in some Cord or Grin or ever we wot of our selves. A third thing
in Persecutors that troubles the people of God very much, is the Language of
Persecutors; it is as a Sword in their Bowels while the enemies say continually
where is their God: I rather bid Execution or Martyrdom, says the poor man, or
I bid their Language; it is a Sword always in my Bones, while they say
continually where is there God? A fourth thing in Enemies that tosses and
troubles the people of God very much; is their Cruelty, they will never neither
let them get Nights rest nor Days rest, whill they apprehend them; and till
they deal Inhumainly with them, in Executing them, and dealing worse then
Heathens or Pagons would deal with them: Now notwithstanding of all this
tossing of David with Enemies, yet he comes to an Anchorage, and there he
fixes; he comes to a point, and there he fixes. Now there are six points that a
Christian may win to in the midst of all his tossings with enemies: Have any of
you win to all these six points ye Prisoners? Fix your selves Sirs, for the
Lord knows what battering we may meeet with or all the business end. The first
point that a Christian may win to in the midst of all his tossings, ye may take
it out of the 6 v. of this Psalm, I said unto the Lord, thou art my God; Go the
world as it will, I have a standing Interest in God, and I Will fix there and bid
there; for they call this the main Chance, therefore fix there, for it is the
main business, and sicker what ye will, if the main Chance be not sickered, I Will
not give a Gray Groat for you and your Religion both; if ye be not well
Anchored here, it matters not what ye be Anchored on. The second point that a
Christian may win to in the midst of all his tossings, and that is in the 27
Psalm. at the 4 v. One thing have I desired of the Lord that will I seek after,
that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life; and go where
I will poor ordinance shall ay be best to me, I shall never cast out with them,
be in what Country I will, go to what Country I will, poor and pure ordinance
shall be my pursuit, go where I will, I Will never desire to live without poor
Ordinances; there I fix, and go where I will the Ordinances of God, of thee O
Scotland shall never go out of my mind; O broken down well of the Daughter of
Zion in thee O Scotland! for thee shall mine eyes trinkle down, if I forget
thee O Jerusalem, then let my Tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth. The third
point that poor men may win to when they are sore tossed with enemies, and ye
may take it out of the 4 of the Acts 27 and 28 v. There says the Apostle,
Herod and Pontius Pilate, and the Jews are gathered together against thy holy
child Jesus; I wot well then that will be a black Council, then I wot well they
will exceed bounds when all the enemies are together, no they will do but to the
holy Child Jesus what ever thy hand and counsel has foreordained to be done;
here they stand poor folk, they can win no farther nor thy allowance: We are ay
flitting and flowing in our Thoughts about what enemies will do, but let their
intentions to do be never so strong, they can neither add nor pair, but what
his counsel and hand has decreed; and since there is a hand and a counsel of
God about all that concerns me, what needs I be feared though enemies should
hunt me as a Partridge in the wilderness. The fourth point that poor men may
win to when they are tossed, and that is in 76 Psalm. 10 v. Surely the wrath of
man shall praise thee: There comes the poor man and he flings down his Anchor,
the men of the world thinks that they will get much done by their Wrath and
Malice, and so all the Skaith must come to themselves, for we and our Master
shall have the winning of it. There is a fifth point that we may come to in the
midst of our tossings, and that is in the 31 Jerem. 35 v. Thus says the Lord,
who gives the Sun for a light by day, and the Ordinances of the Moon and of
the Stars for a light by night, who divides the Sea when the waves thereof
roar, the Lord of hosts is his Name: If these ordinances depart from before me,
says the Lord, then the seed of Israel shall cease from being a Nation before
me for ever. There is an Alteration to be upon the good will of the Lord toward
his people and Church in keeping a Table for his Bairns, and in making a Lamp
always to burn before his Anointed as long as the Ordinances of Sun and Moon
and Stars do not fail, as long as there is no alteration, there it is a sign and
token of his unchangeable respect to his Church and people; there we fix. There
is a sixth point that we come to in the midh of our tossings, and that is the 3
of Isaiah 10 v. Say to the righteous is shall be well with them, for they shall
eat fruit of their doings: There is a point we fix on go the world as it will;
I will not say but we may meet with sad troubles for righteousness sake but
(well well shall call) up the Rear of it Now Sirs, will ye tell me, have he win
to all these 6 points? Yet now for Use, I think there are three complaints that
our Master has of us all. The first is that which ye may read in the 1 Kings
at the 21 v. How long halt ye betwixt two opinions? If the Lord be God follow
him, but if Baal, then follow him: Our Master is saying, to Prisoners, to to
Ministers and Professors, How long will ye halt betwixt two opinions? Will ye
once be determined in the matters of your Faith in this reeling and flowing
time?

The second complaint that our Master has of the most part of the Professors
in Scotland, and that is, Every new trouble puts them to be seeking their
ground again, after they seemed to have taken it up; Is not this very sad that
every new trouble puts us to seek a stance again, though we seemed to be
footing a stand before. There is a third complaint he has of us all, and that
is our hearts are not right with him, neither are we steadfast in his Covenant,
and the most part of us travels betwixt these two, even for getting of his
counsel, and inconstancy with him in his Covenant: But we come now more
particularly to the Words; I know that the Cause of the afflicted and the Right
of the poor God will maintain: And the Observation is this, That as the people
of God have need of knowledge in a day of troubble, so it is very commendable
among them to be making use of their knowledge for settling and fixing the
heart in a day of the Cross; O but ignorance does folk much ill in a day of
trouble; there is many folk has knowledge, and they make not the right use of
its and there are many has knowledge, and yet they get not the right use of
it; but that is an ill use that a man gets of his knowledge when he makes use
of it for the stumbling of those that are about him, that are not so knowing;
but ye see how the man has knoweldge, and he makes use of it for settling of
himself upon God. There is two things in this Observation. First, it is a brave
thing for a Christian to have much Light. Secondly, it is a brave thing for a
Christian to be making use of that Light for fixing of himself in a day of
trouble. That I may speak a little to the Observation, I Will speak a Word to
these three or four things. First, what are these things that a Christian is to
know in order to its fixedness in a day of the Cross. Secondly, what the
knowledge is that fixes us on the nobleness of that knowledge. We shall speak
of these pieces of knowledge, and then a word of use. The first thing then to
be spoken to is, There are these things that we shall know; and there are 9
things the knowledge of which should never be off our hearts. The first is in
the 9 of Jer. 24 ver. But let him that glories glory in this. That he
understands and knows me, that I am the Lord which exercises Judgment,
Righteousness and Loving Kindness in the Earth; for in these things I delight,
says the Lord. That is one thing that I am to know, and let the Impression of
it never wear off my Soul; What ever tossings his people come to upon the
Earth, that God exercises Loving Kindness toward them. A second thing that I
know, and that is in the 33 Psalm, at the 10 and 11. v. The Lord brings the
Counsel of the Heathen to naught, he makes the Devices of the people of none
effect; The Counsel of the Lord stands for ever, the thoughts of his heart to
all Generations. There is another thing, I know the men of the World says the
Acts of their Council shall stand against us sentenced for Rebels, but that is
not the Counsel of God when all is done, therefore he will bring it to naught,
and make it of none effect, Therefore when we have gotten our Sentence from the
World, and from the Counsel we will appeal to another Judicature that is above
them, well's us, for we have one above us, that will see us righted in our
Sentence; it is he whose Counsel endures for ever, and the thoughts of his
heart to all Generations. There is a third thing I am to know, and that is in
the 2 Timothy 1.12. I know in whom I have believed, and the good thing I have
committed unto him he will keep till that day, I know I have committed my Soul
to him, and I know I have committed Wife and Bairns, Goods and Geir to him, and
all now if ye take not the Bond. I can commit all to God, and he can give me a
good account of all in that day, O but that day will be a brave counting day
betwixt Christ and his Followers: and if ye should spear what an a day will
that be? It will be a brave counting day betwixt Christ and his Followers, it'l
be a brave counting day betwixt Christ and his Father; Here am I, and the
Children thou gave me, here am I, and my Bairns at my Back, there is never one
of them lost, for all the scatterings, and wanderings that was among them* they
are all here; Now some were killed in the Fields, some were executed on
Scaffolds, some by Murderers hagged down as they stood on the Cross-ways, some
murdered in Houses, their Relations never heard tell of them, some lost in the
Sea, some banished to the utmost Parts of the Earth, some part of them buried,
and some part of them unburied; but here are they all now, and never one of
them lost; they shall all Proclaim the high Praises of the Lord through
Eternity. Sixthly, it'l be a counting Day betwixt Christ and his Followers.
Here am I, with all that ye committed to me, your Souls with Increase; O such a
gallant counting day as that will be. There is a fourth thing I know, and that
is in the 4 Dan. 2 or 3* v. before the end. I know God rules in Heaven among
the Children of men. I pray you who is Master Governor of the World? I wot
well it is neither. Men nor Devils, then we would not have a Cock to crow day; I
wot well says the Magistrates and Men of the World, there is* none rules above
us, soft and fair, as noble Blaids has been taught by sad strokes and sore
Skins; that the most high rules in Heaven among the Children of Men: Noble
Nebuchadnizzar would not ken this, he was so great, till he made him to ken it
by a sore skin, 4 Dan. 38 v. It may be it cost some of our great men a sore
skin yet or they learn this Lesson; but learn it they shall; some of them might
have known* this already, by what they were put to, but if they will not take
up their Lesson by what they have met with, God shall gar them ken yet by a
more God-like-stroke, that he rules in Heaven, and among the Children of Men.
There is a fifth thing I am to carry the knowledge of alongs with me; and that
is in the 5 Matthew. 18 v. Heaven and Earth may pass away, but one jot or tittle
of his Word shall not pass away, till all be fulfilled; Therefore what ever is
commanded I know I must obey, and what ever threatenings he has threatened upon
enemies, I believe they will be accomplished, and whatever he has promised to
his friends, I know it will be made out; This I know, and this I am to carry,
the Faith of alongs with me through all my troubles. There is a sixth thing
that I am to know, and that is in the 89th. Psalm, That whatever be the
afflictions of the people of God, yet he will not take his Loving Kindness from
them; And since I know that, what for should I be discouraged and cast down?
The men of the World says what have we to look to now since we are suffering
such hard things for our Covenant and Work of Reformation? Indeed and our*
Master were taking his Loving Kindness from us, then we will brag the best of
them all, say the contrary who will, and I say rejoice not over me, O mine
Enemy, though I fall I shall rise again; they shall be upmost that bides by our
Master, and they shall be undermost that opposes him; say the contrary who
will. There is a seventh thing I am to know, and that is, Be his Dispensations
never so sad, yet I know that which is in the 10th. v. of the 25 Psalm. All his
Paths are Mercy and Truth to them that keep his Testimonies; And if I could
come to be a fearer of him, and a keeper of his Covenant, I would soon be at a
point as to what men could do to me; The men of the World says they shall put
this and that in our Cup, to gar us rue what we have done; but if I be a keeper
of his Covenant, my Master will put in Mercy and Truth in all his Dispensations
to me, and then that'l sweeten all. There is an eighth thing I know, and that
is in the 75 v. of the 119 Psalm. I know all thy Judgments are right, and that
thou in faithfulness have afflicted me, I know that there is also much
faithfulness in every rod that is laid upon my Back, as was exercised upon me
when I was dandled upon his Knees. There is a ninth thing I know, and that is,
That the Lord is God, and not Man, the holy one of Israel in the midst of us;
therefore we shall not die but live; He has ordained us for Correction, but
not for Destruction; he will debate with us, but it will be in measure. There
is a tenth thing I am to know, and that is in the 3 of Malachy, 3 v. He shall
sit as a Refiner and Purifier of Silver; I know this, that as long as we are in
the Fire, he will sit at the Lip of it; I know he sits as a Refiner to drop in
Bell-mettal as the Dross goes away: Bnd his end in all this is that we may
offer unto him the Sacrifice of Righteousness; Now these are ten things that a
Christian is to know and anchor upon in a day of trouble. The second thing to
be spoken to is, What is that knowledge that a Christian has, which is a
knowledge in order to fixedness that a man must have, it is a knowledge with
these four in the midst of it; I am distinct in what I know, the cause of the
afflicted, and the right of the poor God will maintain: I know though I should
be Banished to Virginia, and never see that Cause maintained, yet God will
maintain it; I know that, and I am distinct in the knowledge of it. 2dly. This
man he knows believingly, he knows him so, that he has a persuasion through
Faith that will admit of no Controversies, it is not a knowledge by ratrym, it is
not a knowledge by report and hearsay; but it is a knowledge that has a
divine Persuasion in the Bosom of it, flowing from a divine stamp of the finger
of God upon the Spirit, cannot be taken off. Thirdly, not only does he know
distinctly and believingly, but he knows experimentally, and from what he has
found, he draws conclusions and persuasions. Fourthly, it is a knowledge with
much operation in the Bosom of it, making him quick and nimble in the Practice
of holiness in all the course of this Life. The third thing to be spoken to,
is, Wherein lies the nobleness of this knowledge? The nobleness of attaining
such knowledge lies in these three. First, The nobleness of it lies in this, it
says thou have been a good Scholar at the School of Christ; but I fear it may
be said of the most part of us, we have been but Buboes all our time, and so
will come of it. Secondly, The nobleness of it lies in this, that it is that
which will help to fix you and keep you from being blown over in the day of
Tempests and Storms, when other folk are made Ship-wreck. Thirdly, The
nobleness of it lies in this, this is it that will help you to brag all your
Enemies out of it, and it'l make you read your Fortune, and the Fortune of your
Enemies; Though I fall I shall rise: Nor for use of this: Will ye tell me,
Sirs, what knowledge have ye, and what use ye are getting of your knowledge? I
trow it may be said of many of us that we have little knowledge, and that the
knowledge we have, we get not the right use of it; What use make ye of your
knowledge nowadays, Sirs, ye that has win to knowledge, for it is not for want
of Light that the most part of you runs to the Devil, but ye run to the Devil
now a days with a Candle in your hand; O but there is much thortering and
murdering in Scotland, but thortering with Light shall be the warisomest sin
that ever Scotland meddled with; for thereby many a poor body shall have a
debate in their bosom, that they shall not soon win over, whether or no they
have sinned the sin against the Holy Ghost; because they have gone over the
belly of so much Light; I will not say much to it, but O but it is heartsome to
win to these two, much Light, and the right use of that Light: O but here is
noble News: the Cause of the afflicted, and the right of the poor, God will
maintain it; and it is upon this account, that when the Kirk and people of God
cannot get righting from the Courts under the Sun, but is wronged by the
Sentences of the Councels of men. they take in their wronged Sentences before
God: Therefore says David in the 17 Ps. 2 v. Let my Sentence come forth from
thy presence, and let thine eyes behold these things that are equal; We have
gotten our Sentence from men, now good Lord we must have our Sentence from
thee, and thou must judge upon things that are equal, and see whether thy
Sentence will not agree with theirs; the Cause of the afflicted, and the right
of the poor God will maintain: Now there is three things lying in the bosom of
this.

First, that the people of God hes a Cause in Scotland. although many of them
hes little in their owning of it; there is a Cause own it as ye will; O woe to
many a man because the people of God hes a Cause to own in Scotland, woe to many
a man that we had a Cause, for they have lost their Soul, because they would
not own it. Thirdly, though that Cause be good, yet the owners of it be a very
afflicted people; yet a good Cause backed by an afflicted people shall have God
to maintain it, therefore cast not out with the Cause, the owner of it be an
afflicted people: That I may speak a little to this, I Will speak a word to these
three or four. First, what is the reason of this that a good Cause may have
none to own it but a poor and an afflicted people. Secondly, what way does God
maintain that Cause when there is none to own it but an affl cted people.
Thirdly, what ground of encouragement is this to an afflicted people owning a
good Cause that God will maintain it himself. Fourthly, a word of Caution,
together with some uses and then go forward. Now for the first, how comes it
that the Cause of the people God is good, and yet they are but an afflicted
party in owning of it? It is upon three accounts that it is so: First, upon
this account, that though they own their duty, yet they are not without sin and
sinful faults, and therefore though he will honor them to own the cause,
because they are his people, and give them a reward for the same, yet he will not
miss to take vengeance on their Inventions; and therefore though owning the
Cause they are but an afflicted people. Secondly, he will have us an afflicted
people that own his good Cause, that he may train us up in the exercise of
three three things. First, In the exercising of believing 3 Zephaniah 12. I
will also leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people, and they
shall trust in the Name of the Lord: But I trow though we be an afflicted and
poor people, yet we have done as little at the believing Trade, as if we had
not been called to that exercise: Thirdly, he will have us trained up in the
exercising of waiting, but I trow in stead of waiting on, many of us comes to
the far nook of our patience. Fourthly, he will have us thereby trained up in
self-denial on the one hand, and dependence upon God on the other hand, he will
have us dying of our own bottom by affliction, but O Sirs, but self love may go
through many a Cross with a Christian, O but it may be long or a Christian win
to that; not I but Christ in me. Fifthly, he will have poor bodies trained up in
this; to acknowledge God in all his ways. And Lastly, he will have us an
afflicted people, tho we be owning his Cause for this reason, that he may put
all and every one of us to subscrive this with our blood, as it were, That it
is a bitter thing to depart from the living God, 2 Jerem. 19. And last of all,
that he may make the afflicted people carry the afflicted and born down Cause
over the belly of all the great and prosperous men in the world that opposes
it: That he may make out the Scriptures to make the things that are not, to
confound things that are; that so the work may be seen to be of God and not of
man, for he will not have arm revealed by the arm of flesh; therefore he will have
none to own his Cause but an afflicted and poor people. The next thing to be
spoken to, is what way God does maintain this Cause, when there is none to own
it but an afflicted people: There is eight ways that God does maintain the
Cause when there is none to back it but an afflicted people. The first way that
he maintains it is this; he gars the Cause speak and plead for it self, when
all poor bodies are laid by, when there is none to plead for a Covenant, and
Cause, and work of Reformation, he will gar it plead with the arguments of
vengeance, that all the Prelates in Scotland shall not be able to answer the
arguments thereof; The Philistines when they got the Ark of God, I warrant they
thought they had a prise, there was never one to appear to own them, For it
well, says the Lord, the Ark shall plead for it self, and they shall be as
blyth to quit it, as ever they were blyth to take it; as ye may see in the 2 Samuel 4 v. I will not say much Sirs, but I am sure the Kirk and Work of God will
be troublesome on the Stomach of some of our Malignants in Scotland, it'l make
unrest when they think it to be disjeasted; there is some sort of Meat, though
folk would fain eat it, yet it will not disjeast on their Stomach, but it comes
up and gars them wirry them, but shall not go down; for a broken Covenant will
plead with such vengeance, that they shall not answer the arguments of it.
There is a second way that he maintains the Cause when poor bodies is laid by,
and that is by borrowing a yocking of some enemies Plough for plowing a yocking
in persecutors Land, to give the people of God breathing time and leisure to
get their plough yocked, so God borrowes a yocking of the Philistines plough to
Till a Rigg in Readiness Lund when he was pursuing David, while David got his
Plough yocked, there was nothing betwixt David and him, but he is e'n coming
pursuing him down the one side of the Hill, and David is going up the other;
well, the Lord sends one to Saul to cry to him, the Philistines is come in upon
thy borders, and leaves off from pursuing David, and that was a yocking to
Saul, while David was made ready for him; who wots but God may borrow a yocking
of some enemies Plough to give Persecutors yet a yocking, while the people of
God get their Cords fixed.

A third way how he maintains the Cause sometimes, and that is, by making
Religion take a grip of the hearts of some of the enemies that has been the
Ringleaders of the Persecutors of the Kirk and People of God, and then there
will be rest in the Church and People walking in the fear of the Lord, and in
the comforts of the Holy Ghost, in that 9 Acts Saul a Persecutor and
Ringleader of Persecution; Religion gripped him at the heart. And then. in the
31. There was rest throughout all the Church, walking in fear of the Lord, and
in the comforts of the Holy Ghost: Is not that a brave way of maintaining of
the Cause, that the persecuted Cause shall take some great men be the heart,
and then there shall be rest in all the Churches, walking in the fear of the
Lord, and in the comforts of the Holy Ghost. There is a fourth way that he
maintains the Cause, and it is this, That be his Peoples Cause what will, they
shall be honorably dealt with, and honorably carried through by him, and
there shall be nothing wanting when they are put to sufferings, to bear their
expenses for the honor of the Cause, but it shall be a gracious Cause by their
great expense in suffering; this is clear in the 11 of the Revelations: There
the witnesses are slain, and their Bodies left on the Ground unburied; Well,
within three days and a half they rise again, and are carried into Heaven, and
their being carried into Heaven is a greater terror to Enemies, then all they
did among them: Our Master has so honourly born his peoples Expenses, that he
has made the Cause more glorious than all the actings, and many a time has his
People had that to crack of, the more they were persecuted, the more they sang,
who would have thought but a Prison and a sore Skin would have gart folk forget
singing? and yet they never sang sweeter nor then; some says if they were in
Prison two or three days, they would be carried out in Biers, some says if they
were in Prison they would forget singing; there shall neither Prisons nor sore
Skins keep me from singing, II sing as well in Prison as in a Palace, and our
singing in Prison and Bonds shall be for the credit of our Cause, as well as
preaching at liberty. Poor Paul and Barnabas when they got many Stripes, and
were easten in Prison,

(...)
