Stationars and Printers, a Privilegial, not Municipal Company or Corporation,
however their Proprieties to be individually conserved, Humbly presented to
the Honorable Committee for Examinations, etc.
HAving lately (as far as I might) discerned the subtle, yet ambiguous desires
of some, (not the soundest nor most able Printers) I find their pretenses to
be Regulation, as in order to themselves, but no way in relation to the
Commonwealth: And their chief ends to apply to themselves Communicatively the
chiefest Copies, being the proprieties of other men. Wherefore that these
innovating men should, if they would, better understand themselves, I have
directed these sequels.

1. A Company Municipal is such an one which subordinately utitur regulis suis
in ordine ad se; uses their own Rules and Constitutions in relation to
themselves, as do Mercers, Drapers, Fish-mongers, etc. Also Goldsmiths,
Brasiers, Shoo-makers, etc. All of whom can buy, barter, sell, contract, work,
etc. without any special privilege, order, or license from any Superior,
Superiors, Supervisor or Supervisors. But Printers, Book-binders, and
Booksellers cannot by Decrees and Ordinances (hitherto thought fit to
continue) print, bind, or sell a Book (imprinted within this Nation) but by
special license and allowance; nor import from other Nations, but with like
regard. And in France, Germany, Spain, and other Countries, they cannot print,
but for a certain determined time, such or such a Book; nor sell, but for such
a price (a convenience, which, I suppose, would be useful in this
Commonwealth,) especially for some Books. So that albeit the Printers,
Book-binders, and Booksellers, are a Company which subordinately utitur suis
regulis, in some things; yet they use such Rules and Constitutions in ordine ad
alios, viz. Their Superiors (or rather the Commonwealth) not ad se; as the
forementioned Companies do; And are therefore to be accounted a Privilegial,
not a Municipal Company.

2. And whereas the Printers would not only invade other men's Proprieties
(thereby endeavoring to null, as much as in them lie's, Meum and Tuum, and
inducing, as far as may be, an example of ill consequence to this
Commonwealth) but they would also destroy (as I am credibly informed)
Patrimonial Right; that is, that the Father of a free Stationar shall not make
his Son free; and consequently that his Son shall not be capable of having or
enjoying the benefit of Printing his Father's Copies; This their endeavor I
conceiv to be most injurious; For many a Stationar (including the Printers)
have many times little or nothing to leav their Wives and Children, but their
Copies: Which if they should, by the indirect device of these innovating
Printers, be deprived of; then they cannot other way subsist. Moreover, why
should any free Stationar be debarred from such Right, which by the Rules and
Constitutions general of the honorable City of London every Freeman enjoys;
to wit, to make his Son a Freeman? This I take to be a device of the Printers
against Matthew Barker, and others, whose Rights they would invade. So that (in
my opinion) it would be requisite, that neither the Booksellers, nor the
Printers, being (as I have already instanced, but privilegial, and not
properly municipal) debate nor draw any Act or Acts, on their own behalf, for
regulating of Printers and Printing: But that such Act or Acts be from
henceforth debated by the Honorable Council of State, or by such as they shall
appoint, and by them drawn up and recommended to the Parliament, for the
regulating of Printing it self in a true Decorum, as also of all Proprieties
individually. And if this of Proprieties were but exactly considered and
reported, these new (and for the most part mean) Innovators, would (in all
probability) desist from further troublesome soliciting the Honorable Council
of State, and apply themselves to be ruled and governed, as their Honors, and
high Court of Parliament should in their Wisdoms think fit.

If it should be said, That none ought to exercise the Art or Mystery of
Printing, but such as have served seven years to a Printer, in regard that
Printing may be said to be a manual occupation, and consequently to be
comprehended within the Act of Elis. 5. c. 4. I answer, That albeit Printing
may in regard of its labor, be said to be a manual occupation; yet in regard
of its END, it is a Privilegial, and not a Popular manual occupation, no
otherwise then Coining. And that Act of Elis.etc. intend's only manual
occupations popular, not privilegial; as the clauses thereof manifest. So that
the privilege of Printing, or right of Copies, may reside in one or more, who
are no Artists; and the performance of Printing in such only who are Artists
in Printing.

Januarie 2. 1651. William Ball.


