An Account and Testimony OF Samuel Brown, Concerning his dear MOTHER Sarah
Brown, Widow, Who departed this Life at his House in Leicester the 30th of the
9th Month, 1693.
HAving something in my Heart to leave upon Record, as a Testimony unto the
Memory of my Honored Mother, and of the Goodness of our God unto her, I could
not well be clear until I had put Pen to Paper, as follows.

She was born in Loughborough in the County of Leicester of honest Parents; who
gave her a Sober Education, being aged near 83. She was a Woman who in the
Course of her Life was deeply exercised with many Difficulties and great
Tribulations, so that it may be truly said of her, That she was a Woman of
Sorrows, and well acquainted with Griefs, But through all her Trials inward and
outward, her Relyance was upon the Lord her God: Who in his infinite Mercy, in
his own due time delivered her out of all her Troubles, for which she often
praised and magnified his holy, excellent and great Name.

She sought the Lord earnestly and sincerely in her tender years, using to
frequent the Assemblies of the soberest People in that Day, which were called
Separates or Puritans, etc. And when the People called Baptists appeared, she
searched into their Principles, even as the Noble Bereans did, with real
purpose to find that way to walk in, in which she might have Peace with God,
and Salvation for her weary and mournful Soul; and with them she joined several
Years, walking so inoffensively, that she gained a good Esteem among them.
During which Communion she often received the Public Members of that Society,
duly administering her Charity as occasion. But in the fullness of Time God
having fitted and prepared a People in the Northern Parts of this Nation, whom
the World in Scorn called Quakers, to whom the Lord had revealed his Holy Will
and Way of Life and Salvation, and given them Commission to publish his
Everlasting Gospel-day. When they came she received them and their Testimony
with great Joy and Thankfulness unto the Lord, and became as a Nursing-Mother
among them: And my dear Father, at her request gave up his House for her
Friends to keep Meetings in, even in the Morning of that Blessed Day, she
accounting nothing too dear to part with for the Truth's Sake. She walked so
lovingly, soberly and humbly with them, and so inoffensively, that she had the
Love of all good Friends that were acquainted with her being a good Example of
Temperance, Meekness and Charity, toward those with whom she was concerned.
She was dutiful to her Parents in their time, a true and loving Wife to her
Husband in his Day, even unspotted of the World. She was a tender Mother to me
and mine, living with us near twenty Years, in her Widowhood. She truly loved
all her Relations, and was a good Neighbor and firm Friend, having a Word of
Comfort in due Season to many, when in Afflictions; and often exhorted her
Offspring to fear God, and to remember their Creator in the Days of their
Youth, and to do their Duty both to God and Man; telling them, That then the
Lord would bless them.

She was taken in the Night-Season (with a violent Pain in her Legs) on the 6th
Day of the Week, and deceased the next 5th Day. I was immediately called to
her, she desiring the Lord to mitigate the Violence of her Pain, and to give
her Strength to bear his Hand with Patience.

I was much grieved for her* which she perceiving, said Child, do not do so,
rejoice and be glad, for thou have no other cause: Thou have been a dutiful and
loving Son to me, even unto the full. And the Lord visited my Soul with his
heavenly Power and Divine Presence, and gave me a living Sense of his
everlasting Love unto her, and made me willing to give her up into his good
Hand, to do with her, as to Life or Death, as he pleased; the which I was never
able to do before; for which my Soul has cause to bless his holy Name. And the
Lord had regard unto her, when she cried unto him, and in a short Time took
away the Violence of her Pain, and she magnified his Mercy and Goodness unto
her; speaking of his great Mercy and Favor to her all her Life long, to the
great and mutual Comfort of me, my dear Wife and Children, who were exercised
during the time of her Weakness with great Care, Tenderness and Dutiful
Affections toward her: Which she perceived and was well pleased with, saying:
The Lord bless thee and thine for thy Love and Duty unto me, for I do rejoice
that thou wast born unto me. She particularly took notice of my dear Wife's
Diligence, Duty and tender Care toward her in the time of her Weakness,
saying; Daughter, thou promisedst to take Care of me when Weakness should
approach, and now thou art as good as thy Word: The Lord bless thee and thine
for all your love to me.

And her sweetness of Temper and Gratitude was such, that she returned her
Thankfulness to my honest Servant, Joseph Hardy, for his Kindness and Readiness
to serve her at all times. And in a deep Sense of the Love of the Lord to her,
she uttered these Words, O Lord guide thy poor Handmaid by thy pure Eye into
thy everlasting Kingdom, where I may sing Allelujas to thee for ever.

She designed her Interment at Barrough upon Sore; but 2 Days before her
Departure gave Orders to me to lay her Body in our Burying Place in Leicester
by her Grandchildren; which was done accordingly upon the first of the 10th
Month, 1693.

And now what shall I say of thee my dear Mother? thou art taken from me, even
in a good old Age: Thy Memory is sweet unto me, thou wast one that in thy Day
did truly love thy God and his People, highly esteeming them that walked
wisely, who loved the Prosperity of Sion; and thou pitiedst them who were
Enemies to their own Happiness: Thou lovedst to visit the Widow and Fatherless,
the Prisoners and the House of Mourning, to Feed the Hungry, Cloth the Naked,
and wash the Saints Feet; and often lamentedst the Calamities of Mankind, and
were for preferring others before thy self: Thou gave thy Body to the Prison,
and thy Goods to the Spoiler, counting all as Dross and Dung, that thou
might win Christ. Thou wast a diligent frequenter of the Meetings of Friends
in thy Day, and lovedst the good Order of Truth among them. Thou receivedst the
Messenger of Death with contentedness, committing thy self to the Lord thy God,
being sweetly given up to his good Will and Pleasure, thou finishedst thy
Course with Joy, and restest from thy Labors, and art entered into everlasting
Happiness and thy Works follow thee; for which my Soul does magnify the holy
Name of the Lord my God for evermore.

Amen.
S. B.

THis I have to say of my dear Mother; She was a Woman of great Temperance,
full of Love, without Dissimulation; no Whisperer nor Backbiter; and as she
loved the Lord, and desired to live in his Fear from her Youth, so he honored
her with his heavenly Presence and stood by her in the Hour of Death: Which,
blessed be the Lord, I had a sense of, and of her eternal Happiness, to my
great Comfort; which caused my Soul and Spirit to Rejoice in the God of our
Salvation, and I believe has received the Answer of Well done thou good and
faithful Servant, and is entered into the Joy of the Lord, and according to her
Desires, will sound high Praises and Allelujahs to him for ever and evermore.

E. B.

The Testimony of Tho Pitstow, concerning his ancient Friend Sarah Brown and
his Wife Anne Pitstow; with a tender Exhortation to Friends to be faithful to
God.
THe Name of the Righteous shall be had in everlasting Remembrance, but the
Name of the Wicked shall rot. And this has often been the Word of the Lord in
my Heart, say unto the Righteous, It shall go well with them; but unto the
Wicked, it shall go ill: And this I have seen in my Day, that when the Lord
has sent his Messenger of Death to lay hold upon the Wicked and upon the
Hypocrite, what Fear and Amazement, Anguish and Tribulation has been upon
their Souls and Spirits? And again, on the other Hand, those that have feared
the Lord in their Day, and have wrought Righteousness, they have been accepted
of the Lord, for behold the latter End of that Man is Peace; as it was with
this our dear Friend Sarah Brown: For when I was sent for unto her, I said
unto her, The Lord has sent his Messenger; she made Answer, He was come: and I
can truly say, She had Unity with Death, for she had nothing to do but to die,
and the Cry of her Soul was, Lord give me an easy Passage; and the Lord heard
her Cry, and answered the Desires of her Soul, and sweetened her Passage with
his blessed Presence, that in a living Sense thereof she many times praised the
Lord, and blessed his Name for his Mercies, for they endure for ever. I need not
say any thing of her Birth and Education, and Convincement, and Sufferings,
because her loving and dutiful Son has already touched upon those things: But
this I have to say, Ever since I have had Knowledge of of her, which is about
15 Years, I have had good Unity with her; She was a tender Woman, and like a
Mother to me and mine: She always ^ook Care of my dear Wife, in all her
Extremity, as if she had been her own Child (and I have this to say of my dear
Wife, She well deserved it, who lived and died as one of ^he Lord's Worthies,
and had gained a good Report, as a sweet Savor in the Hearts of Friends and
others) to the great Joy and Comfort of my Soul. O the Victory that they ^btain
that be faithful unto God in their Day and Generation, as it is written, 1 Cor.
15. Death is swallowed up in Victory; O Death where is thy Sting, O Grave where
is thy Victory? the Sting of Death is Sin, and the Strength of Sin is the Law;
but Thanks be to God who has given us the Victory, through our Lord Jesus
Christ: And this is that Crown that they enjoy that be faithful unto God.

O my dear Friends that be convinced of God's blessed Truth, this is the
Exhortation that springs in my Heart unto you: O live in the Truth and be
inwardly exercised before the Lord in Living Desires, to enjoy the Presence of
the Living God; for it is not a bare Profession that will stand us in stead,
when Death looks us in the Face; but the inward Enjoyment of divine
Refreshments and inward Comforts from the presence of the living God. This is
that my Soul desires above all other things, who truly desires the everlasting
Happiness and well-being of the Souls of all People.

Thomas Pitstow.

FINIS.

