A LETTER From a Gentleman in the COUNTRY, To a Member of the House of COMMONS
in England; in Reference to the VOTES Of the 14th of December, 97. Relating to
the TRADE of IRELAND.

Together with An ANSWER To the said LETTER.

By Sir F. B.

DUBLIN, Reprinted for Patrick Campbel; and are to be sold at his shop in
Skinner-row. School.

A LETTER from a Gentleman in the Country, to a Member of the House of Commons,
etc.
SIR,
THO you receive this from my hands, yet it is the Sense of your Sea and Land
Neighbors in the Country, upon your Resolving That a Committee be appointed to
consider of the Trade of England and Ireland, and how to make the Trade of this
Kingdom more ^eneficial.

We also hope that your House will consider in ^^me of Peace, what may enable
the Nation to De^^nd themselves in time of War. It cannot but (...) a trouble
to all thinking Men, to see a King^^m and People once so famous for Trade and
Na^^gation, to fight themselves out of both; without ^^flecting on the Expense
of 50 Millions Sterling; which was the Harvest of 700 Years, when this ^^ation
was almost sole in the Tilledge of the Sea: ^^ow we are encompassed with
Rivals, and cannot ^^pect such plentiful Crops. Therefore we have (...) much
reason to consider how to secure our Trade in time of Peace, as we have our
Liberties in time of War.

Among the many Rivals of our Trade and Navigation, I have often thought
Ireland to be the most dangerous; and that which first led me into the opinion,
was the practice of the two last Reigns, encouraging the Irish more than their
English Subjects in Trade and Navigation; they being proper Tools to support
Popery and Slavery, which Ireland was a fit Nursery for; and although the English
there are mortal Enemies to the first, yet are they bred up with, and sharers
in the latter; that is, in the Power they have over the Irish in Arbitrary
Administration; and that which first led the English into such despotick
Practice, was the numbers of the Irish, and their aversion to the English Laws
and Religion; which upon any alteration of Government in England, the Irish get
up in Rebellion. To prevent which, the English were forced to be Extraordinary
in their Discipline over them; and this manage of inferior Magistrates in the
Country, was followed by superior Courts of Justice^ until it reached the
English themselves; yet could they not complain, since in their stations from
the Constable to the Justice the same was practiced. All which I think was
designed to breed up Instruments for Arbitrary Government in Ireland to
introduce it here, and we may remember Irish Judge^ removed from Ireland here
to serve a Turn.

This I mention, though it may be thought Foreign (...) Trade, because I think
admitting Ireland to their own Conduct, either in Government, or Commerce, etc.
is dangerous to England. But I ^^all not hold you longer from the subject of
Trade, ^^e design of this Letter; and that you may not ^^ink I write on common
Fame, give me leave (...) tell you, that I have been concerned in the Trade of
Ireland, and have been twice in that Kingdom, where I made the Observations
following.

First, That the Kingdom lies with greater Ad^^ntage for Trade and Navigation
than any Part (...) Europe.

Secondly, That both its Land and Seas are blessed (...) Nature with better
Products than any Part of ^^^rope.

Thirdly, That it stands betwixt us and all the ^^ofitable Commerce of the
World.

Fourthly, That all this is in the Possession of ^^reigners and Irish, the
English in Ireland being ^^oprietors of most of the Land, giving themselves to
Rural Employments.

This being matter of Fact, that you will consi^^^ the reason England has, to
enquire into the ^^^pose and manage of the Trade of that Kingdom, ^^ich has
lost this Nation so much Blood and ^^^easure to recover, after 32 Rebellions.

^n the compass of a Letter I cannot innumerate (...) he particulars where in
Ireland interferes with the Trade of England; I shall only insist upon Five,
Viz.

First, That of their Fishing, which they have variety of sorts more than we
have in England early on their Coast, nearer than we are to a Market so that
they may sell before ours are out of the Sea.

Secondly, They have Provisions of all sort Fifty per Cent. cheaper than we
have.

Thrdily, They do by their cheapness of Hide^ and plenty of Bark, make Land,
and Leather, Cen^ per Cent. cheaper than we can.

Fourthly, By their vast Woods they supply Fran^^ and Spain with Staves, build
Ships at Fifty per Cent. cheaper than we can, by which they draw o^^ from
England our Ship-Carpenters; which in th^^ end may destroy our Navigation, and
make the^^ the Carryers of our Merchandise, and increase the^^ Seamen, which by
the way, are most Irish; for as (...) said before, the English generaly follow
Count^^ Employments.

Fifthly, By the cheapness and large Staple (...) their Wool multitude of
Irish Spinners, and cheapness of their Work, they are in a fair way of bei^^
more than Rivals in our Woollen Manufactury' (...) great numbers of our
Clothiers running into th^^ Kingdom with what small Stocks they have; whi^^
they are the more encouraged unto by their raisi^^ the Coin Twenty per Cent.
above its Value in England; so that he which goes from hence with Eigh^^
Pounds, has a Hundred when he arrives in Irela^^ Thus at a blow we loose our
Manufacturies, Men; and Money. A fair return you will say for ^ur kindness in
relieving them here; and restoring them there to their Estates: But that which
I think ^he most unaccountable of all is, that we suffer them (...) hold
Parliaments, settle Estates, pass Attainders, Regulate our Trade, Pardon their
own Rebellions, that we have paid for. This could be done by no^^ing but Irish
Assurance, nor endured by any but English Conquerors, for so I hope they will
yet al^ow us to be, if not, that your House will take a ^ourse to make them
remember it:

After what is said, you may expect I should pro^ose some Expedients to prevent
Ireland from run^ing away with a Million Sterling per Annum of ^^e Trade of
this Nation.

What I conceive might be a Remedy to preserve (...), and yet not hurt them,
(for I am not Ruining (...) Brethren that are there,) is as follows:

First, That they should not be admitted (...) Build or keep at Sea any Ship,
but to have all (...) Carriage of that Kingdom by Ships of England.

Secondly, That they should be bounded and ^^escribed in all their Trade by Act
of Parliament of England, not only to the places they shall ^rade, but to the
quantity of their Natural Pro^^ct they shall Export, and to the Season and ^^me
when, so that England may have the first ^arket.

Thirdly, That they may not Fish but with Boat^^ and Men of England.

Fourthly, That their Money be brought to (...) Standard of England.

Fifthly, That they hold no Parliaments, but (...) Governed by the Parliament
Laws of England.

Sixthly, That they be not permitted to ma^^ any Manufactures whatsoever,
except Linen.

I will trouble you no longer than to pray yo^^ Reading of Mr. Carey of
Bristols Book, who ha^^ writ with great Judgment and Affection to (...) Country
on this subject. I wish we had more M^^^ that considered the Trade of the
Nation, the (...) of which will be more dangerous than a standin^ Army.

AN ANSWER TO A LETTER from a Getleman in the Country, to a Member of the House
of COMMONS, in ENGLAND.
On the VOTES of the 14th of December, 1697. Relating to the TRADE of IRELAND.
SIR,
WE live in an Age where scribbling is the Language of one Man to another, and
too often used on a Subject, to which ^^ey are as much strangers, as to each
other's Per^^n. This seems our case, we come abroad with the ^^ow'd to please
our selves, though we disturb others; ^^t that which brings me in Print is,
because I ^^ink Men of better Understanding will not trou^^e themselves to
Answer your unpolished Libel on ^^e Government and our Brethren in Ireland;
and by that means your Invectives might have the success you wished for, viz. a
belief amongst the Industrious part of the Nation; which, were the^^ true, the
first work of England should be to remo^^ our Friends, destroy the Natives, and
send o^^^ a Hundred Thousand Soldiers to keep the Isla^^ from them; that know
how to make a good use (...) it, if we don't: But the best way of confuting
yo^^ Maxims in Trade and Government, is to repe^^ them, and then a very few
words will Answ^^ them.

I begin with your assertion, That it cannot (...) be the trouble of all
thinking Men, to see a Kingdom and People once so famous for Trade and
Navigation, to Fight themselves out of both. To t^^ it is answered, I meet with
few of your opinion, (...) such as think the Nation did ill to fight at all.

Obedience to the late K. tho in Wooden Sho^^^ and Faggots on our backs, to
Smithfield was our ^^ry, your Holy Church tells us; but that whi^^ makes few
believe it, is, that Doctrine was alw^^ preached by Men of debauched Lives, and
Pro^^^tutes for preferment. But, Sir, I must tell (...) what Men that think as
much as yours, say; (...) that is, They believe that by the War which (...)
ended with so much honor and advantage to (...) Nation, we have secured our
Trade and Navigation, with something more that perhaps you are (...) friend unto
our Laws and Religion; but as (...) Trade and Navigation, pray how should we
(...) preserved them if the French had been Masters of ^^e United Provinces.
For seeing we and the Dutch ^^ere fully employed both together, to deal with
the ^rench alone, which way could we have blovvn the ^rench and Dutch Fleets,
out of the Sea in case ^^ey had been united. Those that find fault with ^^r
War, would be pleased with our Captivity; ^^ft words are called for by such
as are vvounded ^ith Truths, therefore I shall not speak my ^houghts of your
Principels. You tell us of 700 ^^ers Harvest, and 50 Millions spent in this
War; ^^t were more, Englishmen think we have the ^orth of it; but I hope you
do not believe the ^hole 50 Millions are carried out of the King^^m, it is
demonstrable, that the greatest part is still ^^ongst us though I confess it may
be in worse hands ^^n before the War. I must own my self no ^^end to that
practice which inriches the Servant (...) beggars the Master: It should be the
abhor^^^ce of all good Men, to see people in Civil Imploy^^^ts ready to burst
with unrighteous Gain; and (...) industrious Merchant languishing by the
Opression of their Servants; but this we hope will ^^^nquired into.

Your next Paragraph begins thus, Among the ^^^y rivals of our Trade and
Navigation, I have (...) thought Ireland to be the most dangerous, and (...)
which led me into this Opinion, was the pra^^^ of the two last Reigns,
encouraging the Irish more (...) their English Subjects in Trade and
Navigation, thereby to make Ireland a Nursery for Arbitrary Government, to
which the English were abettors.

There needs no other Answer to your Thoughts That Ireland is most dangerous to
the Trade o^ England, but that all the yearly Exports of Ireland amount not to
the Value of one East India Ship^ Cargoe, as will appear by what follows.

That you say of the design of the two last Reigns t^ introduce Arbitrary
Government is not doubted, b^ that the English in Ireland were Abettors to it,
(...) most manifestly False; there were no Men in the Three Kingdoms that
ventured their Lives mo^ bravely against it then they did; and to them think
in a great measure we owe our Quiet and o^^ Trade, on the late happy Revolution
of this Kingdom, which I fancy is the reason you are so ang^^ with them;
perhaps you cannot forgive the sta^^ they of Inneskilling and Londonderry made
to (...) late Kings Army, when they designed for Scotla^^ if they could have
reduced those Men in their w^^ They would then have been troublesome to (...)
nearer home, where you and your Friends were r^^dy to receive them.

As to the English's being for Arbitrary Government, you are as much out, as in
the number^ the Irish Seamen; and least you should thin^^ speak at random, as
you do, know I was bor^^ a City that has a great share in the Trade of (...)
land, have been thrice in that Kingdom, (...) made all the Observation I could
of the Nature, Trade, and Constitution of that Country; amongst other Things, I
found they had very little Navigation; Dublin their Capital had not one Ship
belonging to it, Carickfergus, or Belfast, and Corck, had a few small Craft,
but not a Ship of Force or Burden in the Kingdom. I enquired particularly the
Number of their Irish Seamen, and by all I asked, was answered, they never saw
one that could Top and Yard, a phrase they have among Seamen.

Your next Paragraph tells us, How dangerous it is to England to leave Ireland
to their own conduct in Trade and Government.

Surely you are a stranger to the Laws of both Kingdoms, or else you would have
known that they can Pass no Act of Parliament in Ireland, but what comes first
from the King and Council here; and cannot alter one Word in it, but must take
the Act just as it comes from England.

Your following Observations of the Situation, Nature, Product, etc. are true;
for that Reason I think we should keep it in English Hands, and not follow your
Proposals to drive them out: But of that when I come to your Expedients.

Now as to your Five particulars, wherein you say, Ireland Interferes with the
Trade of England, First, in that of their Fishing, wherein no doubt they have
Advantage above us, but they never had yet Men, Money, or Craft to make use of
it; the more's the pity, it being a loss to us, and I think a fault that we do
not help them.

Your second Assertion is true in part, Their Provisions are Cheaper; but then
let me tell you, they are not so good as ours, and their Butter and Chief is
near as dear.

Your third and fourth Observations, are so aparently False, that one Word will
Answer them both; you say, you have been twice in Ireland; but besides your
self, I may venture to say, there was never any man in it, but can tell you,
there is not Timber to supply the tenth part of the Use of the Kingdom; I have
seen a Survey of all the Woods in that Island, and except Shellela, there is
not so much valuable Timber in the whole, as one Gentleman has in England.
Surely then we are in no danger of their Building Ships or Tanning Leather.

Your Fifth Observation is of their Wool, in which you are right; but as for
the multitude of Irish Spinners, you are in an Error; they are so far from
being our Rivals in the Woollen Manufactury, that this last year they could not
get so much in all the Country as to cloth their small Army.

But however, I think we have reason to look carefully into that Manufactury,
which is the Soul of all we have left of Trade, and yet I see Advocates for the
East India Trade to the destruction of our Manufactury at home.

In this methinks we Act like ill Husbands, that being Abused abroad, Revenge
themselves at home on their Wives and Children. We are wheedl'd out of our
Manufacturies, by Designing Men amongst our selves, kicked out of our Fishing
abroad, and then, like Sampson, we pull down the House upon our selves, to be
revenged for our two Eyes. So I take our Woollen Manufactury, and Fishing to
be. But let us destroy Ireland, beat our Wives and Children, and we shall
Recover all.

You end your Fifth Paragraph with that which you think the most unaccountable
of all, The suffering them to hold Parliaments.

Now Sir, if you never read History, and so are ignorant how the Crown of
England came first to entitled to Ireland, then it is great Assurance in you
to talk of the Constitution of a Kingdom, you know nothing of; if you have
Read, you must know there was a Compact that they should hold Parliaments, with
the same Privileges as England: and although they have by their own Parliaments
abridged themselves by Poynings Law in some things, yet have they still an Act
of Parliament for Annual Parliaments, and another Act, that all Laws made in
England before the Tenth of Henry VII. should be in force in Ireland. I believe
you will own we had Parliaments in England before ^denry VII. they have then
the same Right (...) hold Parliaments, that we have, but they are a poor
People, and must submit. Have a care of that French Maxim (we know not whose
turn it may be next) I remember in the Reign of Charles II. discoursing with
the Duke of Ormond (who I think, take him every way, was one of the greatest
Men of that time) upon the Trial of the Earl of Shaftsbury, his Grace said, My
Lord Shaftsbury was never my Friend, yet were I a Commoner and one of his Jury,
I would starve before I would find him Guilty by straining the Law: We must
have a care of Constitutions and Laws, they are of better use to preserve our
selves, than to take off our Enemies. If you were of this opinion, you would
not be against Ireland's holding Parliaments: have a care, Sir, of breaking
into Constitutions, we know not who may come next, we are sure His present
Majesty will preserve our Constitution, and it it is our happiness, He is more
tender of them then many of our selves; but if we will destroy them in a good
Reign, there may come a time when our own Presidents may bebrought against us.

You end your Paragraph with an Invective saying, You hope the House will make
them Remember they were Conquered. I remember to have seen a Book in this
Reign, by Order of Parliament, Burnt by the Common-Hangman, for Asserting that
conquering Doctrine. It is by our Laws that all the Monarchs of England, and a
monst the rest his present Majesty is declared to be King of Ireland, de Jure,
when King of England de Facto^ Now if you please to remember, the British of
Ireland, who are Proprietors of most of that Kingdom, were as one man in the
Interest of England; fought (as is said before) for and with the King, that
came to deliver them from the Usurpation and Tyranny of the late King James;
for so it was, He having lost his Title by Abdication, before he came to
Ireland; And King William came there to rescue his Protestant Subjects in
Ireland, from the Ravage and Murders of the Rebellious Irish Subjects. This I
hope you will not make a Conquest, if it be, we have had two or three of them
in this Reign by the Execution of Traitors at Tyburn.

You now come to your Expedients, which are like that of an English Sea Captain,
that being in danger of two Dunkirk Men of War, a French Officer on Board him,
Asked the Captain what he should do, for he dreaded being carried into France,
Never fear, said the Captain, I wont be taken: How can you be sure of that,
said the French Man? I will first blow up my Ship, replied the Captain; at
which Monsieur shrug'd his shoulders and said, Par ma foy un tres bon expedient
Anglois. So are your Expedients; as will appear presently. I will repeat them
in order, and then one Answer will serve them all.

1. That they should not Build, or keep at Sea one Ship.

2. That they be Bounded and Prescribed in all their Trade by Act of Parliament
here; not only to the place they shall go, but also to the Qualities and
Natures of the Commodities they Export, and to the Timewhen they shall export
that we may have the sir^^ market.

3. That they should not Fish but with Men an^ Boats of England.

4. That their Money be brought to the Standard (...) England.

5. That they hold no Parliament, but be Governe^ by the Parliament of England.

6. That they be not permitted to make any Man^ facturies but Linen.

I told you before, one Answer should serve (...) them all, and that shall be
with a Question, (...) as a Porter made a Lord Mayor of London, in (...)
Usurpers time, (for Regulating the Price of Bee^ was Proclaming) That none
should be sold (...) more then a Penny a Quart: A Porter standing (...) my Lord
Mayors Horse, called out, that the^ was the most material thing left out, which
wa^ appointing who should drink that small Beer, for (...) swore he would drink
none? So, Sir, you should have appointed in your Expedients, who should live in
Ireland; for no Englishman will: And surely our Nation will not think it safe
in any others Hands.

Methinks you make a bold stroke to propose Ireland should be Governed by the
Parliament of England; that, in English, is Loping off one of the Three
Kingdoms from the Crown. Your Scheme of Government exceeds all I ever read of;
you would make Ireland to be a Common wealth, but none of the Country to be in
the Government; sure some body need Govern you, though it were in Bedlam.

You and your Letter with referring to Mr. Carry of Bristol's Book; I know the
Gentleman and have discoursed on his Book, which though it comes not ^o your
Notions, yet he abated much of it in Explanation. And now, Sir, with your
leave, I shall ^ake some General Remarks on your whole Letter: What you say of
the extraordinary Advantages Ireland has above us in Trade and Navigation, is
true, and it is as true, that they never ^ad oppertunity to make use of them.

The British in general speaking, acquiting their ^^rtunes there by Arms, not
with Arts or Trade; ^ose few that come there with either of the the two last,
are usually such as have miscarryed in their own Country; so far want of sto^k
do rarely more than earn their Bread in that plentiful Country Frequent
Rebellions lessens the Inhabitants bu^ adds Acres to the British; which they
are more fond of, then Navigation and Commerce: and (...) far you are in the
right, that they are most taken (...) in Country Employments, but you are much
in the wrong in saying, the Irish are most in the Trade an^ Navigation; they
seldom sail further then to a Pota^^ Garden and Trade only in Cowes. I have
bee^ in several Parts of the World, and according to (...) Observation, the
Irish are as ignorant of Tra^^ and Navigation as the Indians in America. No^
that you should fear their numbers at Sea, that have not Five Seamen of their
Nation, gives groun^ to believe, you writ with Jesuitical Maxims; thro^^ Dirt
-- however false, some may stick. Put in (...) the Heads of the multitude,
frightful stories of the danger we are in of being overrun by the Iri^^ both
at Land and Sea; and that you may have (...) strings to your bow, you bring in
Foreigners Running away with what the Irish do not of the Tra^^ of Ireland. To
show your integrity in this, I (...) give undeniable Authority out of the
Custom-hou^^ Books of Ireland against you.

I have now by me an exact Account of all (...) Exports and Imports of Ireland;
for six Years (...) the greatest time of Irelands prosperity, and by (...)
Account their Exports in the Year 1682, amounted but to Five Hundred Forty One
Thousand Four Hundred and Nineteen Pounds Sterling, of which Four Hundred and
two Thousand Pounds was for Account of Merchants in England; and Exported in
their Ships, One Hundred Thousand Pounds Sterling, for Account of the English
in Ireland, and about Forty Thousand for Account of Foreigners. And that you
may not think this computation was made at random; I will tell you how it was
done.

The whole Account was drawn out of the Custom-house Books by a Clerk under the
Examiner of their Accounts, with every Merchants Name that entered them, and to
what place the Ship belonged, in which the Goods were Exported: this was after
all brought into Form by a Man of the greatest Practice and Experience that
perchance was ever a Trader in that Kingdom, who knew for whom the most
considerable Factors dealt: (For by the way, most of the Trade of that Kingdom
is managed by Factors.) This Gentleman did assure me with demonstrations more
then can be comprehended in the compass of this Discourse, that there was very
little Exceptions to be made to this Account, which he spent some years in
perfecting, for he writ Observations on every Commodity Exported and Imported.
What is here brought against your matter of Fact, as you call it, is I think
undeniable.

And that your ignorance in Commerce may appear, I will show that what you say
of Foreigners running away with the Trade of Ireland, is impossible; and that
for these Reasons.

1. First, because the greatest part of their Product is by their own Laws
prohibited to all parts of the World but England as their Wool, Sheep Skins,
Woolen, Yarn, Linnen-yarn; Green and Tan'd Hides pay double Duty upon their
Export to any part but England; all which Commodities are more then half their
Export.

2. The Act of Navigation is in Force by Law in Ireland. Now Sir, if you know
not my meaning by mentioning that Act, it is, That by tha^ Statute no Foreign
Ship can carry any Good from Ireland to England.

3. The greatest part of the Provisions of Ireland are Exported by ships of
England to our Foreign Plantations for little Beeff, or Porke, whateve^ we
think, goes to Foreign Markets, now the Act of Navigation before mentioned,
Prohibit^^ all Foreign Ships from Trading to our Plantations.

4. By Law they are Prohibited the Importation of any, tho Commodities of our
Foreign Plantations but from England, not so much as a Poun^ of Tobacco or
Sugar is admitted into Ireland, but what comes from England; I may add, that
they Forfeit Ship and Goods, if they carry out of Ireland any thing but
Provisions, Servants and Horses. I knew a Ship seized in Virginia for bringing
but a Dozen of Woollen Stockens from Ireland. After all this, pray what is
there left for Foreigners to drive that mighty Trade you speak of in Ireland.

I think it proper to inquire now where the Million is, you tell us Ireland
runs away with of the Trade of England; it is proved, that their whole Annual
Exports amounts to little more then one half of your Million, and of that Four
Hundred Thousand goes for England, and English Merchants Accounts; you have
then but Forty Thousand Pounds to raise your Million out of.

There is another Remarkable Instance you give of the danger we are in by
raising their Money 20 yet Cent. above it is value; it would be no very mannerly
question to ask you where you have been for this 12 Months, in which time the
nature of Coin has been so fully Debated and resolved in Parliament, and
explained to the whole Nation, that I thought every one in it was convinced,
that by Raising Money we cheated no body but our selves; and I do not think but
that the Gentlemen of Ireland understand that Truth, but necessity often
prevails over Judgment; we know not their Circumstances, only may guess, that a
Country who in their greatest Prosperity had never Four Hundred Thousand Pounds
Sterling, of Running Cash, and Two Hundred and Forty Thousand Pounds per Annum
of the Rents of that Kingdom, belonging unto and spent in this, are in hazard
of having all carried out. But let their consideration be what it will, I think
we have no reason to fear, but rather pity them in this matter.

I had like to have past over your most sensible part; for it in Truth shows
the Man and his Conversation.

Your Words are these, But that which I thin^ the most unaccountable of all is,
that we suffer the^ to hold Parliaments, Settle Estates, Pardon the^ own
Rebellions. etc.

It is plain what you mean, but it comes so nea^ Arraigning the Government,
that you durst n^^ express it in plain Words; the late King JAME^ with his
Irish Mob, that he called, a Parliament (...) Dublin, did there Attaint all the
British Protestan^ by Name, that owned King William their Rightful Lawful
King; and to make sure of all the Protestants Estates in that Kingdom, there
pretend^ Act named Women and Children that never sa^ Irish Ground. Now this
Rebellious Edict of (...) Irish, the present Parliament of Ireland have
declared and Enacted Illegal and Rebellious, and the pretended Parliament that
made it, to be then in Rebellion against the Crown of England. And for this you
say, the Parliaments of Ireland pardon their own Rebellions; for you do
insinuate their being in Rebellion when they left the late King James: Truly
Sir, by what I hear of that Parliament, they are so far from pardoning
Rebellions, that they expelled one of their own Members for but a small overt
Act in the time of the late King James's being in Ireland. They are a People (
I am sorry it should be so in respect of our selves, tho I commend it in them,)
that are not divided, as we are, in parties, but as one Man in His Majesty's
interest, except a very few that are advanced in the Kings Service, as too many
have been here, by mistake of some, and design of others; however those plants
grow not in Ireland; it is Observed no venomous Creature brought from England
lives there; I suppose you never intend to try.

I have now done with your Letter, and shall end mine with directing what
follows, to Men of better Principles then you seem to be; and such I presume
will not use Ireland as the Harlot would have had the Child, her Language was
like yours, divide the Child, let it be neither thine nor mine. Your Friends
have neither right nor Posession of it, and they that have you Malign; But all
true Englishmen consider them as bone of (...) bone, and it is reasonable to
believe the House of Commons passed that Vote for ma^^ing the Trade of Ireland
more beneficial (...) England, with that consideration, there (...) no doubt,
room enough to make it so.

I have often thought it would be one (...) the first Works the Parliament
would (...) upon, at the conclusion of a Peace, and (...) to let such a
Treasure as that Island mig^^ be made to England, lie waste, as it ha^^ always
been ever since the English ha^^ had Footing in it, which is unaccountab^^ it
would be thought so in the conduct (...) a Private Man, if he should neglect
(...) own Inheritance and lay out his Mo^^ in Improving that of another Man's;
(...) not so when we employ our Men and ^^ney to enrich the Subjects of the
Mog^^ and neglect a Country of our own so (...) as that, if righty managed,
would streng^en and enrich our Nation more then all Trade we have in the World
besides. W^^ would France make of it if they had it (...) do not think they
would cry it down the destruction of their Kingdom: have perhaps more reason to
value it then is at present seen; I doubt we are in more danger of losing our
Trade and Navigation, then ever we were in since we were a People; and it is
feared we love nothing left to help us but Ireland; but then it must not be let
to former Conduct, I am loath ^^say what I know in this matter.

We should also consider, the Jason we have to encourage Britt^ Planters in
that Kingdom; for ^^other can secure it to England. It I have been too long for
a let^^, tho too short for the Subject; shall only give my humble Opinion, That
it would be for the Ser^^e of England in this great Con^^n of settling the TRADE
of both ^^ngdoms, to hear the People of Ireland before they conclude them, he^
him, hear him, is Parliament Language, and Christian Practice, be^o^^ Judgment.
I end with the Words Seneca in his Morals,

He that lives according to R^^son shall never be poor: And (...) that governs
his Life, by Opinion shall never be Rich.

FINIS.

