The Second Part OF THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION.

By the Lords.
Die Lunae 3. Januarij 1680.
ORdered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That the
Thanks of this House be given to Dr. Burnet, for the great Service done by him
to this Kingdom, and the Protestant Religion, in writing the History of the
Reformation of the Church of England, so truly and exactly; And that he be
desired to proceed in the perfecting what he further intends therein with all
convenient speed.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

By the Commons.
Jovis 23. Die December. 1680.
ORdered, That the Thanks of This House be given to Dr. Burnet, for his Book
Entitled The History of the Reformation of the Church of England.

Will. Goldesbrough. Cleric. Dom. Com.

Mercurij 5. Die Januarij 1680.
ORdered, That Dr. Burnet be desired to proceed with, and complete that Good
Work by him begun in Writing and Publishing The History of the Reformation of
the Church of England.

Will. Goldesbrough Cler. Dom. Com.

THE HISTORY of the REFORMATION of the Church of England The Second Part

Printed for Rich: Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church yard.

engraved title page The Holy Bible



THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION OF THE Church of England.

The Second Part.

OF THE Progress made in it till the Settlement of it in the beginning OF Q.
Elizabeth's Reign.

By GILBERT BVRNET, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXXXI.

THE PREFACE.
THE favorable reception which the former Part of this Work had, together with
the new Materials that were sent me from Noble and Worthy Hands, have
encouraged me to prosecute it, and to carry down the History of the Reformation
of this Church till it was brought to a complete settlement in the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign, which I now offer to the World.

The great zeal of this Age for what was done in that, about Religion, has made
the History of it to be received and read with more than ordinary attention and
care: and many have expressed their satisfaction in what was formerly
published, by contributing several Papers of great consequence to what
remained: and since I found no Part of the first Volume was more universally
acceptable, than that wherein I was only a Transcriber, I mean the Collection
of Records and Authentic Papers, which I had set down in confirmation of the
more remarkable and doubtful parts of the History; I continue the same method
now. I shall repeat nothing here that was in my former Preface: But refer the
Reader to such things as concern this History in general, and my encouragement
in the undertaking and prosecution of it, to what is there premised to the
whole Work: and therefore I shall now enlarge on such things as do more
particularly relate to this Volume.

The Papers that were conveyed to me from several Hands are referred to, as the
occasion to mention them occurs in the History, with such acknowledgements as I
thought best became this way of writing, though far short of the merits of
those who furnished me with them. But the Storehouse from whence I drew the
greatest part both of the History and Collection, is the often-celebrated
Cotton Library, out of which, by the noble favor of its truly learned Owner,
Sir John Cotton, I gathered all that was necessary for composing this Part,
together with some few things which had escaped me in my former Search, and
belong to the First Part: and those I have mixed in the Collection added to
this Volume upon such occasions as I thought most pertinent. But among all the
Remains of the last Age, that are with great industry and order laid up in that
Treasury, none pleased me better, nor were of more use to me, than the Journal
of King Edwards Reign, written all with his own Hand: with some other Papers of
his, which I have put by themselves in the beginning of the Collection: Of
these I shall say nothing here, having given a full account of them in the
History of his Reign, to which I refer the Reader. I find most of our Writers
have taken Parcels out of them, and Sir John Heyward has transcribed from them
the greatest part of his Book; therefore I thought this a thing of such
consequence, that upon good advice I have published them all faithfully copied
from the Originals.

But as others assisted me toward the perfecting this Part, so that learned
Divine, and most exact Enquirer into Historical Learning, Mr. Fulman, Rector of
Hamton-Meysey in Gloucestershire, did most signally oblige me, by a Collection
of some mistakes I had made in the former Work. He had for many years applied
his thoughts with a very searching care to the same Subject, and so was able to
judge more critically of it, than other Readers. Some of those had escaped me,
others had not come within my view, in some particulars my Vouchers were not
good, and in others I had mistaken my Authors. These I publish at the end of
this Volume, being neither ashamed to confess my faults, nor unwilling to
acknowledge from what Hand I received better information. My design in writing
is to discover Truth, and to deliver it down impartially to the next Age; so I
should think it both a mean and criminal piece of vanity to suppress this
discovery of my Errors. And though the number and consequence of them had been
greater than it is, I should rather have submitted to a much severer Penance,
than have left the World in the mistakes, I had led them into: yet I was not a
little pleased to find that they were neither many, nor of importance to the
main Parts of the History: and were chiefly about Dates or small variations in
the order of Time. I hope this Part has fewer faults since that worthy Person
did pursue his former kindness so far, as to review it beforehand: and with
great judgment to correct such errors as he found in it: Those I had formerly
fallen into, made me more careful in examining even the smallest matters. Yet
if after all my care, and the kind Censures of those who have revised this
Work, there is any thing left that may require a further Retractation, I shall
not decline to make it so soon as I see there is need of it, being, I hope,
raised above the poor vanity of seeking my own reputation, by sacrificing Truth
to it.

Those to whose censure I submitted this whole History in both its Parts, were
chiefly three great Divines, whose Lives are such Examples, their Sermons such
Instructions, their Writings such unanswerable Vindications of our Church, and
their whole deportment so suitable to their profession, that as I reckon my
being admitted into some measure of friendship with them, among the chief
Blessings of my Life, so I know nothing can more effectually recommend this
Work than to say that it passed with their hearty approbation, after they had
examined it with that care, which their great zeal for the Cause concerned in
it, and their goodness to the Author, and freedom with him obliged them to use.
They are so well known, that without naming them, those of this Age will easily
guess who they are; and they will be so well known to Posterity, by their
excellent Writings, that the naming them is so high an advantage to my Book,
that I much doubt whether it is decent for me to do it. One of them, Dr. Lloyd,
is now, while I am writing, by His Majesty's favor, promoted to the Bishopric
of St. Asaph: a Dignity to which how deservedly soever his great Learning,
Piety, and Merit, has advanced him, yet I particularly know how far he was from
any aspirings to it. It was he I described in my former Preface, that engaged
me first to this design, and for that reason he has been more than ordinary
careful to examine it, with that exactness that is peculiar to him. The other
two are the Reverend, Learned, and Judicious Deans, of Canterbury and St.
Paul's, Dr. Tillotson, and Dr. Stillingfleet, too well known to receive any
addition from the Characters I can give of them.

Others gave me Supplies of another sort, to enable me to go through with an
undertaking that put me to no small expense. I am not ashamed to acknowledge,
that the straitness of my condition, made this uneasy to me, being destitute
of all public provision: but I should be much ashamed of my ingratitude, if I
did not celebrate their bounty who have taken such care of me, as not to leave
this addition of charge, on one who lives not without difficulties. I must
again repeat my Thanks, for the generous kindness, protection, and liberal
Supplies of Sir Harbotle Grimstone, Master of the Rolls, this being the sixth
year of my subsistence under him, to whom I must ever acknowledge that I am
more beholding than to all Men living. The noble Mr. Boil, as he employs both
his Time and Wealth, for the good of Mankind, (for which he considers himself
as chiefly born, and which he has promoted not only in his own excellent
Writings, that have made him so famous over all the World, but in many other
designs that have been chiefly carried on at his cost,) so has he renewed his
kindness to me in largesses suitable to so great a Mind. Others were also
pleased to join their help. The Right Honorable the Lord Finch, now Lord High
Chancellor of England, whose great Parts, and greater Virtues, are so
conspicuous, that it were a high Presumption in me to say any thing in his
commendation, being in nothing more eminent than in his zeal for, and care of
this Church, thought it might be of some importance to have its History well
digested, and therefore as he bore a large share of my expense, so he took it
more particularly under his care, and under all the Burdens of that high
Employment which he now bears, yet found time for reading it in Manuscript, of
which he must have robbed himself, since he never denies it to those who have a
Right to it on any public account; and has added such Remarks and Corrections
as are no small part of any finishing it may be judged to have. The Lord
Russel, the Inheritor of that Zeal for true Religion, and the other Virtues
that have from the first beginnings of the Reformation, in a continued Entail,
adorned that Noble Family of Bedford, beyond most others of the Kingdom, did
espouse the Interests of the Protestant Religion in this particular, as he has
done on all other more public occasions: and by a most liberal Supply
encouraged me to prosecute this Undertaking. That Worthy Counselor, whose
celebrated Integrity and clear Judgment have raised him so high in his
Profession, Anthony Keck Esquire, did also concur in easing me of the charge
that Searching, Copying, and gathering Materials put me to: And having received
as much from these my Noble Benefactors, as did enable me to carry on my
Design, I did excuse my self at other Persons Hands, who very generously
offered to supply me in the expense which this Work brought with it. That was
done in a most extraordinary manner, by the Right Honorable the Earl of
Halifax, whom, if I reckon among the greatest Persons this Age has produced, I
am sure all that know him will allow, that I speak modestly of him: He indeed
offered me the yearly continuance of a Bounty, that would not only have
defrayed all this expense, but have been an entire and honorable subsistence
to me; and though my necessities were not so pressing as to persuade me to
accept it; yet so unusual a generosity does certainly merit the highest
acknowledgements I can make for it.

But I now turn to that which ought to be the chief Subject of this Preface to
remove the prejudices, by which weak and unwary Persons have been prepossessed
in their Judgments concerning the Reformation, during that Period of it that
falls within this Volume. I know the Duty of an Historian leads him to write as
one that is of neither Party, and I have endeavored to follow it as carefully
as I could, neither concealing the faults of the one Party, nor denying the
just Praises that were due to any of the other side; and have delivered things
as I found them, making them neither better nor worse than indeed they were:
But now that I am not yet entered into that Province, and am here writing my own
Thoughts, and not relating the Actions of other Men, I hope it will be judged
no indecent thing to clear the Readers mind of those Impressions, which may
either have already biassed him too much, or may upon a slight reading of what
follows, arise in his thoughts: unless he were prepared and armed with some
necessary Reflections, which every one that may possibly read this History, has
not had the leisure, or other opportunities, to make to such a degree as were
needful.

It is certainly an unjust way of proceeding, in any that is to be a Judge, to
let himself be secretly possessed, with such Impressions of Persons and Things,
as may biass his thoughts: for where the Scales are not well adjusted, the
Weight cannot be truly reckoned. So that it is an indirect Method to load Men's
Minds with Prejudices, and not to let them in to the trial of Truth, till their
Inclinations are first swayed such a way. I deny not but in matters of Religion
most commonly Men receive such Notions, before they can well examine them, as
do much determine them in the Enquiries they make afterward, when their
understandings grow up to a fuller ripeness: but those Pre-occupations, if
rightly infused, are rather such as give them general Notions of what is good
and honest in the abstracted Idea's, than concerning matters of Fact: for every
wise and pious Man must avoid all such Methods of Instruction, as are founded
on Falsehood and Craft: and he that will breed a Man to love Truth, must form in
him such a liking of it, that he may clearly see he would bribe him into no
Opinion or Party by false or indirect Arts: But since Men are generally so apt
to let some easy Notions enter into their Minds, which will pre-engage their
Affections, and for most part those who set themselves to gain Proselites, do
begin with such Arts, it will not be amiss to give the Reader such an account
of these, as may prepare him against them, that so he may with a clearer mind
consider what is now to be delivered to him, concerning the Reformation of
Religion among us.

I shall begin with that which is most commonly urged; that the whole Church
being one Body, the Changes that were made in Religion, did break that Unity,
and dissolve the Bond by which the Catholic Church is to be knit together, and
that therefore the first Reformers began, and we still continue a Schism in
the Church.

In answer to this, it is to be considered that the Bishops and Pastors of the
Church are obliged to instruct their People in the true Faith of Christ,
according to the Scriptures: The nature of their Function, being a Sacred
Trust, binds them to this; they were also at their Consecration engaged to it,
by a formal Sponsion, according to the Questions and Answers that are in the
Roman Pontifical to this day. Pastors owe it as a Debt to their People to teach
them according to the Scriptures: They owe a Charity to their Brethren, and are
to live with them in the terms of Brotherly Love, and Friendly Correspondence;
but if that cannot be had on easier terms, than the concealing necessary
Truths, and the delivering gross errors to those committed to their charge, it
is certain that they ought not to purchase it at so dear a rate. When the
Pastors of this Church saw it overrun with errors and corruptions, they were
obliged by the duty they owed to God and to their People, to discover them; and
to undeceive their misled Flocks. It is of great importance to maintain Peace
and Unity, but if a Party in the Church does set up some Doctrines and
Practices, that do much endanger the Salvation of Souls, and makes advantages
by these, so that there is no hope left to gain them by rational and softer
Methods, then as St. Peter was to be withstood to his Face, in a lesser matter,
much more are those, who pretend no higher than to be his Successors, to be
withstood, when the things are of great moment and consequence. When Heresies
sprung up in the Primitive Church, we find the neighboring Bishops condemned
them without staying for the concurrence of other Churches; as in the Case of
Samosatenus, Arius, and Pelagius: and even when the greatest part of the Church
was become Semi-Arian, and many great Councils, chiefly that at Ariminum,
consisting of above 800 Bishops, as some say, had through ignorance and fear
complied, the Orthodox Bishops did not forbear to instruct those committed to
their care according to the true Faith. A general concurrence is a thing much
to be labored for; but when it cannot be had, every Bishop must then do his
duty so as to be answerable to the chief Bishop of Souls.

So that instead of being led away by so slight a prejudice, we must turn our
Enquiries to this, Whether there were really such abuses in the Church, as did
require a Reformation? and whether there was any reason to hope for a more
general concurrence in it? In the following History the Reader will see what
corruptions were found to be both in the Doctrine and Worship of this Church:
from whence he may infer what need there was of Reformation. And it is very
plain, that they had no reason to expect the concurrence of other Churches; for
the Council of Trent had already made a great progress, and it was very
visible, that as the Court of Rome governed all things there, so they were
resolved to admit of no effectual Reformation, of any considerable matters; but
to establish by a more formal decision, those errors and abuses that had given
so much scandal to the Christian World for so many Ages.

This being the true state of the Case, it is certain, that if there were
really great corruptions, either in Belief or Manners in this Church, then the
Bishops were bound to reform them: since the backwardness of others in their
duty, could not excuse them from doing theirs, when they were clearly convinced
of it. So that the Reader is to shake off this prejudice, and only to examine
whether there was really such need of a Reformation? since if that be true, it
is certain the Bishops of this as well as of other Churches, were bound to set
about it; and the faultiness of some could be no excuse to the rest.

The second Prejudice is, That the Reformation was begun and carried on, not by
the major part of the Bishops and Clergy; but by a few selected Bishops and
Divines, who being supported by the Name of the Kings Authority, did frame
things as they pleased; and by their Interest at Court got them to be Enacted
in Parliament: and after they had removed such Bishops as opposed them, then
they procured the Convocation to consent to what was done: So that upon the
matter, the Reformation was the Work of Cranmer, with a few more of his Party,
and not of this Church, which never agreed wholly to it, till the Bishops were
so modelled as to be compliant to the designs of the Court. In short, the
resolution of this, is to be taken from a common Case; when the major part of a
Church is according to the Conscience of the Supreme Civil Magistrate in an
Error, and the lesser part is in the right. The Case is not hard, if well
understood: for in the whole Scripture there is no promise made to the major
part of the Pastors of the Church; and there being no Divine Promise made about
it, it is certain that the Nature of Man is such, that Truth separated from
Interest has few Votaries: but when it is opposite to it, it must have a very
small Party. So that most of those things which needed Reformation, being such
as added much to the Wealth and Power of the Clergy, it had been a wonder
indeed, if the greater part had not opposed it. In that Case, as the smaller
part were not to depart from their Sentiments, because opposed in them by a
more numerous Party that was too deeply concerned in the matter: so it was both
natural for them, and very reasonable, to take Sanctuary in the Authority and
Protection of the Prince and the Law. That Princes have an Authority in things
Sacred, was so universally agreed to in King Henry's Reign, and was made out
upon such clear Evidence of Reason and Precedents, both in the Jewish State,
and in the Roman Empire, when it turned Christian, that this ground was already
gained. It is the first Law in Justinians Code, made by Theodosius when he came
to the Empire, That all should every were, under severe pains, follow that
Faith which was received by Damasus Bishop of Rome, and Peter of Alexandria.
And why might not the King and Laws of England give the like Authority to the
Archbishops of Canterbury and York.

When the Empire, and especially the Eastern part of it, had been, during the
Reign of Constantius, and Valens succeeding him after a short Interval, so
overspread with Arianisme, it is scarce to be imagined how it could have been
reformed in any other manner: for they durst not at first trust it to the
discretion of a Synod; and yet the Question then on foot was not so linked with
Interest, being a Speculative Point of Divinity, as those about which the
Contests were in the beginnings of the Reformation.

It is not to be imagined how any Changes in Religion can be made by Sovereign
Princes, unless an Authority be lodged with them of giving the Sanction of a
Law, to the sounder, though the lesser part of a Church: for as Princes and
Lawgivers are not tied to an implicit obedience to Clergymen, but are left to
the freedom of their own discerning, so they must have a Power to choose what
side to be of where things are much enquired into. The Jurisdiction of Synods
or Councils, is founded either on the Rules of Expediency and Brotherly
Correspondence, or on the force of Civil Laws: for when the Christian Belief
had not the support of Law, every Bishop taught his own Flock the best he
could, and gave his Neighbors such an account of his Faith, at, or soon after
his Consecration, as satisfied them, and so maintained the Unity of the Church.
The formality of Synods grew up in the Church, from the division of the Roman
Empire, and the Dignity of the several Cities; which is a thing so well known,
and so plainly acknowledged by the Writers of all sides, that it were a
needless imposing on the Readers patience, to spend time to prove it. Such as
would understand it more perfectly, will find it in De Marca the late
Archbishop of Paris's Books de Concordia Imperii and Sacerdotii, and in
Blondells Works, De la Primaute de l'Eglise. None can imagine there is a Divine
Authority in that which sprang from such a beginning. The major part of Synods
cannot be supposed to be in matters of Faith, so assisted from Heaven, that the
lesser part must necessarily acquiesce in their Decrees, or that the Civil
Powers must always measure their Laws, by their Votes: especially where
Interest does visibly turn the Scales. And this may satisfy any reasonable Man
as to this prejudice; that if Archbishop Cranmer and Holgate, the two Primates
and Metropolitanes of this Church, were in the right, in the things that they
procured to be reformed, though the greater part of the Bishops being biassed
by base ends, and generally both superstitious and little conversant in the
true Theological Learning, did oppose them, and they were thereby forced to
order matters so, that at first they were prepared by some selected Bishops and
Divines, and afterward Enacted by King and Parliament, this is no just
exception to what was so managed. And such a Reformation can no more be blasted
by being called a Parliament-Religion, than the Reformations made by the Kings
of Israel without or against the Majority of the Priests, could be blemished by
being called the Kings Religion.

A third Prejudice is, that the Persons who governed the Affairs at Court, were
weak or ill Men: that the King being under Age, things were carried by those
who had him in their Power. And for the two great Ministers of that Reign, or
rather the Administrators of it, the Dukes of Somerset and Northumberland, as
their violent and untimely deaths, may seem to be effects of the indignation of
Heaven, for what they did; so they were both eminently faulty in their
Administration, and are supposed to have sought too much their own ends. This
seems to cast a blemish on their Actions, and to give some reason to suspect
the things were not good which had such Instruments to advance them.

But this Prejudice, compounded of many Particulars, when taken to pieces, will
appear of no force to blast the credit of what they did. By our Law, the King
never dies, and is never young nor old, so that the Authority of the King is
the same, whether administered by himself or by his Governors, when he is under
Age: nor are we to judge of Men by the events that befall them. These are the
deepest Secrets of Divine Providence, into which it is impossible for Men of
limited understandings to penetrate: and if we make Judgments of Persons and
Things by accidents, we shall very often most certainly conclude falsely.
Solomon made the Observation, which the Series of Humane Affairs ever since
has fully justified, That there are Just Men to whom it happens according to
the Work of the Wicked; and Wicked Men to whom it happens according to the Work
of the Righteous: and the enquiring into these seemingly unequal steps of Gods
Governing the World, is a vanity. As for the Duke of Northumberland, the
Reformation is not at all concerned in him, for if we believe what he said,
when there was the least reason to suspect him, on the Scaffold, he was all the
while a Papist in his Heart. And so no wonder if such a Man, striking in for
his own ambitious ends, with that which was popular, even against the
persuasions of his Conscience, did very ill things. The Duke of Somerset was
indeed more sincere, and though he was not without his faults, (which we may
safely acknowledge, since the Man of Infallibility is not pretended to be
without sin) yet these were not such heinous transgressions, but rather such as
humane infirmity exposes most Men to, when they are raised to an high
condition. He was too vain, too much addicted to his own Notions, and being a
Man of no extraordinary Parts, he was too much at the disposal of those, who by
flatteries and submissions insinuated themselves into him; and he made too
great have to raise a vast Estate to be altogether innocent: but I never find
him charged with any personal disorders, nor was he ever guilty of falsehood, of
perverting Justice, of Cruelty, or of Oppression. He was so much against the
last of these, that he lost the affections of the Nobility for being so careful
of the Commons, and covering them from the oppression of their Landlords. The
Business of his Brother, though it has a very ill appearance, and is made to
look worse by the lame account our Books give of it, seems to have been forced
on him: for the Admiral was a Man of most incurable ambition, and so inclined
to raise disturbance, that after so many relapses and such frequent
Reconciliations, he still breaking out into new disorders, it became almost
necessary to put him out of a capacity of doing more mischief. But if we
compare the Duke of Somerset with the great Ministers even in the best Courts;
we shall find him better than most of them: and if some few have carried their
Prosperity better, many more even of those who are otherwise recorded for
extraordinary Persons, have been guilty of far greater faults. He who is but a
little acquainted with History, or with the Courts of Princes, must needs know
so much of this Argument, that he will easily cure himself of any ill effects
which this Prejudice may have on him.

A fourth Prejudice is raised from the great Invasions which were then made
upon the Church Lands, and things dedicated to Pious Uses; which is a thing
hated by Men of all Religions, and branded with the odious Names of Sacrilege,
and robbing of God; so that the Spoils of Religious Houses and Churches, seem
to have been the secret Motives that at first drew in, and still engage so many
to the Reformation. This has more weight in it than the former, and therefore
deserves to be more fully considered.

The Light of Nature teaches, that those who are dedicated to the Service of
God, and for instructing the People, ought to be so well provided for, that
they may be delivered from the distractions of Secular Cares, and secured from
the contempt which follows Poverty; and be furnished with such means as may
both enable them to know that well wherein they are to instruct others, and to
gain such an Interest in the affections of those among whom they labor, as
modest Hospitality and liberal Almsgiving may procure. In this all Nations and
Religions have so generally agreed, that it may be well called a Law of
Nations, if not of Nature. Had Churchmen been contented with this measure, it
is very probable things had never run to the other Extreme so much as they have
done. But as the Pope got to himself a great Principality, so the rest of his
Clergy defigned to imitate him in that, as much as was possible: they spared no
pains, nor thought they any Methods too bad, that could set forward these
Projects. The belief of Purgatory, and the redeeming of Souls out of it by
Masses, with many other public Cheats imposed on the World, had brought the
Wealth of this and other Nations into their Hands. Upon the discovery of this
imposture, it was but a reasonable and just proceeding of the Government to
reassume those Lands, and dispose otherwise of them, which had been for most
part fraudulently drawn from the former Ages: for indeed the best part of the
Soil of England, being in such ill Hands, it was the Interest of the whole
Kingdom to have it put to better uses. So that the Abbeys being generally
raised and endowed by the efficacy of those false Opinions, which were infused
into the People, I can see no just exception against the dissolution of them,
with the Chantries, and other Foundations of like superstition; and the fault
was not in taking them away, but in not applying a greater part of them to uses
truly Religious.

But most of these Monasteries had been enriched by that, which was indeed the
Spoil of the Church: for in many Places the Tithes which belonged to the
Secular Clergy were taken from them, and by the Authority of Papal Bulls were
given to the Monasteries. This was the Original of the greatest mischief that
came on this Church at the Reformation: The Abbots having possessed themselves
of the Tithes, and having left to those who served the Cure either some small
Donative or Stipend, and at best the small Tithes or Viccarage, those who
purchased the Abbey-Lands from the Crown in the former Reign, had them with no
other charge reserved for the Incumbents, but that small Pittance that the
Abbots had formerly given them: and this is now a much less allowance, than the
Curates had in the times of Popery: for though they have now the same Right by
their Incumbency that they then had, yet in the time of Superstition, the Fees
of Obits, Exequies, Soul Masses, and such other Perquisites did furnish them so
plentifully, that considering their obligation to remain unmarried, they lived
well, though their certain maintenance was but small: but these things falling
off by the Reformation, which likewise leaves the Clergy at liberty in the
matter of Marriage, this has occasioned much ignorance and scandal among the
Clergy. I shall not enter into the debate about the Divine Right of Tithes,
this I am sure of, a decent maintenance of the Clergy is of natural Right, and
that it is not better looked to, is a public reproach to the whole Nation;
when in all other Religions and Nations, those who serve at the Altar live by
it. The ancient Allowances for the Curates in Market Towns, being generally so
small, because the Number and Wealth of the People made the Perquisites so
considerable, has made those Places to be too often but ill supplied: and what
way this makes for the seducers of all hands, when the Minister is of so mean a
condition, and has so incompetent a Maintenance that he can scarce secure
himself from extreme want, and great contempt, I leave it to every Man to judge.

This is as high a contempt of Religion and the Gospel as any can be, and is
one of those things for which this Nation has much to answer to God; that now
in one hundred and twenty years time, so little has been done by public
Authority for the redress of such a crying oppression. Some private Persons
have done great things this way, but the public has yet done nothing suitable
to the occasion: Though their Neighbor Nation of Scotland, has set them a very
good Example, where, by the great zeal and care of King James, and the late
blessed King, Acts and Orders of Parliament have been made, for examining the
whole state of the Clergy, and for supplying all poor Livings so plentifully,
that in Glebe and Tithes all Benefices are now raised to at least fifty Pounds
Sterling yearly. What greater scorn can be put on Religion, than to provide so
scantly for those that are trusted with the care of Souls, that some hundreds
of Parishes in England pay not Ten Pounds a year to their Pastors, and perhaps
some thousands not Fifty? This is to be numbered among those crying sins that
are bringing down vengeance on us, since by this many Souls are left to perish,
because it is not possible to provide them with faithful and able Shepherds. I
shall not examine all the particular Reasons that have obstructed the redress
of this mischief, but those concerned in it may soon find some of them out in
themselves. And here I acknowledge a great and just prejudice lies against our
Reformation, which no man can fully answer. But how faulty soever we may be in
this Particular, they of the Church of Rome have little reason to object it to
us, since the first and true occasion of it was of their own doing. Our fault
is, that at the dissolution of the Monasteries, restitution was not made to the
Parish Priests of what the Popes had sacrilegiously taken from them. And now
that we are upon the utter extirpation of Popery, let us not retain this
Relic of it. And I pray God to inspire and direct His Majesty and His two
Houses of Parliament effectually to remove this just and, for ought I know,
only great scandal of our English Reformation.

A fifth Prejudice, which seems to give ill impressions of our Reformation, is,
that the Clergy have now no interest in the Consciences of the People, nor any
inspection into their manners; but they are without yoke or restraint. All the
Ancient Canons for the public Penance of scandalous offenders are laid aside,
and our Clergy are so little admitted to know or direct the Lives and Manners
of their Flocks, that many will scarce bear a reproof patiently from them: Our
Ecclesiastical Courts are not in the Hands of the Bishops and their Clergy, but
put over to the Civilians, where too often Fees are more strictly looked after,
than the correction of Manners. I hope there is not cause for so great a Cry,
but so it is, these Courts are much complained of; and public vice and scandal
is but little enquired after, or punished: Excommunication is become a kind of
Secular Sentence, and is hardly now considered as a Spiritual Censure, being
judged and given out by Laymen, and often upon Grounds which, to speak
moderately, do not merit so severe and dreadful a Sentence. There are besides
this a great many other Abuses, brought in in the worst Times, and now purged
out of some of the Churches of the Roman Communion, which yet continue, and are
too much in use among us, such as Pluralities, Non-residencies, and other
things of that nature: so that it may be said, that some of the manifest
corruptions of Popery, where they are recommended by the advantages that
accompany them, are not yet thoroughly purged out, notwithstanding all the noise
we have made about Reformation in matters much more disputable, and of far less
consequence.

This whole Objection, when all acknowledged, as the greatest part of it cannot
be denied, amounts indeed to this, that our Reformation is not yet arrived at
that full perfection, that is to be desired. The want of public Penance, and
Penitentiary Canons, is indeed a very great defect: our Church does not deny
it, but acknowledges it in the Preface to the Office of Commination. It was one
of the greatest Glories of the Primitive Church, that they were so governed,
that none of their number could sin openly without public Censure, and a long
separation from the Holy Communion; which they judged was defiled by a
promiscuous admitting of all Persons to it. Had they consulted the Arts of
Policy, they would not have held in Converts by so strict a way of proceeding,
lest their discontent might have driven them away; at a time when to be a
Christian was attended with so many discouragements, that it might seem
dangerous by so severe a Discipline, to frighten the World out of their
Communion. But the Pastors of that time, resolved to follow the Rules delivered
them by the Apostles, and trusted God with the success, which answered and
exceeded all their expectations: for nothing convinced the World more of the
truth of that Religion, than to see those trusted with the care of Souls, watch
so effectually over their Manners, that for some sins, which in these loose
Ages in which we live, pass but for common effects of humane frailty, Men were
made to abstain from the Communion for many years, and did cheerfully submit to
such Rules as might be truly medicinal for curing those Diseases in their Minds.

But alas! the Churchmen of the latter Ages being once vested with this
Authority, to which the World submitted, as long as it saw the good effects of
it, did soon learn to abuse it; and to bring the People to a blind subjection
to them. It was one of the chief Arts by which the Papacy swelled to its
height: for Confessors in stead of bringing their Penitents to open Penance,
set up other things in the room of it; pretending they could commute it, and in
the Name of God accept of one thing for another: and they accepted of a
Penitents going, either to the Holy War, or which was more Holy of the two, to
one of the Popes Wars against Heretics, or deposed Princes; and gave full
Pardons to those who thus engaged in their designs. Afterward (when the Pope
had no great occasion to kill Men, or the People no great mind to be killed in
his Service) they accepted of Money, as an Alms to God: and so all public
Penance was laid down, and Murder or Merchandise was set up in its room. This
being the state of things at the Keformation, it is no wonder if the People
could not be easily brought to submit to public Penance; which had been for
some Ages entirely laid aside: and there was reason why they should not be
forward to come under the Yoke of their Priests, lest they should have raised
upon that Foundation, such a Tyrannical Dominion over them, as others had
formerly exercised. This made some Reformed Churches beyond Sea bring in the
Laity with them, into their Courts; which if they had done merely as a good
Expedient, for removing the jealousy which the World then had of
Ecclesiastical Tyranny, there was no great Objection to have been made to it;
but they made the thing liable to very great exception, when they pretended a
Divine Institution for those Lay Elders. Here in England, it is plain the
Nation would not bear such Authority to be lodged with the Clergy at first; but
it will appear in the following Work, that a Platform was made of an
Ecclesiastical Discipline, though the Bishops had no hope of reducing it into
practice, till the King should come to be of Age, and pass a Law for the
authorizing of it: but he dying before this was effected, it was not prosecuted
with that zeal that the thing required in Queen Elizabeth's time: and then those
who in their Exile were taken with the Models beyond Seas, contending more to
get it put in the method of other Churches, than to have it set up in any other
Form, that contention begat such heat, that it took Men off from this and many
other excellent designs: and whereas the Presbyters were found to have had
anciently a share in the Government of the Churches, as the Bishops Council and
Assistants, some of them that were of hot tempers demanding more than their
share, they were by the immoderate use of the Counterpoise kept out of any part
of Ecclesiastical Discipline; and all went into those Courts commonly called
the Spiritual Courts; without making distinction between those Causes of
Testaments, Marriages, and such other suits, that require some learning in the
Civil and Canon Law, and the other Causes of the Censures of the Clergy and
Laity, which are of a more Spiritual Nature, and ought indeed to be tried only
by the Bishops and Clergy; for they are no small part of the Care of Souls,
which is incumbent on them: and by them only Excommunications ought to be made,
as being a Suspension from the Sacred Rights of Christians, of which none can
be the competent Judges, but those to whom the charge of Souls is committed.
The worst that can be said of all these Abuses, is, that they are Relics of
Popery, and we owe it to the unhappy Contests among our selves, that a due
correction has not been yet given to them.

From hence one evil has followed, not inferior to these from whence it flows,
that the Pastoral Charge is now looked on by too many, rather as a device only
for instructing People, to which they may submit as much as they think fit,
than as a Care of Souls, as indeed it is: And it is not to be denied but the
practice of not a few of us of the Clergy, has confirmed the People in this
mistake, who consider our Function as a Method of living, by performing Divine
Offices, and making Sermons, rather than as, a watching over the Souls of the
Flocks committed to us, visiting the Sick, reproving scandalous Persons,
reconciling differences, and being strict at least in governing the Poor, whose
necessities will oblige them to submit to any good Rules, we shall set them for
the better conduct of their Lives. In these things does the Pastoral Care
chiefly consist, and not only in the bare performing of Offices, or pronouncing
Sermons, which every one almost may learn to do after some tolerable fashion.
If Men had a just Notion of this Holy Function, and a right sense of it before
they were initiated into it, those scandalous abuses of Plurality of Benefices
with Cure, (except where they are so poor and contiguous, that both can scarce
maintain one Incumbent, and one Man can discharge the duty of both very well)
Non-residencies, and the hiring out that Sacred Trust to pitiful Mercenaries at
the cheapest rates, would soon fall off. These are things of so crying a
nature, that no wonder if the wrath of God is ready to break out upon us. These
are abuses that even the Church of Rome, after all her impudence, is ashamed
of, and are at this day generally discountenanced all France over. Queen Mary
here in England in the time of Popery, set her self effectually to root them
out. And that they should be still found among Protestants, and in so Reformed
a Church, is a scandal that may justly make us blush. All the honest Prelates
at the Council of Trent endeavored to get Residence declared to be of Divine
Right, and so not to be dispensed with upon any consideration whatsoever: and
there is nothing more apparently contrary to the most common impressions, which
all Men have about matters of Religion, than that Benefices are given for the
Office to which they are annexed: and if in matters of Men's Estates, or of
their Health, it would be a thing of high scandal, for one to receive the Fees,
and commit the Work to the care of some inferior or raw Practitioner, how much
worse is it to turn over so important a concernment, as the care of Souls must
be confessed to be, to mean hands? And to conclude, those who are guilty of
such disorders, have much to answer for, both to God, for the neglect of those
Souls for which they are to give an account, and to the World, for the reproach
they have brought on this Church and on the Sacred Functions, by their ill
practices; nor could the divisions of this Age ever have risen to such a
height, if the People had not been possessed with ill impressions of some of
the Clergy, from those inexcusable faults, that are so conspicuous in too many
that are called Shepherds: Who Cloth themselves with the Wool, but have not
fed the Flock, that have not strengthened the diseased, nor Healed the sick,
nor bound up that which was broken, nor brought again that which was driven
away, nor sought that which was lost, but have ruled them with force and
cruelty: And if we would look up to God who is visibly angry with us, and has
made us base and contemptible among the People, we should find great reason to
reflect on those words of Jeremy. The Pastors are become Brutish, and have not
sought the Lord, therefore they shall not prosper, and all their Flocks shall
be scattered.

But I were very unjust if having ventured on so plain and necessary a
reprehension; I should not add, that God has not so left this Age and Church,
but there is in it a great number in both the holy Functions, who are perhaps
as Eminent in the exemplariness of their Lives, and as diligent in their
Labors, as has been in any one Church in any Age since Miracles ceased. The
humility and strictness of Life in many of our Prelates and some that were
highly Born, and yet have far outgone some others from whom more might have
been expected, raises them far above censure, tho perhaps not above envy. And
when such think not the daily instructing their Neighbors a thing below them,
but do it with as constant a care, as if they were to earn their Bread by it,
when they are so affable to the meanest Clergymen that come to them, when they
are so nicely scrupulous about those whom they admit into holy Orders, and so
large in their Charities, that one would think they were furnished with some
unseen ways, these things must raise great esteem for such Bishops, and seem to
give some hopes of better times. Of all this I may be allowed to speak the more
freely, since I am led to it by none of those Bribes, either of gratitude, or
fear, or hope, which are wont to Corrupt men to say what they do not think: But
I were much to blame, if in a Work that may perhaps Live some time in the Word,
I should only find fault with what is amiss, and not also acknowledge what is
so very Commendable and Praiseworthy. And when I look into the Inferior
Clergy, there are, chiefly about this great City of London, so many, so
Eminent, both for the strictness of their Lives, the constancy of their
Labors, their Excellent and plain way of Preaching, (which is now perhaps
brought to as great a Perfection, as ever was since men spoke as they received
it immediately from the Holy Ghost) the great gentleness of their Deportment,
to such as differ from them, their mutual Love and Charity, and in a Word for
all the qualities that can adorn Ministers or Christians, that if such a number
of such Men cannot prevail with this debauched Age, this one thing to me looks
more dismally than all the other affrighting Symptoms of our Condition; that
God having sent so many faithful Teachers, their Labors are still so
ineffectual.

I have now Examin^d all the prejudices that either occur to my thoughts, or
that I have not met with in Books or Discourses, against our Reformation; and I
hope upon a free enquiry into them, it will be found that some of them are of
no force at all, and that the other, which are better Grounded, can amount to
no more than this, that things were not managed with that care, or brought to
that Perfection that were to be desired: so that all the use we ought to make
of these Objections, is to be directed by them, to do those things which may
complete and adorn that Work, which was managed by Men subject to Infirmities,
who neither could see every thing, nor were able to accomplish all that they
had Projected, and saw fit to be done.

But from the matter of the following History, another Objection of another
sort may arise, which tho it has no Relation to the Reformation, yet leaves no
small Imputation on the Nation, as too apt to change, and be carried about with
every Religion in Vogue, since in little more than 20 years time, there were
four great changes made in Religion; and in all these the main Body of the
Nation turned with the Stream: and it was but a small number that stood firm
and suffered for their Consciences. But if the State of the Nation be well
considered, there will be nothing in all this so strange as at first view it
may perhaps appear: for in the times of Popery the People were kept in such
profound ignorance, that they knowing nothing of Religion, beyond the outward
Forms and Pageantry, and being highly dissatisfied with the ill Lives of the
Clergy, and offended with their Cruelty against those that contradicted their
Opinions, it is no wonder that they were inclined to hear Preachers of any
sort, who laid out to them the reasons of the Doctrine they delivered, and did
not impose it on them in gross, as the others had done. These Teachers being
also Men of Innocent tempers, and good Lives, and being recommended to the
Compassion of the Nation, by their sufferings, and to their esteem, by their
zeal and readiness to run all hazards for their Consciences, had great
advantages to gain on the Belief and affections of the People. And to speak
freely I make no doubt, but if the Reformation had been longer a hatching under
the heat of Persecution, it had come forth perfecter than it was. This
disposition of the People, and King Henry's Quarrelling with the Pope, made the
way easy for the first Change: But then the severities about the Supremacy on
one hand, and the six Articles on the other, made People to stagger and reel
between the two Religions. And all People being fond of new things, and the
discoveries of the Impostures of the Priests and lewdness of the Monks,
increasing their dislike of them, it was no wonder the Reformation went on with
so little Tumult and Precipitation till King Edward's time. But tho there were
then very Learned and Zealous Divines, who Managed and carried on the changes
that were made, yet still the greater part of the Clergy was very Ignorant, and
very Corrupt; which was occasioned by the Pensions that were reserved out of
the Rents of the suppressed Monasteries to the Monks during their Lives, or
till they were provided with livings. The Abbey Lands that were sold with the
Charge of these annexed to them, coming into the Hands of Persons who had no
mind to have that Burden lie longer on them, they got these Monks Provided with
Benefices, that so they might be eased of that Charge. And for the other Abbeys
that still remained with the Crown, the same Course was taken: for the Monks
were put into all the small Benefices that were in the Kings gift. So that the
greatest part of the Clergy, were such as had been formerly Monks or Friars,
very Ignorant for most part, and generally addicted to their former
Superstition, tho otherwise Men, that would Comply with any thing rather than
forfeit their Livings. Under such Incumbents nothing but Ignorance and
Vnconcernedness in Religion could prevail. By this means it was that the
greater part of the Nation was not well Instructed, nor Possessed with any
warmth and sincere Love to the Reformation, which made the following change
under Queen Mary more easily effected. The Proceedings in King Edward's time
were likewise so gentle and Moderate, flowing from the calm temper of
Archbishop Cranmer, and the policy of others, who were willing to accept of
any thing they could obtain, hoping that time would do the business, if the
overdriving it did not precipitate the whole affair; that it was an easy thing
for a Concealed Papist to weather the difficulties of that Reign. There were
also great scandals given by the Indiscretion of many of the New Preachers. The
misgovernment of Affairs under the Duke of Somerset, with the restless Ambition
of the Duke of Northumberland did alienate the Nation much from them; and a
great aversion commonly begets an universal dislike of every thing that is done
by those whom we hate.

All these things concurred to prepare the minds of the People to the change
made by Queen Mary: but in her Reign Popery did more plainly discover it self
in the many repeated B^rnings, and the other Cruelties then openly exercised.
The Nation was also in such danger of being brought under the uneasy Yoke of
Spanish Government, and they were many of them in fear of losing their new
gotten Church Lands; These things, together with the loss of Calais in the end
of her Reign, which was Universally much resented as a lasting dishonor to the
Nation, raised in them a far greater aversion to her Government, and to every
thing that had been done in it, than they had to the former. The Genius of the
English leads them to hate Cruelty and Tyranny; and when they saw these were
the necessary Concomitants of Popery, no wonder it was thrown out with so
general an agreement, that there was scarce any considerable Opposition made to
it, except by some few of their Clergy: who having changed so often, were ashamed
of such repeated recantations: and so resolved at last to stand their ground;
which was the more easy to resolve on under so merciful a Prince, who punished
them only by a Forfeiture of their Benefices; and that being done, took care of
their Subsistence for the rest of their Lives: Bonner himself not being
excepted, tho so deeply dyed in the Blood of so many Innocents.

All these things laid together, it will not seem strange that such great
Alterations were so easily brought about in so short a time. But from the days
of Queen Elizabeth that the Old Monks were worn out, and New Men better
Educated were placed in Churches, things did generally put on a new Visage: and
this Church has since that time continued to be the Sanctuary and shelter of
all Foreigners, and the chief Object of the Envy and Hatred of the Popish
Church, and the great Glory of the Reformation; and has wisely avoided the
splitting asunder, on the high Points of the Divine Decrees, which have broken
so many of the Reformed beyond Sea; but in these has left Divines to the
freedom of their several Opinions: nor did she run on that other Rock, of
Defining at first so peremptorily the manner of Christ's Presence in the
Sacrament, which divided the German and the Helvetian Churches, but in that did
also leave a Latitude to Men of different persuasions. From this great temper
it might have reasonably been expected, that we should have continued United at
Home, and then for things Sacred, as well as Civil, we had been out of the
Danger of what all our Foreign Enemies could have Contrived or done against us.

But the Enemy, while the Watchmen slept, sowed his Tares even in this Fruitful
Field; of which it may be expected I should give some Account here, and the
rather because I end this Work at the time when those unhappy differences first
arose; so that I give them no part in this History: and yet I have in the
search I made, seen some things of great Importance, which are very little
known, that give me a clearer light into the beginnings of these Differences
than is commonly to be had; of which I shall discourse so, as becomes one who
has not blindly given himself up to any Party, and is not afraid to speak the
truth even in the most critical matters.

There were many Learned and Pious Divines in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, who being driven beyond Sea had observed the New Modells set
up in Geneva, and other places, for the Censuring of Scandalous Persons, of
mixed Judicatories of the Ministers and Laity: and these reflecting on the
great looseness of Life which had been universally Complained of in King
Edward's time, thought such a Platform might be an Effectual way for keeping
out a return of the like disorders. There were also some few Rites reserved in
this Church, that had been either used in the Primitive Church, or tho brought
in of later time, yet seemed of excellent use to beget Reverence in Holy
Performances: which had also this to be said for them, that the keeping these
still, was done in Imitation of what Christ and his Apostles did in Symbolizing
with the Jewish Rites, to gain the Jews th reby as much as could be; so it was
Judged necessary to preserve these, to let the World see that tho Corruptions
were thrown out, yet the Reformers did not love to change only for change sake,
when it was not otherwise needful: and this they hoped might draw in many, who
otherwise would not so easily have forsaken the Roman Commnaion. Yet these
Divines excepted to those, as Complyances with Popery, and tho they Professed
no great dislike to the Ceremonies themselves, or doubt of their Lawfulness,
yet were they against their Continuance, upon that single Account, which was
indeed the chief reason why they were continued. But all this Debate was
modestly Managed, and without violent Heat or Separation: afterward some of
the Queens Courtiers had an eye to the fair Mannours of some of the greater
Sees, and being otherwise Men of ill Tempers and Lives, and probably of no
Religion, would have persuaded the Queen, that nothing could Unite all the
Reformed Churches so effectually, as to bring the English Church to the Model
beyond Sea, and that it would much Enrich the Crown, if she took the Revenues
of Bishoprics and Cathedrals into her own Hands. This made those on the other
hand who laid to Heart the true Interest of the Protestant Religion, and
therefore endeavored to preserve this Church in that strong and well Modelled
Frame to which it was brought (particularly the Lord Burleigh, the Wisest
Statesman of that Age, and perhaps of any other) study how to Engage the Queen
out of Interest to support it, and they Demonstrated to her that these New
Modells would certainly bring with them a great Abatement of her Prerogative:
since if the Concerns of Religion came into Popular Hands, there would be a
Power set up distinct from hers, over which she could have no Authority.

This she perceived well, and therefore resolved to Maintain the Ancient
Government of the Church, but by this means it became a matter of Interest, and
so these differences which might have been more easily reconciled before, grew
now into formed Factions: so that all Expedients were left unattempted which
might have made up t^^ Breach: And it becoming the Interest of some, to put it
past reconciling, this was too easily effected. Those of the Division finding
they could not carry their main design; raised all the Clamours they could
against the Churchmen; and put in Bills into the Parliament against the abuses
of Pluralities, Non-residences, and the Excesses of the Spiritual Courts. But
the Queen being possessed with this, that the Parliaments meddling in these
matters tended to the lessening of her Authority, of which she was extremely
sensible, got all these Bills to be thrown out. If the abuses that gave such
occasion to the mal-contented to complain, had been effectually redressed, that
Party must have had little to work on: but these things furnished them with new
Complaints still: the Market Towns being also ill provided for, there were
Voluntary Contributions made, for Lectures in these places. The Lecturers were
generally Men that overtopped the Incumbents in diligent and Zealous Preaching,
and they depending on the bounty of the People for their Subsistence, were
engaged to follow the humors of those who Governed those Voluntary
Contributions. All these things tended to the increase of the Party; which owed
its chief growth to the scandalous Maintenance of the Ministers of great Towns,
for which reason they were seldom of great Abilities, and to the scandals given
by the Pluralities and Non-residences of others, that were over-provided. Yet
the Government in Civil matters was so steady all the Queens Reign, that they
could do no great thing, after she once declared her self so openly and
resolutely against them.

But upon King James's coming to the Crown; and the divisions that came to be
afterward in Parliaments, between the too too often named Parties, for the
Court and Country; and Clergymen being linked to the interests of the Crown,
all those who in Civil matters Opposed the designs of the Court, resolved to
cherish those of the Division, under the Color of their being hearty
Protestants, and that it was the interest of the Reformed Religion to use them
well; and that all Protestants should Unite: And indeed the differences between
them were then so small, that if great Art had not been used to keep them
asunder, they had certainly United of their own accord. But the late unhappy
Wars, engaged those who before only complained of Abuses, into a formed
separation, which still continues to the great danger and disgrace of the
Protestant Religion. I shall not make any Observations on latter Transactions
which fall within all Men's View; but it is plain that from the beginning there
have been labored designs to make Tools of the several Parties; and to make a
great breach between them; which lays us now so open to our common Enemy. And
it looks like a sad forerunner of Ruin, when we cannot after so long Experience
of the mischievous Effects of these Contests, learn to be so wise as to avoid
the running on those Rocks, on which our Fathers did so unforutnately split;
but on the contrary many steer as steadily toward them, as if they were the
only safe Harbors, where they may securely weather every Storm.

But being now to lead the Reader into so agreeable a Prospect, as I hope the
Reformation of the Church will be to him, I will hold him yet a little longer
before I open it, and desire him for his better preparation to it to reflect on
the nature of Religion in general, and of the Christian in particular. That
Religion is chiefly designed for perfecting the nature of Man, for improving
his Faculties, governing his Actions, and securing the Peace of every Man's
Conscience, and of the societies of Mankind in common, is a truth so plain,
that without further arguing about it all will agree to it. Every part of
Religion is then to be Judged by its Relation to the main ends of it; And since
the Christian Doctrine was revealed from Heaven, as the most perfect and proper
way that ever was, for the advancing the good of Mankind, nothing can be a part
of this holy Faith but what is proportioned to the end for which it was
designed. And all the additions that have been made to it, since it was first
delivered to the World, are justly to be suspected; especially where it is
manifest at first view that they were intended to serve carnal and secular
ends. What can be reasonably supposed in the Papacy, where the Popes are chosen
by such intrigues, either of the two Crowns, the Nephews of the former Pope, or
the craft of some aspiring men, to entitle them to Infallibility or Universal
Jurisdiction? What can we think of redeeming souls out of Purgatory, or
preserving them from it by tricks, or some mean Pageantry; but that it is a
foul piece of Merchandise? What is to be said of Implicit Obedience, the
Priestly Dominion over Consciences, the keeping the Scriptures out of the
peoples hands, and the Worship of God in a strange Tongue? but that these are
so many Arts to hoodwink the world, and to deliver it up into the hands of the
ambitious Clergy. What can we think of the superstition and idolatry of Images,
and all the other pomp of the Roman Worship? but that by these things the
People are to be kept up in a gross notion of Religion, as a splendid business,
and that the Priests have a trick of saving them, if they will but take care to
humor them, and leave that matter wholly in their hands. And to sum up all,
what can we think of that constellation of Prodigies in the Sacrament of the
Altar, as they pretend to explain it, and all really to no purpose? but that it
is an art to bring the World by whole sale to renounce their reason and sense,
and to have a most wonderful veneration for a sort of men who can with a word
perform the most astonishing thing that ever was.

I should grow too large for a Preface, if I would pursue this Argument as far
as it will go. But if on the other hand we reflect on the true ends of this
holy Religion, we must needs be convinced that we need go no where else out of
this Church to find them; but are completely instructed in all parts of it, and
furnished with all the helps to advance us to that which is indeed the end of
our faith, the salvation of our souls. Here we have the Rules of holy
Obedience, and the Methods of Repentance and Reconciliation for past sins
clearly set before us: we believe all that Doctrine which Christ and his
Apostles delivered, and the Primitive Church received: we have the comfort of
all those Sacraments which Christ instituted, and in the same manner that he
appointed them: All the helps to devotion that the Gospel offers are in every
ones hand. So what can it be that should so extravagantly seduce any who have
been bred up in a Church so well constituted, unless a blind superstition in
their temper, or a desire to get heaven in some easier method than Christ has
appointed, do strangely impose on their understandings, or corrupt their minds.
Indeed the thing is so unaccountable that it looks like a curse from heaven on
those who are given up to it, for their other sins; for an ordinary measure of
Infatuation cannot carry any one so far in folly. And it may be laid down for a
certain Maxim, that such as leave us, have never had a true and well formed
Notion of Religion, or of Christianity in its main and chief Design; but take
things in parcels, and without examining them suffer themselves to be carried
away by some prejudices which only darken weaker Judgments.

But if it is an high and unaccountable folly for any to forsake our Communion,
and go over to those of Rome, it is at the same time an unexcusable weakness in
others who seem full of zeal against Popery, and yet upon some inconsiderable
Objections do depart from the unity of this Body, and form separated Assemblies
and Communions; though they cannot object any thing material either to our
Doctrine or Worship: But the most astonishing part of the wonder is, that in
such differences there should be so little mutual forbearance or gentleness to
be found: and that these should raise such heats as if the substance of
Religion were concerned in them. This is of God, and is a stroke from Heaven on
both sides, for their other sins: We of the Church Communion have trusted too
much to the supports we receive from the Law, we have done our duties too
slightly, and have minded the Care of Souls too little; therefore God to punish
and awaken us has suffered so many of our People to be wrested out of our
hands: and those of the Separation have been too forward to Blood and War, and
thereby have drawn much guilt on themselves, and have been too compliant with
the Leaders of their several Factions, or rather apt to outrun them. It is
plain, God is offended with us all, and therefore we are punished with this
fatal blindness, not to see at this time the things that belong to our peace.

And this leads me to Reflections of another sort, with which I shall conclude
this Preface, which I have now drawn out to a greater length than at first I
intended. It is apparent the Wrath of God hangs over our heads, and is ready to
break out upon us. The Symptoms of our ill condition are as sad as they are
visible: and one of the worst is, that each sort and Party is very ready to
throw the guilt of it off themselves, and cast it on others, with whom they are
displeased: But no man says, What have I done? The Clergy accuse the Laity, and
the Laity condemn the Clergy. Those in the City charge the Country, and the
Country complains of the City: every one finds out somewhat wherein he thinks
he is least concerned, and is willing to fix on that all the Indignation of
Heaven, which, God knows, we our selves have kindled against our selves. It
cannot be denied, since it is so visible, that universally the whole Nation is
corrupted, and that the Gospel has not had those effects among us which might
have been expected, after so long and so free a course as it has had in this
Island. Our wise and worthy Progenitors reformed our Doctrine and Worship; but
we have not reformed our Lives and Manners: what will it avail us to understand
the right Methods of worshipping God, if we are without true Devotion, and
coldly perform public Offices, without sense and affection, which is as bad as
a Bead-roll of Prayers in what ever Language they be pronounced. What signifies
our having the Sacraments purely administered among us, if we either
contemptuously neglect them, or irreverently handle them, more perhaps in
compliance with Law, than out of a sense of the Holy Duties incumbent on us?
for what end are the Scriptures put in our hands, if we do not read them with
great attention, and order our lives according to them? and what does all
preaching signify, if Men go to Church merely for Form, and hear Sermons only
as set Discourses, which they will censure or commend as they think they see
cause, but are resolved never to be the better for them? If to all these sad
Considerations we add the gross sensuality and impurity, that is so avowedly
practiced that it is become a fashion, so far it is from being a reproach; the
oppression, injustice, intemperance, and many other immoralities among us, what
can be expected, but that these abominations receiving the highest aggravation
they are capable of, from the clear light of the Gospel which we have so long
enjoyed, the just Judgments of Heaven, should fall on us so signally, as to
make us a reproach to all our Neighbors. But as if all this were not enough,
to fill up the measure of our iniquities, many have arrived at a new pitch of
Impiety, by defying Heaven it self, with their avowed Blasphemies and Atheism:
and if they are driven out of their Atheistical Tenets which are indeed the
most ridiculous of any in the World, they set up their rest on some general
Notions of Morality and Natural Religion, and do boldly reject all that is
revealed: and where they dare vent it, (alas! where dare they not do it?) they
reject Christianity and the Scriptures, with open and impudent scorn, and are
absolutely insensible of any obligation of Conscience in any thing whatsoever:
and even in that Morality which they for decencies sake magnify so much, none
are more bare-facedly and grossly faulty. This is a direct attempt against God
himself, and can we think that he will not visit for such things, nor be
avenged on such a Nation? And yet the hypocrisy of those who disguise their
flagitious Lives, with a Mask of Religion, is perhaps a degree above all;
though not so scandalous till the Mask falls off, and that they appear to be
what they truly are. When we are all so guilty, and when we are so allarumed by
the black Clouds that threaten such terrible and lasting Storms, what may be
expected but that we should be generally struck with a deep sense of our crying
sins, and turn to God with our whole Souls? But if after all the loud
awakenings from Heaven we will not hearken to that Voice, but will still go on
in our sins, we may justly look for unheard of Calamities, and such miseries as
shall be proportioned to our offenses: and then we are sure they will be great
and wonderful.

Yet if on the other hand there were a general turning to God, or at least if
so many were rightly sensible of this, as, according to the proportion that the
Mercies of God allow, did some way balance the wickedness of the rest, and if
these were as zealous in the true methods of imploring Gods favor, as others
are in procuring his displeasure; and were not only mourning for their own
sins, but for the sins of others; the Prayers and Sighs of many such, might
dissipate that dismal Cloud which our sins have gathered; and we might yet hope
to see the Gospel take root among us: since that God who is the Author of it is
merciful, and full of compassion, and ready to forgive; and this holy Religion
which by his Grace is planted among us is still so dear to him, that if we by
our own unworthiness do not render our selves incapable of so great a Blessing,
we may reasonably hope that he will continue that which at first was by so many
happy concurring Providence brought in, and was by a continued Series of the
same indulgent care advanced by degrees, and at last raised to that pitch of
perfection which few things attain in this World. But this will best appear in
the ensuing History, from which I fear I may have too long detained the Reader.

10. September 1680.
THE CONTENTS OF THIS VOLUME.
BOOK I.
OF the Life and Reign of King Edward the Sixth. Page 1.
BOOK II.
Of the Life and Reign of Queen Mary. Page 233.
BOOK III.
Of the Settlement of the Reformation in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign. Page 373.
COLLECTION OF RECORDS.
King Edwards Journal and Remains. Page 1. Ad Librum Primum. Page 89. Ad Librum
Secundum. Page 239. Ad Librum Tertium. Page 327.
An APPENDIX concerning the Errors and Falsehoods in Sanders's Book of the
English Schism. Page 383.
ERRATA.
PAge 10. Line 22. usual r. unusual. p. 20. l. 15. levy Taxes hand r. heavy
Taxes laid. p. 36. l. 47. after it r. did. p. 31. l. 31. dele of. p. 40. Marg.
l. 7. after In r. Cor. p. 82. l. 43. dele the Marginal Note. Ibid. l. ult. run
used to r. used to run. p. 94. l. 38. for in r. the. p. 136. l. 20. for when r.
where. l. 41. ad Marg. r. Collection Numb. 42. so the Numbers 42, 43, 44, 45.
are for Numb. 43, 44, 45, 46. p. 155. Alesse r. Alesse. p. 166. l. 20. Pactors
r. Pastors. p. 205. Marg. 23. r. 3. p. 219. l. 44. for John r. Richard. p. 220.
l. 7. the same error. p. 237. l. 42. Suffolk r. Sussex. p. 249. l. 21, Ring r.
King. p. 252. l. 1. Sanders r. Sandy. p. 253. l. penult. no r. on. p. 283, 284,
285, 286. r. 267, 268, 269, 270. p. 273. Marg. deserve r. severe, p. 274. Marg.
dele two. p. 275. l. ult. Wales r. Wells. p. 277. l. 28. racked r. raked. p.
304. Marg. considered r. censured. p. 305. l. ult. dele be. p. 307. l. 44.
before where r. Fathers house. l. 49. dele Fathers house. p. 319. Marg. Numb.
24. r. 23. the error in the Number continues to the end of the Book. p. 320 l.
16. before that r. few. l. 46. Anne r. Elizabeth 6th r. 4th. p. 396. l. 44. for
was so r. so was. p. 412. l. 6. for five r. free.

engraved portrait of King Edward VI EDWARDUS SEXTUS ANGLIAE GALLIAE and
HIBERNIAE REX
R: White sculp:
royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE Natus 12 October 1537.
Regnare cepit. 28

Januarij 15^7. Obijt 6.to Julij 1553.

Printed for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in S.t Paul's Church yard.



The Second Part OF THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION OF THE Church of England.
BOOK I. Of the Life and Reign of King Edward the Sixth.
EDward, the Sixth King of England of that Name, 1547.
was the only Son of King Henry the 8th, by his best beloved Queen Jane
Seimour, or St. Maur, Daughter to Sir John Seimour, who was descended from
Roger St. Maur, that married one of the Daughters and Heirs of the Lord
Beauchamp of Hacche. Their Ancestors came into England with William the
Conqueror, and had at several times made themselves considerable by the Noble
Acts they did in the Wars. 1537. Oct. 12. Edward VI. born.
He was born at Hampton Court on the 12th day of October, being St. Edward's
Eve, in the Year 1537. The Queen died on the 14th, say Hall, Stow, Speed, and
Herbert: on the 15th says Hennings: on the 17th, if the Letter of the
Physicians be true in Fullers Church Hist. p. 422. Cott. libr.
and lost his Mother the day after he was born; who died, not by the cruelty of
the Chyrurgeons ripping up her Belly to make way for the Princes Birth, (as
some Writers gave out, to represent King Henry barbarous and cruel in all his
Actions; whose report has been since too easily followed:) but as the Original
Letters that are yet extant, show, she was well delivered of him, and the day
following was taken with a distemper incident to Women in that condition, of
which she died.

He was soon after Christened, the Archbishop of Canterbury, And Christened.
and the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk being his Godfathers, according to his
own Journal, though Hall says the last was only his Godfather when he was
Bishopped; He continued under the charge and care of the Women, till he was six
years old; and then he was put under the Government of Dr. Cox and Mr. Cheek:
The one was to be his Preceptor for his Manners, and the knowledge of
Philosophy and Divinity: The other for the Tongues and Mathematics. And he was
also provided with Masters for the French, and all other things becoming a
Prince, the Heir of so great a Crown.

His disposition.
He gave very early many indications of a good disposition to Learning, and of a
most wonderful probity of mind, and above all, of great respect to Religion,
and every thing relating to it. So that when he was once in one of his childish
diversions, somewhat being to be reached at, that he and his Companions were
too low for, one of them laid on the floor a great Bible that was in the Room,
to step on; which he beholding with indignation, took up the Bible himself, and
gave over his play for that time. He was in all things subject to the Orders
laid down for his Education, and profited so much in Learning, that all about
him conceived great hopes of extraordinary things from him, if he should live:
But such unusual beginnings seemed rather to threaten the too early end of a
Life, that by all appearance was likely to have produced such astonishing
things. He was so forward in his learning, that before he was eight years old
he wrote Latin Letters to his Father, who was a Prince of that stern severity,
that one can hardly think those about his Son durst cheat him by making Letters
for him. He used also at that Age to write both to his Godfather the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and to his Uncle, who was first made Viscount
Beauchamp, as descended from that Family, and soon after Earl of Hartford. It
seems Q. Catherine Parr understood Latin, for he wrote to her also in the same
Language. But the full Character of this young Prince is given us by Cardan,
who writ it after his death, and in Italy, where this Prince was accounted an
Heretic, so that there was nothing to be got or expected by flattering him;
and yet it is so Great, and withal so agreeing in all things to Truth, that as
I shall begin my Collection of Papers at the end of this Volume with his words
in Latin, Collection. Number 1.
so it will be very fit to give them here in English.

Cardanes Character of him.
All the Graces were in him. He had many Tongues when he was yet but a Child:
Together with the English his natural Tongue, he had both Latin and French: nor
was he ignorant, as I hear, of the Greek, Italian, and Spanish, and perhaps
some more. But for the English, French and Latin, he was exact in them; and apt
to learn every thing. Nor was he ignorant of Logic, of the Principles of
natural Philosophy, nor of Music. The sweetness of his temper was such as
became a Mortal, his gravity becoming the Majesty of a King, and his
disposition suitable to his high degree. In sum, that Child was so bred, had
such Parts, was of such expectation, that he looked like a Miracle of a Man.
These things are not spoken Rhetorically, and beyond the truth, but are indeed
short of it. And afterward he adds, He was a marvelous Boy: When I was with
him, he was in the 15th Year of his Age, in which he spoke Latin as politely
and as promptly as I did: He asked me what was the Subject of my Books, de
rerum Varietate, which I had dedicated to him? I answered, That in the first
Chapter I gave the true cause of Comets, which had been long enquired into, but
was never found out before. What is it, said he? I said, it was the concourse
of the light of wandering Stars. He answered, How can that be, since the Stars
move in different Motions? How comes it that the Comets are not soon
dissipated, or do not move after them according to their Motions? To this I
answered, They do move after them, but much quicker than they, by reason of the
different Aspect, as we see in a Crystal, or when a Rainbow rebounds from the
Wall: for a little change makes a great difference of place. But the King said,
How can that be, where there is no Subject to receive that Light, as the Wall
is the Subject for the Rainbow? To this I answered, That this was as in the
Milky-way, or where many Candles were lighted, the middle place where their
shining met was white and clear. From this little taste it may be imagined what
he was. And indeed the ingenuity and sweetness of his disposition had raised in
all good and learned Men the greatest expectation of him possible. He began to
love the Liberal Arts before he knew them, and to know them before he could use
them: and in him there was such an attempt of Nature, that not only England,
but the World has reason to lament his being so early snatched away. How truly
was it said of such extraordinary Persons, That their Lives are short, and
seldom do they come to be old? He gave us an Essay of Virtue, though he did not
live to give a Pattern of it. When the gravity of a King was needful, he
carried himself like an Old Man; and yet he was always affable and gentle, as
became his Age. He played on the Lute: he meddled in Affairs of State: and for
Bounty, he did in that emulate his Father; though he even, when he endeavored
to be too good, might appear to have been bad: but there was no ground of
suspecting any such thing in the Son, whose mind was cultivated by the study of
Philosophy.

It has been said in the end of his Fathers Life, A desi^n to create him Prince
of Wales.
that he then designed to create him Prince of Wales: For though he was called
so, as the Heirs of this Crown are, yet he was not by a formal Creation
invested with that dignity. This pretense was made use of to hasten forward the
Attainder of the Duke of Norfolk; since he had many Offices for life, which the
King intended to dispose of; and desired to have them speedily filled, in order
to the creating of his Son Prince of Wales. King Henry dies.
In the mean time his Father died, and the Earl of Hartford, and Sir Anthony
Brown, were sent by the Council to give him notice of it, being then at
Hartford, and to bring him to the Tower of London; and having brought him to
Enfield, with his Sister the Lady Elizabeth, they let him know of his Fathers
death, and that he was now their King: On the 31st of January Jan. 31.
the Kings Death was published in London, and he Proclaimed King.

At the Tower, his Fathers Executors, King Edward came to the Tower.
with the rest of the Privy Council, received him with the respects due to
their King: So tempering their sorrow for the death of their late Master, with
their joy for his Sons happy succeeding him; that by an excess of joy they
might not seem to have forgot the one so soon, nor to bode ill to the other by
an extreme grief. The first thing they did, was the opening King Henry's Will:
King Henry's Will opened.
by which they found he had nominated sixteen Persons to be his Executors, and
Governors to his Son, and to the Kingdom, till his Son was eighteen years of
age. These were the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Wriothesley Lord
Chancellor, the Lord St. John Great Master, the Lord Russel Lord Privy Seal,
the Earl of Hartford Lord Great Chamberlain, the Viscount Lisle Lord Admiral,
Tonstall Bishop of Duresme, Sir Anthony Brown Master of the Horse, Sir William
Paget Secretary of State, Sir Edward North Chancellor of the Court of
Augmentations, Sir Edward Montague Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
Judge Bromley, Sir Anthony Denny, and Sir William Herbert Chief Gentlemen of
the Privy-Chamber, Sir Edward Wotton Treasurer of Callice, and Dr. Wotton Dean
of Canterbury and York. These, or the major part of them, were to execute his
Will, and to administer the Affairs of the Kingdom. By their consent, were the
King, and his Sisters, to be disposed of in Marriage. But with this difference,
that it was only ordered, That the King should marry by their Advice; but the
two Sisters were so limited in their Marriage, that they were to forfeit their
Right of Succession, if they married without their consent: it being of far
greater importance to the Peace and Interest of the Nation who should be their
Husbands, if the Crown did devolve on them, than who should be the Kings Wife.
And by the Act passed in the 35th Year of King Henry, he was empowered to leave
the Crown to them, with what limitations he should think fit. To the Executors,
the King added by his Will, a Privy Council who should be assisting to them.
These were, the Earls of Arundel, and Essex, Sir Thom. Cheyney Treasurer of the
Household, Sir John Gage Comptroller, Sir Anthony Wingfield Vice-Chamberlain,
Sir William Petre Secretary of State, Sir Richard Rich, Sir John Baker, Sir
Ralph Sadler, Sir Thom. Seimour, Sir Richard Sowthwell, and Sir Edmund Peckham.
The King also ordered, That if any of the Executors should die, the Survivors,
without giving them a Power of substituting others, should continue to
administer Affairs. He also charged them to pay all his Debts, and the Legacies
he left, and to perfect any Grants he had begun, and to make good every thing
that he had promised. The Will being opened and read, all the Executors, Judge
Bromley and the two Wottons only excepted, were present, and did resolve to
execute the Will in all points, and to take an Oath for their faithful
discharge of that Trust.

Debate about choosing a Protector.
But it was also proposed, That for the speedier dispatch of things, and for a
more certain order and direction of all Affairs, there should be one chosen to
be Head of the rest, to whom Ambassadors and others might address themselves.
It was added to caution this, That the Person to be raised to that Dignity,
should do nothing of any sort without the Advice and Consent of the greater
part of the rest. But this was opposed by the Lord Chancellor, who thought
that the Dignity of his Office, setting him next the Archbishop of Canterbury,
who did not much follow Secular Affairs, he should have the chief stroke in the
Government; therefore he pressed, That they might not depart from the Kings
Will in any particular, neither by adding to it, nor taking from it. It was
plain, the late King intended they should be all alike in the Administration,
and the raising one to a Title or Degree above the rest was a great change from
what he had ordered. And whereas it was now said, that the Person to be thus
nominated was to have no manner of Power over the rest, that was only to exalt
him into an high Dignity with the less envy or apprehension of danger; for it
was certain great Titles always make way for high Power. But the Earl of
Hartford had so great a Party among them, that it was agreed to, the Lord
Chancellor himself consenting when he saw his opposition was without effect,
The Earl of Hartford chosen.
that one should be raised over the rest in Title to be called the Protector of
the Kings Realms, and the Governor of his Person: The next Point held no long
debate, who should be nominated to this high Trust; for they unanimously
agreed, That the Earl of Hartford, by reason of his nearness of Blood to the
King, and the great experience he had in Affairs, was the fittest Person. So he
was declared Protector of the Realm, and Governor to the Kings Person; but
with that special and express Condition, that he should not do any Act but by
the Advice and Consent of the other Executors, according to the Will of the
late King. Then they all went to take their Oaths, but it was proposed, that it
should be delayed till the next day, that so they might do it upon better
consideration. More was not done that day, save that the Lord Chancellor was
ordered to deliver up the Seals to the King, and to receive them again from his
Hands; for King Henry's Seal was to be made use of, either till a new one was
made, or till the King was Crowned: He was also ordered to renew the
Commissions of the Judges, the Justices of Peace, the Presidents of the North,
and of Wales, and of some other Officers. This was the issue of the first
Council-day under this King: In which, the so easy advancement of the Earl of
Hartford to so high a Dignity gave great occasion to censure: it seeming to be
a change of what King Henry had designed. But the Kings great kindness to his
Uncle made it pass so smoothly; For the rest of the Executors, not being of the
Ancient Nobility, but Courtiers, were drawn in easily to comply with that which
was so acceptable to their young King. Only the Lord Chancellor, who had
chiefly opposed it, was to expect small favor at the new Protectors hands. It
was soon apparent what emulation there was between them. And the Nation being
then divided, between those who loved the old Superstition, and those who
desired a more complete Reformation; The Protector set himself at the Head of
the one, and the Lord Chancellor at the Head of the other Party.

The next day the Executors met again, Which is declared in Council.
and first took their Oaths most solemnly for their faithful executing the
Will. They also ordered all those who were by the late King named
Privy-Councellors to come into the Kings Presence, and there they declared to
the King the choice they had made of his Uncle; who gave his Assent to it. It
was also signified to the Lords of the Council, who likewise with one voice
gave their Consent to it. And Dispatches were ordered to be sent to the
Emperor, the French King, and the Regent of Flanders, giving notice of the
Kings Death, and of the Constitution of the Council, and the Nomination of the
Protector during the Minority of their young King. All Dispatches were ordered
to be Signed only by the Protector; and all the Temporal Lords, with all the
Bishops about the Town, were commanded to come and swear Allegiance to the
King. On the 2d of Feb. Feb. 2.
the Protector was declared Lord Treasurer, and Earl Marshal, these Places
having been designed for him by the late King upon the Duke of Norfolks
Attainder. Letters were also sent to Callice, Bulloigne, Ireland, the Marches
of Scotland, and most of the Counties of England, giving notice of the Kings
Succession, and of the order now settled. The Will was also ordered to be
Enrolled, and every of the Executors was to have an Exemplification of it under
the Great Seal: and the Clerks of Council were also ordered to give to every of
them an account of all things done in Council under their Hands and Seals. The
Bishops take out Commissions for their Bishoprics.
And the Bishops were required to take out new Commissions of the same form
with those they had taken out in King Henry's time, (for which see Page 267. of
the former Part;) only with this difference, That there is no mention made of a
Vicar General in these Commissions, as was in the former, there being none
after Cromwell advanced to that Dignity. Two of these Commissions are yet
extant, one taken out by Cranmer, the other taken out by Bonner. But this was
only done by reason of the present juncture, because the Bishops being
generally addicted to the former Superstition, it was thought necessary to keep
them under so arbitrary a Power as that subjected them to; for they hereby held
their Bishoprics only during the Kings pleasure, and were to exercise them as
his Delegates in his Name, and by his Authority. Cranmer set an Example to the
rest, Collection Number 2.
and took out his Commission, which is in the Collection. But this was
afterward judged too heavy a Yoke, and therefore the new Bishops that were
made by this King were not put under it; (and so Ridley, when made Bishop of
London in Bonners room, was not required to take out any such Commission;) but
they were to hold their Bishoprics during life.

The reason of the new Creation of many Noblemen.
There was a Clause in the Kings Will, requiring his Executors to make good all
that he had promised in any manner of ways. Whereupon Sir William Paget, Sir
Anthony Denny, and Sir William Herbert, were required to declare what they knew
of the Kings Intentions and Promises; the former being the Secretary whom he
had trusted most, and the other two those that attended on him in his
Bedchamber during his sickness; though they were called Gentlemen of the
Privy-Chamber; for the Service of the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber was not then
set up. Paget declared, That when the Evidence appeared against the Duke of
Norfolk, and his Son the Earl of Surrey, the King, who used to talk often in
private with him alone, told him, that he intended to bestow their Lands
liberally: and since by Attainders, and other ways, the Nobility were much
decayed, he intended to create some Peers; and ordered him to write a Book of
such as he thought meetest: who thereupon proposed the Earl of Hartford to be a
Duke; the Earl of Essex to be a Marquess; the Viscount Lisle to be an Earl; the
Lords St. John, Russel, and Wriothesley, to be Earls; and Sir Tho. Seimour, Sir
Thom. Cheyney, Sir Richard Rich, Sir William Willoughby, Sir Tho. Arundel, Sir
Edmund Sheffield, Sir Jo. St. Leiger, Sir (...); Wymbish, Sir (...) Vernon of
the Peak, and Sir Christopher Danby, to be Barons. Paget also proposed a
distribution of the Duke of Norfolk's Estate. But the King liked it not, and
made Mr. Gates bring him the Books of that Estate; which being done, he ordered
Paget to tot upon the Earl of Hartford (these are the words of his Deposition)
a Thousand Merks; on the Lord Lisle, St. John, and Russel, 200 Pounds a year;
to the Lord Wriothesley 100; and for Sir Tho. Seimour 300 Pounds a year. But
Paget said it was too little, and stood long arguing it with him: yet the King
ordered him to propose it to the Persons concerned, and see how they liked it.
And he putting the King in mind of Denny, who had been often a Suitor for him,
but he had never yet in lieu of that obtained any thing for Denny, the King
ordered 200 Pounds for him, and 400 Marks for Sir William Herbert, and
remembered some others likewise. But Paget having, according to the Kings
Commands, spoken to these who were to be advanced, found that many of them
desired to continue in their former Ranks, and thought the Lands the King
intended to give were not sufficient for the maintenance of the Honor to be
conferred on them: which he reported to the best advantage he could for every
Man, and endeavored to raise the Kings favor to them as high as he could. But
while this was in consultation, the Duke of Norfolk, very prudently
apprehending the ruin of his Posterity, if his Lands were divided into many
Hands, out of which he could not so easily recover them; whereas if they
continued in the Crown, some turn of Affairs might again establish his Family;
and intending also to oblige the King by so unusual a Complement, sent a desire
to him that he would be pleased to settle all his Lands on the Prince, (the now
King) and not give them away: for, said he, according to the Phrase of that
Time, They are good and stately Gear. This wrought so far on the King, that he
resolved to reserve them for himself, and to reward his Servants some other
way. Whereupon Paget pressed him once to resolve on the Honors he would
bestow, and what he would give with them, and they should afterward consider
of the way how to give it. The King growing still worse, said to him, That if
ought came to him but good, as he thought he could not long endure, he intended
to place them all about his Son, as Men whom he trusted and loved above all
other: and that therefore he would consider them the more. So after many
Consultations he ordered the Book to be thus filled up, The Earl of Hartford to
be Earl Marshal, and Lord Treasurer, and to be Duke of Somerset, Exeter, or
Hartford, and his Son to be Earl of Wiltshire, with 800 l. a year of Land, and
300 l. a year out of the next Bishops Land that fell void; the Earl of Essex to
be Marquess of Essex; the Viscount Lisle to be Earl of Coventry; the Lord
Wriothesly to be Earl of Winchester; Sir Tho. Seimour to be a Baron and Lord
Admiral; Sir Richard Rich, Sir Jo. St. Leiger, Sir William Willoughby, Sir Ed.
Sheffield, and Sir Christopher Danby, to be Barons; with yearly Revenues to
them, and several other Persons. And having at the Suit of Sir Edw. North
promised to give the Earl of Hartford six of the best Prebends that should fall
in any Cathedral, except Deanries and Treasurerships; at his suit he agreed,
that a Deanery and a Treasurership should be in stead of two of the six
Prebendaries. And thus all this being written as the King had ordered it, the
King took the Book and put it in his Pocket, and gave the Secretary order to
let every one know what he had determined for them. But before these things
took effect the King died. Yet being on his Deathbed put in mind of what he
had promised, he ordered it to be put in his Will, that his Executors should
perform every thing that should appear to have been promised by him. All this
Denny and Herbert confirmed, for they then waited in his Chamber; and when the
Secretary went out, the King told them the substance of what had passed between
them, and made Denny read the Book over again to him; whereupon Herbert
observed that the Secretary had remembered all but himself; to which the King
answered, He should not forget him, and ordered Denny to write 400 l. a year
for him. All these things being thus declared upon Oath, and the greatest part
of them having been formerly signified to some of them, and the whole matter
being well known and spread abroad, the Executors, both out of Conscience to
the Kings Will, and for their own Honors, resolved to fulfill what the King had
intended, but was hindered by death to accomplish. But being apprehensive both
of Wars with the Emperor and French King, they resolved not to lessen the
Kings Treasure nor Revenue, nor to sell his Jewels or Plate, but to find some
other ways to pay them; and this put them afterward on selling the Chantry
Lands.

The Affairs of Scotland.
The business of Scotland was then so pressing, that Balnaves, who was Agent for
those that had shut themselves within the Castle of St. Andrews, had this day
1180 l. ordered to be carried to them for an half years pay to the Soldiers of
that Garrison: There were also Pensions appointed for the most leading Men in
that Business. The Earl of Rothes eldest Son had 280 Pound, Sir James Kircaldy
had 200, and many others had smaller Pensions allowed them, for their amity, as
it is expressed in the Council Books. 1547. Feb. 6. the King Knighted.
That day the Lord Protector Knighted the King, being authorized to do it by
Letters Pattents. So it seems, that as the Laws of Chivalry required that the
King should receive Knighthood from the Hand of some other Knight; so it was
judged too great a presumption for his own Subject to give it, without a
Warrant under the Great Seal. The King at the same time Knighted Sir John
Hublethorn the Lord Major of London. When it was known abroad what a
distribution of Honor and Wealth the Council had resolved on, it was much
censured: many saying, that it was not enough for them to have drained the dead
King of all his Treasure, but that the first step of their proceedings in their
new Trust was to provide Honor and Estates for themselves; whereas it had been
a more decent way for them to have reserved their Pretensions till the King had
come to be of Age. Another thing in the Attestations seemed much to lessen the
credit of the Kings Will, which was said to be Signed the 30th of December. and
so did bear date: whereas this Narration insinuates, that it was made a very
little while before he died, not being able to accomplish his design in these
things which he had projected: but it was well known that he was not so ill on
the 30th of December.

Secular Men had their Ecclesiastical Dignities.
It may perhaps seem strange, that the Earl of Hartford had six good Prebends
promised him; two of these being afterward converted into a Deanery and a
Treasurership. But it was ordinary at that time. The Lord Cromwell had been
Dean of Wells; and many other Secular Men had these Ecclesiastical Benefices
without Cure conferred on them. For which, there being no charge of Souls
annexed to them, this might seem to be an excuse. Yet even those had a sacred
charge incumbent on them in the Cathedrals; and were just and necessary
encouragements, either for such as by Age or other defects were not fit for a
Parochial Charge, and yet might be otherwise capable to do eminent service in
the Church; or for the support of such as in their Parochial labors did serve
so well as to merit preferment, and yet perhaps were so meanly provided for as
to need some farther help for their subsistence. But certainly they were never
intended for the enriching of such lazy and sensual Men, who having given
themselves up to a secular course of life, had little of a Churchman but the
Habit and Name; and yet used to rail against Sacrilege in others, not
considering how guilty themselves were of the same crime, enriching their
Families with the Spoils of the Church, or with the Goods of it, which were put
into their Hands for better uses. And it was no wonder that when Clergymen had
thus abused these Endowments, Secular Men broke in upon them: observing
plainly, that the Clergy who enjoyed them made no better use of them than
Laics might do. Though in stead of reforming an abuse that was so generally
spread, they, like Men that minded nothing more than the enriching of
themselves, took a certain course to make the mischief perpetual, by robbing
the Church of those Endowments and Helps it had received from the Munificence
of the Founders of its Cathedrals, who were generally the first Christian Kings
of this Nation; which had it been done by Law would have been a thing of very
bad consequence; but as it was done, was directly contrary to the Magna Charta,
and to the Kings Coronation Oath.

But now they that were weary of the Popish Superstitions observing that
Archbishop Cranmer had so great a share of the young Kings affection, and that
the Protector and he were in the same Interests, began to call for a further
Reformation of Religion; and some were so full of zeal for it, that they would
not wait on the slow motions of the State. Images removed without Authority out
of one Church in London.
So the Curate and Churchwardens of St. Martins in Ironmonger-lane in London,
took down the Images and Pictures of the Saints, and the Crucifix out of their
Church, and painted many Texts of Scripture on the Walls; some of them
according to a perverse Translation, as the Complaint has it; and in the place
where the Crucifix was, they set up the Kings Arms with some Texts of Scripture
about it. Upon this the Bishop and Lord-Major of London complained to the
Council. And the Curate and Churchwardens being cited to appear, answered for
themselves, That the Roof of their Church being bad, they had taken it down,
and that the Crucifix and Images were so rotten, that when they removed them
they fell to powder: That the charge they had been at in repairing their Church
was such, that they could not buy new Images: That they had taken down the
Images in the Chancel, because some had been guilty of Idolatry toward them.
In conclusion, they said, what they had done was with a good intention; and if
they had in any thing done amiss, they asked pardon, and submitted themselves.
Some were for punishing them severely; for all the Papists reckoned that this
would be a leading Case to all the rest of this Reign: and if this was easily
passed over, others would be from that remisness animated to attempt such
things every where. But on the other hand, those at Court who had designed to
set forward a Reformation, had a mind only so far to check the heat of the
People, as to keep it within compass, but not to dishearten their Friends too
much. Cranmer and his Party were for a general removing of all Images; and said
that in the late Kings time order being given to remove such as were abused to
Superstition; Upon that there were great Contests in many Places what Images
had been so abused, and what not; and that these Disputes would be endless
unless all were taken away.

In the purest Times of Christianity they had no Images at all in their
Churches. One of the first Councils, namely that at Elvira in Spain, An account
of the Progress of Image Worship.
made a Canon against the painting what they worshipped on the Walls. Epiphanius
was highly offended when he saw a Vail hanging before the door of a Church with
a Picture on it, which he considered so little as not to know well whose
Picture it was, but thought it might be Christ's, or some other Saints; yet he
tore it, and gave them of that Place Money to buy a new Vail in its room.
Afterward, with the rest of the pomp of Heathenism, Images came to be set up
in Churches; yet so as that there was no sort of Worship paid to them. But in
the time of Pope Gregory the first, many went into extremes about them; some
were for breaking them, and others worshipped them; That Pope thought the middle
way best, neither to break, nor to worship them, but to keep them only to put
the People in mind of the Saints. Afterward there being subtle Questions
started about the Unity of Christ's Person and Will, the Greek Emperors
generally inclined to have the animosities raised by these, removed by some
comprehensive words to which all might consent: which the Interest of State as
well as Religion seemed to require; for their Empire every day declining, all
methods for uniting it were thought good and prudent. But the Bishops were
stiff and peremptory: So in the sixth general Council they condemned all who
differed from them. Upon this the Emperors that succeeded would not receive
that Council, but the Bishops of Rome ordered the Pictures of all the Bishops
who had been at that Council to be set up in the Churches: Upon which the
Emperors contended against these or any Pictures whatsoever in Churches. And
herein that happened which is not usual, that one Controversy rising
occasionally out of another, the Parties forsake the first Contest, and fall
into sharp Conflicts about the occasional differences. For now the Emperors
and Popes quarrelled most violently about the use of Images, and ill Names
going a great way tomards the defaming an Opinion, the Popes and their Party
accused all that were against Images, as favoring Judaism, or Mahometanism,
which was then much spread in Asia and Africa: The Emperors and their Party
accusing the others of Gentilism and Heathenish Idolatry. Upon this occasion
Gregory the third first assumed the Rebellious Pretension to a Power to depose
Leo the Emperor from all his Dominions in Italy. There was one General Council
at Constantinople that condemned the use or worship of Images; and soon after
another at Nice did establish it: and yet at the same time Charles the Great,
though not a little linked in Interest to the Bishops of Rome, holding both the
French and Imperial Crowns by the favor of the Popes, wrote, or employed
Alcuinus (a most learned Countryman of ours as these times went) to write in
his Name against the Worship of Images. And in a Council at Frankfort it was
condemned, which was also done afterward in another Council at Paris. But in
such Ages of Ignorance and Superstition any thing that wrought so much on the
senses and imaginations of the People was sure to prevail in conclusion. And
this had in a Course of seven more Ages been improved by the craft and
impostures of the Monks, so wonderfully, that there was no sign of Divine
Adoration that could be invented that was not applied to these Images. So in
King Henry's time that temper was found that such Images as had been abused to
Superstition should be removed; and for other Images external Worship, such as
kneeling, censing, and praying before them, was kept up, but the People were to
be taught that these were not at all intended to the Image, but to that which
was represented by it. And upon this there was much subtle arguing. Among
Cranmers Papers I have seen several Arguments for a moderate use of Images. But
to all these they opposed the second Commandment as plainly forbidding all
visible Objects of Adoration, together with what was in the Scriptures against
the Idolatry of the Heathens, and what the Fathers had written against the
Gentiles. And they added, that how excusable soever that practice might have
been in such dark and barbarous Ages in which the People knew little more of
Divine Matters than what they learned from their Images, yet the horrible
abuses that followed on the bringing them into Churches, made it necessary now
to throw them all out. It was notorious that the People every where doted on
them, and gave them Divine Honor: Nor did the Clergy, who were generally too
guilty themselves of such abuses, teach them how to distinguish aright: and the
Acts of Worship that were allowed, were such, that beside the scandal such
Worship had in it, and the danger of drawing People into Idolatry, it was in it
self inexcusable to offer up such external parts of Religious Adoration to Gold
or Silver, Wood or Stone. So Cranmer and others, being resolved to purge the
Church of this abuse, got the worst part of the Sentence that some had designed
against the Curate and Churchwardens, to be mitigated into a Reprimend; and as
it is entered in the Council Books, In respect of their submission, and of some
other Reasons which did mitigate their offense, (These were Cranmers Arguments
against Images) they did pardon their Imprisonment, which was at first
determined, and ordered them to provide a Crucifix, or at least some painting
of it till one were ready, and to beware of such rashness for the future. But
no mention is made of the other Images.

The carriage of the Council in this matter discovering the inclinations of the
greatest part of them, Many begin to pull down Images,
and Dr. Ridley having in his Lent-Sermon preached against the Superstition
that was generally had to Images and Holy Water, it raised a great heat over
England: So that Gardener hearing that on May Day the People of Portsmouth had
removed and broken the Images of Christ and the Saints, writ about it with
great warmth to one Captain Vaughan, that waited on the Protector, and was then
at Portsmouth. He desired to know whether he should send one to preach against
it; though he thought that was the casting Precious Stones to Hogs, or worse
than Hogs, as were these Lollards. He said that Luther had set out a Book
against those who removed Images, At which Gardener is much offended.
and himself had seen them still in the Lutheran Churches: and he thought the
removing Images was on design to subvert Religion and the state of the World:
he argues for them from the Kings Image on the Seal, Caesar's Image on the Coin
brought to Christ, the Kings Arms carried by the Heralds: he condemns false
Images; but for those that were against true Images, he thought they were
possessed with the Devil. Vaughan sent his Letter to the Protector, with one from
Gardener to himself, who finding the reasoning in it not so strong but that it
might be answered, wrote to him himself, That he allowed of his zeal against
Innovations, The Protector writ to him about it. The Letters are in Fox's Acts
and Monuments.
but that there were other things that needed to be looked to as much. Great
difference there was between the Civil respect due to the Kings Arms, and the
Worship given to Images. There had been a time in which the abuse of the
Scriptures was thought a good reason to take them from the People, yea and to
burn them: though he looked on them as more sacred than Images; which if they
stood merely as Remembrancers, he thought the hurt was not great; but it was
known that for the most part it was otherwise: and upon abuse the Brazen
Serpent was broken, though made at Gods Commandment: and it being pretended
that they were the Books of the People, he thought the Bible a much more
intelligible and useful Book. There were some too rash, and others too
obstinate. The Magistrate was to steer a middle Course between them; not
considering the Antiquity of things so much, as what was good and expedient.
Gardener writ again to the Protector, complaining of Bale and others, who
published Books to the dishonor of the late King; and that all were running
after Novelties; and often inculcates it, that things should be kept in the
state they were in, till the King were of Age: and in his Letters reflects both
on the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Bishop of Duresme for consenting to
such things.

Gardener writ to Ridley who had preached against Images.
But finding his Letters had no effect on the Protector, he wrote to Ridley:
That by the Law of Moses we were no more bound not to have Images than not to
eat Blood-Puddings. Image and Idol might have been used promiscuously in former
times, as King and Tyrant were; yet there was a great difference between these,
according to the Notions we now have. He cites Pope Gregory who was against
both adoring and breaking them: and says the Worship is not given to the Image,
so there is no Idolatry but to him represented by it: and as the sound of
Speech did by the Ear beget Notions in us, so he did not see but the sight of
an Image might stir up devotion. He confessed there had been abuses, as there
is in every thing that is in Men's Hands: he thinks Imagery, and Graving, to be
of as good use for instruction, as Writing or Printing: and because Ridley had
also preached against the Superstition of Holy Water to drive away Devils, he
added, That a Virtue might be in Water, as well as in Christ's Garment, St.
Peter's Shadow, or Elisha's Staff. Pope Marcellus ordered Equitius to use it,
and the late King used to bless Cramp-Rings both of Gold and Silver, which were
much esteemed every where, and when he was abroad they were often desired from
him. This Gift he hoped the young King would not neglect. He believed the
Invocation of the Name of God might give such a Virtue to Holy Water as well as
to the Water of Baptism. For Ridley's Answer to this, I never saw it; so these
things must here pass without any Reply: though it is very probable an ordinary
Reader will with a very small measure of common Sense and Learning, see how
they might have been answered. The thing most remarkable here is about these
Cramp-Rings which King Henry used to bless, of which I never met with any thing
before I saw this Letter; but since I understand the Office of Blessing of
these Rings is extant, as it was prepared for Queen Mary's use, as shall be
told in her Reign: It must be left to conjecture whether he did it as a
practice of former Kings, or whether upon his being made Supreme Head, he
thought fit to take on him, as the Pope did, to consecrate such things, and
send them about. Where to be sure Fancy and Flattery would raise many Stories
of the wonderful effects of what he had so blessed; and perhaps these might
have been as true as the Reports made of the Virtues of Agnus Deis, touched
Beads, blessed Peebles, with such other goodly Ware which the Friars were wont
to carry about and distribute to their Benefactors as things highly sanctified.
This I set down more fully, and have laid some things together that fell not
out till some months after this, being the first step that was made toward a
Reformation in this Reign.

Upon this occasion it is not unlikely that the Council wrote their Lette^s to
all the Justices of Peace of England, 1547. Feb. 12. The Commission of the
Justices of the Peace.
on the 12th of Feb. letting them know, that they had sent down new Commissions
to them for keeping the Peace: ordering them to assemble together, and first to
call earnestly on God for his Grace to discharge their Duties faithfully
according to the Oaths which they were to take: and that they should
impartially, without corruption, or sinister affection, execute their Office,
so that it might appear that they had God and the good of their King and
Country before their Eyes: and that they should divide themselves into the
several Hundreds, and see to the public Peace: and that all Vagabonds and
disturbers of the Peace should be duly punished; and that once every six weeks
they should write to the Lord Protector and Council the state in which the
County was, till they were otherwise commanded. That which was sent into the
County of Norfolk will be found in the Collection. Collection Number 3.


But now the Funeral of the deceased King, and the Coronation of his Son were
to be dispatched. In the Coronation-Ceremonies that had been formerly used,
there were some things that did not agree with the present Laws of the Land: as
the Promise made to the Abbots for maintaining their Lands and Dignities: They
were also so tedious, that a new Form was ordered to be drawn, which the Reader
will find in the Collection. The most material thing in it is the first
Ceremony, Collection Number 4.
whereby, the King being showed to the People at the four Corners of the Stage,
the Archbishop was to demand their Consent to it: and yet in such terms as
should demonstrate he was no Elective Prince; for he being declared the
rightful and undoubted Heir both by the Laws of God and Man, they were desired
to give their good Wills and Assents to the same, as by their Duty of
Allegiance they were bound to do. This being agreed on the 13th of Feb. on the
day following King Henry's Body was with all the pomp of a Royal Funeral
removed to Sheen in the way to Windsor. 1547. Feb. 13. King Henry buried.
There great observation was made on a thing that was no extraordinary matter:
He had been extreme corpulent, and dying of a Dropsy, or some thing like it,
it was no wonder if a fortnight after, upon so long a motion, some putrid
Matter might run thorough the Coffin. But Sheen having been a House of
Religious Women, it was called a signal Mark of the displeasure of Heaven, that
some of his Blood and Fat droped through the Lead in the night: and to make
this work mightily on weak People, it was said, that the Dogs licked it next
morning. This was much magnified in Commendation of Friar Peto, afterward made
Cardinal, who (as was told Page 151. of the former Part) had threatened him in a
Sermon at Greenwich, That the Dogs should lick his Blood. Though to consider
things more equally, it had been a Wonder indeed if it had been otherwise. But
having met with this Observation in a MS. written near that time, I would not
envy the World the Pleasure of it. Next day he was brought to Windsor, and
interred in St. George's Chapel. And he having by his Will left that Church
600 l. a year for ever for two Priests to say Mass at his Tomb daily, for four
Obits yearly, and a Sermon at every Obit, with 10 l. to the Poor, and for a
Sermon every Sunday, together with the maintenance of thirteen poor Knights;
The Judges were consulted how this should be well settled in Law. Who advised
that the Lands which the King had given, should be made over to that College
by Indentures Tripartite, the King being one Party, the Protector and the other
Executors a second, and the Dean and Chapter of Windsor a third Party. These
were to be Signed with the Kings Hand, and the Great Seal put to them, with the
Hands and Seals of all the rest: and then Patents were to be given for the
Lands, founded on the Kings Testament, and the Indentures Tripartite.

Soul-Masses examined.
But the Pomp of this Business ministered an occasion of enquiring into the use
and lawfulness of Soul-Masses and Obits, which came to be among the first
things that were reformed. Christ had instituted the Sacrament to be celebrated
in remembrance of his Death, and it was a Sacrament only to those who did
participate in it: but that the consecrating the Sacrament could be of any use
to departed Souls, seemed a thing not easy to be conceived. For if they are
the Prayers of the Living that profit the Dead, then these would have done as
well without a Mass. But the People would not have esteemed bare Prayers so
much, nor have paid so dear for them. So that the true original of Soul-Masses
was thought to have been only to increase the Esteem and Wealth of the Clergy.
It is true, in the Primitive Church there was a Commemoration of the Saints
departed in the Daily Sacrifice, so they termed the Communion, and such as had
given any offense at their death were not remembered in it: So that for so
slight an offense, as the leaving a Priest Tutor to ones Children, which might
distract them from their Spiritual care, ones Name was to be left out of that
Commemoration in Cyprians time; which was a very disproportioned punishment to
that offense, if such Commemorations had been thought useful or necessary to
the Souls departed. But all this was nothing to the private Masses for them,
and was indeed nothing at first but an honorable mention of such as had died
in the Faith. And they believing then generally that there was a Glorious
Thousand Years to be on Earth, and that the Saints should rise some sooner and
some later to have their part in it, they prayed in general for their quiet
Rest, and their speedy Resurrection. Yet these Prayers growing, as all
superstitious devices do, to be more considered, some began to frame an
Hypothesis to justify them by; that of the Thousand Years being generally
exploded. And in St. Austin's time they began to fancy there was a state of
punishment even for the Good in another Life, out of which some were sooner and
some later freed, according to the measure of their Repentance for their Sins
in this Life. But he tells us, this was taken up without any sure ground, and
that it was no way certain. Yet by Visions, Dreams, and Tales, the belief of it
was so far promoted, that it came to be generally received in the next Age
after him: and then as the People were told that the Saints interceded for
them, so it was added that they might intercede for their departed Friends. And
this was the Foundation of all that Trade of Souls-Masses and Obits. Now the
deceased King had acted like one who did not believe that these things
signified much; otherwise he was to have but ill reception in Purgatory, having
by the subversion of the Monasteries deprived the departed Souls of the benefit
of the many Masses that were said for them in these Houses: yet it seems at his
death he would make the matter sure, and to show he intended as much benefit to
the Living, as to himself being dead, he took care that there should be not
only Masses and Obits, but so many Sermons at Windsor, and a frequent
distribution of Alms for the relief of the Poor. But upon this occasion it came
to be examined what value there was in such things. Yet the Archbishop plainly
saw that the Lord Chancellor would give great opposition to every motion that
should be made for any further alteration; for which he and all that Party had
this specious pretense always in their Mouths; That their late Glorious King
was not only the most learned Prince, but the most learned Divine in the World,
(for the flattering him did not end with his Life) and that therefore they were
at least, to keep all things in the condition wherein he had left them, till
the King were of Age. And this seemed also necessary on Considerations of
State; For Changes in matter of Religion might bring on Commotions and
Disorders, which they as faithful Executors ought to avoid. But to this it was
answered, That as their late King was infinitely learned, (for both Parties
flattered him dead, as well as living) so he had resolved to make great
Alterations, and was contriving how to change the Mass into a Communion: that
therefore they were not to put off a thing of such consequence, wherein the
Salvation of Peoples Souls was so much concerned, but were immediately to set
about it. But the Lord Chancellor gave quickly great advantage against himself
to his Enemies, who were resolved to make use of any Error he might be guilty
of, so far as to ease themselves of the trouble he was like to give them.

The Kings Funeral being over, The Creation of Peers.
order was given for the Creation of Peers. The Protector was to be Duke of
Somerset, the Earl of Essex to be Marquess of Northampton, the Viscount Lisle
to be Earl of Warwick, the Lord Wriothesley Earl of Southampton; beside the new
Creation of the Lords Seimour, Rich, Willoughby of Parham, and Sheffield: the
rest it seems excusing themselves from new Honors, as it appeared from the
Deposition of Paget, that many of those on whom the late King had intended to
confer Titles of Honor had declined it formerly. 1547. Feb. 20. Coronation.
On the 20th of Feb. being Shrove-Sunday the King was Crowned by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, according to the form that was agreed to. The
Protector serving in it as Lord Steward, the Marquess of Dorset as Lord
Constable, and the Earl of Arundel as Earl Marshal, deputed by the Protector. A
Pardon was proclaimed, out of which the Duke of Norfolk, Cardinal Pole, and
some others were excepted.

The first Business of importance after the Coronation, The Lord Chancellor is
removed from his Office.
was the Lord Chancellors fall. Who, resolving to give himself wholly to
Matters of State, had on the 18th of Feb. put the Great Seal to a Commission,
directed to Sir Richard Southwell Master of the Rolls, John Tregonnel Esquire;
Master of Chancery, and to John Oliver, and Anthony Bellasis, Clerks, Masters
of Chancery; setting forth, that the Lord Chancellor being so employed in the
Affairs of State, that he could not attend on the hearing of Causes in the
Court of Chancery, these three Masters, or any two of them, were empowered to
execute the Lord Chancellors Office in that Court, in as ample manner as if he
himself were present: only their Decrees were to be brought to the Lord
Chancellor to be Signed by him, before they were Enrolled, This being done
without any Warrant from the Lord Protector, and the other Executors, it was
judged a high presumption in the Lord Chancellor thus to devolve on others that
Power which the Law had trusted in his Hands. The Persons named by him
increased the offense which this gave, two of them being Canonists, so that the
common Lawyers looked upon this as a President of very high and ill
consequence. And being encouraged by those who had no good will to the
Chancellor, they petitioned the Council in this Matter, and complained of the
evil consequences of such a Commission, and set forth the fears that all the
Students of the Law were under, of a Change that was intended to be made of the
Laws of England. The Council remembered well they had given no Warrant at all to
the Lord Chancellor for the issuing out any such Commission; so they sent it to
the Judges, and required them to examine the Commission with the Petition
grounded upon it: Who delivered their Opinions on the last of Feb. That the
Lord Chancellor ought not without Warrant from the Council to have set the Seal
to it; Feb. 28.
and that by his so doing he had by the Common Law forfeited his Place to the
King, and was liable to Fine and Imprisonment at the Kings pleasure. March 6.
This lay sleeping till the sixth of March, and then the Judges Answer being
brought to the Council, Signed with all their Hands, they entered into a debate
how far it ought to be punished. The Lord Chancellor carried it very high; and
as he had used many Menaces to those who had petitioned against him, and to the
Judges for giving their Opinions as they did, so he carried himself insolently
to the Protector, and told him he held his Place by a better Authority than he
held his: That the late King being empow'red to it by Act of Parliament, had
made him not only Chancellor, but one of the Governors of the Realm during his
Sons Minority; and had by his Will given none of them Power over the rest to
throw them out at pleasure: and that therefore they might declare the
Commission void if they pleased, to which he should consent, but they could not
for such an error turn him out of his Office, nor out of his share of the
Government. To this it was answered, That by the late Kings Will they, or the
major part of them, were to Administer till the King was of Age; That this
subjected every one of them in particular to the rest; That otherwise if any of
them broke out into Rebellion, he might pretend he could not be attainted nor
put from the Government: Therefore it was agreed on, That every of them in
particular was subject to the greater part. Then the Lord Chancellor was
required to show what Warrant he had for that he had done: Being now driven
from that which he chiefly relied on, he answered for himself, That he had no
Warrant; yet he thought by his Office he had Power to do it; that he had no ill
intention in it, and therefore submitted himself to the Kings mercy, and to the
gracious consideration of the Protector and the Council; and desired that in
respect of his past Services he might forego his Office with as little slander
as might be; and that as to his Fine and Imprisonment they would use
moderation. So he was made to withdraw. The Counselors (as it is entered in the
Council-Book) considering in their Consciences his abuses sundry ways in his
Office, to the great prejudice and utter decay of the C^mmon Laws, and the
prejudice that might follow by the Seals continuing in the Hands of so stout
and arrogant a Person, who would as he pleased put the Seals to such
Commissions without Warrant, did agree, That the Seal should be taken from him,
and he be deprived of his Office, and be further fined as should be afterward
thought fitting; only they excused him from Imprisonment. So he being called
in, and heard say all he could think of for his own justification, they did not
judge it of such importance as might move them to change their mind. Sentence
was therefore given, That he should stay in the Council Chamger and Closet till
the Sermon was ended, that then he should go home with the Seal to Ely House
where he lived: but that after Supper, the Lord Seimour, Sir Anthony Brown, and
Sir Edw. North, should be sent to him, and that he should deliver the Seal into
their Hands; and be from that time deprived of his Office, and confined to his
House during pleasure, and pay what Fine should be laid on him. To all which he
submitted, and acknowledged the justice of their Sentence. So the next day the
Seal was put into the Lord St. John's Hands, till they should agree on a fit Man
to be Lord Chancellor; and it continued with him several months. On the day
following, the late Kings Will being in his Hands for the granting of
Exemplifications of it under the Great Seal, it was sent for, and ordered to be
laid up in the Treasury of the Exchequer: and the Earl of Southampton continued
in his Confinement till the 29th of June, but then he entered into a
Recognisance of 4000 l. to pay what Fine they should impose on him, and upon
that he was discharged of his Imprisonment. But in all this Sentence, they made
no mention of his forfeiting his being one of the late Kings Executors, and of
the present Kings Governors; either judging that, being put in these Trusts as
he was Lord Chancellor, the discharging him of his Office did by consequence
put an end to them; or perhaps they were not willing to do any thing that might
seem to change the late Kings Will; and therefore by keeping him under the fear
of a severe Fine, they chose rather to oblige him to be absent, and to carry
himself quietly, than by any Sentence to exclude him from his share in that
Trust. Which I incline the rather to believe, because I find him afterward
brought to Council without any Order entered about it: So that he seems to have
come thither rather on a former Right than on a new choice made of him. Thus
fell the Lord Chancellor, and in him the Popish Party lost their chief support,
and the Protector his most emulous Rival. The Reader will find the Commission
with the Opinion of the Judges about it in the Collection, Collection Number 5.
from which he will be better able to judge of these Proceedings against him.
Which were summary, and severe, beyond the usage of the Privy Council, and
without the common forms of legal Processes. But the Councils Authority had
been raised so high, by the Act mentioned Page 263. of the former Part, that
they were empowerd sufficiently for Matters of that nature.

That which followed a few days after made this be the more censured, The
Protector holds his Office by Patent.
since the Lord Protector, who hitherto held his Office but by the choice of
the rest, and under great restrictions, was now resolved to hold it by Patent,
to which the late Chancellor had been unwilling to consent. The pretense for it
was, That the Foreign Ministers, the French Ambassador in particular, desired
to be satisfied concerning his Power, and how far they might treat with him,
and depend on the assurances and promises he gave. So the Protector and Council
did on the 13th of March March 13.
petition the King that they might act by a Commission under the Great Seal,
which might empower and justify them in what they were to do. And that was to
be done in this manner. The King and the Lords were to Sign the Warrant for it,
upon which the Lord St. John (who, though he had the keeping of the Great Seal,
was never designed to be Lord Keeper, nor was empowred to hear Causes) should
set the Seal to it. The Original Warrant was to be kept by the Protector, and
Exemplifications of it were to be given to Foreign Ministers. To this Order
Sir Thom. Cheyney set his Hand, upon what Authority I do not so clearly see,
since he was none of the Executors. By this Commission, (which will be found in
the Collection) it is set forth, Collection Number 6.
That the King being under Age, was desired by diverse of the Nobles and
Prelates of the Realm to name and authorize one above all others, to have the
Charge of the Kingdom, with the Government of his Person; whereupon he had
formerly by word of mouth named his Uncle to be Protector and Governor of his
Person; yet for a more perfect Declaration of that, he did now ratify and
approve all he had done since that Nomination, and constituted him his
Governor and the Protector of his Kingdom till he should attain the full Age
of 18 years: giving him the full Authority that belonged to that Office, to do
every thing as he by his Wisdom should think for the Honor, Good, and
Prosperity of the King and Kingdoms: and that he might be furnished with a
Council for his aid and assistance, he did by the advice of his Uncle and
others, Nobles, Prelates, and wise Men, accept of these Persons for his
Counselors, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord St. John President, the
Lord Russel Lord Privy Seal, the Marquess of Northampton, the Earls of Warwick,
and Arundel, the Lord Seimour, the Bishop of Duresme, the Lord Rich, Sir Thomas
Cheyney, Sir Joh. Gage, Sir Anth. Brown, Sir Anthony Wingfield, Sir William
Paget, Sir William Petre, Sir Ralph Sadler, Sir John Baker, Doctor Wotton, Sir
Anth. Denny, Sir William Herbert, Sir Edw. North, Sir Ed. Montague, Sir Ed.
Wotton, Sir Edm. Peckham, Sir Tho. Bromley, and Sir Richard Southwell: giving
the Protector Power to swear such other Commissioners as he should think fit:
and that he, with so many of the Council as he should think meet, might annul
and change what they thought fitting: restraining the Council to act only by
his Advice and Consent. And thus was the Protector fully settled in his Power,
and no more under the curb of the Co-executors, who were now mixed with the
other Counselors, that by the late Kings Will were only to be consulted with
as they saw cause. But as he depressed them to an equality with the rest of the
Counselors, so he highly obliged the others who had been formerly under them,
by bringing these equally with them into a share of the Government. He had also
obtained to himself an high Authority over them; since they could do nothing
without his consent, but he was only bound to call for so many of them as he
thought meet, and was not limited to act as they advised, but clothed with the
full Regal Power: and had it in his Hands to oblige whom he would, and to make
his Party greater by calling into the Council such as he should nominate. How
far this was legal I shall not enquire. It was certainly contrary to King
Henry's Will. And that being made upon an Act of Parliament, which empowred him
to limit the Crown and the Government of it at his pleasure, this Commission,
that did change the whole Government during the Kings Minority, seems capable
of no other defense, but that it being made by the consent of the major part of
the Executors, it was still warrantable even by the Will, which devolved the
Government on them, or the major part of them.

All this I have opened the more largely, both because none of our Historians
have taken any notice of the first Constitution of the Government during this
Reign, and being ignorant of the true account of it, they have committed great
errors: and because having obtained, by the favor of that most industrions
Collector of the Transactions of this Age Mr. Rushworth, the Original
Council-Book, for the two first years of this Reign, I had a certain Authority
to follow in it: the exactness of that Book being beyond any thing I ever met
with in all our Records. For every Council-day the Privy-Councellors that were
present set their Hands to all that was ordered; judging so great caution
necessary when the King was under Age. And therefore I thought this a Book of
too great consequence to lie in private Hands: so the owner having made a
Present of it to me, I delivered it to that Noble and Virtuous Gentleman Sir
John Nicolas, one of the Clerks of the Council, to be kept with the rest of
their Books.

And having now given the Reader a clear Prospect of the state of the Court, I
shall next turn to the Affairs that were under their consideration. The state
of Affairs in Germany.
That which was first brought before them was concerning the state of Germany.
Francis Burgartus Chancellor to the Duke of Saxe, with others from the other
Princes and Cities of the Empire, were sent over upon the news of the former
Kings death to solicit for Aids from the new King toward the carrying on the
War with the Emperor. In order to the clearing of this, and to give a just
account of our Councils in reference to Foreign Affairs, especially the cause
being about Religion, I shall give a short view of the state of Germany at this
time. The Emperor, having formed a design of an Universal Monarchy, laid hold
on the differences of Religion in Germany, as a good mean to cover what he did,
with the specious pretense of punishing Heresy, and protecting the Catholics.
But before he had formed this design, 1531. Jan. 11. Ferdinand Crowned King of
the Romans.
he procured his Brother to be chosen King of the Romans, and so declared his
Successor in the Empire; which he was forced to do, being obliged to be much in
Spain and his other hereditary Dominions; and being then so young as not to
enter into such deep Counsels as he afterward laid. But his Wars in Italy put
him often in ill terms with the Pope; and being likewise watched over in all his
Motions by Francis the I. and Henry VIII. and the Turk often breaking into
Hungary and Germany, he was forced to great compliances with the Princes of the
Empire: Who being animated by the two great Crowns, did enter into a League for
their mutual defense against all Aggressors. And at last in the Year 1544.
1544. Feb. 20. Diet began at Spire.
in the Diet held at Spire, the Emperor, being engaged in War with France, and
the Turk, both to secure Germany, and to obtain Money of the Princes, was
willing to agree to the Edict made there; which was, That till there was a free
Council in Germany, or such an Assembly in which Matters of Religion might be
settled, there should be a general Peace, and none was to be troubled for
Religion; the free exercise of both Religions being allowed; and all things
were to continue in the state they were then in. And the Imperial Chamber at
Spire was to be reformed: for the Judges of that Court being all Papists, there
were many Processes depending at the Suit of the Ecclesiastics against the
Protestant Princes who had driven them out of their Lands: and the Princes
expecting no fair dealing from them, all these Processes were now suspended,
and the Chamber was to be filled up with new Judges, that should be more
favorable to them. They obtaining this Decree, contributed very liberally to
the Wars the Emperor seemed to be engaged in. 1544. Sept. 24. Emperor has
Peace with France.
Who having his Treasure thus filled, presently made Peace both with France and
the Grand Seigniour, and resolved to turn his Wars upon the Empire, and to make
use of that Treasure and Force they had contributed, 1545. Oct. Peace with Turk.
to invade their Liberties, and to subdue them entirely to himself. Upon this
he entered into a Treaty with the Pope, that a Council should be opened in
Trent; upon which he should require the Princes to submit to it, which if they
refused to do, he should make War on them. The Pope was to assist him with
10000 Men, besides levy Taxes hard on his Clergy; to which he willingly
consented. But the Emperor knowing, That if Religion were declared to be the
ground of the War, all the Protestants would unite against him, who were the
much greater number of the Empire; resolved to divide them among themselves,
and to pretend somewhat else than Religion as the cause of the War. There were
then four of the Electors of that Religion; the Count Palatine, the Duke of
Saxe, the Marquess of Brandenburg, and the Archbishop of Colen; besides the
Landgrave of Hesse, the Duke of Wittemberg, and many lesser Princes: and almost
all the Cities of the Empire. Bohem and the other hereditary Dominions of the
House of Austria were also generally of the same Religion. The Northern Kings
and the Swiss Cantons were firmly united to them: The two Crowns of England and
France were likewise concerned in Interest to support them against the Austrian
Family. But the Emperor got France and England engaged in a War between
themselves. So that he was now at leisure to accomplish his designs on the
Empire; where some of the Princes being extreme old, as the Count Palatine, and
Herman Archbishop of Colen, others being of soft and unactive tempers, as the
Marquess of Brandenburg, and others discontented and ambitious, as Maurice of
Saxony, and the Brothers of Brandenburg, he had indeed none of the first Rank
to deal with, but the Duke of Saxe and the Landgrave of Hesse. Who were both
great Captains, but of such different tempers, that where they were in equal
Command, there was no great probability of success. The former was a Prince of
the best composition of any in that Age, he was sincerely religious, and one of
the most equally tempered Men that was then alive, neither lifted up with
success, nor cast down with misfortunes: He had a great capacity, but was slow
in his resolutions. The Landgrave on the other hand had much more heat, was a
quicker Man, and of an impatient temper, on which the accidents of Life made
deep impressions.

When the Emperor began to engage in this design, the Pope, being jealous of
his greatness, and desirous to entangle him in a long and expenceful War,
published the secret ends of the League; and opened the Council in Trent in
Novem. 1545. where a few Bishops and Abbots, with his Legates presiding over
them, usurped the most Glorious Title of The most Holy Ecumenical Council
representing the Catholic Church. They entered by such slow steps, as were
directed from Rome, into the discussion of Articles of Doctrine; which were, as
they were pleased to call it, explained to them by some Divines, for most part
Friars, who amused the more ignorant Bishops with the nice speculations with
which they had been exercised in the Schools; where hard and barbarous words
served in good stead to conceal some things not so fit to be proposed
barefaced, and in plain terms. The Emperor having done enough toward his
design, that a Council was opened in Germany, endeavored to keep them from
determining Points of Doctrine, and pressed them to examine some abuses in the
Government of the Church, which had, at least given occasion to that great
alienation of so many from the Sea of Rome and the Clergy. There were also
diverse wise and learned Prelates, chiefly of Spain, who came thither, full of
hopes of getting these abuses redressed. Some of them had observed, That in all
times, Heresies and Schisms did owe their chief growth to the scandals, the
ignorance, and negligence of the Clergy, which made the Laity conceive an ill
opinion of them, and so disposed them both in inclination and interest to
cherish such as opposed them; and therefore they designed to have many great
corruptions cast out: and observing that Bishops Non-residence was a chief
occasion of all those evils, they endeavored to have Residence declared to be
of Divine Right: intending thereby to lessen the Power of the Papacy, which was
grown to that height, that they were slaves to that See, taxed by it at
pleasure, and the care of their Diocesses extorted out of their hands by the
several ranks of exempted Priests; and also to raise the Episcopal Authority to
what it was anciently, and to cut off all these encroachments which the Sea of
Rome had made on them at first by craft, and which they still maintained by
their Power: But the Court of Rome was to lose much by all Reformations, and
some Cardinals openly declared, That every Reformation gave the Heretics great
advantages, and was a Confession that the Church had erred, and that these very
things so much complained of were the chief Nerves of the Popedom, which being
cut, the greatness of their Court must needs fall: and therefore they did
oppose all these motions, and were still for proceeding in establishing the
Doctrine. And though the opposing a Decree to oblige all to Residence was so
grossly scandalous that they were ashamed of it, yet they intended to secure the
greatness of the Court by a Salvo for the Popes Privilege and Dignity in
granting Dispensations. These Proceedings at Trent discovered what was to be
expected from that Council, and alarmed all the Protestants to think what they
were to look for, if the Emperor should force them to submit to the Decrees of
such an Assembly, where those whom they called Heretics could expect little,
since the Emperor himself could not prevail so far as to obtain or hinder
delays, or to give preference for Matters of Discipline to Points of Doctrine.
So the Protestants met at Frankfort, 1546. January, Princes meet at Frankfort.
and entered into Councils for their common safety, in case any of them should
be disturbed about Religion; chiefly for preserving the Elector of Colen whom
the Pope had cited to Rome for Heresy. They wrote to the Emperors Ministers,
That they heard from all Hands that the Emperor was raising great Forces, and
designing a War against them; who thought themselves secured by the Edict of
Spire, and desired nothing but the confirmation of that, and the regulation of
the Imperial Chamber, as was then agreed on. A Meeting being proposed between
the Emperor and the Landgrave, the Landgrave went to him to Spire, where the
Emperor denied he had any design of a War, with which the other charged him:
only he said he had with great difficulty obtained a Council in Germany, and
therefore he hoped they would submit to it. But after some expostulations on
both hands, the Landgrave left him; and now the thing was generally understood,
though the Emperor did still deny it, and said he would make no War about
Religion, but only against the disturbers of the Peace of the Empire. By this
means he got the Elector Palatine to give little or no aid to the other
Princes. The Marquess of Brandenburg was become jealous of the greatness of
Saxe, and so was at first Neuter, but afterward openly declared for the
Emperor. But Maurice the Duke of Saxe's near Kinsman, who by that Dukes means
was settled in a fair Principality, which his Uncle George had left him only on
condition that he turned Papist, notwithstanding which he got him to be
possessed of it; was made use of by the Emperor as the best Instrument to work
his ends. To him therefore he promised the Electoral Dignity with the Dominions
belonging to the Duke of Saxe, if he would assist him in the War against his
Kinsman the present Elector; and gave him assurance under his Hand and Seal,
That he would make no change in Religion, but leave the Princes of the Ausburg
Confession the free exercise of their Religion. And thus the Emperor singled
out the Duke of Saxe and the Landgrave from the rest, reckoning wisely, that if
he once mastered them, he should more easily overcome all the rest. He
pretended some other quarrels against them, as that of the Duke of Brunswick,
who having begun a War with his Neighbors was taken Prisoner, and his
Dominions possessed by the Landgrave. That with some old Quarrels was pretended
the ground of the War. Upon which the Princes published a Writing to show that
it was Religion only, and a secret design to subdue Germany, that was the true
cause of the War; and those alleged were sought Pretenses to excuse so
infamous a breach of Faith, and of the public Decrees: that the Pope who
designed the destruction of all of that Confession, had set on the Emperor to
this; who easily laid hold on it, that he might master the liberty of Germany.
Therefore they warned all the Princes of their danger. The Emperors Forces
being to be drawn together out of several Places in Italy, Flanders, Burgundy,
and Boheme, they whose Forces lay nearer had a great advantage if they had
known how to use it: 1546. June, The Elector and Landgrave arm.
For in June they brought into the Field 70000 Foot and 15000 Horse, and might
have driven the Emperor out of Germany, had they proceeded vigorously at first.
But the divided Command was fatal to them, for when one was for Action, the
other was against it. So they lost their opportunity, and gave the Emperor time
to gather all his Forces about him, which were far inferior to theirs in
strength: but the Emperor gained by time, whereas they who had no great
Treasure lost much. All the Summer and a great deal of the Winter was spent
without any considerable Action, though the two Armies were often in view one of
another. 1546. Jul. 20. Duke of Saxe and Landgrave proscribed.
But in the beginning of the Winter, the Emperor having proscribed the Duke of
Saxe, and promised to bestow the Principality on Maurice, he fell into Saxony,
and carried a great many of the Cities which were not prepared for any such
impression. Nov. 23. The Elector returns into Saxony.
This made the Duke separate his Army, and return to the defense of his own
Country; which he quickly recovered; and drove Maurice almost out of all his
own Principality. The States of Boheme also declared for the Elector of Saxony.

This was the state of Affairs there. The Princes thought they had a good
Prospect for the next Year, having mediated a Peace between the Crowns of
England and France, 1546. Jan. 7. Peace concluded between England and France.
whose Forces falling into Flanders must needs have bred a great distraction in
the Emperors Councils. But King Henry's death gave them great apprehensions,
and not without cause. For when they sent hither for an Aid in Money to carry
on the War, the Protector and Council saw great dangers on both hands: if they
left the Germans to perish, the Emperor would be then so lifted up, that they
might expect to have an uneasy Neighbor of him: on the other hand it was a
thing of great consequence to engage an Infant King in such a War. Therefore
their Succors from hence were like to be weak and very slow. Howsoever the
Council ordered Paget to assure them that within three or four Months they
should send 50000 Crowns to their assistance: which was to be covered thus; The
Merchants of the Still-yard were to borrow so much of the King, and to engage
to bring home Stores to that value; they having the Money, should send it to
Hamburg, and so to the Duke of Saxe. But the Princes received a second Blow in
the loss of Francis the first of France. Who having lived long in a familiarity
and friendship with King Henry, not ordinary for Crowned Heads, was so much
affected with the news of his death, that he was never seen cheerful after it.
He made Royal Funeral Rites to be performed to his memory in the Church of
Nostredame: to which the Clergy (who one would have thought should have been
glad to have seen his Funerals Celebrated in any fashion) were very averse. But
that King had emancipated himself to a good degree from a servile subjection to
them, and would be obeyed. He outlived the other not long, 1557. Mar. 31.
Francis I. died.
for he died the last of March. He was the chief Patron of Learned Men and
advancer of Learning that had been for many Ages. He was generally unsuccessful
in his Wars, and yet a great Commander. At his death he left his Son an Advice
to beware of the Brethren of Lorain, and to depend much on the Counselors whom
he had employed. But his Son, upon his coming to the Crown, did so deliver
himself up to the charms of his Mistress Diana, that all things were ordered as
Men made their Court to her; which the Ministers that had served the former
King scorning to do, and the Brothers of the House of Lorain doing very
submissively, the one were discharged of their employments, and the other
governed all the Councils. Francis had been often fluctuating in the business of
Religion. Sometimes he had resolved to shake off the Popes Obedience, and set
up a Patriarch in France; and had agreed with Henry the 8th to go on in the
same Councils with him. But he was first diverted by his Alliance with Clement
the 7th; and afterward by the Ascendant which the Cardinal of Tournon had over
him, who engaged him at several times into severities against those that
received the Reformation. Yet he had such a close Eye upon the Emperors
motions, that he kept a constant good understanding with the Protestant
Princes, and had no doubt assisted them if he had lived. But upon his death new
Councils were taken; the Brothers of Lorain were furiously addicted to the
Interests of the Papacy, one of them being a Cardinal, who persuaded the King
rather to begin his Reign with the recovery of Bulloine out of the hands of the
English. So that the state of Germany was almost desperate before he was aware
of it. And indeed the Germans lost so much in the death of these two Kings,
upon whose assistance they had depended, that it was no wonder they were easily
overrun by the Emperor. Some of their Allies, the Cities of Vlm and Frankfort,
and the Duke of Wittemberg, submitting themselves to the Emperors mercy, the
rest were much disheartened: which is a constant forerunner of the ruin of a
Confederacy. Such was the state of Religion abroad.

The design laid for a further Reformation at home.
At home Men's minds were much distracted. The People, especially in Market Towns
and Places of Trade, began generally to see into many of the corruptions of the
Doctrine and Worship, and were weary of them; Some preached against some
abuses: Glasier at Paul's Cross taught, that the observance of Lent was only a
Positive Law; others went further, and plainly condemned most of the former
abuses; But the Clergy were as much engaged to defend them. They were for the
most part such as had been bred in Monasteries and Religious Houses. For there
being Pensions reserved for the Monks, when their Houses were surrendered and
dissolved, till they should be otherwise provided; The Court of Augmentations
took care to ease the King of that Charge, by recommending them to such small
Benefices as were at the Kings disposal; and such as purchased those Lands of
the Crown, with that Charge of paying the Pensions to the Monks, were also
careful to ease themselves by procuring Benefices for them. The Benefices were
generally very small, so that in many Places three or four Benefices could
hardly afford enough for the maintenance of one Man. And this gave some color
for that abuse of one Man's having many Benefices that have a care of Souls
annexed to them; and that not only where they are so contiguous, that the duty
can be discharged by one, and so poor that the maintenance of both will scarce
serve for the encouragement of one Person, but even where they are very remote,
and of considerable value. This Corruption that crept in, in the dark Ages of
the Church, was now practiced in England out of necessity. By an Act made in
King Henry the 8th's time none might hold two Benefices without a Dispensation,
but no Dispensation could enable one to hold three: yet that was not at this
time much considered. The excuses made for this were, That in some Places they
could not find good Men for the Benefices, but in most Places the Livings were
brought to nothing. For while the Abbeys stood, the Abbots allowed those whom
they appointed to serve the Cure in the Churches that belonged to them, (which
were in value above the half of England) a small Stipend, or some little part
of the Vicarage Tithes; and they were to raise their subsistence out of the
Fees they had by the Sacraments, and other Sacramentals; and chiefly by the
singing Masses for the Poor that died; for the Abbeys had the profit of it from
the Rich. And Masses went generally for 2 d. a Groat was thought a great
Bounty. So they all concluded themselves undone if these things were withdrawn.
This engaged them against any Reformation, since every step that was made in it
took their Bread out of their Mouths. But they being generally very ignorant
could oppose nothing with the force of Reason or Learning. So although they
were resolved to comply with any thing, rather than forfeit their Benefices;
yet in their hearts they abhorred all Reformation, and murmured against it
where they thought they might do it safely; some preached as much for the old
abuses, as others did against them. Dr. Peru at St. Andrews Undershaft
justified the Worship of Images on the 23d of April: yet on the 19th of June he
preached a Recantation of that Sermon. Besides these, there were great
Prelates, as Gardener, Bonner, and Tonstall, whose long experience in Affairs,
they being often employed in Foreign Ambassies, together with their high
preferment, gave them great Authority; and they were against all Alterations in
Religion. But that was not so decent to profess, therefore they set up on this
pretense, That till the King, their Supreme Head, were of Age, so as to
consider things himself, all should continue in the state in which King Henry
had left them: and these depended on the Lady Mary the Kings eldest Sister as
their Head, who now professed her self to be in all Points for what her Father
had done: and was very earnest to have every thing Enacted by him, but chiefly
the six Articles, to continue in force.

On the other hand Crvnmer, being now delivered from that too awful subjection
that he had been held under by King Henry, resolved to go on more vigorously in
purging out abuses. He had the Protector firmly united to him in this design.
Dr. Cox and Mr. Cheek, who were about the young King, were also very careful to
infuse right Principles of Religion into him; and as he was very capable of
understanding what was laid before him, so he had an early liking to all good
and generous Principles; and was of so excellent a temper of mind, that as he
naturally loved Truth, so the great probity of his Manners made him very
inclinable to love and cherish true Religion. Cranmer had also several Bishops
of his side; Holgate of York, Holbeach of Lincoln, Goodrick of Ely, and above
all Ridley Elect of Rochester, designed for that See by King Henry, but not
Consecrated till September this Year. Old Latimer was now discharged of his
Imprisonment, but had no mind to return to a more public Station, and did
choose rather to live private, and employ himself in Preaching. He was kept by
Cranmer at Lambeth, where he spent the rest of his days, till he was imprisoned
in Queen Mary's time, and attained the glorious end of his innocent and pious
Life. But the apprehensions of his being restored again to his old Bishopric,
put Heath, then Bishop of Worcester, into great anxieties; sometimes he thought
if he consented to the Reformation, then Latimer, who left his Bishopric on
the account of the six Articles, must be restored, and this made him join with
the Popish Party: at other times, Journal of the House of Commons.
when he saw the House of Commons moved to have Latimer put in again, then he
joined in the Councils for the Reformation, to secure Friends to himself by
that compliance. Others of the Bishops were ignorant and weak Men, who
understood Religion little, and valued it less; and so, although they liked the
old Superstition best, because it encouraged Ignorance most, and that was the
only sure Support of their Power and Wealth, yet they resolved to swim with the
Stream. It was designed by Cranmer and his Friends to carry on the Reformation
but by slow and safe degrees, not hazarding too much at once. They trusted in
the Providence of God, that he would assist them in so good a Work. They knew
the corruptions they were to throw out to be such that they should easily
satisfy the People with what they did, and they had many Learned Men among
them who had now for diverse years been examining these matters. There were also
many that declared they had heard the late King express his great regret for
leaving the state of Religion in so unsettled a condition; and that he had
resolved to have changed the Mass into a Communion, besides many other things.
And in the Act of Parliament which he had procured, (see Page 263. first Part)
for giving force and Authority to his Proclamations, a Proviso was added; That
his Sons Counselors while he should be under Age might set out Proclamations
of the same Authority with these which were made by the King himself. This gave
them a full Power to proceed in that Work; in which they resolved to follow the
method begun by the late King of sending Visitors over England with Injunctions
and Articles. A Visitation is made over England.
They ordered them six several Circuits or Precincts. The first was London,
Westminster, Norwich, and Ely. The second Rochester, Canterbury, Chichester,
and Winchester. The third Sarum, Exeter, Bath, Bristol, and Gloucester. The
fourth York, Durham, Carlisle, and Chester. The fifth Peterborough, Lincoln,
Oxford, Coventry, and Litchfield. And the sixth Wales, Worcester, and Hereford.
For every Circuit there were two Gentlemen, a Civilian, a Divine, and a
Register. They were designed to be sent out in the beginning of May, as appears
by a Letter to be found in the Collection, Collection Number 7.
written the fourth of May to the Archbishop of York. (There is also in the
Registers of London another of the same strain.) Yet the Visitation being put
off for some Months, this Inhibition was suspended on the 16th of May, till it
should be again renewed. The Letter sets forth, That the King being speedily to
order a Visitation over his whole Kingdom, therefore neither the Archbishop
nor any other should exercise any jurisdiction while that Visitation lasted.
And since the minds of the People were held in great suspense by the
Controversies they heard so variously tossed in the Pulpits, that for quieting
these the King did require all Bishops to preach no where but in their
Cathedrals, and that all other Clergymen should not preach but in their
Collegiate or Parochial Churches, unless they obtained a special License from
the King to that effect. The design of this was to make a distinction between
such as preached for the Reformation of abuses, and such as did it not. The one
were to be encouraged by Licenses to preach wherever they desired to do it,
but the others were restrained to the Places where they were Incumbents. But
that which of all other things did most damp those who designed the
Reformation, was the misery to which they saw the Clergy reduced, and the great
want of able Men to propagate it over England. For the Rents of the Church were
either so swallowed up by the suppression of Religious Houses, to whom the
Tithes were generally appropriated, or so basely alienated by some lewd or
superstitious Incumbents, who, to preserve themselves, being otherwise
obnoxious, or to purchase Friends, had given away the best part of their
Revenues and Benefices; that there was very little encouragement left for those
that should labor in the Work of the Gospel. And though many Projects were
thought on for remedying this great abuse, yet those were all so powerfully
opposed, that there was no hope left of getting it remedied, till the King
should come to be of Age, and be able by his Authority to procure the
Churchmen a more proportioned maintenance.

Two things only remained to be done at present. The one was to draw up some
Homilies for the instruction of the People, which might supply the defects of
their Incumbents, Some Homilies compiled.
together with the providing them with such Books as might lead them into the
understanding of the Scripture. The other was to select the most eminent
Preachers they could find and send them over England with the Visitors, who
should with more Authority instruct the Nation in the Principles of Religion.
Therefore some were appointed to compile those Homilies; and Twelve were at
first agreed on, being about those Arguments which were in themselves of the
greatest importance. The 1st was about the use of the Scriptures. The 2d of the
misery of Mankind by sin. 3d. Of their Salvation by Christ. 4th. Of True and
Lively Faith. 5th. Of Good Works. 6th. Of Christian Love and Charity. 7th.
Against Swearing, and chiefly Perjury. 8th. Against Apostasy, or declining from
God. 9th. Against the fear of Death. 10th. An Exhortation to Obedience. 11th.
Against Whoredom and Adultery, setting forth the state of Marriage how
necessary and honorable it was. And the 12th against Contention, chiefly about
Matters of Religion. They intended to set out more afterward, but these were
all that were at this time finished. The chief design in them was to acquaint
the People with the method of Salvation according to the Gospel; in which there
were two dangerous Extremes at that time that had divided the World. The
greatest part of the ignorant Commons seemed to consider their Priests as a
sort of People who had such a secret trick of saving their Souls, as
Mountebanks pretend in the curing of Diseases; and that there was nothing to be
done but to leave themselves in their hands, and the business could not
miscarry. This was the chief Basis and support of all that superstition which
was so prevalent over the Nation. The other Extreme was of some corrupt
Gospellers, who thought if they magnified Christ much, and depended on his
Merits and Intercession, they could not perish, which way soever they led their
Lives. In these Homilies therefore special care was taken to rectify these
errors. And the Salvation of Mankind was on the one hand wholly ascribed to the
Death and Sufferings of Christ, to which Sinners were taught to fly, and to
trust to it only, and to no other devices for the pardon of sin. They were at
the same time taught that there was no Salvation through Christ, but to such as
truly repented, and lived according to the Rules of the Gospel. The whole
matter was so ordered to teach them, that avoiding the hurtful errors on both
hands, they might all know the true and certain way of attaining Eternal
Happiness. For the understanding the New Testament Erasmus's Paraphrase, which
was translated into English, was thought the most profitable and easiest Book.
Therefore it was resolved, that together with the Bible there should be one of
these in every Parish Church over England. They next considered the Articles
and Injunctions that should be given to the Visitors. The greatest part of them
were only the renewing what had been ordered by King Henry during Cromwell's
being Vicegerent, which had been much neglected since his fall. For as there
was no Vicegerent, so there was few Visitations appointed after his death by
the Kings Authority; but the executing former Injunctions was left to the
several Bishops, who were for the most part more careful about the six
Articles, than about the Injunctions.

So now all the Orders about renouncing the Popes Power, and asserting the
Kings Supremacy, about Preaching, teaching the Elements of Religion in the
Vulgar Tongue, Articles and Injunctions for the Visitation.
about the Benefices of the Clergy, and the Taxes on them for the Poor, for
Scholars, and their Mansion-Houses, with the other Injunctions for the
strictness of Church-mens Lives, and against Superstitions, Pilgrimages,
Images, or other Rites of that kind, and for Register-Books, were renewed. And
to these, many others were added: as, That Curates should take down such Images
as they knew were abused by Pilgrimages or Offerings to them; but that private
Persons should not do it. That in the Confessions in Lent they should examine
all People whether they could recite the Elements of Religion in the English
Tongue. That at High-Mass they should read the Epistle and Gospel in English,
and every Sunday and Holy Day they should read at Mattins one Chapter out of
the New Testament, and at Even-song another out of the Old in English. That the
Curates should often visit the Sick, and have many places of the Scripture in
English in readiness wherewith to comfort them. That there should be no more
Processions about Churches, for avoiding contention for precedence in them. And
that the Letany formerly said in the Processions, should be said thereafter in
the Quire in English, as had been ordered by the late King. That the Holy Day
being instituted at first that Men should give themselves wholly to God, yet
God was generally more dishonored upon it than on the other days, by idleness,
drunkenness, and quarrelling, the People thinking that they sufficiently
honored God by hearing Mass and Mattins, though they understood nothing of it
to their edifying; therefore thereafter the Holy Day should be spent, according
to Gods Holy Will, in hearing and reading his Holy Word, in public and private
Prayers, in amending their Lives, receiving the Communion, Visiting the Sick,
and reconciling themselves to their Neighbors. Yet the Curates were to declare
to their People, that in Harvest-time they might upon the Holy and
Festival-days labor in their Harvest: That Curates were to admit none to the
Communion, who were not reconciled to their Neighbors: That all dignified
Clergymen should preach personally twice a year. That the People should be
taught not to despise any of the Ceremonies not yet abrogated, but to beware of
the Superstition of sprinkling their Beds with Holy Water, or the ringing of
Bells, or using of Blessed Candles for driving away Devils. That all Monuments
of Idolatry should be removed out of the Walls or Windows of Churches, and that
there should be a Pulpit in every Church for preaching: That there should be a
Chest with a hole in it for the receiving the Oblations of the People for the
Poor, and that the People should be exhorted to Almsgiving as much more
profitable than what they formerly bestowed on Superstitious Pilgrimages,
Trentals, and decking of Images. That all Patrons who disposed of their Livings
by Simoniacal Pactions should forfeit their Right for that vacancy to the King.
That the Homilies should be read. That Priests should be used charitably and
reverently for their Office sake. That no other Primer should be used but that
set out by King Henry. That the Prime and the Hours should be omitted where
there was a Sermon or Homily. That they should in Bidding the Prayers remember
the King their Supreme Head, the Queen Dowager, the Kings two Sisters, the Lord
Protector, and the Council, the Lords, the Clergy, and the Commons of the
Realm; and to pray for Souls departed this life, that at the last day we with
them may rest both Body and Soul. All which Injunctions were to be observed,
under the pains of Excommunication, Sequestration, or Deprivation, as the
Ordinaries should answer it to the King, the Justices of Peace being required
to assist them.

Besides these, there were other Injunctions given to the Bishops. Injunctions
to the Bishops.
That they should see the former put in execution, and should preach four times
a year in their Diocesses: once at their Cathedral, and three times in other
Churches, unless they had a reasonable excuse for their omission. That their
Chaplains should be able to preach Gods Word, and should be made labor often in
it: That they should give Orders to none but such as would do the same; and if
any did otherwise, that they should punish him, and recall their License. These
are the chief Heads of the Injunctions, which being so often printed, I shall
refer the Reader that would consider them more carefully, to the Collection of
these and other such curious things made by the Right Reverend Father in God
Anthony Sparrow now Lord Bishop of Norwich.

These being published, These were much censured.
gave occasion to those who censured all things of that nature to examine them.

The removing Images that had been abused, gave great occasion of quarrel; and
the thing being to be done by the Clergy only, it was not like that they, who
lived chiefly by such things, would be very zealous in the removing them. Yet
on the other hand, it was thought necessary to set some restraints to the heats
of the People, who were otherwise apt to run too far where Bounds were not set
to them.

The Article about the strict observance of the Holy Day seemed a little
doubtful, whether by the Holy Day was to be understood, only the Lord's Day, or
that and all other Church-Festivals. The naming it singularly the Holy Day, and
in the end of that Article adding Festival-days to the Holy day, seemed to
favor their opinion that thought this strict observance of the Holy Day was
particularly intended for the Lord's Day, and not for the other Festivals. And
indeed the setting aside of large portions of time on that day for our
Spiritual Edification, and for the Service of God, both in public and private,
is so necessary for the advancement of true Piety, that great and good effects
must needs follow on it. But some came afterward, who not content to press
great strictness on that day, would needs make a Controversy about the
Morality of it, and about the fourth Commandment, and framed many Rules for it,
which were stricter than themselves or any other could keep, and so could only
load Men's Consciences with many scruples. This drew an opposition from others
who could not agree to these severities, and these Contests were, by the
subtilty of the Enemies of the Power and Progress of Religion so improved, that
in stead of all Men's observing that time devoutly as they ought, some took
occasion from the strictness of their own way, to censure all as irreligious,
who did not in every thing agree to their notion concerning it: Others by the
heat of contradiction did too much slacken this great Bond and Instrument of
Religion; which is since brought under so much neglect, that it is for most
part a day only of Rest from Men's bodily labors, but perhaps worse employed
than if they were at work: So hard a thing it is to keep the due mean, between
the Extremes of Superstition on the one hand, and of Irreligion on the other.

The corruption of Lay-Patrons in their Simoniacal Bargains, was then so
notorious, that it was necessary to give a Check to it, as we find there was by
these Injunctions. But whether either this, or the Oath afterward appointed to
be taken, has effectually delivered this Church of that great abuse, I shall
not determine. If those who bestow Benefices, did consider, that the charge of
Souls being annexed to them, they shall answer to God severely for putting so
sacred a Trust in mean or ill hands, upon any base or servile accounts, it
would make them look a little more carefully to a thing of so high consequence;
and neither expose so holy a thing to sale, nor gratify a Friend or Servant by
granting them the next Advowson, or be too easily overcome with the
solicitations of impudent Pretenders.

The Form of Bidding Prayer was not begun by King Henry, as some have weakly
imagined; but was used in the times of Popery, as will appear by the Form of
Bidding the Beads in King Henry the 7th's time, which will be found in the
Collection. Collection Number 8.
Where the way was, first for the Preacher to name and open his Text, and then
to call on the People to go to their Prayers, and to tell them what they were
to pray for; after which, all the People said their Beads in a general silence,
and the Minister kneeled down likewise, and said his. All the change King Henry
the 8th made in this, was, That the Pope and Cardinals names being left out, he
was ordered to be mentioned with the addition of his Title of Supreme Head,
that the People hearing that often repeated by their Priests, might be better
persuaded about it, but his other Titles were not mentioned. And this Order was
now renewed. Only the Prayer for departed Souls was changed from what it had
been. It was formerly in these words. Ye shall pray for the Souls that be
departed, abiding the Mercy of Almighty God, that it may please him, the rather
at the contemplation of our Prayers, to grant them the Fruition of his
Presence; which did imply their being in a state where they did not enjoy the
Presence of God; which was avoided by the more general words now prescribed.

The Injunctions given the Bishops directed them to that which, if followed
carefully, would be the most effectual means of Reforming, at least the next
Age, if not that wherein they lived. For if Holy Orders were given to none, but
to those who are well qualified, and seem to be internally called by a Divine
Vocation, the Church must soon put on a new face: whereas, when Orders are too
easily given, upon the credit of emendicated Recommendations, or Titles, and
after a slight trial of the knowledge of such Candidates, without any exact
scrutiny into their sense of things, or into the disposition of their minds; no
wonder if by the means of Clergymen so ordained, the Church lose much in the
esteem and love of the People, who being possessed with prejudices against the
whole Society for the faults which they see in particular Persons, become an
easy prey to such as divide from it.

Thus were the Visitors instructed, and sent out to make their Circuits, in
August, August. The Protector went into Scotland.
about the time that the Protector made his Expedition into Scotland. For the
occasion of it I shall refer the Reader to what is already said in the former
part of this Work. Before they engaged deeper in the War, Sir Francis Brian was
sent over to France, to congratulate the new King, and to see if he would
confirm these Propositions that were agreed to during his Fathers life; and if
he would pay the Pension that was to be given yearly till Bulloigne were
restored; and chiefly to obtain of him to be neutral in the War of Scotland:
Thuanus
complaining of that Nation that had broken their Faith with England in the
matter of the Marriage. To all which the French King answered, That for these
Articles they mentioned he thought it dishonorable for him to confirm them;
and said his Fathers Agent Poligny had no Warrant to yield to them, for by them
the English were at liberty to fortify what they had about Bulloigne, which he
would never consent to; That he was willing to pay what was agreed to by his
Father, but would have first the conditions of the delivery of Bulloigne made
more clear; As for the Scots, they were his perpetual Allies, whom he could not
forsake if they were in any distress. And when it was pressed on him, and his
Ambassador at London, Questions made, whether Scotland was a free Kingdom or
Subject to England.
That Scotland was subject to the Crown of England, they had no regard to it.
When the Council desired the French Ambassador to look on the Records which
they should bring him for proving their Title: He excused himself, and said his
Master would not interpose in a Question of that nature, nor would he look back
to what was pretended to have been done two or three hundred years ago; but was
to take things as he found them; and that the Scots had Records likewise to
prove their being a free Kingdom. So the Council saw they could not engage in
the War with Scotland, without drawing on a War with France; which made them
try their Interest with their Friends this year to see if the Marriage could be
obtained. But the Castle of St. Andrews was now lost by the assistance of that
Leo Strozi brought from France. And though they in England continued to send
Pensions to their Party, (for in May 1300 l. was sent down by Henry Balnaves,
and in June 125 l. was sent to the Earl of Glencairn for an half years payment
of his Pension) yet they could gain no ground there; for the Scots now thought
themselves safer than formerly; the Crown of England being in the hands of a
Child, and the Court of France being much governed by their Queen Dowagers
Brothers. They gave way to the Borderers to make In-rodes; of whom about 2000
fell into the Western Marches, and made great Depredations. The Scots in
Ireland were also very ill Neighbors to the English there. There were many
other Complaints of Pyracies at Sea, and of a Ship-Royal that robbed many
English Ships; but how these came to be complained of, I do not see, for they
were in open War, and I do not find any Truce had been made. The French Agent
at London pressed much that there might be a Treaty on the Borders before the
Breach were made wider. But now the Protector had given Orders for raising an
Army; so that he had no mind to lose that Summer. Yet to let the French King
see how careful they were of preserving his Friendship, they appointed the
Bishop of Duresme, and Sir Robert Bows, to give the Scotch Commissioners a
Meeting on the Borders the 4th of August: but with these secret Instructions,
That if the Scots would confirm the Marriage, all other things should be
presently forgiven, and Peace be immediately made up; but if they were not
empow'red in that particular, and offered only to treat about Restitutions,
that then they should immediately break off the Treaty. The Bishop of Duresme
was also ordered to carry down with him the Exemplifications of many Records,
to prove the Subjection of the Crown of Scotland to England: some of these are
said to have been under the Hands and Seals of their Kings, their Nobles, their
Bishops, Abbots, and Towns. He was also ordered to search for all the Records
that were lying at Duresme, where many of them were kept, to be ready to be
showed to the Scots upon any occasion that might require it. The Meeting on the
Borders came to a quick issue, for the Scottish Commissioners had no Power to
treat about the Marriage. But Tonstall searching the Registers of his See,
found many Writings of great consequence to clear that Subjection, of which the
Reader will see an account, in a Letter he writ to the Council, Collection
Number 9.
in the Collection of Papers. The most remarkable of these was, the Homage King
William of Scotland made to Henry the second, by which he granted, That all the
Nobles of his Realm should be his Subjects, and do Homage to him: and that all
the Bishops of Scotland should be under the Archbishops of York: and that the
King of England should give all the Abbeys and Honors in Scotland, at the
least they should not be given without his consent, with many other things of
the like nature. It was said that the Monks in those days, who generally kept
the Records, were so accustomed to the forging of Stories and Writings, that
little credit was to be given to such Records as lay in their keeping. But
having so faithfully acknowledged what was alleged against the freedom of
Scotland, I may be allowed to set down a Proof on the other side, for my Native
Country, copied from the Original Writing yet extant under the Hands and Seals
of many of the Nobility and Gentry of that Kingdom. It is a Letter to the Pope:
and it was ordinary that of such public Letters there were Duplicates Signed;
The one of which was sent, and the other laid up among the Records, of which I
have met with several Instances. So that of this Letter the Copy which was
reserved being now in Noble Hands, was communicated to me, and is in the
Collection. Collection Number 10.
It was upon the Popes engaging with the King of England to assist him to
subdue Scotland that they writ to him, and did assert most directly that their
Kingdom was at all times free and independent. But now these Questions being
waved, the other difference about the Marriage was brought to a sharper
decision.

August the Protector took out a Commission to be General, and to make War on
Scotland: and did devolve his Power during his absence on the Privy Council;
and appointed his Brother to be Lord Lieutenant for the South, and the Earl of
Warwick (whom he carried with him) Lord Lieutenant for the North; and left a
Commission of Array to the Marquess of Northampton for Essex, Suffolk, and
Norfolk; to the Earl of Arundel, for Sussex, Surrey, Hampshire, and Wiltshire;
and to Sir Thom. Cheyney for Kent. All this was in case of any Invasion from
France. Having thus settled Affairs during his absence, he set out for
Newcastle, having ordered his Troops to march thither before: and coming
thither on the 27th of that Month, Scotland. The Lord Clinton commanded the
Ships that sailed on as the Army marched; which was done, that Provisions and
Ammunition might be brought by them from Newcastle or Berwick, if the Enemy
should at any time fall in behind their Army. He entered into Scotch Ground the
second of September, Sept. 2.
and advanced to the Paths the 5th, 5.
where the Passage being narrow and untoward, they looked for an Enemy to have
disputed it, but found none; the Scots having only broken the Ways, which in
that dry Season signified not much, but to stop them some hours in their March.
When they had passed these, some little Castles, Dunglas, Thornton, and
Innerwick, having but a few ill provided Men in them, rendered to them. On the
9th they came to Falside, Sept. 9.
where there was a long Fight in several Parties, in which there were 1300 of
the Scots slain. And now they were in sight of the Scotch Army, which was for
numbers of Men one of the greatest that they had ever brought together,
consisting of 30000 Men: of which 10000 were commanded by the Governor, 8000
by the Earl of Angus, 8000 by the Earl of Huntley, and 4000 by the Earl of
Argile, with a fair Train of Artillery, nine Brass, and 21 Iron Guns. On the
other side, the English Army consisted of about 15000 Foot, and 3000 Horse, but
all well appointed. The Scots were now heated with the old National Quarrel to
England. It was given out that the Protector was come with his Army to carry
away their Queen, and to enslave the Kingdom. And for the encouraging of the
Army it was also said, that 12 Galleys and 50 Ships were on the Sea from
France, and that they looked for them every day.

The Protector finding an Army brought together so soon, The Protectors Offers
to the Scots.
and so much greater than he expected, began to be in some apprehension, and
therefore he writ to the Scots to this effect: That they should remember they
were both Christians, and so should be tender of the effusion of so much Blood;
that this War was not made with any design, but for a perpetual Peace, by the
Marriage of their two Princes which they had already agreed, and given their
public Faith upon it; and that the Scots were to be much more gainers by it
than the English: The Island seemed made for one Empire; It was pity it should
be more distracted with such Wars, when there was so fair and just a way
offered for uniting it: and it was much better for them to marry their Queen to
a Prince of the same Language, and on the same Continent, than to a Forreigner:
but if they would not agree to that, he offered that their Queen should be bred
up among them, and not at all contracted, neither to the French, nor to any
other Forreigner, till she came of Age, that by the consent of the Estates she
might choose a Husband for her self. If they would agree to this, he would
immediately return with his Army out of Scotland, and make satisfaction for the
damages the Country had suffered by the Invasion. This Proposition seems to
justify what the Scotch Writers say, though none of the English mention it,
That the Protector, what for want of Provisions, and what from the
apprehensions he had of so numerous an Army of the Scots, was in great straits,
and intended to have returned back to England, without hazarding an Engagement.
But the Scots thought they were so much superior to the English, and that they
had them now at such a disadvantage, that they resolved to fall upon them next
day. And that the fair offers made by the Protector might not raise division
among them, the Governor having communicated these to a few whom he trusted,
was by their advice persuaded to suppress them; but he sent a Trumpeter to the
English Army with an Offer to suffer them to return without falling upon them:
Rejected by them.
which the Protector had reason to reject, knowing that so mean an Action in
the beginning of his Administration, would have quite ruined his Reputation.
But to this, another that came with the Trumpeter added a Message from the Earl
of Huntley, That the Protector and he with ten or twenty of a side, or singly,
should decide the Quarrel by their Personal Valor. The Protector said, This
was no private Quarrel, and the Trust he was in obliged him not to expose
himself in such a way: and therefore he was to fight no other way but at the
Head of his Army. But the Earl of Warwick offered to accept the Challenge. The
Earl of Huntley sent no such Challenge, as he afterward purged himself when he
heard of it. For as it was unreasonable for him to expect the Protector should
have answered it, so it had been an affronting the Governor of Scotland to
have taken it off of his hands, since he was the only Person that might have
challenged the Protector on equal terms. The truth of the matter was, a
Gentleman that went along with the Trumpeter, made him do it without Warrant,
fancying the Answer to it would have taken up some time, in which he might have
viewed the Enemies Camp.

Sept. 10. The Ba^tel of Pinkey near Musselburgh.
On the 10th of September the two Armies drew out, and fought in the Field of
Pinkey near Musselburgh. The English had the advantage of the Ground. And in
the beginning of the Action, a Canon Ball from one of the English Ships killed
the Lord Grames eldest Son, and 25 Men more; which put the Earl of Argiles
Highlanders into such a fright, that they could not be held in order. But after
a Charge given by the Earl of Angus, in which the English lost some few Men,
the Scots gave ground; and the English observing that, and breaking in
furiously upon them, the Scots threw down their Arms and fled: The English
pursued hard, and slew them without mercy. A great defeat given the Scots.
There were reckoned to be killed about 14000 and 1500 taken Prisoners, among
whom was the Earl of Huntley, and 500 Gentlemen; and all the Artillery was
taken. This loss quite disheartened the Scots, so that they all retired to
Strivling, and left the whole Country to the Protectors mercy. Who the next day
went and took Lies, and the Soldiers in the Ships burnt some of the Sea-Towns
of Fife, and re-took some English Ships that had been taken by the Scots, and
burnt the rest. They also put a Garrison in the Isle of St. Columba in the
Frith of about 200 Soldiers, and left two Ships to wait on them. He also sent
the Earl of Warwick's Brother Sir Ambrose Dudley to take Broughty, a Castle in
the Mouth of Tay; in which he put 200 Soldiers. He wasted Edinburgh, and
uncovered the Abbey of Holyrood-house, and carried away the Lead and the Bells
belonging to it. But he neither took the Castle of Edinburgh, nor did he go on
to Strivling where the Queen with the straglers of the Army lay. And it was
thought, that in the consternation wherein the late defeat had put them, every
Place would have yielded to him. But he had some private reasons that pressed
his return, and made him let go the advantages that were now in his hands, and
so gave the Scots time to bring Succors out of France; whereas he might easily
have made an end of the War now at once, if he had followed his success
vigorously. The Earl of Warwick, who had a great share in the Honor of the
Victory, but knew that the errors in conduct would much diminish the Protectors
glory, which had been otherwise raised to an unmeasurable height, was not
displeased at it. So on the 18th of September Sept. 18.
the Protector drew his Army back into England, and having received a Message
from the Queen and the Governor of Scotland offering a Treaty, he ordered them
to send Commissioners to Berwick to treat with those he should appoint. As he
returned through the Merch, and Teviotdale, all the chief Men in these Counties
came in to him, and took an Oath to King Edward, the Form whereof will be sound
in the Collection, Collection Number 11.
and delivered into his hands all the Places of strength in their Counties. He
left a Garrison of 200 in Home Castle, under the Command of Sir Edw. Dudley;
and fortified Roxburgh, where, for encouraging the rest, he wrought two hours
with his own hands, and put 300 Soldiers and 200 Pioneers into it, giving Sir
Ralph Bulmer the Command. At the same time the Earl of Lennox and the Lord
Wharton made an in-road by the West Marches; but with little effect.

On the 29th of September the Protector returned into England Sept. 29. The
Protector returned to England.
full of Honor, having in all that Expedition lost not above 60 Men, as one
that then writ the account of it says: The Scotch Writers say he lost between 2
and 300. He had taken 80 Piece of Canon, and bridled the two chief Rivers of
the Kingdom by the Garrisons he left in them; and had left many Garrisons in
the strong Places on the Frontier. And now it may be easily imagined how much
this raised his reputation in England; since Men commonly make Auguries of the
Fortune of their Rulers, from the Successes of the first Designs they
undertake. So now they remembered what he had done formerly in Scotland; and how
he had in France with 7000 Men, raised the French Army of 20000 that was set
down before Bulloigne, and had forced them to leave their Ordnance, Baggage,
and Tents, with the loss of one Man only in the year 1544, and that next year
he had fallen into Picardy, and built New Haven with two other Forts there. So
that they all expected great success under his Government. And indeed if the
breach between his Brother and him, with some other errors, had not lost him
the advantages he now had, this prosperous Action had laid the foundation of
great Fortunes to him.

He left the Earl of Warwick to treat with those that should be sent from
Scotland. But none came; for that Proposition had been made only to gain time.
The Queen Mother there, was not ill pleased to see the interest of the
Governor so much impaired by that misfortune, and persuaded the chief Men of
that Kingdom to cast themselves wholly into the Arms of France, and to offer
their young Queen to the Dolphin, and to think of no Treaty with the English.
So the Earl of Warwick returned to London, having no small share in the Honor
of this Expedition. He was Son to that Dudley, who was attainted and executed
the first year of King Henry the 8th's Reign. But whether it was that the King
afterward repented of his severity to the Father, or that he was taken with
the qualities of the Son, he raised him by many degrees to be Admiral and
Viscount Lisle. He had defended Bulloigne, when it was in no good condition,
against the Dolphin, whose Army was believed 50000 strong; and when the French
had carried the Bassetown, he recovered it, and killed 800 of their Men: The
Year after that, being in Command at Sea, he offered the French Fleet Battle;
which they declining, he made a descent upon Normandy with 5000 Men, and having
burnt, and spoiled, a great deal, he returned to his Ships with the loss only
of one Man. And he showed he was as fit for a Court as a Camp; For being sent
over to the French Court upon the Peace, he appeared there with much Splendor,
and came off with great Honor. He was indeed a Man of great Parts, had not
insatiable ambition with profound dissimulation stained his other Noble
Qualities.

The Protector at his return was advised presently to meet the Parliament, (for
which the Writs had been sent out before he went into Scotland) now that he was
so covered with Glory, to get himself established in his Authority, and to do
those other things which required a Session. The Visitors execute the
Injunctions.
He found the Visitors had performed their Visitation, and all had given
obedience. And those who expounded the secret Providence of God with an Eye to
their own opinions, took great notice of this; that on the same day in which
the Visitors removed, Acts and Monuments.
and destroyed, most of the Images in London, their Armies were so successful
in Scotland in Pinkey Field. It is too common to all Men to magnify such
Events much, when they make for them; but if they are against them, they turn
it off by this, That Gods Ways are past finding out. So partially do Men argue
where they are once engaged. Bonner and Gardener had showed some dislike of the
Injunctions. Bonner received them with a Protestation, that he would observe
them, if they were not contrary to Gods Law and the Ordinances of the Church.
Upon which Sir Anthony Cook, and the other Visitors, complained to the Council.
So Bonner was sent for, where he offered a submission, but full of vain
Quiddities, (so it is expressed in the Council-Book, But they were not well
received by Bonner. Collection Number 12.
) But they not accepting of that, he made such a full one as they desired,
which is in the Collection. Yet for giving terror to others he was sent to lie
for some time in the Prison called the Fleet. Gardener seeing the Homilies, was
also resolved to protest against them. Nor by Gardener.
Sir John Godsalve, who was one of the Visitors, wrote to him not to ruin
himself, nor lose his Bishopric by such an Action. To whom he wrote a Letter,
that has more of a Christian, and of a Bishop in it, than any thing I ever saw
of his. He expresses in handsome terms a great contempt of the World, and a
resolution to suffer any thing rather than depart from his Conscience. Besides
that, (as he said) the things being against Law, he would not deliver up the
Liberties of his Country, but would petition against them. This Letter will be
found in the Collection, Collection Number 13.
for I am resolved to suppress nothing of consequence on what side soever it
may be. Sept. 15.
On the 25th of September it being informed to the Council, that Gardener had
written to some of that Board, and had spoken to others, many things in
prejudice and contempt of the Kings Visitation; and that he intended to refuse
to set forth the Homilies and Injunctions; he was sent for to the Council.
Where being examined, he said, he thought they were contrary to the Word of
God, and that his Conscience would not suffer him to observe them. He excepted
to one of the Homilies that it exclude Charity from justifying Men, as well as
Faith. This he said was contrary to the Book set out in the late Kings time,
which was afterward confirmed in Parliament in the Year 1542. he said further,
that he could never see one place of Scripture nor any ancient Doctor that
favored it. He also said Erasmus's Paraphrase was bad enough in Latin, but
much worse in English, for the Translator had often out of ignorance, and often out
of design, misrendred him palpably, and was one that neither understood Latin
nor English well. He offered to go to Oxford to dispute about Justification
with any they should send him to, or to enter in conference with any that would
undertake his Instruction in Town. But this did not satisfy the Council. So
they pressed him to declare what he intended to do when the Visitors should be
with him. He said, he did not know; he should further study these Points, for
it would be three weeks before they could be with him; and he was sure he would
say no worse than that he should obey them as far as could consist with Gods
Law and the Kings. The Council urged him to promise that he would without any
limitation set forth the Homilies and the Injunctions, which he refusing to do,
was sent to the Fleet. Some days after that Cranmer went to see the Dean of St.
Paul's, having the Bishops of Lincoln and Rochester with Dr. Cox and some others
with him. He sent for Gardener thither, and entered into discourse with him
about that Passage in the Homily, excluding Charity out of our Justification:
and urged those Places of St. Paul, That we are justified by Faith without the
Works of the Law: He said his design in that Passage was only to draw Men from
trusting in any thing they did: and to teach them to trust only to Christ. But
Gardener had a very different Notion of Justification. For as he said, Infants
were justified by Baptism, and Penitents by the Sacrament of Penance: and that
the Conditions of the justifying of those of Age were Charity as well as Faith,
as the three Estates make a Law all joined together: for by this Simile he set
it out in the report he writ of that Discourse to the Lord Protector, reckoning
the King one of the three Estates, (a way of Speech very strange, especially in
a Bishop, and a Lawyer.) For Erasmus it was said, that though there were faults
in his Paraphrase, as no Book besides the Scriptures is without faults, yet it
was the best for that use they could find: and they did choose rather to set
out what so learned a Man had written, than to make a new one which might give
occasion to more Objections; and he was the most indifferent Writer they knew.
Afterward Cranmer knowing what was likely to work most on him, let fall some
words (as Gardener writ to the Protector) of bringing him into the
Privy Council, if he would concur in what they were carrying on. But that not
having its ordinary effect on him, he was carried back to the Fleet.

There were also many complaints brought by some Clergymen, of such as had
used them ill for their obeying the Kings Injunctions, and for removing Images.
Many were upon their submission sent away with a severe rebuke; others that
offended more hainously were put in the Fleet for some time, and afterward
giving Bond for their good behavior were discharged. But upon the Protectors
return, the Bishop of Winchester writ him a long Letter in his own vindication.
He complained of the Visitors proceeding in his absence in so great a matter.
He said the Injunctions were contrary to themselves, for they appointed the
Homilies to be read, and Erasmus's Paraphrase to be put in all Churches: so he
selected many passages out of these, that were contrary to one another. He also
gathered many things out of Erasmus's Paraphrase that were contrary to the
Power of Princes, and several other censurable things in that Work, which
Erasmus wrote when he was young, being of a far different strain from what he
writ when he grew older, and better acquainted with the World. But he concluded
his Letter with a discourse of the extent of the King and Councils Power,
Collection Number 14.
which is all I transcribed of it, being very long, and full of things of no
great consequence. He questions how far the King could command against Common
or Statute Law: of which himself had many occasions to be well informed.
Cardinal Wolsey had obtained his Legatine Power at the Kings desire, but
notwithstanding that, he was brought into a Praemunire: and the Lawyers upon
that Argument cited many Precedents of Judges that were fined when they
transgressed the Laws, though commanded by Warrants from the King; and Earl
Typteft, who was Chancellor, lost his Head for acting upon the Kings Warrant
against Law. In the late Kings time the Judges would not set Fines on the
breakers of the Kings Proclamations, when they were contrary to Law, till the
Act concerning them was passed, about which there were many hot words when it
was debated. He mentions a Discourse that passed between him and the Lord
Audley in the Parliament concerning the Kings Supremacy. Audley bid him look
the Act of Supremacy, and he would see the Kings doings were restrained to
Spiritual Jurisdiction: and by another Act no Spiritual Law could take place
against the Common Law or an Act of Parliament: otherwise the Bishops would
strike in with the King, and by means of the Supremacy would order the Law as
they pleased: but we will provide, said he, that the Praemunire shall never go
off of your backs. In some late Cases he heard the Judges declare what the King
might do against an Act of Parliament, and what danger they were in that meddled
in such matters. These things being so fresh in his memory he thought he might
write what he did to the Lords of Council. But by this it appears, that no sort
of Men is so much for the Kings Prerogative, but when it becomes in any
instance uneasy to them, they will shelter themselves under the Law. He
continued afterward by many Letters to the Protector to complain of his ill
usage: That he had been then seven weeks in the Fleet without Servants, a
Chaplain, or a Physician: that though he had his Writ of Summons, he was not
suffered to come to the Parliament, which might be a ground afterward of
questioning their Proceedings: He advised the Protector not to make himself a
Party in these matters, and used all the insinuations of decent flattery that
he could invent, with many sharp reflections on Cranmer, and stood much on the
force of Laws, that they could not be repealed by the Kings Will. Concerning
which he mentions a Passage that fell out between Cromwell and himself before
the late King. Cromwell said, That the King might make or repeal Laws as the
Roman Emperors did, and asked his opinion about it, whether the Kings Will was
not a Law? To which he answered facetiously, That he thought it was much better
for the King to make the Law his Will, than to make his Will a Law. But
notwithstanding all his Letters, (which are printed in the second Volume of
Acts and Monum. Edit. 1641.) yet he continued a Prisoner till the Parliament
was over, and then by the Act of Pardon he was set at liberty. This was much
censured as an invasion of Liberty; and it was said these at Court durst not
suffer him to come to the House, lest he had confounded them in all they did.
And the explaining Justification with so much nicety in Homilies that were to
be read to the People, was thought a needless subtilty. But the former abuses,
of trusting to the Acts of Charity that Men did, by which they fancied they
bought Heaven, made Cranmer judge it necessary to express the matter so nicely;
though the expounding those Places of St. Paul, was, as many thought, rather
according to the strain of the Germans, than to the meaning of these Epistles.
And upon the whole matter, they knew Gardiners haughty temper, and that it was
necessary to mortify him a little, though the pretense on which they did it
seemed too slight for such severities. But it is ordinary, when a thing is once
resolved on, to make use of the first occasion that offers for effecting it.
The Party that opposed the Reformation, The Lady Mary dissatisfied with the
Reformation.
finding these attempts so unsuccessful, engaged the Lady Mary to appear for
them. She therefore wrote to the Protector, that she thought all changes in
Religion till the King came to be of Age, were very much contrary to the
respect they owed the memory of her Father, if they went about to shake what he
had settled; and against their duty to their young Master, to hazard the Peace
of his Kingdom, and engage his Authority in such Points before he was capable
of judging them. The Protector writ to her. Collection Number 15.
I gather this to have been the substance of her Letter, from the Answer which
the Protector wrote, which is in the Collection. In it he wrote, That he
believed her Letter flowed not immediately from her self, but from the
instigation of some malicious Persons. He protests they had no other design,
but the Glory of God, and the Honor and Safety of the King, and that what they
had done was so well considered, that all good Subjects ought rather to rejoice
at it than find fault with it. And whereas she had said, That her Father had
brought Religion to a godly order and quietness, to which both Spiritualty and
Temporalty did without compulsion give their assent; he remembers her what
opposition the stiff-necked Papists gave him; and what Rebellions they raised
against him; which he wonders how she came so soon to forget: Adding, that
death had prevented him before he had finished these Godly Orders which he had
designed; and that no kind of Religion was perfected at his death, but all was
left so uncertain, that it must inevitably bring on great disorders, if God did
not help them; and that himself and many others could witness what regret their
late Master had, when he saw he must die before he had finished what he
intended. He wond'red that she, who had been well bred, and was learned, should
esteem true Religion, and the knowledge of the Scriptures, Newfangledness, or
Fantasy. He desired she would turn the Leaf, and look on the other side, and
would with an humble Spirit, and by the assistance of the Grace of God,
consider the matter better.

Thus things went on, till the Parliament met, The Parliament meets.
which was summoned to meet the fourth of November. The day before it met,
November. 3.
the Protector gave too public an instance how much his prosperous success had
lifted him up. For by a Patent under the Great Seal, Rot. Pat. 1. Reg. 7. Part.
he was warranted to sit in Parliament on the Right Hand of the Throne under
the Cloth of State; and was to have all the Honors and Privileges that at
any time any of the Unkles of the Kings of England, whether by the Fathers or
Mothers side, had enjoyed; with a Non obstante to the Statute of Precedence.
The Lord Rich had been made Lord Chancellor on the 24th of October; but whether
the Protector, or he, opened the Parliament by any Speech, does not appear from
the Journal of the Lords House. On the 10th of December. December. 10.
a Bill was brought in for the repealing several Statutes. It was read the
second time on the 12th, and the third time on the 16th day. On the 19th 19.
some Provisoes were added to it, and it was sent down to the Commons, who sent
it up the 23d of December, 23. Dec.
to which the Royal Assent was given. The Commons had formed a new Bill for
repealing these Statutes, which upon some Conferences they were willing to let
fall; only some Provisoes were added to the old one; upon which, the Bishops of
London, Duresme, Ely, Hereford, and Chichester, dissented. An Act repealing
former severe Laws.
The Preamble of it sets forth, That nothing made a Government happier than
when the Prince governed with much clemency, and the Subjects obeyed out of
love. Yet the late King and some of his Progenitors, being provoked by the
unruliness of some of their People, had made severe Laws; but they judging it
necessary now to recommend the Kings Government to the affections of the
People, repealed all Laws that made any thing to be Treason, but what was in
the Act of 25 of Edw. the 3d, as also two of the Statutes about Lollardies,
together with the Act of the six Articles, and the other Acts that followed in
explanation of that. All Acts in King Henry the 8th's time declaring any thing
to be Felony that was not so declared before, were also repealed, together with
the Acts that made the Kings Proclamations of equal Authority with Acts of
Parliament. It was also Enacted, That all who denied the Kings Supremacy, or
asserted the Popes, in words, should for the first offense forfeit their Goods
and Chattels, and suffer Imprisonment during pleasure; For the second offense
should incur the Pain of Praemunire; and for the third offense be attainted of
Treason. But if any did in Writing, Printing, or by any overt Act or Deed,
endeavor to deprive the King of his Estate, or Titles, particularly of his
Supremacy; or to confer them on any other, after the first of March next, he
was to be adjudged guilty of High Treason: and if any of the Heirs of the Crown
should usurp upon another, or did endeavor to break the Succession of the
Crown, it was declared high Treason, in them, their Aiders and Abettors. And
all were to enjoy the Benefit of Clergy, and the Privilege of Sanctuary, as
they had it before King Henry the 8th's Reign; excepting only such as were
guilty of Murder, Poisoning, Burglary, Robbing on the Highway, the stealing of
Cattle, or stealing out of Churches or Chapels. Poisoners were to suffer as
other Murderers. None were to be accused of Words, but within a Month after
they were spoken. And those who called the French King by the Title of King of
France, were not to be esteemed guilty of the Pains of translating the Kings
Authority, or Titles, on any other. In Chapter Coll. Camb. among Parkers Papers.
This Act was occasioned by a Speech that Archbishop Cranmer had in
Convocation, in which he exhorted the Clergy to give themselves much to the
study of the Scripture, and to consider seriously what things were in the
Church that needed Reformation, that so they might throw out all the Popish
trash, that was not yet cast out. Upon this some intimated to him, that as long
as the six Articles stood in force, it was not safe for them to deliver their
Opinions. This he reported to the Council, upon which they ordered this Act of
Repeal. By it the Subjects were delivered from many fears they were under, and
had good hopes of a mild Government, when in stead of procuring new severe Law,
the old ones were let fall. The Council did also free the Nation of the
jealousies they might have of them by such an abridgment of their own Power.
But others judged it had been more for the interest of the Government, to have
kept up these Laws still in force, but to have restrained the execution of
them. This Repeal drew on another, which was sent from the Commons on the 20th
of December, and was agreed to by the Lords on the 21st. It was of an Act in
the 28th year of the last King by which all Laws made while his Son was under
24 years of Age might be by his Letters Patents, after he attained that Age,
annulled as if they had never been. Which they altered thus, That the King,
after that Age, might by his Letters Patents void any Act of Parliament for the
future; but could not so void it from the beginning, as to annul all things
done upon it between the making and annulling of it, which were still to be
lawful Deeds.

The next Bill of a public nature was concerning the Sacrament. Act about the
Communion.
Which was brought in, and read the first time, on the 12th of November. the
second time on the 15th, and was twice read on the 17th. And on the 24th a Bill
was brought in for the Communion to be received in both kinds; on the third of
December it was read the second time, and given to the Protector; on the 5th
read again, and given to two Judges; on the 7th it was read again, and joined
to the other Bill about the Sacrament. And on the 10th the whole Bill was
agreed to by all the Peers, except the Bishops of London, Hereford, Norwich,
Worcester, and Chichester, and sent down to the Commons. On the 17th a Proviso
was sent after it, but was rejected by the Commons, since the Lords had not
agreed to it. On the 20th it was sent up agreed to, and had afterward the
Royal Assent. By it, first, the value of the Holy Sacrament, commonly called
the Sacrament of the Altar, and in the Scripture the Supper and Table of the
Lord, was set forth; together with its first Institution; but it having been of
late marvellously abused, some had been thereby brought to a contempt of it,
which they had expressed in Sermons, Discourses, and Songs, (in words not fit
to be repeated;) therefore whosoever should so offend after the first of May
next was to suffer Fine and Imprisonment at the Kings Pleasure; and the
Justices of the Peace were to take Information, and make Presentiments of
Persons so offending within three Months after the offenses so committed,
allowing them Witnesses for their own purgation. And it being more agreeable to
Christ's first Institution, And the practice of the Church for 500 years after
Christ, that the Sacrament should be given in both the kinds of Bread and Wine,
rather than in one kind only; Therefore it was Enacted, That it should be
commonly given in both kinds, except necessity did otherwise require it. And it
being also more agreeable to the first Institution, and the primitive Practice,
that the People should receive with the Priest, than that the Priest should
receive it alone; therefore the day before every Sacrament, an Exhortation was
to be made to the People, to prepare themselves for it, in which the benefits
and danger of worthy and unworthy receiving were to be expressed, and the
Priests were not without a lawful cause to deny it to any who humbly asked it.

This was an Act of great consequence, Communion appointed in both kinds.
since it reformed two abuses that had crept into the Church. The one was the
denying the Cup to the Laity, the other was the Priests communicating alone. In
the first Institution it is plain, that as Christ bad all drink of the Cup, and
his Disciples all drank of it, so St. Paul directed every one to examine
himself, that he might eat of that Bread and drink of that Cup. From thence the
Church for many Ages continued this practice: and the Superstition of some who
received only in one kind was severely censured, and such were appointed either
to receive the whole Sacrament or to abstain wholly. It continued thus till the
belief of the Corporal Presence of Christ was set up; and then the keeping and
carrying about the Cup in Processions, not being so easily done, some began to
lay it aside. For a great while the Bread was given dipped in the Cup, to
represent a bleeding Christ, as it is in the Greek Church to this day. In other
Places the Laity had the Cup given them, but they were to suck it through Pipes
that nothing of it should fall to the ground. But since they believed that
Christ was in every crumb of Bread, it was thought needless to give the
Sacrament in both kinds: So in the Council of Constance the Cup was ordered to
be denied the Laity, though they acknowledged it to have been instituted and
practiced otherwise. To this the Bohemians would never submit; though to compel
them to it much Blood was shed in this Quarrel. And now in the Reformation this
was every where one of the first things with which the People were possessed,
the opposition of the Roman Church herein to the Institution of Christ being so
manifest.

And all private Masses put down.
At first this Sacrament was also understood to be a Communion of the Body and
Blood of Christ, of which many were to be partakers: while the fervor of
devotion lasted, it was thought a scandalous and censurable thing if any had
come unto the Christian Assemblies, and had not stayed to receive these Holy
Mysteries: and the denying to give any one the Sacrament was accounted a very
great punishment. So sensible were the Christians of their ill condition when
they were hindered to participate of it. But afterward the former Devotion
slackening, the good Bishops in the 4th and 5th Centuries complained often of it,
that so few came to Receive: yet the Custom being to make Oblations before the
Sacrament, out of which the Clergy had been maintained during the poverty of
the Church, the Priests had a great mind to keep up the constant use of these
Oblations; and so persuaded the Laity to continue them, and to come to the
Sacrament, though they did not receive it: and in process of time they were
made to believe that the Priest received in behalf of the whole People. And
whereas this Sacrament was the Commemoration of Christ's Sacrifice on the Cross,
and so by a Phrase of Speech was called a Sacrifice, they came afterward to
fancy that the Priests consecrating and consuming the Sacrament was an Action
of it self expiatory, and that both for the Dead and the Living. And there rose
an infinite number of several sorts of Masses; some were for commemorating the
Saints, and those were called the Masses of such Saints; others for a
particular Blessing, for Rain, Health, etc. and indeed for all the accidents of
Humane Life, where the addition or variation of a Collect made the difference:
So that all that Trade of Massing was now removed. An Intimation was also made
of Exhortations to be read in it, which they intended next to set about. These
abuses in the Mass gave great advantages to those who intended to change it
into a Communion. But many in stead of managing them prudently, made unseemly
Jests about them: and were carried by a lightness of temper to make Songs, and
Plays, of the Mass: for now the Press went quick, and many Books were printed
this year about matters of Religion; the greatest number of them being
concerning the Mass; which were not written in so decent and grave a style as
the matter required. Against this Act only five Bishops protested. Many of that
Order were absent from the Parliament, so the opposition made to it was not
considerable.

The next Bill brought into the House of Lords, An Act about the Admission of
Bishops.
was concerning the admission of Bishops to their Sees by the Kings Letters
Patents. Which being read, was committed to the Archbishop of Canterburies
care on the fifth of November, and was read the second time on the 10th, and
committed to some of the Judges, and was read the third time on the 28th of
November, and sent down to the Commons on the 5th of December. There was also
another Bill brought in, concerning the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the
Bishops Courts, on the 17th of November, and passed, and sent down on the 13th
of December. But both these Bills were put in one, and sent up by the Commons
on the 20th of that Month, and assented to by the King. By this Act it was set
forth, That the way of choosing Bishops by Conge d'Eslire was tedious and
expenceful, that there was only a shadow of Election in it, and that therefore
Bishops should thereafter be made by the Kings Letters Patents, upon which they
were to be consecrated: And whereas the Bishops did exercise their Authority,
and carry on Processes, in their own Names, as they were wont to do in the time
of Popery; and since all Jurisdiction both Spiritual and Temporal was derived
from the King, that therefore their Courts and all Processes should be from
henceforth carried on in the Kings Name, and be sealed by the Kings Seal, as it
was in the other Courts of Common Law, after the first of July next; excepting
only the Archbishop of Canterbury's Courts, and all Collations, Presentations,
or Letters of Orders, which were to pass under the Bishops proper Seals as
formerly. Upon this Act great advantages were taken to disparage the
Reformation, as subjecting the Bishops wholly to the pleasure of the Court.

At first, The ancient ways of electing Bishops.
Bishops were chosen and ordained by the other Bishops in the Countries where
they lived. The Apostles, by that Spirit of discerning, which was one of the
extraordinary gifts they were endued with, did ordain the first Fruits of their
Labors; and never left the Election of Pastors to the discretion of the
People: Indeed when they were to ordain Deacons, who were to be trusted with
the distribution of the public Alms, they appointed such as the People made
choice of; but when St. Paul gave directions to Timothy and Titus about the
choice of Pastors, all that depended on the People by them was that they should
be blameless and of good report. But afterward, the poverty of the Church
being such, that Churchmen lived only by the free bounty of the People, it was
necessary to consider them much; so that in many Places the choice began among
the People; and in all Places it was done by their approbation and good liking.
But great disorders followed upon this, as soon as by the Emperors turning
Christians, the Wealth of Church-benefices made the Pastoral Charge more
desirable: and the vast numbers of those who turned Christians with the Tide,
brought in great Multitudes to have their Votes in these Elections. The
inconvenience of this was felt early in Phrygia, where the Council of Laodicea
made a Canon against these Popular Elections. Yet in other parts of Asia, and
at Rome, there were great and often Contests about it. In some of these many
Men were killed. In many Places the inferior Clergy chose their Bishops. But in
most Places the Bishops of the Province made the choice, yet so as to obtain
the consent of the Clergy and People. The Emperors by their Laws made it
necessary that it should be confirmed by the Metropolitans: They reserved the
Elections of the great Sees to themselves, or at least the Confirmation of
them. Thus it continued till Charles the Great's time. But then the nature of
Church-employments came to be much altered. For though the Church had Predial
Lands with the other Rights that belonged to them by the Roman Law, yet he
first gave Bishops and Abbots great Territories, with some branches of Royal
Jurisdiction in them, who held these Lands of him, according to the Fewdal
Laws. This, as it carried Churchmen off from the humility and abstraction from
the World which became their Function, so it subjected them much to the Humors
and Interests of those Princes on whom they had their dependence. The Popes,
who had made themselves Heads of the Hierarchy, could not but be glad to see
Churchmen grow rich and powerful in the World; but they were not so well
pleased to see them made so much the more dependent on their Princes: and no
doubt by some of those Princes that were thus become Patrons of Churches, the
Bishoprics were either given for Money, or charged with reserved Pensions.
Upon this the Popes filled the World with the complaints of Simony, and of
enslaving Churchmen to court Interests; and so would not suffer them to accept
of Investitures from their Princes; but set up for free Elections, as they
called them, which they said were to be confirmed by the See-Apostolick. So the
Canons Secular or Regular in Cathedral Churches were to choose the Bishops, and
their Election was to be confirmed at Rome: yet Princes in most Places got some
hold of those Elections, so that still they went as they had a mind they
should. Which was often complained of as a great slavery on the Church; and would
have been more universally condemned, if the World had not been convinced that
the matter would not be much the better, if there should have been set up
either the Popular or Synodical Elections, in which Faction was like to sway
all. King Henry had continued the old way of the Elections by the Clergy, but
so, as that it seemed to be little more than a mockery; but now it was thought
a more ingenuous way of proceeding, to have the thing done directly by the
King, rather than under the thin covert of an involuntary Election.

For the other Branch about Ecclesiastical Courts, The Causes before them
concerning Wills and Marriages, being matters of a mixed nature, and which only
belong to these by the Laws of the Land, and being no parts of the Sacred
Functions; it was thought no Invasion of the Sacred Offices to have these tried
in the Kings Name. But the Collation of Benefices, and giving of Orders, which
are the chief parts of the Episcopal Function, were to be performed still by
the Bishops in their own Names. Only Excommunication, by a fatal neglect,
continued to be the punishment for contempts of these Courts; which belonging
only to the Spiritual Cognizance, ought to have been reserved for the Bishop
with the assistance of his Clergy. But the Canonists had so confounded all the
Ancient Rules about the Government of the Church, that the Reformers being
called away by Considerations that were more obvious and pressing, there was
not that care taken in this that the thing required. And these errors or
oversights in the first concoction have by a continuance grown since into so
formed a strength, that it is easier to see what is amiss, than to know how to
rectify it.

On the 29th of November the Bill against Vagabonds was brought in. An Act
against Vagabonds.
By this it was Enacted, That all that should any where loiter without work, or
without offering themselves to work, three days together; or that should run
away from work, and resolve to live idly, should be seized on, and whosoever
should present them to a Justice of Peace, was to have them adjudged to be his
Slaves for two years; and they were to be marked with the Letter V. imprinted
with a hot Iron on their Breast. A great many Provisoes follow concerning
Clerks so convict, which show that this Act was chiefly levelled at the idle
Monks and Friars, who went about the Country, and would betake themselves to no
employment; but finding the People apt to have compassion on them, they
continued in that course of life. Which was of very ill consequence to the
State. For these Vagrants did every where alienate the Peoples Minds from the
Government, and persuaded them that things would never be well settled, till
they were again restored to their Houses. Some of these came often to London,
on pretense of suing for their Pensions; but really to practice up and down
through the Country: To prevent this, there was a Proclamation set out on the
18th of September, requiring them to stay in the Places where they lived, and
to send up a Certificate where they were, to the Court of Augmentations; who
should thereupon give order for their constant payment. Some thought this Law
against Vagabonds was too severe, and contrary to that common liberty, of which
the English Nation has been always very sensible, both in their own, and their
Neighbors particulars. Yet it could not be denied but extreme Diseases
required extreme Remedies: and perhaps there is no punishment too severe for
Persons that are in health, and yet prefer a loitering course of life to an
honest employment. There followed in the Act many excellent Rules for providing
for the truly poor and indigent in the several Places where they were born, and
had their abode. Of which this can only be said, That as no Nation has laid
down more effectual Rules for the supplying the Poor, than England, so that
indeed none can be in absolute want; so the neglect of these Laws is a just and
great reproach on those who are charged with the execution of them, when such
numbers of poor Vagabonds swarm every where without the due restraints that the
Laws have appointed.

On the 6th of December the Bill for giving the Chantries to the King was
brought into the House of Lords. An Act giving the Chantries to the King.
It was read the second time on the 12th, the third time on the 13th, and the
fourth time on the 14th of that Month. It was much opposed, both by Cranmer on
the one hand, and the Popish Bishops on the other. The late Kings Executors saw
they could not pay his Debts, nor satisfy themselves in their own pretensions
formerly mentioned, out of the Kings Revenue; and so intended to have these to
be divided among them. Cranmer opposed it long. For the Clergy being much
impoverished by the Sale of the impropriated Tithes, that ought in all reason
to have returned into the Church, but upon the dissolution of the Abbeys were
all sold among the Laity; he saw no probable way remaining for their supply,
but to save these Endowments till the King were of Age, being confident he was
so piously disposed, that they should easily persuade him to convert them all
to the bettering of the Condition of the poor Clergy that were now brought into
extreme misery. And therefore he was for reforming and preserving these
Foundations, till the Kings full Age. The Popish Bishops liked these Endowments
so well, that upon far different Motives, they were for continuing them in the
state they were in. But those who were to gain by it were so many that the Act
passed; the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of London, Duresme, Ely,
Norwich, Hereford, Worcester, and Chichester, dissenting. So it being sent down
to the House of Commons, was there much opposed by some Burgesses; who
represented that the Boroughs, for which they served, could not maintain their
Churches, and other public Works of the Guilds and Fraternities, if the Rents
belonging to them were given to the King, for these were likewise in the Act.
This was chiefly done by the Burgesses of Linn, and Coventry; who were so
active, that the whole House was much set against that part of the Bill for the
Guild-Lands. Therefore those who managed that House for the Court, took these
off by an assurance that their Guild-Lands should be restored to them. And so
they desisted from their opposition, and the Bill passed on the promise given
to them, which was afterward made good by the Protector. In the Preamble of
the Act it is set forth, That the great superstition of Christians, rising out
of their ignorance of the true way of Salvation by the death of Christ, in
stead of which they had set up the vain conceits of Purgatory, and Masses
satisfactory, was much supported by Trentals and Chantries. And since the
converting these to godly uses, such as the endowing of Schools, Provisions for
the Poor, and the augmenting of Places in the Universities, could not be done
by Parliament; they therefore committed it to the care of the King. And then
reciting the Act made in the 37th year of his Fathers Reign, they give the King
all such Chantries, Colleges, and Chapels, as were not possessed by the late
King, and all that had been in being any time these five years last past: as
also all Revenues belonging to any Church, for Anniversaries, Obits, and
Lights; together with all Guild-Lands, which any Fraternity of Men enjoyed, for
Obits, or the like: and appoint these to be converted to the maintenance of
Gramar-Schools, or Preachers, and for the increase of Vicarages. After this
followed the Act giving the King the Customs known by the Name of Tonnage and
Poundage, besides some other Laws, of Matters that are not needful to be
remembered in this History. Last of all came the Kings general Pardon; with the
common mon Exceptions, among which, one was of these who were then Prisoners in
the Tower of London, in which the Duke of Norfolk was included. So all business
being ended, the Parliament was Prorogued from the 24th of December to the 20th
of April following.

Acts that were proposed but not carried.
But having given this account of these Bills that were passed, I shall not
esteem it an unfruitful piece of History to show what other Bills were
designed. There were put into the House of Lords, two Bills that were stifled.
The one was, for the use of the Scriptures, which came not to a second reading.
The other was a Bill for erecting a new Court of Chancery for Ecclesiastical
and Civil Causes, which was committed to some Bishops and Temporal Lords, but
never more mentioned. The Commons sent up also some Bills, which the Lords did
not agree to. One was about Benefices with Cure, and Residence. It was
committed, but never reported. Another was for the Reformation of diverse Laws,
and of the Courts of Common Law; and a third was, that married Men might be
Priests, and have Benefices. To this the Commons did so readily agree, that it
being put in on the 19th of December, and read then for the first time, it was
read twice the next day, and sent up to the Lords on the 21st. But being read
there once, it was like to have raised such debates, that, it being resolved to
end the Session before Christmas, the Lords laid it aside.

But while the Parliament was sitting, The Convocation meets.
they were not idle in the Convocation; though the Popish Party was yet so
prevalent in both Houses, that Cranmer had no hopes of doing any thing, till
they were freed of the trouble which some of the great Bishops gave them. The
lower House made some Petitions. Number 16.
The most important thing they did, was the carrying up four Petitions to the
Bishops, which will be found in the Collection. 1. That according to the
Statute made in the Reign of the late King there might be Persons empow'red for
reforming the Ecclesiastical Laws. The second, That according to the ancient
Custom of the Nation, and the Tenor of the Bishops Writ to the Parliament, the
inferior Clergy might be admitted again to sit in the House of Commons, or that
no Acts concerning matters of Religion might pass without the sight and assent
of the Clergy. The third, That since diverse Prelates, and other Divines, had
been in the late Kings time appointed to alter the Service of the Church; and
had made some progress in it, that this might be brought to its full
perfection. The fourth, That some consideration might be had for the
maintenance of the Clergy, the first year they came into their Livings, in
which they were charged with the First Fruits; to which they added, a desire to
know whether they might safely speak their minds about Religion, without the
danger of any Law. For the first of these four Petitions, an account of it
shall be given hereafter. As to the second it was a thing of great consequence,
and deserves to be farther considered in this place.

Anciently, all the free Men of England, The Inferior Clergy desire to be
admited to have Representatives in the House of Commons.
or at least those that held of the Crown in chief, came to Parliament; and
then the inferior Clergy had Writs as well as the Superior, and the first of
the three Estates of the Kingdom were the Bishops, the other Prelates and the
Inferior Clergy. But when the Parliament was divided into two Houses, then the
Clergy made likewise a Body of their own, and sat in Convocation, which was
the third Estate. But the Bishops having a double capacity, the one of
Ecclesiastical Prelature, the other of being the Kings Barons, they had a Right
to sit with the Lords as a part of their Estate, as well as in the Convocation.
And though by parity of reason it might seem that the rest of the Clergy, being
Freeholders as well as Clarks, had an equal Right to choose, or be chosen, into
the House of Commons; yet whether they were ever in possession of it, or
whether according to the Clause Premonentes in the Bishops Writ, they were ever
a part of the House of Commons, is a just doubt. For besides this assertion in
the Petition that was mentioned, and a more large one in the second Petition,
which they presented to the same purpose, which is likewise in the Collection,
Number 17.
I have never met with any good reason to satisfy me in it. There was a
general Tradition in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, that the Inferior Clergy departed
from their Right of being in the House of Commons; when they were all brought
into the Praemunire upon Cardinal Wolsey's Legatine Power, and made their
submission to the King. But that is not credible: for as there is no footstep
of it, which in a time of so much writing and printing must have remained, if
so great a change had been then made; so it cannot be thought, that those who
made this Address but 17 years after that Submission, (many being alive in
this, who were of that Convocation, Polidore Virgil in particular, a curious
observer since he was maintained here to write the History of England) none of
them should have remembered a thing that was so fresh, but have appealed to
Writs and ancient Practices. But though this design of bringing the Inferior
Clergy into the House of Commons did not take at this time, yet it was again
set on foot, in the end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and Reasons were offered to
persuade her to set it forward. Which not being then successful, these same
Reasons were again offered to King James, to induce him to endeavor it. The
Paper that discovers this was communicated to me by Dr. Borlace the Worthy
Author of the History of the Irish Rebellion. It is corrected in many places by
the Hand of Bishop Ravis, then Bishop of London, a Man of great Worth. This,
for the affinity of the matter, and the curiosity of the thing, I have put into
the Collection, Number 18.
with a large Marginal Note, as it was designed to be transcribed for King
James. But whether this Matter was ever much considered, or lightly laid aside,
as a thing unfit and unpracticable, does not appear; certain it is, that it
came to nothing. Upon the whole matter it is not certain what was the Power or
Right of these Proctors of the Clergy in former times: Some are of opinion,
that they were only assistants to the Bishops, Coke 4. Inst. 3.4
but had no Voice in either House of Parliament. This is much confirmed by an
Act passed in the Parliament of Ireland, in the 28th Year of the former Reign,
which sets forth in the Preamble, That though the Proctors of the Clergy were
always summoned to Parliament, yet they were no part of it; nor had they any
right to Vote in it, but were only Assistants in case Matters of Controversy
or Learning came before them, as the Convocation was in England, which had been
determined by the Judges of England after much enquiry made about it. But the
Proctors were then pretending to so high an Authority, that nothing could pass
without their consents; and it was presumed they were set on to it by the
Bishops, whose Chaplains they were for the most part. Therefore they were by
that Act declared to have no right to Vote.

From this some infer, they were no other in England, and that they were only
the Bishops Assistants and Council. But as the Clause Premonentes in the Writ,
seems to make them a part of the Parliament; so these Petitions suppose that
they sat in the House of Commons anciently, where it cannot be imagined they
could sit, if they came only to be Assistants to the Bishops, for then they
must have sat in the House of Lords rather; as the Judges, the Masters of
Chancery, and the Kings Council do. Nor is it reasonable to think they had no
Voice: for then their sitting in Parliament had been so insignificant a thing,
that it is not likely they would have used such endeavors to be restored to it
since their coming to Parliament, upon such an account must have been only a
charge to them.

There is against this Opinion an Objection of great force from the Acts passed
in the 21st Year of Richard the second's Reign. In the second Act of that
Parliament it is said, That it was first prayed by the Commons, and that the
Lords Spiritual, and the Proctors of the Clergy, did assent to it, upon which
the King, by the assent of all the Lords and Commons, did enact it. The 12th
Act of that Parliament was a Repeal of the whole Parliament that was held in
the 11th Year of that Reign; and concerning it, it is expressed, That the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, the Proctors of the Clergy, and the Commons, being
severally examined, did all agree to it. From hence it appears, that these
Proctors were then not only a part of the Parliament, but were a distinct Body
of Men that did severally from all the rest deliver their Opinions. It may seem
strange, that if they were then considered as a part of either House of
Parliament, this should be the only time in which they should be mentioned as
bearing their share in the Legislative Power. In a matter that is so perplexed
and dark, I shall presume to offer a Conjecture which will not appear perhaps
improbable. In the 129th Page of the former part, I gave the Reasons that made
me think the lower House of Convocation consisted at first only of the Proctors
of the Clergy. So that by the Proctors of the Clergy, both in the Statute of
Ireland, and in those made by Richard the second, is perhaps to be understood
the lower House of Convocation: and it is not unreasonable to think, that upon
so great an occasion as the annulling a whole Parliament, to make it pass the
better, in an Age in which the People paid so blind a Submission to the
Clergy, the concurrence of the whole Representative of the Church might have
been thought necessary. It is generally believed, that the whole Parliament
sat together in one House before Edward the thirds time, and then the Inferior
Clergy were a part of that Body without question. But when the Lords and
Commons sat apart, the Clergy likewise sat in two Houses, and granted
Subsidies as well as the Temporalty. It may pass for no unlikely conjecture
that the Clause Premonentes was first put in the Bishops Writ for the summoning
of the lower House of Convocation, consisting of these Proctors, and
afterward, though there was a special Writ for the Convocation, yet this might
at first have been continued in the Bishops Writ by the neglect of a Clark, and
from thence be still used. So that it seems to me most probable, that the
Proctors of the Clergy were both in England and Ireland the lower House of
Convocation. Now before the Submission which the Clergy made to King Henry, as
the Convocation gave the King great Subsidies, so the whole business of
Religion lay within their Sphere. But after the Submission they were cut off
from meddling with it, except as they were authorized by the King. So that
having now so little power left them, it is no wonder they desired to be put in
the state they had been in before the Convocation was separated from the
Parliament: or at least that Matters of Religion should not be determined till
they had been consulted, and had reported their Opinions and Reasons. The
Extreme of raising the Ecclesiastical Power too high in the Times of Popery,
had now produced another of depressing it too much. For seldom is the
Counterpoise so justly balanced, that Extremes are reduced to a well-tempered
Mediocrity.

For the third Petition, it was resolved that many Bishops and Divines should
be sent to Windsor to labor in the Matter of the Church Service. But that
required so much consideration, that they could not enter on it during a
Session of Parliament. And for the fourth, what Answer was given to it does not
appear.

On the 29th of November a Declaration was sent down from the Bishops
concerning the Sacraments being to be received in both kinds. To which, Jo.
Tyler the Prolocutor, and several others set their Hands; and being again
brought before them, it was agreed to by all without a contradictory Vote: 64
being present, among whom I find Polidore Virgil was one. And on the 17th of
December the Proposition concerning the Marriage of the Clergy was also sent to
them, and subscribed, by 35 affirmatively, and by 14 negatively: so it was
ordered, that a Bill should be drawn concerning it. I shall not here digress to
give an account of what was alleged for, or against this, reserving that to
its proper place, when the thing was finally settled.

And this is all the account I could recover of this Convocation. I have
chiefly gathered it from some Notes, and other Papers, of the then Dr. Parker,
(afterward Archbishop of Canterbury) which are carefully preserved with his
other MSS. in Corpus Christi College Library, at Cambridge. To which Library I
had free access by the favor of the most learned Master Dr. Spencer, with the
other Worthy Fellows of that House: and from thence I collected many remarkable
things in this History.

The Parliament being brought to so good a Conclusion, the Protector took out a
new Commission, in which all the Addition that is made to that Authority he
formerly had is, that in his absence he is empow'red to substitute another to
whom he might delegate his Power.

The state of Affairs in Germany.
And thus this Year ended in England, but as they were carrying on the
Reformation here, it was declining apace in Germany. The Duke of Saxe and the
Landgrave were this Year to command their Armies apart. The Duke of Saxe kept
within his own Country, but having there unfortunately divided his Forces, the
Emperor overtook him near the Alb at Mulberg; where the Emperors Soldiers
crossing the River, and pursuing him with great fury, after some resistance, in
which he himself performed all that could be expected from so great a Captain,
was taken Prisoner, 1547. Apr. 24. Duke of Saxe taken.
and his Country all possessed by Maurice, who was now to be invested with the
Electoral Dignity. He bore his misfortunes with a greatness and equality of
mind that is scarce to be paralleled in History. Neither could the insolence
with which the Emperor treated him, nor the fears of death to which he adjudged
him, nor that tedious imprisonment which he suffered so long, ever shake or
disorder a Mind that was raised so far above the inconstancies of Humane
Affairs. And though he was forced to submit to the hardest Conditions possible,
of renouncing his Dignity and Dominions, some few Places being only reserved
for his Family; yet no Entreaties nor Fears could ever bring him to yield any
thing in Matters of Religion. He made the Bible his chief Companion and Comfort
in his sharp Afflictions; which he bore so, as if he had been raised up to that
end, to let the World see how much he was above it. It seemed unimitable; and
therefore engaged Thuanus, with the other excellent Writers of that Age, to set
it out with all the advantages that so unusual a temper of mind deserved. Yet
had those Writers lived in our Age, and seen a great King, not overpow'red by a
Superior Prince, but by the meanest of his own People, and treated with equal
degrees of malice and scorn, and at last put to death openly, with the
Pageantry of Justice; and yet bearing all this with such invincible Patience,
Heroical Courage, and most Christian Submission to God, they had yet found a
nobler Subject for their Eloquent Pens: but he saved the World the labor of
giving a just Representation of his behavior in his Sufferings, having left
his own Portraiture drawn by himself in such lively and lasting Colors.

The Landgrave of Hesse saw he could not long withstand the Emperors Army, now
so lifted up with success; and therefore was willing to submit to him on the
best terms that his Sons-in-law the Elector of Brandenburg, and Maurice of
Saxe, could obtain for him. Which were very hard, only he was to enjoy his
Liberty, without any Imprisonment, and to preserve his Dominions. But the
Emperors Ministers dealt most unfaithfully with him in this: For in the German
Language there was but one Letters difference, and that only inverted, between
perpetual Imprisonment, and any Imprisonment, ( Ewig for Emig) so by this base
Artifice, he was, when he came and submitted to the Emperor, detained a
Prisoner. He had not the Duke of Saxes temper, but was out of measure
impatient, and did exclaim of his ill usage: but there was no remedy, for the
Emperor was now absolute. All the Towns of Germany, Magdeburg and Breme only
excepted, submitted to him, and redeemed his favor by great Sums of Money, and
many Pieces of Ordnance. And the Bohemians were also forced to implore his
Brothers mercy, who before he would receive them into his Hands, got his
Revenue to be raised vastly. And now the Empire was wholly at the Emperors
mercy. Nothing could withstand him who had in one year turned out two Electors.
1546. Apr 16. Herman excommunicated at Rome.
For Herman Bishop of Colen, as he was before condemned by the Pope, so was
also degraded from that Dignity by the Emperor; and Adolph, whom he had
procured to be made his Coadjutor, was declared Elector. Many of his Subjects
and Neighbor Princes offered their Service, if he would stand to his own
defense; but he was very old, and of so meek a temper, that he would suffer no
Blood to be shed on his account; and therefore withdrew peaceably to a
retirement in which he lived four years till his death. His Brother that was
Bishop of Munster and Dean of Bonne, Nov. 4. Herman resigned.
who had gone along with him in his Reformation, was also turned out; and
Gropper was made Dean, who was esteemed one of the learnedest and best Men of
the Clergy at this time. He is said to have expressed a generous contempt of
the highest Dignity the Sea of Rome could bestow on him, for he refused a
Cardinals Hat when it was offered him: yet in this matter he had not behaved
himself as became so good a Man, and so Learned a Divine. For he had consented
to the Changes had been made, and was in a correspondence with Martin Bucer,
whom Herman brought to Colen: (as will appear by an excellent Letter of Bucers
to him, Number 19.
which will be found in the Collection concerning that matter) by which it is
plain he went along with them from the beginning. But it seems he did it
covertly and fearfully, and was afterward drawn off, either by the love of the
World, or the fears of the Cross; of which it appears Bucer had then some
apprehensions, though he expressed them very modestly. Groppers Memory being in
such high esteem, and this Letter being found among Bucers Papers, I thought
the publishing of it would not be unacceptable, though it be of a Foreign
Matter.

Germany being thus under the Power and Dread of the Emperor, a Diet was
summoned to Ausburg: Where the chief Church was taken from the Protestants, and
put into the Cardinal of Ausburg's Hands, to have the Mass set up again in it,
though the Town was so much Protestant that they could find none that would
come to it, but some poor People who were hired. The Emperor, among other
Propositions he put in to the Diet, pressed this, That all differences in
Religion, which had so distracted Germany, might be removed. The Ecclesiastical
Princes answered, That the only way to effect that, was to submit to the
General Council that was at Trent: Those that were for the Ausburg Confession,
said, they could submit to no Council where the Pope Presided, and where the
Bishops were sworn to obey him; but would submit to it, if that Oath was
dispensed with, and their Divines admitted to defend their Opinions, and all
the Decrees that had been made were again considered. In this difference of
Opinion, the Emperor thought that if the whole matter should be left to his
discretion, to which all should be bound to submit, he would then be able to
determine it as he pleased. So he dealt privately with the Electors Palatine,
and Saxe; and as they published it afterward, gave them secret assurances
about the freedom of their Religion, and that he only desired this to put him
in a capacity of dealing on other terms with the Pope. Upon which, they
consented to a Decree, referring the Matter of Religion wholly to his care. But
the Deputies from the Cities, who looked on this as a giving up of their
Religion, could not be wrought to do it, without Conditions, which they put
into another Writing, as explanatory of the Submission: But the Emperor took no
notice of that, and only thanked them for their confidence in him, and so the
Decree was published. All this was in some sort necessary for the Emperor, who
was then in very ill terms with the Pope about the business of Placenzia. 1547.
Sept. 10. Petrus Aloisius killed.
For the Popes Natural Son Petrus Aloisius being killed by a Conspiracy, the
Governor of Millain had seized on Placenzia, which made the Pope believe the
Emperor was accessory to it: for which the Reader is referred to the Italian
Historians. The Pope saw the Emperor in one Summer delivered of a War, which he
had hoped would have entangled him his whole life; and though in decency he
could not but seem to rejoice, and did so no doubt, at the ruin of those whom
he called Heretics, yet he was not a little grieved to see the Emperor so much
exalted.

The Proceedings at Trent.
At Trent the Legates had been often threatened and affronted by the Emperors
Ambassadors and Bishops who were much set on reforming abuses, and lessening
the Power of the Sea of Rome. So they had a mind to break up the Council; but
that would have been so scandalous a thing, and so resented by the Emperor,
that they resolved rather on a Translation into some Town of the Popes, to
which it was not likely the Imperialists would follow them, and so at least the
Council would be suspended, if not dissolved. For this Remove, they laid hold
on the first color they could find. One dying of a malignant Fever, it was
given out and certified by Physicians, that he died of the Plague; so in all
have they translated the Council to Bologna. Apr. 21. The first Session of
Bologna
The Imperialists protested against it; but in vain, for thither they went. The
Emperor was hereby quite disappointed of his chief design, which was to force
the Germans to submit to a Council held in Germany: and therefore no Plague
appearing at Trent, he pressed the return of the Council thither. But the Pope
said, it was the Councils act, and not his; and that their Honor was to be
kept up; that therefore such as stayed at Trent were to go first to Bologna,
and acknowledge the Council, and they should then consider what was to be done.
So that now all the hope the Germans had, was, that this difference between the
Pope and Emperor might give them some breathing; and time might bring them out
of these extremities into which they were then driven. Upon these disorders the
Foreign Reformers, who generally made Germany their Sanctuary, were now forced
to seek it elsewhere. So Peter Martyr, in the end of November this Year, was
brought over to England, by the Invitation which the Archbishop of Canterbury
sent him in the Kings Name. He was born in Florence, where he had been an
Augustinian-Monk. He was learned in the Greek, and the Hebrew, which drew on
him the envy of the rest of his Order, whose Manners he inveighed often against.
So he left them, and went to Naples, where he gathered an Assembly of those who
loved to Worship God more purely. This being made known, he was forced to leave
that Place, and went next to Lucca, where he lived in society with Tremellius
and Zanchius. But being also in danger there, he went to Zurick with
Bernardinus Ochinus, that had been one of the most celebrated Preachers of
Italy, and now forsook his former Superstitions. From Zurick he went to Basil;
and from thence by Martin Bucers means he was brought to Strasburg; where
Cranmers Letter found both him and Ochinus. The Latter was made a Canon of
Canterbury, with a Dispensation of Residence; and by other Letters Patents 40
Marks were given yearly to him, and as much to Peter Martyr.

There had been this Year some differences between the English and French
concerning the Fortifications about Bulloigne. The French quarrel about
Bulloigne.
The English were raising a great Fort by the Harbor there. This being
signified to King Henry by Gaspar Coligny, afterward the famous Admiral of
France, then Governor of the neighboring Parts to Bulloigne; it was
complained of at the Court of England. It was answered, That this was only to
make the Harbor more secure, and so the Works were ordered to be vigorously
carried on. But this could not satisfy the French, who plainly saw it was of
another sort than to be intended only for the Sea. The King of France came and
viewed the Country himself, and ordered Coligny to raise a Fort on a high
Ground near it, which was called the Chastilion Fort, and commanded both the
English Fort and the Harbor. But the Protector had no mind to give the French
a color for breaking with the English; so there was a Truce and further
Cessation agreed on, in the end of September. These are all the considerable
Foreign Transactions of this Year, in which England was concerned. But there
was a secret contrivance laid at home of a high nature, which though it broke
not out till the next Year, yet the beginnings of it did now appear.

The Protectors Brother, Thomas Seimour, was brought to such a share in his
Fortunes, The Breach between the Protector and the Admiral.
that he was made a Baron, and Lord Admiral. But this not satisfying his
ambition, he endeavored to have linked himself into a nearer relation with the
Crown, by marrying the Kings Sister the Lady Elizabeth. But finding he could
not compass that, he made his Addresses to the Queen Dowager. Who enjoying now
the Honor and Wealth the late King had left her, resolved to satisfy her self
in her next Choice; and entertained him a little too early, for they were
married so soon after the Kings death, that it was charged afterward on the
Admiral, that if she had brought a Child as soon as might have been after the
Marriage, it had given cause to doubt whether it had not been by the late King:
which might have raised great disturbance afterward. But being thus married to
the Queen, he concealed it for some time, till he procured a Letter from the
King, recommending him to her for a Husband: upon which they declared their
Marriage, with which the Protector was much offended. Being thus possessed of
great Wealth, and being Husband to the Queen Dowager, he studied to engage all
that were about the King to be his Friends: and he corrupted some of them by
his Presents, and forced one on Sir John Cheek. That which he designed, was,
That whereas in former times, the Infant Kings of England had had Governors of
their Persons, distinct from the Protectors of their Realms; which Trusts were
divided between their Unkles; it being judged too much to join both in one
Person, who was thereby too great, whereas a Governor of the Kings Person
might be a check on the Protector; he would therefore himself be made Governor
of the Kings Person, alleging, that since he was the Kings Uncle as well as
his Brother, he ought to have a proportioned share with him in the Government.
About Easter this Year he first set about this design; and corrupted some about
the King who should bring him sometimes privately through the Gallery to the
Queens Lodgings, and he desired they would let him know when the King had
occasion for Money, and that they should not always trouble the Treasury, for
he would be ready to furnish him, and he thought a young King might be taken
with this. So it happened that the first time Latimer preached at Court, the
King sent to him to know what Present he should make him: Seimour sent him 40
l. but said he thought 20 enough to give Latimer, and the King might dispose of
the rest as he pleased. Thus he gained ground with the King, whose sweet nature
exposed him to be easily won by such Artifices.

It is generally said, that all this difference between the Brothers was begun
by their Wives; and that the Protectors Lady, being offended that the younger
Brothers Wife had the precedence of her, which she thought belonged to her
self, did thereupon raise and inflame the differences. But in all the Letters
that I have seen concerning this Breach, I could never find any such thing once
mentioned. Nor is it reasonable to imagine that the Duchess of Somerset should
be so foolish as to think that she ought to have the precedence of the Queen
Dowager. Therefore I look upon this Story as a mere Fiction, though it is
probable enough there might upon some other accounts have been some Animosities
between the two high-spirited Ladies, which might have afterward be thought to
have occasioned their Husbands quarrel.

It is plain in the whole thread of this Affair, that the Protector was at
first very easy to be reconciled to his Brother; and was only assaulted by
him; but bore the trouble he gave him with much patience for a great while,
though in the end, seeing his factious temper was incurable, he laid off Nature
too much, when he consented to his Execution. Yet all along till then, he had
rather too much encouraged his Brother to go on, by his readiness to be after
every breach reconciled to him. When the Protector was in Scotland, the Admiral
then began to act more avowedly, and was making a Party for himself; of which
Paget took notice, and charged him with it in plain terms. He asked him, why he
would go about to reverse that, which himself and others had consented to under
their Hands? Their Family was now so great, that nothing but their mutual
quarrelling could do them any prejudice: But there would not be wanting
officious Men to inflame them, if they once divided among themselves; and the
Breaches among near Friends commonly turn to the most irreconcilable Quarrels.
Yet all was ineffectual; for the Admiral was resolved to go on, and either get
himself advanced higher, or to perish in the Attempt. It was the knowledge of
this which forced the Protector to return from Scotland so abruptly and
disadvantageously, for the securing of his Interest with the King, on whom his
Brothers Artifices had made some impression. Whether there was any
reconciliation made between them before the Parliament met, is not certain. But
during the Session, the Admiral got the King to write with his own Hand a
Message to the House of Commons, for the making of him the Governor of his
Person; and he intended to have gone with it to the House, and had a Party
there, by whose means he was confident to have carried his business. He dealt
also with many of the Lords and Counselors to assist him in it. When this was
known, before he had gone with it to the House, some were sent to him in his
Brothers Name to see if they could prevail with him to proceed no further. He
refused to hearken to them, and said, That if he were crossed in his attempt,
he would make this the blackest Parliament that ever was in England. Upon that,
he was sent for by Order from the Council, but refused to come. Then they
threatened him severely, and told him the Kings Writing was nothing in Law, but
that he who had procured it, was punishable for doing an Act of such a nature,
to the disturbance of the Government, and for engaging the young King in it. So
they resolved to have sent him to the Tower, and to have turned him out of all
his Offices. But he submitted himself to the Protector and Council: and his
Brother and he seemed to be perfectly reconciled. Yet as the Protector had
reason to have a watchful Eye over him, so it was too soon visible that he had
not laid down, but only put off his high Projects, till a fitter conjuncture.
For he began the next Christmas to deal Money again among the Kings Servants,
and was on all occasions infusing into the King a dislike of every thing that
was done, and did often persuade him to assume the Government himself. But the
sequel of this Quarrel proved fatal to him, as shall be told in its proper
place. And thus ended the Year 1547.

On the 8th of Jan. 1548. Jan. 8.
next year Gardener was brought before the Council. Where it was told him, that
his former Offenses being included in the Kings general Pardon, he was
thereupon discharged; a grave admonition was given him to carry himself
reverently and obediently, and he was desired to declare whether he would
receive the Injunctions and Homilies, and the Doctrine to be set forth from
time to time by the King and Clergy of the Realm. He answered, he would conform
himself as the other Bishops did, and only excepted to the Homily of
Justification, and desired four or five days to consider of it. What he did at
the end of that time does not appear from the Council-Book, no farther mention
being made of this matter; for the Clerks of Council did not then enter every
thing with that exactness that is since used. He went home to his Diocese,
where there still appeared in his whole behavior great malignity to Cranmer,
and to all motions for Reformation; yet he gave such outward compliance, that
it was not easy to find any advantage against him, especially now since the
Councils great Power was so much abridged.

The Marquess of Northampton sues a Divorce for Adultery.
In the end of Jan. the Council made an Order concerning the Marquess of
Northampton, which will oblige me to look back a little for the clear account
of it. This Lord, who was Brother to the Queen Dowager, had married Anne
Bourchier, Daughter to the Earl of Essex, the last of that Name. But she being
convicted of Adultery, he was divorced from her; which according to the Law of
the Ecclesiastical Courts was only a separation from Bed and Board. Upon which
Divorce, it was proposed in King Henry's time to consider what might be done in
favor of the Innocent Person, when the other was convicted of Adultery. So in
the beginning of King Edward's Reign, on the 7th of May, a Commission was
granted to the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of Duresme and Rochester,
(this was Holbeack, who was not then translated to Lincoln) to Dr. Ridley, and
six more, ten in all, of whom six were a Quorum, to try whether the Lady Anne
was not by the Word of God so lawfully divorced, that she was no more his Wife,
and whether thereupon he might not marry another Wife. This being a new Case,
and of great importance, Cranmer resolved to examine it with his ordinary
diligence, and searched into the Opinions of the Fathers and Doctors, Ex MSS.
D. Stillingfleet.
so copiously, that his Collections about it grew into a large Book, (the
Original whereof I have perused;) the greatest part of it being either written,
or marked, and interlined, with his own Hand. This required a longer time, than
the Marquess of Northampton could stay; and therefore presuming on his great
Power, without waiting for Judgment, he solemnly married Eliz. Daughter to
Brook Lord Cobham. On the 28th of Jan. Information was brought to the Council
of this, which gave great scandal, since his first Marriage stood yet firm in
Law. So he being put to answer for himself, said, he thought that by the Word
of God he was discharged of his tie to his former Wife; and the making
Marriages indissoluble was but a part of the Popish Law, by which it was
reckoned a Sacrament; and yet the Popes, knowing that the World would not
easily come under such a Yoke, had by the help of the Canonists invented such
distinctions, that it was no uneasy thing to make a Marriage void among them:
and that the condition of this Church was very hard, if upon Adulteries, the
Innocent must either live with the Guilty, or be exposed to temptations to the
like sins, if a separation was only allowed, but the bond of the Marriage
continued undissolved. But since he had proceeded so far before the Delegates
had given sentence, it was Ordered, that he and his new Wife should be parted;
and that she should be put into his Sister the Queen Dowagers keeping, till the
matter were tried, whether it was according to the Word of God, or not; and
that then further order should be given in it. Upon this the Delegates made
have, and gathered their Arguments together. Of which I shall give an Abstract,
both for the clearing of this matter, (concerning which not many years ago
there were great debates in Parliament) and also to show the exactness of the
Proceedings in that time.

Christ condemned all Marriages upon Divorces, The Grounds on which he was
suffered to marry again.
except in the Case of Adultery; which seemed manifestly to allow them in that
Case. And though this is not mentioned by St. Mark, and St. Luke, yet it is
enough that St. Matthew has it. Christ also defined the state of Marriage, to be
that in which two are one flesh; so that when either of the two has broken
that Union, by becoming one with another Person, then the Marriage is
dissolved. And it is often repeated in the Gospel, That married Persons have
power over one another Bodies, and that they are to give due benevolence to
each other; which is plainly contrary to this way of separation without
dissolving the Bond. St. Paul putting the case of an Unbeliever departing from
the Partner in Marriage, says, The Believing Party, whether Brother or Sister,
is not under Bondage in such a case: which seems a discharge of the Bond in
case of Desertion: and certainly Adultery is yet of a higher nature. But
against this was alleged on the other side, That our Saviors allowing Divorce
in the Case of Adultery was only for the Jews, to whom it was spoken, to
mitigate the cruelty of their Law, by which the Adulteress was to be put to
death: and therefore he yielded Divorce in that Case, to mitigate the severity
of the other Law. But the Apostle writing to the Gentile Christians, at Rome,
and Corinth, said, The Wife was tied by the Law to the Husband, as long as he
lived. And that other general Rule, Whom God has joined together let no Man put
asunder, seems against the dissolving the Bond. To this it was answered, That
it is against separating as well as dissolving: that the Wife is tied to her
Husband; but if he cease to be her Husband, that tie is at an end: That our
Savior left the Wife at liberty to divorce her Husband for Adultery, though
the Law of Moses had only provided, That the Adulterous Wife, and he who
defiled her, were to die, but the Husband who committed Adultery was not so
punishable; therefore our Savior had by that Provision declared the Marriage
to be clearly dissolved by Adultery.

From hence they went to examine the Authorities of the Fathers. Hermes was for
putting away the Adulteress, but so as to receive her again upon repentance.
Origin thought the Wife could not marry again after divorce. Tertullian allowed
Divorce, and thought it dissolved the Marriage as much as Death did. Epiphanius
did also allow it. And Ambrose in one Place allows the Husband to marry after
divorce for Adultery, though he condemns it always in the Wife. Basil allowed
it on either side upon Adultery. Jerome, who condemns the Wife's marrying,
though her Husband were guilty of Adultery; and who disliked the Husbands
marrying again, though he allowed him to divorce upon Adultery, or the
suspicion of it; yet when his Friend Fabiola had married after a Divorce, he
excuses it, saying it was better for her to marry than to burn. Chromatius
allowed of second Marriages after Divorce. And so did Chrysostom, though he
condemned them in Women so divorcing. St. Austin was sometimes for a Divorce,
but against Marriage upon it; yet in his Retractations, he writ doubtfully of
his former Opinion. In the Civil Law, the Christian Emperors allowed the power
of Divorcing both to Husband and Wife, with the right of marrying afterward.
Nor did they restrain the Grounds of Divorce only to Adultery, but permitted it
in many other Cases; as if the Wife were guilty of Treason, had treated for
another Husband, had procured an Abortion, had been whole nights abroad, or had
gone to see the public Plays without leave from her Husband; besides many
other Particulars. Against which, none of the Fathers had writ, nor endeavored
to get them repealed. All these Laws were confirmed by Justinian, when he
gathered the Laws into a Body, and added to it where they were defective. In
the Canon Law, it is provided, that he whose Wife is defiled must not be denied
lawful Marriage. Pope Gregory denied a second Marriage to the guilty Person,
but allowed it to the Innocent after Divorce. Pope Zachary allowed the Wife of
an Incestuous Adulterer to be married, if she could not contain. In the Canon
Law, the Council of Tribury is cited, for allowing the like Privilege to the
Husbands. By the Council of Elvira, a Man that finds that his Wife intends to
kill him, may put her away, and marry another; but she must never marry. The
Council of Arles recommended it to Husbands, whose Wives were found in
Adultery, not to marry during their Lives. And that at Elvira denied the
Sacrament, to a Wife who left an Adulterous Husband, and married another; but
she might have the Communion when her first Husband died: So the second
Marriage was accounted good, but only indecent. But the Council of Milevi
forbids both Man and Wife to marry after Divorce. All these were Collected by
Cranmer, with several very important Reflections on most of the Quotations out
of the Fathers. With these, there is another Paper, given in by one who was
against the dissolving the Bond, in which there are many Quotations brought
both from the Canon Law, and the Fathers, for the contrary Opinion. But most of
the Fathers there cited are of the latter Ages; in which the state of Coelibate
had been so exalted by the Monks, that, in all doubtful Cases, they were
resolved still to prefer that Opinion which denied Liberty for further
Marriages. In conclusion, this whole Question was divided into eight Queries,
which were put to some learned Men; (who these were does not appear) and they
returned their Answer in favor of the second Marriage, Number 20.
which will be found in the Collection. In end Sentence was given, allowing the
second Marriage in that Case, and by consequence confirming the Marquess of
Northampton's Marriage to his second Wife, who upon that was suffered to
cohabit with him. Yet four years after, he was advised to have a special Act of
Parliament for confirming this Sentence; of which mention shall be made in its
due time and Place.

Some further advance in the Reformation.
The next thing that came under consideration, was the great contradiction that
was in most of the Sermons over England. Some were very earnest to justify and
maintain all the old Rites that yet remained; and others were no less hot to
have them laid aside. So that in London especially, the People were wonderfully
distracted by this variety among their Teachers. The Ceremonies of Candlemass,
and their observance of Lent, with the Rites used on Palm Sunday, Good Friday,
and Easter, were now approaching. Those that were against them, condemned them
as superstitious Additions to the Worship of God, invented in the dark Ages,
when an outward Pageantry had been the chief thing that was looked after. But
others set out the good use that might be made of these things, and taught
that, till they were abolished by the Kings Authority, they ought to be still
observed. In a Visitation that had been made, (when I cannot learn, only it
seems to have been about the end of King Henry's Reign) it had been declared
that Fasting in Lent was only a Positive Law. Several Directions were also
given about the use of the Ceremonies, and some hints as if they were not to be
long continued: and all Wakes, and Plough-Mondays, were suppressed, since they
drew great Assemblies of People together, which ended in drinking and
quarrelling. These I have also inserted in the Collection, Number 21.
having had a Copy of the Articles left at the Visitation of the Deanery of
Doncaster, communicated to me by the favor of a most learned Physician, and
curious Antiquary, Dr. Nathaniel Johnston, who sent me this with several other
Papers out of his generous zeal for contributing every thing in his power to
the perfecting of this Work.

The Country People generally loved all these Shows, Processions, and
Assemblies, as things of diversion: and judged it a dull business, only to come
to Church for Divine Worship, and the hearing of Sermons: therefore they were
much delighted with the gayity and cheerfulness of those Rites. But others,
observing that they kept up all these things, just as the Heathens did their
Plays and Festivities for their Gods, judged them contrary to the gravity and
simplicity of the Christian Religion, and therefore were earnest to have them
removed. This was so effectually represented to the Council, by Cranmer, that
an Order was sent to him about it. He sent it to Bonner, who, being Dean of the
College of Bishops in the Province of Canterbury, was to transmit, all such
Orders over the whole Province. By it, the carrying of Candles on Candlemass
day, of Ashes on Ash Wednesday, and Palms on Palm Sunday, were forbid to be
used any longer. And this was signified by Bonner, to Thirleby Bishop of
Westminster, on the 28th of June, as appears by the Register.

After this, on the 6th of February, A Proclamation against those who Innovated
without Authority,
a Proclamation was issued out against such as should on the other hand rashly
innovate, or persuade the People from the old accustomed Rites, under the Pains
of Imprisonment, and other Punishments at the Kings pleasure; excepting only
the formerly mentioned Rites; to which are added, the creeping to the Cross on
Good Friday, taking Holy Bread and Water, and any other that should be
afterward at any time certified by the Archbishop of Canterbury to the other
Bishops in the Kings Name to be laid aside. And for preventing the mischiefs
occasioned by rash Preachers, none were to preach without License from the King
or his Visitors, the Archbishop of Canterbury, or the Bishop of the Diocese,
where they lived; excepting only Incumbents preaching in their own Parishes.
Those who preached otherwise were to be imprisoned till Order were given for
their punishment: and the inferior Magistrates were required to see to the
execution of these Orders. This Proclamation, which is in the Collection,
Number 22.
was necessary for giving Authority to the Archbishop of Canterbury's Letters,
which were censured as a great presumption for him without any public Order to
appoint changes in Sacred Rites. Some observed, that the Council went on making
Proclamations with arbitrary Punishments, though the Act was repealed that had
formerly given so great Authority to them. To this it was answered, That the
King by his Supremacy might still in matters of Religion make new Orders, and
add Punishments upon the Transgressors; yet this was much questioned, though
universally submitted to.

The general taking away of all Images. Number 23.
On the 11th of Feb. there was a Letter sent from the Council to the Archbishop
for a more considerable Change. There were every where great Heats about the
removing of Images which had been abused to superstition: Some affirming, and
others denying, that their Images had been so abused. There were in the
Churches some Images of so strange a nature, that it could not be denied that
they had been abused. Such was the Image of the Blessed Trinity, which was to
be censed, on the day of the Innocents, Processionale in Festo Innocentium.
by him that was made the Bishop of the Children: This shows it was used on
other days, in which it is like it was censed by the Bishop where he was
present. How this Image was made, can only be gathered from the Prints that
were of it at that time: In which the Father is represented sitting on the one
hand as an old Man with a Triple Crown and Rays about him, the Son on the
other hand as a young Man with a Crown and Rays, and the Blessed Virgin
between them, and the Emblem of the Holy Ghost a Dove spread over her Head. So
it is represented in a fair Book of the Hours according to the use of Sarum,
printed Anno 1526. The impiety of this did raise horror in most Men's Minds,
when that unconceivable Mystery was so grossly expressed. Besides, the taking
the Virgin into it, was done in pursuance to what had been said by some
blasphemous Friars, of her being assumed into the Trinity. In another Edition
of these it is represented by three Faces formed in one Head. These things had
not been set up by any public Warrant; but having been so long in practice,
they stood upon the general Plea that was for keeping the Traditions of the
Church: for it was said, that the Promises made to the Church were the same in
all Ages, and that therefore every Age of the Church had an equal Right to
them. But for the other Images, it was urged against them, that they had been
all consecrated with such Rites and Prayers, that it was certain they were
every one of them superstitious; since it was prayed, that they might be so
blessed and consecrated, that whosoever worshipped them might by the Saints
Prayers and Aid, whom they represented, obtain every thing that he desired. So
they resolved on an entire removal of all Images. And the Protector with the
Council wrote to Cranmer, that for putting an end to all these Contests, and
that the living Images of Christ might not quarrel about the dead ones, it was
concluded they should all of them be taken down: and he was to give order to
see this executed in his own Diocese, and to transmit it to the other Bishops
to be in like manner executed by them. There were also Orders given, That all
rich Shrines, with all the Plate belonging to them should be brought in to the
Kings use, and that the Clothes that covered them, should be converted to the
use of the Poor. This gave Gardener, and those of his Party, a new affliction.
For in his Diocese he had been always on their side that were for keeping up
the Images. But they all submitted, and so the Churches were emptied of all
these Pictures and Statues which had been for diverse Ages the chief Objects of
the Peoples Worship.

And now the greatest care of the Reformers was, Some Restraints put on
Preachers.
to find the best Men they could, who should be licensed by the Kings Authority
to preach. To whom the Council sent a Letter in the beginning of May, May 4.
intimating, that by the restraint put on preaching, they only intended to put
an end to the rash contentions of indiscreet Men, and not to extinguish the
lively Preaching of the pure Word of God, Number 24.
made after such sort as the Holy Ghost should for the time put in the
Preachers mind: They are therefore charged to preach sincerely, and with that
caution and moderation, that the Time and Place shall require: and
particularly, that they should not set on the People to make Innovations, or to
run before those whom they should obey; but should persuade them to amend their
Lives, and keep the Commandments of God, and to forsake all their old
Superstitions. And for the things not yet changed, they ought to wait
patiently, and to conclude that the Prince did either allow, or suffer them:
and in delivering things to the People, they were ordered to have a special
regard to what they could bear.

But this temper was not observed. Some plainly condemned it as a political
patching, and said, Why should not all these Superstitions be swept away at
once? To this it was answered by others, That as Christ forbade the pulling up
of the Tares, lest with them they should pull up good Wheat; so if they went
too forwardly to the changing of things, they might in that have change much
for the worse: and great care was to be had not to provoke the People too much,
lest in the infancy of the King, or in some ill conjuncture of Affairs, they
might be disposed to make Commotions. And the compliances that both Christ and
his Apostles gave to the Jews, when they were to abroga^e the Mosaical Law,
were often insisted on. It was said, if they who were clothed with a Power of
Miracles, for the more effectual conviction of the World, condescended so far;
it was much more reasonable for them, who had not that Authority over Men's
Consciences, and had no immediate signs to show from Heaven, to persuade the
People rather by degrees to forsake their old mistakes, and not to precipitate
things by an over have.

This Winter there was a Committee of selected Bishops and Divines appointed
for examining all the Offices of the Church, and for reforming them. Some had
been in King Henry's time employed in the same business, in which they had made
a good progress, which was now to be brought to a full perfection. Bishops and
Divines examine the Offices of the Church.
Therefore the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, the Bishops of London,
Duresme, Worcester, Norwich, St. Asaph, Salisbury, Coventry and Litchfield,
Carlisle, Bristol, St. David's, Ely, Lincoln, Chichester, Hereford, Westminster,
and Rochester, with Doctors Cox, May, Tailor, Heins, Robertson, and Redmayn,
were appointed to examine all the Offices of the Church, and to consider how
far any of them needed amendment.

The thing they first examined was the Sacrament of the Eucharist; which being
the chief Symbol of Christian Communion, was thought to deserve their chief
care. And here they managed their Enquiries in the same manner that was used in
the former Reign; in which, when any thing was considered in order to a Change,
it was put into several Queries, to which every one in Commission was to give
his Answer in writing. It is no wonder if the confusions, that followed in
Queen Mary's Reign, have deprived us of most of these Papers; yet there is one
Set of them preserved, relating to some Questions about the Priests single
communicating; Whether one Man's receiving it can be useful to another? What was
the Oblation or Sacrifice that was made of Christ in the Mass? Wherein the Mass
consisted? When the Priests receiving alone began? Whether it was convenient to
retain that, and continue Masses satisfactory for departed Souls? Whether the
Gospel ought to be taught at the time of the Mass? Whether it were convenient
to have it all in a known Tongue or not? And when the reserving or hanging up
of the Sacrament first began? To these the Bishops made their several Answers.
Some answered them all: others answered only a few of them; it is like,
suspending their Opinions about those which they answered not. The Bishops of
London, Worcester, Chichester, and Hereford, gave in their Answers once in one
Paper together; but afterward they joined with the Bishops of Norwich, and St.
Asaph, and all those six gave a joint Answer in one Paper. Those are not all
subscribed, as those which I inserted in the former Volume were; or at least
the Papers I have, are not the Originals. But Cranmers Hand is over every one
of them, marking the Name of the Bishop to whom they belonged; and Dr. Cox has
set his Hand and Seal to his Answer. Number 25.
By these, which are in the Collection, the Reader will perceive how generally
the Bishops were addicted to the old Superstition, and how few did agree in all
things with Cranmer. It may be thought that these Questions were given out
before the Act of Parliament passed, in which the Priests single communicating
is turned into a Communion of more. Yet by that Act it was only provided, That
all who came to receive should be admitted, but Priests were not forbid to
Consecrate if none were to Communicate, which was the thing now inquired into.

The Corruptions in the Office of the Communion examined.
It is certain there was no part of Worship more corrupted than this Sacrament
was. The first Institution was so plain and simple, that, except in the Words,
This is my Body, there is nothing which could give a color to the corruptions
that were afterward brought in. The Heathens had their Mysteries, which the
Priests concealed with hard and dark words, and dressed up with much Pomp; and
thereby supported their own esteem with the People; since they looked on these
to be of so high a nature, that all those who had the ordering of them were
accounted Sacred Persons. The Primitive Christians retained the first
simplicity of Divine Institutions for some Ages. But afterward, as their
number increased, they made use of some things not unlike those the Heathens
had practiced, to draw the Gentiles more easily into their belief; since
external Shows make deep impressions in the Vulgar. And those that were thus
brought over, might afterward come to like these things for their own sakes,
which were at first made use of only to gain the World. Others finding some
advantage in such Services, that were easy, and yet appeared very pompous,
that they might cover great faults by countenancing and complying with the
follies that were in vogue contributed liberally to the improvement of them.
And after the Roman Emperors turned Christian, much of that vast Wealth, of
which they and their People were Masters, was brought into the Church, and
applied to these Superstitions. Yet it became not so universally corrupted,
till by the Invasion of the Goths, Vandalls, and other barbarous Nations, the
Roman Empire was broken and divided into many Kingdoms. These new Conquerors
were rude and ignorant, wholly given to sensible things, and Learning being
universally extinguished, gross Superstition took place; for more refined
Superstitions would not serve the turn of darker Ages: But as they grew in
Ignorance they continued in the Belief and Practice of more absurd things.

The high opinion they justly had of this Sacrament being much raised by the
Belief of the Corporal Presence of Christ in it, which came in afterward, then
the dull Wits of the Priests, and the Wealth of the People, were employed to
magnify it with all the pomp possible. All the Vessels and Garments belonging
to it were consecrated and anointed with much devotion; the whole Office was in
an unknown Tongue. A great part of it was to be secretly whispered, to make it
appear the more wonderful charm. But chiefly the words of Consecration were by
no means to be heard by the People; it being fabled, that when the words were
spoken aloud, some Shepherds had repeated them over their Bread, which was
thereupon presently turned into Flesh. Besides that it was but suitable that a
Change which was not to be seen, should be made by words not to be heard. The
Priest was not to approach it, but after so many Bowings, Crossings, and
Kissings of the Altar; and all the while he went through with the Office, the
People were only now and then blessed by a short Blessing, The Lord be with
you, and even that in Latin. Then after Consecration, the Bread was lifted up,
and all the People worshipped it, as if Christ had appeared in the Clouds. It
was often exposed on the Altar, and carried about in Processions, with the
Ceremonies of carrying Flambeaux before it, which the greatest Persons
accounted it an Honor to do; the Priest that carried it all the while going
pompously under a rich Canopy.

This was also thought most effectual for all the accidents of life. And
whereas it was first only intended to be a Commemoration and Communion of the
Death of Christ; that seemed almost forgotten, but it was applied to all other
ends imaginable. That which brought in most Custom was, Trentalls, which was a
Method of delivering Souls out of Purgatory, by saying 30 Masses a year for
them. And whereas it was observed, that Men on the Anniversaries of their
Birth-days, Wedding, or other happy accidents of their Lives, were commonly in
better humor; so that Favors were more easily obtained; they seemed to have
had the same opinion of God and Christ. So they ordered it, that three of these
should be said on Christmas day, three on Epiphany, three on the Purification
of the Blessed Virgin, three on the Annunciation, three on the Resurrection,
three on the Ascension, three on Whit-Sunday, three on Trinity-Sunday, three on
the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, and three on her Birthday; hoping that
these days would be the Mollia tempora when God and Christ, or the Blessed
Virgin, would be of easier access, and more ready to grant their desires. Yet
the most unaccountable part of all, was the Masses on the Saints days, praying
that the Intercession of the Saint might make the Sacrifice acceptable, that
the Saint, for whose Honor these Oblations were solemnly offered, would by his
Merits procure them to be accepted, and that the Sacrifice might bring to them
a greater Indulgence, being offered up by the Suffrages of the Saint. If the
Sacrifice was of Jesus Christ, and was of its own Nature expiatory, how this
should be done in honor to a Saint, and become of greater virtue by his
Intercession, was a thing very hard to be understood. There were many Pieces of
ridiculous Pageantry also used in it, as the laying the Host in the Sepulcher
they made for Christ on Good Friday; and that not only the Candles that were to
burn at the Easter Celebration, but the very Fire that was to kindle them, was
particularly consecrated on Easter Eve. Some Masses were believed to have a
peculiar Virtue in them. For in the Mass Book printed at London Anno 1500.
there is a Mass for avoiding sudden death; which Pope Clement made in the
College with all his Cardinals, and granted to all who heard it 270 days of
Indulgence, charging them that they should hold in their Hand a burning Candle
all the while it was saying, and for five days after should likewise hold a
Candle, kneeling during the whole Mass: and to those that did so, sudden death
should do no harm. And it is added, that this was certain, and approved, in
Avignion, and all the neighboring Places. All this I have opened the more
largely, to let the Reader plainly understand, what things were then in this
Sacrament that required Reformation: and I have gathered these things out of
the Mass Book, then most used in England, and best known by the Name of the
Missal after the use of Sarum.

A new Office for the Communion set out.
The first step these deputed Bishops and Divines made, was to reform this. But
they did not at once mend every thing that required it, but left the Office of
the Mass as it was, only adding to it that which made it a Communion. It began
first with an Exhortation, to be used the day before, which differs not much
from that now used. Only after the advice given concerning Confession, it is
added, That such as desired to make auricular Confession, should not censure
those who were satisfied with a general Confession to God, and that those who
used only Confession to God and to the Church should not be offended with those
who used auricular Confession to a Priest; but that all should keep the Rule of
Charity, every Man being satisfied to follow his own Conscience, and not
judging another Man's in things not appointed by God. After the Priest had
received the Sacrament, he was to turn to the People and read an Exhortation to
them; the same we now use, only a little varied in words. After that, followed
a Denunciation against Sinners, requiring them who were such, and had not
repented, to withdraw, lest the Devil should enter into them as he did into
Judas. Then after a little pause, to see if any would withdraw; there was to
follow a short Exhortation, with a Confession of sins, and Absolution, the very
same which we do yet retain. Then those Texts of Scripture were read, which we
yet read; followed with the Prayer, We do not presume, etc. After this, the
Sacrament was to be given in both kinds; first to the Ministers then present,
and then to all the People, with these words, The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ
which was given for thee, preserve thy Body unto Everlasting Life; and, The
Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ which was shed for thee, preserve thy Soul unto
Everlasting Life. When all was done, the Congregation was to be dismissed with
a Blessing. The Bread was to be such as had been formerly used, and every one
of the Breads so consecrated was to be broken in two or more pieces; and the
People were to be taught that there was no difference in the quantity they
received, whether it were small, or great, but that in each of them they
received the whole Body of Christ. If the Wine, that was at first consecrated,
did not serve, the Priest was to consecrate more; but all to be without any
Elevation. This Office, being thus finished, was set forth with a Proclamation,
reciting, That whereas the Parliament had Enacted that the Communion should be
given in both kinds to all the Kings Subjects, it was now ordered to be given
in the Form here set forth, and all were required to receive it with due
reverence, and Christian behavior, and with such uniformity as might encourage
the King to go on in the setting forth godly Orders for Reformation, which he
intended most earnestly to bring to effect by the help of God: Willing his
Subjects, not to run before his direction, and so by their rashness to hinder
such things; assuring them of the earnest zeal he had to set them forth, hoping
they would quietly and reverently tarry for it.

This was published on the 8th of March, and on the 13th Books were sent to all
the Bishops of England, requiring them to send them to every Parish in their
Diocese, that the Curates might have time, both to instruct themselves about
it, and to acquaint their People with it; so that by the next Easter it might
be universally received in all the Churches of the Nation. This was variously
censured. It is variously censured.
Those that were for the old Superstition, were much troubled to have
Confession thus left indifferent, and a general Confession of sins to be used,
with which they apprehended the People would for the most part content
themselves. Chiefly that Auricular Confession was laid down.
In the Scripture there was a Power of Binding and Loosing sins given to the
Apostles. And St. James exhorted those to whom he wrote, to confess their
faults to one another. Afterward Penitents came to be reconciled to the
Church, when they had given public scandal, either by their Apostasy, or ill
Life, by an open Confession of their sins; and after some time of separation
from the other pure Christians in Worship, and an abstention from the
Sacrament, they were admitted again to their share of all the Privileges that
were given in common to Christians. But according to the nature of their sins,
they were, besides the public Confession, put under such Rules as might be
most proper for curing these ill Inclinations in them: and according to the
several Ranks of sins, the time and degrees of this Penitence was proportioned.
And the Councils that met in the fourth and fifth Centuries made the regulating
these penitentiary Canons the chief Subject of their Consultations. In many
Churches, there were penitentiary Priests, who were more expert in the
knowledge of these Rules, and gave directions about them: which were taken away
in Constantinople upon the indiscretion of which one of them had been guilty.
For secret sins, there was no obligation to confess, since all the Canons were
about public scandals: yet for these, the devout People generally went to
their Priests for their Counsel, but were not obliged to it; and so went to
them for the distempers of their Minds, as they did to Physicians for the
Diseases of their Bodies.

About the end of the 5th Century, they began in some Places to have secret
Penances; either within Monasteries, or other Places which the Priests had
appointed: and upon a secret Confession, and performing the Penance imposed,
Absolution was also given secretly: whereas in former times, Confession and
Absolution had been performed openly in the Church. In the 7th Century it was
every where practiced, that there should be secret Penance for secret sins:
which Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury did first bring into a Method, and
under Rules. But about the end of the 8th Century, the commutation of Penance,
and exchanging it for Money, or other Services to the Church, came to be
practiced: and then began Pilgrimages to Holy Places, and afterward the going
to the Holy War: and all the severities of Penance were dispensed with to such
as undertook these. This brought on a great Relaxation of all Ecclesiastical
Discipline. Afterward, Croisadoes came in use, against such Princes as were
deposed by Popes: and to these was likewise added, to encourage all to enter
into them, that all Rules of Penitence were dispensed with to such as put on
that Cross. But Penitence being now no more public, but only private, the
Priests managed it as they pleased, and so by Confession entered into all Men's
secrets, and by Absolution had their Consciences so entirely in their Power,
that the People were generally governed by them. Yet because the Secular
Priests were commonly very ignorant, and were not put under such an association
as was needful to manage those designs, for which this was thought an excellent
Engine; therefore the Friars were employed every where to hear Confessions, and
to give Absolutions. And to bring in Customers to them, two new things were
invented. The one was, a Reserving of certain Cases, in which such as were
guilty of them could not be absolved but by the Popes, or those deputed by
them: and the Friars had faculties in the Popes Name to absolve in these Cases.
The other was on some occasion the use of certain new Secrets, by which Men
were to obtain great Indulgences; either by saying such Prayers, or performing
such Impositions; and these were all trusted to the Friars, who were to trade
with them, and bring all the Money they could gather by that means to Rome.
They being bred up to a voluntary Poverty, and expecting great Rewards for
their Industry, sold those Secrets with as much cunning, as Mounte-banks use in
selling their Tricks: only here was the difference, that the ineffectualness of
the Mountebanks Medicines was soon discovered, so their Trade must be but short
in one Place; whereas the other could not be so easily found out; The chief
Piece of the Religion of those Ages being to believe all that their Priests
taught them. Of this sort the Reader will find in the Collection an Essay of
Indulgences as they were printed in the Hours after the use of Sarum,
Collection Number 26.
which were set down in English, though the Prayers be all Latin, that so all
the People might know the value of such Ware. Those had been all by degrees
brought from Rome, and put into Peoples Hands, and afterward laid together in
their Offices. By them, Indulgences of many years, Hundreds, Thousands, and
Millions of years, and of all sins whatsoever, were granted to such as devoutly
said such Collects: but it was always understood that they must confess and be
absolved, which is the meaning of those Expressions concerning their being in a
state of Grace. And so the whole Business was a Cheat.

And now all this Trade was laid aside, and Confession of secret sins was left
to all Men's free choice: since it was certain that the Confession to a Priest
was no where enjoined in the Scriptures. It was a reasonable Objection, that as
secret Confession and private Penance had worn out the primitive practice of
the public censuring of scandalous Persons, so it had been well if the
reviving of that Discipline had driven out these later Abuses: but to let that
lie unrestored, and yet to let Confession wear out, was to discharge the World
of all outward restraints, and to leave them to their full liberty, and so to
throw up that Power of Binding and Loosing, which ought to take place, chiefly,
in admitting them to the Sacrament. This was confessed to be a great defect,
and effectual endeavors were used to retrieve it, though without success: and
it was openly declared to be a thing which they would study to repair: But the
total disuse of all public censure had made the Nation so unacquainted with
it, that without the effectual concurrence of the Civil Authority, they could
not compass it. And though it was acknowledged to be a great disorder in the
Church, yet as they could not keep up the necessity of private Confession,
since it was not commanded in the Gospel; so the generality of the Clergy being
superstitious Men, whose chief influence on the People was by those secret
Practices in Confession, they judged it necessary to leave that free to all
People, and to represent it as a thing to which they were not obliged, and in
the place of that ordered the general Confession to be made in the Church, with
the Absolution added to it. For the Power of Binding and Loosing, it was by
many thought to be only Declarative; and so to be exercised, when the Gospel
was preached, and a General Absolution granted, according to the Ancient Forms.
In which Forms, the Absolution was a Prayer that God would absolve; and so it
had been still used in the Absolution which was given on Maundy-Thursday: but
the Formal Absolution given by the Priest in his own Name, I absolve thee, was
a late invention to raise their Authority higher, and signified nothing
distinct from those other Forms that were anciently used in the Church.

Others censured the Words in distributing the two kinds in the Lords Supper:
the Body being given for the preserving the Body, and the Blood of Christ for
preserving the Soul. This was thought done on design to possess the People with
an high value of the Chalice, as that which preserved their Souls; whereas the
Bread was only for the preservation of their Bodies. But Cranmer being ready to
change any thing for which he saw good reason, did afterward so alter it, that
in both it was said, Preserve thy Body and Soul. And yet it stands so in the
Prayer, We do not presume, etc. On all this I have digressed so long, because
of the importance of the matter, and for satisfying the Scruples that many
still have upon the laying aside of Confession in our Reformation.

Commissions were next given to examine the state of the Chantries and
Guildable Lands. The Instruction about them will be found in the Collection, of
which I need give no abstract here, Collection Number 27.
for they were only about the Methods of enquiring into their value, and how
they were possessed, or what Alienations had been made of them.

The Protector and Council were now in much trouble. The War with Scotland they
found was like to grow chargeable, since they saw it was supported from France.
There was a Rebellion also broke out in Ireland, and the King was much
indebted, nor could they expect any Subsidies from the Parliament; in which it
had been said that they gave the Chantry Lands, that they might be delivered
from all Subsidies. Therefore the Parliament was prorogued till Winter. Upon
this the whole Council did on the 17th of April unanimously resolve, that it
was necessary to sell 5000 l. a year of Chantry Lands for raising such a Sum as
the Kings occasions required, and Sir Hen. Mildmay was appointed to treat about
the Sale of them.

Gardener falls into new Troubles.
The new Communion-Book was received over England without any opposition. Only
complaints were brought of Gardener, that he did secretly detract from the
Kings Proceedings. Upon which the Council took occasion to reflect on all his
former behavior. And here it was remembered, how at first upon his refusing to
receive the Kings Injunctions, he had been put in the Fleet; where he had been
as well used, as if it had been his own House; (which is far contrary to his
Letters to the Protector, of which mention has been already made) and that he
upon promise of Conformity had been discharged. But when he was come home,
being forgetful of his Promises; he had raised much strife and contention, and
had caused all his Servants to be secretly armed and harnessed, and had put
public affronts on those whom the Council sent down to preach in his Diocese;
for in some Places, to disgrace them, he went into the Pulpit before them, and
warned the People to beware of such Teachers, and to receive no other Doctrine
but what he had taught them. Upon this he had been sent for a second time, but
again upon his Promise of Conformity was discharged, and ordered to stay at his
own House in London. That there he had continued still to meddle in public
Matters, of which being again admonished, he desired that he might be suffered
to clear himself of all misrepresentations that had been made of him, in a
Sermon which he should preach before the King, in which he should openly
declare how well he was satisfied with his Proceedings: yet it is added, That
in his Sermon, where there was a wonderful Audience, he did most arrogantly
meddle with some Matters that were contrary to an express command given him
both by word of Mouth and by Letters; and in other Matters, used such words as
had almost raised a great Tumult in the very time, and had spoken very
seditiously concerning the Policy of the Kingdom. So they saw that Clemency
wrought no good effect on him; and it seeming necessary to terrify others by
their Proceedings with him, he was sent to the Tower, and the door of his
Closet was sealed up. Thus it is entered in the Council-Book, Signed E.
Somerset, T. Cantuarien. W. St. John's, J. Russel, and T. Cheyney. Yet it seems
this Order was not Signed when it was made, but some years after. For the Lord
Russel Signed first Bedford, but remembering that at the time when this Order
was made he had not that Title, therefore he dashed it out, (but so as it still
appears) and Signed, J. Russel.

Fox's Acts and Monuments.
The account that Gardener himself gives of this Business, is, That being
discharged upon the Act of Pardon, he was desired to promise that he would set
forth the Homilies; and a Form was given him to which he should set his Hand;
but he, considering of it a fortnight, returned, and said he could not
subscribe it: so he was confined to his House. Then Ridley and Mr. Cecil,
(afterward the great Lord Burleigh, Lord Treasurer to Queen Eliz. at that time
Secretary to the Protector) were sent to him, and so prevailed, that he did set
his Hand to it. But upon some Complaints that were made of him, he was sent for
after Whit-Sunday, and accused, that he had carried Palms, had crept to the
Cross, and had a Sepulcher on Good Friday, which was contrary to the Kings
Proclamations: all which he denied, and said, he had and would still give
obedience to what the King should command. That of affronting the Kings
Preachers was objected to him, to which he answered telling matter of fact how
it was done, but he does not in his Writing set it down. Then it was
complained, that in a Sermon he had said, The Apostles came away rejoicing from
the Council, the Council, the Council, repeating it thus, to make it seem
applicable to himself. This he denied. Then it was objected, That he preached
the Real Presence in the Sacrament, the Word Real not being in Scripture, and
so it was not the setting forth the pure Word of God: He said, he had not used
the Word Real, only he had asserted the Presence of Christ, in such words as he
had heard the Archbishop of Canterbury dispute for it against Lambert, that
had been burnt. He was commanded to tarry in London; but he desired, that since
he was not an Offender, he might be at his liberty. He complained much of the
Songs made of him, and of the Books written against him, and particularly of
one Philpot in Westminster, whom he accounted a mad Man.

Then he relates, That Cecil came to him, and proposed to him to preach before
the King, and that he should write his Sermon; and also brought him some Notes
which he wished him to put in his Sermon: he said he was willing to preach, but
would not write it, for that was to preach as an Offender: nor would he make
use of Notes prepared by other Men. Then he was privately brought to the
Protector, none but the Lord St. John being present, who showed him a Paper
containing the opinion of some Lawyers, of the Kings Power, and of a Bishops
Authority, and of the Punishment of disobeying the King: but he desired to
speak with those Lawyers, and said, no subscription of theirs should oblige him
to preach otherwise than as he was convinced. The Protector said, he should
either do that, or do worse. Secretary Smith came to him to press him further
in some Points, but what they were is not mentioned. Yet by the other Papers in
that Business it appears, they related to the Kings Authority when under Age,
and for justifying the Kings proceedings in what had been done about the
Ceremonies, and that Auricular Confession was indifferent. So the Contest
between him and the Protector ended; and there was no writing required of him;
but he left the whole matter to him, so that he should treat plainly of those
things mentioned to him by Cecil. He chose St. Peter's day, because the Gospel
agreed to his purpose. Cecil showed him some Notes, written with the Kings
Hand, of the Sermons preached before him; especially what was said of the Duty
of a King; and warned him, that when ever he named the King he should add, and
his Council. To this he made no Answer; for though he thought it wisely done of
a King to use his Council, yet being to speak of the Kings Power according to
Scripture, he did not think it necessary to add any thing of his Council: and
hearing by a confused report some secret matter, he resolved not to meddle with
it. Two days before he preached, the Protector sent him a Message, not to
meddle with those Questions about the Sacrament; that were yet in controversy
among Learned Men; and that therefore he was resolved there should be no
public determination made of them beforehand in the Pulpit. He said, he could
not forbear to speak of the Mass, for he looked on it as the chief foundation
of Christian Religion: but he doubted not that he should so speak of it, as to
give them all content. So the day following the Protector writ to him, Number
28.
(as will be found in the Collection) requiring him in the Kings Name, not to
meddle with these Points, but to preach concerning the Articles given him, and
about Obedience, and good Life, which would afford him matter enough for a long
Sermon: since the other points were to be reserved to a public Consultation.
The Protector added, That he held it a great part of his Duty under the King,
not to suffer wilful Persons to dissuade the People from receiving such Truths
as should be set forth by others. But Gardener pretended that there was no
Controversy about the Presence of Christ. And so the next day he took his Text
out of the Gospel for the day, Thou art Christ, Parkers MSS. Ex C. Chapter Col.
Cant. He preached before the King.
etc. In his Sermon (of which I have seen large Notes) he expressed himself
very fully concerning the Popes Supremacy as justly abolished, and the
Suppression of Monasteries and Chantries; he approved of the Kings Proceedings;
he thought Images might have been well used, but yet they might be well taken
away. He approved of the Sacrament in both kinds, and the taking away that
great number of Masses satisfactory, and liked well the new Order for the
Communion. But he asserted largely the Presence of Christ's Flesh and Blood in
the Sacrament: Upon which many of the Assembly, that were indiscreetly hot on
both sides, cried out, some approving, and others disliking it. Of the Kings
Authority under Age, and of the Power of the Council in that Case, he said not
a word: and upon that he was imprisoned.

The occasion of this was, the Popish Clergy began generally to have it spread
among them, that though they had acknowledged the Kings Supremacy, yet they had
never owned the Councils Supremacy. That the Council could only see to the
execution of the Laws and Orders that had been made, but could not make new
ones; and that therefore the Supremacy could not be exercised, till the King,
in whose Person it was vested, came to be of Age to consider of Matters
himself. Upon this, the Lawyers were consulted; who did unanimously resolve,
that the Supremacy being annexed to the Regal Dignity, was the same in a King
under Age, when it was executed by the Council, that it was in a King at full
Age; and therefore, things ordered by the Council now, had the same Authority
in Law that they could have when the King did act himself. But this did not
satisfy the greater part of the Clergy. Some of whom, by the high Flatteries
that had been given to Kings in King Henry's time, seemed to fancy that there
were degrees of Divine Illumination derived unto Princes, by the anointing them
at the Coronation; and these not exerting themselves till a King attained to a
ripeness of understanding, they thought the Supremacy was to lie dormant while
he was so young. The Protector and Council endeavored to have got Gardener to
declare against this, but he would not meddle in it. How far he might set
forward the other Opinion, I do not know. These Proceedings against him were
thought too severe, and without Law; but he being generally hated, they were
not so much censured, as they had been, if they had fallen on a more acceptable
Man.

And thus were the Orders made by the Council generally obeyed; many being
terrified with the usage Gardener met with, from which others inferred what
they might look for, if they were refractory, when so great a Bishop was so
treated.

The next thing Cranmer set about, was the compiling of a Catechism, or large
instruction of young Persons in the Grounds of the Christian Religion. In it,
he reckons the two first Commandments but one; Cranmer sets out a Catechism.
though, he says, many of the Ancients divided them in two. But the division
was of no great consequence, so no part of the Decalogue were suppressed by the
Church. He showed that the excuses the Papists had for Images, were no other
than what the Heathens brought for their Idolatry; who also said, they did not
worship the Image, but that only which was represented by it. He particularly
takes notice of the Image of the Trinity. He shows how St. Peter would not
suffer Cornelius, and the Angel would not suffer St. John, to worship them. The
believing that there is a virtue in one Image more than in another, he accounts
plain Idolatry. Ezekias broke the Brazen Serpent, when abused, though it was a
Type or Image of Christ, made by Gods command, to which a miraculous Virtue had
been once given. So now there was good reason to break Images, when they had
been so abused to superstition and Idolatry; and when they gave such scandal to
Jews and Mahometans, who generally accounted the Christians Idolaters on that
account. He asserts, besides the two Sacraments, of Baptism, and the Lords
Supper, the Power of reconciling Sinners to God, as a third; and fully owns the
Divine Institution of Bishops and Priests; and wishes that the Canons and Rites
of public Penitence were again restored; and exhorts much to Confession, and
the Peoples dealing with their Pastors about their Consciences, that so they
might, upon knowledge, bind and loose according to the Gospel. Having finished
this easy, but most useful work, he dedicated it to the King. And in his
Epistle to him, complains of the great neglect, that had been in former times,
of Catechizing; and that Confirmation had not been rightly administered, since
it ought to be given only to these of Age, who understood the Principles of the
Christian Doctrine, and did upon knowledge, and with sincere minds, renew their
Baptismal Vow. From this it will appear, that from the beginning of this
Reformation, the Practice of the Roman Church in the matter of Images was held
Idolatrous. Cranmer's zeal for restoring the Penitentiary Canons is also clear:
and it is plain, that he had now quite laid aside those singular opinions which
he formerly held of the Ecclesiastical Functions; for now, in a Work which was
wholly his own, without the concurrence of any others, he fully sets forth
their Divine Institution.

All these things made way for a greater Work, which these selected Bishops and
Divines, who had labored in the setting forth of the Office of the Communion,
were now preparing; which was, the entire Reformation of the whole Service of
the Church. In order to this, they brought together all the Offices used in
England. In the Southern Parts, A General Reformation of all the Offices of the
Church is set about.
those after the use of Sarum were universally received, which were believed to
have been compiled by Osmund Bishop of Sarum. In the North of England, they had
other Offices, after the use of York. In South Wales they had them after the
use of Hereford. In North Wales after the use of Bangor. And in Lincoln,
another sort of an Office proper to that See.

In the Primitive Church, when the extraordinary Gifts ceased, the Bishops of
the several Churches put their Offices and Prayers into such a Method, as was
nearest to what they had heard or remembered from the Apostles. And these
Liturgies were called by the Apostles Names from whose Forms they had been
composed; as that at Jerusalem carried the Name of St. James, and that of
Alexandria the Name of St. Mark; though those Books that we have now under
these Names are certainly so interpolated, that they are of no great Authority:
But in the fourth Century we have these Liturgies first mentioned. The Council
of Laodicea appointed the same Office of Prayers to be used in the Mornings and
Evenings. The Bishops continued to draw up new Additions, and to put old Forms
into other Methods. But this was left to every Bishops care, nor was it made
the Subject of any public Consultation, till St. Austins time; when in their
dealings with Heretics, they found they took advantages from some of the
Prayers that were in some Churches. Upon this he tells us, it was ordered, that
there should be no Prayers used in the Church, but upon common advice: after
that the Liturgies came to be more carefully considered. Formerly the Worship
of God was a pure and simple thing, and so it continued, till Superstition had
so infected the Church that those Forms were thought too naked, unless they
were put under more Artificial Rules, and dressed up with much Ceremony.
Gregory the Great was the first that took much care to make the Church Music
very regular, and he did also put the Liturgies in another Method than had been
formerly used. Yet he had no such fondness of his own composures; but left it
to Austin the Monk, whom he sent over into England, when he consulted him in
it, either to use the Roman or French Rituals, or any other, as he should find
they were most likely to edify the People. After this, in most Sees there were
great variations; for as any Prelate came to be Canonized, or held in high
esteem by the People, some private Collects or particular Forms that he had
used, were practiced in his, or perhaps, as his Fame spread, in the
neighboring Dioceses. In every Age there were notable Additions made: and all
the Writers almost, in the 8th and 9th Centuries, employed their Fancies to
find out mystical significations for every Rite that was then used; and so, as
a new Rite was added, it was no hard matter to add some Mystery to it. This had
made the Offices swell out of measure, and there was a great variety of them,
Missals, Breviaries, Rituals, Pontificals, Portoises, Pies, Gradualls,
Antiphonalls, Psalteries, Hours, and a great many more. Every Religious Order
had likewise their peculiar Rites, with the Saints days that belonged to their
Order, and Services for them; and the understanding how to officiate was become
so hard a piece of the Trade, that it was not easy to learn it exactly,
without a long practice in it. So now it was resolved to correct and examine
these.

It was resolved there should be a new Liturgy.
I do not find it was ever brought under consideration, whether they should
compose a Form for all the Parts of Divine Worship, or leave it to the sudden
and extemporary heats of those who were to officiate, which some have called
since that time, The worshipping by the Spirit: Of this way of serving God, they
did not then dream; much less that the appointing of Forms of Prayer was an
encroaching on the Kingly Office of Christ, but thought, what ever praying in
the Spirit might have been in the Apostles time, (where yet every Man brought
his Psalms, which are a sort of Prayers, as well as Praises, and these look
like some written Composures, as St. Paul expresses it) that now to pray with
warm affection and sincere devotion was Spiritual Worship: and that where it
was the same thing that was to be daily asked of God, the using the same
expressions, was the sign of a steady devotion, that was fixed on the thing
prayed for; whereas the heat that new words raised, looked rather like a warmth
in the fancy. Nor could it agree with the Principles of a Reformation, that was
to divest the Churchmen of that unlimited Authority which they had formerly
exercised over Men's Consciences, to leave them at liberty to make the People
pray after them, as they pleased; this being as great a resignation of the
People, when their devotion depended on the sudden heats of their Pastors, as
the former Superstition had made of their Faith and Conscience to them. So it
being resolved to bring the whole Worship of God under set Forms. they set one
General Rule to themselves, (which they afterward declared) of changing
nothing for novelties sake, or merely because it had been formerly used. They
resolved to retain such things as the Primitive Church had practiced, cutting
off such abuses as the later ages had grafted on them, and to continue the use
of such other things, which, though they had been brought in not so early, yet
were of good use to beget devotion; and were so much recommended to the People
by the practice of them, that the laying these aside would perhaps have
alienated them from the other changes they made. And therefore they resolved to
make no change without very good and weighty reasons. In which they considered
the practice of our Savior; who did not only comply with the Rites of Judaism
himself, but even the Prayer he gave to his Disciples, was framed according to
their Forms; and his two great Institutions of Baptism, and the Eucharist, did
consist of Rites that had been used among the Jews. And since he who was
delivering a new Religion, and was authorized in the highest manner that ever
any was, did yet so far comply with received Practices, as from them to take
those which he sanctified for the use of his Church; it seemed much fitter for
those who had no such extraordinary warrant to give them Authority in what they
did, when they were reforming abuses, to let the World see, they did it not
from the wanton desire of change, or any affectation of novelty: and with those
resolutions they entered on their Work.

In the search of the former Offices, they found an infinite deal of
superstition, in the Consecrations, of Water, Salt, Bread, Incense, Candles,
Fire, Bells, Churches, Images, Altars, Crosses, Vessels, Garments, Palms,
Flowers; all looked like the Rites of Heathenism, and seemed to spring from the
same Fountain. When the Water or Salt were blessed, it was expressed to be to
this end, that they might be health both to Soul and Body, and Devils (who
might well laugh at these tricks which they had taught them) were adjured not
to come to any place where they were sprinkled: and the Holy Bread was blessed,
to be a defense against all Diseases, and snares of the Devil: and the Holy
Incense, that Devils might not come near the smoke of it, but that all who
smelled at it might perceive the Virtue of the Holy Ghost: and the Ashes were
blessed so, that all who were covered with them, might deserve to obtain the
remission of their sins. All those things had drawn the People to such
confidence in them, that they generally thought that, without those harder
terms of true holiness, they might upon such superstitious observances be sure
of Heaven. So all these they resolved to cast out, as things which had no
warrant in Scripture, and were vain devices to draw Men away from a lively
application to God through Christ, according to the method of the Gospel. Then
the many Rites in Sacramental Actions were considered, all which had swelled up
to an infinite heap. And as some of these, which had no foundation in
Scripture, were thrown out; so the others were brought back to a greater
simplicity. In no part of Religion was the corruption of the former Offices
more remarkable, than in the Priests granting Absolution to the Living, and the
Dead. To such as Confessed, the Absolution was thus granted; I absolve thee in
the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. To which this was added,
And I grant to thee that all the Indulgences, given, or to be given thee, by
any Prelate, with the Blessings of them, all the Sprinklings of Holy Water, all
the Devout Beatings of thy Breast, the Contritions of thy Heart, this
Confession, and all thy other devout Confessions, all thy Fastings,
Abstinencies, Almsgivings, Watchings, Disciplines, Prayers, and Pilgrimages,
and all the good thou have done, or shall do, and all the evils thou have
suffered, or shall suffer, for God; the Passions of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Merits of the Glorious and Blessed Virgin Mary, and of all other Saints, and
the Suffrages of all the Holy Catholic Church, turn to thee for the remission
of these, and all other thy sins, the increase of thy Merits, and the
attainment of Everlasting Rewards. When Extreme Unction was given to dying
Persons, they applied it to the Ears, Lips, Nose, and other Parts, with this
Prayer; By this Holy Unction, and his own most tender Mercy, and by the
Intercession of the Blessed Virgin, and all the Saints, may God pardon thee
whatever thou have sinned, by thy Hearing, Speaking, or Smelling, and so in the
other Parts. And when the dead Body was laid in the Grave, this Absolution was
said over it; The Lord Jesus Christ, who gave to St. Peter and his other
Disciples power to bind and loose, absolve thee from all the guilt of thy sins;
and in so far as is committed to my weakness, be thou absolved before the
Tribunal of our Lord, and may thou have Eternal Life, and live for evermore.
This was thought the highest abuse possible; when in giving the hopes of
Heaven, and the pardon of sins, which were of all the other parts of Religion
the most important, there were such mixtures: and that which the Scriptures had
taught could be only attained by Jesus Christ, and that upon the sincere belief
and obedience of his Gospel, was now ascribed to so many other procuring
Causes. These things had possessed the World with that conceit that there was a
trick for saving Souls, besides that plain method which Christ had taught; and
that the Priests had the secret of it in their Hands; so that those who would
not come under the Yoke of Christ, and be saved that way, needed only to apply
themselves to Priests, and purchase their favor, and the business would be
done.

There were two other Changes, which run through the whole Offices. The one
was, The translating them into a Vulgar Tongue. The Jewish Worship was either
in Hebrew, or, after the Captivity, in the Syriack, the Vulgar Tongues of
Palestine. The Apostles always officiated in the Tongues that were best
understood: So that St. Paul did copiously censure those who in Prayers or
Psalms, used any Language that was not understood. And Origin, Basil, with all
the Fathers that had occasion to mention this, took notice, that every one in
their own Tongue worshipped God. After the renting of the Roman Empire by the
Goths, and other barbarous Nations, the Roman Tongue did slowly mix with their
Tongues, till it was much changed, and altered from it self by degrees; yet it
was so long a doing that, that it was not thought necessary to translate the
Liturgy into their Languages. But in the ninth Century, when the Slavons were
converted, it being desired that they might have Divine Offices in their own
Language; while some opposed it, a Voice was said to be heard, Let every Tongue
Praise God; Upon which, Pope John the 8th writ to Methodius their Bishop, that
it might be granted, and founded it on St. Paul's Epist. to the Cor. and on
these words of David, Let every Tongue praise the Lord. And in the fourth
Council of Lateran it was decreed, That Bishops who lived in Places where they
were mixed with Greeks, should provide fit Priests for performing Divine
Offices, according to the Rites and Language of those to whom they ministered.
But the Roman Church, though so merciful to the Greeks, and Slavons, was more
cruel to the rest of Europe; and since only Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, had been
written on the Cross of Christ by Pilate, they argued that these Languages were
thereby consecrated: though it is not easy to apprehend what Holiness could be
derived into these Tongues by Pilate, who ordered these Inscriptions. It was
also pretended, that it was a part of the Communion of Saints, that every where
the Worship should be in the same Tongue. But the truth was, they had a mind to
raise the value of the Priestly Function, by keeping all Divine Offices in a
Tongue not understood; which in People otherwise well seasoned with
superstition, might have that effect; but it did very much alienate the rest of
the World from them. There was also a vast number of Holy Days, formerly
observed, with so many Prayers and Hymns belonging to them, and so many Lessons
that were to be read; which were many of them such impudent Forgeries, that,
the whole Breviary and Missal being full of these, a great deal was to be left
out. There is in the whole Breviary scarce one Saint, but the Lessons
concerning him contain some ridiculous Legend, such as indeed could not be well
read in a Vulgar Tongue without the scorn and laughter of the Hearers; and for
most part the Prayers and Hymns do relate to these lying Stories. Many of the
Prayers and Hymns were also in such a Style, that the pardon of Sin, Grace, and
Heaven, were immediately desired from the Saints; as if these things had come
from their Bounty, or by their Merits; or were given by them only, of which the
Reader shall have a little taste in the Collection, in some of the Addresses
made to them. Collection Number 29.


The Reformers having thus considered the corruptions of the former Offices,
were thereby better prepared to frame new ones. But the Priests had officiated
in some Garments, which were appropriated to that use, as Surplices, Copes, and
other Vestments; and it was long under consideration whether these should
continue. It was objected, that these Garments had been parts of the Train of
the Mass, and had been superstitiously abused, only to set it off with the more
pomp. On the other hand it was argued, That as White was anciently the Color
of the Priests Garments in the Mosaical Dispensation, so it was used in the
African Churches in the fourth Century: And it was thought a natural expression
of the purity and decency that became Priests: besides the Clergy were then
generally extreme poor, so that they could scarce afford themselves decent
Clothes; the People also running from the other Extreme of submitting too much
to the Clergy, were now as much inclined to despise them, and to make light of
the Holy Function; so that if they should officiate in their own mean Garments,
it might make the Divine Offices grow also into contempt. And therefore, it was
resolved to continue the use of them; and it was said, that their being
blessed, and used superstitiously, gave as strong an Argument against the use
of Churches, and Bells; but that St. Paul had said, That every Creature of God
was good, and even the Meat of the Sacrifice offered to an Idol, than which
there could be no greater abuse, might lawfully be eaten; therefore they saw no
necessity because of a former abuse to throw away Habits, that had so much
decency in them, and had been formerly in use.

In the compiling the Offices, they began with Morning and Evening Prayer.
These were put in the same Form they are now; only there was no Confession nor
Absolution; the Office beginning with the Lords Prayer. In the Communion
Service, the Ten Commandments were not said, as they are now; but in other
things, it was very near what it is now. All that had been in the Order of the
Communion formerly mentioned was put into it. The Offertory was to be made of
Bread and Wine mixed with Water. Then was said the Prayer for the state of
Christ's Church, in which they gave thanks to God for his wonderful Grace
declared in his Saints, in the Blessed Virgin, the Patriarchs, Apostles,
Prophets, and Martyrs; and they commended the Saints departed to Gods Mercy and
Peace, that at the day of the Resurrection we with them might be set on Christ's
Right Hand. To this, the consecratory Prayer which we now use, was joined as a
part of it; only with these words that are since left out, With thy Holy Spirit
vouchsafe to Bless, and Sanctify, these thy Gifts and Creatures of Bread and
Wine, that they may be unto us the Body and Blood of thy most dearly beloved
Son, etc. To the Consecration was also joined the Prayer of Thanksgiving now
used. After the Consecration, all Elevation was forbidden, which had been first
used as a Rite expressing how Christ was lifted up on the Cross; but was, after
the belief of the Corporal Presence, made use of to show the Sacrament, that
the People might all fall down and worship it. And it was ordered, That the
whole Office of the Communion, except the Consecratory Prayer, should be used
on all Holy Days, when there was no Communion, to put People in mind of it, and
of the Sufferings of Christ. The Bread was to be unleavened, round, but no
print on it, and somewhat thicker than it was formerly. And though it was
anciently put in the Peoples Hands, yet because some might carry it away, and
apply it to superstitious uses, it was ordered to be put by the Priest into
their Mouths. It is clear that Christ delivered it into the Hands of the
Apostles, and it so continued for many Ages, as appears by several remarkable
Stories of Holy Men carrying it with them in their Journeys. In the Greek
Church, where the Bread and Wine were mingled together, some began to think it
more decent to receive it in little Spoons of Gold, than in their Hands; but
that was condemned by the Council in Trullo: Yet soon after they began in the
Latin Church to appoint Men to receive it with their Hands, but Women to take
it in a Linen Cloth, which was called their Dominical. But when the belief of
the Corporeal Presence was received, then a new way of receiving was invented
among other things to support it: The People were now no more to touch that
which was conceived to be the Flesh of their Savior, and therefore the Priests
Thumb and Fingers were particularly anointed, as a necessary disposition for so
holy a Contact, and so it was by them put into the Mouths of the People. A
Letany was also gathered, consisting of many short Petitions, interrupted by
Suffrages between them: and was the same that we still use, only they had one
Suffrage that we have not, to be delivered from the tyranny of the Bishop of
Rome, and all his detestable enormities.

In Baptism there was, besides the Forms which we still retain, a Cross at
first made on the Child's Forehead, and Breast, with an adjuration of the Devil
to go out of him, and come at him no more. Then the Priest was to take the
Child by the Right Hand, and to place him within the Font: there he was to be
dipped thrice, once on the right side, once on the left, and once on the Breast;
which was to be discreetly done: but if the Child were weak, it was sufficient
to sprinkle Water on his Face. Then was the Priest to put a White Vestment or
Chrisome on him, for a token of Innocence, and to anoint him on the Head, with
a Prayer for the Unction of the Holy Ghost. In Confirmation, those that came,
were to be Catechized, which having in it a formal engagement to make good the
Baptismal Vow, was all that was asked: (The Catechism then was the same that is
now, only there is since added an Explanation of the Sacraments:) This being
said, the Bishop was to Sign them with the Cross, and to lay his Hands on them,
and say, I Sign thee with the Sign of the Cross, and lay my Hands on thee, in
the Name of the Father, etc. The Sick, who desired to be anointed, might have
the Unction on their Forehead, or their Breast only; with a Prayer, that as
their Body was outwardly anointed with Oil, so they might receive the Holy
Ghost, with Health, and victory over Sin, and Death. At Funerals, they
recommended the Soul departed to Gods Mercy, and prayed that his sins might be
pardoned, that he might be delivered from Hell, and carried to Heaven, and that
his Body might be raised at the last day.

They also took care that those who could not come, or be brought to Church,
should not therefore be deprived of the use of the Sacraments. The Church of
Rome had raised the belief of the indispensable necessity of the Sacraments so
high, that they taught they did ex opere operato by the very action it self
without inward acts, justify and confer Grace, unless there were a bar put to
it by the Receiver: and the first rise of the Questions about Justification
seems to have come from this: For that Church teaching that Men were justified
by Sacramental Actions, the Reformers opposed this, and thought Men were
justified by the Internal Acts of the Mind: If they had held at this, the
Controversy might have been managed with much greater advantages; which they
lost in a great measure by descending to some minuter subtleties. In the Church
of Rome pursuant to their belief concerning the necessity of the Sacraments,
Women were allowed in extreme Cases to Baptize: and the Midwives commonly did
it; which might be the beginning of their being licensed by Bishops to exercise
that Calling. And they also believed that a simple attrition with the
Sacraments was sufficient for Salvation in those who were grown up, and upon
these Grounds the Sacraments were administered to the Sick.

In the Primitive Church they sent Portions of the Sacrament to those who were
sick, or in Prison: and did it not only without Pomp or Processions, but sent
it often by the hands of Boys and other Laics, as appears from the famed Story
of Serapion: which as it shows they did not then believe it was the very Flesh
and Blood of Christ; so when that Doctrine was received it was a natural effect
of that belief, to have the Sacrament carried by the Priest himself with some
Pomp and Adoration. The Ancients thought it more decent and suitable to the
Communion of Saints to consecrate the Elements only in the Church, and to send
Portions to the Sick, thereby expressing their Communion with the rest. The
Reformers considering these things steered a middle course: They judged the
Sacraments necessary, where they could be had; as appointments instituted by
Christ: and though they thought it more expedient to have all Baptisms done in
the Church at the Fonts, than in private Houses; thereby signifying that the
Baptized were admitted to the fellowship of that Church; yet since our Savior
had said, That where two or three are gathered together he will be in the midst
of them; they thought it savoured too much of a Superstition to the Walls or
Fonts of Churches, to tie this Action so to these, that where Children, either
through infirmity, or the sharpness of Weather, could not be, without danger,
carried to Church, they should be denied Baptism. But still they thought
public Baptism more expressive of the Communion of the Saints, so that they
recommended it much, and only permitted the other in Cases of necessity. This
has since grown to a great abuse; many thinking it a piece of state to have
their Children Baptized in their Houses; and so bringing their pride with them
even into the most Sacred Performances. There may be also a fault in the
Ministers, who are too easily brought to do it. But it is now become so
universal, that all the endeavors of some of our Bishops have not been able to
bring it back, to the first design of not Baptizing in private Houses;
excepting only where there was some visible danger in carrying the Children to
Church.

As for the other Sacrament, it was thought by our Reformers, that according to
the mind of the Primitive Church, none should be denied it in their
extremities: it never being more necessary, than at that time, to use all means
that might strengthen the faith, and quicken the devotion of dying Persons; it
being also most expedient that they should then profess their dying in the
Faith, and with a good Conscience, and in Charity with all Men: Therefore they
ordered the Communion to be given to the Sick, and that before it were so
given, the Priest should examine their Consciences; and upon the sincere
profession of their Faith, and the confession of such sins as oppressed their
Consciences, with the doing of all that was then in their power, for the
completing of their Repentance, as the forgiving injuries, and dealing justly
with all People, he should give them the Peace of the Church in a formal
Absolution, and the Holy Eucharist. But that they might avoid the pomp of vain
Processions on the one hand, and the indecencies of sending the Sacrament by
common Hands on the other, they thought it better to gather a Congregation
about the Sick Person, and there to consecrate and give the Sacrament to that
small Assembly: where, as Christ's Promise, of being in the midst of two or
three that were gathered together in his Name, should have put an end to the
weak exceptions some have made to these private Communions; so on the other
hand it is to be feared, that the greater part retain still too much of the
Superstition of Popery; as if the Priests Absolution with the Sacrament, and
some slight sorrow for sin, would be a sure Passport for their admittance to
Heaven: which it is certain can only be had, upon so true a Faith as carries a
sincere Repentance with a change of Heart and Life along with it: for to such
only the Mercies of God through the Merits of Jesus Christ are applied in all
ordinary Cases.

To all this they prefixed a Preface concerning Ceremonies, The Preface to the
Book of Common Prayer.
the same that is still before the Common Prayer Book. In which Preface they
make a difference between those Ceremonies that were brought in with a good
intent, and were afterward abused; and others that had been brought in out of
vanity and superstition at first, and grew to be more abused: The one they had
quite rejected, the other they had reformed, and retained, for decency and
edification. Some were so set on their old Forms, that they thought it a great
matter to depart from any of them; others were desirous to innovate in every
thing; between both which they had kept a mean. The burden of Ceremonies in
St. Austins days was such that he complained of them, then as intolerable, by
which the state of Christians was worse than that of the Jews; but these were
swelled to a far greater number since his days, which did indeed darken
Religion, and had brought Christians under a heavy Yoke. Therefore they had
only reserved such as were decent, and apt to stir up Men's Minds with some good
signification. Many Ceremonies had been so abused by superstition and avarice,
that it was necessary to take them quite away: But since it was fit to retain
some, for decency and order, it seemed better to keep those which were old,
than to seek new ones. But these that were kept, were not thought equal with
Gods Law, and so were upon just causes to be altered: they were also plain, and
easy to be understood, and not very subject to be abused. Nor did they in
retaining these, condemn other Nations, or prescribe to any but their own
People. And thus was this Book made ready against the next meeting of
Parliament.

In it, the use of the Cross was retained, Reflections made on the new Liturgy.
since it had been used by the ancient Christians, as a public declaration
that they were not ashamed of the Cross of Christ. Though they acknowledged
this had been strangely abused in the later Ages, in which the bare use of the
Cross was thought to have some Magical Virtue in it: And this had gone so far,
that in the Roman Pontifical it was declared, that the Crosier Staff was to be
worshipped with that supreme degree of Adoration, called Latria. But it was
thought fit to retain it in some parts of Worship; and the rather, because it
was made use of among the People to defame the Reformers, that they had no
Veneration for the Cross of Christ. And therefore as an outward expression of
that, in the Sacrament of Baptism, and in the Office of Confirmation, and in
the consecration of the Sacramental Elements, it was ordered to be retained,
but with this difference, that the Sign of the Cross was not made with the
opinion of any virtue or efficacy in it to drive away evil Spirits, or to
preserve one out of dangers, which were thought Virtues that followed the use
of it in the Roman Church; for in Baptism, as they used the Sign of the Cross,
they added an Adjuration to the evil Spirit not to violate it, and in the
making it said, Receive the Sign of the Cross both in thy Forehead and in thy
Heart, and take the Faith of the Heavenly Precepts. Thus a Sacramental Virtue
was pretended to be affixed to it; which the Reformers thought could not be
done without a Warrant from a Divine Institution, of which it is plain there
was none in Scripture. But they thought the use of it only as an expression of
the Belief of the Church, and as a Badge of Christianity, with such words added
to it as could import no more, was liable to no exception. This seems more
necessary to be well explained, by reason of the Scruples that many have since
raised against significant Ceremonies, as if it were too great a presumption in
any Church to appoint such; since these seem to be of the nature of Sacraments.
Ceremonies that signify the Conveyance of a Divine Grace, and Virtue, are
indeed Sacraments, and ought not to be used without an express Institution in
Scripture: but Ceremonies that only signify the sense we have, which is
sometimes expressed as significantly in dumb shows as in words, are of another
kind; and it is as much within the power of the Church to appoint such to be
used, as it is to order Collects or Prayers, words and signs being but
different ways of expressing our thoughts. The belief of Christ's Corporal
Presence was yet under consideration. And they observing wisely how the Germans
had broken, by their running too soon into Contests about that, resolved to
keep up still the old general Expressions, of the Sacraments being the whole
and true Body of Christ, without coming to a more particular explanation of it.
The use of Oil on so many occasions, was taken from the Ancient Christians,
who, as Theophilus says, began early to be anointed; and understood those words
of St. Paul, of Gods anointing and sealing, literally. It was also anciently
applied to the receiving of Penitents. But it was not used about the Sick, from
the Apostles times till about the 10th Century. And then, from what St. James
writ to those in the Dispersion, of sending for the Elders to come to such as
were sick, who should anoint them with Oil, and their sins should be forgiven
them, and they should recover; they came to give it to those that were dying;
but not while there was any hope of Life left in them. Though it is clear, that
what St. James writ, related to that extraordinary Gift of Healing, by
imposition of Hands, and anointing with Oil, which yet continued in the Church
when he writ that Epistle. And it is plain, that this Passage in St. James was
not so understood by the Ancients, as it is now in the Roman Church; since the
Ancients, though they used Oil on many other occasions, yet applied it not at
all to the Sick, till after so many Ages, that gross Superstition had so
disposed the World to new Rites, that there could be no discovery or invention
more acceptable, than the addition of a new Ceremony; though they were then
much oppressed with the old ones.

The Changes that were made, and those that were designed to be made,
occasioned great heats every where. And the Pulpits generally contending with
one another; to restrain that clashing, the power of granting Licenses to
Preach, was taken from the Bishops of each Diocese, so that none might give
them, but the King and the Archbishop of Canterbury. Yet that not proving an
effectual restraint, on the 23d of September a Proclamation is said to have
come out, setting forth, All Prea^hing was for a time restrained.
That whereas according to former Proclamations none was to preach, but such as
had obtained Licenses from the King or the Archbishop; yet some of those that
were so licensed, had abused that permission, and had carried themselves
irreverently contrary to the Instructions that were sent them. Therefore the
King intending to have shortly an uniform Order over all the Kingdom, and to
put an end to all Controversies in Religion; about which some Bishops and other
Learned Men were then assembled; and though many of the Preachers so licensed
had carried themselves wisely, to the Honor of God, and the Kings great
contentation; yet till the Order now preparing should be set forth, he did
inhibit all manner of Persons to preach in any public Audience; to the intent
that the Clergy might apply themselves to Prayer, for a Blessing on what the
King was then about to do: not doubting but the People would be employed
likewise in Prayer, and hearing the Homilies read in their Churches, and be
ready to receive that uniform Order that was to be set forth: and the inferior
Magistrates were required to see to the execution of this. I never met with any
footstep of this Proclamation, neither in Records, nor in Letters, nor in any
Book written at that time. But Mr. Fuller has printed it, and Dr. Heylin has
given an Abstract of it from him. If Fuller had told how he came by it, it
might have been further examined. But we know not whether he saw the printed
Proclamation, or only a Copy of it. And if he saw but a Copy, we have reason to
doubt of it; for that might have been only the Essay of some projecting Man's
Pen. But because I found it in those Authors, I thought best to set it down as
it is, and leave the Reader to judge of it.

Having thus given an account of the Progress of the Reformation this Summer, I
shall now turn to transactions of State, The Affairs in Scotland this Year.
and shall first look toward Scotland. The Scots gaining time the last Winter,
and being in daily expectation of Succors from France, were resolved to carry
on the War. The Governor began the Year with the Siege of Broughty Castle, a
little below Dundee. But the English that were in it defended themselves so
well, that after they had been besieged three Months, the Siege was raised, and
only so many were left about it as might cover the Country from their
excursions. The English on the other side had taken, and fortified, Hadingtoun;
and were at work also at Lauder to make it strong. The former of these, lying
in a Plain, and in one of the most fruitful Counties of Scotland, within twelve
Miles of Edinburgh, was a very fit Place to be kept as a Curb upon the Country.
About the end of May 6000 Men were sent from France under the Command of
Dessie: 3000 of these were Germans, commanded by the Rhinegrave; 2000 of them
were French, and a Thousand were of other Nations. They landed at Lies; and
the Governor having gathered 8000 Scots to join with them, they sat down
before Hadingtoun; and here the Scottish Nobility entered into a long
Consultation about their Affairs.

The Protector had sent a Proposition to them, that there might be a Truce for
Ten Years. (But whether he offered to remove the Garrisons, does not appear.)
This he was forced to upon many accounts. He saw the War was like to last long,
and to draw on great expense, and would certainly end in another War with
France; he durst not any more go from Court, and march himself at the Head of
the Army, and leave the King to the Practices of his Brother: There were also
great discontents in England, many were offended with the Changes made in
Religion; the Commons complained generally of oppression, and of the enclosing
of Grounds, of which the sad effects broke out next Year: He began to labor
under the envy of the Nobility; the Clergy were almost all displeased with him;
and the state of Affairs in Germany made it necessary to join with the King of
France against the Emperor. All this made him very desirous of such a Peace
with Scotland, as might at least preserve the Queen from being disposed of, for
Ten Years. In that time, by Treaty and Pensions, they might hope to gain their
ends; more certainly than by a War, which only inflamed the Scots against them;
according to the witty Saying of one of the Scots, who being asked what he
thought of the Match with England, said, he knew not how he should like the
Marriage, but he was sure he did not like the way of wooing. On the other hand,
the French pressed the Scots to send their young Queen into France, in the
Ships that had brought over their Forces; who should be married to the Dolphin,
and then they might depend on the Protection of France. Many were for accepting
the Proposition from England, (particularly all those who secretly favored the
Reformation) they thought it would give them present quiet, and free them from
all the distractions, which they either felt, or might apprehend, from a
lasting War with so powerful an Enemy: whereas the sending away of their Queen
would put them out of a capacity of obtaining a Peace, if the War this year
proved as unsuccessful as it was the last; and the defense they had from France
was almost as bad as the Invasions of the English, for the French were very
insolent, and committed great disorders. But all the Clergy were so
apprehensive of their ruin by the Marriage with England, that they never
judged themselves safe till the thing was out of their power, by the sending
their Queen into France. And it was said, that when once the English saw the
hopes of the Marriage irrecoverably lost, they would soon grow weary of the
War: for then the King of France would engage in the defense of Scotland with
his whole Force, so that nothing would keep up the War so much as having their
Queen still among them. To this many of the Nobility yielded, being corrupted
by Money from France; and the Governor consented to it, for which he was to be
made Duke of Chastelherault in France, The Scottish Queen is sent to France.
and to have an Estate of 12000 Livres a year. And so it was agreed to send
their Queen away. This being gained, the French Ships set sail to Sea, as if
they had been to return to France; but sailed round Scotland by the Isles of
Orkney, and came into Dunbriton Frith, near to which the Queen was kept in
Dunbriton Castle; and receiving her from thence, August Queen of Scots sent
into France.
with an Honorable Convoy that was sent to attend on her, they carried her
over to Britaigne in France, and so by easy Journeys she was brought to Court,
where her Unkles received her with great joy, hoping by her means to raise and
establish their Fortunes in France.

In the mean time the Siege of Hadingtoun The Siege of Hadingtoun.
was carried on with great valor, on both sides. The French were astonished at
the courage, the nimbleness, and labors, of the Scotch Highlanders; who were
half naked; Thuanus.
but capable of great hardships, and run used to on with mavelous swiftness.
In one Sally which the Besieged made, one of those got an English Man on his
Shoulders, and carried him away, with that quickness that nothing could stop
him: and though the English Man bit him so in the Neck, that as soon as he had
brought him into the Camp, he himself fell down as dead, yet he carried him
off; for which he was nobly rewarded by Dessie. The English defended themselves
no less courageously; and though a Recruit of about 1000 Foot and 300 Horse,
that was sent from Berwick, led by Sir Robert Bows, and Sir Tho. Palmer, was
so fatally intercepted, that they were almost all to a Man killed, yet they
lost no Heart. Another Party, of about 300, escaped the Ambush laid for them,
and got into the Town, with a great deal of Ammunition and Provisions, of which
the Besieged were come to be in want. But at the same time both Home Castle and
Fascastle were lost. The former was taken by treachery: for some coming in as
deserters, seeming to be very zealous for the English quarrel, and being too
much trusted by the Governor, and going often out to bring intelligence, gave
the Lord Home notice, that on that side where the Rock was, the English kept no
good Watches, trusting to the steepness of the Place; so they agreed that some
should come and climb the Rock, to whom they should give assistance; which was
accordingly done, and so it was surprised in the night. The Governor of
Fascastle had summoned the Country People to bring him in Provisions; upon
which (by a common Stratagem) Soldiers, coming as Countrymen, threw down their
Carriages at the Gates, and fell on the Sentinels: and so the Signal being
given, some, that lay concealed near at hand, came in time to assist them, and
took the Castle.

The Protector, till the Army was gathered together, A Fleet sent against
Scotland.
sent a Fleet of Ships to disturb the Scots, by the descents they should make
in diverse places: and his Brother being Admiral, he commanded him to go to his
charge. He landed first in Fife, at St. Minins, but there the Queens natural
Brother, James, afterward Earl of Murray, and Regent of Scotland, gathered the
Country People together, and made Head against them. The English were 1200, and
had brought their Canon to Land; but the Scots charged them so home, that they
forced them to their Ships: Many were drowned, and many killed; the Scots
reckoned the number of the slain to be 600, and a hundred Prisoners taken. The
next descent they made was no more prosperous to them. For landing in the night
at Mountrose, Aerskin of Dun gathered the Country together, and divided them in
three Bodies, ordering one to appear soon after the former had engaged: the
Enemy, seeing a second, But was not successful.
and a third Body come against them, apprehending greater numbers, run back to
their Ships; but with so much loss, that of 800 who had landed, the third Man
got not safe to the Ships again. So the Admiral returned, having got nothing
but loss and disgrace by the Expedition.

But now the English Army came into Scotland, commanded by the Earl of
Shrewsbury: though both the Scotch Writers and Thuanus say, the Earl of Lennox
had the chief command; but he only came with the Earl of Shrewsbury, as knowing
the Country and People best, and so being the fitter both to get intelligence,
and to negotiate, if there was room for it. The Scots were by this time gone
home for the most part; and the Nobility with Dessie agreed that it was not fit
to put all to hazard, and therefore raised the Siege of Hadingtoun, and marched
back to Edinburgh. The Lord Gray with a great part of the English Army followed
him in the Rear, Aug. 20. The Siege of Hadingtoun raised.
but did not engage him into any great Action: by which a good opportunity was
lost, for the French were in great disorder. The English Army came into
Hadingtoun. They consisted of about 17000 Men: of which Number 7000 were Horse;
and 3000 of the Foot were German Landsknights, whom the Protector had
entertained in his Service. These Germans were some of the broken Troops of the
Protestant Army, who, seeing the state of their own Country desperate, offered
their Service to the Protector. He too easily entertained them; reckoning, that
being Protestants, they would be sure to him, and would depend wholly on
himself. But this proved a fatal Counsel to him; the English having been always
jealous of a standing, but much more of a Foreign Force about their Prince: so
there was great occasion given by this to those who traded in sowing Jealousies
among the People. The English, having victualled Hadingtoun, and repaired the
Fortifications, returned back into their own Country. But had they gone on to
Edinburgh, they had found things there in great confusion. For Dessie, when he
got thither, having lost 500 of his Men in the Retreat, went to quarter his
Soldiers in the Town; but the Provost, (so is the chief Magistrate there
called) opposed it. The French broke in with force, and killed him and his Son,
with all they found in the Streets, Men, Women, and Children: and as a Spy,
whom the English had in Edinburgh, gave them notice, the Scots were now more
alienated from the French than from the English. The French had carried it very
gently till the Queen was sent away; but reckoned Scotland now a Conquered
Country, and a Province to France. So the Scots began, though too late, to
repent the sending away of the Queen. But it seems the English had orders not
to venture too far; for the hopes of the Marriage were now gone, and the
Protector had no mind to engage in a War with France. These things happened in
the beginning of October. Dessie, apprehending that at Hadingtoun they were now
secure, the Siege being so lately raised, resolved to try if he could carry the
Place by surp^^ze. The English from thence had made Excursions as far as
Edinburgh; in one of which the French fell on them, pursued them, and killed
about 200, and took sixscore Prisoners, almost within their Works. Soon after,
Dessie marched in the night, and surprised one of their Outworks, and was come
to the Gates; where the Place had been certainly lost, if it had not been for a
French Deserter, who knew, if he were taken, what he was to expect. He
therefore fired one of the great Canon, which being discharged amongst the
thickest of the French, killed so many, and put the rest in such disorder, that
Dessie was forced to quit the Attempt. From thence he went and fortified Lies,
which was then but a mean Village; but the situation of the Place being
recommended by the security it now had, it soon came to be one of the best
Peopled Towns in Scotland. From thence he intended to have gone on, to take
Broughty Castle, and to recover Dundee, which were then in the Hands of the
English, But he was ordered by the Queen Regent to make an Inroad into England.
There, after some slight Engagements, in which the English had the worst, the
Scotch and French came in as far as New Castle, and returned loaded with Spoil:
which the French divided among themselves, allowing the Scots no share of it.
An English Priest was taken, who bore that disgrace of his Country so heavily,
that he threw himself on the ground, and would not eat, nor so much as open his
Eyes, but lay thus prostrate till he died. This the French, who seldom let
their misfortunes afflict them, looked on with much astonishment. But at that
time, the English had fortified Inch-keith, an Island in the Frith, and put 800
Men in it. Seventeen days after that, Dessie brought his Forces from Lies, and
recovered it; having killed 400 English, and forced the rest to surrender.

Thus ended this Year, and with it Dessie's Power in Scotland. Discontents in
Scotland.
For the Queen Mother and the Governor had made great complaints of him at the
Court of France, that he put the Nation to vast charge to little purpose; so
that he was more uneasy to his Friends than his Enemies: and his last disorder
at Edinburgh, had on the one hand so raised the insolence of the French
Soldiers, and on the other hand so alienated and inflamed the People, that
unless another were sent to command, who should govern more mildly, there might
be great danger of a defection of a whole Kingdom. For now, the Seeds of their
distaste of the French Government were so sown, that Men came generally to
condemn their sending the Queen away; and to hate the Governor for consenting
to it, but chiefly, to abhor the Clergy, who had wrought it for their own ends.

Monsieur de Thormes was sent over to command; Monluc sent thither to b^ Lord
Chancellor.
and Monluc Bishop of Valence came with him to govern the Councils, and be
Chancellor of the Kingdom. He had lately returned from his Ambassy at
Constantinople. He was one of the wisest Men of that time, and was always for
moderate Councils in Matters of Religion: which made him be sometime suspected
of heresy. And indeed the whole sequel of his life declared him to be one of
the greatest Men of that Age: only his being so long, and so firmly, united to
Queen Katharine Medici's Interest, takes off a great deal of the high Character
which the rest of his Life has given of him. But he was at this time unknown,
and ill represented, in Scotland; where they that looked for advantages from
their alliance with France, took it ill to see a French Man sent over to enjoy
the best Office in the Kingdom. The Queen Mother her self was afraid of him: So
to avoid new grounds of discontent, he left the Kingdom, But was not well
received.
and returned into France.

Thus ended the War between Scotland and England this Year, in almost an equal
mixture of good and bad success. The English had preserved Hadingtoun, which
was the chief matter of this Years Action. But they had been at great charge in
the War, in which they were only on the defensive: they had lost other Places,
and been unsuccessful at Sea: and which was worst of all, they had now lost all
hopes of the Marriage, and were almost engaged in a War with France, which was
like to fall on the King, when his Affairs were in an ill condition, his People
being divided and discontented at home, and his Treasure much exhausted by this
War.

The state of Germany was at this time most deplorable: The Affairs of Germany.
The Pope and Emperor continued their quarrelling about the translation of the
Council. Mendoza at Rome, and Velasco at Bologna, declared in the Emperors
Name, that a Council being called by his great and long endeavors for the
quieting of Germany, and he being engaged in a War to get it to be received;
and having procured a submission of the Empire to the Council, it was, upon
frivolous and feigned causes, removed out of Germany, to one of the Popes
Towns: by which the Germans thought themselves disengaged of their promise,
which was to submit to a Council in Germany: and therefore that he protested
against it, as an unlawful Meeting, to whose Decrees he would not submit; and
that if they did not return to Trent, he would take care of settling Religion
some other way. But the Pope, being encouraged by the French King, was not ill
pleased to see the Emperor anew embroil himself with the Germans: and therefore
intended the Council should be continued at Bologna. The Emperor being
displeased with the Translation of the Council, orders the Interim to be drawn.
Upon this the Emperor ordered three Divines, Julius Flugius Bishop of
Naumburg, Michael Sidonius, and Islebius Agricola, to draw a Form of Religion.
The two former had been always Papists, and the latter was formerly a
Protestant, but was believed to be now corrupted by the Emperor, that the Name
of one of the Ausburg Confession might make what they were to set out, pass the
more easily. They drew up all the Points of Religion in a Book which was best
known by the Name of the Interim, because it was to last during that Interval,
till a General Council should meet in Germany. In it, all the Points of the
Romish Doctrine were set forth in the smoothest terms possible: only married
Men might officiate as Priests, and the Communion was to be given in both
kinds. Feb. Diet at Ausburg.
The Book being thus prepared, a Diet was summoned to Ausburg in Feb. where the
first thing done was the solemn Investiture of Maurice in the Electorate of
Saxony. He had been declared Elector last year by the Emperor before
Wittenberg; but now it was performed with great Ceremony on the 24th of Feb.
which was the Emperors Birthday: Feb. 24. Maurice made Elector of Saxony.
John Frederick looking on with his usual constancy of mind. All he said, was,
Now they triumph in that Dignity, of which they have against Justice and Equity
spoiled me: God grant they may enjoy it peaceably and happily, and may never
need any assistance from me or my Posterity. And without expressing any further
concern about it, he went to his Studies, which were almost wholly employed in
the Scriptures.

The Book of the Interim being prepared, the Elector of Brandenburg sent for
Martin Bucer, who was both a learned and moderate Divine; and showed it him.
Bucer having read it, plainly told him, that it was nothing but downright
Popery, only a little disguised: at which the Elector was much offended, for he
was pleased with it; and Bucer not without great danger returned back to
Strasburg. On the 15th of March, March 15. The Interim received in the Diet.
the Book was proposed to the Diet: and the Elector of Mentz, without any
order, did in all the Princes Names, give the Emperor thanks for it: which he
interpreted as the assent of the whole Diet; and after that would not hear any
that came to him to stop it, but published it as agreed to by the Diet.

The Papists offended at it as well as the Protestants.
At Rome, and Bologna, it was much condemned, as an high attempt in the Emperor
to meddle with Points of Religion; such as dispensing with the Marriage of
Priests, and the Communion in both kinds. Wherefore some of that Church writ
against it. And Matters went so high, that wise Men of that side began to fear
the Breach between the Emperor and them might, before they were aware, be past
reconciling: for they had not forgot that the last Popes stiffness had lost
England, and they were not a little afraid they might now lose the Emperor. But
if the Pope were offended for the concessions in these two Particulars, the
Protestants thought they had much greater cause to dislike it; since in all
other controverted Points it was against them. So that several of that side
writ likewise against it. But the Emperor was now so much exalted with his
success, that he resolved to go through with it, little regarding the
opposition of either hand. The new Elector of Saxony went home, and offered it
to his Subjects. But they refused to receive it, and said, (as Sir Philip
Hobbey, Cotton Library Titus B. 2.
then Ambassador from England at the Emperors Court, writ over) that they had
it under the Emperors Hand and Seal, that he should not meddle with Matters of
Religion, but only with reforming the Commonwealth: and that if their Prince
would not protect them in this matter, they should find another, who would
defend them from such oppression. An Exhortation for the receiving of it was
read at Ausburg; but they also refused it. Many Towns sent their Addresses to
the Emperor, desiring him not to oppress their Consciences. But none was of
such a nature as that from Linda, a little Town near Constance, which had
declared for the Emperor in the former War. They returned answer, That they
could not agree to the Interim, without incurring Eternal Damnation: but to
show their submission to him in all other things they should not shut their
Gates, nor make resistance, against any he should find, though it were to spoil
and destroy their Town. This let the Emperor and his Council see how difficult
a work it would be to subdue the Consciences of the Germans. But his Chancellor
Granvell pressed him to extreme Councils, and to make an example of that Town,
who had so peremptorily refused to obey his Commands. Yet he had little reason
to hope he should prevail on those who were at liberty, when he could work so
little on his Prisoner the Duke of Saxe. For he had endeavored by great offers
to persuade him to agree to it: but all was in vain, for he always told them
that kept him, that his Person was in their Power, but his Conscience was in
his own, and that he would not on any terms depart from the Ausburg Confession.
Upon this he was severely used, his Chaplain was put from him, with most of his
Servants; but he continued still unmoved, and as cheerful as in his greatest
Prosperity. The Lutheran Divines entered into great disputes how far they might
comply. Melanchthon thought that the Ceremonies of Popery might be used, since
they were of their own nature indifferent. Others, as Amstorfius, Illiricus,
with the greatest part of the Lutherans, thought the receiving the Ceremonies
would make way for all the errors of Popery; and though they were of their own
nature indifferent, yet they ceased to be so, when they were enjoined as things
necessary to Salvation. But the Emperor going on resolutely, many Divines were
driven away; some concealed themselves in Germany, others fled into
Switzerland, and some came over into England.

When the news of the Changes that were made here in England were carried
beyond Sea, and after Peter Martyr's being with Cranmer, were more copiously
written by him to his friends; Calvin, and Mar. Bucer, who began to think the
Reformation almost oppressed in Germany, now turned their Eyes more upon England.
Calvin writ to the Protector Calvin writ to the Protector.
on the 29th of October, encouraging him to go on notwithstanding the Wars: as
Hezekias had done in his Reformation. He lamented the heats of some that
professed the Gospel, but complained that he heard there were few lively
Sermons preached in England; and that the Preachers recited their discourses
coldly. He much approves a set form of Prayers, whereby the consent of all the
Churches did more manifestly appear. But he advises a more complete
Reformation: he taxed the Prayers for the Dead, the use of Chrisme and Extreme
Unction, since they were no where recommended in Scripture. He had heard that
the reason why they went no further was, because the Times could not bear it;
but this was to do the Work of God by Political Maxims; which though they
ought to take place in other things, yet should not be followed in Matters in
which the Salvation of Souls was concerned. But above all things he complained
of the great impieties and vices that were so common in England; as Swearing,
Drinking, and Uncleanness; and prayed him earnestly that these things might be
looked after.

Bucer writ against Gardener.
Martin Bucer writ also a Discourse, congratulating the Changes then made in
England, which was translated into English by Sir Philip Hobbey's Brother. In
it he answered the Book that Gardener had written against him; which he had
formerly delayed to do, because King Henry had desired he would let it alone,
till the English and Germans had conferred about Religion. That Book did
chiefly relate to the Marriage of the Clergy: Bucer showed from many Fathers,
that they thought every Man had not the Gift of Chastity, which Gardener
thought every one might have that pleased. He taxed the open lewdness of the
Romish Clergy, who being much set against Marriage, which was Gods Ordinance,
did gently pass over the impurities which the forbidding it had occasioned
among themselves. He particularly taxed Gardener himself, that he had his Rents
paid him out of Stews. He taxed him also for his state and pompous way of
living, and showed how indecent it was for a Churchman to be sent in
Ambassies: and that St. Ambrose, though sent to make Peace, was ashamed of it,
and thought it unbecoming the Priesthood. Both Fagius, and he, being forced to
leave Germany, upon the business of the Interim, Cranmer invited them over to
England; and sent them to Cambridge, as he had done Peter Martyr to Oxford. But
Fagius, not agreeing with this Air, died soon after, a Man greatly learned in
the Oriental Tongues, and a good Expounder of the Scripture.

This being the state of Affairs both abroad and at home, a Session of
Parliament was held in England on the 24th of November, Nov. 24. Parliament
sits.
to which day it had been prorogued from the 15th of October, by reason of the
Plague then in London. The first Bill that was finished, was that about the
Marriage of the Priests. It was brought into the House of Commons the 3d of
December, read the second time on the 5th, and the third time the 6th. But this
Bill being only that married Men might be made Priests, a new Bill was framed,
that, besides the former Provision, Priests might marry. This was read the
first time the 7th, the second time the 10th, and was fully argued on the 11th,
and agreed on the 12th, and sent up to the Lords on the 13th of December. In
that House it stuck as long, as it had been soon dispatched, by the Commons. It
lay on the Table till the 9th of February. Then it was read the first time, and
the 11th the second time; on the 16th it was committed to the Bishops of Ely
and Westminster, the Lord Chief Justice, and the Attorney General: and on the
19th of Feb. it was agreed to; the Bishops of London, Duresme, Norwich,
Carlisle, Hereford, Worcester, Bristol, Chichester, and Landaff; and the Lords
Morley, Dacres, Windsor, and Wharton, dissenting. It had the Royal Assent, and
so became a Law. The Preamble sets forth, An Act about the Marriage of the
Clergy.
That it were better for Priests and other Ministers of the Church to live
chaste and without Marriage; whereby they might better attend to the Ministry of
the Gospel, and be less distracted with secular cares: so that it were much to
be wished, that they would of themselves abstain. But great filthiness of
living, with other inconveniences, had followed on the Laws that compelled
Chastity, and prohibited Marriage: so that it was better they should be
suffered to marry, than be so restrained. Therefore all Laws and Canons that
had been made against it, being only made by humane Authority, are repealed. So
that all Spiritual Persons of what degree soever might lawfully marry,
providing they married according to the Order of the Church. But a Proviso was
added, that because many Divorces of Priests had been made after the six
Articles were enacted, and that the Women might have thereupon married again,
all these Divorces, with every thing that had followed on them, should be
confirmed. There was no Law that passed in this Reign with more contradiction
and censure than this, and therefore the Reader may expect the larger account
of this matter.

The unmarried state of the Clergy had so much to be said for it, Which was
much enquired into.
as being a course of life that was more disengaged from secular cares, and
pleasures; that it was cast on the Reformers every where as a foul reproach,
that they could not restrain their appetites, but engaged in a life that drew
after it domestic cares, with many other distractions. This was an Objection
so easy to be apprehended, that the People had been more prejudiced against
the Marriage of the Clergy, if they had not felt greater inconveniences by the
debaucheries of Priests; who being restrained from Marriage, had defiled the
Beds, and deflow'red the Daughters of their Neighbors, into whose Houses they
had free and unsuspected access, and whom under the Cloak of receiving
Confessions they could more easily entice. This made them that they were not so
much wrought on by the noise of Chastity, (when they saw so much and so plainly
to the contrary) as otherwise they would have been, by a thing that sounded so
well. But on the other hand, there was no Argument which the Reformers had more
considered. There were two things upon which the Question turned: The one was,
the Obligation that Priesthood brought with it to live unmarried; the other
was, the tie they might be under by any Vow they had made. For the former, they
considered, Arguments for it from Scripture.
that God having ordained a Race of Men te be Priests under Moses Law, who
should offer up expiatory Sacrifices for the sins of the Jews, did not only not
forbid Marriage, but made it necessary, for that Office was to descend by
inheritance; so that Priesthood was not inconsistent with that state. In the
New Testament some of the qualifications of a Bishop and Deacon are their being
the Husband of one Wife, and their having well ordered their House, and brought
up their Children: St. Peter and other Apostles were married; it was thought
St. Paul was so likewise; Aquila was certainly married to Priscilla, and
carried her about with him. Our Savior, speaking of the help that an unmarried
state was to the Kingdom of God, recommended it equally to all Ranks of Men as
they could bear it. St. Paul said, Let every Man have his own Wife; It is
better to marry than to burn; and, Marriage is honorable in all; and the
forbidding to marry is reckoned by him a mark of the Apostasy of the latter
times; so that the matter seemed clear from the Scriptures.

And from the Fathers.
In the first Ages Saturninus, Basilides, Montanus, Novatus, and the Eucratites
condemned Marriage as a state of liberty more than was fit for Christians.
Against those was asserted by the Primitive Fathers the lawfulness of Marriage
to all Christians without discrimination: and they who entering into Holy Orders
forsook their Wives, were severely condemned by the Apostolical Canons, and by
the Council of Gangra in the beginning of fourth, and the Council in Trullo in
the fifth Age. Many great Bishops in these times lived still with their Wives,
and had Children by them, as namely both Nazianzen's and Basil's Fathers: and
Hilary of Poictiers when banished to Phrygia and very old, writing to his own
Daughter Abra, bid her ask her Mother the meaning of those things which she by
reason of her Age understood not; by which it appears that his Daughter was
then very young, and by consequence born to him after he was a Bishop. In the
Council of Nice, it being proposed that Clergymen should depart from their
Wives, Paphnutius, though himself unmarried, opposed it as an unreasonable
Yoke. And Heliodorus Bishop of Trica, the Author of the first of those
Love-Fables, now known by the Name of Romances, being suspected of too much
lasciviousness, and concerned to clear himself of that charge, did first move
that Clergymen should be obliged to live single, which the Historian says they
were not tied to before, but Bishops as they pleased lived still with their
Wives. The Fathers in those times extolled a single Life very high, and yet
they all thought a Man once married might be a Bishop though his Wife were yet
living; they did not allow it indeed to him that had married twice; but for
this they had a distinction, that if a Man had been once married before his
Baptism, and again after his Baptism, he was to be understood to be in the
state of a single Marriage. So that Jerome, who writ warmly enough against
second Marriages, yet says, Ad Oceanum, that the Bishops in his Age who were
but once married in that sense were not to be numbered, and that more of these
could be reckoned than were at the Council of Ariminum, who are said to have
been 800 Bishops. It is true that in that Age they began to make Canons against
the Marriage of those who were in Orders, especially in the Roman and African
Churches; but those were only Positive Laws of the Church, and the frequent
repeating of those Canons shows that even there, they were not generally
obeyed. Of Synesius we read, that when he was ordained Priest, he declared that
he would not live secretly with his Wife as some did, but that he would ^well
publicly with her, and wished that he might have many Children by her. In the
Eastern Church all their Clergy below the Order of Bishops are usually married
before they be ordained, and afterward live with their Wives, and have Children
by them, without any kind of Prohibition. In the Western Church the Married
Clergy are taken notice of in many of the Spanish and Gallican Synods, and the
Bishops and Priests Wives are called Epyscopae and Presbyterae. In most of the
Cathedrals of England the Clergy were married in the Saxon times, but as was
shown, Page 22. of the first Part, because they would not quit their Wives they
were put out, not of Sacred Orders, but only out of the Seats they were then
in, and those were given to the Monks. When Pope Nicolas had pressed the
Coelibate of the Clergy in the 9th Century, there was great opposition made to
it, chiefly by Huldericus Bishop of Ausburg, who was held a Saint
notwithstanding this opposition. Restitutus Bishop of London lived openly with
his Wife: nor was the Coelibate of the Clergy generally imposed till Pope
Gregory the 7th's time in the eleventh Century, who projecting to have the
Clergy depend wholly on himself, and so to separate them from the Interests of
those Princes in whose Dominions they lived, considered that by having Wives
and Children they gave Pledges to the State where they lived, and reckoned that
if they were free from this encumbrance, then their Persons being Sacred, there
would be nothing to hinder, but that they might do as they pleased in obedience
to the Popes, and opposition to their own Princes Orders. The Writers near
Gregory the 7th's time called this a new thing, against the Mind of the Holy
Fathers, and full of rashness in him thus to turn out married Priests. Lanfranc
Archbishop of Canterbury did not impose Coelibate on the Clergy in the
Villages, but only on those that lived in Towns, and on Prebendaries. But
Anselm carried it further, and simply imposed it on all the Clergy; yet himself
laments that Sodomy was become then very common, and even public, which was
also the complaint of Petrus Damiani in Pope Gregory's time. Bernard said that,
that sin was frequent among the Bishops in his time, and that this with many
other abominations was the natural effect of prohibiting Marriage. This made
Abbot Panormitan wish that it were left to Men's liberty to marry if they
pleased. And Pius the second said there might have been good reasons for
imposing Coelibate on the Clergy, but he believed there were far better Reasons
for taking away these Laws that imposed it. Yet even since those Laws have been
made Petrarch had a License to marry, and keep his Preferments still. Boniface
Archbishop of Canterbury, Richard Bishop of Chichester, and Geofrey Bishop of
Ely are said to have had Wives; and though there were not so many Instances of
Priests marrying after Orders, yet if there were any thing in the nature of
Priesthood inconsistent by the Law of God with Marriage, then it was as
unlawful for them to continue in their former Marriages as to contract a new
one. Some few Instances were also gathered out of Church History of Bishops and
Priests marrying after Orders: but as these were few, so there was just reason
to controvert them.

Upon the whole matter it was clear that the Coelibate of the Clergy flowed
from no law of God, nor from any general Law of the Church; The Vows and other
Reasons against it examined.
but the contrary, of Clergy-mens living with their Wives, was universally
received for many Ages. As for Vows, it was much questioned how far they did
bind in such Cases. It seemed a great sin to impose such on any, when they were
yet young, and did not well know their own dispositions. Nor was it in a Man's
power to keep them. For, Continence being none of those Graces that are
promised by God to all that ask it, as it was not in a Man's Power without
extreme severities on himself to govern his own constitution of Body, so he had
no reason to expect God should interpose when he had provided another remedy
for such Cases. Besides, the Promise made by Clergymen, according to the Rites
of the Roman Pontifical, did not oblige them to Coelibate. The words were, Will thou follow Chastity and Sobriety? to which the Subdeacon answered, I will. By
Chastity was not to be understood a total abstinence from all, but only from
unlawful embraces; since a Man might live chaste in a state of Marriage, as well
as out of it. But whatever might be in this, the English Clergy were not
concerned in it: for there was no such Question nor Answer made in the Forms of
their Ordination. So they were not by any Vow precluded from Marriage. And for
the Expediency of it, nothing was more evident, than that these Laws had
brought in much uncleanness into the Church, and those who pressed them most
had been signally noted for these Vices. No Prince in the English History
lewder than Edgar that had so promoted it. The Legate that in King Henry the
second's time got that severe Decree made, that put all the married Clergy from
their Livings, was found the very night after (for the credit of Coelibate) in
bed with a Whore. On this Subject many undecent Stories were gathered,
especially by Bale, who was a learned Man, but did not write with that temper
and discretion that became a Divine. He gathered all the lewd Stories that
could be raked together to this purpose; and the many abominable things found
in the Monasteries were then fresh in all Men's memories. It was also observed,
that the unmarried Clergy had been, as much as the married could be, intent
upon the raising Families, and the enriching of their Nephews and Kindred, (and
sometimes of their Bastards, witness the present Pope Paul the third, and not
long before him Alexander the 6th) so that the married Clergy could not be
tempted to more Covetousness than had appeared in the unmarried. And for the
Distraction of Domestic Affairs, the Clergy had formerly given themselves up
to such a secular course of Life, that it was thought nothing could increase
it; but if the married Clergy should set themselves to raise more than a decent
maintenance for their Children, such as might fit them for Letters or Callings,
and should neglect Hospitality, become covetous, and accumulate Livings and
Preferments, to make Estates for their Children; this might be justly curbed by
new Laws, or rather the renewing of the ancient Canons, by which Clergymen
were declared to be only entrusted with the Goods of the Church for public
ends, and were not to apply them to their own private uses, nor to leave them
to their Children and Friends.

Thus had this Matter been argued in many Books that were written on this
Subject, by Poinet, and Parker, the one afterward Bishop of Winchester, and
the other Archbishop of Canterbury; also by Bale Bishop of Ossory, with many
more. Dr. Ridley, Dr. Tailor, (afterward Bishop of Lincoln) Dr. Benson, and
Dr. Redmayn, appeared more confidently in it, than many others; being Men that
were resolved never to marry themselves; who yet thought it necessary, and
therefore pleaded, (according to the Pattern that Paphnutius had set them) that
all should be left to their liberty in this matter.

The Debate about it was brought into the Convocation, where Dr. Redmayn's
Authority went a great way. He was a Man of great Learning and Probity, and of
so much greater weight, because he did not in all Points agree with the
Reformers: but being at this time sick, his opinion was brought under his Hand,
Collection Number 30.
which will be found in the Collection, copied from the Orignal. It was to this
purpose, That though the Scriptures exhorted Priests to live chaste, and out of
the cares of the World; yet the Laws forbidding them Marriage, were only Canons
and Constitutions of the Church; not founded on the Word of God: and therefore
he thought that a Man once married might be a Priest: and he did not find the
Priests in the Church of England had made any Vow against Marriage; and
therefore he thought that the King and the higher Powers of the Church, might
take away the Clog of perpetual continence from the Priests, and grant that
such as could not or would not contain, might marry once, and not be put from
their holy Ministration. It was opposed by many in both Houses, but carried at
last by the major Vote. All this I gather from what is printed concerning it:
For I have seen no Remains of this, or of any of the other Convocations that
came afterward in this Reign; the Registers of them being destroyed in the
Fire of London. This Act seemed rather a connivance, and permission of the
Clergy to marry, than any direct allowance of it, So the Enemies of that state
of life continued to reproach the married Clergy still: and this was much
heightened by many undecent Marriages, and other light behavior of some
Priests. But these things made way for a more full Act concerning this matter
about three years after.

The next Act that past in this Parliament was about the public Service; which
was put into the House of Commons on the 9th of December, An Act confirming the
Liturgy.
and the next day was also put into the House of Lords: It lay long before
them, and was not agreed to till the 15th of Jan. The Earl of Derby, the
Bishops of London, Duresme, Norwich, Carlisle, Hereford, Worcester,
Westminster, and Chichester, and the Lords, Dacres, and Windsor, protesting.
The Preamble of the Act sets forth, That there had been several Forms of
Service, and that of late there had been great difference in the Administration
of the Sacraments, and other parts of Divine Worship: and that the most
effectual endeavors could not stop the Inclinations of many to depart from the
former Customs: which the King had not punished, believing they flowed from a
good zeal. But that there might be an uniforme way over all the Kingdom, the
King, by the advice of the Lord Protector and his Council, had appointed the
Archbishop of Canterbury, with other learned and discreet Bishops and Divines,
to draw an Order of Divine Worship, having respect to the pure Religion of
Christ taught in the Scripture, and to the practice of the Primitive Church,
which they by the Aid of the Holy Ghost, had with one uniforme agreement
concluded on; wherefore the Parliament having considered the Book, and the
things that were altered or retained in it, they gave their most humble thanks
to the King for his care about it: and did pray that all who had formerly
offended in these matters, except such as were in the Tower of London, or the
Prison of the Fleet, should be pardoned; and did Enact, that from the Feast of
Whit-Sunday next, all Divine Offices should be performed according to it, and
that such of the Clergy as should refuse to do it, or continue to officiate in
any other manner, should upon the first conviction be imprisoned six Months,
and forfeit a years Profit of their Benefice: For the second offense forfeit
all their Church Preferments, and suffer a years Imprisonment: And for the
third offense should be imprisoned during life. And all that should write, or
put out things in print against it, or threaten any Clergymen for using it,
were to be fined in 10 l. for the first offense, 20 for the second, and to
forfeit all their Goods, and be imprisoned for life, upon a third offense. Only
at the Universities they might use it in Latin and Greek, excepting the Office
of the Communion. It was also lawful to use other Psalms or Prayers taken out
of the Bible, so these in the Book were not omitted. This Act was variously
censured by those who disliked it. The Censures passed upon it.
Some thought it too much, that it was said the Book was drawn by the Aid of
the Holy Ghost. But others said this was not to be so understood, as if they
had been inspired by extraordinary assistance; for then there had been no room
for any correction of what was now done: and therefore it was only to be
understood in that sense, as all good Motions and Consultations are directed or
assisted by the secret influences of Gods Holy Spirit; which do often help good
Men, even in their imperfect actions, where the good that is done is justly
ascribed to the Grace of God. Others censured it, because it was said to be
done by uniform agreement, though four of the Bishops that were employed in the
drawing of it, protested against it. These were the Bishops of Norwich,
Hereford, Chichester, and Westminster; but these had agreed in the main parts
of the Work, though in some few Particulars they were not satisfied, which made
them dissent from the whole.

Singing of Psalms brought in.
The Proviso for the Psalms and Prayers taken out of the Bible, was for the
Singing Psalms, which were translated into Verse, and much sung by all who
loved the Reformation, and were in many Places used in Churches. In the Ancient
Church the Christians were much exercised in repeating the Psalms of David:
many had them all by heart, and used to be reciting them when they went about
their Work; and those who retired into a Monastical course of life, spent many
of their hours in repeating the Psalter. Apollinaris put them in verse, as
being easier for the memory. Other devout Hymns came to be also in use.
Nazianzen among the Greeks, and Prudentius among the Latins, labored on that
Argument with the greatest success. There were other Hymns that were not put in
verse, the chief of which were, that most ancient Hymn which we use now after
the Sacrament, and the Celebrated Ambrosian Hymn that begins Te Deum Laudamus.
But as when the Worship of the departed Saints came to be dressed up with much
pomp, Hymns were also made for their honor: and in Latin Tongue, as well as
Prosody, being then much decayed, these came to be cast into Rithmes, and were
written generally in a fantastical affected Style: So now at the Reformation,
some Poets, such as the times afforded, translated David's Psalms into verse;
and it was a sign by which Men's affections to that Work were every where
measured, whether they used to sing these, or not. But as the Poetry then was
low, and not raised to that justness to which it is since brought, so this
Work, which then might pass for a tolerable composure, has not been since that
time so reviewed or changed as perhaps the thing required: hence it is that
this piece of Divine Worship, by the meanness of the Verse, has not maintained
its due esteem. Another thing, that some thought deserved to be considered in
such a Work, was, that many of the Psalms, being such as related more specially
to David's Victories, and contained Passages in them not easily understood, it
seemed better to leave out these, which it was not so easy to sing with
Devotion, because the meaning of them either lay hid, or did not at all concern
Christians.

The Parliament was adjourned from the 22d of December to the second of Jan. On
the 7th of Jan. the Commons sent an Address to the Protector to restore Latimer
to the Bishopric of Worcester: 1549.
but this took no effect, for that good old Man did choose rather to go about
and preach, than to engage in a matter of Government, being now very ancient. A
Bill was put in by the Lords for appointing of Parks, Jour. Proc.
and agreed to, the Earl of Arundel only dissenting; but being sent down to the
Commons, it was upon the second reading thrown out, yet not so unanimously but
that the House was divided about it.

On the fourth of Feb. a Bill was put in against eating Flesh in Lent, and on
Fasting days; it was committed to the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of
Ely, Worcester, and Chichester; and sent to the Commons on the 16th, who sent
it up on the 7th of March, with a Proviso to which the Lords agreed. In the
Preamble it is said, An Act about Fasts.
That though it is clear by the Word of God, that there is no Day, nor kind of
Meat, purer than another, but that all are in themselves alike; yet many out of
sensuality had contemned such abstinence, as had been formerly used; and since
due abstinence was a mean to virtue, and to subdue Men's Bodies to their Soul
and Spirit, and was also necessary to encourage the Trade of Fishing, and for
saving of Flesh; therefore all former Laws about Fasting and Abstinence were to
be after the first of May repealed, and it was Enacted, That from the first of
May, none should eat Flesh on Fridays, Saturdays, Ember-days, in Lent, or any
other days that should be declared Fish-days, under several Penalties. A
Proviso was added for excepting such as should obtain the Kings License, or
were sick, or weak, and that none should be indicted but within three Months
after the Offense.

Christ had told his Disciples, that when he should be taken from them, then
they should fast. Accordingly the Primitive Christians used to fast often, more
particularly before the Anniversary of the Passion of Christ, which ended in a
high Festivity at Easter. Yet this was differently observed, as to the number
of days. Some abstained 40 days in imitation of Christ's Fast, others only that
Week, and others had only an entire Fast from the time of Christ's death till
his Resurrection. On these Fasts they eat nothing till the Evening, and then
they eat most commonly Herbs and Roots. Afterward the Fridays were kept as
Fasts, because on that day Christ suffered. Saturdays were also added in the
Roman Church, but not without contradiction. Ember-weeks came in afterward,
being some days before those Sundays, in which Orders were given. And a General
Rule being laid down, that every Christian Festival should be preceded by a
Fast, thereupon the Vigils of Holy Days came, though not so soon, into the
Number. But this, with the other good Institutions of the Primitive times,
became degenerate; even in St. Austins time, Religion came to be placed in
these observances, and anxious Rules were made about them. Afterward in the
Church of Rome they were turned into a Mockery; for, as on Fast-days they
dined, which the Ancients did not, so the use of the most delicious Fish, dressed
in the most exquisite manner, with the richest Wines that could be had, was
allowed, which made it ridiculous. So now they resolved to take off the
severities of the former Laws, and yet to keep up such Laws about Fasting and
Abstinence, as might be agreeable to its true end: which is, to subdue the
Flesh to the Spirit, and not to gratify it by a change of one sort of diet
into another, which may be both more delicate, and more inflaming. So fond a
thing is Superstition, that it will help Men to deceive themselves by the
slightest Pretenses that can be imagined.

It was much lamented then, and there is as much cause for it still, that
carnal Men have taken advantages from the abuses that were formerly practiced,
to throw off good and profitable Institutions: since the frequent use of
Fasting, with Prayer and true Devotion joined to it, is perhaps one of the
greatest helps that can be devised, to advance one to a spiritual temper of
Mind, and to promote a holy course of Life: And the mockery that is discernable
in the way of some Men's Fasting, is a very slight excuse for any to lay aside
the use of that which the Scriptures have so much recommended.

Some Bills were rejected.
There were other Bills put in into both Houses, but did not pass. One was, for
declaring it Treason to marry the Kings Sisters without consent of the King and
his Council: but it was thought that King Henry's Will, disabling them from the
Succession in that case, would be a stronger restraint; and so it was laid
aside. Another Bill was put in for Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. Great
Complaints were made of the abounding of Vices and Immoralities, which the
Clergy could neither restrain nor punish, and so they had nothing left but to
preach against them, which was done by many with great freedom. In some of
these Sermons, the Preachers expressed their apprehensions of signal and speedy
Judgments from Heaven, if the People did not repent; but their Sermons had no
great effect, for the Nation grew very corrupt, and this brought on them severe
punishments. The Temporal Lords were so jealous of putting power in Church-mens
hands, especially to correct those vices of which themselves perhaps were most
guilty, that the Bill was laid aside. The pretense of opposing it, was, that
the greatest part of the Bishops and Clergy were still Papists in their Hearts;
so that if Power were put into such Men's hands, it was reasonable to expect,
they would employ it chiefly against those who favored the Reformation, and
would vex them on that score, though with Pretenses fetched from other things.

A design for digesting the Common Law into a Body.
There was also put into the House of Commons a Bill for reforming of Processes
at Common Law, which was sent up by the Commons to the Lords, but it fell in
that House. I have seen a large Discourse written then upon that Argument; in
which it is set forth, that the Law of England was a barbarous kind of Study,
and did not lead Men into a finer sort of Learning, which made the Common
Lawyers to be generally so ignorant of Foreign Matters, and so unable to
negotiate in them; therefore it was proposed, that the Common and Statute Laws,
should be, in imitation of the Roman Law, digested into a Body under Titles and
Heads, and put in good Latin. But this was too great a Design to be set on, or
finished under an Infant King. If it was then necessary, it will be readily
acknowledged to be much more so now, the Volume of our Statutes being so much
swelled since that time; besides the vast number of Reports, and Cases, and the
Pleadings growing much longer than formerly: yet whether this is a thing to be
much expected or desired, I refer it to the learned and wise Men of that Robe.

The only Act that remains of this Session of Parliament, The Admirals
Attainder.
about which I shall inform the Reader, is the Attainder of the Admiral. The
Queen Dowager that had married him died in September last, not without
suspicion of Poison. She was a good and virtuous Lady, and in her whole Life
had done nothing unseemly, but the marrying him so indecently, and so soon
after the Kings death. There was found among her Papers a Discourse written by
her concerning her self; entitled, The Lamentation of a Sinner, which was
published by Cecil, who writ a Preface to it. In it, she, with great sincerity,
acknowledges the sinful course of her Life for many years, in which she,
relying on External Performances, such as Fasts, and Pilgrimages, was all that
while a Stranger to the Internal and True Power of Religion: which she came
afterward to feel by the study of the Scripture, and the calling upon God for
his Holy Spirit. She explains clearly the Notion she had of Justification by
Faith, so that Holiness necessarily followed upon it: but lamented the great
scandal given by many Gospellers: So were all these called who were given to
the reading of the Scriptures.

She being thus dead, The Queen Dowager dying, he courted the Lady Eliz.
the Admiral renewed his Addresses to the Lady Elizabeth, but in vain; for as
he could not expect that his Brother and the Council would consent to it, so if
he had married her without that, the possibility of succeeding to the Crown was
cut off by King Henry's Will. And this Attempt of his occasioned that Act to be
put in, which was formerly mentioned, for declaring the marrying the Kings
Sisters, without consent of Council, to be Treason. Seeing he could not compass
that design, he resolved to carry away the King to his House of Holt in the
Country; and so to displace his Brother, and to take the Government into his
own hands. For this end, he had laid in Magazines of Arms, and listed about
10000 Men in several Places: and openly complained, that his Brother intended
to enslave the Nation, and make himself Master of all; and had therefore
brought over those German Soldiers. He had also entered into Treaty with several
of the Nobility, that envied his Brothers greatness, and were not ill pleased
to see a breach between them, and that grown to be irreconcilable. To these he
promised that they should be of the Council, and that he would dispose of the
King in Marriage to one of their Daughters: the Person is not named. The
Protector had often told him of these things, and warned him of the danger into
which he would throw himself by such ways; but he persisted still in his
designs; though he denied and excused them as long as was possible. Now his
restless ambition seeming incurable, he was on the 19th of Jan. sent to the
Tower. The original Warrant, Jan. 19. The Admiral sent to the Tower.
Signed by all the Privy Council, is in the Council-Book formerly mentioned;
where the Earl of Southampton Signs with the rest; who was now, in outward
appearance reconciled to the Protector. On the day following the Admirals Seal
of his Office was sent for, and put into Secretary Smiths Hands. And now many
things broke out against him; and particularly a Conspiracy of his with Sir W.
Sharington, Vice-Treasurer of the Mint at Bristol, who was to have furnished
him with 10000 l. and had already coined about 12000 l. false Money, and had
clipped a great deal more, to the value of 40000 l. in all; for which he was
attainted by a Process at Common Law, and that was confirmed in Parliament.
Fowler also, that waited in the Privy Chamber, with some few others, were sent
to the Tower: Many complaints being usually brought against a sinking Man, the
Lord Russel, the Earl of Southampton, and Secretary Petre, were ordered to
receive their Examinations. And thus the Business was let alone till the 28 of
Feb. in which time his Brother did again try if it were possible to bring him
to a better temper: And as he had, since their first breach, granted him 800 l.
a year in Land, to gain his friendship; so means were now used to persuade him
to submit himself, and to withdraw from Court, and from all employment. But it
appeared that nothing could be done to him that could cure his ambition, or the
hatred he carried to his Brother. And therefore on the 22d of Feb. a full
report was made to the Council of all the things that were informed against
him; consisting not only of the Particulars formerly mentioned, but of many
foul misdemeanors in the discharge of the Admiralty: several Pirates being
entertained by him, who gave him a share of their Robberies, and whom he had
protected, notwithstanding the Complaints made by other Princes, by which the
King was in danger of a War from the Princes so complaining. The whole Charge
consists of 33 Articles, which will be found in the Collection. Collection
Number 31.
The Particulars, as it is entered in the Council-Book, were so manifestly
proved, not only by Witnesses, but by Letters under his own Hand, that it did
not seem possible to deny them. Yet he had been sent to, and examined, by some
of the Council, but refused to make a direct Answer to them, or to Sign those
Answers that he had made. So it was ordered, that the next day, all the Privy
Council, except the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Sir John Baker, Speaker to
the House of Commons, who was engaged to attend in the House, should go to the
Tower, and examine him. On the 23d the Lord Chancellor, with the other
Counselors, went to him, and read the Articles of his Charge, and earnestly
desired him to make plain Answers to them, excusing himself where he could, and
submitting himself in other things: and that he would show no obstinacy of
Mind. He answered them, That he expected an open Trial, and his Accusers to be
brought face to face. All the Counselors endeavored to persuade him to be
more tractable, but to no purpose. At last the Lord Chancellor required him on
his Allegiance to make his Answer. He desired, they would leave the Articles
with him, and he would consider of them, otherwise he would make no Answer to
them. But the Counselors resolved not to leave them with him on those terms.
On the 24th of Feb. it was resolved in Council, that the whole Board should
after Dinner acquaint the King with the state of that Affair, and desire to
know of him whether he would have the Law to take place; and since the thing
had been before the Parliament, whether he would leave it to their
determination: so tender they were of their young King in a Case that concerned
his Unkles Life. But the King had begun to discern his seditious temper, and
was now much alienated from him.

The Council desired the King to refer the Matter to the Parliament.
When the Counselors waited on him, the Lord Chancellor opened the Matter to
the King, and delivered his Opinion for leaving it to the Parliament. Then
every Councellor by himself spoke his mind, all to the same purpose. Last of
all the Protector spoke; he protested this was a most sorrowful business to
him, that he had used all the means in his power to keep it from coming to this
extremity; but were it Son or Brother he must prefer his Majesty's safety to
them, for he weighed his Allegiance more than his Blood: and that therefore he
was not against the request that the other Lords had made; and said, if he
himself were guilty of such offenses, he should not think he were worthy of
life; and the rather because he was of all Men the most bound to his Majesty,
and therefore he could not refuse Justice. The King answered them in these
words. Who consented to it.
We perceive that there are great things objected and laid to my Lord Admiral
my Uncle, and they tend to Treason, and We perceive that you require but
Justice to be done, We think it reasonable, and We Will, that you proceed
according to your Request. Which words, (as it is marked in the Council-Book)
coming so suddenly from his Graces Mouth, of his own motion, as the Lords might
well perceive, they were marvellously rejoiced, and gave the King most hearty
praise and thanks: yet resolved, that some of both Houses should be sent to the
Admiral, before the Bill should be put in against him, to see what he could or
would say. All this was done to try if he could be brought to a Submission. So
the Lord Chancellor, the Earls of Shrewsbury, Warwick, and Southampton, and Sir
John Baker, Sir Tho. Cheyney, and Sir Anth. Denny, were sent to him. He was
long obstinate, but after much persuasion was brought to give an Answer to the
first three Articles, which will be found in the Collection at the end of the
Articles: and then on a sudden he stopped, and bade them be content, for he would
go no further: and no entreaties would work on him, either to answer the rest,
or to set his Hand to the Answers he had made.

On the 25th of Feb. the Bill was put in for attainting him, The Bill passed in
both Houses.
and the Peers had been so accustomed to agree to such Bills in King Henry's
time, that they did easily pass it. All the Judges, and the Kings Council,
delivered their Opinions, that the Articles were Treason. Then the Evidence was
brought, many Lords gave it so fully, that all the rest with one Voice
consented to the Bill; only the Protector, for natural pities sake, as is in
the Council-Book, desired leave to withdraw. On the 27th the Bill was sent down
to the Commons, with a Message, That if they desired to proceed as the Lords
had done, those Lords that had given their Evidence in their own House, should
come down and declare it to the Commons. But there was more opposition made in
the House of Commons. Many argued against Attainders in absence, and thought it
an odd way that some Peers should rise up in their Places in their own House,
and relate somewhat to the slander of another, and that he should be thereupon
attainted: therefore it was pressed, that it might be done by a Trial, and that
the Admiral should be brought to the Bar, and be heard plead for himself. But
on the fourth of March a Message was sent from the King, that he thought it was
not necessary to send for the Admiral: and that the Lords should come down and
renew before them the Evidence they had given in their own House. This was
done: and so the Bill was agreed to by the Commons in a full House, judged
about 400, and there were not above ten or twelve that voted in the negative.
The Royal Assent was given on the 5th of March. On the 10th of March, the
Council resolved to press the King that Justice might be done on the Admiral:
and since the Case was so heavy and lamentable to the Protector, (so it is in
the Council-Book) though it was also sorrowful to them all, they resolved to
proceed in it, so that neither the King, nor he, should be further troubled
with it. After Dinner they went to the King, the Protector being with them. The
King said, he had well observed their Proceedings, and thanked them for their
great care of his safety, and commanded them to proceed in it without further
molesting him or the Protector: and ended, I pray you my Lords do so. Upon this
they ordered the Bishop of Ely to go to the Admiral, and to instruct him in the
things that related to another Life: and to prepare him to take patiently his
deserved Execution. And on the 17th of March, he having made report to them of
his attendance on the Admiral, the Council Signed a Warrant for his Execution,
which will be found in the Collection, Collection Number 32.
to which both the Lord Protector and the Archbishop of Canterbury set their
Hands. And on the 20th his Head was cut off. March 20. The Admiral beheaded.
What his behavior was on the Scaffold I do not find.

Thus fell Tho. Lord Seimour, Lord high Admiral of England, a Man of high
thoughts, of great violence of temper, and ambitious out of measure. Censures
past upon it.
The Protector was much censured for giving way to his Execution, by those who
looked only at that relation between them, which they thought should have made
him still preserve him. But others, who knew the whole Series of the Affair,
saw it was scarce possible for him to do more for the gaining his Brother than
he had done. Yet the other being a Popular Notion, that it was against Nature
for one Brother to destroy another, was more easily entertained by the
Multitude, who could not penetrate into the Mysteries of State. But the way of
Proceeding was much condemned; since to attaint a Man without bringing him to
make his own defense, or to object what he could say to the Witnesses that were
brought against him, was so illegal and unjust, that it could not be defended.
Only this was to be said for it, that it was a little more regular than
Parliamentary Attainders had been formerly; for here the Evidence upon which it
was founded was given before both Houses.

And on Cranmers signing the Warrant for his Execution.
One Particular seemed a little odd, that Cranmer Signed the Warrant for his
Execution; which being in a Cause of Blood, was contrary to the Canon Law. In
the Primitive Times, Churchmen had only the Cure of Souls lying on them,
together with the reconciling of such differences as might otherwise end in
Suits of Law before the Civil Courts, which were made up of Infidels. When the
Empire became Christian, these Judgments, which they gave originally on so
charitable an account, were by the Imperial Laws made to have great Authority;
but further than these, or the care of Widows and Orphans, they were forbid,
both by the Council of Chalcedon, and other lesser Councils, to meddle in
Secular Matters. Among the Endowments made to some Churches, there were Lands
given, where the Slaves, according to the Roman Law, came within the Patrimony
of these Churches, and by that Law Masters had Power of Life and Death over
their Slaves.

Laws against Church-mens meddling in Matters of Blood.
In some Churches this Power had been severely exercised, even to maiming and
death, which seemed very indecent in a Churchman. Besides, there was an
Apprehension that some severe Churchmen, who were but Masters for life, might
be more profuse of the Lives of such Slaves, than those that were to transmit
them to their Families. Therefore to prevent the wast that would be made in the
Churches Patrimony, it was agreed on that Churchmen should not proceed
capitally against any of their Vassals or Slaves. And in the Confusions that
were in Spain, the Princes that prevailed, had appointed Priests to be Judges,
to give the greater reputation to their Courts. This being found much to the
prejudice of the Church, it was decreed in the fourth Council of Toledo that
Priests who were chosen by Christ to the Ministry of Salvation, should not
judge in Capital Matters, unless the Prince should swear to them, that he would
remit the punishment: and such as did otherwise, were held guilty of
Bloodshedding, and were to lose their Degree in the Church. This was soon
received over all the Western Church; and Arguments were found out afterward
by the Canonists to prove the necessity of continuing it; from David's not being
suffered to build the Temple, since he was a Man of Blood; and from the
qualification required by St. Paul in a Bishop, That he should be no striker,
since he seemed to strike, that did it either in Person, or by one whom he
deputed to do it. But when afterward Charles the Great, and all the Christian
Princes in the West, gave their Bishops great Lands and Dominions; they obliged
them to be in all their Councils, and to do them such Services as they required
of them by virtue of their Tenures. The Popes, designing to set up a Spiritual
Empire, and to bring all Church Lands within it; required the Bishops to
separate themselves from a dependence on their Princes, as much as it was
possible: And these Laws formerly made about Cases of Blood, were judged a
Color good enough why they should not meddle in such Trials; so they procured
these Cases to be excepted. But it seems Cranmer thought his Conscience was
under no tie from those Canons, and so judged it not contrary to his Function
to Sign that Order.

The Parliament was on the 14th of March Prorogued to the 4th of Nov. the
Clergy having granted the King a Subsidy of 6 s. in the Pound to be paid in
three Years. Subsidies granted by the Clergy and Laity.
In the Preamble of the Bill of Subsidy they acknowledged the great quietness
they enjoyed under him, having no Let nor Impediment in the Service of God. But
the Laity set out their Subsidy with a much fuller Preamble, of the great
happiness they had by the true Religion of Christ; declaring that they were
ready to forsake all things rather than Christ; as also to assist the King in
the Conquest of Scotland, which they call a part of his Dominion; therefore
they give 12 d. in the Pound of all Men's Personal Estates to be paid in three
Years.

But now to look into Matters of Religion, there was, A New Visitation.
immediately after the Act of Uniformity passed, a new Visitation, which, it is
probable, went in the same Method that was observed in the former. There were
two things much complained of; the one was, that the Priests read the Prayers
generally with the same tone of Voice that they had used formerly in the Latin
Service: so that, it was said, the People did not understand it much better
than they had done the Latin formerly. This I have seen represented in many
Letters; and it was very seriously laid before Cranmer by Martin Bucer. The
course taken in it, was, that in all Parish Churches the Service should be read
in a plain audible Voice; but that the former way should remain in Cathedrals,
where there were great Quires, who were well acquainted with that Tone, and
where it agreed better with the Music that was used in the Anthems. Yet even
there, many thought it no proper way in the Letany, where the greatest gravity
was more agreeable to such humble Addresses, than such a modulation of the
Voice, which to those unacquainted with it seemed light, and for others that
were more accustomed to it, it seemed to be rather use that had reconciled them
to it, than the natural decency of the thing, or any fitness in it to advance
the devotion of their Prayers. But this was a thing judged of less importance:
It was said that those who had been accustomed to read in that Voice, could not
easily alter it: but as those dropped off and died, others would be put in their
places, who would officiate in a plainer Voice. Some of the old Abuses coninued
in the new Service.
Other Abuses were more important. Some used in the Communion-Service many of
the old Rites, such as kissing the Altar, crossing themselves, lifting the Book
from one place to another, breathing on the Bread, showing it openly before the
distribution, with some other of the old Ceremonies. The People did also
continue the use of their praying by Beads, which was called an Innovation of
Peter the Hermit in the 12th Century. By it, ten Aves went for one Pater
Noster, and the reciting these so often in Latin, had come to be almost all the
devotion of the Vulgar: and therefore the People were ordered to leave that
unreasonable way of Praying, it seeming a most unaccountable thing that the
reciting the Angels Salutation to the Blessed Virgin, should be such a high
piece of Divine Worship. And that this should be done ten times, for one Prayer
to God, looked so like preferring the Creature to the Creator, that it was not
easy to defend it from an appearance of Idolatry. The Briests were also
ordered to exhort the People to give to the Poor. The Curates were required to
preach and declare the Catechism, at least every sixth Week. And some Priests
continuing secretly the use of Soul Masses, in which, for avoiding the censure
of the Law, they had one to communicate with them, but had many of these in one
day; It was ordered, that there should be no selling of the Communion, in
Trentals, and that there should be but one Communion in one Church, except on
Easter Day and Christmas; in which the People coming to the Sacrament in
greater numbers, there should be one Sacrament in the Morning, and another near
Noon. And there being great abuses in Churches, and Churchyards, in which in
the times of Popery, Markets had been held, and Bargains made, that was forbid,
chiefly in the time of Divine Service or Sermon.

Collection Number 33.
These Instructions, which the Reader will find in the Collection, were given in
charge to the Visitors. Cranmer had also a Visitation about the same time, in
which the Articles he gave out are all drawn according to the Kings
Injunctions. By some Questions in them, they seem to have been sent out before
the Parliament, because the Book of Service is not mentioned: but the last
Question save one, being of such as contemned married Priests, and refused to
receive the Sacrament at their hands, I conceive that these were compiled after
the Act concerning their Marriage was past, but before the Feast of Whit-Sunday
following, for till then the Common Prayer Book was not to be received. There
were also Orders sent by the Council to the Bishop of London, to see that there
should be no special Masses in St. Paul's Church; which, being the Mother Church
in the chief City of the Kingdom, would be an example to all the rest; and that
therefore there should be only one Communion at the great Altar, and that at
the time when the high Mass was wont to be celebrated, unless some desired a
Sacrament in the Morning, and then it was to be celebrated at the high Altar.
Bonner, who resolved to comply in every thing, sent the Councils Letter to the
Dean and Residentiaries of St. Paul's, to see it obeyed: and indeed all England
over the Book was so universally received, that the Visitors did return no
complaint from any corner of the whole Kingdom. All received the new Service
except the Lady Mary.
Only the Lady Mary continued to have Mass said in her House, of which the
Council being advertised, writ to her to conform her self to the Laws, and not
to cast a reproach on the Kings Government; for the nearer she was to him in
Blood, she was to give the better example to others: and her disobedience might
encourage others to follow her in that contempt of the Kings Authority. So they
desired her to send to them, her Comptroller, and Dr. Hopton her Chaplain, by
whom she should be more fully advertised of the King and Councils Pleasure.
Upon this she sent one to the Emperor to interpose for her, that she might not
be forced to any thing against her Conscience.

At this time there was a Complaint made at the Emperors Court, The Ambassador
at the Emperors Court not suffered to use it.
of the English Ambassador Sir Philip Hobby, for using the new
Common Prayer Book there: To which he answered, He was to be obedient to the
Laws of his own Prince and Country; and as the Emperors Ambassador had Mass at
his Chapel at London, without disturbance, though it was contrary to the Law
of England, so he had the same reason to expect the like liberty. But the
Emperor espousing the Interest of the Lady Mary, both Paget, (who was sent over
Ambassador Extraordinary to him upon his coming into Flanders) and Hobby
promised in the Kings Name that he should dispense with her, for some time, as
they afterward declared upon their Honors, when the thing was further
questioned: though the Emperor and his Ministers pretended, that without any
Qualification it was promised that she should enjoy the free exercise of her
Religion. The Emperor was now grown so high with his success in Germany, A
Treaty of Marriage for the Lady Mary.
and that at a time when a War was coming on with France, that it was not
thought advisable to give him any offense. There was likewise a Proposition
sent over by him to the Protector and Council, Cotton lib. Galba B. 12.
for the Lady Mary to be married to Alphonso, Brother to the King of Portugal.
The Council entertained it: and though the late King had left his Daughters but
10000 l. a-piece, yet they offered to give with her 100000 Crowns in Money, and
20000 Crowns worth of Jewels. The Infant of Portugal was about her own Age, and
offered 20000 Crowns Jointure. But this Proposition fell, on what hand I do not
know. She writ to the Council concerning the new Service.
The Lady Mary writ on the 22d of June to the Council, that she could not obey
their late Laws; and that she did not esteem them Laws, as made when the King
was not of Age, and contrary to those made by her Father, which they were all
bound by Oath to maintain. She excused the not sending her Comptroller, (Mr.
Arundel) and her Priest: the one did all her business, so that she could not
well be without him; the other was then so ill that he could not travel. Upon
this the Council sent a peremptory Command to these, requiring them to come up,
and receive their Orders. The Lady Mary wrote a second Letter to them on the
27th of June, in which she expostulated the matter with the Council. She said,
She was subject to none of them, and would obey none of the Laws they made; but
protested great Obedience and Subjection to the King. When her Officers came to
Court, they were commanded to declare to the Lady Mary, that though the King
was young in Person, yet his Authority was now as great as ever: that those who
have his Authority and act in his Name are to be obeyed; and though they as
single Persons were her humble Servants, yet when they met in Council, they
acted in the Kings Name, Who required her to obey as other Subjects did.
and so were to be considered by all the Kings Subjects as if they were the
King himself: they had indeed sworn to obey the late Kings Laws, but that could
bind them no longer than they were in force; and being now repealed, they were
no more Laws; other Laws being made in their room: There was no exception in
the Laws, all the Kings Subjects were included in them; and for a Reformation
of Religion made when a King was under Age, one of the most perfect that was
recorded in Scripture was so carried on, when Josiah was much younger than
their King was: therefore they gave them in charge to persuade her Grace, (for
that was her Title) to be a good example of obedience, and not to encourage
peevish and obstinate Persons, by her stiffness. But this Business was for some
time laid aside.

And now the Reformation was to be carried on to the establishing of a Form of
Doctrine, which should contain the chief Points of Religion. In order to which,
there was this Year great enquiry made into many particular Opinions, The
manner of Christ's Presence in the Sacrament examined.
and chiefly concerning the Presence of Christ in the Sacrament. There was no
Opinion, for which the Priests contended more ignorantly and eagerly, and that
the People generally believed more blindly and firmly, as if a strong Belief
were nothing else but winking very hard. The Priests, because they accounted it
the chief support now left of their falling Dominion, which being kept up,
might in time retrieve all the rest. For while it was believed, that their
Character qualified them for so strange and mighty a Performance, they must
needs be held in great reverence. The People, because they thought they
received the very Flesh of Christ, and so (notwithstanding our Saviors express
Declaration to the contrary, that the Flesh profits nothing) looked on those
who went about to persuade them otherwise, as Men that intended to rob them of
the greatest Privilege they had. And therefore it was thought necessary to
open this fully, before there should be any change made in the Doctrine of the
Church.

The Lutherans seemed to agree with that which had been the Doctrine of the
Greek Church, that in the Sacrament there was both the Substance of Bread and
Wine, and Christ's Body likewise. Only many of them defended it by an Opinion
that was thought akin to the Eutychian Heresy, that his humane Nature by
virtue of the union of the Godhead, was every where: though even in this way
it did not appear that there was any special Presence in the Sacrament, more
than in other things. Those of Switzerland had on the other hand, taught that
the Sacrament was only an Institution to commemorate the Sufferings of Christ.
This, because it was intelligible, was thought by many too low and mean a
thing, and not equal to the high expressions that are in the Scripture, of its
being the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ. The Princes of Germany saw
what mischief was like to follow on the diversity of Opinions in explaining the
Sacrament: and as Luther, being impatient in his temper, and too much given to
dictate, took it very ill to see his Doctrine so rejected; so by the undecent
way of writing in matters of Controversy, to which the Germans are too much
inclined, this difference turned to a direct breach among them. The Landgrave
of Hesse had labored much to have these diversities of Opinion laid asleep,
since nothing gave their common Enemies such advantage, as their quarrelling
among themselves. Martin Bucer was of a moderate temper, and had found a middle
Opinion in this matter, though not so easy to be understood. He thought there
was more than a Remembrance, to wit, a Communication of the Body and Blood of
Christ in the Sacrament; that in general a Real Presence ought to be asserted,
and that the way of explaining it ought not to be anxiously enquired into: and
with him Calvin agreed, that it was truly the Body and Blood of Christ, not
figuratively, but really present. The advantage of these general Expressions
was, that thereby they hoped to have silenced the Debates between the German
and Helvetian Divines, whose Doctrine came likewise to be received by many of
the Cities of the Empire, and by the Elector Palatine. And among Martin Bucers
Papers, I met with an Original Paper of Luthers, Collection Number 34.
(which will be found in the Collection) in which he was willing to have that
difference thus settled: Those of the Ausburg Confession should declare, that in
the Sacrament there was truly Bread and Wine, and those of the Helvetian
Confession should declare, that Christ's Body was truly present, and so without
any further curiosities in the way of explaining it, in which Divines might use
their liberty, the difference should end. But how this came to take no effect,
I do not understand. It was also thought that this way of expressing the
Doctrine would give least offense; for the People were scarce able to bear the
Opinion of the Sacraments being only a Figure: but wherein this Real Presence
consisted, was not so easy to be made out. Some explained it more intelligibly
in a sense of Law, that in the Sacrament there was a real application of the
Merit of Christ's Death, to those who received it worthily: so that Christ as
crucified was really present: and these had this to say for themselves, that
the Words of the Institution do not call the Elements simply Christ's Body and
Blood, but his Body broken, and his Blood shed, and that therefore Christ was
really present, as he was crucified, so that the importance of Really was
Effectually. Others thought all ways of explaining the manner of the Presence
were needless curiosities, and apt to beget differences: that therefore the
Doctrine was to be established in general words, and to save the labor both of
explaining and understanding it, it was to be esteemed a Mystery. This seems to
have been Bucers Opinion, but Peter Martyr inclined more to the Helvetians.

There were public Disputations held this Year both at Oxford and Cambridge
upon this Matter. Public Disputations about it.
At Oxford the Popish Party did so encourage themselves by the Indulgence of
the Government, and the gentleness of Cranmers temper, that they became upon
this Head insolent out of measure. Peter Martyr had read in the Chair
concerning the Presence of Christ in the Sacrament, which he explained
according to the Doctrine of the Helvetian Churches: Dr. Smith did upon this
resolve to contradict him openly in the Schools, and challenge him to dispute
on these Points: and had brought many thither, who should by their Clamours and
Applauses run him down: yet this was not so secretly laid, but a friend of P.
Martyrs brought him word of it before he had come from his House, and persuaded
him not to go to the Schools that day, Antiq. Oxon.
and so disappoint Smith. But he looked on that as so mean a thing, that he
would by no means comply with it. So he went to the Divinity Schools; on his
way one brought him a Challenge from Smith to dispute with him, concerning the
Eucharist. He went on and took his place in the Chair, where he behaved himself
with an equal measure of courage and discretion: he gravely checked Smiths
presumption, and said, he did not decline a dispute; but was resolved to have
his Reading that day, nor would he engage in a public Dispute without leave
from the Kings Council: Upon this a Tumult was like to rise; so the
Vice Chancellor sent for them before him: P. Martyr said he was ready to defend
every thing that he had read in the Chair, in a Dispute: but he would manage it
only in Scripture-Terms, and not in the Terms of the Schools.

This was the beating the Popish Doctors out of that which was their chief
strength; for they had little other Learning, but a slight of tossing some
Arguments from hand to hand, with a gibberish kind of Language, that sounded
like somewhat that was sublime; but had really nothing under it. By constant
practice they were very nimble at this sort of Legerdemain, of which both
Erasmus and Sir Tho. More, with the other learned Men of that Age, had made
such sport, that it was become sufficiently ridiculous: and the Protestants
laid hold on that advantage which such great Authorities gave them to disparage
it. They set up another way of disputing from the Original Text of the
Scripture in Greek and Hebrew, which seemed a more proper thing in matters of
Divinity, than the Metaphysical Language of the Schoolmen.

This whole Matter being referred to the Privy Council, they appointed some
Delegates to hear and preside in the Disputation: but Dr. Smith being brought
in some trouble, either for this Tumult, or upon some other account, was forced
to put in Sureties for his good behavior: he desiring that he might be
discharged of any further prosecution, made the most humble submission to
Cranmer that was possible; and being thereupon set at liberty, he fled out of
the Kingdom, it is said he went first to Scotland, and from thence to Flanders.
But not long after this Peter Martyr had a Disputation before the Commissioners
sent by the King, who were the Bishop of Lincoln, Dr. Cox, then Chancellor of
the University, and some others; in which Tresham, Chadsey, and Morgan,
disputed against those three Propositions: 1. In the Sacrament of Thanksgiving
there is no Transubstantiation of Bread and Wine in the Body and Blood of
Christ. 2. The Body or Blood of Christ is not Carnally or Corporally in the
Bread and Wine, nor as others use to say, under the Bread and Wine. 3. The Body
and Blood of Christ are united to the Bread and Wine Sacramentally. Ridley was
sent also to Cambridge with some others of the Kings Commissioners, where, on
the 20th, 24th, and 27th of June, there were public Disputations on these two
Positions.

Transubstantiation cannot be proved by the plain and manifest words of
Scripture; nor can it be necessarily collected from it; nor yet confirmed by
the consent of the Ancient Fathers.

In the Lords Supper there is none other Oblation and Sacrifice, than of a
Remembrance of Christ's Death, and of Thanksgiving.

Dr. Madew defended these, and Glyn, Langdale, Sedgewick, and Young, disputed
against them the first day; and the second day Glyn defended the contrary
Propositions, and Peru, Grindal, Gest, and Pilkington, disputed against them.
On the third day the Dispute went on, and was summed up in a learned
Determination by Ridley against the Corporal Presence. There had been also a
long Disputation in the Parliament on the same Subject; but of this we have
nothing remaining, but what King Edward writ in his Journal. Ridley had, by
reading Bertrams Book of the Body and Blood of Christ, been first set on to
examine well the old Opinion concerning the Presence of Christ's very Flesh and
Blood in the Sacrament: and wondering to find that in the 9th Century that
Opinion was so much controverted, and so learnedly writ against by one of the
most esteemed Men of that Age, began to conclude, that it was none of the
ancient Doctrines of the Church, but lately brought in, and not fully received,
till after Bertrams Age. He communicated the Matter with Cranmer, and they set
themselves to examine it with more than ordinary care. Cranmer afterward
gathered all the Arguments about it into the Book which he writ on that
Subject, to which Gardener set out an Answer under the disguised Name of Marcus
Constantius; and Cranmer replied to it. I shall offer the Reader in short, the
Substance of what was in these Books, and of the Arguments used in the
Disputations, and in many other Books which were at that time written on this
Subject.

Christ in the Institution took Bread, and gave it. So that his words, The
manner of the Presence explained according to the Scripture.
This is my Body, could only be meant of the Bread: Now the Bread could not be
his Body literally. He himself also calls the Cup, The Fruit of the Vine. St.
Paul calls it, The Bread that we break, and the Cup that we bless; and speaking
of it after it was blessed, calls it, That Bread and that Cup. For the Reason
of that Expression, This is my Body; it was considered that the Disciples, to
whom Christ spoke thus, were Jews; and that they being accustomed to the
Mosaical Rites, must needs have understood his words in the same sense they did
Moses's words, concerning the Paschal Lamb, which is called the Lords Passover.
It was not that literally, for the Lords Passover was the Angels passing by the
Israelites when he smote the firstborn of the Egyptians; so the Lamb was only
the Lords Passover as it was the Memorial of it: and thus Christ substituting
the Eucharist to the Paschal Lamb, used such an Expression, calling it his
Body, in the same manner of speaking as the Lamb was called the Lords Passover.
This was plain enough, for his Disciples could not well understand him in any
other sense than that to which they had been formerly accustomed. In the
Scripture many such Figurative Expressions occur frequently. In Baptism, the
other Sacrament instituted by Christ, he is said to Baptize with the Holy Ghost
and with Fire: and such as are Baptized, are said to put on Christ: which were
Figurative Expressions: As also in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the Cup
is called the New Testament in Christ's Blood, which is an Expression full of
Figure. Farther it was observed, that that Sacrament was Instituted for a
Remembrance of Christ, and of his death: which implied that he was to be absent
at the time when he was to be remembered. Nor was it simply said, that the
Elements were his Body and Blood; but that they were his Body broken, and his
Blood shed, that is, they were these as suffering on the Cross; which as they
could not be understood literally, for Christ did Institute this Sacrament
before he had suffered on the Cross; so now Christ must be present in the
Sacrament, not as glorified in Heaven, but as suffering on his Cross. From
those Places where it is said, that Christ is in Heaven, and that he is to
continue there; they argued, that he was not to be any more upon Earth. And
those words in the 6th of St. John, of eating Christ's Flesh, and drinking his
Blood, they said were to be understood not of the Sacrament: since many receive
the Sacrament unworthily, and of them it cannot be said that they have Eternal
Life in them; but Christ there said of them that received him in the sense that
was meant in that Chapter, that all that did so eat his Flesh had Eternal Life
in them; therefore these words can only be understood Figuratively of receiving
him by Faith, as himself there explains it: And so in the end of that
Discourse, finding some were startled at that way of expressing himself, he
gave a Key to the whole, when he said his Words were Spirit and Life, and that
the Flesh profited nothing, it was the Spirit that quickened. It was ordinary
for him to teach in Parables; and the receiving of any Doctrine, being often
expressed by the Prophets, by the Figure of eating and drinking, he, upon the
occasion of the Peoples coming to him after he had fed them with a few Loaves,
did discourse of their believing, in these dark Expressions; which did not seem
to relate to the Sacrament, since it was not then Instituted. They also argued
from Christ's appealing to the Senses of his Hearers, in his Miracles, and
especially in his discourses upon his Resurrection, that the Testimony of Sense
was to be received, where the Object was duly applied, and the Sense not
vitiated. They also alleged natural Reasons against a Bodies being in more
places than one, or being in a Place in the manner of a Spirit, so that the
Substance of a complete Body, could be in a crumb of Bread or drop of Wine: and
argued, that since the Elements after Consecration, would nourish, might
putrify, or could be poisoned, these things clearly evinced, That the
Substance of Bread and Wine remained in the Sacrament.

And from the Fathers.
From this they went to examine the Ancient Fathers. Some of them called it
Bread and Wine; others said it nourished the Body, as Justin Martyr; others,
that it was digested in the Stomach, and went into the draught, as Origin. Some
called it a Figure of Christ's Body, so Tertullian, and St. Austin; others
called the Elements Types and Signs, so almost all the Ancient Liturgies, and
the Greek Fathers generally. In the Creeds of the Church it was professed, that
Christ still sat on the Right Hand of God; the Fathers argued from thence,
that he was in Heaven, and not on Earth. And the Marcionites, and other
Heretics, denying that Christ had a true Body, or did really suffer; the
Fathers appealed in that to the Testimony of Sense, as Infallible. And St.
Austin giving Rules concerning Figurative Speeches in Scripture; one is this,
that they must be taken Figuratively, where in the literal sense the thing were
a Crime; which he applies to these Words of eating Christ's Flesh, and drinking
his Blood. But that on which they put the stress of the whole cause, as to the
Doctrine of the Fathers, was the reasoning that they used against the
Eutychians, who said that Christ's Body and Humane Nature was swallowed up by
his Divinity. The Eutychians, arguing from the Eucharists being called Christ's
Body and Blood, in which they said Christ's Presence did convert the Substance
of the Bread and Wine into his own Flesh and Blood; so in like manner, said
they, his Godhead had converted the Manhood into it self: Against this,
Gelasius Bishop of Rome, and Theodoret, one of the learnedest Fathers of his
Age, argue in plain words, That the Substance of the Bread and Wine remained,
as it was formerly, in its own Nature, and Form; and from their Opinion of the
Presence of Christ's Body in it without converting the Elements, they turned the
Argument to show how the Divine and Humane Nature can be together in Christ,
without the ones being changed by the other. Peter Martyr had brought over with
him the Copy of a Letter of St. Chrysostomes, which he found in a MS. at
Florence, written to the same purpose, and on the same Argument: which was the
more remarkable, because that Chrysostom had said higher things in his Sermons
and Commentaries concerning Christ's being present in the Sacrament than any of
all the Fathers; but it appeared by this Letter, that those high Expressions
were no other than Rhetorical Figures of Speech to beget a great reverence to
this Institution: and from hence it was reasonable to judge that such were the
like Expressions in other Fathers, and that they were nevertheless of
Chrysostomes mind touching the Presence of Christ in this Sacrament. That
Epistle of his does lie still unpublished, though a very learned Man now in
France has procured a Copy of it: but those of that Church know the consequence
that the printing of it would have, and so it seems are resolved to suppress it
if they can. From all these things it was plain that though the Fathers
believed there was an extraordinary Virtue in the Sacrament, and an
unaccountable Presence of Christ in it, yet they thought not of
Transubstantiation nor any thing like it. But when darkness and ignorance crept
into the Church, the People were apt to believe any thing that was incredible:
and were willing enough to support such Opinions as turned Religion into
external Pageantry. The Priests also knowing little of the Scriptures, and
being only or chiefly conversant in those Writings of the Ancients that had
highly extolled the Sacrament; came generally to take up the Opinion of the
Corporal Presence, and being soon apprehensive of the great esteem it would
bring to them, cherished it much. In the 9th Century Bertram, Rabanus Maurus,
Amalarius, Alcuinus, and Joannes Scotus, all writ against it: nor were any of
them censured or condemned for these Opinions. It was plainly and strongly
contradicted by some Homilies that were in the Saxon Tongue, in which not a few
of Bertrams words occur: particularly in that which was to be read in the
Churches on Easter day. But in the 11th or 12th Century it came to be
universally received; as indeed any thing would have been that much advanced
the Dignity of Priesthood. And it was farther advanced by Pope Innocent the
third, and so established in the fourth Council of Lateran; That same Council,
in which the rooting out of Heretics, and the Popes Power of deposing
Heretical Princes, and giving their Dominions to others, were also decreed.

But there was another curious Remark made of the Progress of this Opinion.
When the Doctrine of the Corporal Presence was first received in the Western
Church, they believed that the whole Loaf was turned into one entire Body of
Jesus Christ; so that in the distribution one had an Eye, a Nose, or an Ear,
another a Tooth, a Finger, or a Toe, a third a Collop, or a piece of Tripe; and
this was supported by pretended Miracles suited to that Opinion, for sometimes
the Host was said to bleed, Parts of it were also said to be turned to pieces
of Flesh. This continued to be the Doctrine of the Church of Rome for near 300
Years. It appears clearly in the Renunciation which they made Berengarius
swear. But when the Schoolmen began to form the Tenets of that Church by more
artificial and subtle Rules; as they thought it an ungentle way of treating
Christ to be thus mangling his Body, and eating it up in Gobbets, so the
Maxims they set up about the Extension of matter, and of the manner of Spirits
filling a space, made them think of a more decent way of explaining this
Prodigious Mystery. They taught that Christ was so in the Host and Chalice,
that there was one entire Body in every crumb and drop; so that the Body was no
more broken, but upon every breaking of the Host, a new whole Body flew off
from the other parts, which yet remained an entire Body, notwithstanding that
diminution. And then the former Miracles being contrary to this conceit, were
laid aside, and new ones invented, fitted for this Explanation, by which
Christ's Body was believed present after the manner of a Spirit. It was given
out, that he sometimes appeared as a Child all in Rays upon the Host,
sometimes with Angels about him, or sometimes in his Mothers Arms. And that the
Senses might give as little contradiction as was possible, instead of a Loaf
they blessed then only Wafers, which are such a shadow of Bread as might more
easily agree with their Doctrine of the accidents of Bread being only present:
and least a larger measure of Wine might have encouraged the People to have
thought it was Wine still, by the sensible effects of it, that came also to be
denied them.

This was the Substance of the Arguments that were in those Writings. But an
Opinion that had been so generally received, was not of a sudden to be altered.
Therefore they went on slowly in discussing it, and thereby did the better
dispose the People to receive what they intended afterward to establish
concerning it. And this was the state of Religion for this Year.

At this time there were many Anabaptists in several parts of England. They
were generally Germans, Proceedings against Anabaptists.
whom the Revolutions there had forced to change their Seats. Upon Luthers
first preaching in Germany, there arose many, who building on some of his
Principles, carried things much further than he did. The chief Foundation he
laid down was, That the Scripture was to be the only Rule of Christians. Upon
this many argued, that the Mysteries of the Trinity, and Christ's Incarnation
and Sufferings, of the Fall of Man, and the Aids of Grace, were indeed
Philosophical Subtilties, and only pretended to be deduced from Scripture, as
almost all Opinions of Religion were; and therefore they rejected them. Among
these, the Baptism of Infants was one. They held that to be no Baptism, and so
were re-baptiz'd: but from this, which was most taken notice of, as being a
visible thing, they carried all the general Name of Anabaptists. Of whom there
were two sorts.
Of these there were two sorts most remarkable. The one was of those who only
thought that Baptism ought not to be given but to those who were of an Age
capable of Instruction, and who did earnestly desire it. This Opinion they
grounded on the silence of the New Testament about the Baptism of Children;
they observed, that our Savior commanding the Apostles to baptize, did join
Teaching with it; and they said, the great decay of Christianity flowed from
this way of making Children Christians before they understood what they did.
These were called the gentle or moderate Anabaptists. But others who carried
that Name, denied almost all the Principles of the Christian Doctrine, and were
Men of fierce and barbarous tempers. They had broke out into a general revolt
over Germany, and raised the War called The Rustic War: and possessing
themselves of Munster, made one of their Teachers, John of Leyden, their King,
under the Title of the King of the new Jerusalem. Some of them set up a
fantastical unintelligible way of talking of Religion, which they turned all
into Allegories: These being joined in the common Name of Anabaptists with the
other, brought them also under an ill Character.

On the 12th of April there was a Complaint brought to the Council, that with
the Strangers that were come into England, some of that Persuasion had come
over, and were disseminating their Errors, and making Proselites: Rot. Pat.
Par. 6. ^. R^g.
So a Commission was ordered for the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of
Ely, Worcester, Westminster, Chichester, Lincoln, and Rochester, Sir William
Petre, Sir Tho. Smith, Dr. Cox, Dr, May, and some others, three of them being a
Quorum, to examine and search after all Anabaptists, Heretics, or contemners
of the Common Prayer. They were to endeavor to reclaim them, to enjoin them
Penance, and give them Absolution: or if they were obstinate, to excommunicate
and imprison them, and to deliver them over to the Secular Power to be farther
proceeded against. Some Tradesmen in London were brought before these
Commissioners in May, and were persuaded to abjure their former Opinions: which
were, That a Man regenerate could not sin; that though the outward Man sinned,
the inward Man sinned not; That there was no Trinity of Persons; That Christ
was only a Holy Prophet, and not at all God; That all we had by Christ was,
that he taught us the way to Heaven; That he took no Flesh of the Virgin; and
that the Baptism of Infants was not profitable. One of those who thus abjured
was commanded to carry a Faggot next Sunday at St. Paul's, where there should be
a Sermon setting forth his Heresy. But there was another of these extreme
obstinate, Joan Bocher, commonly called Joan of Kent. She denied that Christ
was truly incarnate of the Virgin, whose Flesh being sinful, he could take none
of it: but the Word by the consent of the inward Man in the Virgin, took Flesh
of her: these were her words. They took much pains about her, and had many
Conferences with her; but she was so extravagantly conceited of her own
Notions, that she rejected all they said with scorn: whereupon she was adjudged
an obstinate Heretic, and so left to the Secular Power: The Sentence against
her will be found in the Collection. Collection Number 3^.
This being returned to the Council, the good King was moved to Sign a Warrant
for burning her, but could not be prevailed on to do it: he thought it a piece
of cruelty too like that which they had condemned in Papists, to burn any for
their Consciences. And in a long Discourse he had with Sir Jo. Cheek he seemed
much confirmed in that Opinion. Cranmer was employed to persuade him to Sign
the Warrant. He argued from the Law of Moses, by which Blasphemers were to be
stoned: He told the King, he made a great difference between Errors in other
Points of Divinity, and those which were directly against the Apostles Creed:
that these were impieties against God, which a Prince, as being Gods Deputy,
ought to punish; as the Kings Deputies were obliged to punish offenses, against
the Kings Person. These Reasons did rather silence than satisfy the young
King, who still thought it a hard thing (as in truth it was) to proceed so
sev^rely in such Cases: so he set his hand to the Warrant, with Tears in his
Eyes, saying to Cranmer, That if he did wrong, since it was in submission to
his Authority, he should answer for it to God. This struck the Archbishop with
much horror, so that he was very unwilling to have the Sentence executed. And
both he, and Ridley, took the Woman then in custody to their Houses, to see if
they could persuade her. But she continued, by Jeers and other Insolences, to
carry her self so contemptuously, that at last the Sentence was executed on
her, the second of May the next Year, An Anabaptist burnt.
Bishop Scory preaching at her burning: she carried her self then as she had
done in the former parts of her Process, very undecently, and in the end was
burnt.

This Action was much censured, as being contrary to the clemency of the
Gospel; and was made often use of by the Papists, who said it was plain that the
Reformers were only against Burning, when they were in fear of it themselves.
The Woman's carriage made her be looked on as a frantic Person, fitter for
Bedlam than a Stake. People had generally believed that all the Statutes for
burning Heretics had been repealed: but now, when the thing was better
considered, it was found that the burning of Heretics was done by the Common
Law, so that the Statutes made about it were only for making the Conviction
more easy, and the Repealing the Statutes did not take away that which was
grounded on a Writ at Common Law. To end all this matter at once; two years
after this, one George Van Pare, a Dutchman, being accused for saying that God
the Father was only God, and that Christ was not very God, he was dealt with
long to abjure: but would not: so on the 6th of April 1551. he was condemned in
the same manner that Joan of Kent was, and on the 25th of April was burnt in
Smithfield. Another burnt.
He suffered with great constancy of mind, and kissed the Stake and Faggots,
that were to burn him. Of this Pare I find a Popish Writer saying, That he was
a Man of most wonderful strict Life, that he used not to eat above once in two
days, and before he did eat would lie sometime in his devotion prostrate on the
ground. All this they made use of to lessen the credit of those who had
suffered formerly; for it was said, they saw now that Men of harmless Lives,
might be put to death for Heresy, by the conf^ssion of the Reformers
themselves: And in all the Books published in Queen Mary's days, justifying her
severity against the Protestants, these Instances were always made use of: and
no part of Cranmers Life exposed him more than this did. This was much censured.
It was said he had consented both to Lamberts and Anne Askews death, in the
former Reign, who both suffered for Opinions which he himself held now: and he
had now procured the death of these two Persons, and when he was brought to
suffer himself afterward, it was called a just retalliation on him. One thing
was certain, that what he did in this matter flowed from no cruelty of temper
in him, no Man being further from that black disposition of Mind; but it was
truly the effect of those Principles by which he governed himself.

Disputes concerning the Baptism of Infants.
For the other sort of Anabaptists, who only denied Infants Baptism, I find no
severities used to them: but several Books were written against them, to which
they wrote some Answers. It was said that Christ allowed little Children to be
brought to him, and said, of such was the Kingdom of Heaven, and blessed them:
Now if they were capable of the Kingdom of Heaven, they must be regenerated,
for Christ said none but such as were born of Water and of the Spirit could
enter into it. St. Paul had also called the Children of believing Parents Holy,
which seemed to relate to such a consecration of them as was made in Baptism.
And Baptism being the Seal of Christians, in the room of Circumcision among the
Jews, it was thought the one was as applicable to Children as the other. And
one thing was observed, that the whole World in that Age having been baptized
in their Infancy, if that Baptism was nothing, then there were none truly
baptized in being; but all were in the state of mere Nature: Now it did not
seem reasonable that Men who were not baptized themselves should go and baptize
others: and therefore the first Heads of that Sect, not being rightly baptized
themselves, seemed not to act with any Authority when they went to baptize
others. The Practice of the Church, so early begun, and continued without
dispute for so many Ages, was at least, a certain confirmation of a thing which
had (to speak moderately) so good foundations in Scripture for the lawfulness,
though not any peremptory, but only probable Proof for the practice of it.

These are all the Errors in Opinion that I find were taken notice of at this
time. There was another sort of People, The Doctrine of Predestination much
abused.
of whom all the good Men in that Age made great complaints. Some there were
called Gospellers, or Readers of the Gospel, who were a scandal to the Doctrine
they professed. In many Sermons I have often met with severe Expostulations with
these, and heavy Denunciations of Judgments against them. But I do not find any
thing objected to them, as to their belief; save only that the Doctrine of
Predestination having been generally taught by the Reformers, many of this Sect
began to make strange Inferences from it; reckoning, that since every thing was
decreed, and the Decrees of God could not be frustrated, therefore Men were to
leave themselves to be carried by these Decrees. This drew some into great
impiety of Life, and others into desperation. The Germans soon saw the ill
effects of this Doctrine. Luther changed his mind about it, and Melancthon
openly writ against it: and since that time the whole stream of the Lutheran
Churches has run the other way. But both Calvin and Bucer were still for
maintaining the Doctrine of these Decrees; only they warned the People not to
think much of them, since they were Secrets which Men could not penetrate into;
but they did not so clearly show how these consequences did not flow from such
Opinions. Hooper, and many other good Writers, did often dehort People from
entering into these curiosities; and a Caveat to that same purpose was put
afterward into the Article of the Church about Predestination.

One ill effect of the dissoluteness of Peoples manners broke out violently
this Summer, occasioned by the Enclosing of Lands. Tumults in England.
While the Monasteries stood, there were great numbers of People maintained
about these Houses; their Lands were easily let out, and many were relieved by
them. But now, the Numbers of the People increased much, Marriage being
universally allowed; they also had more time than formerly, by the abrogation
of many Holy Days, and the putting down of Processions and Pilgrimages; so that
as the Numbers increased, they had more time than they knew how to bestow.
Those who bought in the Church Lands, as they every where raised their Rents,
of which old Latimer made great Complaints in one of his Court Sermons, so they
resolved to enclose their Grounds, and turn them to Pasture: for Trade was then
rising fast, and Corn brought not in so much Money as Wool did. Their Flocks
also being kept by few Persons in Grounds so enclosed, the Landlords themselves
enjoyed the profit which formerly the Tenants made out of their Estates: and so
they intended to force them to serve about them at any such rates as they would
allow. By this means the Commons of England saw they were like to be reduced to
great misery. This was much complained of, and several little Books were
written about it. Some proposed a sort of Agrarian Law, that none might have
Farms above a set value, or Flocks above a set number of 2000 Sheep; which
Proposal I find the young King was much taken with, as will appear in one of
the Discourses he wrote with his own Hand. It was also represented that there
was no care taken of the educating of Youth, except of those who were bred for
Learning; and many things were proposed to correct this: but in the mean time
the Commons saw the Gentry were like to reduce them to a very low condition.

The Protector seemed much concerned for the Commons, and often spoke against the
oppression of Landlords. He was naturally just and compassionate, and so did
heartily espouse the Cause of the poor People, which made the Nobility and
Gentry hate him much. The former year, the Commons about Hampton Court,
petitioned the Protector and Council, complaining, that whereas the late King
in his Sickness had enclosed a Park there, to divert himself with private easy
Game, the Deer of that Park did overlay the Country, and it was a great burden
to them; and therefore they desired that it might be disparked. The Council
considering that it was so near Windsor, and was not useful to the King, but a
charge rather, ordered it to be disparked, and the Deer to be carried to
Windsor; but with this Proviso, that if the King when he came of Age desired to
have a Park there, what they did should be no prejudice to him. There was also
a Commission issued out to enquire about Enclosures and Farms, and whether
those who had purchased the Abbey-Lands kept Hospitality, to which they were
bound by the Grants they had of them, and whether they encouraged Husbandry.
But I find no effect of this. And indeed there seemed to have been a general
design among the Nobility and Gentry to bring the Inferior sort to that low and
servile state to which the Peasants in many other Kingdoms are reduced. In the
Parliament an Act was carried in the House of Lords for imparking Grounds, but
was cast out by the Commons: yet Gentlemen went on every where taking their
Lands into their own Hands, and enclosing them.

Many are easily quieted.
In May the Commons did rise first in Wilt-shire; where Sir William Herbert
gathered some resolute Men about him, and dispersed them, and slew some of
them. Soon after that, they rose in Sussex, Hamp-shire, Kent, Gloucestershire,
Suffolk, Warwickshire, Essex, Hartford-shire, Leichestershire,
Worcestershire, and Rutland-shire; but by fair persuasions the fury of the
People was a little stopped, till the matter should be represented to the
Council. The Protector said, he did not wonder the Commons were in such
distempers, they being so oppressed, that it was easier to die once than to
perish for want: and therefore he set out a Proclamation, contrary to the mind
of the whole Council, against all new Enclosures; with another, indempnifying
the People for what was past, so they carried themselves obediently for the
future. Commissions were also sent every where, with an unlimited Power to the
Commissioners, to hear and determine all Causes about Enclosures, Highways,
and Cottages. The vast Power these Commissioners assumed was much complained
of; the Landlords said it was an Invasion of their Property, to subject them
thus to the pleasure of those who were sent to examine the Matters without
proceeding in the ordinary Courts according to Law. The Commons being
encouraged by the favor they heard the Protector bore them, and not able to
govern their heat, or stay for a more peaceable issue, did rise again, but were
anew quieted. Yet the Protector being opposed much by the Council, he was not
able to redress this Grievance so fully as the People hoped. So in Oxfordshire
and Devon-shire they rose again, and also in Norfolk and Yorkshire. Those in
Oxfordshire were dissipated by a Force of 1500 Men, led against them by the
Lord Gray. Some of them were taken and hanged by Martial Law, as being in a
state of War; the greatest part ran home to their Dwellings.

In Devon-shire the Insurrection grew to be better formed; But those of
Devon-shire grew formidable.
for that County was not only far from the Court, but it was generally inclined
to the former superstition, and many of the old Priests run in among them. They
came together on the 10th of June, being Whit-Munday; and in a short time they
grew to be 10000 strong. At Court it was hoped this might be as easily
dispersed as the other Risings were: but the Protector was against running into
extremities, and so did not move so speedily as the thing required. He, after
some days, at last sent the Lord Russel with a small Force to stop their
Proceedings. And that Lord, remembering well how the Duke of Norfolk had with a
very small Army broken a formidable Rebellion in the former Reign, hoped that
time would likewise weaken and dis-unite these; and therefore he kept at some
distance, and offered to receive their Complaints, and to send them to the
Council. But these delays gave advantage and strength to the Rebels; who were
now led on by some Gentlemen: Arundel of Cornwall being in chief Command among
them; and in answer to the Lord Russel, they agreed on fifteen Articles, the
Substance of which was as follows.

1. That all the General Councils, Their Demands.
and the Decrees of their Forefathers, should be observed:

2. "That the Act of the Six Articles should be again in force.

3. That the Mass should be in Latin, and that the Priests alone should receive.

4. That the Sacrament should be hanged up, and worshipped; and those who
refused to do it should suffer as Heretics.

5. That the Sacrament should only be given to the People at Easter in one kind.

6. "That Baptism should be done at all times.

7. That Holy Bread, Holy Water, and Palms be again used; and that Images be
set up, with all the other ancient Ceremonies.

8. That the new Service should be laid aside, since it was like a Christmas
Game: and the old Service again should be used with the Procession in Latin.

9. That all Preachers in their Sermons, and Priests in the Mass, should pray
for the Souls in Purgatory.

10. That the Bible should be called in, since otherwise the Clergy could not
easily confound the Heretics.

11. That Dr. Moreman, and Crispin, should be sent to them, and put in their
Livings.

12. That Cardinal Pool should be restored, and made of the Kings Council.

13. That every Gentleman might have only one Servant for every hundred Marks
of yearly Rent that belonged to him.

14. That the half of the Abbey and Church Lands should be taken back, and
restored to two of the chief Abbeys in every County: and all the Church Boxes
for seven years should be given to such Houses, that so devout Persons might
live in them, who should pray for the King and the Commonwealth.

15. And that for their particular grievances, they should be redressed, as
Humphrey Arundel and the Major of Bodmyn should inform the King, for whom they
desired a safe conduct.

These Articles being sent to the Council, the Archbishop of Canterbury was
ordered to draw an Answer to them, which I have seen corrected with his own
Hand. Cranmer drew an Answer to them. Ex MS. Col. C. C. Cantab.
The Substance of it was, That their Demands were insolent, such as were
dictated to them by some seditious Priests: they did not know what General
Councils had decreed; nor was there any thing in the Church of England contrary
to them, though many things had been formerly received which were so: and for
the Decrees, they were framed by the Popes to enslave the World, of which he
gave several Instances.

For the Six Articles, he says, They had not been carried in Parliament if the
late King had not gone thither in Person, and procured that Act; and yet of his
own accord he slackened the execution of it.

To the third, it was strange that they did not desire to know in what terms
they worshipped God: and for the Mass, the ancient Canons required the People to
communicate in it, and the Prayers in the Office of the Mass did still imply
that they were to do it.

For the hanging up and adoring the Host, it was but lately set up by Pope
Innocent, and Honorius, and in some Places it had never been received.

For the fifth, the Ancient Church received that Sacrament frequently, and in
both kinds.

To the sixth, Baptism in Cases of necessity was to be administered at any time:
but out of these Cases it was fit to do it solemnly; and in the Ancient Church
it was chiefly done on the Eves of Easter and Whit-Sunday, of which usage some
Footsteps remained still in the old Offices.

To the seventh, these were late superstitious devices: Images were contrary to
the Scriptures, first set up for remembrance, but soon after made Objects of
Worship.

To the eight, The old Service had many ludicrous things in it; the new was
simple and grave: If it appeared ridiculous to them, it was as the Gospel was
long ago foolishness to the Greeks.

To the ninth, The Scriptures say nothing of it: it was a superstitious
Invention derogatory to Christ's death.

To the tenth, The Scriptures are the Word of God, and the readiest way to
confound that which is Heresy indeed.

To the eleventh, These were ignorant, superstitious, and deceitful Persons.

To the twelfth, Pool had been attainted in Parliament for his spiteful
Writings and Doings against the late King.

To the thirteenth, It was foolish and unreasonable: one Servant could not do a
Man's business; and by this, many Servants would want employment.

To the fourteenth, This was to rob the King, and those who had these Lands of
him; and would be a means to make so foul a Rebellion be remembered in their
Prayers.

To the fifteenth, These were notorious Traitors, to whom the Kings Council was
not to submit themselves.

After this, they grew more moderate, and sent eight Articles: They make new
Demands.
1. Concerning Baptism. 2. About Confirmation. 3. Of the Mass. 4. For reserving
the Host. 5. For Holy Bread and Water. 6. For the old Service. 7. For the
single Lives of Priests. 8. For the Six Articles: and concluded, God save the
King, for they were His, both Body and Goods. To this there was an Answer sent
in the Kings Name, on the 8th of July, (so long did the Treaty with them hold)
in which, Which were also rejected.
after Expressions of the Kings affection to his People, he taxes their rising
in Arms against him their King as contrary to the Laws of God: He tells them,
That they are abused by their Priests, as in the Instance of Baptism, which
according to the Book might, necessity requiring it, be done at all times: that
the Changes that had been set out, were made after long and great consultation;
and the Worship of this Church, by the advice of many Bishops and Learned Men,
was reformed, as near to what Christ and his Apostles had taught and done, as
could be: and all things had been settled in Parliament. But the most specious
thing that misled them being that of the Kings Age, it was showed them that his
Blood, and not his Years, gave him the Crown: and the state of Government
requires, that at all times there should be the same Authority in Princes, and
the same Obedience in the People. It was all penned in a high threatening Style,
and concluded with an earnest Invitation of them to submit to the Kings Mercy,
as others that had risen had also done, to whom he had not only showed Mercy,
but granted Redress of their just grievances: otherwise they might expect the
utmost severity that Traitors deserved.

But nothing prevailed on this enraged Multitude, whom the Priests inflamed
with all the Artifices they could imagine: and among whom the Host was carried
about by a Priest on a Cart, that all might see it. But when this Commotion was
thus grown to a Head, The Rebellion in Norfolk headed by Ket a Tanner.
the Men of Norfolk rose the 6th of July, being led by one Ket a Tanner. These
pretended nothing of Religion, but only to suppress and destroy the Gentry, and
to raise the commons, and to put new Counselors about the King. They increased
mightily, and became 20000 strong, but had no Order nor Discipline, and
committed many horrid outrages. The Sheriff of the County came boldly to them,
and required them in the Kings Name to disperse, and go home; but had he not
been well mounted, they had put him cruelly to death. They came to Moushold
Hill above Norwich, and were much favored by many in that City. Parker,
afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, came among them, and preached very freely
to them, of their ill Lives, their Rebellion against the King, and the
Robberies they daily committed: by which he was in great danger of his Life.
Ket assumed to himself the Power of Judicature, and under an old Oak, called
from thence the Oak of Reformation, did such Justice as might be expected from
such a Judge, and in such a Camp. The Marquess of Northampton was sent against
them, but with Orders to keep at a distance from them, and to cut off their
Provisions; for so it was hoped that without the shedding much Blood they might
come to themselves again. When the news of this Rising came into Yorkshire,
the Commons there rose also; A Rising in Yorkshire.
being further encouraged by a Prophecy; That there should be no King nor
Nobility in England, that the Kingdom should be ruled by four Governors chosen
by the Commons, who should hold a Parliament, in commotion, to begin at the
South and North Seas. This they applied to the Devon-shire Men on the South
Seas, and themselves on the North Seas. They at their first rising fired
Beacons, and so gathered the Country, as if it had been for the defense of the
Coast; and meeting two Gentlemen, with two others with them, they without any
provocation murdered them, and left their naked Bodies unburied. The French
fall into the Bullognese.
At the same time that England was in this Commotion, the News came that the
French King had sent a great Army into the Territory of Bulloigne, so that the
Government was put to most extraordinary straits.

A Fast at Court, where Cranmer preached. Ex MS. Col. C. C. Cantab.
There was a Fast proclaimed in and about London. Cranmer preached on the
Fast Day at Court. I have seen the greatest part of his Sermon under his own
Hand: and it is the only Sermon of his I ever saw. It is a very plain
unartificial Discourse, no shows of Learning, or conceits of Wit in it, but he
severely expostulated in the Name of God with his Hearers, for their ill Lives,
their Blasphemies, Adulteries, mutual Hatred, Oppression, and Contempt of the
Gospel: and complained of the slackness in punishing these sins, by which the
Government became in some sort guilty of them. He set many Passages of the
Jewish Story before them of the Judgments such sins drew on, and of Gods Mercy
in the unexpected deliverances they met with upon their true Repentance. But he
chiefly lamented the scandal given by many who pretended a zeal for Religion,
but used that for a Cloak to disguise their other Vices: He set before them the
fresh Example of Germany, where People generally loved to hear the Gospel, but
had not amended their Lives upon it; for which God had now, after many years
forbearance, brought them under a severe scourge, and intimated his
apprehensions of some signal stroke from Heaven upon the Nation, if they did
not repent.

Exeter besieged.
The Rebels in Devon-shire went and besieged Exeter, where the Citizens resisted
them with great courage: they set fire to the Gates of the City, which those
within fed with much Fuel for hindering their entry, till they had raised a
Rampart within the Gates, and when the Rebels came to enter, the Fire being
spent, they killed many of them. The Rebels also wrought a Mine, but the
Citizens Countermined, and poured in so much Water as spoiled their Powder. So
finding they could do nothing by force, they resolved to lie about the Town,
reckoning that the want of Provision would make it soon yield. The Lord Russel,
having but a small Force with him, stayed a while for some Supplies, which Sir
William Herbert was to bring him from Bristol. But being afraid that the Rebels
should enclose him, he marched back from Honnington where he lay; and finding
they had taken a Bridge behind him, he beat them from it, killing 600 of them
without any loss on his side. By this he understood their strength, and saw
they could not stand a brisk Charge, nor rally when once in disorder. So the
Lord Gray, and Spinola that commanded some Germans, joining him, he returned to
raise the Siege of Exeter, which was much straightened for want of Victuals. The
Rebels had now shut up the City twelve days, they within had eat their Horses,
and endured extreme Famine, but resolved to perish rather than fall into the
Hands of those Savages; for the Rebels were indeed no better. They had blocked
up the Ways, and left 2000 Men to keep a Bridge which the Kings Forces were to
pass. But the Lord Russel broke thorough them, and killed about 1000 of them;
upon that the Rebels raised the Siege, and retired to Lanceston. The Lord
Russel gave the Citizens of Exeter great thanks in the Kings Name for their
Fidelity and Courage: and pursued the Rebels, But is relieved, and the Rebels
defeated by the Lord Russel.
who were now going off in Parties, and were killed in great numbers. Some of
their Heads, as Arundel, and the Major of Bodmyne, Temson, and Barret, two
Priests, with six or seven more, were taken and hanged. And so this Rebellion
was happily subdued in the West, about the beginning of August, to the great
Honor of the Lord Russel; who with a very small Force had saved Exeter, and
dispersed the Rebels Army, with little or no loss at all.

But the Marquess of Northampton was not so successful in Norfolk. He carried
about 1100 Men with him, but did not observe the Orders given him, and so
marched on to Norwich. The Rebels were glad of an occasion to engage with him,
and fell in upon him the next day with great fury, and the Town not being
strong, he was forced to quit it, but lost 100 of his Men in that Action, among
whom was the Lord Sheffield, who was much lamented. The Rebels took about 30
Prisoners, with which they were much lifted up. This being understood at Court,
the Earl of Warwick was sent against them, Warwick disperses the Rebels at
Norfolk
with 6000 Foot and 1500 Horse that were prepared for an Expedition to
Scotland: He came to Norwich, but was scarce able to defend it; for the Rebels
fell often in upon him, neither was he well assured of the Town. But he cut off
their Provisions, so that the Rebels, having wasted all the Country about them,
were forced to remove. And then he followed them with his Horse. They turned
upon him, but he quickly routed them, and killed 2000 of them, and took Ket
their Captain, with his Brother, and a great many more. Ket was hanged in
Chains at Norwich next January.

The Rebels in Yorkshire had not become very numerous, not being above 3000 in
all: but hearing of the defeating of those in other Parts, they accepted of the
offer of Pardon that was sent them: only some few of the chief Ringleaders
continued to make new stirs, and were taken, and hanged, in York the September
following.

When these Commotions were thus over, the Protector pressed that there might
be a general and free Pardon speedily proclaimed, for quieting the Country, and
giving their Affairs a reputation abroad. This was much opposed by many of the
Council; who thought it better to accomplish their several ends, by keeping the
People under the lash, than by so profuse a Mercy: But the Protector was
resolved on it, judging the state of Affairs required it. A general Pardon.
So he gave out a general Pardon of all that had been done before the 21st of
August, excepting only those few whom they had in their hands, and resolved to
make public Examples. Thus was England delivered from one of the most
threatening Storms that at any time had broke out in it: in which deliverance
the great prudence and temper of the Protector seems to have had no small
share. Of this whole Matter Advertisement was given to the Foreign Ministers,
in a Letter which will be found in the Collection. Collection Number 36.


There was this Year a Visitation of the University of Cambridge. Ridley was
appointed to be one of the Visitors, A Visitation at Cambridge.
and to preach at the opening of it: he thereupon writ to May Dean of St.
Paul's, to let him know what was to be done at it, that so his Sermon might be
adjusted to their business. He received answer, That it was only to remove some
superstitious Practices and Rites, and to make such Statutes as should be found
needful. But when he went to Cambridge, he saw the Instructions went further.
They were required to procure a resignation of some Colleges, and to unite
them with others; and to convert some Fellowships appointed for encouraging the
Study of Divinity, to the Study of the Civil Law. In particular Clare-Hall was
to be suppressed. But the Master and Fellows would not resign, and after two
days laboring to persuade them them to it, they absolutely refused to do it.
Upon this Ridley said he could not with a good Conscience go on any further in
that matter: the Church was already so robbed and stripped, that it seemed there
was a design laid down by some, to drive out all Civility, Learning, and
Religion out of the Nation: therefore he declared he would not concur in such
things, and desired leave to be gone. The other Visitors complained of him to
the Protector, that he had so troubled them with his barking, (so indecently
did they express that strictness of Conscience in him) that they could not go
on in the Kings Service: and because Clare-hall was then full of Northern
People, they imputed his unwillingness to suppress that House, to his partial
affection to his Countrymen, for he was born in the Bishopric of Duresme. Upon
this the Protector writ a chiding Letter to him. To it he writ an Answer so
suitable to what became a Bishop, who would put all things to hazard rather than
do any thing against his Conscience, that I thought it might do no small right
to his Memory to put it with the Answer which the Protector writ to him in the
Collection. Collection Numb. 59, 60.
These with many more I found among his Majesty's Papers of State, in that
Repository of them commonly called the Paper-Office. To which I had a free
access by a Warrant which was procured to me from the King, by the Right
Honorable the Earl of Sunderland, one of the Principal Secretaries of State,
who very cheerfully and generously expressed his readiness to assist me in any
thing that might complete the History of our Reformation. That Office was first
set up by the care of the Earl of Salisbury, when he was Secretary of State in
King James's time: which though it is a copious and certain Repertory for those
that are to write our History ever since the Papers of State were laid up
there, yet for the former times it contains only such Papers as that great
Minister could then gather together, so that it is not so complete in the
Transactions that fall within the time of which I writ.

There was also a settlement made of the Controversy concerning the Greek
Tongue. A contest about pronouncing the Greek.
There had been in King Henry's time a great Contest raised concerning the
Pronunciation of the Greek Vowels. That Tongue was but lately come to any
perfection in England, and so no wonder the Greek was pronounced like English,
with the same sound and apertures of the Mouth: To this Mr. Cheek, then Reader
of that Tongue in Cambridge, opposed himself, and taught other Rules of
Pronunciation. Gardener was it seems so afraid of every Innovation, though ever
so much in the right, that he contended stiffly to have the old Pronunciation
retained: and Cheek persisting in his Opinion, was either put from the Chair,
or willingly left it to avoid the Indignation of so great and so spiteful a Man
as Gardener was, who was then Chancellor of the University: Cheek wrote a Book
in vindication of his way of pronouncing Greek; of which this must be said,
That it is very strange to see how he could write with so much Learning and
Judgment on so bare a Subject. Redmayn, Poinet, and other learned Men were of
his side, yet more covertly: but Sir Tho. Smith, now Secretary of State, writ
three Books on the same Argument, and did so evidently confirm Cheeks Opinion,
that the Dispute was now laid aside, and the true way of pronouncing the Greek
took place; the rather because Gardener was in disgrace, and Cheek and Smith
were in such Power and Authority: So great an Influence had the Interests of
Men in supporting the most speculative and indifferent things.

Soon after this, Bonner fell into new troubles, Bonner falls into trouble.
he continued to oppose every thing, as long as it was safe for him to do it,
while it was under debate, and so kept his Interest with the Papists: but he
complied so obediently with all the Laws and Orders of Council, that it was not
easy to find any matter against him. He executed every Order that was sent
him, so readily, that there was not so much as ground for any Complaint; yet it
was known he was in his Heart against every thing they did, and that he
cherished all that were of a contrary mind. The Council being informed, that
upon the Commotions that were in England, many in London withdrew from the
Service and Communion, and frequented Masses, which was laid to his charge, as
being negligent in the execution of the Kings Laws and Injunctions; they writ
to him on the 23d of July, to see to the correcting of these things, and that
he should give good example himself. Upon which, on the 26th following, he sent
about a Charge to execute the Order in this Letter, which he said he was most
willing and desirous to do. Yet it was still observed, that whatsoever
obedience he gave, it was against his Heart. And therefore he was called before
the Council the 11th of August. Injunctions are given him.
There a Writing was delivered to him, complaining of his remissness; and
particularly that whereas he was wont formerly on all high Festivals to
officiate himself, yet he had seldom or never done it, since the New Service
was set out: as also that Adultery was openly practiced in his Diocese, which
he took no care according to his Pastoral Office to restrain or punish:
therefore he was strictly charged to see these things reformed. He was also
ordered to preach on Sunday come three weeks at St. Paul's Cross: and that he
should preach there once a quarter for the future, and be present at every
Sermon made there, except he were sick: that he should officiate at St. Paul's
at every high Festival, such as were formerly called Majus duplex, and give the
Communion: that he should proceed against all who did not frequent the
Common Prayer, nor receive the Sacrament once a year; or did go to Mass: that
he should search out and punish Adulterers: that he should take care of the
reparation of Churches, and paying Tithes, in his Diocese, and should keep his
residence in his House in London. As to his Sermon, he was required to preach
against Rebellion, setting out the hainousness of it; he was also to show what
was true Religion, and that external Ceremonies were nothing in themselves; but
that in the use of them Men ought to obey the Magistrate, and join true
devotion to them, and that the King was no less King, and the People no less
bound to obey, when he was in Minority, than when he was of full Age.

In his Sermon he did not set forth the King Power under Age, as he had been
required to do.
On the first of September, being the day appointed for him to preach, there was
a great Assembly gathered to hear him. He touched upon the Points that were
enjoined him, excepting that about the Kings Age, of which he said not one
word. But since the manner of Christ's Presence in the Sacrament was a thing
which he might yet safely speak of, he spent most of his Sermon on the
asserting the Corporal Presence; which he did with many sharp reflections on
those who were of another mind. There were present among others William
Latimer, and John Hooper, soon after Bishop of Gloucester, who came and informed
against him; that as he had wholly omitted that about the Kings Age, so he had
touched the other Points but slightly, and did say many other things which
tended to stir up disorder and dissension. Upon this there was a Commission
issued out to Cranmer, and Ridley, with the two Secretaries of State, Rot. Pat.
11. Par. 3. Reg.
and Dr. May Dean of St. Paul's, to examine that matter. They or any two of them
had full power by this Commission to suspend, imprison or deprive him, as they
should see cause. They were to proceed in the Summary way, called in their
Courts De plano.

On the 10th of September Bonner was summoned to appear before them at Lambeth.
He is proceeded against.
As he came into the place where they sat, he carried himself as if he had not
seen them, till one pulled him by the sleeve to put off his Cap to the Kings
Commissioners; upon which he protested he had not seen them; which none of them
could believe. He spoke slightingly to them of the whole matter, and turned the
discourse off to the Mass, which he wished were had in more reverence. When the
Witnesses were brought against him, Regist. Bonner.
he jeered them very undecently, and said the one talked like a Goose, and the
other like a Woodcock, and denied all they said. The Archbishop asked him,
whether he would refer the matter in proof to the People that heard him? and so
asked whether any there present had heard him speak of the Kings Authority when
under Age? His insolent behavior.
Many answered, No, No. Bonner looked about, and laughed, saying, Will you
believe this fond People? Some he called Dunces, and others Fools, and behaved
himself more like a Madman than a Bishop. The next day he was again brought
before them. Then the Commission was read. The Archbishop opened the Matter,
and desired Bonner to answer for himself: He read a Protestation which he had
prepared, setting forth, that since he had not seen the Commission, he reserved
to himself power to except, either to his Judges, or to any other Branch of the
Commission, as he should afterward see cause. In this he called it a pretended
Commission, and them pretended Judges, which was taxed as irreverent: but he
excused it, alleging that these were terms of Law which he must use, and so
not be precluded from any Objections he might afterward make use of. The Bill
of Complaint was next read, and the two Informers appeared with their Witnesses
to make it good. But Bonner objected against them, that they were notorious
Heretics, and that the ill Will they bore him, was because he had asserted the
true Presence of Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar: that Hooper in
particular had in his Sermon, that very day on which he had preached, denied
it; and had refuted and mis-recited his Sayings, like an Ass, as he was an
Ass indeed; so ill did he govern his Tongue: Upon this Cranmer asked him,
whether he thought Christ was in the Sacrament with Face, Mouth, Eyes, Nose,
and the other Lineaments of his Body? and there passed some words between them
on that Head: but Cranmer told him that was not a time and place to dispute,
they were come to execute the Kings Commission. So Bonner desired to see both
it, and the denunciation; which were given him, and the Court adjourned till
the 13th.

Secretary Smith sat with them at their next Meeting, which he had not done
the former day, though his Name was in the Commission: Upon this Bonner
protested, that according to the Canon Law none could act in a Commission, but
those who were present the first day in which it was read. But to this it was
alleged, that the constant practice of the Kingdom had been to the contrary:
that all whose Names were in any Commission, might sit and judge, though they
had not been present at the first opening of it. This Protestation being
rejected, he read his Answer in writing to the Accusation. He first objected to
his Accusers, His Defenses.
that they were Heretics in the matter of the Sacrament: and so were,
according to the Laws of the Catholic Church, under Excommunication, and
therefore ought not to be admitted into any Christian Company. Then he denied
that the Injunctions given to him had been signed, either with the Kings Hand
or Signet, or by any of his Council. But upon the whole matter he said he had
in his Sermon condemned the late Rebellion in Cornwall, Devon-shire, and
Norfolk, and had set forth the Sin of Rebellion according to several Texts of
Scripture: He had also preached for obedience to the Kings Commands; and that
no Ceremonies that were contrary to them ought to be used; in particular he had
exhorted the People to come to Prayers, and to the Communion, as it was
appointed by the King, and wondered to see them so slack in coming to it: which
he believed flowed from a false opinion they had of it. And therefore he
taught, according to that which he conceived to be the duty of a faithful
Pastor, the true Presence of Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament: which was
the true Motive of his Accusers in their prosecuting him thus. But though he
had forgot to speak of the Kings Power under Age, yet he had said that which
necessarily inferred it; for he had condemned the late Rebels, for rising
against their lawful King, and had applied many Texts of Scripture to them,
which clearly implied, that the Kings Power was then entire, otherwise they
could not be Rebels.

These are rejected.
But to all this it was answered, That it was of no great consequence who were
the Informers, if the Witnesses were such that he could not except against
them: besides, they were impow'red by their Commission to proceed ex Officio;
so that it was not necessary for them to have any to accuse. He was told that
the Injunctions were read to him in Council by one of the Secretaries, and then
were given to him by the Protector himself; that afterward they were called
for, and that Article concerning the Kings Power before he came to be of Age
being added, they were given him again by Secretary Smith; and he promised to
execute them. He was also told, that it was no just excuse for him to say he
had forgot that about the Kings Power; since it was the chief thing pretended
by the late Rebels, and was mainly intended by the Council in their
Injunctions; so that it was a poor shift for him to pretend he had forgot it,
or had spoken of it by a consequence.

The Court adjourned to the 16th day. And then Latimer and Hooper offered to
purge themselves of the Charge of Heresy, since they had never spoken nor
written of the Sacrament, but according to the Scripture: and whereas Bonner
had charged them, that on the first of September they had entered into
consultation and confederacy against him, they protested, they had not seen
each other that day, nor been known to one another till some days after. Bonner
upon this read some Passages of the Sacrament out of a Book of Hoopers, whom he
called that Varlet. But Cranmer cut off the discourse, and said, it was not
their business to determine that Point, and said to the People, that the Bishop
of London was not accused for any thing he had said about the Sacrament. Then
Bonner, turning to speak to the People, was interrupted by one of the
Delegates, who told him, he was to speak to them, and not to the People: at
which some laughing, he turned about in great fury, and said, Ah Woodcocks!
Woodcocks! But to the chief Point, he said he had prepared Notes of what he
intended to say about the Kings Power in his Minority; from the Instances in
Scripture, of Achaz, and Osias, who were Kings at Ten, of Solomon, and
Manasses, who Reigned at Twelve, and of Josias, Joachim, and Joas, who began to
Reign when they were but Eight years old. He had also gathered out of the
English History, that Henry the third, Edward the third, Richard the second,
Henry the sixth, and Edward the fifth, were all under Age: and even their late
King was but eighteen when he came to the Crown: and yet all these were obeyed
as much before, as after they were of full Age. But these things had escaped
his memory, he not having been much used to preach. There had been also a long
Bill sent him from the Council to be read, of the defeat of the Rebels, which
he said, had disordered him: and the Book in which he had laid his Notes, fell
out of his hands, when he was in the Pulpit: for this he appealed to his two
Chaplains, Bourn and Harpsfield, whom he had desired to gather for him the
Names of those Kings who Reigned before they were of Age. For the other
Injunctions, he had taken care to execute them, and had sent Orders to his
Archdeacons to see to them: and as far as he understood, there were no Masses
nor Service in Latin within his Diocese, except at the Lady Mary's, or in the
Chapels of Ambassadors. But the Delegates required him positively to answer,
whether he had obeyed that Injunction about the Kings Authority or not;
otherwise they would hold him as guilty: and if he denied it, they would
proceed to the examination of the Witnesses. He refusing to answer otherwise
than he had done, they called the Witnesses, who were Sir John Cheek and four
more, who had their Oaths given them: and Bonner desiring a time to prepare his
interrogatories, it was granted. So he drew a long Paper of twenty
Interrogatories, every one of them containing many Branches in it; full of all
the niceties of the Canon Law: a taste of which may be had from the third in
number, which is indeed the most material of all. The Interrogatory was,
Whether they, or any of them, were present at his Sermon, where they stood, and
near whom, when they came to it, and at what part of his Sermon, how long they
tarried, at what part they were offended, what were the formal Words, or
Substance of it, who with them did hear it, where the other Witnesses stood,
and how long they tarried, or when they departed?

The Court adjourned to the 18th of September: And then there was read a
Declaration from the King, explaining their former Commission, chiefly in the
Point of the Denunciation, that they might proceed either that way, or ex
Officio, as they saw cause: giving them also Power finally to determine the
matter, cutting off all superfluous delays. Bonner gave in also some other
Reasons, why he should not be obliged to make a more direct Answer to the
Articles objected against him: The chief of which was, That the Article about
the Kings Age was not in the Paper given him by the Protector, but afterward
added by Secretary Smith of his own Head. Cranmer admonished him of his
irreverence, since he called them always his pretended Judges. Smith added,
That though Proctors did so in common matters, for their Clients, yet it was
not to be endured in such a Case, when he saw they acted by a special
Commission from the King. New Articles were given him more explicit and plain
than the former, but to the same purpose. And five Witnesses were sworn upon
these, who were all the Clerks of the Council, to prove that the Article about
the Kings Age was ordered by the whole Council, and only put in writing by
Secretary Smith, at their Command. He was appointed to come next day, and make
his Answer. But on the 19th two of his Servants came, and told the Delegates,
that he was sick, and could not attend. It was therefore ordered, That the
Knight-Marshal should go to him; and if he were sick, let him alone; but if it
were not so, should bring him before them next day. On the 20th Bonner
appearing, answered as he had done formerly; only he protested, that it was his
opinion, that the King was as much a King, and the People as much bound to obey
him, before he was of Age, as after it: And after that, Secretary Smith having
taken him up more sharply than the other Delegates, he protested against him as
no competent Judge, He protests against Secretary Smith.
since he had expressed much passion against him, and had not heard him
patiently, but had compared him to Thieves and Traitors, and had threatened to
send him to the Tower to sit with Ket and Arundel; and that he had added some
things to the Injunctions given him by the Protector, for which he was now
accused, and did also proceed to judge him, notwithstanding his Protestation,
grounded on his not being present when the Commission was first opened and
received by the Court. But this Protestation also was rejected by the
Delegates; and Smith told him, That whereas he took exception at his saying
that he acted as Thieves and Traitors do, it was plainly visible in his doings:
upon which, Bonner, being much inflamed, said to him, That as he was Secretary
of State, and a Privy Councellor, he honored him; but as he was Sir Tho.
Smith, he told him, he lied, and that he defied him. At this the Archbishop
chid him, and said, he deserved to be sent to Prison for such irreverent
carriage. He answered, he did not care whither they sent him, so they sent him
not to the Devil, for thither he would not go: he had a few Goods, a poor
Carcass, and a Soul: the two former were in their power, but the last was in
his own. After this, being made to withdraw, he, when called in again, put in
an Appeal from them to the King, and read an Instrument of it, which he had
prepared at his own House that Morning: and so would make no other answer,
unless the Secretary should remove. For this contempt he was sent to the Prison
of the Marshalsea; and as he was led away, he broke out in great passion, both
against Smith, and also at Cranmer, for suffering Heretics to infect the
People, which he required him to abstain from, as he would answer for it to God
and the King.

On the 23d he was again brought before them, where, by a second Instrument, he
adhered to his former Appeal. But the Delegates said, they would go on, and
judge him, unless there came a Supersedeas from the King, and so required him
to answer those Articles which he had not yet answered, otherwise they would
proceed against him as Contumax, and hold him as Confessing. But he adhered to
his Appeal, and so would answer no more. New matter was also brought, of his
going out of St. Paul's in the midst of the Sermon on the 15th of the Month, and
so giving a public disturbance and scandal: and of his writing next day to the
Lord Major, not to suffer such Preachers to sow their ill Doctrine. This was
occasioned by the Preachers speaking against the Corporal Presence of Christ in
the Sacrament: But he would give the Court no account of that matter; so they
adjourned to the 27th, and from that to the first of October. In that time
great endeavors were used to persuade him to submit, and to behave himself
better for the future; and upon that condition he was assured he should be
gently used. But he would yield to nothing. So on the first of October, when he
was brought before them, the Archbishop told him, they had delayed so long,
being unwilling to proceed to extremities with him; and therefore wished him to
submit. But he read another Writing, by which he protested, that he was brought
before them by force, and that otherwise he would not have come, since, that
having appealed from them, he looked on them as his Judges no more. He said,
that he had also written a Petition to the Lord Chancellor, complaining of the
Delegates, and desiring that his Appeal might be admitted; and said, by that
Appeal it was plain, that he esteemed the King to be clothed with his full
Royal Power, now that he was under Age, since he thus appealed to him. Upon
which the Archbishop, the Bishop of Rochester, Secretary Smith, and the Dean
of St. Paul's, He is deprived from his Bishopric.
gave Sentence against him; that since he had not declared the Kings Power,
while under Age, in his Sermon, as he was commanded by the Protector and
Council, therefore the Archbishop, with the Consent and Assent of his
Colleagues, did deprive him of the Bishopric of London. Sentence being thus
given, he appealed again by word of mouth. The Court did also order him to be
carried to Prison, till the King should consider further of it. This account of
his Trial is drawn from the Register of London, where all these Particulars are
inserted. From thence it was that Fox printed them. For Bonner, though he was
afterward Commissioned by the Queen to deface any Records that made against the
Catholic Cause, yet did not care to alter any thing in this Register after his
readmission in Queen Mary's time. It seems he was not displeased with what he
found Recorded of himself in this matter.

Thus was Bonner deprived of his Bishopric of London. Censures past upon it.
This Judgment, as all such things are, was much censured: It was said, it was
not Canonical, since it was by a Commission from the King, and since Secular
Men were mixed with Clergymen in the censure of a Bishop. To this it was
answered, That the Sentence being only of deprivation from the Sea of London,
it was not so entirely an Ecclesiastical Censure, but was of a mixed nature, so
that Laymen might join in it: and since he had taken a Commission from the
King for his Bishopric, by which he held it only during the Kings pleasure, he
could not complain of this deprivation, which was done by the Kings Authority.
Others who looked further back, remembered that Constantine the Emperor had
appointed Secular Men to enquire into some things objected to Bishops, who were
called Cognitores, or Triers: and such had examined the business of Cecilian
Bishop of Carthage, even upon an Appeal, after it had been tried in several
Synods; and given Judgment against Donatus and his Party. The same Constantine
had also by his Authority put Eustathius out of Antioch, Athanasius out of
Alexandria, and Paul out of Constantinople: and though the Orthodox Bishops
complained of these Particulars, as done unjustly at the false suggestion of
the Arrians; yet they did not deny the Emperors Authority in such Cases.
Afterward the Emperors used to have some Bishops attending on them in their
Comitatus or Court, to whose Judgment they left most Causes, who acted only by
Commission from the Emperor. So Epiphanius was brought to condemn Chrysostom
at Constantinople, who had no Authority to judge him by the Canons. Others
objected, that it was too severe to deprive Bonner for a defect in his memory;
and that therefore they should have given him a new Trial in that Point, and
not have proceeded to censure him on such an omission; since he protested it
was not on design, but a pure forgetfulness: and all People perceived clearly
it had been before hand resolved to lay him aside, and that therefore they now
took him on this disadvantage, and so deprived him. But it was also well known,
that all the Papists infused this Notion into the People, of the Kings having
no Power till he came to be of Age; and he being certainly one of them, there
was reason to conclude, that what he said for his defense, was only a Pretense;
and that it was of design that he had omitted the mentioning the Kings Power
when under Age. The adding of Imprisonment to his Deprivation was thought by
some to be an extreme accumulation of Punishments. But that was no more than
what he drew upon himself by his rude and contemptuous behavior. However, it
seems that some of these Objections wrought on Secretary Petre, for he never
sat with the Delegates after the first day, and he was now turning about to
another Party.

On the other hand, Bonner was little pitied by most that knew him. He was a
cruel, and fierce Man: he understood little of Divinity, his Learning being
chiefly in the Canon Law. Besides, he was looked on generally as a Man of no
Principles. All the obedience he gave either to the Laws, or the Kings
Injunctions, was thought a compliance against his Conscience, extorted by fear.
And his undecent carriage during his process had much exposed him to the
People: so that it was not thought to be hard dealing, though the Proceedings
against him were summary and severe. Nor did his carriage afterward during his
imprisonment discover much of a Bishop or a Christian. For he was more
concerned to have Puddings and Pears sent him, than for any thing else. This I
gather from some original Letters of his to Richard Leechmore Esquire; in
Worcestershire, (which were communicated to me by his Heir Lineally descended
from him, the Worshipful Mr. Leechmore, now the Senior Bencher of the
Middle Temple;) of which I transcribed the latter part of one, Collection
Number 37.
that will be found in the Collection. In it he desires a large quantity of
Pears and Puddings to be sent him: otherwise he gives those to whom he writes
an odd sort of Benediction, very unlike what became a Man of his Character, he
gives them to the Devil, to the Devil, and to all the Devils, if they did not
furnish him well with Pears and Puddings. It may perhaps be thought indecent to
print such Letters, being the privacies of friendship, which ought not to be
made public; but I confess, Bonner was so brutish, and so bloody a Man, that I
was not ill pleased to meet with any thing that might set him forth in his
natural Colors to the World.

Foreign Affairs.
Thus did the Affairs of England go on this Summer within the Kingdom; but it
will be now necessary to consider the state of our Affairs in Foreign Parts.
The King of France finding it was very chargeable to carry on the War wholly in
Scotland, resolved this year to lessen that Expense, and to make War directly
with England, both at Sea and Land. So he came in person with a great Army, and
fell into the Country of Bulloigne, The French take many Places about Bulloigne.
where he took many little Castles about the Town; as Sellaque, Blackness,
Hambletue, Newhaven, and some lesser ones. The English Writers say, those were
ill provided, which made them be so easily lost: but Thuanus says, they were
all very well stored. In the night they assaulted Bullingberg, but were beat
off: then they designed to burn the Ships that were in the Harbor, and had
prepared Wildfire with other combustible Matter, but were driven away by the
English. At the same time the French Fleet met the English Fleet at Jersey,
but, as King Edward writes in his Diary, they were beat off with the loss of
1000 Men; though Thuanus puts the loss wholly on the English side. The French
King sat down before Bulloigne, in September, hoping that the disorders then
in England, would make that Place be ill supplied, and easily yielded: the
English finding Bullingberg was not tenable, razed it, and retired into the
Town: but the Plague broke into the French Camp, so the King left it under the
command of Chastilion. He endeavored chiefly to take the Pierre, and so to cut
off the Town from the Sea, and from all communication with England: and after a
long Battery he gave the Assault upon it, but was beat off. There followed many
Skirmishes between him and the Garrison, and he made many attempts to close up
the Channel, and thought to have sunk a Galley full of Stones and Gravel in it;
but in all these he was still unsuccessful. And therefore Winter coming on, the
Siege was raised; only the Forts about the Town, which the French had taken,
were strongly garrisoned: so that Bulloigne was in danger of being lost the
next year.

In Scotland also, the English Affairs declined much this year. Thermes, The
English insuccessful in Scotland.
before the Winter was ended, had taken Broughty Castle, and destroyed almost
the whole Garrison. In the Southern Parts there was a change made of the Lords
Wardens of the English Marches. Sir Robert Bows was complained of, as
negligent in relieving Hadingtoun the former year; so the Lord Dacres was put
in his room. And the Lord Gray, who lost the great advantage he had when the
French raised the Siege of Hadingtoun, was removed, and the Earl of Rutland was
sent to command. The Earl made an Inroad into Scotland, and supplied Hadingtoun
plentifully with all sorts of Provisions, necessary for a Siege. He had some
Germans, and Spaniards with him: but a Party of Scotch Horse surprised the
Germans Baggage; and Romero with the Spanish Troop was also fallen on, and
taken, and almost all his Men were cut off. The Earl of Warwick was to have
marched with a more considerable Army this Summer into Scotland, had not the
disorders in England diverted him, as it has been already shown. Thermes did
not much more this Year He intended once to have renewed the Siege of
Hadingtoun; but when he understood how well they were furnished, he gave it
over. But the English Council, finding how great a charge the keeping of it
was, and the Country all about it being destroyed, so that no Provisions could
be had, but what were brought from England, from which it was 28 Miles distant,
resolved to withdraw their Garrison, and quit it, which was done on the first
of October: So that the English having now no Garrison within Scotland, but
Lauder, Thermes sat down before that, and pressed it, so that had not the
Peace been made up with France, it had fallen into his Hands.

Things being in this disorder both at home and abroad, the Protector had
nothing to depend on, but the Emperors Aid; and he was so ill satisfied with
the Changes that had been made in Religion, that much was not to be expected
from him. The confusions this year occasioned that Change to be made in the
Office of the daily Prayers; where the Answer to the Petition, Give Peace in
our time O Lord, which was formerly, and is still continued, was now made,
Because there is none other that fights for us but only thou O God. The state
of Germany.
For now the Emperor having reduced all the Princes, and most of the Cities, of
Germany to his obedience, none but Magdeburg and Breame standing out, did by a
mistake, incident to great Conquerors, neglect those advantages which were then
in his hands, and did not prosecute his Victories; but leaving Germany, came
this Summer into the Netherlands, whither he had ordered his Son Prince Philip
to come from Spain to him, thorough Italy and Germany, that he might put him
into possession of these Provinces, and make them swear Homage to him. Whether
at this time the Emperor was beginning to form the design of retiring, or
whether he did this only to prevent the Mutinies and Revolts that might fall
out upon his death, if his Son were not in actual possession of them, is not so
certain. One thing is memorable, in that Transaction that was called the Laetus
Introitus, or the terms upon which he was received Prince of Brabant, to which
the other Provinces had been formerly united into one Principality; after many
Rules and Limitations of Government, in the matter of Taxes, and public
Assemblies, Cott. Library Galba B. 12.
the not keeping up of Forces, and governing them not by Strangers, but by
Natives, it was added, That if he broke these Conditions, it should be free for
them not to obey him or acknowledge him any longer, till he returned to govern
according to their Laws. This was afterward the chief ground on which they
justified their shaking off the Spanish Yoke, all these Conditions being
publicly violated

Jealousies arise in the Emperors Family.
At this time there were great jealousies in the Emperors Family. For as he
intended to have had his Brother resign his Election to be King of the Romans,
that it might be transferred on his own Son; so there were designs in Flanders,
which the French cherished much, to have Maximilian, Ferdinands Son, the most
accomplished and virtuous Prince that had been for many Ages, to be made their
Prince. The Flemings were much disgusted with the Queen Regents Government,
who, when there was need of Money, sent to Bruges, and Antwerp, ordering
Deputies to be sent her from Flanders, and Brabant: and when they were come,
she told them what Money must be raised; and if they made any objections, she
used to bid them give over merchandising with the Emperor, for he must and
would have the Money he asked: so that nothing remained to them, but to see how
to raise what was thus demanded of them, rather than desired from them. This,
as the English Ambassador writ from Bruges, seemed to be the reason that moved
the Emperor to make his Son swear to such Rules of Government; which, the
Sequel of his Life showed, he meant to observe in the same manner that his
Father had done before him. At the same time, in May this year, I find a secret
Advertisement was sent over from France to the English Court, that there was a
private Treaty set on foot between that King and the Princes of Germany, for
restoring the liberty of the Empire: but that the King of France was resolved
to have Bulloigne in his Hands before he entered on new Projects. Therefore it
was proposed to the Protector, to consider whether it were not best to deliver
it up by a Treaty, and so to leave the King of France free to the defense of
their Friends in the Empire: for I find the consideration of the Protestant
Religion was the chief measure of our Councils all this Reign.

A great Faction against the Protector.
Upon this there was great distraction in the Councils at home. The Protector
was inclined to deliver up Bulloigne for a Sum of Money, and to make Peace both
with the French and Scots. The Kings Treasure was exhausted, Affairs at home
were in great confusion, the defense of Bulloign was a great charge, and a War
with France was a thing of that consequence, that in that state of Affairs it
was not to be adventured on. But on the other hand, those who hated the
Protector, and measured Councils more by the bravery than the solidity of them,
said, it would be a reproach to the Nation to deliver up a Place of that
consequence, which their late King, in the declining of his days, had gained
with so much loss of Men and Treasure: and to sell this for a little Money was
accounted so sordid, that the Protector durst not adventure on it. Upon this
occasion I find Sir William Paget (being made Comptroller of the Kings
Household, Pagets Advice about Foreign Affairs.
which was then thought an advancement from the Office of a Secretary of State)
made a long Discourse, Cotton Libr. Titus B. 2.
and put it in Writing. The substance of it was, to balance the dangers in
which England was at that time. The Business of Scotland and Bulloigne drew
France into a Quarrel against it. On the account of Religion, it had no reason
to expect much from the Emperor. The Interest of England was then to preserve
the Protestants of Germany; and therefore to unite with France, which would be
easily engaged in that Quarrel against the Emperor. He proposed a firm Alliance
with the Venetians, who were then jealous of the Emperors Progress in Italy,
and would be ready to join against him, if he were thoroughly engaged in
Germany; and by their means, England was to make up an agreement with France.
On the other hand, William Thomas, then a Clerk of the Council, Thomas's Advice
differs from his. Cott. Libr. Vespasian D. 18.
writ a long Discourse of other Expedients: He agreed with Paget, as to the ill
state of England, having many Enemies, and no Friends. The North of England was
wasted by the incursion of the Scots. Ireland was also in an ill condition; for
the Natives there did generally join with the Scots, being addicted to the old
Superstition. The Emperor was so set on reducing all to one Religion, that they
could expect no great Aid from him, unless they gave him some hope of returning
to the Roman Religion. But the continuance of the War would undo the Nation:
for if the War went on, the People would take advantage from it to break out
into new disorders: it would be also very dishonorable to deliver up, or
rather to sell, the late Conquests in France. Therefore he proposed, that to
gain time, they should treat with the Emperor, and even give him hopes of
re-examining what had been done in Religion: though there was danger even in
that, of disheart'ning those of Magdeburg, and the few remaining Protestants in
Germany; as also they might expect the Emperor would be highly enraged when he
should come to find that he had been deluded: but the gaining of time was then
so necessary, that the preservation of the Nation depended on it. For Scotland
he proposed, that the Governor of that Kingdom should be pressed to pretend to
the Crown; since their Queen was gone into a strange Country: by this means
Scotland would be for that whole Age separated from the Interests of France,
and obliged to depend on England: and the French were now so hated in Scotland,
that any who would set up against them would have an easy Work, especially
being assisted by the nearness of England. And for Ireland, he proposed, that
the chief Heads of Families should be drawn over, and kept at Court. And that
England thus being respited from Foreign War, the Nation should be armed, and
exercised, the Coin reformed, Treasure laid up, and things in the Government at
home that were uneasy should be corrected.

Thus I have opened the Councils at that time, as I found them laid before me
in these Authentic Papers, from which I drew them. Paget sent over to treat
with the Emperor.
The result of their Consultation was to send over Sir William Paget to join
with Sir Philip Hobbey, then Resident at the Emperors Court. His Instructions
will be found in the Collection. The Substance of them was, Collection Number
38.
That the Treaty between the Emperor and the late King should be renewed with
this King, and confirmed by the Prince and the States of Flanders: that some
ambiguous Passages in it should be cleared: that the Emperor would comprehend
Bulloigne within the League defensive, and so protect it, England being ready
to offer any thing reciprocal in the room of it. He was also to show their
readiness to agree to the Emperor concerning the Lady Mary's Marriage, to
adjust some differences occasioned by the complaints made of the Admiralty, and
about Trade: to show the reason of the Messages that passed between them and
France; and to engage, that if the Emperor would heartily assist them, they
would never agree with France. Paget was also to propose, as of himself, that
Bulloigne should be put into the Emperors Hands upon a reasonable recompense.
Thus was Paget instructed, and sent over in June this Year. But the Emperor put
him off with many delays, and said, The carrying of his Son about the Towns in
Flanders and Brabant, with the many Ceremonies and Entertainments that followed
it, made it not easy for him to consider of Matters that required such deep
consultation. He put him off from Brussels to Gaunt, and from Gaunt to Bruges.
But Paget growing impatient of such delays, since the French were marched into
the Bulloignese; the Bishop of Arras, (Son to Granvell that had been long the
Emperors chief Minister) who was now like to succeed in his Fathers room that
was old and infirm, and the two Presidents of the Emperors Councils, St.
Maurice and Viglius, came to Sir William Paget, and had a long communication
with him and Hobbey, Collection Number 39.
an account whereof will be found in the Collection in a Dispatch from them to
the Protector.

He meets with the Emperors Ministers.
They first treated of an explanation of some ambiguous words in the Treaty, to
which the Emperors Ministers promised to bring them an Answer. Then they talked
long of the Matters of the Admiralty, the Emperors Ministers said, no justice
was done in England upon the Merchants complaints: Paget said, every Mariner
came to the Protector, and if he would not solicit their business, they run
away with a Complaint that there was no Justice; whereas he thought, that as
they meddled with no private matters, so the Protector ought to turn all these
over upon the Courts that were the competent Judges. But the Bishop of Arras
said, There was no Justice to be had in the Admiralty Courts, who were indeed
Parties in all these Matters: Paget said, There was as much Justice in the
English Admiralty Courts as was in theirs: and the Bishop confessed, there were
great corruptions in all these Courts. So Paget proposed, that the Emperor
should appoint two of his Council to hear and determine all such Complaints, in
a Summary way, and the King should do the like in England. For the Confirmation
of the Treaty, the Bishop said, the Emperor was willing his Son should confirm
it; but that he would never sue to his Subjects to confirm his Treaties: and he
said, when it was objected that the Treaty with France was confirmed by the
three Estates, that the Prerogative of the French Crown was so restrained that
the King could alienate nothing of his Patrimony without the Parliament of
Paris and his three Estates. He believed the King of England had a greater
Prerogative: he was sure the Emperor was not so bound up: he had fifteen or
sixteen several Parliaments, and what work must he be at if all these must
descant on his Transactions? When this general discourse was over, the two
Presidents went away: but the Bishop of Arras staid with him in private. Paget
proposed the Business of Bulloigne: but the Bishop having given him many good
words in the general, excepted much to it, as dishonorable to the Emperor;
since Bulloigne was not taken when the League was concluded between the Emperor
and England: so that if he should now include it in the League, it would be a
breach of Faith and Treaties with France: and he stood much on the Honor and
Conscience of observing these Treaties inviolably. So this Conversation ended;
in which the most remarkable Passage is, that concerning the Limitations on the
French Crown, and the Freedoms of the English; for at that time the Kings
Prerogative in England was judged of that extent, that I find in a Letter
written from Scotland, one of the main Objections made to the marrying their
Queen to the King of England was, That an Union with England would much alter
the constitution of their Government, the Prerogatives of the Kings of England
being of a far larger extent than those in Scotland.

Two or three days after the former Conversation, the Emperors Ministers
returned to Pagets Lodging, with answer to the Propositions which the English
Ambassadors had made: of which a full account will be found in the Collection
in the Letter which the Ambassadors writ upon it into England. Collection
Number 40.
The Emperor gave a good answer to some of the Particulars, which were
ambiguous in former Treaties. For the Confirmation of the Treaty, he offered,
that the Prince should join in it; but since the King of England was under Age,
he thought it more necessary that the Parliament of England should confirm it.
To which Paget answered, That their Kings, as to the Regal Power, were the same
in all the Conditions of Life: and therefore when the Great Seal was put to any
agreement, the King was absolutely bound by it. If his Ministers engaged him in
ill Treaties, they were to answer for it at their Perils; but howsoever the
King was tied by it. They discoursed long about the Administration of Justice,
but ended in nothing. And as for the main business about Bulloigne, the Emperor
stood on his Treaties with the French, which he could not break: upon which
Paget said to the Bishop, that his Father had told him, they had so many
Grounds to quarrel with France, that he had his Sleeve full of them, to produce
when there should be occasion to make use of them. But finding the Bishops
Answers were cold, and that he only gave good words, he told him that England
would then see to their own security: and so he took that for the Emperors
final Answer, and thereupon resolved to take his leave, which he did soon
after, and came back into England. But at home the Councils were much divided,
of which the sad Effects broke out soon afterward.

It was proposed in Council, that the War with Scotland should be ended. For it
having been begun, and carried on, Debates in Council concerning Peace.
only on design to obtain the Marriage, since the hopes of that were now so far
gone, that it was not in the power of the Scots themselves to retrieve them, it
was a vain and needless expense both of Blood and Money to keep it up; and
since Bulloigne was by the Treaty, after a few more years, to be delivered up
to the French, it seemed a very unreasonable thing, in the low state to which
the Kings Affairs were driven, to enter on a War; in which they had little
reason to doubt but they should lose Bulloigne, after the new expense of a
Siege and another years War. The Protector had now many Enemies, who laid hold
on this conjuncture to throw him out of the Government. The Earl of Southampton
was brought into the Council, but had not laid down his secret hatred of the
Protector; and did all he could to make a Party against him. The Earl of
Warwick was the fittest Man to work on: him therefore he gained over to his
side, and having formed a confidence in him, he showed him, that he had really
got all these Victories for which the Protector triumphed: he had won the Field
of Pinkey near Musselburgh, and had subdued the Rebels of Norfolk: and as he
had before defeated the French, so if he were sent over thither, new Triumphs
would follow him: but it was below him to be second to any. So he engaged him
to quarrel in every thing with the Protector, all whose wary motions were
ascribed to fear or dullness. To others he said, What friendship could any
expect from a Man who had no pity on his own Brother? But that which provoked
the Nobility most, Complaints against the Protector.
was the partiality the Protector had for the Commons in the Insurrections that
had been this Summer. He had also given great Grounds of jealousy, by
entertaining Foreign Troops in the Kings Wars; which, though it was not
objected to him, because the Council had consented to it, yet it was whispered
about, that he had extorted that Consent. But the noble Palace he was raising
in the Strand, (which yet carries his Name) out of the ruins of some Bishops
Houses, and Churches, drew as public an envy on him as any thing he had done.
It was said, that when the King was engaged in such Wars, and when London was
much disordered by the Plague, that had been in it for some Months, he was then
bringing Architects from Italy, and designing such a Palace as had not been
seen in England. It was also said, That many Bishops and Cathedrals had
resigned many Mannours to him, for obtaining his favor. Though this was not
done without leave obtained from the King; for in a Grant of some Lands made to
him by the King on the 11th of July, in the second year of his Reign, it is
said, That these Lands were given him as a Reward of his Services in Scotland,
Rot. Pat. 4. Par. 2. Reg.
for which he was offered greater Rewards; but that he refusing to accept of
such Grants as might too much impoverish the Crown, had taken a License to the
Bishop of Bath and Wells, for his alienating some of the Lands of that
Bishopric to him: he is in that Patent called by the Grace of God Duke of
Somerset, which had not of late years been ascribed to any but Sovereign
Princes. It was also said, That many of the Chantry Lands had been sold to his
Friends at easy rates; for which they concluded he had great Presents: and a
course of unusual greatness had raised him up too high; so that he did not
carry himself toward the Nobility with that equality that they expected from
him.

All these things concurred to beget him many Enemies, and he had very few
Friends, for none stuck firmly to him, but Paget, and Secretary Smith, and
especially Cranmer, who never forsook his Friend. All that favored the old
Superstition were his Enemies: and seeing the Earl of Southampton heading the
Party against him, they all run in to it. And of the Bishops, that were for the
Reformation, Goodrich of Ely likewise joined to them: He had attended on the
Admiral in his Preparations for death, from whom, it seems, he drank in ill
impressions of the Protector. All his Enemies saw, and he likewise saw it
himself, that the continuance of the War must needs destroy him; and that a
Peace would confirm him in his Power, and give him time and leisure to break
thorough the Faction, that was now so strong against him, that it was not
probable he could master it without the help of some time. So in the Council
his Adversaries delivered their Opinions against all motions for Peace: and
though upon Pagets return from Flanders, it appeared to be very unreasonable to
carry on the War; yet they said, Paget had secret Instructions to procure such
an Answer, that it might give a color to so base a Project. The Officers that
came over from these Places that the French had taken, pretended, as is common
for all Men in such Circumstances, that they wanted things necessary for a
Siege; and though in truth it was quite contrary, (as we read in Thuanus) yet
their Complaints were cherished and spread about among the People. The
Protector had also, against the Mind of the Council, ordered the Garrison to be
drawn out of Hadingtoun; and was going, notwithstanding all their opposition,
to make Peace with France; and did in many things act by his own Authority,
without asking their advice, and often against it. This was the assuming a
Regal Power, and seemed not to be endured by those who thought they were in all
Points his equals. It was also said, That when, contrary to the late Kings
Will, he was chosen Protector, it was with that special condition, that he
should do nothing without their consent: and though by the Patent he had for
his Office, his Power was more enlarged; (which was of greater force in Law,
than a private Agreement at the Council Table) yet even that was objected to
him, as an high presumption in him to pretend to such a vast Power. Thus all
the Month of September there were great Heats among them: several Persons
interposed to mediate, but to no effect: for the Faction against him was now so
strong, that they resolved to strip him of his exorbitant Power, and reduce him
to an equality with themselves. The King was then at Hampton Court, where also
the Protector was, with some of his own Retainers and Servants about him; which
increased the Jealousies; for it was given out, that he intended to carry away
the King. So on the 6th of October some of the Council met at Ely House: the
Lord St. John President, Most of the Council separate from him.
the Earls of Warwick, Arundel, and Southampton, Sir Edw. North, Sir Richard
Southwell, Sir Edmund Pecham, Sir Edw. Wotton, and Dr. Wotton; and Secretary
Petre being sent to them in the Kings Name, to ask what they met for, joined
himself likewise to them. They sat as the Kings Council, and entered their
Proceedings in the Council-Book, from whence I draw the account of this
Transaction.

These being met together, and considering the disorders that had been lately
in England, the losses in Scotland and France, laid the blame of all on the
Protector, who, they said, was given up to other Councils, so obstinately, that
he would not hearken to the advises they had given him, both at the Board, and
in private; and they declared, that having intended that day to have gone to
Hampton Court, for a friendly communication with him, he had raised many of the
Commons to have destroyed them, and had made the King set his Hand to the
Letters he had sent for raising Men; and had also dispersed seditious Bills
against them; therefore they intended to see to the safety of the King and the
Kingdom. So they sent for the Lord Major and Aldermen of London, and required
them to obey no Letters sent them by the Protector, but only such as came from
themselves. They also writ many Letters to the Nobility and Gentry over
England, giving them an account of their Designs and Motives, and requiring
their assistance. They also sent for the Lieutenant of the Tower, and he
submitted to their Orders. Next day, the Lord Chancellor, the Marquess of
Northampton, the Earl of Shrewsbury, Sir Tho. Cheyney, Sir John Gage, Sir Ralph
Sadler, and the Lord Chief Justice Montague, joined with them. Then they wrote
to the King a Letter, Collection Number 41.
(which is in the Collection) full of expressions of their duty and care of his
Person, complaining of the Duke of Somerset's not listening to their Councils,
and of his gathering a Force about him for maintaining his wilful doings: they
owned that they had caused Secretary Petre to stay with them, and in it they
endeavored to persuade the King that they were careful of nothing so much as
of his preservation. They also wrote to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and to
Sir William Paget, to see to the Kings Person, and that his own Servants should
attend on him, and not those that belonged to the Duke of Somerset. But the
Protector, hearing of this disorder, had removed the King to Windsor in all
have; and had taken down all the Armor that was either there, or at
Hampton Court, and had armed such as he could gather about him for his
preservation.

The Council at London complained much of this, that the King should be carried
to a Place where there were no Provisions fit for him. So they ordered all
things that he might need to be sent to him from London. And on the 8th of
October they went to Guild Hall, when they gave an account of their Proceedings
to the Common Council of the City: and assured them, they had no thoughts of
altering the Religion, as was given out by their Enemies, but intended only the
safety of the King, and the Peace of the Kingdom; and for these ends desired
their assistance. The City of London joins with them.
The whole Common Council with one Voice, declared, they thanked God for the
good intentions they had expressed, and assured them they would stand by them
with their Lives and Goods. At Windsor, when the Protector understood, that not
only the City, but the Lieutenant of the Tower, of whom he had held himself
assured, had forsaken him, he resolved to struggle no longer: and though it is
not improbable, that he, who was chiefly accused for his protecting the
Commons, might have easily gathered a great Body of Men for his own
preservation; yet he resolved rather to give way to the Tide that was now
against him. So he protested before the King and the few Counselors then about
him, that he had no design against any of the Lords; and that the Force he had
gathered was only to preserve himself from any violent attempt that might be
made on his Person: he declared, that he was willing to submit himself; The
Protector offers to treat and submit.
and therefore proposed, that two of those Lords should be sent from London,
and they, with two of those that were yet about the King, should consider what
might be done, in whose determination he would acquiesce: and desired, that
whatsoever was agreed on, should be confirmed in Parliament. Hereupon there was
sent to London a Warrant under the Kings Hand, for any two of the Lords of the
Council that were there to come to Windsor with twenty Servants a-piece, who
had the Kings Faith for their safety in coming and going: and Cranmer, Paget,
and Smith, wrote to them to dispose them to end the matter peaceably, and not
follow cruel Councils, nor to be misled by them who meant otherwise than they
professed, of which they knew more than they would then mention. This seemed to
point at the Earl of Southampton.

On the 9th of October the Council at London increased by the accession of the
Lord Russel, the Lord Wentworth, Sir Anthony Brown, Sir Ant. Wingfield, and Sir
John Baker, the Speaker of the House of Commons. For now those who had stood
off a while; seeing the Protector was resolved to yield, came and united
themselves with the prevailing Party: so that they were in all two and twenty.
They were informed, that the Protector had said, that if they intended to put
him to death, the King should die first; and if they would famish him, they
should famish the King first: and that he had armed his own Men, and set them
next to the Kings Person, and was designing to carry him out of Windsor, and as
some reported, out of the Kingdom: upon which they concluded, that he was no
more fit to be Protector. But of those words no proofs being mentioned in the
Council-Books, they look like the forgeries of his Enemies to make him odious
to the People. The Council ordered a Proclamation of their Proceedings to be
printed, and writ to the Lady Mary, and the Lady Elizabeth acquainting them
with what they had done. They also wrote to the King (as will be found in the
Collection) acknowledging the many bonds that lay on them in gratitude both for
his Fathers goodness to them, and his own, to take care of him. Collection
Number 4^.
They desired he would consider, they were his whole Council, except one or
two; and were those whom his Father had trusted with the Government: that the
Protector was not raised to that Power by his Fathers Will, but by their
choice, with that condition, that he should do all things by their advice;
which he had not observed, so that they now judged him most unworthy of these
Honors: therefore they earnestly desired they might be admitted to the Kings
Presence, to do their duties about him, and that the Forces gathered about his
Person might be sent away, and the Duke of Somerset might submit himself to the
Order of Council. They also wrote to the Archbishop and Sir William Paget,
(which is in the Collection) charging them as they would answer it, Collection
Number 43.
that the Kings Person might be well looked to, that he should not be removed
from Windsor, and that he should be no longer guarded by the Duke of Somersets
Men, (as they said he had been, of which they complained severely) but by his
own sworn Servants; and they required them to concur in advancing the desire
they had signified by their Letter to the King, protesting that they would do
with the Duke of Somerset, as they would desire to be done by, and with as much
moderation and favor as in honor they could: so that there was no reason to
apprehend from them such cruelty as they had mentioned in their Letters. These
were sent by Sir Philip Hobbey, who was returned from Flanders, and had been
sent by the King to London on the day before. Upon this, Cranmer, and Paget,
(as is entered in the Council-Book) persuaded both the King and the Protector to
grant their desire. The Protectors Servants were dismissed, and the Kings were
set about his Person. And Cranmer, Paget, and Smith, wrote to the Council at
London, that all they had proposed should be granted: They desired to know
whether the King should be brought to London, or stay at Windsor: and that
three of the Lords might be sent thither, who should see all things done
according to their minds: and for other things they referred them to Hobbey
that carried the Letter, (which is in the Collection) upon this the Council
sent Sir Anthony Wingfield, Collection Number 44.
Sir Anthony St. Leiger, and Sir J. Williams, to Windsor, with a charge to see
that the Duke of Somerset should not withdraw before they arrived, and that Sir
Tho. Smith the Secretary, Sir Michael Stanhop, Sir John Thynn, Edw. Wolf, and
William Cecil, should be restrained to their Chambers, till they examined them.
On the 12th of October the whole Council went to Windsor, and coming to the
King, they protested that all they had done was out of the zeal and affection
they had to his Person and Service. The King received them kindly, and thanked
them for their care of him, and assured them that he took all they had done in
good part. On the 13th day they sat in Council, and sent for those who were
ordered to be kept in their Chambers; only Cecil was let go. They charged them,
that they had been the chief Instruments about the Duke of Somerset in all his
wilful Proceedings; therefore they turned Smith out of his Place of Secretary,
and sent him with the rest to the Tower of London. He is accused and sent to
the Tower. Collection Number 45.
On the day following, the Protector was called before them, and Articles of
Misdemeanors and high Treason were laid to his charge, (which will be found in
the Collection) The Substance of them was, That being made Protector, on
condition that he should do nothing without the consent of the other Executors,
he had not observed that Condition, but had treated with Ambassadors, made
Bishops and Lord-Lieutenants, by his own Authority: and that he had held a
Court of Requests in his own House; and had done many things contrary to Law,
had embased the Coin, had in the Matter of Enclosures set out Proclamations,
and given Commissions against the mind of the whole Council: that he had not
taken care to suppress the late Insurrections, but had justified and encouraged
them: that he had neglected the Places the King had in France, by which means
they were lost: that he had persuaded the King that the Lords who met at London
intended to destroy him, and had desired him never to forget it, but to revenge
it, and had required some young Lords to keep it in his remembrance; and had
caused those Lords to be proclaimed Traitors: that he had said, If he should
die, the King should die too: that he had carried the King so suddenly to
Windsor, that he was not only put in great fear, but cast into a dangerous
disease: that he had gathered the People, and armed them for War; and had armed
his Friends and Servants; and left the Kings Servants unarmed: and that he
intended to fly to Jersey, or Garnsey. So he was sent to the Tower, being
conducted thither by the Earls of Sussex, and Huntington. That day the King was
carried back again to Hampton Court; and an Order was made, that six Lords
should be the Governors of his Person: who were the Marquess of Northampton,
the Earls of Warwick, and Arundel, the Lords St. John, Russel, and Wentworth.
Two of those were in their course to attend constantly on the King.

Censures passed upon him.
And thus fell the Duke of Somerset from his high Offices and great Trust. The
Articles objected to him seem to say as much for his justification, as the
Answers could do, if they were in my Power. He is not accused of rapine,
cruelty, or bribery; but only of such things as are incident to all Men that
are of a sudden exalted to a high and disproportioned greatness. What he did
about the Coin, was not for his own advantage, but was done by a common mistake
of many Governors, who, in the necessity of their Affairs, fly to this as
their last shift, to draw out their business as long as is possible; but it
ever rebounds on the Government to its great prejudice and loss. He bore his
Fall more equally than he had done his Prosperity: and set himself in his
imprisonment to study, and reading: and falling on a Book that treated of
Patience, both from the Principles of Moral Philosophy, and of Christianity; he
was so much taken with it, that he ordered it to be translated into English,
and writ a Preface to it himself, mentioning the great comfort he had found in
reading it, which had induced him to take care that others might reap the like
benefit from it. Peter Martyr writ him also a long consolatory Letter, which
was printed, both in Latin, and in an English Translation: and all the
Reformed, both in England, and abroad, looked on his Fall as a public loss to
that whole Interest which he had so steadily set forward.

But on the other hand, The Papists much lifted up.
the Popish Party were much lifted up at his Fall; and the rather, because they
knew the Earl of Southampton, who they hoped should have directed all Affairs,
was entirely theirs. It was also believed, that the Earl of Warwick had given
them secret Assurances: So it was understood at the Court of France, as Thuanus
writes. They had also, among the first things they did, gone about to discharge
the Duke of Norfolk of his long imprisonment, in consideration of his great
Age, his former Services, and the extremity of the Proceedings against him,
which were said to have flowed chiefly from the ill Offices the Duke of
Somerset had done him. But this was soon laid aside. So now the Papists made
their Addresses to the Earl of Warwick. The Bishop of Winchester wrote to him a
hearty Congratulation, rejoicing that the late tyranny (so he called the Duke
of Somersets Administration) was now at an end: he wished him all prosperity,
and desired, that when he had leisure from the great Affairs, that were in so
unsettled a condition, some regard might be had of him. The Bishop of London,
being also in good hopes, since the Protector, and Smith, whom he esteemed his
chief Enemies, were now in disgrace, and Cranmer was in cold, if not in ill
terms, with the Earl of Warwick, sent a Petition that his Appeal might be
received, and his Process reviewed. But their hopes soon vanish.
Many also began to fall off from going to the English Service, or the
Communion; hoping that all would be quickly undone that had been settled by the
Duke of Somerset. But the Earl of Warwick, finding the King so zealously
addicted to the carrying on of the Reformation, that nothing could recommend
any one so much to him, as the promoting it further would do, soon forsook the
Popish Party, and was seemingly the most earnest on a further Reformation that
was possible. I do not find that he did write any Answer to the Bishop of
Winchester. He continued still a Prisoner. And for Bonners Matter, there was a
new Court of Delegates appointed to review his Appeal, consisting of four
Civilians, and four Common Lawyers; who having examined it, reported, that the
Process had been legally carried on, and the Sentence justly given, and that
there was no good reason why the Appeal should be received, and therefore they
rejected it. This being reported to the Council, they sent for Bonner in the
beginning of February, and declared to him, that his Appeal was rejected, and
that the Sentence against him was in full force still.

But the Business of Bulloigne was that which pressed them most. Ambassadors
sent to the Emperor.
They misdoubting, as was formerly shown, that Paget had not managed that
matter dexterously and earnestly with the Emperor, sent on the 18th of October
Sir Tho. Cheyney, and Sir Phil. Hobbey to him, to entreat him to take Bulloigne
into his protection; they also sent over the Earl of Huntington to command it,
with the addition of a thousand Men for the Garrison. When the Ambassadors came
to the Emperor, they desired leave to raise 2000 Horse and 3000 Foot in his
Dominions for the preservation of Bulloigne. Cotton Libr. Galba B. 12.
The Emperor gave them very good words, but insisted much on his League with
France: and referred them to the Bishop of Arras, who told them plainly the
thing could not be done. So Sir Tho. Cheyney took his leave of the Emperor, who
at parting desired him to represent to the Kings Council, how necessary it was
to consider matters of Religion again, that so they might be all of one mind;
for, to deal plainly with them, till that were done, he could not assist them
so effectually as otherwise he desired to do. And now the Council saw clearly,
they had not been deceived by Paget in that Particular, and therefore resolved
to apply themselves to France for a Peace. But now the Earl of Warwick falling
off wholly from the Popish Party, The Earl of Southampton leaves the Court.
the Earl of Southampton left the Court in great discontent. He was neither
restored to his Office of Chancellor, nor made Lord Treasurer, (that Place,
which was vacant by the Duke of Somersets Fall, being now given to the Lord St.
John, who soon after, was made Earl of Wilt-shire:) nor was he made one of
those who had charge of the Kings Person. So he began to lay a Train against
the Earl of Warwick; but he was too quick for him, and discovered it: upon
which he left the Court in the night, and it was said, he poisoned himself, or
pined away with discontent, for he died in July after.

A new Office for Ordinations.
So now the Reformation was ordered to be carried on: and there being one part
of the Divine Offices not yet reformed, that is, concerning the giving Orders,
some Bishops and Divines, brought now together by a Session of Parliament, were
appointed to prepare a Book of Ordination.

A Session of Parliament.
But now I turn to the Parliament, which sat down on the 4th of November. In it
a severe Law was made against unlawful Assemblies: that if any, An Act against
Tumultuary Assemblies.
to the number of twelve should meet together unlawfully, for any matter of
State, and being required by any lawful Magistrate, should not disperse
themselves, it should be Treason: and if any broke Hedges, or violently pulled
up Pales, about Enclosures, without lawful Authority, it should be Felony. It
was also made Felony to gather the People together without Warrant, by ringing
of Bells, or sound of Drums and Trumpets, or the firing of Beacons. There was
also a Law made against Prophecies concerning the King or his Council, since by
these the People were disposed to sedition: for the first offense it was to be
punished by Imprisonment for a year, and 10 l. Fine: For the second, it was
Imprisonment during Life, with the forfeiture of Goods and Chattels. All this
was on the account of the Tumults the former year, and not with any regard to
the Duke of Somersets security, as some have without any reason fancied: for he
had now no Interest in the Parliament, nor was he in a condition any more to
apprehend Tumults against himself, being stripped of his so much envied
greatness. And against Vagabonds.
Another Law was made against Vagabonds, relating, That the former Statute made
in this Reign being too severe, was by that means not executed: so it was
repealed, and the Law made in King Henry the 8th's Reign put in force:
Provisions were laid down for relieving the Sick and Impotent, and setting the
Poor, that were able, to work: That once a month there should be every where a
Visitation of the Poor, by those in Office, who should send away such as did
not belong to that Place, and those were to be carried from Constable to
Constable, till they were brought to such Places as were bound to see to them.
There was a Bill brought in for the repealing of a Branch of the Act of
Uniformity, but it went no further than one reading.

On the 14th of November the Bishops made a heavy complaint to the Lords, of
the abounding of vice and disorder, The Bishops move for a reviving of
Ecclesiastical Censures.
and that their Power was so abridged, that they could punish no sin, nor
oblige any to appear before them, or to observe the Orders of the Church. This
was heard by all the Lords with great regret, and they ordered a Bill to be
drawn about it. On the 18th of November a Bill was brought in, but rejected at
first reading, because it seemed to give the Bishops too much Power. So a
second Bill was appointed to be drawn by a Committee of the House. It was
agreed to, and sent down to the Commons, who laid it aside after the second
reading. They thought it better to renew the design that was in the former
Reign, of two and thirty Persons being authorized to compile the Body of
Ecclesiastical Laws; and when that was prepared, it seemed more proper, by
confirming it, to establish Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, than to give the
Bishops any Power, while the Rules of their Courts were so little determined or
regulated: So an act passed, empow'ring the King to name fixteen Persons of the
Spiritualty, of whom four should be Bishops, and sixteen of the Temporalty, of
whom four should be common Lawyers, who within three years should compile a
Body of Ecclesiastical Laws; and those, being nothing contrary to the Common
and Statute Laws of the Land, should be published by the Kings Warrant, under
the Great Seal, and have the force of Laws in the Ecclesiastical Courts. Thus
they took care that this should not be turned over to an uncertain Period, as
it had been done in the former Reign, but designed that it should be quickly
finished. The Bishops of that time were generally so backward in every step to
a Reformation, that a small number of them was made necessary to be of this
Commission. The effect that it had shall be afterward opened.

There was a Bill brought in to the House of Commons, That the Preaching and
holding of some Opinions should be declared Felony: it passed with them, but
was laid aside by the Lords. 1550.
A Bill for the Form of Ordaining Ministers was brought in to the House of
Lords, and was agreed to, the Bishops of Duresme, Carlisle, Worcester,
Chichester, and Westminster, protesting against it. The Substance of it was, An
Act about the Forms of giving Orders
That such Forms of Ordaining Ministers as should be set forth by the advice of
six Prelates and six Divines, to be named by the King, and authorized by a
Warrant under the Great Seal, should be used after April next, and no other. On
the second of January a Bill was put in against the Duke of Somerset, An Act
about the Duke of Somerset.
of the Articles formerly mentioned, with a Confession of them Signed by his
Hand. This he was prevailed with to do, upon assurances given that he should be
gently dealt with, if he would freely confess, and submit himself to the Kings
mercy. But it was said by some of the Lords, that they did not know whether
that Confession was not drawn from him by force: and that it might be an ill
President to pass Acts upon such Papers, without examining the Party, whether
he had subscribed them freely and uncompelled: so they sent four Temporal
Lords, and four Bishops, to examine him concerning it. And the day following,
the Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield made the Report, that he thanked them for
that kind Message, but that he had freely subscribed the Confession that lay
before them. He had made it on his Knees before the King and Council, and had
Signed it on the 13th of December. He protested his offenses had flowed from
rashness and indiscretion, rather than malice, and that he had no treasonable
design against the King or his Realms. So he was fined by Act of Parliament in
2000 l. a year of Land, and he lost all his Goods and Offices. Upon this he
wrote to the Council, acknowledging their favor, in bringing off his Matter by
a Fine: he confessed, that he had fallen into the frailties that often attend
on great Places, but what he had done amiss was rather for want of true
Judgment, than from any malicious meaning: he humbly desired they would
interpose with the King for a moderation of his Fine, and that he might be
pardoned and restored to favor; assuring them, that for the future he should
carry himself so humbly and obediently, that he should thereby make amends for
his former follies: This was much censured by many, as a sign of an abject
Spirit: others thought it was wisely done in him, once to get out of Prison on
any terms, since the greatness of his former condition gave such jealousy to
his Enemies, that unless he had his pardon, he would be in continual danger, as
long as he was in their hands. So on the 6th of February he was set at liberty,
giving Bond of 10000 l. for his good behavior; and being limited that he
should stay at the Kings House of Sheen, or his own of Zion, and should not go
four Miles from them, nor come to the King or the Council, unless he were
called: He had his Pardon on the 16th of February, and carried himself after
that so humbly, that his behavior, with the Kings great kindness to him, did
so far prevail, that on the 10th of April after, he was restored into favor,
and sworn of the Privy Council. And so this storm went over him much more
gently than was expected; but his carriage in it was thought to have so little
of the Hero, that he was not much considered after this.

The Reformation is set on vigorously.
But to go on with the business of the Parliament; reports had been spread, that
the old Service would be again set up: and these were much cherished by those
who still loved the former superstition: who gave out, that a change was to be
expected, since the New Service had been only the Act of the Duke of Somerset.
Upon this the Council wrote on Christmas day a Letter to all the Bishops of
England, to this effect, That whereas the English Service had been devised by
Learned Men, according to the Scripture, and the use of the Primitive Church;
therefore, for putting away those vain expectations, all Clergymen were
required, to deliver to such as should be appointed by the King to receive
them, all Antiphonales, Missals, Grayles, Processionals, Manuals, Legends,
Pies, Portuasses, Journals, and Ordinals, after the use of Sarum, Lincoln,
York, or any other private use: requiring them also to see to the observing one
uniform Order in the Service set forth by the common consent of the Realm: and
particularly to take care that there should be every where provision made of
Bread and Wine for the Communion on Sunday. This will be found in the
Collection. But to give a more public declaration of their zeal, Collection
Number 46.
an Act was brought into Parliament about it, and was agreed to by all the
Lords; except the Earl of Darby, the Bishops of Duresme, Coventry and
Litchfield, Carlisle, Worcester, Westminster, and Chichester, and the Lords
Morley, Stourton, Windsor, and Wharton. By it, not only all the Books formerly
mentioned were to be destroyed, but all that had any Image that had belonged to
any Church or Chapel, were required to deface it before the last of June: and
in all the Primers set out by the late King the Prayers to the Saints were to
be dashed out. There was also an Act for a Subsidy to be paid in one year, for
which there was a Release granted of a Branch of the Subsidy formerly given.
Last of all came the Kings general Pardon, out of which those in the Tower, or
other Prisons, on the account of the State, as also all Anabaptists were
excepted.

Thus were all Matters ended, and on the first of February the Parliament was
prorogued. Only in the House of Commons there was a Debate that deserves to be
remembered. It seems that before this time the Eldest Sons of Peers were not
Members of the House of Commons: and Sir Francis Russel, becoming, by the death
of his elder Brother, Heir apparent to the Lord Russell; it was on the 21st of
Jan. carried upon a Debate, That he should abide in the House as he was before.
So it is entered in the Original Journal of the House of Commons, which was
communicated to me by Mr. Surle, and Mr. Clark, in whose Hands it is now, and
is the first Journal that ever was taken in that House.

But it may be expected that I should next give an account of the Forms of
Ordination now agreed on. Twelve were appointed by the Council to prepare the
Book; among whom, Heath Bishop of Worcester was one, but he would not consent
to the Reformations that were proposed in it: So on the 8th of February he was
called before the Council, and required to agree to that which all the rest had
consented to. But he could not be prevailed with to do it. Heath Bishop of
Worcester put in Prison for not agreeing with the others appointed to draw the
Book for Ordinations.
Wherefore on the fourth of March he was committed to the Fleet, because (as it
is entered in the Council Books) that he obstinately denied to subscribe the
Book for the making of Bishops and Priests. He had hitherto opposed every thing
done toward Reformation in Parliament, though he had given an entire obedience
to it when it was enacted. He was a Man of a gentle temper, and great prudence,
that understood Affairs of State better than Matters of Religion. But now it
was resolved to rid the Church of those Compliers, who submitted out of fear,
or interest, to save their Benefices; but were still ready upon any favorable
conjuncture, to return back to the old superstition.

As for the Forms of Ordination, they found, that the Scripture mentioned only
the Imposition of Hands and Prayer. In the Apostolical Constitutions, In the
fourth Council of Carthage, and in the pretended Works of Denis the Areopagite,
there was no more used. Therefore all those additions, of Anointing, and giving
them Consecrated Vestments, were later Inventions. But most of all the conceit,
which from the time of the Council of Florence was generally received, that the
Rites by which a Priest was ordained, were the delivering him the Vessels for
consecrating the Eucharist, with a Power to offer Sacrifice to God for the dead
and the living. This was a vain Novelty, only set up to support the belief of
Transubstantiation: and had no ground, in the Scriptures, nor the Primitive
Practice. So they agreed on a Form of ordaining Deacons, Priests, and Bishops,
which is the same we yet use, except in some few words, that have been added
since in the Ordination of a Priest, or Bishop. For there was then no express
mention made in the words of Ordaining them, that it was for the one, or the
other Office: In both it was said, Receive thou the Holy Ghost, in the Name of
the Father, etc. But that having been since made use of to prove both Functions
the same, it was of late years altered, as it is now. Nor were these words,
being the same in giving both Orders, any ground to infer that the Church
esteemed them one Order; the rest of the Office showing the contrary very
plainly. Another difference between the Ordination Book set out at that time,
and that we now use, was, that the Bishop was to lay his one Hand on the
Priests Head, and with his other to give him a Bible, with a Chalice and Bread
in it, saying the words now said at the delivery of the Bible. In the
Consecration of a Bishop there was nothing more than what is yet in use, save
that a Staff was put into his Hand, with this Blessing, Be to the Flock of
Christ a Shepherd. By the Rule of this Ordinal, a Deacon was not to be ordained
before he was 21, a Priest before he was 24, nor a Bishop before he was 30
years of Age.

The Additions brought into the Church of Rome in giving Orders.
In this Ritual all those superadded Rites were cut off, which the later Ages
had brought in, to dress up these Performances with the more pomp: whereof we
have since a more perfect account, than it was possible for them then to have.
For in our Age Morinus, a learned Priest of the Oratorian Order, has published
the most ancient Rituals he could find; by which it appears how these Offices
swelled in every Age by some new addition. About the middle of the sixth
Century, they anointed and blessed the Priests Hands in some parts of France:
though the Greek Church never used anointing; nor was it in the Roman Church
two Ages after that: for Pope Nicolaus the first plainly says, it was never
used in the Church of Rome. In the 8th Century, the Priests Garments were given
with a special Benediction, for the Priests offering expiatory Sacrifices: It
was no ancienter that that Phrase was used in Ordinations: and in that same Age
there was a special Benediction of the Priests Hands, used before they were
anointed: and then his Head was anointed. This was taken partly from the
Levitical Law, and partly because the People believed that their Kings derived
the Sacredness of their Persons, from their being anointed: So the Priests
having a mind to have their Persons secured and exempted from all Secular
Power, were willing enough to use this Rite in their Ordinations: and in the
10th Century, when the belief of Transubstantiation was received, the
delivering of the Vessels for the Eucharist, with the Power of offering
Sacrifices, was brought in, besides a great many other Rites. So that the
Church did never tie it self to one certain Form of Ordinations; nor did it
always make them with the same Prayers; for what was accounted anciently the
Form of Ordination, was in the later Ages but a preparatory Prayer to it.

Interrogations and Sponsions in the new Book.
The most considerable addition that was made in the Book of Ordinations, was
the putting Questions to the Persons to be ordained: who by answering these,
make solemn Declarations or Sponsions and Vows to God. The first Question when
one is presented to Orders, is, Do you trust that you are inwardly moved by the
Holy Ghost, to take upon you this Office and Ministration, to serve God, for
the promoting his Glory, and for the edifying of his People? To which he is to
answer, He trusts he is. It has been often lamented, that many come to receive
Orders before ever they have seriously read over these Questions, and examined
themselves whether they could with a good Conscience make the Answers there
prescribed: since it is scarce credible that Men of common honesty would lie in
the Presence of God, on so great an occasion: and yet it is too visible, that
many have not any such inward vocation, nor have ever considered seriously what
it is. If it were well apprehended, that heat that many have to get into Orders
would soon abate; who perhaps have nothing in their Eye, but some Place of
Profit, or Benefice, to which way must be made by that preceding Ceremony: and
so enter into Orders, as others are associated into Fraternities and
Corporations, with little previous sense of that Holy Character, they are to
receive, when they thus dedicate their Lives and Labors to the Service of God,
in the Gospel. In the Primitive Church the apprehension of this made even good
and holy Men afraid to enter under such Bonds: and therefore they were often to
be dragged almost by force, or catched at unawares, and be so initiated: as
appears in the Lives of these two Greek Fathers Nazianzen and Chrysostom. If
Men make their first step to the Holy Altar, by such a lie, as is their
pretending to a motion of the Holy Ghost, concerning which they know little,
but that they have nothing at all of it; they have no reason to expect that
Blessing which otherwise attends on such Dedications. And it had been happy for
the Church, if all those that are authorized to confer Orders, had stood on
this more critically; and not been contented with a bare putting these
Questions to those who come to be ordained; but had used a due strictness
before hand, suitable to that grave admonition of St. Paul's to Timothy, Lay
Hands suddenly on no Man, and be not partaker of other Men's sins.

In the Sponsions made by the Priests, they bind themselves to teach the People
committed to their charge, to banish away all erroneous Doctrines, and to use
both public and private Monitions, and Exhortations, as well to the Sick, as
the Whole, within their Cures, as need shall require, and as occasion shall be
given. Such as remember that they have plighted their Faith for this to God,
will feel the Pastoral Care to be a Load indeed, and so be far enough from
relinquishing it, or hiring it out perhaps to a loose or ignorant Mercenary.
These are the blemishes and scandals that lie on our Church, brought on it
partly by the corruption of some Simoniacal Patrons, but chiefly by the
negligence of some, and the faultiness of other Clergymen: Which could never
have lost so much ground in the Nation, upon such trifling accounts, as are the
Contests since raised about Ceremonies; if it were not that the People, by such
palpable faults in the Persons and behavior of some Churchmen, have been
possessed with prejudices, first against them, and then upon their account
against the whole Church: so that these corrupt Churchmen are not only to
answer to God for all those Souls within their charge, that have perished
through their neglect, but in a great degree for all the mischief of the Schism
among us; to the nourishing whereof they have given so great and palpable
occasion. The importance of those things made me judge they deserved this
digression, from which I now turn to other Affairs.

The Business of Bulloigne lay heavy on the Council. The French had stopped all
communication between Calais and it; so that it was not easy to supply it from
thence. The Council, to rid the Nation of the Foreigners, sent them all to
Calais with 3000 English, and resolved to force a way through, if it came to
extremities: but at this time both the French and English were well disposed to
a Peace. The King of France knew the Emperor intended to go into Germany next
Summer; so he longed to be at liberty to wait on his Motions. It is resolved to
deliver Bulloigne to the French.
The English Council, that opposed the delivery of Bulloigne, chiefly to throw
off the Duke of Somerset, that being done, were all convinced that it was not
worth the cost and danger of a War: only they stood on the indecency of
yielding it; especially, they having raised such clamours against the
Protector, when he went about the delivering it up. So they made great shows of
preparations to defend it: but at the same time were not unwilling to listen to
Propositions of Peace. One Guidotti, a Florentine that lived in England, was
employed by the Constable of France, Mountmorancy, to set on a Treaty; yet he
was to do it without owning he had any orders from that King. He went often to
and again between Paris and London, and at last it was resolved on both sides
that there should be a Treaty. Pope Paul the third dies.
But at this time there was a great change of Affairs in Italy. Pope Paul the
third having held that See fifteen years, died the 10th of November, in the 82d
Year of his Age: much broken in mind at the calamity of his Family, the killing
of his Son, the loss of Placentia, and the ingratitude of his Grandchild. Upon
his death all the Cardinals, being gathered from Bollogna, Trent, and other
neighboring Places, entered the Conclave: where one that is to have such a
share in the following part of this Work, was so much concerned, that it will
be no impertinent digression to give an account of it. There were great
animosities between the Imperialists and the French: Cardinal Farnese had also
many Votes that followed him: so that these three Factions, were either of them
strong enough to exclude any that was unacceptable to them. Cardinal Pool was
elected Pope.
Cardinal Pool was set up by Farnese, as a moderate Imperialist, who had
carried it so well at Trent, that they saw he would not blindly follow the
Emperor. He had lived many years at Viterbo, where he was made Legate, after he
had given over his Practices against England. There he gave himself wholly to
the Study of Divinity, not without some imputations of favoring Heresy. For
one Antonio Flaminio, that was also suspect of Lutheranisme, lived with him.
Tremellius that learned Jew, who had been Baptized in his House, was also known
to incline that way: and many, who left their Monasteries, and went to Germany,
used to stay some time with him on their way, and were well received by him:
nor would he proceed against any suspected of Heresy. There was causes enough
to raise suspicion in a less jealous People than Italians. Yet the vast zeal
that he had shown for the exaltation of the Papacy, made all those things be
over-looked: He was sent one of the Popes Legates to Trent, where he asserted
the German Doctrine of Justification by Faith: But upon the Emperors setting
out the Interim he wrote freely against it. He was indeed a Man of an easy and
generous temper, but much in the Power of those whom he loved and trusted.
Farnese therefore looking on him as one that would be governed by him, and that
was acceptable to the Imperialists, and not much hated by the French, the
Cardinal of Guise being his Friend, resolved to promote him: and by the
scrutiny they made, it was found that they were within two of the number that
was requisite. But he seemed so little concerned at it himself, that he desired
them not to make too much have in a thing of that nature: for that dignity was
rather to be undertaken with fear, than to be ambitiously desired. The
Cardinals, who had heard of such things among the Ancient Romans, but had seen
few such modern Instances, and who valued Men by nothing more than their
ambitious aspiring imputed this either to dullness, or hypocrisy: He himself
seemed nothing affected with it, and did not change his behavior, and carried
it with an equality of mind, that became one who had divided his time between
Philosophy and Divinity. Caraffa, that hated him, did all he could to alienate
the Conclave from him: he objected to him, not only Heresy, but also the
suspicion of incontinence, since he bred up a Nun who was believed to be his
Daughter. Of these things he coldly purged himself; he showed that he had
suffered so much on the account of Religion in his own Country, that he was
beyond the suspicion of Heresy: and he proved that the Girl whom he maintained
among the Nuns, was an English-man's Daughter, to whom he had assigned an
allowance. Caraffa prevailed little, and the next night the number was
complete: so that the Cardinals came to adore him, and make him Pope; but he
receiving that, with his usual coldness said, it was night, and God loved light
better than darkness, therefore he desired to delay it till day came. The
Italians who, what ever Judges they may be about the qualifications of such a
Pope as is necessary for their Affairs, understood not this temper of mind,
which in better times would have recommended one with the highest advantages,
shrunk all from him: and after some intrigues usual on such occasions, chose
the Cardinal de Monte, afterward Pope Julius the third, who gave a strange
Omen of what advancements he intended to make, when he gave his own Hat,
according to the custom of the Popes who bestow their Hats before they go out
of the Conclave, on a mean Servant of his, who had the charge of a Monkey that
he kept: and being asked what he observed in him to make him a Cardinal, he
answered, as much as the Cardinals had seen in him to make him Pope. But it was
commonly said, that the secret of this Promotion was an unnatural affection to
him. Upon this occasion I shall refer the Reader to a Letter which I have put
in the Collection, Collection Number 47.
written by Cardinal Woolsey upon the death of Pope Adrian the sixth, to get
himself chosen Pope; it sets out so naturally the Intrigues of that Court on
such occasions, that though it belongs to the former Volume, yet having fallen
upon it since I published it, I thought it would be no unacceptable thing to
insert in this Volume, though it does not belong to it. It will demonstrate how
likely it is, that a Bishop chosen by such Arts, should be the infallible Judge
of Controversies, and the Head of the Church.

And now to return to England; A Treaty between the English and French.
it was resolved to send Ambassadors to France: who were, the Lord Russel,
Paget now made a Lord, Secretary Petre, and Sir John Mason. Their Instructions
will be found in the Collection. The Substance of them was, they were not to
stick about the Place of Treaty, Collection Number 48. Instructions given to
the English Ambassadors.
but to have it at Calais, or Bulloigne, if it might be: they were to agree to
the delivery up of Bulloigne, but to demand that the Scotch Queen should be
sent back, for perfecting the Marriage formerly agreed on: That the
Fortifications of Newhaven, and Blackness, should be ruinated: That the
perpetual Pension agreed to King Henry should still be paid, together with all
Arrears that were due before the Wars: they were only to insist on the last, if
they saw the former could not be obtained: They were to agree the time and
manner of the delivery of Bulloigne to be as honorable as might be. For
Scotland, they being also in War with the Emperor, the King of England could
not make Peace with them, unless the Emperor, his Ally, who had made War on
them upon his account, were also satisfied: All Places there, were to be
offered up, except Roxburgh, and Aymouth. If the French spoke any thing of the
Kings marrying their Kings Daughter Elizabeth, they were to put it off; since
the King was yet so young. They were also at first to agree to no more but a
Cessation. So they went over on the 21st of January; the French Commissioners
appointed to treat with them were Rochpot, Chastilion, Mortier, and de Sany,
who desired the Meeting might be near Bulloigne, though the English endeavored
to have brought it to Guisnes. Upon the English laying out their Demands, the
French answered them roundly, that for delivering up the Queen of Scots, they
would not treat about it; nor about a perpetual Pension; since, as the King was
resolved to marry the Scotch Queen to the Dolphin, so he would give no
perpetual Pension, which was in effect to become a tributary Prince: but for a
Sum of Money they were ready to treat about it. As to Scotland, they demanded,
that all the Places that had been taken should be restored, as well as
Roxburgh, and Aymouth, as Lauder, and Dunglasse. The latter two were soon
yielded to, but the Commissioners were limited as to the former. There was also
some discourse of razing the Fortifications of Alderney, and Sark, two small
Islands in the Channel, that belonged to England: the latter was in the Hands
of the French, who were willing to yield it up, so the Fortifications both in
it and Alderny were razed. Upon this there were second Instructions sent over
from the Council, (which are in the Collection) that they should so far insist
on the keeping of Roxburgh, Collection Number 49.
and Aymouth, as to break up their Conference upon it; but if that did not work
on the French, they should yield it rather than give over the Treaty. They were
also instructed to require Hostages from the French till the Money were all
paid, and to offer Hostages on the part of England till Bulloigne was
delivered; and to struggle in the matter of the Isles all they could, but not
to break about it. Between the giving the first and second Instructions, the
Lord St. John was created Earl of Wilt-shire, as appears by his Subscriptions.
The Commissioners finished their Treaty about the end of February, Articles of
the Treaty.
on these Articles, On condition that all Claims of either side should be
reserved as they were at the beginning of the War. This was a temper between
the English demand, of all the Arrears of King Henry's Pension; and the French
denial of it: for thus the King reserved all the right he had before the War.
Bulloigne was to be delivered within six Months, with all the Places about it,
and the Ordnance, except what the English had (...) and was to have 1000 l. a
year of the Rents of the Bishopric; and for his further Supply, was dispensed
with to hold a Prebendary of Canterbury and Westminster. It was thought
needless to have two Bishoprics so near one another; and some, gaping after
the Lands of both, procured this Union. But I do not see any reason to think,
that at any time in this Reign, the suppression of the Deanries and Prebends in
Cathedrals was designed. For neither in the suppression of the Bishoprics of
Westminster, Gloucester, or Duresme, was there any attempt made to put down the
Deanries or Prebendaries in these Places: so that I look on this as a
groundless conceit, among many others that pass concerning this Reign. For
Thirleby of Westminster, there was no cause given to throw him out; for he
obeyed all the Laws and Injunctions when they came out, though he generally
opposed them when they were making. So to make way for him, William Reps, the
Bishop of Norwich, was prevailed with to resign, and he was promoted to that
See, vacant (as his Patent has it) by the free resignation of William the
former Bishop. And the same day, being the first of April, Ridley was made
Bishop of London and Westminster. Both were, according to the common Form, to
be Bishops durante vita naturali during Life.

Proceedings against Gardener.
The Sea of Winchester had been two years as good as vacant, by the long
imprisonment of Gardener, who had been now above two years in the Tower. When
the Book of Common Prayer was set out, the Lord St. John, and Secretary Petre,
were sent with it to him, to know of him whether he would conform himself to
it, or not: and they gave him great hopes, that if he would submit, the
Protector would sue to the King for mercy to him. He answered, That he did not
know himself guilty of any thing that needed mercy: so he desired to be tried,
for what had been objected to him, according to Law. For the Book, he did not
think that while he was a Prisoner he was bound to give his Opinion about such
things, it might be thought he did it, against his Conscience, to obtain his
liberty; but if he were out of Prison, he should either obey it, or be liable
to punishment according to Law. Upon the Duke of Somersets Fall, the Lord
Treasurer, the Earl of Warwick, Sir William Herbert, and Secretary Petre, were
sent to him: ( Fox says, this was on the 9th of July; but there must be an
error in that, for Gardener in his Answer says, That upon the Duke of Somersets
coming to the Tower, he looked to have been let out within two days, and had
made his farewell Feast, but when these were with him a Month or thereabout had
passed: so it must have been in November the former year.) They brought him a
Paper, to which they desired he would set his Hand. It contained first a
Preface, which was an acknowledgment of former faults, for which he had been
justly punished: There were also diverse Articles contained in it, Some Articles
are sent to him.
which were, touching the Kings Supremacy; his Power of appointing or
dispencing with Holy Days and Fasts; that the Book of Common Prayer set out by
the King and Parliament was a most Christian and Godly Book, to be allowed of
by all Bishops and Pastors in England, and that he should both in Sermons and
Discourses commend it to be observed; that the Kings Power was complete now
when under Age, and that all owed Obedience to him, now, as much as if he were
thirty or forty years old; that the six Articles were justly abrogated; and
that the King had full Authority to correct and reform what was amiss in the
Church both in England and Ireland. He only excepted to the Preface; and
offered to Sign all the Articles, but would have had the Preface left out. They
bid him rather write on the Margent his Exceptions to it; so he writ, that he
could not with a good Conscience agree to the Preface, and with that Exception
he set his Hand to the whole Paper. The Lords used him with great kindness,
Which he Signed with some Exceptions.
and gave him hope that his troubles should be quickly ended. Herbert, and
Petre, came to him some time after that, but how soon is not so clear, and
pressed him to make the acknowledgment without exception; he refused it, and
said, he would never defame himself, for when he had done it, he was not sure
but it might be made use of against him as a Confession. Two or three days
after that, Ridley was sent to him, together with the other two, and they
brought him new Articles. In this Paper the acknowledgment was more general
than in the former: It was said here in the Preface, that he had been suspected
of not approving the Kings Proceedings, and being appointed to preach, had not
done it as he ought to have done, and so deserved the Kings displeasure, for
which he was sorry: The Articles related to the Popes Supremacy, New Articles
sent to him.
the suppression of Abbeys and Chantries, Pilgrimages, Masses, Images, the
adoring the Sacrament, the Communion in both kinds, the abolishing the old
Books, and bringing in the new Book of Service, and that for ordaining of
Priests and Bishops, the compleatness of the Scripture, and the use of it in
the Vulgar Tongue, the lawfulness of Clergy-mens Marriage, and to Erasmus's
Paraphrase that it had been on good considerations ordered to be set up in
Churches. He read all these, and said, he desired first to be discharged of his
imprisonment, and then he would freely answer them all, so as to stand by it,
and suffer if he did amiss: but he would trouble himself with no more Articles,
while he remained in Prison; since he desired not to be delivered out of his
troubles in the way of Mercy, but of Justice. After that, he was brought before
the Council, and the Lords told him they sat by a special Commission to judge
him, and so required him to subscribe the Articles that had been sent to him.
He prayed them earnestly to put him to a Trial for the grounds of his
Imprisonment, and when that was over he would clearly answer them in all other
things: but he did not think he could subscribe all the Articles after one
sort; some of them being about Laws already made, which he could not qualify,
others of them being matters of Learning, in which he might use more freedom:
In conclusion, he desired leave to take them with him, and he would consider
how to answer them. But they required him to subscribe them all, without any
qualification; But he refusing to Sign them,
which he refused to do. Upon this the Fruits of his Bishopric were
sequestered; and he was required to conform himself to their Orders within three
Months, upon pain of deprivation; and the liberty he had, of walking in some
open Galleries, Was hardly used.
when the Duke of Norfolk was not in them, was taken from him: and he was again
shut up in his Chamber.

All this was much censured, as being contrary to the liberties of Englishmen,
and the Forms of all legal Proceedings. It was thought very hard to put a Man
in Prison upon a complaint against him; and without any further enquiry into
it, after two years durance to put Articles to him. And they which spoke
freely, said it savoured too much of the Inquisition. But the Canon Law not
being rectified, and the King being in the Popes room, there were some things
gathered from the Canon Law, and the way of proceeding ex officio, which rather
excused than justified this hard measure he met with. The sequel of this
business shall be related in its proper place.

Latimers advice to the King concerning his Marriage.
This Lent old Latimer preached before the King. The discourse of the Kings
marrying a Daughter of France had alarmed all the Reformers, who rather
inclined to a Daughter of Ferdinand King of the Romans. (To a Marriage with her
it is no wonder they all wished well: for both Ferdinand and his Son Maximilian
were looked upon as Princes that in their Hearts loved the Reformation, and the
Son was not only the best Prince, but accounted one of the best Men of the
Age.) But Latimer in his Sermon advised the King to marry in the Lord; and to
take care that Marriages might not be made only as bargains, which was a thing
too frequently done, and occasioned so much Whoredom and Divorcing in the
Nation. He run out in a sad lamentation of the vices of the time, the vanity of
Women, the luxury and irregularity of Men, he complained, that many were
Gospellers for love of the Abbey and Chantry Lands: he pressed, that the
discipline of the Church, and the excommunicating of scandalous Persons, might
be again set up: he advised the King to beware of seeking his pleasure too
much, and to keep none about him who would serve him in it: he said he was so
old, that he believed he would never appear there more, and therefore he
discharged his Conscience freely: he complained the Kings Debts were not paid,
and yet his Officers lived high, made great Purchases, and built Palaces: he
prayed them all to be good to the King, and not to defraud the poor Tradesmen
that wrought for his Stores, who were ill paid. This I set down not so much to
give an account, of that Sermon, as of the state of the Court and Nation, which
he so freely discoursed of.

Hooper is made Bishop of Gloucester.
Wakeman, that had been Abbot of Tewksbury, and was after made Bishop of
Gloucester, died in December last year: and on the third of July this year,
Hooper was by Letters Patents appointed to be his Successor. Upon which there
followed a Contest that has since had such fatal consequences, that of it we
may say with St. James, How great a matter has a little fire kindled? It has
been already shown, that the Vestments used in Divine Service, were appointed
to be retained in this Church: but Hooper refused to be consecrated in the
Episcopal Vestments. The grounds he went on were, But refuses to wear the
Episcopal Vestments.
That they were humane Inventions, brought in by Tradition or Custom, not
suitable to the simplicity of the Christian Religion: that all such Ceremonies
were condemned by St. Paul as beggarly Elements: that these Vestments had been
invented chiefly for celebrating the Mass, with much pomp, and had been
consecrated for that effect: therefore he desired to be excused from the use of
them. Cranmer, and Ridley, on the other hand, alleged, that Traditions in
matters of Faith were justly rejected, but in matters of Rites and Ceremonies
Custom was often a good Argument for the continuance of that which had been long
used. Upon this a great Dispute rises.
Those Places of St. Paul did only relate to the observance of the Jewish
Ceremonies, which some in the Apostles times pleaded were still to be retained,
upon the Authority of their first Institution by Moses: so this implying, that
the Messiah was not yet come, in whom all these had their accomplishment, the
Apostles did condemn the use of them on any such account; though when the bare
observing them, without the opinion of any such necessity in them, was likely
to gain the Jews, they both used Circumcision, and purified themselves in the
Temple: If then they who had such absolute Authority in those matters, did
condescend so far to the weakness of the Jews; it was much more becoming
Subjects to give obedience to Laws in things indifferent. And the abuse that
had been formerly, was no better reason to take away the use of these
Vestments, than it was to throw down Churches, and take away the Bells, because
the one had been consecrated, and the other baptized, with many superstitious
Ceremonies. Therefore they required Hooper to conform himself to the Law.
Cranmer, who, to his other excellent qualities, had joined a singular modesty
and distrust of himself, writ about this difference to Bucer, reducing it to
these two plain Questions. Whether it was lawful and free from any sin against
God, for the Ministers of the Church of England to use those Garments in which
they did then officiate; since they were required to do it by the Magistrates
command? And whether he that affirmed that it was unlawful, or on that account
refused, to use those Vestments, did not sin against God; calling that unclean,
which God had sanctified, and the Magistrate required; since he thereby
disturbed the public order of the Kingdom? To this Bucer writ a large Answer
on the 8th of December this Year. Bucers Opinion concerning them.
He thought that those who used these Garments ought to declare they did not
retain them as parts of Moses Law, but as things commanded by the Law of the
Land: he thought every Creature of God was good, and no former abuse could make
it so ill, that it might not be retained; and since these Garments had been
used by the Ancient Fathers before Popery, and might still be of good use to
the weak when well understood, and help to maintain the Ministerial Dignity,
and to show that the Church did not of any lightness change old Customs; he
thought the retaining them was expedient: that so the People might, by seeing
these Vestments, consider of the candor and purity that became them: and in
this sense he thought to the Pure all things were pure; and so the Apostles
complied in many things with the Jews. Upon the whole matter, he thought they
sinned who refused to obey the Laws in that particular. But he added, That
since these Garments were abused by some to superstition, and by others to be
matter of contention, he wished they were taken away, and a more complete
Reformation established: he also prayed that a stop might be put to the
spoiling of Churches, and that Ecclesiastical Discipline against offenders
might be set up: for, said he, unless these manifest and horrid Sacriledges be
put down, and the complete Kingdom of Christ be received, so that we all submit
to his Yoke; how intolerably shall the wrath of God break out on this Kingdom?
The Scriptures sets many such Examples before our Eyes, and Germany offers a
most dreadful prospect of what England might look for.

He writ also to Hooper upon the same Argument. He wished the Garments were
removed by Law; but argued fully for the use of them till then: he lamented the
great corruptions that were among the Clergy, and wished that all good Men
would unite their strength against these; and then lesser abuses would be more
easily redressed. He also answered Hoopers Objections on the Principles
formerly laid down. Peter Martyr was also writ to; and, as he writ to Bucer, he
was fully of his mind, and approved of all he had writ about it. And P. Martyrs.
And he added these words, which I shall set down in his own terms, copied from
the Original Letter: Quae de Hopero ad me scribis, non potuerunt non videri
mira; Certe illis auditis obstupui. Sed been habet, quid Episcopi Literas meas
viderunt; unde invidia ego quidem sum liberatus. Ecce illius causa sic jacet,
ut melioribus and pijs nequaquam probetur. Dolet, dolet, idque mihi gravissime,
talia inter Evangelij professores contingere. Ille toto hoc tempore, cum illi
sit interdicta concio, non videtur posse quiescere: suae fidei confessionem
edidit, qua rursus multorum animos exacerbavit: deinde queritur de
Consiliarijs, and fortasse, quod mihi non refert, de nobis: Deus foelicem
Catastrophen non laetis actibus imponat. In English: What you wrote to me about
Hooper could not but seem wonderful to me: when I heard it I was struck with
it. It was well that the Bishops saw my Letters, by which I am freed from their
displeasure. His business is now at that pass, that the best and most pious
disprove of it. I am grieved, and sadly grieved, that such things should fall
out among the Professors of the Gospel. All this while in which he is suspended
from preaching, he cannot be at rest: he has set out a profession of his Faith,
by which he has provoked many: he complains of the Privy-Councellors, and
perhaps of us too, of which he says nothing to me. God give an happy issue to
these uncomfortable beginnings. This I set down more fully, that it may appear
how far either of these Divines were from cherishing such stiffness in Hooper.
He had been Chaplain to the Duke of Somerset, as appeared by his defense of
himself in Bonners Process; yet he obtained so much favor of the Earl of
Warwick, that he writ earnestly in his behalf to the Archbishop to dispense
with the use of the Garments, and the Oath of Canonical Obedience at his
Consecration. Cranmer wrote back, That he could not do it without incurring a
Praemunire: So the King was moved to write to him, warranting him to do it,
without any danger which the Law could bring on him for such an omission. But
though this was was done on the 4th of August, yet he was not consecrated till
March next year; and in the mean while it appears by Peter Martyrs Letters,
that he was suspended from Preaching.

A Congregation of Germans in London.
This Summer John a Lasco, with a Congregation of Germans that fled from their
Country upon the persecution raised there, for not receiving the Interim, was
allowed to hold his Assembly at St. Austins in London. The Congregation was
erected into a Corporation. John a Lasco was to be Superintendent, and there
were four other Ministers associated with him. For the curiosity of the thing,
I have put the Patents in the Collection. Collection Number 51.
There were also 380 of the Congregation made Denizens of England, as appears
by the Records of their Patents. But a Lasco did not carry himself with that
decency that became a Stranger who was so kindly received: for he wrote against
the Orders of this Church, both in the matter of the Habits, and about the
Posture in the Sacrament, being for sitting rather than kneeling.

Polidore Virgil leaves England.
This Year Polidore Virgil, who had been now almost forty years in England,
growing old, desired leave to go nearer the Sun. It was granted him on the
second of June: and in consideration of the public Service he was thought to
have done the Nation by his History, Rot. Pat. 4 Ed. 6. 2. Part.
he was permitted to hold his Archdeaconry of Wells, and his Prebend of
Nonnington, notwithstanding his absence out of the Kingdom. On the 26th of June
Poinet was declared Bishop of Rochester, and Coverdale was made Coadjutor to
Veysy Bishop of Exeter.

About the end of this Year, or the beginning of the next, A Review of the
Common Prayer Book.
there was a review made of the Common Prayer Book. Several things had been
continued in it, either to draw in some of the Bishops, who by such yielding
might be prevailed on to concur in it; or in compliance with the People, who
were fond of their old Superstitions. So now a review of it was set about.
Martin Bucer was consulted in it; and Aleffe, the Scotch Divine mentioned in
the former part, translated it into Latin for his use. Upon which Bucer writ
his Opinion, which he finished, Bucers Advice concerning it.
the fifth of January in the Year following. The Substance of it was, That he
found all things in the Common-Service and daily Prayers were clearly according
to the Scriptures. He advised, that in Cathedrals the Quire might not be too
far separated from the Congregation, since in some Places the People could not
hear them read Prayers. He wished there were a strict discipline to exclude
scandalous Livers from the Sacrament. He wished the old Habits might be laid
aside, since some used them superstitiously, and others contended much about
them. He did not like the half Office of Communion or Second-Service to be said
at the Altar, when there was no Sacrament. He was offended with the requiring
the People to receive at least once a year, and would have them pressed to it
much more frequently. He disliked that the Priests generally read Prayers with
no devotion, and in such a Voice that the People understood not what they said.
He would have the Sacrament delivered into the Hands, and not put into the
Mouths of the People. He censured praying for the dead, of which no mention is
made in the Scripture, nor by Justin Martyr an Age after. He thought that the
Prayer, that the Elements might be to us the Body and Blood of Christ, favored
Transubstantiation too much: a small variation might bring it nearer to a
Scripture Form. He complained that Baptism was generally in Houses, which being
the receiving Infants into the Church, ought to be done more publicly. The
Hallowing of the Water, the Chrisme, and the White Garment he censured, as
being too Scenical: He excepted to the exorcising the Devil, and would have it
turned to a Prayer to God: that authoritative way of saying I adjure not being
so decent. He thought the Godfathers answering in the Child's Name, not so well
as to answer in their own, that they should take care in these things, all they
could. He would not have Confirmation given upon a bare recital of the
Catechism; but would have it delayed till the Persons did really desire to
renew the Baptismal Vow. He would have Catechizing every Holy Day, and not
every sixth Sunday: and that People should be still Catechized, after they were
Confirmed, to preserve them from ignorance. He would have all Marriages to be
made in the full Congregation. He would have the giving Unction to the Sick,
and praying for the Dead, to be quite laid aside; as also the offering the
Chrisomes at the Churching of Women. He advised, that the Communion should be
celebrated four times a year. He sadly lamented the want of faithful Teachers;
and entreated the Archbishop to see to the mending of this, and to think on
some stricter ways of examining those who were to be ordained, than barely the
putting of some Questions to them. All this I have gathered out the more
largely, that it may appear how carefully things were then considered: and that
almost in every particular, the most material things which Bucer excepted to,
were corrected afterward.

But at the same time, the King having taken such care of him, that hearing he
had suffered in his health last Winter by the want of a Stove, such as is used
in Germany, he had sent him 20 l. to have one made for him; he was told that
the King would expect a New-years-gift from him, of a Book made for his own
use. So upon that occasion he writ a Book entitled, Bucer writ a Book for the
Kings use.
Concerning the Kingdom of Christ. He sets out in it the miseries of Germany,
which he says were brought on them by their sins; for they would bear no
discipline; nor were the Ministers so earnest in it, as was fitting: though in
Hungary it was otherwise. He writes largely of Ecclesiastical Discipline; which
was intended chiefly for separating ill Men from the Sacrament; and to make
good Men avoid their company, whereby they might be ashamed. He presses much
the Sanctification of the Lord's Day, and of the other Holy Days, and that there
might be many days of Fasting: but he thought Lent had been so abused, that
other times for it might be more expedient. He complains much of Pluralities,
and Non-residence, as a remainder of Popery; so hurtful to the Church, that in
many Places there were but one or two, or few more Sermons in a whole year: But
he thought that much was not to be expected from the greatest part of the
Clergy, unless the King would set himself vigorously to Reform these things.
Lastly, he would have a complete exposition of the Doctrine of the Church
digested, and set out: and he proposed diverse Laws to the Kings consideration;
as,

1. For Catechizing Children.

2. For Sanctifying Holy Days.

3. For Preserving Churches for Gods Service, not to be made Places for
walking, or for Commerce.

4. To have the Pastoral Function entirely restored to what it ought to be,
that Bishops throwing off all Secular cares, should give themselves to their
Spiritual Employments: he advises that Coadjutors might be given to some, and a
Council of Presbyters be appointed for them all. It was plain, that many of
them complied with the Laws against their minds, these he would have deprived.
He advises Rural Bishops to be set over twenty or thirty Parishes, who should
gather their Clergy often together, and inspect them closely: And that a
Provincial Synod should meet twice a year, where a Secular Man in the Kings
Name should be appointed to observe their Proceedings.

5. For restoring Church Lands, that all who served the Church might be well
provided: If any lived in luxury, upon their high Revenues, it was reasonable
to make them use them better; but not to blame or rob the Church for their
fault.

6. For the maintenance of the Poor, for whom anciently a fourth part of the
Churches Goods was assigned.

The 7th was about Marriage. That the prohibited degrees might be well settled;
Marriage without consent of Parents annulled; and that a second Marriage might
be lawful after a Divorce, which he thought might be made for Adultery and some
other reasons.

8. For the Education of Youth.

9. For restraining the excess of some Peoples living.

10. For reforming and explaining the Laws of the Land which his Father had
begun.

11. To place good Magistrates; that no Office should be sold, and that
Inferior Magistrates should often give an account to the Superior, of the
Administration of their Offices.

12. To consider well who were made Judges.

13. To give order that none should be put in Prison upon slight offenses.

The 14th was for moderating of some punishments; chiefly, the putting Thieves
to death, which was too severe, whereas Adultery was too slightly passed over:
though Adultery be a greater wrong to the suffering Party, than any Theft, and
so was punished with death by Moses Law.

This Book was sent to the young King. And he having received it, The King
thinks of Reforming many abuses.
set himself to write a general Discourse about a Reformation of the Nation,
which is the second among the Discourses written by him, that follow the
Journal of his Reign. Coll. K. Edw. Remains, Number 2.
In it he takes notice of the Corrections of the Book of the Liturgy which were
then under consideration; as also that it was neccssary there should be a Rule
of Church Discipline, for the censures of ill Livers; but he thought that Power
was not to be put into the Hands of all the Bishops at that time. From thence
he goes on to discourse of the ill state of the Nation, and of the remedies
that seemed proper for it. The first he proposes was the Education of Youth,
next the correction of some Laws, and there either broke it off, or the rest of
it is lost. In which, as there is a great discovery of a mavelous probity of
mind, so there are strange hints, to come from one not yet fourteen years of
Age. And yet it is all written with his own Hand, and in such a manner, that
any who shall look on the Original, will clearly see it was his own Work: The
Style is simple, and suitable to a Child: few Men can make such Composures, but
somewhat above a Child will appear in their Style, which makes me conclude it
was all a device of his own.

This Year the King began to write his Journal himself. He writes a Journal of
all Proceedings during his Reign.
The first three years of his Reign are set down in a short way of
recapitulating matters. But this Year he set down what was done every day, that
was of any moment, together with the Foreign News that were sent over. And
oftentimes he called to mind Passages, some days after they were done; and
sometime after the middle of a Month he tells what was done in the beginning of
it. Which shows clearly it was his own Work; for if it had been drawn for him
by any that were about him, and given him only to copy out for his memory, it
would have been more exact; so that there remains no doubt with me but that it
was his own originally. And therefore since all who have writ of that time have
drawn their Informations from that Journal; and though they have printed some
of the Letters he wrote, when a Child, which are indeed the meanest things that
ever fell from him; yet, except one little fragment, nothing of it has been yet
published; I have copied it out entirely, and set it before my Collection.
Coll. K. Edw. Remains, Number 1.
I have added to it some other Papers that were also writ by him. The first of
these is in French: It is a Collection of many Passages out of the Old
Testament against Idolatry, and the worshipping of Images, which he dedicated to
his Uncle, being then Protector: the Original under his own hand lies in
Trinity College in Cambridge, from whence I copied the Preface and the
Conclusion, which are printed in the Collection after his Journal.

Ridley visits his Diocese.
There was nothing else done of moment this Year, in relation to the Church,
save the Visitation made of the Diocese of London by Ridley their new Bishop.
But the exact time of it is not set down in the Register. It was according to
King Edwards Journal some time before the 26th of June: for he writes, that on
that day Sir Jo. Yates the high Sheriff of Essex was sent down with Letters to
see the Bishop of Londons Injunctions performed, which touched the plucking
down of Superaltaries, Altars, and such like Ceremonies and Abuses: so that the
Visitation must have been about the beginning of June. The Articles of it are
in Bishop Sparrows Collection. They are concerning the Doctrines and Lives, and
Labors, and Charities, of the Clergy; viz. Whether they spoke in favor of the
Bishop of Rome, or against the use of the Scripture, or against the Book of
Common Prayer? Whether they stirred up Sedition, or sold the Communion or
Trentals, or used private Masses any where? Whether any Anabaptists or others
used private Conventicles, with different Opinions and Forms from these
established? Whether there were any that said the wickedness of the Minister
took away the effect of the Sacraments, or denied Repentance to such as sinned
after Baptism? Other Questions were about Baptisms, and Marriages. Whether the
Curates did visit the Sick, and bury the Dead, and expound the Catechism, at
least some part of it, once in six weeks? Whether any observed abrogated
Holy Days, or the Rites that were now put down?

Collection Number 52.
To these he added some Injunctions which are in the Collection. Most of them
relate to the old Superstitions, which some of the Priests were still
inclinable to practice, and for which they had been gently, if at all, reproved
by Bonner. Such were, washing their Hands at the Altar, holding up the Bread,
licking the Chalice, blessing their Eyes with the Patten or Sudary, and many
other Relics of the Mass. The Ministers were also required to charge the
People often to give Alms, and to come often to the Communion, and to carry
themselves reverently at Church. But that which was most new, was, that there
having been great Contests about the Form of the Lords Board, whether it should
be made as an Altar, or as a Table; He orders all Altars to be turned to Tables
for the Communion.
Therefore, since the Form of a Table was more like to turn the People from the
Superstition of the Popish Mass, and to the right use of the Lords Supper, he
exhorted the Curates and Churchwardens to have it in the fashion of a Table,
decently covered: and to place it in such part of the Quire or Chancel as
should be most meet, so that the Ministers and Communicants should be separated
from the rest of the People: and that they should put down all By-Altars.

There are many Passages among Ancient Writers, that show their
Communion-Tables were of Wood; and that they were so made as Tables, that those
who fled into Churches for Sanctuary, did hide themselves under them. The Name
Altar came to be given to these generally, because they accounted the Eucharist
a Sacrifice of Praise, as also a Commemorative Sacrifice of the Oblation which
Christ made of himself on the Cross. From hence it was, that the
Communion Table was called also an Altar. But now it came to be considered,
whether, as these terms had been on good reason brought in to the Church, when
there was no thought of the corruptions that followed; so if it was not fit,
since they did still support the belief of an expiatory Sacrifice in the Mass,
and the opinion of Transubstantiation, and were always but Figurative Forms of
Speech, to change them: and to do that more effectually, to change the Form and
Place of them, Some have fondly thought, that Ridley gave this Injunction after
the Letter which the Council writ to him, in the end of November following. But
as there was no fit time to begin a Visitation after that time this year, so
the Style of the Injunctions shows they were given before the Letter. The
Injunction only exhorts the Curates to do it, which Ridley could not have done
in such soft words, after the Council had required and commanded him to do it:
So it appears, that the Injunctions were given only by his Episcopal Power. And
that afterward the same matter being brought before the Council, who were
informed, that in many Places there had been Contests about it, some being for
keeping to their old Custom, and others being set on a change, the Council
thought fit to send their Letter concerning it to Ridley in the beginning of
November following. The Letter sets out, that Altars were taken away in diverse
Places, upon good and godly considerations, but still continued in other
Places; by which there rose much contention among the Kings Subjects;
therefore, for avoiding that, they did charge and command him to give
substantial order through all his Diocese for removing all Altars, and setting
up Tables every where for the Communion to be administered in some convenient
part of the Chancel: And that these Orders might be the better received, there
were Reasons sent with the Letters, which he was to cause discreet Preachers to
declare, in such Places as he thought fit, and that himself should set them out
in his own Cathedral, if conveniently he could,

The Reasons were, to remove the People from the superstitious Opinions of the
Popish Mass: and because a Table was a more proper Name than an Altar, for that
on which the Sacrament was laid. And whereas in the Book of Common Prayer these
terms are promiscuously used, it is done without prescribing any thing about
the Form of them, so that the changing the one into the other did not alter any
part of the Liturgy. It was observed, that Altars were erected for the
Sacrifices under the Law, which ceasing they were also to cease: and that
Christ had instituted the Sacrament not at an Altar, but at a Table. And it had
been ordered by the Preface to the Book of Common Prayer, that if any doubt
arose about any part of it, the determining of it should be referred to the
Bishop of the Diocese. Upon these Reasons therefore was this change ordered to
be made all over England, which was universally executed this year.

There began this year a Practice which might seem in itself not only innocent,
but good, Sermons on working days forbidden.
of preaching Sermons and Lectures on the week days, to which there was great
running from neighboring Parishes. This as it begat emulation in the Clergy,
so it was made use of as a Pretense for many to leave their labor, and gad
idly about. Upon complaint therefore made of it, Ridley had a Letter sent to
him from the Council, against all preaching on working-days, on which there
should only be Prayers. How this was submitted to then, is not clear. But it
cannot be denied, that there have been since that time excesses on all hands in
this matter: while some have, with great sincerity and devotion, kept up these
in Market Towns; but others have carried them on with too much faction, and a
design to detract from such as were not so eminent in their way of preaching.
Upon these abuses, while some Rulers have studied to put all such Performances
down, rather than to correct the abuses in them, great contradiction has
followed on it; and the People have been possessed with unjust prejudices
against them, as hinderers of the Word of God; and that opposition has kept up
the zeal for these Lectures. Which nevertheless, since they have been more
freely preached, have of late years produced none of the ill effects that did
follow them formerly when they were endeavored to be suppressed.

And thus I end the Transactions about Religion this Year. The rest of the
Affairs at home were chiefly for the regulating of many abuses, that had grown
up and been nourished by a long continuance of War. All the Foreign Soldiers
were dismissed. And though the Duke of Lunenburg had offered the King 10000 Men
to his assistance, and desired to enter into a Treaty of Marriage for the Lady
Mary: they only thanked him for the offer of his Soldiers, of which they, being
now at peace with all their Neighbors, had no need; and since the Proposition
for marrying the Lady Mary to the Infant of Portugal was yet in dependence,
they could not treat in that kind with any other Prince till that Overture was
some way ended. There were endeavors also for encouraging Trade, and reforming
the Coin. And at the Court things began to put on a new Visage: for there was
no more any faction; the Duke of Somerset, and the Earl of Warwick, being now
joined into a near alliance; the Earls eldest Son, the Lord Lisle, marrying the
Dukes Daughter; so that there was a good prospect of happy times.

The Affairs of Scotland.
In Scotland, the Peace being proclaimed, the Government was now more entirely
in the Hands of the Duke of Castelherault, who gave himself up wholly to the
Counsels of his base Brother, who was Archbishop of St. Andrews. And he was so
abandoned to his pleasures, that there was nothing so bad that he was ashamed
of. He kept another Man's Wife openly for his Concubine. There were also many
excesses in the Government. Which things, as they alienated all Peoples minds
from the Clergy, so they disposed them to receive the new Doctrines, which many
Teachers were bringing from England, and prepared them for the changes that
followed afterward. The Queen Mother went over into France in September,
pretending it was to see her Daughter, and the rest of her Kindred there: where
she laid down the Method for the wresting of the Government of Scotland out of
the Governors Hands, and taking it into her own.

And of Germany.
The Emperor appointed a Diet of the Empire to meet in the end of July, and
required all to appear personally at it, except such as were hindered by
sickness, of which they were to make Faith upon Oath. And at the same time he
proscribed the Town of Magdeburg. But the Magistrates of that Town set out a
large Manifesto for their own vindication, as they had done the former Year.
They said, they were ready to give him all the obedience, that they were bound
to by the Laws of the Empire: they were very apprehensive of the mischiefs of a
Civil War: they were not so blind as to think they were able to resist the
Emperors great Armies, lifted up with so many Victories, if they trusted only
to their own strength: they had hitherto done no act of hostility to any, but
what they were forced to for their own defense. It was visible, the true ground
of the War of Germany was Religion, to extinguish the Light of the Gospel, and
to subdue them again to the Papal Tyranny. For the Artifices that were formerly
used to disguise it did now appear too manifestly; so that it was not any more
denied. But it would be too late to see it, when Germany was quite oppressed.
In Civil Matters, they said, they would yield to the miseries of the time. But
St. Peter had taught them that it was better to obey God than Man: and
therefore they were resolved to put all things to hazard, rather than to make
Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience. There were Tumults raised in
Strasburg, and diverse other Towns, against those who set up the Mass among
them; and generally all Germany was disposed to a Revolt, if they had had but a
Head to lead them.

The Emperor had also set out a very severe Edict in Flanders, when he left it;
against all that favored the new Doctrines, as they were called. But the
execution of this was stopped at the intercession of the Town of Antwerp, when
they perceived the English were resolved to remove from thence, and carry their
Trade to some other Place. When the Diet was opened, the Emperor pressed them
to submit to the Council which the new Pope had removed back to Trent. Maurice
of Sax^ answered, he could not submit to it, unless all that had been done
formerly in it should be reviewed, and the Divines of the Ausburg Confession
were both heard and admitted to a Suffrage, and the Pope should subject himself
to their Decrees, and dispense with the Oath which the Bishops had sworn to
him. On these terms he would submit to it, and not otherwise. This was refused
to be entered into the Registers of the Diet by the Elector of Mentz; but there
was no have, for the Council was not to sit till the next year. The Emperor
complained much, that the Interim was not generally received: to which it was
answered by the Princes, that it was necessary to give the People time to
overcome their former prejudices. All seemed to comply with him. And Maurice
did so insinuate himself into him, that the Siege of Magdeburg being now
formed, and a great many Princes having gathered Forces against it, among whom
the Duke of Brunswick, and the Duke of Mekleburg were the most forward; yet he
got himself declared by the Diet General of the Empire, for the reduction of
that Place, and he had 100000 Crowns for undertaking it, and 60000 Crowns a
Month were appointed for the expense of the War. He saw well, that if Magdeburg
were closely pressed, it would soon be taken, and then all Germany would be
brought to the Emperors devotion: and so the War would end in a slavery. But he
hoped so to manage this small remainder of the War, as to draw great effects
from it. This was a fatal step to the Emperor, thus to trust a Prince who was
of a different Religion, and had a deep resentment of the injury he had done
him, in detaining his Father-in-law the Landgrave of Hesse Prisoner, against
the Faith he had given him. But the Emperor reckoned, that as long as he had
John Duke of Saxe in his Hands, Maurice durst not depart from his Interests;
since it seemed an easy thing for him to repossess the other of his Dominions
and Dignity. Thus was the crafty Emperor deluded, and now put that, upon which
the completing of his great designs depended, into the Hands of one that
proved too hard for him at that in which he was such a Master, Cunning and
Dissimulation.

1551. The Compliance of the Popish Clergy.
In these Consultations did this Year end. In the beginning of the next Year,
there was a great complaint brought against Dr. Oglethorp, afterward Bishop of
Carlisle under Queen Mary, and now President of Magdalen College in Oxford.
But he, to secure himself from that part of the Complaint that related to
Religion, being accused as one that was against the new Book of Service, and
the Kings other Proceedings, Signed a Paper, Co^lection Number 53.
(which will be found in the Collection) in which he declared, That he had
never taught any thing openly against those, but that he thought them good, if
well used: and that he thought the order of Religion now set forth to be better
and much nearer the use of the Apostolical and Primitive Church than that which
was formerly: and that in particular, he did approve of the Communion in both
kinds, the Peoples communicating always with the Priest, the Service in
English, and the Homilies that had been set forth: and that he did reject the
lately received Doctrine of Transubstantiation, as being not agreeable to the
Scriptures, or to Ancient Writers: but he thought there was an inconceivable
Presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, and that therefore it should be
received not without great examination beforehand. So compliant was he now,
though he became of another mind in Queen Mary's time; yet then he was more
moderate, than the greatest part of those who did now comply most servily. In
particular, Dr. Smith had written a Book for the Caelibate of Priests, and had
opposed all the Changes that had been made: He was brought to London upon the
Complaints that were sent up against him from Oxford, but after a whiles
imprisonment, he was set at liberty, giving Surety for his good behavior: and
carried himself so obediently after it, that Cranmer got his Sureties to be
discharged, upon which he writ him a Letter as full of acknowledgment as was
possible: Collection Number 54.
which is in the Collection. He protested he should retain the sense of it as
long as he lived: he wished that he had never written his Book of the Caelibate
of Priests, which had been printed against his Will: he found he was mistaken
in that which was the foundation of it all, that the Priests of England had
taken a Vow against Marriage: he desired to see some of the Collections Cranmer
had made against it. (It seems Cranmer was enquiring after a MS. of Ignatius's
Epistles, for he tells him, They were in Magdalen College Library:) he
acknowledged the Archbishops great gentleness toward all those who had been
complained of for Religion in that University: and protested, that for his own
part, if ever he could serve his basest Servant, he would do it; wishing that
he might perish if he thought otherwise than he said: and wished him long Life
for the propagation and advancement of the Christian Doctrine. Soon after he
writ another Letter to Cranmer, in which he cited some Passages out of Austin
concerning his Retractations; and professes he would not be ashamed to make the
like, and to set forth Christ's true Religion; and called, in St. Paul's words,
God to be a Witness against his Soul if he lied. He had also in the beginning
of this Reign made a Recantation Sermon of some Opinions he had held concerning
the Mass, but what these were, King Edwards Journal (from whence I gather it)
does not inform us. Day Bishop of Chichester did also now so far comply, as to
preach a Sermon at Court against Transubstantiation, though he had refused to
set his Hand to the Book of Common Prayer, before it was enacted by Law. For
the Principle that generally run among the Popish Party, was, that though they
would not consent to the making of such Alterations in Religion, yet being
made, they would give obedience to them, which Gardener plainly professed: and
it appeared in the practice of all the rest. This was certainly a gross sort of
compliance, in those who retained the old Opinions, and yet did now declare
against them; and in the Worship they offered up to God, acted contrary to
them; which was the highest degree of prevarication both with God and Man that
was possible. But Cranmer was always gentle and moderate. He left their private
Consciences to God: but thought, that if they gave an external obedience, the
People would be brought to receive the Changes more easily; whereas the
proceeding severely against them might have raised more opposition. He was also
naturally a Man of Bowels and Compassion, and did not love to drive things to
extremities: he considered that Men who had grown old in some errors could not
easily lay them down, and so were by degrees to be worn out of them. Only in
the Proceedings against Gardener and Bonner, he was carried beyond his ordinary
temper. But Gardener he knew to be so inveterate a Papist, and so deep a
Dissembler, that he was for throwing him out, not so much for the Particulars
objected to him, as upon the ill Character he had of him. Bonner had also
deceived him so formerly, and had been so cruel a Persecutor upon the Statute
of the Six Articles, and was become so brutal and luxurious, that he judged it
necessary to purge the Church of him. And the Sees of London, and Winchester,
were of such consequence, that he was induced, for having these well supplied,
to stretch a little in these Proceedings against those dissembling Bishops.

In the end of February he lost his friend Martin Bucer, Bucers Death.
on whose assistance he had depended much, in what remained yet to be done.
Bucer died of the Stone, and Griping of the Guts, on the 28th of February. He
lay ill almost all that Month, and expressed great desire to die. Bradford, who
will be mentioned in the next Book with much Honor, waited most on him in his
sickness. He lamented much the desolate State of Germany, and expressed his
apprehensions of some such stroke coming upon England, by reason of the great
dissoluteness of the Peoples Manners, of the want of Ecclesiastical Discipline,
and the general neglect of the Pastoral Charge. He was very patient in all his
pain, which grew violent on him; he lay often silent, only after long intervals
cried out sometimes, Chastise me Lord, but throw me not off in mine old Age. He
was by order from Cranmer, and Sir John Cheek, buried with the highest
Solemnities that could be devised, to express the value the University had for
him. The Vice Chancellor, and all the Graduates, and the Major, with all the
Town, accompanied his Funeral to St. Mary's; where, after Prayers, Haddon the
University Orator made such a Speech concerning him, and pronounced it with
that affection, that almost the whole Assembly shed Tears. Next Dr. Parker,
that had been his most intimate Friend, made an English Sermon, in his praise,
and concerning the sorrowing for our departed Friends. And the day following
Dr. Redmayn, then Mr. of Trinity College, made another Sermon concerning
Death: and in it gave a full account of Bucers Life and Death. He particularly
commended the great sweetness of his temper, to all, but remarkably to those
who differed from him. Redmayn and he had differed in many things, both
concerning Justification, and the Influences of the Divine Grace. But he said,
as Bucer had satisfied him in some things, so he believed if he had lived he
had satisfied him in more; and that he being dead, he knew none alive from whom
he could learn so much. This Character given him by so grave and learned a Man,
who was in many Points of a different persuasion from him, was a great
commendation to them both. And Redmayn was indeed an extraordinary Person. All
in the University, that were eminent either in Greek or Latin Poetry, did adorn
his Coffin with Epitaphs: in which they expressed a very extraordinary sense of
their loss: about which one Carr writ a copious and passionate Letter to Sir
John Cheek. But Peter Martyr bore his death with the most sensible sorrow that
could be imagined; having in him lost a Father, and the only intimate Friend he
had in England. His Character.
He was a very learned, judicious, pious, and moderate Person. Perhaps he was
inferior to none of all the Reformers for Learning: but for Zeal, for true
Piety, and a most tender care of preserving Unity among the Foreign Churches,
Melancthon and he, without any injury done the rest, may be ranked apart by
themselves. He was much opposed by the Popish Party at Cambridge; who, though
they complied with the Law, and so kept their Places, yet either in the way of
Argument, as it had been for disputes sake, or in such Points as were not
determined, set themselves much to lessen his esteem. Nor was he furnished
naturally with the quickness that is necessary for a Dispute, from which they
studied to draw advantages: and therefore Peter Martyr writ to him to avoid all
public Disputes with them. For they did not deal heartily on these occasions.
They often kept up their Questions till the hour of the Dispute, that so the
extemporary faculty of him who was to preside might be the more exposed; and
right or wrong they used to make Exclamations, and run away with a Triumph: In
one of his Letters to Bucer, he particularly mentions Dr. Smith for an Instance
of this. It was that Smith he said who writ against the Marriage of Priests,
and yet was believed to live in Adultery with his Man's Wife. This Letter was
occasioned by the Disputes that were in August the former Year, between Bucer
and Sedgwick, Young and Pern, about the Authority of the Scripture, and the
Church. Which Disputes Bucer intending to publish, caused them to be writ out,
and sent the Copy to them to be corrected, offering them, that if any thing was
omitted that they had said, or if they had any thing else to say which was
forgot in the Dispute, they might add it: but they sent back the Papers to him
without vouchsafing to read them. At Ratisbone he had a Conference with
Gardener, who was then King Henry's Ambassador: in which Gardener broke out
into such a violent passion, that as he spared no reproachful words, so the
Company thought he would have fallen on Bucer and beat him: he was in such
disorder, that the little Vein between his Thumb and Forefinger did swell and
palpitate, which Bucer said he had never before that observed in any Person in
his life.

But as Bucer was taken away by death, Gardener is deprived.
so Gardener was soon after put out, which was a kind of death; though he had
afterward a Resurrection fatal to very many. There was a Commission issued
out, to the Archbishop, the Bishops of London, Ely, and Lincoln, Secretary
Petre, Judge Hales, Griffith, and Leyson, two Civilians, and Goodrick, and
Gosnosd, two Masters of Chancery, to proceed against Gardener for his contempt
in the matters formerly objected to him. He put in a Compurgation, by which he
endeavored to show there was malice born to him, and Conspiracies against him,
as appeared by the Business of Sir Hen. Knevet, mentioned in the former Part,
and the leaving him out of the late Kings Will, which he said was procured by
his Enemies. He complained of his long Imprisonment without any Trial, and that
Articles of one sort after another were brought to him: so that it was plain he
was not detained for any Crime, but to try if such usage could force him to do
any thing, that should be imposed on him. He declared, that what Order soever
were set out by the Kings Council, he should never speak against it, but to the
Council themselves: and that though he could not give consent to the Changes
before they were made, he was now well satisfied to obey them; but he would
never make any acknowledgment of any fault. The things chiefly laid against
him, were, that being required, he refused, to preach concerning the Kings
Power when he was under Age; and that he had affronted Preachers sent by the
King into his Diocese; and had been negligent in obeying the Kings Injunctions;
and continued, after all, so obstinate, that he would not confess his fault,
nor ask the King mercy. His Crimes were aggravated by this, that his timely
asserting the Kings Power under Age, might have been a great mean for
preventing the Rebellion and Effusion of Blood; which had afterward happened,
chiefly on that pretense, to which his obstinacy had given no small occasion.
Upon this, many Witnesses were examined; chiefly the Duke of Somerset, the
Earls of Wilt-shire, and Bedford, who deposed against him. But to this he
answered, That he was not required to do it by any Order of Council, but only
in a private Discourse, to which he did not think himself bound to give
obedience. Other Witnesses were also examined on the other Particulars. But he
appealed from the Delegates to the King in Person. Yet his Judges, on the 18th
of April, gave sentence against him; by which, for his disobedience and
contempt, they deprived him of his Bishopric. Upon that he renewed his
Protestation and Appeal: and so his Process ended, and he was sent back to the
Tower, where he lay till Queen Mary discharged him.

The same Censures, with the same Justifications, belong both to this, and
Bonners Business: so I shall repeat nothing that was formerly said. He had
taken a Commission, as well as Bonner, to hold his Bishopric only during the
Kings Pleasure; so they both had the less reason to complain which way soever
the Royal Pleasure was signified to them. Eight days after, on the 26th of
April, Poinet was translated from Rochester to Winchester; and had 2000 Marks a
Year in Lands assigned him out of that wealthy Bishopric for his Subsistence.
Dr. Story was made Bishop of Rochester. Veysey Bishop of Exeter did also
resign, pretending extreme old Age; but he had reserved 485 l. a year in
Pension for himself, during Life, out of the Lands of the Bishopric; and
almost all the rest he had basely alienated, taking care only of himself, and
ruining his Successors. Miles Coverdale was made Bishop of Exeter. So that now
the Bishoprics were generally filled with Men well affected to the
Reformation. Hooper is consecrated upon his Conformity.
The business of Hooper was now also settled. He was to be attired in the
Vestments that were prescribed, when he was consecrated, and when he preached
before the King, or in his Cathedral, or in any public Place; but he was
dispensed with upon other occasions. On these Conditions he was consecrated in
March: for the Writ for doing it bears date the 7th of that Month. So now the
Bishops being generally addicted to the purity of Religion, most of this Year
was spent in preparing Articles, which should contain the Doctrine of the
Church of England.

Many thought they should have begun first of all with those. But Cranmer upon
good Reasons was of another mind, though much pressed by Bucer about it. Till
the Order of Bishops was brought to such a Model, that the far greater part of
them would agree to it, it was much fitter to let that design go on slowly,
than to set out a Profession of their Belief, to which so great a part of the
chief Pactors might be obstinathly averse. The corruptions that were most
important were those in the Worship, by which Men in their immediate Addresses
to God, were necessarily involved in unlawful compliances, and these seemed to
require a more speedy Reformation. But for speculative Points, there was not so
pressing a necessity to have them all explained, since in these, Men might,
with less prejudice, be left to a freedom in their Opinions. It seemed also
advisable to open and ventilate matters in public Disputations and Books,
written about them for some years, before they should go too hastily to
determine them: lest if they went too fast in that Affair, it would not be so
decent to make alterations afterward; nor could the Clergy be of a sudden
brought to change their old Opinions. Therefore upon all these Considerations
that Work was delayed till this Year; in which they set about it, and finished
it, before the Convocation met in the next February. In what Method they
proceeded for the compiling of these Articles; whether they were given out to
several Bishops and Divines to deliver their Opinions concerning them, as was
done formerly, or not, it is not certain. I have found it often said, that they
were framed by Cranmer, and Ridley; which I think more probable; and that they
were by them sent about to others, to correct or add to them as they saw cause.
Collection Number 55.
They are in the Collection with the differences between these, and those set
out in Queen Elizabeth's time, marked on the Margent.

The Articles of Religion are prepared.
They began with the Assertion of the Blessed Trinity, the Incarnation of the
Eternal Word, and Christ's descent into Hell; grounding this last on these Words
of St. Peter, of his Preaching to the Spirits that were in Prison. The next
Article was about Christ's Resurrection: The fifth about the Scriptures
containing all things necessary to Salvation: so that nothing was to be held an
Article of Faith that could not be proved from thence. The sixth, That the Old
Testament was to be kept still.

The 7th for the receiving the three Creeds, the Apostles, the Nicen, and
Athanasius Creed: in which they went according to the received Opinion, that
Athanasius was the Author of that Creed, which is now found not to have been
compiled till near three Ages after him.

The 8th makes Original Sin to be the corruption of the nature of all Men
descending from Adam; by which they had fallen from Original Righteousness, and
were by nature given to evil: but they defined nothing about the derivation of
guilt from Adams sin.

The 9th for the necessity of prevailing Grace, without which we have no free
Will to do things acceptable to God.

The 10th about Divine Grace, which changes a Man, and yet puts no force on
his Will.

The 11th, That Men are justified by Faith only; as was declared in the Homily.

The 12th, That Works done before Grace are not without sin.

The 13th, Against all Works of Supererogation.

The 14th, That all Men, Christ only excepted, are guilty of sin.

The 15th, That Men who have received Grace, may sin afterward, and rise again
by Repentance.

The 16th, That the blaspheming against the Holy Ghost is, when Men out of
malice and obstinately rail against Gods Word, though they are convinced of it,
yet persecuting it: which is unpardonable.

The 17th, That Predestination is Gods free Election of those, whom he
afterward justifies: which though it be matter of great comfort to such as
consider it aright, yet it is a dangerous thing for curious and carnal Men to
pry into: and it being a Secret, Men are to be governed by Gods revealed Will:
they added not a word of Reprobation.

The 18th, That only the Name of Christ, and not the Law or Light of Nature,
can save Men.

The 19th, That all Men are bound to keep the Moral Law.

The 20th, That the Church is a Congregation of Faithful Men, who have the Word
of God Preached, and the Sacraments rightly Administered: and that the Church of
Rome, as well as other particular Churches, have erred in matters of Faith.

The 21st, That the Church is only the Witness and Keeper of the Word of God:
but cannot appoint any thing contrary to it, nor declare any Articles of Faith
without Warrant from it.

The 22d, That General Councils may not be gathered without the consent of
Princes: that they may err and have erred in matters of Faith: and that their
Decrees in matters of Salvation have strength only as they are taken out of the
Scriptures.

The 23d, That the Doctrines of Purgatory, Pardons, Worshipping of Images, and
Relics, and Invocation of Saints, are without any Warrant, and contrary to the
Scriptures.

The 24th, That none may Preach or Minister the Sacraments, without he be
lawfully called by Men who have lawful Authority.

The 25th, That all things should be spoken in the Church in a Vulgar Tongue.

The 26th, That there are two Sacraments, which are not bare Tokens of our
Profession, but effectual Signs of Gods good Will to us: which strengthen our
Faith, yet not by virtue only of the Work wrought, but in those who receive
them worthily.

The 27th, That the virtue of these does not depend on the Minster of them.

The 28th, That by Baptism we are the adopted Sons of God; and that Infant
Baptism is to be commended, and in any ways to be retained.

The 29th, That the Lords Supper is not a bare Token of love among Christians;
but is the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ: that the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation is contrary to Scripture, and has given occasion to much
Superstition: that a Body being only in one place, and Christ's Body being in
Heaven, therefore there cannot be a real and bodily Presence of his Flesh and
Blood in it: and that this Sacrament is not to be kept, carried about, lifted
up, nor worshipped.

The 30th, That there is no other Propitiatory Sacrifice, but that which Christ
offered on the Cross.

The 31st, That the Clergy are not by Gods command obliged to abstain from
Marriage.

The 32d. That Persons rightly excommunicated are to be looked on as Heathens,
till they are by Penance reconciled, and received by a Judge competent.

The 33d, It is not necessary that Ceremonies should be the same at all times:
but such as refuse to obey lawful Ceremonies, ought to be openly reproved as
offending against Law and Order, giving scandal to the weak.

The 34th, That the Homilies are godly and wholesome, and ought to be read.

The 35th, That the Book of Common Prayer is not repugnant, but agreeable to
the Gospel; and ought to be received by all.

The 36th, That the King is Supreme Head under Christ: that the Bishop of Rome
has no Jurisdiction in England: that the Civil Magistrate is to be obeyed for
Conscience sake: that Men may be put to death for great offenses: and that it
is lawful for Christians to make War.

The 37th, That there is not to be a community of all Men's Goods: but yet every
Man ought to give to the Poor according to his ability.

The 38th, That though rash swearing is condemned: yet such as are required by
the Magistrate may take an Oath.

The 39th, That the Resurrection is not already past, but at the last day Men
shall rise with the same Bodies they now have.

The 40th, That departed Souls do not die, nor sleep with their Bodies, and
continue without sense, till the last day.

The 41st, That the Fable of the Millenaries, is contrary to Scripture, and a
Jewish dotage.

The last condemned those who believe that the damned, after some time of
suffering, shall be saved.

Thus was the Doctrine of the Church, cast into a short and plain Form: in
which they took care both to establish the positive Articles of Religion, and
to cut off the errors formerly introduced in the time of Popery, or of late
broached by the Anabaptists and Enthusiasts of Germany: avoiding the niceties
of Schoolmen, or the peremptoriness of the Writers of Controversy: leaving in
matters that are more justly controvertible, a liberty to Divines to follow
their private Opinions, without thereby disturbing the Peace of the Church.

There was in the Ancient Church a great simplicity in their Creeds, and the
Exposition of the Doctrine. But afterward, upon the breaking out of the
Arrian, and other Heresies, concerning the Person of Jesus Christ; as the
Orthodox Fathers were put to find out new Terms to drive the Heretics out of
the equivocal use of these formerly received; so they too soon grew to love
niceties, and to explain Mysteries, with Similies, and other subtilties which
they invented: and Councils afterward were very liberal in their
Anathematismes against any who did not agree in all Points to their Terms, or
ways of Explanation. And though the Council of Ephesus decreed, That there
should be no Additions made to the Creed, they understood that not of the whole
Belief of Christians, but only of the Creed it self: and did also load the
Christian Doctrine with many Curiosities. But though they had exceeded much,
yet the Schoolmen getting the management of the Doctrine, spun their Thread
much finer: and did easily procure Condemnations, either by Papal Bulls, or the
Decrees of such Councils as met in these times, of all that differed from them
in the least matter. Upon the progress of the Reformation, the German Writers,
particularly Osiander, Illiricus, and Amstorfius, grew too peremptory, and not
only condemned the Helvetian Churches, for differing from them in the manner of
Christ's Presence in the Sacrament, but were severe to one another for lesser
Punctilio's, and were at this time exercising the patience of the great and
learned Melancton, because he thought that in things of their own Nature
indifferent, they ought to have complied with the Emperor. This made those in
England resolve on composing these Articles with great temper, in many such
Points. Only one Notion that has been since taken up by some, seems not to have
been then thought of; which is, That these were rather Articles of Peace than
of Belief: so that the subscribing was rather a Compromise not to teach any
Doctrine contrary to them, than a Declaration that they believed according to
them. There appears no reason for this conceit, no such thing being then
declared: so that those who subscribed, did either believe them to be true, or
else they did grossly prevaricate.

The next Business in which the Reformers were employed this Year, Some
Corrections made in the Common Prayer Book.
was the correcting the Common Prayer Book, and the making some Additions, with
the changing of such Particulars as had been retained only for a time. The most
considerable Additions were, That in the daily Service they prepared a short,
but most simple and grave, Form of a general Confession of sins; in the use of
which they intended that those who made this Confession should not content
themselves with a bare recital of the Words, but should join with them in their
Hearts, a particular Confession of their private sins to God. To this was added
a General Absolution, or Pronouncing in the Name of God, the pardon of sin to
all those who did truly repent, and unfeignedly believe the Gospel. For they
judged, that if the People did seriously practice this, it would keep up in
their thoughts frequent reflections on their sins; and it was thought that the
pronouncing a Pardon upon these Conditions might have a better effect on the
People, than that absolute and unqualified Pardon which their Priests were wont
to give in Confession. By which Absolution in times of Popery the People were
made to believe that their sins were thereupon certainly forgiven; than which
nothing could be invented that would harden them into a more fatal security;
when they thought a full Pardon could be so readily purchased. But now they
heard the terms, on which they could only expect it, every day promulgated to
them. The other Addition was also made upon good consideration, in the Office
of the Communion; to which the People were observed to come without due
seriousness or preparation: therefore for awakening their Consciences more
feelingly, it was ordered, that the Office of the Communion should begin with a
solemn pronouncing of the Ten Commandments: all the Congregation being on their
Knees; as if they were hearing that Law anew: and a stop to be made at every
Commandment, for the Peoples devotion, of imploring mercy for their past
offenses, and Grace to observe it for the time to come. This seemed as
effectual a Mean as they could devise, till Church-penitence were again set up,
to beget in Men deep reflections on their sins, and to prepare them thereby to
receive that Holy Sacrament worthily. The other Changes were, the removing of
some Rites which had been retained in the former Book; such as the use of Oil
in Confirmation, and Extreme Unction, the Prayers for Souls departed, both in
the Communion-Service, and in the Office of Burial, the leaving out some
Passages in the Consecration of the Eucharist that seemed to favor the Belief
of the Corporal Presence, with the use of the Cross, in it, and in
Confirmation, with some smaller variations. And indeed they brought the whole
Liturgy to the same Form in which it is now, except some inconsiderable
variations that have been since made for the clearing of some Ambiguities.

An A^count of kneeling in the Communion.
In the Office of the Communion, they added a Rubric concerning the posture of
kneeling, which was appointed to be still the gesture of Communicants. It was
hereby declared, that that gesture was kept up as a most reverent and humble
way of expressing our great sense of the Mercies of God in the death of Christ
there communicated to us: but that thereby there was no adoration intended to
the Bread and Wine, which were gross Idolatry: nor did they think the very
Flesh and Blood of Christ were there present; since his Body, according to the
nature of all other Bodies, could be only in one place at once; and so he being
now in Heaven, could not be corporally present in the Sacrament. This was by
Queen Elizabeth ordered to be left out of the Common Prayer Book; since it
might have given offense to some, otherwise inclinable to the Communion of the
Church, who yet retained the belief the Corporal Presence. But since his
present Majesty's Restoration, many having excepted to the Posture, as
apprehending some thing like Idolatry or Superstition might lie under it, if it
were not rightly explained; that Explication which was given in King Edwards
time, was again inserted in the Common Prayer Book.

For the Posture, it is most likely that the first Institution was in the
Table Gesture, which was, lying along on one side. But it was apparent in our
Saviors Practice, that the Jewish Church had changed the Posture of that
Institution of the Passover, in whose room the Eucharist came. For though Moses
had appointed the Jews to eat their Paschal Lamb, standing, with their Loins
girt, with Staves in their Hands, and Shoes on their Feet; yet the Jews did
afterward change this into the Common-Table-Posture: of which change, though
there is no mention in the Old Testament, yet we see it was so in our Saviors
time; and since he complied with the common Custom, we are sure that Change was
not criminal. It seemed reasonable to allow the Christian Church the like Power
in such things with the Jewish: and as the Jews thought their coming into the
Promised Land, might be a Warrant to lay aside the Posture appointed by Moses,
which became Travelers best; so Christ being now exalted, it seemed fit to
receive this Sacrament with higher Marks of outward respect, than had been
proper in the first Institution, when he was in the state of Humiliation, and
his Divine Glory not yet so fully revealed. Therefore in the Primitive Church
they received standing, and bending their Body, in a posture of Adoration. But
how soon that Gesture of kneeling came in, is not so exactly observed, nor is
it needful to know. But surely there is a great want of ingenuity in them that
are pleased to apply these Orders of some later Popes for kneeling at the
Elevation, to our kneeling; when ours is not at one such part, which might be
more liable to exception, but during the whole Office: by which it is one
continued Act of Worship, and the Communicants kneel all the while. But of this
no more needs to be said, than is expressed in the Rubric, which occasioned this
Digression.

Thus were the Reformations both of Doctrine and Worship prepared: To which all
I can add of this Year, is, Some Orders given to the Kings Chaplains.
that there were six eminent Preachers chosen out to be the Kings Chaplains in
Ordinary: two of those were always to attend at Court; and four to be sent over
England to preach and instruct the People. In the first year, two of these were
to go into Wales, and the other two into Lancashire: the next year two into the
Marches of Scotland, and two into Yorkshire; the third year, two into
Devon-shire, and two into Hamp-shire; and the fourth year, two into Norfolk,
and two into Kent and Sussex. These were Bill, Harle, Pern, Grindal, Bradford,
the Name of the sixth is so dashed in the Kings Journal, that it cannot be
read. These, it seems, were accounted the most zealous and readiest Preachers
of that time; who were thus sent about, as Itinerants to supply the defects of
the greatest part of the Clergy, who were generally very faulty.

The Business of the Lady Mary was now taken up with more heat than formerly.
The Emperors earnest suit, The Lady Mary continued to have Mass said in her
Chapel.
that she might have Mass in her House, was long rejected: for it was said,
that as the King did not interpose in the matters of the Emperors Government,
so there was no reason for the Emperor to meddle in his Affairs. Yet the state
of England making his friendship at that time necessary to the King, and he
refusing to continue in his League, unless his Kinswoman obtained that favor,
it was promised, that for some time, in hope she would reform, there should be
a forbearance granted. The Emperors Ambassadors pressed to have a License for
it under the Great Seal. It was answered, That being against Law, it could not
be done: Then they desired to have it certified under the Kings Hand, in a
Letter to the Emperor; but even that was refused. So that they only gave a
Promise for some time by word of mouth, and Paget, and Hobby, who had been the
Ambassadors with the Emperor, declared they had spoke of it to him with the
same limitations. But the Emperor, who was accustomed to take for absolute what
was promised only under conditions, writ to the Lady Mary, that he had an
absolute Promise for the free exercise of her Religion: and so she pretended
this, when she was at any time questioned about it. The two Grounds she went
on, were, that she would follow the ancient and universal way of Worship, and
not a new invention that lay within the four Seas: and that she would continue
in that Religion, in which her Father had instructed her. To this, the King
sent an Answer, telling her, That she was a part of this Church and Nation, and
so must conform her self to the Laws of it; that the way of Worship now set up,
was no other than what was clearly consonant to the pure Word of God; and the
King's being young, was not to be pretended by her, lest she might seem to
agree with the late Rebels. After this, she was sent for to Court, and pains
was taken to instruct her better. But she refused to hear any thing, or to
enter into any reasonings, but said, she would still do as she had done. And
she claimed the Promise that was said to be made to the Emperor. But it was
told her, that it was but temporary and conditional. Whereupon the last Summer
she was designing to fly out of England; and the King of France gave Sir John
Mason, the English Resident, notice, that the Regent of Flanders had hired one
Scipperus who should Land on the Coast of Essex, as if it had been to victual
his Ship, and was to have conveyed her away. Upon this Information, order was
given to see well to the Coast; so the design being discovered, nothing could
be effected. It was certainly a strange advice to carry her away, and no less
strange in the Kings Ministers to hinder it, if there was at that time any
design formed to put her by her Succession. For if she had been beyond Sea at
the Kings death, it is not probable that she could have easily come to the
Crown. The Emperors Ambassador solicited for her violently, and said he would
presently take leave, and protest, that they had broken their Faith to his
Master, who would resent the usage of the Lady Mary as highly as if it were
done immediately to himself. The Counselors, having no mind to draw a new War
on their Heads, especially from so victorious a Prince, were all inclined to
let the matter fall. There was also a years Cloth lately sent over to Antwerp;
and 1500 Cinqtails of Powder, with a great deal of Armor, bought there for the
Kings use, was not come over. So it was thought by no means advisable to
provoke the Emperor, while they had such effects in his Ports; nor were they
very willing to give higher provocations to the next Heir of the Crown.
Therefore they all advised the King not to do more in that matter at present,
but to leave the Lady Mary to her discretion, who would certainly be made more
cautious by what she had met with, and would give as little scandal as was
possible by her Mass. But the King could not be induced to give way to it, for
he thought the Mass was impious and idolatrous; The King is very earnest
against it.
so he would not consent to the continuance of such a sin. Upon this the
Council ordered Cranmer, Ridley, and Poinet, to discourse about it with him.
They told him, that it was always a sin in a Prince to permit any sin; but to
give a connivance, that is, not to punish, was not always a sin: since
sometimes a lesser evil connived at, might prevent a greater. He was overcome
by this; yet not so easily, but that he burst forth in Tears, lamenting his
Sisters obstinacy, and that he must suffer her to continue in so abominable a
way of Worship as he esteemed the Mass. So he answered the Emperors Agents,
that he should send over an Ambassador to clear that matter. And Dr. Wotton was
dispatched about it, who carried over Attestations from all the Council,
concerning the qualifications of the Promise that had been made: and was
instructed to press the Emperor, not to trouble the King in his Affairs at home
in his own Kingdom. If the Lady Mary was his Kinswoman, she was the Kings
Sister, and Subject: He was also to offer, that the King would grant as much
liberty for the Mass in his Dominions, as the Emperor would grant for the
English Service in his Dominions. But the Emperor pretended, that when her
Mother died, she left her to his protection, which he had granted her, and so
must take care of her. And the Emperor was so exalted with his Successes, that
he did not easily bear any contradiction. But the Council being further
offended with her for the project of going beyond Sea, and being now less in
fear of the Emperor, since they had made Peace with France, resolved to look
more nearly to her. And finding that Dr. Mallet, and Berkley, her Chaplains,
had said Mass in one of her Houses, when she was not in it, they ordered them
to be proceeded against. Upon which, in December the last year, she writ
earnestly to the Council to let it fall. By her Letter it appears, that Mallet
used to be sometimes at his Benefice, where it is certain he could officiate no
other way but in that prescribed by Law: so it seems his Conscience was not
very scrupulous. The Council writ her a long Answer, The Council writ to her of
it.
which being in the Style of a Churchman, seems to have been penned either by
Cranmer, or Ridley. In which Letter they fully cleared the matter of the
Promise: then they showed how express the Law was, with which they could not
dispense: and how ill grounded her Faith, as she called it, was. They asked her
what Warrant there was in Scripture, that the Prayers should be in an unknown
Tongue, that Images should be in the Church, or that the Sacrament should be
offered up for the Dead. They told her, that in all Questions about Religion,
St. Austin and the other ancient Doctors appealed to the Scripture; and if she
would look into these, she would soon see the errors of the old Superstition,
which were supported by false Miracles and lying Stories, and not by Scripture
or good Authority. They expressed themselves in terms full of submission to her,
but said they were trusted with the execution of the Kings Laws, in which they
must proceed equally. So they required her, if the Chaplains were in her House,
to send them to the Sheriff of Essex. But it seems they kept out of the way,
and so the matter slept till the beginning of May this year, that M^llet was
found, and put in the Tower, and convicted of his offense. Upon this there
passed many Letters between the Council and her: she earnestly desiring to have
him set at liberty, and they as positively refusing to do it.

In July the Council sent for Rochester, Inglefield, and Walgrave, three of her
chief Officers; and gave them Instructions to signify the Kings express
pleasure to her, to have the new Service in her Family; and to give the like
charge to her Chaplains, and all her Servants; and to return with an answer. In
August they came back, and said, she was much indisposed, and received the
Message very grievously. She said, she would obey the King in all things,
except where her Conscience was touched: but she charged them to deliver none
of their Message to the rest of her Family; in which they being her Servants
could not disobey her, especially when they thought it might prejudice her
health. Upon this, And sent some to her.
they were sent to the Tower. The Lord Chancellor, Sir Ant. Wingfield, and Sir
William Petre, were next sent to her, with a Letter from the King, and
Instructions from the Council, for the charge they were to give to her and her
Servants. They came to her House of Copthall in Essex. The Lord Chancellor gave
her the Kings Letter, which she received on her Knees: and said, she paid that
respect to the Kings Hand, and not to the matter of the Letter, which she knew
proceeded from the Council: and when she read it, she said, Ah! Mr. Cecil took
much pains here: (he was then Secretary of State in Dr. Wottons room.) So she
turned to the Counselors, and bid them deliver their Message to her. She
wished them to be short, for she was not well at ease, and would give them a
short answer, having writ her mind plainly to the King with her own Hand. The
Lord Chancellor told her, that all the Council were of one mind, that she must
be no longer suffered to have private Mass, or a Form of Religion different
from what was established by Law. He went to read the Names of those who were
of that mind; but she desired him to spare his pains, she knew they were all of
a sort. They next told her, they had order to require her Chaplains to use no
other Service, and her Servants to be present at no other, than what was
according to Law. She answered, She was the Kings most obedient Subject, and
Sister; and would obey him in every thing, but where her Conscience held her,
and would willingly suffer death to do him service: but she would lay her Head
on a Block, rather than use any other Form of Service, But she was Intractable.
than what had been at her Fathers death: only she thought she was not worthy
to suffer death on so good an account. When the King came to be of Age, so that
he could order these things himself, she would obey his Commands in Religion:
for although he, Good sweet King, (these were her words) had more knowledge
than any of his years, yet he was not a fit Judge in these matters; for if
Ships were to be set to Sea, or any matter of Policy to be determined, they
would not think him fit for it, much less could he be able to resolve Points of
Divinity. As for her Chaplains, if they would say no Mass, she could hear none;
and for her Servants, she knew they all desired to hear Mass: her Chaplains
might do what they would, it was but a whiles Imprisonment: but for the new
Service, it should never be said in her House: and if any were forced to say
it, she would stay no longer in the House. When the Counselors spoke of
Rochester, Inglefield, and Walgrave, who had not fully executed their charge;
she said, it was not the wisest Counsel, to order her Servants to control her
in her own House: and they were the honester Men not to do such a thing against
their Consciences. She insisted on the Promise made to the Emperor, which she
had under his Hand, whom she believed better than them all: they ought to use
her better for her Fathers sake, who had raised them all almost out of nothing.
But though the Emperor were dead, or would bid her obey them; she would not
change her mind, and she would let his Ambassador know how they used her. To
this they answered, clearing the mistake about the Promise, to which she gave
little heed. They told her, they had brought one down to serve as her
Comptroller in Rochesters room: She said, she would choose her own Servants;
and if they went to impose any on her, she would leave the House. She was sick,
but would do all she could to live: but if she died, she would protest they
were the causes of it: they gave her good words, but their deeds were evil.
Then she took a Ring from her Finger, and on her Knees gave it to the Lord
Chancellor, to give to the King as a Token from her, with her humble
Commendations; and protested much of her duty to him; but she said, this will
never be told him. The Counselors went from her to her Chaplains, and
delivered their Message to them, who promised they would obey. Then they
charged the rest of the Servants in like manner, and also commanded them to
give notice if those Orders were broken. And so they went to go away. But as
they were in the Court, the Lady Mary called to them from her Window, to send
her Comptroller to her; for she said, that now she her self received the
accounts of her House, and knew how many Loaves were made of a Bushel of Meal,
to which she had never been bred, and so was weary of that Office; but if they
would needs send him to Prison, she said, I beshrew him if he go not to it
merrily, and with a good Will; and concluded, I pray God to send you to do well
in your Souls and Bodies, for some of you have but weak Bodies. This is the
substance of the Report these Counselors gave when they returned back to the
Court on the 29th of August. By which they were now out of all hopes of
prevailing with her by persuasions or Authority: So it was next considered,
whether it was fit to go to further extremities with her. How the matter was
determined, I do not clearly find; it is certain the Lady Mary would never
admit of the new Service, and so I believe she continued to keep her Priests,
and have Mass; but so secretly, that there was no ground for any public
complaint. For I find no further mention of that matter, than what is made by
Ridley, of a Passage that befell him in September next year.

He went to wait on her, she-living then at Hunsden; Nor would she hear Bishop
Ridley preach.
where she received him at first civilly, and told him, she remembered of him in
her Fathers time, and at Dinner sent him to dine with her Officers: after
Dinner, he told her, he came not only to do his Duty to her, but to offer to
Preach before her next Sunday: She blushed, and once or twice desired him to
make the Answer to that himself. But when he pressed her further, she said, the
Parish Church would be open to him if he had a mind to preach in it: but
neither she, nor any of her Family should hear him. He said, he hoped she would
not refuse to hear Gods Word; She said, She did not know what they called Gods
Word; but she was sure that was not now Gods Word that was called so in her
Fathers days. He said, Gods Word was the same at all times. She answered, She
was sure he durst not for his Ears have avowed these things in her Fathers
time, which he did now: and for their Books, as, she thanked God, she never
had, so she never would read them. She also used many reproachful words to him,
and asked him, If he was of the Council; He said not: She replied, He might
well enough be, as the Council goes now adays; and so dismissed him, thanking
him for coming to see her, but not at all for offering to preach before her.
Sir Tho. Wharton, one of her Officers, carried him to a place where he desired
him to drink; which Ridley did: but reflecting on it, said, He had done amiss,
to drink in a place where Gods Word was rejected: for if he had remembered his
Duty, he should upon that refusal have shaken the dust off his Feet, for a
Testimony against the House, and have departed immediately. These words he was
observed to pronounce with an extraordinary concern, and went away much
troubled in his mind. And this is all I find of the Lady Mary during this
Reign. For the Lady Elizabeth, she had been always bred up to like the
Reformation; and Dr. Parker, who had been her Mothers Chaplain, received a
strict charge from her Mother a little before her death, to look well to the
instructing her Daughter in the Principles of true Religion; so that there is
no doubt to be made of her cheerful receiving all the changes that had been
established by Law.

The Designs of the Earl of Warwick.
And this is all that concerns Religion, that falls within this Year. But now a
design came to be laid, which though it broke not out for some time, yet it was
believed to have had a great influence on the Fall of the Duke of Somerset. The
Earl of Warwick began to form great Projects for himself, and thought to bring
the Crown into his Family. The King was now much alienated from the Lady Mary;
the Privy Council had also embroiled themselves so with her, that he imagined
it would be no hard matter to exclude her from the Succession. There was but
one reason that could be pretended for it; which was, that she stood
illegitimated by Law; and that therefore the next Heirs in Blood could not be
barred their right by her; since it would be a great blot on the Honor of the
English Crown to let it devolve on a Bastard. This was as strong against the
Lady Elizabeth, since she was also illegitimated by a Sentence in the Spiritual
Court, and that confirmed in Parliament: so if their jealousy of the elder
Sisters Religion, and the fear of her revenge, moved them to be willing to cut
her off from the Succession, the same reason that was to be used in Law against
her, was also to take place against her Sister. So he reckoned that these two
were to be passed over, as being put both in the Act of Succession, and in the
late Kings Will, by one error. The next in the Will, were the Heirs of the
French Queen by Charles Brandon, who were the Duchess of Suffolk, and her
Sister. Though I have seen it often said in many Letters, and Writings of that
time, that all that Issue by Charles Brandon was illegitimated: since he was
certainly married to one Mortimer, before he married the Queen of France; which
Mortimer lived long after his Marriage to that Queen: so that all her Children
were Bastards: some say he was divorced from his Marriage to Mortimer, but that
is not clear to me.

The Sweating Sickness.
This Year the Sweating Sickness, that had been formerly both in Henry the 7th,
and the late King's Reign, broke out with that violence in England, that many
were swept away by it. Such as were taken with it, died certainly if they
slept, to which they had a violent desire: but if it took them not off in
twenty four hours, they did sweat out the venom of the distemper: which raged
so in London, that in one week 800 died of it. It did also spread into the
Country, and the two Sons of Charles Brandon by his last Wife, both Dukes of
Suffolk, died within a day one of another. So that Title was fallen. Their
Sister by the half Blood was married to Gray Lord Marquess of Dorset. So she
being the eldest Daughter to the French Queen, the Earl of Warwick resolved to
link himself to that Family; and to procure the Honor of the Dukedom of
Suffolk to be given the Marquess of Dorset, who was a weak Man, and easily
governed. He had three Daughters; the eldest was Jane, a Lady of as excellent
qualities as any of that Age; of great Parts, bred to Learning, and much
conversant in Scripture; and of so rare a temper of mind, that she charmed all
who knew her: in particular the young King, about whom she was bred, and who
had always lived with her in the familiarities of a Brother. The Earl of
Warwick designed to marry her to Guilford his fourth Son, then living, his
three elder being already married; and so to get the Crown to descend on them
if the King should die, of which it is thought he resolved to take care. But
apprehending some danger from the Lady Elizabeth's Title, he intended to send
her away. So an Ambassador was dispatched to Denmark, to treat a Marriage for
her with that Kings eldest Son.

To amuse the King himself, a most splendid Embassy was sent to France, The
King treats with the French King for a Marriage with his Daughter.
to propose a Marriage for the King to that Kings Daughter Elizabeth,
afterward married to Philip of Spain. The Marquess of Northampton was sent
with this Proposition, and with the Order of the Garter. With him went the
Earls of Worcester, Rutland, and Ormond; the Lords Lisle, Fitzwater, Bray,
Abergaveny, and Evers; and the Bishop of Ely, who was to be their Mouth: With
them went many Gentlemen of Quality, who with their Train made up near 500.
King Henry received the Garter with great expressions of Esteem for the King.
The Bishop of Ely told him, They were come to desire a more close tie between
these Crowns by Marriage, and to have the League made firmer between them in
other Particulars. To which the Cardinal of Lorrain made answer, in his way of
speaking, which was always vain, and full of ostentation. A Commission was
given to that Cardinal, the Constable, the Duke of Guise, and others, to treat
about it.

The English began first, for Forms sake, to desire the Queen of Scots. But
that being rejected, they moved for the Daughter of France, which was
entertained; but so that neither Party should be bound in Honor and
Conscience, till the Lady were twelve years of Age. Yet this never taking
effect, it is needless to enlarge further about it; of which the Reader will
find all the Particulars in King Edwards Journal. The King of France sent
another very noble Embassy into England, with the Order of St. Michael to the
King, and a very kind Message, that he had no less love to him than a Father
could bear to his own Son. He desired the King would not listen to the vain
Rumors, which some malicious Persons might raise, to break their friendship;
and wished, there might be such a regulation on their Frontiers, that all
differences might be amicably removed. To this the young King made answer
himself, That he thanked his good Brother for his Order, and for the Assurances
of his Love, which he would always requite. For Rumors, they were not always to
be credited, nor always to be rejected; it being no less vain to fear all
things, than it was dangerous to doubt of nothing: and for any differences that
might arise, he should be always ready to determine them, by reason, rather
than force; so far as his Honor should not be thereby diminished. Whether this
Answer was prepared beforehand, or not, I cannot tell; I rather think it was;
otherways it was extraordinary for one of fourteen to talk thus on the sudden.

But while all this was carrying on, there was a design laid to destroy the
Duke of Somerset. He had such access to the King, and such freedoms with him, A
Conspiracy against the Duke of Somerset.
that the Earl of Warwick had a mind to be rid of him, lest he should spoil all
his Projects. The Duke of Somerset seemed also to have designed in April this
Year to have got the King again in his power: and dealt with the Lord Strange,
that was much in his favor, to persuade him to marry his Daughter Jane, and
that he would advertise him of all that passed about the King. But the Earl of
Warwick, to raise himself and all his Friends higher, procured a great Creation
of new Honors. Gray was made Duke of Suffolk, and himself Duke of
Northumberland; for Henry Piercy, the last Earl of Northumberland, dying
without Issue, his next Heirs were the Sons of Thomas Piercy, that had been
attainted in the last Reign for the Yorkshire Rebellion. Pawlet then Lord
Treasurer, and Earl of Wilt-shire, was made Marquess of Winchester; and Sir
William Herbert, that had married the Marquess of Northampton's Sister, was
made Earl of Pembroke. The Lord Russel had been made Earl of Bedford last year,
upon his return from making the Peace with the French: Sir Tho. Darcy had also
been made Lord Darcy. The new Duke of Northumberland could no longer bear such
a Rival in his greatness, as the Duke of Somerset was, who was the only Person
that he thought could take the King out of his Hands. So on the 17th of October
the Duke was apprehended, and sent to the Tower; and with him the Lord Gray;
Sir Ralph Vane, who had escaped over the River, but was taken in a Stable in
Lambeth, hid under the Straw: Sir Tho. Palmer, and Sir Tho. Arundel, were also
taken, yet not sent at first to the Tower, but kept under Guards in their
Chambers. Some of his followers, Hamond, Nudigate, and two of the Seimours,
were sent to Prison. The day after, the Duchess of Somerset was also sent to
the Tower, with one Crane, and his Wife, that had been much about her, and two
of her Chamber-women. After these, Sir Tho. Holdcroft, Sir Miles Partridge, Sir
Michael Stanhop, Wingfield, Bannister, and Vaughan, were all made Prisoners.
The Evidence against the Duke, was, That he had made a Party for getting
himself declared Protector in the next Parliament; which the Earl of Rutland
did positively affirm; and the Duke did so answer it, that it is probable it
was true. But though this might well inflame his Enemies, yet it was no crime.
But Sir Tho. Palmer, though imprisoned with him as a Complice, was the Person
that ruined him. He had been before that brought secretly to the King, and had
told him, that on the last St. Georges day, the Duke apprehending there was
mischief designed against him, thought to have raised the People, had not Sir
William Herbert assured him he should receive no harm: that lately he intended
to have the Duke of Northumberland, the Marquess of Northampton, and the Earl
of Pembroke, invited to Dinner at the Lord Pagets; and either to have set on
them by the way, or to have killed them at Dinner: that Sir Ralph Vane had 2000
Men ready, that Sir Tho. Arundel had assured the Tower, and that all the
Gandarmoury were to be killed: The Duke of Somerset, hearing Palmer had been
with the King, challenged him of it, but he denied all. He sent also for
Secretary Cecil, and told him he suspected there was an ill design against him:
To which the Secretary answered, if he were not in fault, he might trust to his
innocence; but if he were, he had nothing to say but to lament him.

All this was told the King with such Circumstances, that he was induced to
believe it; The King is possessed against him.
and the probity of his disposition wrought in him a great aversion to his
Uncle; when he looked on him as a Conspirator against the Lives of the other
Counselors: and so he resolved to leave him to the Law. Palmer being a second
time examined, said, That Sir Ralph Vane was to have brought 2000 Men, who,
with the Duke of Somersets 100 Horse, were on a Muster-day to have set on the
Gendarmoury; that being done, the Duke resolved to have gone thorough the City,
and proclaimed Liberty, Liberty: and if his attempt did not succeed, to have
fled to the Isle of Wight, or to Pool. Crane confirmed all that Palmer had
said; to which he added, That the Earl of Arundel was privy to the Conspiracy:
and that the thing had been executed, but that the greatness of the Enterprise
had caused delays, and sometimes diversity of advice: and that the Duke, being
once given out to be sick, had gone privately to London, to see what Friends he
could make. Hamond being examined, confessed nothing, but that the Dukes
Chamber at Greenwich had been guarded in the night, by many Armed Men. Upon
this Evidence, both the Earl of Arundel, and the Lord Paget were sent to the
Tower. The Earl had been one of the chief of those who had joined with the Earl
of Warwick to pull down the Protector; and being, as he thought, ill rewarded
by him, was become his Enemy. So this part of the Information seemed very
credible. The thing lay in suspense till the first of December, He is brought
to his Trial.
that the Duke of Somerset was brought to his Trial: where the Marquess of
Winchester was Lord Steward. The Peers that judged him, were twenty seven in
number. The Dukes of Suffolk, and Northumberland, the Marquess of Northampton,
the Earls of Derby, Bedford, Huntington, Rutland, Bath, Sussex, Worcester,
Pembroke, and the Viscount of Hereford, the Lords Abergaveny, Audley, Wharton,
Evers, Latimer, Borough, Souch, Stafford, Wentworth, Darcy, Sturton, Windsor,
Cromwell, Cobham, and Bray. The Crimes laid against him, were cast into five
several Indictments, as the King has it in his Journal; but the Record mentions
only three, whether Indictments or Articles is not so clear. That he had
designed to have seized on the Kings Person, and so have governed all Affairs,
and that he with one hundred others intended to have imprisoned the Earl of
Warwick, afterward Duke of Northumberland, and that he had designed to have
raised an Insurrection in the City of London. Now by the Act that passed in the
last Parliament, if twelve Persons should have assembled together to have
killed any Privy-Counsellor, and upon Proclamation they had not dispersed
themselves, it was Treason: or if such Twelve had been by any malicious
Artifice brought together, for any Riot, and being warned, did not disperse
themselves, it was Felony, without benefit of Clergy or Sanctuary. It seemed
very strange that the three Peers, Northumberland, Northampton, and Pembroke,
who were his professed Enemies, and against the first of whom it was pretended
in the Indictment that he had conspired, should sit his Judges: for though by
the Law no Peer can be challenged in a Trial, yet the Law of Nations, that is
Superior to all other Laws, makes, that a Man cannot be Judge in his own Cause:
and which was very unusual, the Lord Chancellor, though then a Peer, was left
out of the number; but it is like the Reconciliation between the Duke of
Somerset and him was then suspected, which made him not be called to be one of
his Judges.

The Duke of Somerset being, it seems, little acquainted with Law, did not
desire Council to plead, or assist him in Point of Law; but only answered to
matters of Fact. He prefaced, that he desired no advantage might be taken
against him, for any idle or angry word that might have at any time fallen from
him. He protested he never intended to have raised the Northern Parts, but had
only upon some reports sent to Sir William Herbert to be his Friend: that he
had never determined to have killed the Duke of Northumberland, or any other
Person, but had only talked of it, without any intention of doing it: that for
the design of destroying the Gendarmoury, it was ridiculous to think that he
with a small Troop could destroy so strong a Body of Men, consisting of 900; in
which, though he had succeeded, it could have signified nothing: that he never
designed to raise any stirs in London, but had always looked on it as a Place
where he was most safe: that his having Men about him in Greenwich was with no
ill design, since when he could have done mischief with them, he had not done
it; but upon his Attachment rendered himself a Prisoner, without any resistance.
He objected also many things against the Witnesses, and desired they might be
brought face to face. He particularly spoke much against Sir Tho. Palmer, the
chief Witness. But the Witnesses were not brought, only their Examinations were
read: Upon this, the Kings Council pleaded against him, that to levy War was
certainly Treason; that to gather Men with intention to kill Privy-Counsellors
was also Treason; that to have Men about him to resist the Attachment was
Felony; and to assault the Lords, or contrive their deaths, was Felony. Whether
he made any defense in Law, or not, does not appear: For the material defense,
is not mentioned in all the accounts I have seen of it; which was, that these
Conspiracies, and gatherings of the Kings Subjects were only treasonable and
fellonious, after they had been required to disperse themselves, and had
refused to give obedience. And in all this matter, that is never so much as
alleged, no not in the Indictment it self, to have been done. It is plain it
was not done: For if any such Proclamation, or Charge, had been sent him, it is
probable he would either have obeyed it, or gone into London, or to the
Country, and tried what he could have done by force: but to have refused such a
command, and so to have come within the guilt of Treason, and yet not to stir
from his House, are not things consistent.

When the Peers withdrew, it seems the Proofs about his design of raising the
North, or the City, or of the killing the Gandarmes, did not satisfy them. For
all these had been without question treasonable. So they only held to that
Point of conspiring to imprison the Duke of Northumberland. If he, with Twelve
Men about him, had conspired to do that, and had continued together after
Proclamation, it was certainly Felony. But that not being pretended, it seems
there was no Proclamation made. The Duke of Suffolk was of opinion, that no
contention among private Subjects should be on any account scrued up to be
Treason. The Duke of Northumberland said, he would never consent that any
practice against him, And is acquitted of Treason, but found guilty of Felony.
should be reputed Treason. After a great difference of Opinion, they all
acquitted him of Treason. But the greater number found him guilty of Felony.
When they returned him not guilty of Treason, all the People who were much
concerned for his preservation, shouted for joy, so loud, and so long, that
they were heard at Charing Cross. But the joy lasted not long, when they heard
that he was condemned of Felony, and Sentence was thereupon given that he
should die as a Felon.

The Duke had carried himself all the while of the Trial with great temper and
patience; and though the Kings Council had, in their usual way of Pleading,
been very bitter against him; perhaps the rather, that thereby they might
recommend themselves to the Duke of Northumberland; yet he never took notice of
these reflections, nor seemed much affected with them. When Sentence was given,
he thanked the Lords for their favor, and asked pardon of the Duke of
Northumberland, Northampton, and Pembroke, for his ill intentions against them;
and made suit for his Life, and for his Wife, and Children. From thence he was
carried back to the Tower. Whether this asking the Lords pardon, had in it a
full Confession of the Crime charged on him, or was only a complement to them,
that they might not obstruct his Pardon, is but a matter of conjecture. He
confessed he had spoken of killing them, and this made it reasonable enough for
him to ask their pardon; so that it does not imply a Confession of the Crime.
All People thought, that being acquitted of Treason, and there being no
fellonious Action done by him, but only an intention of one, and that only of
Imprisoning a Peer, proved; that one so nearly joined to the King in Blood,
would never be put to death on such an occasion. But to possess the King much
against him, a Story was brought him, and put by him in his Journal; That at
the Dukes coming to the Tower, he had confessed, that he had hired one Bartuile
to kill the Lords; and that Bartuile himself acknowledged it; and that Hammond
knew of it. But whether this was devised to alienate the King wholly from him,
or whether it was true, I can give no assurance. But though it was true, it was
Felony in Bartuile, if he were the Kings Servant; but not in the Duke, who was
a Peer. Yet no doubt this gave the King a very ill opinion of his Uncle, and so
made him more easily consent to his execution: See the Indictment, Cokes
Entries, fol. 482.
since all such Conspiracies are things of that inhumane and barbarous cruelty,
that it is scarce possible to punish them too severely: But it is certain, that
there was no Evidence at all of any design to kill the Duke of Northumberland,
otherwise the Indictment had not been laid against him, only for designing to
seize on, and imprison him, as it was; the conspiring to kill him not being so
much as mentioned in the Indictment, but it was maliciously given out to
possess the World, and chiefly the King, against him.

The King also, in his Letter to Barnaby Fitz-Patrick, who was like to be his
favorite, and was then sent over for his breeding into France, writ, that the
Duke seemed to have acknowledged the Felony, and that after Sentence he had
confessed it, though he had formerly vehemently sworn the contrary. From whence
it is plain, that the King was persuaded of his being guilty. Sir Michael
Stanhop, Sir Tho. Arundel, Sir Ralph Vane, Some of his Friends also condemned.
and Sir Miles Partridge, were next brought to their Trials. The first, and the
last of these, were little pitied. For, as all great Men have People about
them, who make use of their greatness only for their own ends, without
regarding their Masters Honor, or true Interest; so they were the Persons upon
whom the ill things which had been done by the Duke of Somerset were chiefly
cast. But Sir Tho. Arundel was much pitied, and had hard measure in his Trial,
which began at seven a Clock in the Morning, and continued till Noon. Then the
Jury went aside, and they did not agree on their Verdict, till next morning,
when those who thought him not guilty, yet, for preserving their own Lives,
were willing to yield to the fierceness of those who were resolved to have him
found guilty. Sir Ralph Vane was the most lamented of them all. He had done
great Services in the Wars, and was esteemed one of the bravest Gentlemen of
the Nation. He pleaded for himself, that he had done his Country considerable
Service during the Wars; though now in time of Peace, the Coward and the
Courageous were equally esteemed. He scorned to make any submissions for Life.
But this height of mind in him did certainly set forward his condemnation, and
to add more infamy to him in the manner of his Death, he and Partridge were
hanged, whereas the other two were beheaded.

The Seals are taken from the Lord Rich,
The Duke of Somerset was using means to have the King better informed, and
disposed toward him; and engaged the Lord Chancellor to be his Friend: who
thereupon sent him an Advertisement of somewhat designed against him by the
Council, and being in have, writ only on the back of his Letter, To the Duke;
and bid one of his Servants carry it to the Tower, without giving him
particular directions to the Duke of Somerset. But his Servant having known of
the familiarities between his Master and the Duke of Norfolk, who was still in
the Tower; and knowing none between him and the other Duke; carried the Letter
to the Duke of Norfolk. When the Lord Chancellor found the mistake at night, he
knew the Duke of Norfolk, to make Northumberland his Friend, would certainly
discover him; so he went in all have to the King, and desired to be discharged
of his Office, and thereby prevented the malice of his Enemies: and upon this
he fell sick, either pretending he was ill, that it might raise the more pity
for him, or perhaps the fright in which he was did really cast him into
sickness. So the Seal was sent for, by the Marquess of Winchester, the Duke of
Northumberland, and the Lord Darcy, on the 21st of December, and put into the
Hands of the Bishop of Ely, And given to the Bishop of Ely.
who was made Keeper during pleasure: And when the Session of Parliament came
on, he was made Lord Chancellor. But this was much censured: When the
Reformation was first preached in England, Tindal, Barns, and Latimer, took an
occasion, from the great Pomp and Luxury of Cardinal Wolsey, and the Secular
Employments of the other Bishops and Clergymen, to represent them as a sort of
Men that had wholly neglected the care of Souls, and those Spiritual Studies
and Exercises that disposed Men to such Functions; and only carried the Names
of Bishops and Churchmen, to be a Color to serve their Ambition and
Covetousness. And this had raised great prejudices in the Minds of the People
against those who were called their Pastors, when they saw them fill their
Heads with cares, that were at least impertinent to their Callings, if not
inconsistent with the Duties that belonged to them. So now upon Goodrick's
being made Lord Chancellor, that was a Reformed Bishop, it was said by their
Adversaries, these Men only condemned Secular Employments in the Hands of
Churchmen, because their Enemies had them, but changed their mind as soon as
any of their own Party came to be advanced to them. But as Goodrick was raised
by the Popish Interest in opposition to the Duke of Somerset, and to Cranmer,
that was his firm Friend; so it appeared in the beginning of Queen Mary's
Reign, that he was ready to turn with every Tide: and that whether he joined in
the Reformation only in Compliance to the time, or was persuaded in his mind
concerning it; yet he had not that sense of it that became a Bishop, and was
one of these who resolved to make as much advantage by it as he could, but
would suffer nothing for it. So his practice in this matter is neither a
Precedent to justify the like in others, nor can it cast a scandal on those to
whom he joined himself. Christ being spoke to to divide an Inheritance between
two Brethren, said, Who made me a Judge, or a Divider? St. Paul, speaking of
Churchmen, says, No Man that warreth intangleth himself with the Affairs of
this Life: which was understood by St. Cyprian as a perpetual Rule against the
Secular Employments of the Clergy. There are three of the Apostolical Canons
against it: and Cyprian reckoning up the sins of his time, that had provoked
God to send a Persecution on the Church, names this, that many Bishops
forsaking their Sees, undertook Secular Cares. In which he was so strict, that
he thought the being Tutor to Orphans was a distraction unsuitable to their
Character: so that one Priest leaving another Tutor to his Children, because by
the Roman Law he to whom this was left was obliged to undergo it, the Priests
Name who made that Testament was appointed to be struck out of the List of
those Churchmen who had died in the Faith, and were remembered in the daily
Offices. Samosatenus is represented as one of the first eminent Churchmen that
involved himself much in Secular Cares. Upon the Emperors turning Christian, it
was a natural effect of their Conversion for them to cherish the Bishops much,
and many of the Bishops became so much in love with the Court and public
Employments, that Canons were made against their going to Court, unless they
were called, and the Canalis or Road to the Court was kept by the Bishop of
Rome, so that none might go without his Warrant. Their meddling in Secular
Matters was also condemned in many Provincial Councils, but most copiously and
amply by the General Council at Chalcedon. It is true, the Bishops had their
Courts for the Arbitration of Civil Differences: which were first begun upon
St. Paul's Epistle to the Corinthians, against their going to Law before
Unbelievers, and for submitting their Suits to some among themselves. The
Reasons of this ceased when the Judges in the Civil Courts were become
Christians; yet these Episcopal Audiences were still continued after
Constantines time, and their Jurisdiction was sometimes enlarged, and sometimes
abridged, as there was occasion given. St. Austin, and many other Holy Bishops,
grew weary even of that, and found, that the hearing Causes, as it took up much
of their time, so filled their Heads with thoughts of another nature than what
properly belonged to them.

The Bishops of Rome and Alexandria taking advantage from the greatness and
Wealth of their Sees, began first to establish a Secular Principality of the
Church; and the Confusions that fell out in ^aly after the 5th Century, gave
the Bishops of Rome great opportunities for it, which they improved to the
utmost advantage. The Revolutions in Spain gave a Rise to the Spanish Bishops
meddling much in all Civil Matters. And when Charles the Great and his Son had
given great Territories and large Jurisdictions to many Sees and Monasteries,
Bishops and Abbots came after that not only to have a share in all the public
Councils of most of the States of Europe, to which their Lands gave them a
Right, but to be chiefly employed in all Affairs and Offices of State. The
Ignorance of these Ages made this in a manner necessary: and Church-Preferments
were given as Rewards to Men who had served in the State in Embassies, or in
their Princes Courts of Justice. So that it was no wonder if Men advanced upon
that merit continued in their former Method and course of Life. Thus the
Bishops became for the greatest part only a sort of Men who went in peculiar
Habits, and upon some high Festivities performed a few Offices; but for the
Pastoral care, and all the Duties incumbent on them, they were universally
neglected: and that seriousness, that abstraction from the World, that
application to Study and Religious Exercises, and chiefly the care of Souls,
which became their Function, seemed inconsistent with that course of Life which
Secular Cares brought on Men who pursued them. Nor was it easy to persuade the
World, that their Pastors did very much aspire to Heaven, when they were
thrusting themselves so indecently into the Courts of Princes, or ambitiously
pretending to the Administration of Matters of State; and it was always
observed, that Churchmen who assumed to themselves Employments, and an
Authority that was excentrick to their Callings, suffered so much in that
Esteem, and lost so much of that Authority, which of right belonged to their
Character and Office.

But to go on with the Series of Affairs. There was all possible care taken to
divert and entertain the Kings Mind with pleasing Sights, as will appear by his
Journal, which it seems had the effect that was desired, for he was not much
concerned in his Unkles Preservation.

1552.
An Order was sent for beheading the Duke of Somerset on the 22d of January, on
which day he was brought to the Place of Execution, on Tower Hill. His whole
deportment was very composed, and no way changed from what it had ordinarily
been: he first kneeled down, and prayed; and then he spoke to the People in
these words.

The Duke of Somerset's Speech at his Execution.
Dearly beloved Friends, I am brought here to suffer death, albeit that I never
offended against the King neither by word nor deed; and have been always as
faithful and true to this Realm, as any Man has been. But, for so much as I am
by Law condemned to die, I do acknowledge my self, as well as others, to be
subject thereto. Wherefore, to testify my obedience which I owe unto the Laws,
I am come hither to suffer death: whereunto I willingly offer my self, with
most hearty thanks to God, that has given me this time of Repentance; who
might through sudden death have taken away my Life, that neither I should have
acknowledged him, nor my self. Moreover, there is yet somewhat that I must put
you in mind of, as touching Christian Religion; which, so long as I was in
Authority, I always diligently set forth, and furthered to my power; neither
repent I me of my doings, but rejoice therein, since that now the State of
Christian Religion comes most near unto the Form and Order of the Primitive
Church: which thing I esteem as a great benefit given of God both to you and
me; most heartily exhorting you all, that this which is most purely set forth
to you, you will with like thankfulness accept and embrace, and set out the
same in your living; which thing if you do not, without doubt greater mischief
and calamity will follow.

engraved portrait of Duke Edward Somerset, 4th Earl of Worcester DUX EDWARDUS
SEIMERUS SOMERSETI
R: White sculp.
engraved coat of arms ^OY POUR DEVO^



Angliae Protector, Edwardi Regis

Avunculus, Capitruncatus 22 Ja^: 1552.

Printed for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in S.t Paul's Churchyard.



When he had gone so far, there was an extraordinary noise heard, as if some
House had been blown up with Gunpowder; which frighted all the People, so that
many run away, they knew not for what: and the Relator, who tarried still,
says, it brought into his remembrance the astonishment that the Band was in
that came to take our Savior, who thereupon fell backwards to the ground. At
the same time Sir Ant. Brown came riding toward the Scaffold, and they all
hoped he had brought a Pardon; upon which there was a general shouting, Pardon,
Pardon, God save the King; many throwing up their Caps; by which the Duke might
well perceive how dear he was to the People. But as soon as these disorders
were over, he made a Sign to them with his Hand to compose themselves, and then
went on in his Speech thus.

Dearly beloved Friends, there is no such matter here in hand, as you vainly
hope or believe. It seems thus good unto Almighty God, whose Ordinance it is
meet and necessary that we all be obedient to. Wherefore I pray you all to be
quiet, and to be contented with my Death; which I am most willing to suffer.
And let us now join in Prayer to the Lord for the preservation of the Kings
Majesty, unto whom hitherto I have always showed my self a most faithful and
firm Subject. I have always been most diligent about his Majesty, in his
Affairs both at home and abroad; and no less diligent in seeking the common
Commodity of the whole Realm; (upon this the People cried out it was most true)
unto whose Majesty I wish continual health, with all felicity, and all
prosperous success. Moreover, I do wish unto all his Counselors, the Grace and
Favor of God, whereby they may rule in all things uprightly with justice: unto
whom I exhort you all in the Lord to show your selves obedient, as it is your
bounden Duty, under the pain of condemnation; and also most profitable for the
preservation and safeguard of the Kings Majesty. Moreover, for as much as
heretofore I have had Affairs with diverse Men, and hard it is to please every
Man, therefore if there have been any that have been offended or injured by me,
I most humbly require and ask him forgiveness; but especially Almighty God,
whom throughout all my Life I have most grievously offended: and all other
whatsoever they be that have offended me, I do with my whole Heart forgive
them. Then he desired them to be quiet, lest their Tumults might trouble him;
and said, Albeit the Spirit be willing and ready, the Flesh is frail and
wavering; and through your quietness I shall be much more quieter. Moreover, I
desire you all to bear me witness, that I die here in the Faith of Jesus
Christ, desiring you to help me with your Prayers, that I may persevere
constant in the same to my lives end.

Then Dr. Cox, who was with him on the Scaffold, His Death,
put a Paper in his Hand, which was a Prayer he had prepared for him. He read
it on his Knees, then he took leave of all about him, and undressed himself to
be fitted for the Axe. In all which there appeared no change in him, only his
Face was a little rudier than ordinary: he continued calling, Lord Jesus save
me, till the Executioner severed his Head from his Body.

Thus fell the Duke of Somerset: a Person of great Virtues, And Character.
eminent for Piety, humble, and affable in his greatness, sincere and candid in
all his Transactions. He was a better Captain, than a Counselor: had been often
successful in his undertakings, was always careful of the Poor and the
Oppressed, and in a word, had as many Virtues, and as few faults, as most great
Men, especially when they were so unexpectedly advanced, have ever had. It was
generally believed, that all this pretended Conspiracy, upon which he was
condemned, was only a forgery. For both Palmer, and Crane, the chief Witnesses,
were soon after discharged, as were also Bartuile, and Hamond, with all the
rest that had been made Prisoners on the pretense of this Plot. And the Duke of
Northumberland continued after that in so close a friendship with Palmer, that
it was generally believed he had been corrupted to betray him. And indeed, the
not bringing the Witnesses into the Court, but only the Depositions, and the
Parties sitting Judges, gave great occasion to condemn the Proceedings against
him. For it was generally thought, that all was an Artifice of Palmers, who had
put the Duke of Somerset in fears of his Life, and so got him to gather Men
about him for his own preservation; and that he afterward being taken with
him, seemed through fear to acknowledge all that which he had before contrived.
This was more confirmed by the death of the other four formerly mentioned, who
were executed on the 26th of February, and did all protest they had never been
guilty of any design, either against the King, or to kill the Lords. Vane
added, That his Blood would make Northumberland's Pillow uneasy to him. The
People were generally much affected with this Execution; and many threw
Handkerchiefs into the Duke of Somersets Blood, to preserve it in remembrance
of him. One Lady, that met the Duke of Northumberland when he was led through
the City in Queen Mary's Reign, shaking one of these Bloody Handkerchiefs,
said, Behold the Blood of that worthy Man, that good Uncle of that excellent
King, which was shed by thy malicious practice, does now begin apparently to
revenge it self on thee. Sure it is, that Northumberland, as having maliciously
contrived this, was ever after hated by the People.

But on the other hand, great notice was taken that the Duke of Norfolk, (who,
with his Son the Earl of Surrey, were believed to have fallen in all their
misery, by the Duke of Somersets means,) did now outlive him, and saw him fall
by a Conspiracy of his own Servants, as himself and his Son had done. The
Proceeding against his Brother was also remembered, for which many thought the
Judgments of God had overtaken him. Others blamed him for being too apt to
convert things Sacred to his own use, and because a great part of his Estate
was raised out of the Spoils of many Churches: and some late Writers have made
an Inference from this, upon his not claiming the Benefit of Clergy, that he
was thus left of God not to plead that Benefit, since he had so much invaded
the Rights and Revenues of the Church. But in this they showed their ignorance.
For by the Statute, that Felony of which he was found guilty, was not to be
purged by Clergy. Those who pleased themselves in comparing the events in their
own times, with the Transactions of the former Ages, found out many things to
make a parallel between the Duke of Somerset, and Humphrey the good Duke of
Gloucester in Henry the 6th's time; but I shall leave the Reader in that to his
own observation.

Now was the Duke of Northumberland absolute at Court, all Offices being filled
with those that were his Associates. The Affairs of Germany.
But here I stop to give a general view of Affairs beyond Sea this year, though
I have a little transgressed the bounds of it, to give an account of the Duke
of Somersets Fall all together. The Siege of Magdeburg went on in Germany. But
it was coldly followed by Maurice, who had now other designs. He had agreed
with the French King, who was both to give him assistance, and to make War on
the Emperor, at the same time when he should begin. Ferdinand was also not
unwilling to see his Brothers greatness lessened; for he was pressing him, not
without threatenings, to lay down his Dignity; as King of the Romans, and
thought to have established it on his Son. All the other Princes of Germany
were also oppressed by him, so that they were disposed to enter into any
alliance for the shaking off of that Yoke. Maurice did also send over to try
the inclinations of England; if they would join with him, and contribute 400000
Dollars toward the expense of a War, for the preservation of the Protestant
Religion, and recovering the liberty of Germany. The Ambassadors were only sent
to try the Kings mind, but were not empow'red to conclude any thing. They were
sent back with a good Answer, That the King would most willingly join in
alliance with them that were of the same Religion with himself; but he desired,
that the matter of Religion might be plainly set down, lest under the pretense
of that, War should be made for other Quarrels. He desired them also to
communicate their designs with the other Princes, and then to send over others
more fully empow'red. Maurice, seeing such Assistances ready for him, resolved,
both to break the Emperors designs, and by leading on a new League against him,
to make himself more acceptable to the Empire, and thereby to secure the
Electoral Dignity in his Family. So after Magdeburg had endured a long Siege,
he, giving a secret intimation to some Men in whom they confided, persuaded
them about the end of November to surrender to him; and then broke up his Army:
but they fell into the Dominions of several of the Popish Princes, and put them
under very heavy Contributions. This alarumed all the Empire, only the Emperor
himself, by a fatal security, did not apprehend it, till it came so near him,
that he was almost ruined before he dreamed of any danger.

This Year the Transactions of Trent were remarkable. Proceedings at Trent.
The Pope had called the Council to meet there, and the first of May this year
there was a Session held. There was a War now broken out, between the Pope, and
the King of France, on this occasion. The Pope had a mind to have Parma in his
own Hands, but that Prince, fearing that he would keep it, as the Emperor did
Placentia, and so he should be ruined between them, implored the Protection of
France, and received a French Garrison for his safety. Upon this, the Pope
cited him to Rome, declaring him a Traitor if he appeared not: and this engaged
the Pope in a War with France. At first he sent a threatening Message to that
King, that if he would not restore Parma to him, he would take France from him.
Upon this the King of France protested against the Council of Trent, and
threatened that he would call a National Council in France. The Council was
adjourned to the 10th of September. In the mean while the Emperor pressed the
Germans to go to it. So Maurice, and the other Princes of the Ausburg
Confession, ordered their Divines to consider of the matters which they would
propose to the Council. The Electors of Mentz and Trier went to Trent. But the
King of France sent the Abbot of Bellosana thither, to make a protestation,
that by reason of the War that the Pope had raised, he could not send his
Bishops to the Council: and that therefore he would not observe their Decrees:
(for they had declared in France, that absent Churches were not bound to obey
the Decrees of a Council: for which many Authorities were cited from the
Primitive time.) But at Trent they proceeded for all this, and appointed the
Articles about the Eucharist to be first examined: and the Presidents
recommended to the Divines, to handle them according to Scripture, Tradition,
and Ancient Authors, and to avoid unprofitable curiosities. The Italian Divines
did not like this. For they said, to argue so, was but an Act of the memory,
and was an old and insufficient way, and would give great advantage to the
Lutherans, who were skilled in the Tongues; but the School-Learning was a
mystical and sublime way, in which it was easier to set off or conceal matters
as was expedient. But this was done to please the Germans: And, at the suit of
the Emperor, the matter of Communicating in both kinds was postponed, till the
German Divines could be heard. A safe Conduct was desired, by the Germans, not
only from the Emperor, but from the Council. For at Constance, John Huss, and
Jerome of Prague, were burnt, upon this pretense, that they had not the
Councils safe conduct; and therefore when the Council of Basil called for the
Bohemians, they sent them a safe Conduct, besides that which the Emperor gave
them. So the Princes desired one in the same Form that was granted by those of
Basil. One was granted by the Council, which in many things differed from that
of Basil; particularly in one Clause, that all things should be determined
according to the Scriptures, which was in that safe Conduct of Basil, but was
now left out. In October an Ambassador from the Elector of Brandenburg came to
Trent, who was endeavoring to get his Son settled in the Archbishopric of
Magdeburg, which made him more compliant. In his first Address to the Council,
he spoke of the respect his Master had to the Fathers in it, without a word of
submitting to their Decrees. But in the Answer that was made in the Name of the
Council, it was said, they were glad he did submit to them, and would obey
their Decrees. This being afterward complained of, it was said, that they
answered him according to what he should have said, and not according to what
he had said. But in the mean while, the Council published their Decrees about
the Eucharist; in the first part of which, they defined, that the way of the
Presence could hardly be expressed, and yet they called Transubstantiation a
fit term for it. But this might be well enough defended, since that was a thing
as hard to be either expressed or understood, as any thing they could have
thought on. They went on next to examine Confession, and Penitence. And now, as
the Divines handled the matter, they found the gathering Proofs out of
Scripture grew endless and trifling; for there was not a place in Scripture
where I confess was to be found, but they drew it in to prove Auricular
Confession. From that they went on to Extreme Unction. But then came the
Ambassadors of the Duke of Wittenberg, another Prince of the Ausburg
Confession, and showed their Mandate to the Emperors Ambassadors; who desired
them to carry it to the Presidents; but they refused to do that; since it was
contrary to the Protestation, which the Princes of their Confession had made
against a Council in which the Pope should preside. On the 25th of November
they published the Decree of the necessity of Auricular Confession, that so the
Priest might thereby know how to proportion the Penance to the sin. It was much
censured, to see it defined that Christ had instituted Confession to a Priest,
and not showed where or how it was instituted. And the reason for it, about the
proportioning the Penance, was laughed at, since it was known what slight
Penances were universally enjoined to expiate the greatest sins. But the
Ambassadors of Wirtenberg moving that they might have a safe Conduct for their
Divines to come and propose their Doctrine; The Legate answered, that they
would not upon any terms enter into any Disputation with them; but if their
Divines had any scruple, in which they desired satisfaction, with a humble and
obedient mind, they should be heard. And for a safe Conduct, he thought it was
a distrusting the Council, to ask any other than what was already granted. Soon
after this, there arrived Ambassadors from Strasburg, and from other five
Cities, and those sent from the Duke of Saxe were on their Journey: so the
Emperor ordered his Ambassadors to study to gain time till they came; and then
an effectual course must be taken for compassing that about which he had
labored so long in vain to bring it to a happy conclusion. And thus this Year
ended.

The Parliament was opened on the 23d of January, 1552. A Session of Parliament.
and sat till the 15th of April. So I shall begin this Year with the account
of the Proceedings in it. The first Act that was put into the House of Lords,
was for an Order to bring Men to Divine Service; which was agreed to on the
26th, and sent down to the Commons, who kept it long before they sent it back.
On the 6th of April, when it was agreed to, the Earl of Darby, the Bishops of
Carlisle, and Norwich, and the Lords Sturton, and Windsor, dissented. The Lords
afterward brought in another Bill, for authorizing a new Common Prayer Book,
according to the Alterations which had been agreed on the former Year. This the
Commons joined to the former, and so put both in one Act. By it was first set
forth, That an Order of Divine Service being published, An Act authorizing the
new Common Prayer Book.
many did wilfully abstain from it, and refused to come to their
Parish-Churches; therefore all are required, after the Feast of All-hallows
next, to come every Sunday and Holy Day, to Common Prayers, under pain of the
Censures of the Church. And the King, the Lords Temporal, and the Commons, did
in Gods Name require, all Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ordinaries, to
endeavor the due execution of that Act, as they would answer before God for
such Evils and Plagues, with which he might justly punish them, for neglecting
that good and wholesome Law: and they were fully authorized to execute the
Censures of the Church on all that should offend against this Law. To which is
added, That there had been diverse doubts raised about the manner of the
Ministration of the Service, rather by the curiosity of the Ministers and
Mistakers, than of any other worthy Cause; and that for the better explanation
of that, and for the greater perfection of the Service, in some places, where
it was fit to make the Prayer and fashion of Service more earnest and fit, to
stir Christian People to the true honoring of Almighty God; therefore it had
been by the Command of the King and Parliament perused, explained, and made
more perfect. They also annexed to it the Form of making Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons; and so appointed this new Book of Service, to be every where received
after the Feast of All Saints next, under the same Penalties that had been
enacted three years before, when the former Book was set out.

Which was much censured.
It was upon this Act said by the Papists, That the Reformation was like to
change as often as the Fashion did; since they seemed never to be at a Point in
any thing, but new Models were thus continually framing. To which it was
answered, That it was no wonder that the corruptions which they had been
introducing for above a thousand years, were not all discovered or thrown out
at once; but now the business was brought to a fuller perfection, and they were
not like to see any more material Changes. Besides, any that would take the
pains to compare the Offices that had been among the Papists, would clearly
perceive, that in every Age there was such an increase of additional Rites and
Ceremonies, that though the old ones were still retained, yet it seemed there
would be no end of new improvements and additions. Others wondered why the
execution of this Law was put off so long as till the end of the Year. All the
account I can give of this is, that it was expected that by that time the new
Body of the Ecclesiastical Laws, which was now preparing, should be finished;
and therefore, since this Act was to be executed by the Clergy; the day, in
which it was to be in force, was so long delayed, till that Reformation of
their Laws were concluded.

An Act concerning Treasons.
On the 8th of February a Bill of Treasons was put in, and agreed to by all the
Lords, except the Lord Wentworth. It was sent down to the Commons, where it was
long disputed; and many sharp things were said of those who now bore the sway;
that whereas they who governed in the beginning of this Reign had put in a Bill
for lessening the number of such offenses, now they saw the change of Councils,
when severer Laws were proposed. The Commons at last rejected the Bill, and
then drew a new one, which was passed. By it they Enacted, That if any should
call the King, or any of his Heirs named in the Statute of the 35th of his
Fathers Reign, Heretic, Schismatic, Tyrant, Infidel, or Usurper of the Crown;
for the first offense they should forfeit their Goods and Chattels, and be
imprisoned during pleasure; for the second, should be in a Praemunire; for the
third, should be attainted of Treason: but any who should advisedly set that
out in printing or writing, was for the first offense to be held a Traitor. And
that those who should keep any of the Kings Castles, Artillery, or Ships, six
days after they were lawfully required to deliver them up, should be guilty of
Treason: that Men might be proceeded against for Treasons committed out of the
Kingdom, as well as in it. They added a Proviso, That none should be Attainted
of Treason on this Act, unless two Witnesses should come, and to their face
averr the Fact for which they were to be tried; except such as without any
violence should confess it: and that none should be questioned for any thing
said or written, but within three Months after it was done.

This Proviso seems clearly to have been made with relation to the Proceeding
against the Duke of Somerset, in which the Witnesses were not brought to averr
the Evidence to his Face, and by that means he was deprived of all the benefit
and advantage which he might have had by cross examining them. It is certain,
that though some false Witnesses have practiced the Trade so much, that they
seem to have laid off all shame, and have a brow that cannot be daunted; yet
for the greatest part a bright serenity and cheerfulness attends Innocence, and
a lowering dejection betrays the Guilty, when the Innocent and they are
confronted together.

On the 3d of March a Bill was brought into the Lords for Holy Days and Fasting
days; and sent down to the Commons on the 15th of March, An Act about Fasts and
Holy Days.
by whom it was passed, and had the Royal Assent. In the Preamble it is set
forth, That Men are not at all times so set on the performance of Religious
Duties as they ought to be; which made it necessary that there should be set
times, in which labor was to cease, that Men might on these days wholly serve
God: which days were not to be accounted holy of their own nature, but were so
called, because of the Holy Duties then to be set about; so that the
Sanctification of them (was not any Magical Virtue in that time, but) consisted
in the dedicating them to Gods Service: that no day was dedicated to any Saint;
but only to God, in remembrance of such Saints: that the Scripture had not
determined the number of Holy Days, but that these were left to the liberty of
the Church. Therefore they Enact, That all Sundays, with the days marked in the
Calendar and Liturgy, should be kept as Holy Days: and the Bishops were to
proceed by the Censures of the Church against the disobedient. A Proviso was
added for the observation of St. George's Feast by the Knights of the Garter;
and another, That Laborers or Fishermen might, if need so required, work on
those days either in or out of Harvest. The Eves before Holy Days were to be
kept as Fasts; and in Lent, and on Fridays and Saturdays, abstinence from Flesh
was Enacted: but if a Holy Day fell to be on a M^nday, the Eve for it was to be
kept on Saturday, since Sunday was never to be a Fasting-day. But it was
generally observed, that in this and all such Acts, the People were ready
enough to lay hold on any relaxation made by it, but did very slightly observe
the stricter parts of it: so that the liberty left to Tradesmen to work in
cases of necessity, was carried further than it was intended, to a too public
profanation of the time so sanctified; and the other parts of it, directing the
People to a conscientious observing of such times, was little minded.

On the 5th of March, a Bill concerning the relief of the Poor was put into the
House of Lords: the Form of passing it has given occasion to some to take
notice, that though it is a Bill for taxing the Subjects; yet it had its first
birth in the Lords House, and was agreed to by the Commons. By it the
Churchwardens were empow'red to gather charitable Collections for the Poor;
and if any did refuse to contribute, or did dissuade others from it, the Bishop
of the Diocese was to proceed against them. On the 9th of March the Bishops put
in a Bill for the security of the Clergy from some ambiguous words that were in
the submission which the Convocation had made to King Henry in the 21st year of
his Reign: by which they were under a Praemunire, if they did any things in
their Courts contrary to the Kings Prerogative; which was thought hard, since
some through ignorance might transgress. Therefore it was desired, that no
Prelate should be brought under a Praemunire, unless they had proceeded in any
thing after they were prohibited by the Kings Writ. To this the Lords
consented, but it was let fall by the Commons.

There was another Act brought in for the Marriage of the Clergy, which was
agreed to by the Lords; An Act for the Marriage of the Clergy.
the Earls of Shrewsbury, Darby, Rutland, and Bath, and the Lords Abergaveny,
Stourton, Mounteagle, Sands, Windsor, and Wharton, protesting against it. The
Commons also passed it, and it was assented to by the King. By it was set
forth, That many took occasion from words in the Act formerly made about this
matter, to say, that it was only permitted, as Usury and other unlawful things
were, for the avoiding greater evils; who thereupon spoke slanderously of such
Marriages, and accounted the Children begotten in them to be Bastards; to the
high dishonor of the King, and Parliament, and the Learned Clergy of the
Realm, who had determined, that the Laws against Priests Marriages were most
unlawful by the Law of God; to which they had not only given their Assent in
the Convocation, but Signed it with all their Hands. These slanders did also
occasion, that the Word of God was not heard with due reverence: whereupon it
was Enacted, That such Marriages, made according to the Rules prescribed in the
Book of Service, should be esteemed good and valid, and that the Children begot
in them should be inheritable according to Law.

The Marquess of Northampton did also put in a Bill for confirming his
Marriage, which was passed: only the Earl of Darby, the Bishops of Carlisle,
and Norwich, and the Lord Stourton dissented. By it, the Marriage is declared
lawful, as by the Law of God indeed it was; any Decretal, Canon, Ecclesiastical
Law, or usage to the contrary notwithstanding. This occasioned another Act,
That no Man might put away his Wife, and marry another, unless he were formerly
divorced; to which the Bishop of Norwich dissented; because he was of opinion,
that a Divorce did not break the Marriage-Bond. But this Bill fell in the House
of Commons, being thought not necessary, for the Laws were already severe
enough against such double Marriages.

By another Act, the Bishopric of Westminster was quite suppressed, and
reunited to the Sea of London: but the Collegiate Church, with its exempted
Jurisdiction, An Act against Usury.
was still continued. Another Bill was put in against Usury; which was sent
from the Lords to the Commons, and passed by both, and assented to. By it, an
Act passed in Parliament in the 37th year of the late Kings Reign, That none
might take above 20 per Cent. for Money lent, was repealed; which, they say,
was not intended for the allowing of Usury, but for preventing further
inconveniences: and since Usury was by the Word of God forbidden, and set out
in diverse places of Scripture as a most odious and detestable vice; which yet
many continued to practice, for the filthy gain they made by it; therefore from
the first of May all Usury or gain for Money lent, was to cease: and whosoever
continued to practice to the contrary, were to suffer imprisonment, and to be
fined at the Kings pleasure.

This Act has been since repealed, and the gain for Money lent has been at
several times brought to several regulations. It was much questioned, whether
these Prohibitions of Usury by Moses were not judicial Laws, which did only
bind the Nation of the Jews; whose Land being equally divided among the
Families by Lot, the making gain by lending Money was forbid to them of that
Nation: yet it did not seem to be a thing of its nature sinful, since they
might take increase of a Stranger. The not lending Money on use was more
convenient for that Nation; which abounding in People, and being shut up in a
narrow Country, they were necessarily to apply themselves to all the ways of
Industry for their subsistence; so that every one was, by that Law of not
lending upon use, forced to emply his Money in the way of Trade or Manufacture,
for which they were sure to have vent, since they lay near Tire and Sidon, that
were then the chief Places of Traffic and Navigation of the World: and without
such Industry the Soil of Judea could not possibly have fed such vast numbers
as lived on it: So that it seemed clear that this Law in the Old Testament
properly belonged to that policy. Yet it came to be looked on by many
Christians as a Law of perpetual obligation. It came also to be made a part of
the Canon Law; and Absolution could not be given to the breakers of it, without
a special faculty from Rome. But for avoiding the severity of the Law, the
invention of Mortgages was fallen on; which at first, were only Purchases made,
and let back to the owner, for such Rent as the use of the Money came to: so
that the use was taken as the Rent of the Land thus bought. And those who had
no Land to sell thus, fell upon another way: The Borrower bought their Goods,
to be paid within a Year, (for instance an hundred and ten Pound) and sold
them back, for a Sum to be presently laid down as they should agree, (it may be
a hundred Pound;) by this means the one had a hundred Pound in hand, and the
other was to have ten Pound or more at a years end. But this being in the way
of Sale, was not called Usury. This Law was looked on as impossible to be
observed in a Country, like England: and it could not easily appear where the
immorality lay, of lending Money upon moderate gain, such as held proportion to
the value of Land; provided that the perpetual Rule of Christian Equity and
Charity were observed, which is, not to exact above the proportion duly limited
by the Law, and to be merciful in not exacting severely of Persons who by
inevitable accidents have been disabled from making payment. This digression I
thought the more necessary, because of the scruples that many good and strict
Persons have still in that matter.

Another Act passed both Houses, against all Simoniacal Pactions, A Bill
against Simony.
the reservation of Pensions out of Benefices, and the granting Advowsons while
the Incumbent was yet alive. It was agreed to by the Lords, the Earls of Derby,
Rutland, and Sussex, the Viscount Hereford, and the Lords Mounteagle, Sands,
Wharton, and Evers, dissenting. But upon what reason I do not know, the Bill
was not assented to by the King, who being then sick, there was a Collection
made of the Titles of the Bills which were to have the Royal Assent, and those
the King Signed, and gave Commission to some Lords to pass them in his Name.
These abuses have been often complained of, but there have been still new
contrivances found out, to elude all Laws against Simony: either bargains being
made by the Friends of the Parties concerned without their express knowledge;
or Bonds of Resignation given, by which Incumbents lie at the mercy of their
Patrons, and in these, the faultiness of some Clergymen, is made the color of
imposing such hard terms upon others, and of robbing the Church oftentimes by
that means.

There was a private Bill put in, about the Duke of Somersets Estate, which had
been by Act of Parliament entailed on his Son in the 23d Year of the last Kings
Reign. A Repeal of the Entail of the Duke of Somersets Estate.
On the third of March it was sent to the House of Commons, Signed by the King,
it was for the Repeal of that Act. Whether the King was so alienated from his
Uncle, that this extraordinary thing was done by him for the utter ruin of his
Family, or not, I cannot determine: but I rather incline to think it was done
in hatred to the Duchess of Somerset and her Issue. For the Estate was
entailed on them by that Act of Parliament, in prejudice of the Issue of the
former Marriage, of whom are descended the Seimours of Devon-shire; who were
disinherited and excluded from the Duke of Somersets Honors by his Patents,
and from his Estate by Act of Parliament; partly upon some jealousies he had of
his former Wife, but chiefly by the power his second Wife had over him. This
Bill of Repeal was much opposed in the House, though sent to them in so unusual
a way, by the King himself. And though there was on the 8th of March a Message
sent from the Lords, that they should make have toward an end of the
Parliament, yet still they stuck long upon it; looking on the breaking of
Entails that were made by Act of Parliament, as a thing of such consequence,
that it dissolved the greatest security that the Law of England gives for
property. It was long argued by the Commons, and was fifteen several days
brought in. At last a new Bill was devised, and that was much altered too: it
was not quite ended till the day before the Parliament was dissolved. But near
the end of the Session, a Proviso was sent from the Lords, to be added to the
Bill, confirming the Attainder of the Duke and his Accomplices. It seems his
Enemies would not try this at first, till they had by other things measured
their strength in that House; and finding their interest grew there, they
adventured on it; but they mistook their measures, for the Commons would not
agree to it. In conclusion, the Bill of Repeal was agreed to. But whereas there
had been some Writings for a Marriage between the Earl of Oxfords Daughter and
the Duke of Somersets Son, and a Bill was put in for voiding these; upon a
division of the House the 28th of March there were sixty eight that agreed, and
sixty nine that rejected it, so this Bill was cast out. By this we see what a
thin House of Commons there was at that time, the whole being but 137 Members.
But this was a natural effect of a long Parliament: many of those who were at
first chosen, being infirm; and others not willing to put themselves to the
charge and trouble of such constant and long attendance. It is also from hence
clear, how great an interest the Duke of Somerset had in the affections of the
Parliament.

The Commons refuse to attaint the Bishop of Duresme by Bill.
Another Bill gave a more evident discovery how hateful the Duke of
Northumberland was to them. The Bishop of Duresme was, upon some complaint
brought against him of misprision of Treason, put into the Tower about the end
of December last year. What the Particulars were I do not find; but it was
visible that the secret reason was, that he being Attainted, the Duke of
Northumberland intended to have had the Dignities and Jurisdiction of that
Principality conferred on himself: so that he should have been made Count
Palatine of Duresme. Tonstall had in all Points given obedience to every Law,
and to all the Injunctions that had been made: but had always in Parliament
protested against the changes in Religion; which he thought he might with a
good Conscience submit to and obey; though he could not consent to them. Only
in the matter of the Corporal Presence, he was still of the old Persuasion, and
writ about it. But the Latin Style of his Book is much better than the
Divinity and Reasonings in it. So what he would have done, if he had been
required to subscribe the Articles, that were now agreed on, did not appear,
for he was all this while Prisoner. There was a constant good correspondence
between Cranmer and him: Though in many things they differed in opinion; yet
Tonstall was both a Man of candor, and of great moderation, which agreed so
well with Cranmers temper, that no wonder they lived always in good terms. So
when the Bill for Attainting him as guilty of Misprision of Treason was passed
in the House of Lords, on the 31st of March, being put in on the 28th, Cranmer
spoke so freely against it, that the Duke of Northumberland and he were never
after that in friendship together. What his Arguments were I could not recover;
but when he could do no more, he protested against it, being seconded only by
the Lord Stourton. How it came to pass that the other Popish Lords and Bishops
that protested against the other Acts of this Parliament, did not join in this,
I cannot imagine: unless it was, that they were the less concerned for
Tonstall, because Cranmer had appeared to be so much his friend, or were awed
by their fear of offending the Duke of Northumberland. But when the Bill was
carried down to the Commons, with the Evidences against him, which were some
Depositions that had been taken, and brought to the Lords; they who were
resolved to condemn that practice for the future, would not proceed upon it
now. So on the fifth of April they ordered the Privy-Counsellors of their
House, to move the Lords, that his Accusers and he might be heard face to face:
and that not being done, they went no further in the Bill.

By these Indications the Duke of Northumberland saw how little kindness the
House of Commons had for him. The Parliament is Dissolved.
The Parliament had now sat almost five years, and being called by the Duke of
Somerset, his Friends had been generally chose to be of it. So that it was no
wonder, if upon his Fall they were not easy to those who had destroyed him:
nor was there any motion made for their giving the King a Supply. Therefore the
Duke of Northumberland thought it necessary for his Interest to call a new
Parliament. And accordingly on the 15th of April the Parliament was dissolved;
and it was resolved to spend this Summer in making Friends all over England,
and to have a new Parliament in the opening of the next Year.

The Convocation at this time agreed to the Articles of Religion that were
prepared the last Year: which, though they have been often printed, yet since
they are but short, and of so great consequence to this History, I have put
them into the Collection, as was formerly told.

Thus the Reformation of Doctrine and Worship were brought to their perfection;
and were not after this in a tittle mended or altered in this Reign, nor much
afterward; only some of the Articles were put in more general words under
Queen Elizabeth.

Another part of the Reformation was yet unfinished, A Reformation of
Ecclesiastical Courts considered.
and it was the chief work of this year: that was, the giving Rules to the
Ecclesiastical Courts, and for all things relating to the Government of the
Church, and the exercise of the several Functions in it. In the former Volume
it was told, that an Act had passed for this effect; yet it had not taken
effect, but a Commission was made upon it, and these appointed by King Henry
had met and consulted about it, and had made some progress in it, as appears by
an Original Letter of Cranmers to that King in the Year 1545. in which he
speaks of it as a thing then almost forgotten, and quite l^id aside; for from
the time of the six Articles till then, the design of the Reformation had been
going backward: At that time the King began to reassume the thoughts of it,
and was resolved to remove some Ceremonies, such as the creeping to the Cross,
the ringing of Bells on St. Andrews Eve, with other superstitious Practices;
for which Cranmer sent him the draught of a Letter to be written in the Kings
Name, to the two Archbishops, and to be by them communicated to the rest of
the Clergy. In the Postscript of his Letter he complains much of the
sacrilegious wast of the Cathedral Church of Canterbury, where the Dean and
Prebendaries had been made to alienate many of their Mannours upon Letters
obtained by Courtiers from the King, as if the Lands had been desired for the
Kings use: upon which they had surrendered those Lands, which were thereupon
disposed of to the Courtiers that had an Eye upon them. This Letter should have
come in in the former Volume, but I had not seen it then, so I took hold on
this Occasion to direct the Reader to it in the Collection. Collection Number
61.


It was also formerly told, that an Act had passed in this Reign, to empower
thirty two Persons, who should be named by the King, to make a Reformation of
the Ecclesiastical Laws, which was to be finished within three years. But the
revolutions of Affairs, and the other more pressing things that were still
uncompleated, had kept them hitherto from setting to that work. On the first of
November last year, a Commission was given to eight Persons to prepare the
matter for the review of the two and thirty, that so it might be more easily
compiled, being in a few hands, than could well be done, if so many had been to
set about it. These eight were, the Arch bishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop
of Ely, Dr. Cox, and Peter Martyr, two Divines, Dr. May, and Dr. Tailor, two
Doctors of the Law, and John Lucas, and Richard Goodrick, two Common Lawyers.
But on the 14th of November the Commission was renewed, and the Bishop of
London was named in the room of the Bishop of Ely; one Traheron in the room of
May; and Gosnald in Goodrick's room. These, it seems, desiring more time than
one year to finish it in, for two of the years were now lapsed, in the last
Session of the Parliament they had three years more time offered them. But it
seems the Work was believed to be in such a forwardness, that this continuation
was not judged necessary, for the Royal Assent was not given to that Act. After
the Parliament was ended, they made have with it. But I find it said in the
Preface to the Book, as it was printed in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, that Cranmer
did the whole Work almost himself: which will justify the Character some give
of him, that he was the greatest Canonist then in England. Dr. Haddon, that was
University Orator in Cambridge, and Sir Jo. Cheek, were employed to put it in
Latin. And they did so imitate the Style of the Roman Laws, that any who reads
the Book, will fancy himself to be reading a Work of the purer Ages of that
State, when their Language was not yet corrupted with these barbarous terms
which the mixture of other Nations brought in, and made it no where more
nauseously rude than in the Canon Law.

The Work was digested and cast into fifty one Titles: to bring it near the
Number of the Books of the Pandects, into which Justinian had digested the
Roman Law. It was prepared by February this year, and a Commission was granted
to thirty two Persons, of whom the former eight were a part: consisting of
eight Bishops, eight Divines, among whom John a Lasco was one, eight Civilians,
and eight Common Lawyers. They were to revise, correct, and perfect the Work,
and so to present it to the King. They divided themselves into four Classes,
eight to a Classis; and every one of these were to prepare their Corrections,
and so to communicate them to the rest. And thus was the Work carried on, and
finished; but before it received the Royal Confirmation, the King died, and
this fell with him: nor do I find it was ever since that time taken up, or
prosecuted, with the care that a thing of such consequence deserved: and
therefore I shall not think it improper for me, having before showed what was
done, in the next place to give an account of what was then intended to be
done; and is now very fit to be well considered.

The first Title was of the Trinity, and the Catholic Faith; The Chief Heads
of it.
in which those who denied the Christian Religion were to suffer death, and the
loss of their Goods. The Books of Scripture were numbered, these called
Apocryphal being left out of the Canon; which, though they were read in the
Church, it was only for the edification of the People, but not for the proof of
the Doctrine. The power of the Church was subjected to the Scriptures: The four
General Councils were received; but all Councils were to be examined by the
Scripture; as were also the Writings of the Fathers, who were to be much
reverenced, but according to what themselves have written, they were only to be
submitted to when they agreed with the Scriptures.

The second Title contains an enumeration of many Heresies, viz. against the
Trinity, Jesus Christ, the Scriptures, about Original sin, Justification, the
Mass, Purgatory; and censured those who denied Magistracy to be lawful, or
asserted the Community of Goods, or Wives; or who denied the Pastoral Office,
and thought any might assume it at pleasure; or who thought the Sacraments
naked Signs, who denied the Baptism of Infants, or thought none could possibly
be saved that were not Baptized; or who asserted Transubstantiation, or denied
the lawfulness of Marriage, particularly in the Clergy; or who asserted the
Popes Power; or such as excused their ill Lives by the pretense of
Predestination, as many wicked Men did: from which and other Heresies all are
dissuaded, and earnestly exhorted to endeavor the extirpation of them.

The third was about the Judgments of Heresy before the Bishop of the Diocese,
even in exempted Places. They were to proceed by Witnesses; but the Party, upon
fame, might be required to purge himself: if he repented, he was to make
public profession of it in those places where he had spread it; and to
renounce his Heresy, swearing never to return to it any more: but obstinate
Heretics were to be declared infamous, incapable of public Trust, or to be
Witnesses in any Court, or to have power to make a Testament, and were not to
have the benefit of the Law: Clergymen falling into Heresy were not to return
to their Benefices, unless the Circumstances were such that they required it;
and thus all Capital Proceedings for Heresy were laid down.

The fourth was about Blasphemy, flowing from hatred or rage against God, which
was to be punished as obstinate Heresy was.

The fifth was about the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lords Supper. To which
is added, that Imposition of Hands is to be retained in the Ordination of
Pastors; that Marriages are to be solemnly made; that those who renew their
Baptismal Vow, be confirmed by the Bishop: and that the Sick should be visited
by their Pastors.

The sixth was about Idolatry, Magic, Witchcraft, or consulting with
Conjurers; who were to be arbitrarily punished, if they submitted; otherwise,
to be excommunicated.

The seventh was about Preachers; whom the Bishops were to examine carefully,
before they licensed them; and were once a year to gather together all those
who were licensed in their Diocesses, to know of them the true state of their
Flock; what Vices abounded, and what Remedies were most proper. Those who
refused to hear Sermons, or did make disturbance in them, were to be separated
from the Communion. It seems it was designed, that there should be in every
Diocese, some who should go round a Precinct, and Preach like Evangelists, as
some then called them.

The eighth was about Marriage; which was to be after asking Banes, three
Sundays, or Holy Days. Those who were married in any other Form, than that in
the Book of Service, were not to be esteemed lawfully married: those who
corrupted Virgins, were to be excommunicated, if they did not marry them; or if
that could not be done, they were to give them the third part of their Goods,
besides other arbitrary punishments. Marriages made without the consent of
Parents or Guardians, were declared null. Then follow the things that may void
Marriages; they are left free to all: Poligamy is forbid, Marriages made by
force are declared void, Mothers are required to suckle their Children.

The ninth is about the Degrees of Marriage. All these in the Levitical Law, or
those that are reciprocal to them, are forbidden: but Spiritual Kindred was not
to hinder Marriage, since there was nothing in Scripture about it, nor was
there any good reason for it.

The tenth was about Adultery. A Clergyman guilty of it was to forfeit all his
Goods and Estate to his Wife, and Children; or if he had none, to the Poor, or
some pious use; and to lose his Benefice, and be either banished, or imprisoned
during Life. A Layman was to restore his Wives Portion, and to give her the
half of his Goods, and be imprisoned, or banished, during Life. Wives that were
guilty, were to be in like manner punished. But the Innocent Party might marry
again; yet such were rather exhorted, if they saw hope of amendment, to be
reconciled to the offending Party. No Marriage was to be dissolved without a
Sentence of Divorce. Desertion, long Absence, Capital Enmities where either
Party was in hazard of their Life, or the constant perverseness or fierceness
of a Husband against his Wife, might induce a Divorce: but little Quarrels
might not do it; nor a perpetual Disease, Relief in such a Misery being one of
the Ends of Marriage. But all separation from Bed and Board, except during a
Trial, was to be taken away.

The 11th was about Admission to Ecclesiastical Benefices. Patrons were to
consider, the choice of the Person was trusted to them, but was not to be
abused to any sacrilegious or base ends: if they did otherwise, they were to
lose their right for that time. Benefices were not to be given, or promised,
before they were void; nor let lie destitute above six Months, otherwise they
were to devolve to the Bishop. Clergymen before their Ordination were to be
examined by the Archdeacons, with such other Triers as the Bishop should
appoint to be assistant to them: and the Bishop himself was to try them, since
this was one of the chief things, upon which the happiness of the Church
depended. The Candidate was to give an Oath to answer sincerely, upon which he
was to be examined about his Doctrine, chiefly of the whole Points of the
Catechism, if he understood them aright: and what knowledge he had of the
Scriptures: they were to search him well whether he held Heretical Opinions:
None was to be admitted to more Cures than one; and all Privileges for
Pluralities were for ever to cease: nor was any to be absent from his Cure,
except for a time, and a just cause, of which he was to satisfy his Ordinary.
The Bishops were to take great care to allow no absence longer than was
necessary: every one was to enter upon his Cure within two Months after he was
Instituted by the Bishop. Prebendaries who had no particular Cure, were to
preach in the Churches adjacent to them. Bastards might not be admitted to
Orders, unless they had eminent Qualities. But the Bastards of Patrons were
upon no account to be received, if presented by them. Other bodily defects,
unless such as did much disable them, or made them very contemptible, were not
to be a bar to any. Beside the Sponsions in the Office of Ordination, they
were to swear that they had made no agreement to obtain the Benefice to which
they were presented, and that if they come to know of any made by others on
their account, they should signify it to the Bishop; and that they should not
do any thing to the prejudice of their Church.

The 12th and 13th were about the renouncing or changing of Benefices.

The 14th was about purgation upon common fame, or when one was accused for any
crime, which was proved incompleatly, and only by presumptions. The
Ecclesiastical Courts might not re-examine any thing that was proved in any
Civil Court, but upon a high scandal a Bishop might require a Man to purge
himself, otherwise to separate him from Holy things. The Form of a Purgation
was, to swear himself innocent; and he was also to have four Compurgators of
his own Rank, who were to swear, that they believed he swore true: upon which
the Judge was to restore him to his Fame. Any that were under suspicion of a
Crime, might by the Judge be required to avoid all the occasions from which the
suspicion had risen: But all superstitious Purgations were to be rejected.

The 15th, 16th, 17th, and 18th, were about Dilapidations, the Letting of the
Goods of the Church, the confirming the former Rules of Election in Cathedrals
or Colleges, and the Collation of Benefices. And there was to be a Purgation
of Simony, as there should be occasion for it.

The 19th was about Divine Offices. In the Mornings on Holy Days, the
Common Prayer was to be used, with the Communion-Service joined to it. In
Cathedrals, there was to be Communion every Sunday and Holy Day; where the
Bishop, the Dean, and the Prebendaries, and all maintained by that Church, were
to be present. There was no Sermon to be in Cathedrals in the Morning, lest
that might draw any from the Parish Churches; but only in the Afternoons. In
the Anthems, all Figured Music, by which the Hearers could not understand what
they sung, was to be taken away. In Parish Churches, there were only to be
Sermons in the Morning; but none in the Afternoon, except in great Parishes.
All who were to receive the Sacrament, were to come the day before, and inform
the Minister of it; who was to examine their Consciences, and their Belief. On
Holy Days in the Afternoon, the Catechism was to be explained for an hour.
After the Evening-Prayers, the Poor were to be looked to; and such as had given
open scandal were to be examined, and public Penitence was to be enjoined
them: and the Minister, with some of the Ancients of the Parish, were to
commune together about the state of the People in it: that if any carried
themselves indecently, they might be first charitably admonished; and, if that
did not prevail, subjected to severer Censures: but none were to be
excommunicated, without the Bishop were first informed, and had consented to
it. Divine Offices were not to be performed in Chapels, or private Houses,
lest the Churches should under that pretense be neglected, and Errors more
easily disseminated; excepting only the Houses of Peers and Persons of great
Quality, who had numerous Families; but in these, all things were to be done
according to the Book of Common Prayer.

The 20th was about those that bore Office in the Church; Sextons,
Churchwardens, Deacons, Priests, and Rural Deans. This last was to be a Yearly
Office: he that was named to it by the Bishop, being to watch over the manners
of the Clergy and People in his Precinct, was to signify the Bishops pleasure
to them, and to give the Bishop an account of his Precinct every sixth Month.
The Archdeacons were to be general Visitors over the Rural Deans. In every
Cathedral, one of the Prebendaries, or one procured by them, was thrice a week
to expound some part of the Scriptures. The Bishops were to be over all, and to
remember that their Authority was given to them for that end, that many might
be brought to Christ, and that such as had gone astray might be restored by
Repentance. To the Bishop all were to give obedience according to the Word of
God. The Bishop was to preach often in his Church; was to Ordain none for
Rewards, or rashly; was to provide good Pastors, and to deprive bad ones: he
was to visit his Diocese every third year, or oftener as he saw cause; but then
he was to do it at his own charge: he was to have yearly Synods, and to confirm
such as were well instructed. His Family was to consist of Clergymen, whom he
should bring up to the Service of the Church; (so was St. Austins, and other
Ancient Bishops Families constituted.) This being a great means to supply the
great want of good and faithful Ministers. Their Wives and Children were also
to avoid all levity or vain dressing. They were never to be absent from their
Diocesses, but upon a public and urgent cause: and when then grew sick or
infirm, they were to have Coadjutors. If they became scandalous or heretical,
they were to be deprived by the Kings Authority. The Archbishops were to
exercise the Episcopal Function in their Diocese; and were once to visit their
whole Province, and to oversee the Bishops, to admonish them for what was
amiss, and to receive and judge Appeals, to call Provincial Synods upon any
great occasion, having obtained Warrant from the King for it. Every Bishop was
to have a Synod of his Clergy some time in Lent, so that they might all return
home before Palm Sunday. They were to begin with the Letany, a Sermon, and a
Communion; then all were to withdraw into some private place, where they were
to give the Bishop an account of the state of the Diocese, and to consult of
what required advice; every Priest was to deliver his opinion, and the Bishop
was to deliver his Sentence, and to bring matters to as speedy a Conclusion as
might be; and all were to submit to him, or to appeal to the Archbishop.

The 21st, 22d, 23d, 24th, 25th, 26th, 27th, 28th, and 29th Titles are about
Churchwardens, Universities, Tithes, Visitations, Testaments, Ecclesiastical
Censures, Suspension, Sequestration, Deprivation.

The 30th is about Excommunication, of which, as being the chief Ecclesiastical
Censure, I shall set down their Scheme the more fully.

Excommunication they reckon an Authority given of God to the Church, for
removing scandalous or corrupt Persons, Their design concerning the use of
Excommunication.
from the use of the Sacraments, or fellowship of Christians, till they give
clear signs of their repentance, and submit to such Spiritual punishments, by
which the Flesh may be subdued, and the Spirit saved. This was trusted to
Churchmen, but chiefly, to Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Deans, and any
other appointed for it by the Church. None ought to be excommunicated but for
their obstinacy in great faults; but it was never to be gone about rashly; and
therefore the Judge who was to give it, was to have a Justice of Peace with
him, and the Minister of the Parish where the Party lived, with two or three
learned Presbyters, in whose Presence the matter was to be examined, and
Sentence pronounced, which was to be put in writing. It was to be intimated in
the Parish where the Party lived, and in the neighboring Parishes, that all
Persons might be warned to avoid the company of him that was under
Excommunication: and the Minister was to declare what the nature and
consequences of Exmunication were, the Person so censured being cut off from
the Body of Christ: after that, none was to eat, or drink, or keep company with
him, but those of his own Family: whosoever did otherwise, if being admonished
they continued in it, were also to be Excommunicated. If the Person censured
continued forty days without expressing any repentance, it was to be certified
into the Chancery, and a Writ was to issue for taking and keeping him in
Prison, till he should become sensible of his offenses; and when he did confess
these, and submitted to such punishments as should be enjoined, the Sentence
was to be taken off, and the Person publicly reconciled to the Church. And
this was to take place against those, who, being condemned for capital
Offenses, obtained the Kings Pardon, but were notwithstanding to be subject to
Church Censures.

Then follows the Office of receiving Penitents. They were first to stand
without the Church, and desire to be again received into it, and so to be
brought in: the Minister was to declare to the People the hainousness of sin,
and the mercies of God in the Gospel, in a long Discourse, of which the Form is
there prescribed: Then he was to show the People, that as they were to abhor
hardened sinners, so they were to receive with the Bowels of true Charity, all
sincere Penitents: he was next to warn the Person, not to mock God, and deceive
the People, by a feigned Confession; he was thereupon to repeat, first a
general Confession, and then more particularly to name his sin, and to pray to
God for mercy to himself, and that none by his ill example might be defiled;
and finally to beseech them all to forgive him, and to receive him again into
their Fellowship: Then the Minister was to ask the People, whether they would
grant his desires, who were to answer, they would: Then the Pastor was to lay
his Hand on his Head, and to absolve him from the punishment of his offenses,
and the bond of Excommunication; and so to restore him to his place in the
Church of God. Then he was to lead him to the Communion Table, and there to
offer up a Prayer of Thanksgiving to God for reclaiming that sinner. For the
other Titles they relate to the other parts of the Law of those Courts, for
which I refer the Reader to the Book it self.

How far any of those things, chiefly the last about Excommunication, may be
yet brought into the Church, I leave to the Consultations of the Governors of
it, and of the two Houses of Parliament. It cannot be denied, that Vice and
Immorality, together with much impiety, have overrun the Nation; and though
the charge of this is commonly cast on the Clergy, who certainly have been in
too many places wanting to their duty; yet on the other hand, they have so
little power, or none at all, by Law, to censure even the most public sins,
that the blame of this great defect ought to lie more universally on the whole
Body of the Nation, that have not made effectual provision for the restraining
of vice, the making ill Men ashamed of their ways, and the driving them from
the Holy Mysteries, till they change their course of Life.

A Project for relieving the Clergy reduced to great Poverty.
There was another thing proposed this Year for the correcting the great
disorders of Clergymen, which were occasioned by the extreme misery and
poverty to which they were reduced. There were some motions made about it in
Parliament, but they took not effect: so one writ a Book concerning it, which
he dedicated to the Lord Chancellor, then the Bishop of Ely. He showed, that
without Rewards or Encouragements few would apply themselves to the Pastoral
Function, and that those in it, if they could not subsist by it, must turn to
other employments: so that at that time, many Clergymen were Carpenters, and
Tailors, and some kept Alehouses. It was a reproach on the Nation, that there
had been so profuse a zeal for superstition, and so much coldness in true
Religion. He complains of many of the Clergy who did not maintain Students at
the Universities according to the Kings Injunctions; and that in Schools, and
Colleges, the poor Scholars Places were generally filled with the Sons of the
Rich; and that Livings were most scandalously sold; and the greatest part of
the Country-Clergy were so ignorant, that they could do little more than read.
But there was no hope of doing any thing effectually for redressing so great a
calamity, till the King should be of Age himself to set forward such Laws as
might again recover a competent maintenance for the Clergy.

This Year, both Heath of Worcester, and Day Bishop of Chichester, Heath and
Day turned out of their Bishoprics.
were put out of their Bishoprics. For Heath, it has been already said, that
he was put in prison for refusing to consent to the Book of Ordinations. But
for Day, whether he refused to submit to the new Book, or fell into other
transgressions, I do not know. Both these were afterward deprived, not by any
Court consisting of Churchmen, but by Secular Delegates, of whom three were
Civilians, and three Common Lawyers, as King Edwards Journal informs us. Days
Sentence is something ambiguously expressed, in the Patent that Scory Bishop of
Rochester had to succeed him; which bears date the 24th of May, and mentions
his being put there in the room of George late Bishop of that See, who had been
deprived or removed from it: In June following, upon Hollbeach Bishop of
Lincoln's death, Taylour, that had been Dean of Lincoln, was made Bishop. This
Year the Bishopric of Gloucester was quite suppressed, and converted into an
exempted Arch-deaconry; and Hooper was made Bishop of Worcester. In the
December before, Worcester and Gloucester had been united, by reason of their
Voicinage, and their great poverty, and that they were not very populous: so
they were to be for ever after one Bishopric with two Titles, as Coventry and
Litchfield, and Bath and Wells were; and Hooper was made Bishop of Worcester
and Gloucester. But now they were put into another method, and the Bishop was to
be called only Bishop of Worcester. In all the vacancies of Sees, there were a
great many of their best Lands taken from them: and the Sees that before had
been profusely enriched, were now brought to so low a condition, that it was
scarce possible for the Bishops to subsist: and yet, if what was so taken from
them had been converted to good uses, to the bettering the condition of the
poor Clergy over England, it had been some mitigation of so heinous a Robbery;
but these Lands were snatched up by every hungry Courtier, who found this to be
the easiest way to be satisfied in their pretensions: and the World had been so
possessed with the opinion of their excessive Wealth, that it was thought they
never could be made poor enough.

This Year a Passage fell out, relating to Ireland, The Affairs of Ireland.
which will give me occasion to look over to the Affairs of that Kingdom. The
Kings of England had formerly contented themselves with the Title of Lords of
Ireland: which King Henry the 8th, in the 33d Year of his Reign, had in a
Parliament there, changed into the Title of a Kingdom. But no special Crown or
Coronation was appointed, since it was to follow the Crown of England. The
Popes and the Emperors have pretended, that the conferring Titles of Sovereign
Dignity belonged to them. The Pope derived his claim from what our Savior
said, That all Power in Heaven and in Earth was given to him, and by
consequence to his Vicar. The Emperors, as being a dead shadow of the Roman
Empire, which Title, with the designation of Caesar, they still continued to
use, and pretended, that as the Roman Emperors did anciently make Kings, so
they had still the same right: though because those Emperors made Kings in the
Countries which were theirs by Conquest, it was an odd stretch to infer, that
those who retained nothing of their Empire, but the Name, should therefore make
Kings in Countries that belonged not to them: and it is certain, that every
entire or independent Crown or State may make for or within it self what Titles
they please. But the Authority the Crown of England had in Ireland was not then
so entire, as by the many Rebellions that have fallen out since, it is now
become. The Heads of the Clans and Names had the Conduct of all their several
Tribes, who were led on by them to what designs they pleased: And though within
the English Pale, the King was obeyed, and his Laws executed almost as in
England; yet the native Irish were an uncivilized and barbarous Nation, and not
yet brought under the Yoke; and for the greatest part of Vlster, they were
united to the Scots, and followed their Interests.

There had been a Rebellion in the second Year of this Reign. But Sir Anthony
St. Leiger, then Deputy, being recalled, and Sir Edw. Bellinghame sent in his
room, he subdued O-Canor, and O-More, that were the chief Authors of it: and
not being willing to put things to extremities, when England was otherwise
distracted with Wars, he persuaded them to accept of Pensions of 100 l.
a-piece, and so they came in and lived in the English Pale. But the Winter
after, there was another Rebellion designed in Vlster, by O-Neal, O-Donnel,
O-Docart, and the Heads of some other Tribes; who sent to the Queen Dowager of
Scotland, to procure them assistance from France, and they would keep up the
disorders in Ireland. The Bishop of Valence, being then in Scotland, was sent
by her to observe their strength, that he might accordingly persuade the King
of France to assist them. He crossed the Seas, and met with them, and with
Wauchop, a Scotch-man, who was the Bishop of Armagh of the Popes making, and
who, though he was blind, was yet esteemed one of the best at Riding Post in
the World. They set out all their greatness to the French Bishop, to engage him
to be their friend at the Court of France: but he seemed not so well satisfied
of their ability to do any great matter, and so nothing followed on this. One
passage fell out here, which will a little discover the temper of that Bishop.
When he was in O-Docarts House, he saw a fair Daughter of his, whom he
endeavored to have corrupted, but she avoided him carefully. Two English
Gray-Friars, that had fled out of England for their Religion, and were there at
that time, observing the Bishops inclinations, brought him an English Whore,
whom he kept for some time. She one night looking among his things, found a
Glass full of somewhat that was very odoriferous, and poured it all down her
Throat: which the Bishop perceiving too late, fell into a most violent passion;
for it had been presented to him by Soliman the Magnificent, at his leaving
that Court, as the richest Balm in Egypt; and was valued at 2000 Crowns. The
Bishop was in such a rage, that all the House was disturbed with it; whereby he
discovered both his lewdness and passion at once. This is related by one that
was then with him, and was carried over by him to be a Page to the Scotch
Queen; Sir James Melvil, who lived long in that Court, under the Constable of
France, and was afterward much employed by the Prince Elector Palatine in many
Negotiations; and coming home to his own Country, was sent on many occasions to
the Court of England, where he lived in great Esteem. He in his old Age writ a
Narrative of all the Affairs that himself had been concerned in, which is one
of the best and perfectest Pieces of that nature that I have seen. The Original
is yet extant under his own Hand in Scotland: a Copy of it was showed me by one
descended from him, from which I shall discover many considerable Passages,
though the Affairs in which he was most employed, were something later than the
time of which I am to write. But to return to Ireland. Upon the Peace made with
France and Scotland, things were quieted there; and Sir Ant. St. Leiger was in
August 1550. again sent over to be Deputy there. For the Reformation, it made
but a small progress in that Kingdom. It was received among the English, but I
do not find any endeavors were used to bring it in among the Irish. This Year
Bale was sent into Ireland. He had been a busy Writer upon all occasions, and
had a great deal of Learning, but wanted Temper, and did not write with the
decency that became a Divine, or was suitable to such matters; which it seems
made those who recommended Men to preferment in this Church, not think him so
fit a Person to be employed here in England. But the Bishopric of Ossery being
void, the King proposed him to be sent thither. So in August this Year Dr.
Goodaker was sent over to be Bishop of Armagh, and Bale to be Bishop of Ossery.
There were also two other, who were Irish Men, to be promoted. When they came
thither, the Archbishop of Dublin intended to have consecrated them according
to the old Pontifical; for the new Book of Ordination had not been yet used
among them. Goodaker and the two others were easily persuaded to it, but Bale
absolutely refused to consent to it: who being assisted by the Lord Chancellor,
it was carried, that they should be ordained according to the new Book. When
Bale went into his Diocese, he found all things there in dark Popery; but
before he could make any Reformation there, King Edwards death put an end to
his and all such designs.

In England nothing else that had any relation to the Reformation passed this
Year, A Change made in the Order of the Garter.
unless what belongs to the change made in the Order of the Garter may be
thought to relate to it. On the 23d of April the former Year, being St.
George's day, a Proposition was made to consider the Order and Statutes, since
there was thought to be a great deal of superstition in them; and the Story
upon which the Order was founded, concerning St. George's fighting with the
Dragon, looked like a Legend formed in the darker Ages, to support the humor
of Chivalry, that was then very high in the World. And as the Story had no
great credibility in it self, so it was delivered by no Ancient Author. Nor was
it found that there had been any such Saint: there being among Ancient Writers
none mentioned of that Name, but George of Alexandria, the Arrian Bishop, that
was put in when Athanasius was banished. Upon this motion in the former Year,
the Duke of Somerset, the Marquess of Northampton, and the Earls of Wilt-shire,
and Warwick, were appointed to review the Statutes of the Order. So this Year
the whole Order was changed; and the Earl of Westmorland and Sir Andrew Dudley,
who were now to be installed, were the first that were received according to
the new Model, (which the Reader will find in the Collection, King Edwards
Remains, Number 23.
as it was translated into Latin out of the English, by the King himself,
written all with his own Hand, and it is the third Paper after his Journal.)
The Preamble of it sets forth the noble design of the Order, to animate great
Men to gallant Actions, and to associate them into a Fraternity, for their
better encouragement and assistance; but says, it had been much corrupted by
superstition, therefore the Statutes of it were hereafter to be these,

It was no more to be called the Order of St. George, nor was he to be esteemed
the Patron of it; but it was to be called the Order of the Garter. The Knights
of this Order were to wear the Blew Ribond or Garter as formerly; but at the
Collar, in stead of a George, there was to be on one side of the Jewel, a
Knight carrying a Book upon a Sword point, on the Sword to be written
Protectio, on the Book Verbum Dei; on the Reverse, a Shield, on which should be
written Fides; to express their resolution both with offensive and defensive
Weapons to maintain the Word of God. For the rest of the Statutes I shall refer
the Reader to the Paper I mentioned. But this was repealed by Queen Mary, and
so the old Rules took place again, and do so still. This design seems to have
been chiefly intended, that none but those of the Reformed Religion might be
capable of it; since the adhering to, and standing for the Scriptures, was then
taken to be the distinguishing Character between the Papists and the Reformers.

This is the sum of what was either done or designed this Year with relation to
Religion. As for the State, there was a strict enquiry made of all who had
cheated the King in the suppression of Chantries, or in any other thing that
related to Churches; from which the Visitors were believed to have embezeled
much to their own uses, and there were many Suits in the Star Chamber about it.
Most of all these Persons had been the Friends or Creatures of the Duke of
Somerset: and the enquiry after these things seems to have been more out of
hatred to him, than out of any design to make the King the richer by what
should be recovered for his use. But on none did the Storm break more severely
than on the Lord Paget. Paget degraded from being a Knight of the Garter.
He had been Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, and was charged with many
misdemeanors in that Office, for which he was fined in 6000 l. But that which
was most severe, was, that on St. George's Eve, he was degraded from the Order
of the Garter, for diverse offenses; but chiefly, because he was no Gentleman,
neither by Fathers side nor Mothers side. His chief offense was his greatest
Virtue. He had been on all occasions a constant Friend to the Duke of Somerset:
for which the Duke of Northumberland hated him mortally, and so got him to be
degraded to make way for his own Son. This was much censured, as a barbarous
Action, that a Man who had so long served the Crown in such public
Negotiations, and was now of no meaner Blood than he was when King Henry first
gave him the Order, should be so dishonored, being guilty of no other fault,
but what is common to most Courtiers, of enriching himself at his Masters cost;
for which his Fine was severe enough for the expiation. But the Duke of
Northumberland was a Person so given up to violence and revenge, that an
ordinary disgrace did not satisfy his hatred.

Sir Ant. St. Leiger, another Knight of the Order, was at the same time
accused, upon complaint sent from the Archbishop of Dublin in Ireland, for
some high words that he had used. But these being examined, he was cleared, and
admitted to his Place among the Knights at the Garter. Many others that were
obnoxious came in, upon this violent prosecution, to purchase the favor of
Northumberland, who was much set on framing a Parliament to his mind, and so
took those methods which he thought likeliest to work his ends. It being
ordinary for Men of insolent and boisterous tempers, who are generally as
abject when they are low, as they are puffed up with prosperity, to measure other
People by themselves; therefore knowing that the methods of reason and kindness
would have no operation on themselves, and that height and severity are the
only ways to subdue them, they use that same way of gaining others which they
find most effectual with themselves.

This Year the King went on, in paying his Debts, The increase of Tra^e.
reforming the Coin, and other ways that might make the Nation great and
wealthy. And one great Project was undertaken, which has been the chief
beginning and foundation of the great Riches, and strength of Shipping, to
which this Nation has attained since that time. From the days of King Henry the
third the free Towns of Germany, who had assisted him in his Wars, obtained
great Privileges in England: they were made a Corporation, and lived together
in the Still-yard near the Bridge. They had in Edward the 4th's time been
brought into some trouble, for carrying their Privileges further than their
Charter allowed them: and so Judgment was given that they had forfeited it, but
they redeemed themselves out of that, by a great Present which they made to the
King. That which chiefly supported them at Court, was, that they trading in a
Body were not only able to take the Trade out of all other Persons Hands, by
underselling them, but they had always a great stock of Money; and so when the
Government was in a strait, they were ready, upon a good Security, to lend
great Sums: and on lesser occasions could obtain the favor of a Statesman by
the Presents they made him. But now Trade was raised much above what it had
been, and Courts becoming more magnificent than formerly, there was a greater
consumption, particularly of Cloth, than had ever been known. The discovery of
the Indies had raised both Trade and Navigation, so that there was a quicker
circulation of the Wealth of the World, than had been in former Ages.

Antwerp, and Hamburgh, lying both conveniently, the one in the mouth of the
Elb, and the other near the mouth of the Rhine, which were the two greatest
Rivers that fell into those Seas, the Merchants of those two Cities at that
time had the chief Trade of the World. The English began to look on those
Easterlings with envy. All that was Imported or Exported came for most part in
their bottoms: all Markets were in their Hands, so that Commodities of foreign
growth were vented by them in England, and the Product of the Kingdom was
bought up by them. And all the Nation being then set much on Pasture, they had
much advanced their Manufacture; in so much that their own Wool, which had
been formerly wrought at Antwerp, was now made into Cloth in England, which the
Still-yard Men obtained leave to carry away. At first they Shiped not above
eight Cloths in a year, after that an hundred, then a thousand, then six
thousand; but this last year there was Shipped in their Name 44000 Clothes; and
not above 1100 by all others that traded within England.

The Merchant Adventurers found they could not hold out, unless this Company
was broke. So they put in their complaint against them in the beginning of this
year, to which the Still-yard Men made answer, and they replied. Upon this, the
Council made a Decree, that the Charter was broken, and so dissolved the
Company. Those of Hamburg, and Lubeck, and the Regent of Flanders, solicited
the Council to have this redressed, but in vain: for the advantage the Nation
was to have by it, was too visible to admit of any interposition. But the
design of Trade being thus set on foot, another Project of a higher nature
followed it. The War was now begun between the Emperor and the King of France.
And that, with the persecution raised in Flanders against all that leaned to
the Doctrine of the Protestants, made many there think of changing their Seats.
It was therefore proposed here in England to open a free Trade, and to appoint
some Mart Towns, that should have greater Privileges and Securities for
encouraging Merchants to live in them, and should be easier in their Customs
than they were any where else. Southampton for the Cloth Trade, and Hull for
the Northern Trade, were thought the two fittest Places. And for the advantages
and disadvantages of this design, I find the young King had balanced the
matter exactly; for there is a large Paper all written with his own Hand,
containing what was to be said on both sides. But his death, and Queen Mary's
marrying the Prince of Spain, put an end to this Project: though all the
Addresses her Husband made, seconding the desires of the Easterlings, could
never prevail to the setting up of that company again. If the Reader would
understand this matter more perfectly, he may find a great deal of it in the
Kings Journal, King Edwards Remains, Number 4.
and in the fourth Paper that follows it, where the whole Affair seems to be
considered on all hands: but Men that know Merchandise more perfectly will
judge better of these things.

Cardan in England.
This Summer, Cardan, the great Philosopher of that Age, passed thorough
England. He was brought from Italy on the account of Hamilton Archbishop of
St. Andrews, who was then desperately sick of a Dropsy. Cardan cured him of
his Disease: but being a Man much conversant both in Astrology, and Magic, as
himself professed, he told the Archbishop, that though he had at present saved
his Life, yet he could not change his fate; for he was to die on a Gallows. In
his going through England he waited on King Edward, where he was so entertained
by him, and observed his extraordinary Parts and Virtues so narrowly, that on
many occasions he writ afterward of him, with great astonishment, as being the
most wonderful Person he had ever seen.

The Affairs of Scotland.
But the mention of the Scotch Archbishops sickness leads me now to the Affairs
of Scotland. The Queen had passed thorough England from France to Scotland last
year. In her Passage she was treated by the King with all that respect that one
Crowned Head could pay to another. The Particulars are in his Journal, and need
not be recited here. When she came home, she set herself much to persuade the
Governor to lay down the Government, that it might be put in her Hands; to
which he, being a soft Man, was the more easily induced, because his Brother,
who had great power over him, and was a violent and ambitious Man, was then so
sick, that there was no hope of his Life. He had also received Letters from
France, in such a Style, that he saw he must either lay down the Government, or
not only lose the Honor and Pension he had there, but be forced to struggle
for what he had in his own Country. Whether the French understood any thing by
their Spies in the Court of England, that it had been proposed there to
persuade him to pretend to the Crown, and were therefore the more earnest to
have the Government out of his Hands, I do not know: but though I have seen
many hundreds of Letters that passed in those times between England and
Scotland, I could not find by any of them that he ever entered into any Treaty
about it.

It seems his base Brother had some thoughts of it. For when he was so far
recovered that he could enquire after news, and heard what his Brother had
done, he flew out in a passion, and called him a Beast for parting with the
Government, since there was none but a (...) Lass between him and the Crown. I
set down his own words, leaving a space void for an Epithete he used of the
young Queen, scarce decent enough to be mentioned. There had been a great
Consultation in France what to do with the Queen of Scotland. Her Unkles
pressed the King to marry her to the Dolphin: For thereby another Kingdom would
be added to France, which would be a perpetual Thorn in the side of England;
She had also some Prospect of succeeding to the Crown of England; so that on
all accounts it seemed the best Match in Europe, for the Dolphin. But the wise
Constable had observed, that the Spaniards lost by their Dominions that lay so
remote from the chief Seat of their Government; though these were the richest
Countries in Europe; namely, Sicily, Naples, Millain, and the Netherlands; and
wisely apprehended that France might suffer much more, by the accession of such
a Crown, which not only was remote, but where also the Country was poor, and
the People not easily governed. It would be a vast charge to them, to send
Navies, and to pay Armies there: The Nobility might when they would, by
confederating with England, either shake off the French Government, or put them
to a great expense to keep it: so that whereas Scotland had been hitherto, by a
Pension, and sometimes by a little assistance, kept in a perpetual alliance
with France, he apprehended by such a Union it might become their Enemy, and a
great weight on their Government. This the Constable pressed much, both out of
his care of his Masters Interest, and in opposition to the House of Guise. He
advised the King rather to marry her to some of his Subjects, of whom he was
well assured, and to send her and her Husband home into Scotland; by which
means the perpetual amity of that Kingdom might be preserved on easy terms.
But the King was so possessed with the notion of the Union of that Crown to
France, that he gave no ear to this wise advise; thinking it flowed chiefly
from the hatred and enmity which he knew the Constable bore the Family of
Guise. This the Constable himself told Melvil, from whose Narrative I have it.
The Queen Mother of Scotland being possessed of the Government, found two great
Factions in it. The Head of the one was the Archbishop, who now recovering,
and finding himself neglected, and the Queen governed by other Councils, set
himself much against her, and drew the Clergy for the most part into his
Interests. The other Faction was of those who hated him, and them both, and
inclined to the Reformation. They set up the Prior of St. Andrews, who was
their young Queens natural Brother, as their Head; and by his means offered
their Service to the Queen now made Regent: they offered that they would agree
with her to send the Matrimonial Crown to the Dolphin, and consent to the Union
of both Kingdoms: only they desired her protection from the violence of the
Clergy, and that they might have secretly Preachers in their Houses to instruct
them in the Points of Religion. This Offer the Queen readily accepted of, and
so by their assistance carried things till near the end of her Regency with
great moderation and discretion. And now the Affairs of Scotland were put in a
Channel, in which they held long steady and quiet, till about six years after
this, that upon the Peace with the King of Spain there were cruel Councils laid
down in France, and from thence sent over into Scotland, for extirpating
Heresy. But of that we shall discourse in its proper place.

The Affairs of Germany.
As for the Affairs of Germany, there was this year a great and sudden turn of
things there; with which the Emperor was surprised by a strange supineness,
that proved as fatal to him, as it was happy to the Empire; though all the
World besides saw it coming on him. Upon the delivery of Magdeburg, Maurice of
Saxe's Army, pretending there was an Arrear due to them, took up their Winter
Quarters, near Saxe, in the Dominions of some Popish Princes: where they were
very unwelcome Guests. The Sons of the Landgrave, being required by their
Father, pressed the Duke of Saxe on his Honor, to free their Father, or to
become their Prisoner in his room, since they had his faith for his liberty: so
he went to them, and offered them his Person; but though he did not trust them
with his whole design; yet he told them so much that they were willing to let
him go back. The Emperors Counselors were allarumed with what they heard from
all hands. And the Duke of Alva (well known afterward by his cruelties in the
Netherlands) advised him to send for Maurice to come and give an account of all
those suspicious passages, to take the Army out of his hands; and to take such
securities from him, as might clear all the jealousies, for which his carriage
had given great cause. But the Bishop of Arras was on the other hand so assured
of him, that he said, the giving him any suspicion of the Emperors distrust
might really engage him into such designs; and that such deep Projects as they
heard he was in, were too fine conceits for Dutch drunken Heads. He also
assured them he had two of his Secretaries in Pension, so that he was
advertised of all his motions. But the Duke of Saxe came to know that those his
Secretaries were the Emperors Pensioners; and dissembled it so well, that he
used them in all appearance with more confidence than formerly: he held all his
Consultations in their presence, and seemed to open his heart so to them, that
they possessed the Bishop with a firm confidence of his sincerity and
steadiness to the Emperors Interests. Yet his lingering so at the Town of
Magdeburg, with the other dark Passages concerning him, made the Emperor
conceive at last a jealousy of him, and he writ for him to come and clear
himself: Then he refined it higher; for having left Orders with the Officers
whom he had made sure to him, to follow with the Army in all the have they
could; he himself took Post, with as small a Train as his Dignity could admit
of, and carried one of those corrupted Secretaries with him: but on the way he
complained of pains in his side, so that he could not hold on his Journey: but
sent forward his Secretary, who gave such an account of him, that it, together
with his coming so readily a great part of his way in so secure a manner, made
the Emperor now lay down all his former distrusts. The Emperor writ to Trent,
and to many other Places, that there was no cause of fear from Maurice. And
Maurice, to color the matter more completely, had sent his Ambassadors to
Trent, and had ordered Melancthon, and his other Divines, to follow them
slowly, that as soon as the safe Conduct was obtained, they might go on and
defend their Doctrine.

Upon their coming to Trent, and proposing their desires, Proceedings at Trent.
that all might be again considered; the Legates rejected the Proposition with
much scorn. The Emperors Ambassadors and Prelates pressed that they might be
well received. The Archbishop of Toledo showed how much Christ had born with
the Scribes and Pharisees; and that in imitation of him, they ought to leave
nothing undone that might gain upon them. So it was resolved, that the Council
should make a Protestation, that the usage they gave them was out of Charity,
which is above all Law; since it was against the Decretals to have any Treaty
with professed Heretics. At the same time the Imperialists dealt no less
earnestly with the Ambassadors from the Protestant Princes, not to ask too much
at once, but to go on by degrees; and assured them they had a mind to lessen
the Popes greatness as much as they had. The Ambassadors first step was to be
for obtaining a safe Conduct. They excepted to that which the Council had
given, as different from that the Council of Basil had sent to the Bohemians,
in four material Points. The first was, That their Divines should have a
decisive Voice. 2. That all Points should be determined according to the
Scriptures; and according to the Fathers, as they were conformable to those.
The third, That they should have the exercise of their Religion within their
own Houses. 4. That nothing should be done in contempt of their Doctrine. So
they desired that the safe Conduct might be word for word the same with that of
Basil.

But the Legates abhorred the Name of that Council, that had endeavored so
much to break the Power of the Popedom, and had consented to that extraordinary
safe Conduct, only to unite Germany, and to gain them by such compliance to be
of their side against the Pope. Yet the Legates promised to consider of it. The
Ambassadors were received in a Congregation, which differed from a Session of
the Council, just as a Committee of a whole House of Parliament, differs from
the House, when set according to its Forms. They began their Speech with this
Salutation, Most Reverend and most Mighty Fathers and Lords; they added a cold
Complement, and desired a safe Conduct. At this time the Pope hearing that the
Emperor was resolved to bring on the old designs of some Councils for lessening
his greatness, and that the Spanish Bishops were much set on it, united himself
to France, and resolved to break the Council as soon as it was possible; and
therefore he ordered the Legates to proceed in the decision of the Doctrine,
hoping that the Protestants would despair of obtaining any thing, and so go
away. So the safe Conduct they had desired was not granted them, and another
was offered in its room, containing only full security for their Persons. Upon
this security, such as it was, Divines came both from Wirtenberg, and the Town
of Strasburg. But as they were going on to treat of Matrimony, the War of
Germany broke out, and the Bishops of the Empire, with the other Ambassadors,
immediately went home. The Legates laid hold on this so readily, that though
the Session was to have been held on the second of May, they called an
extraordinary one on the 28th of April, and suspended the Council for two years.

An Account of the Council of Trent.
And being to have no other occasion to say any thing more of this Council, I
shall only add, that there had been a great expectation over Christendom of
some considerable event of a General Council for many years. The Bishops and
Princes had much desired it, hoping it might have brought the differences among
Divines to a happy composure; and have settled a Reformation of those abuses,
which had been long complained of, and were still kept up by the Court of Rome,
for the ends of that Principality that they had assumed in Sacred things. The
Popes for the same reasons were very apprehensive of it, fearing that it might
have lessened their Prerogatives; and by cutting off abuses, that brought in a
great Revenue to them, have abridged their Profits. But it was, by the cunning
of the Legates, the dissensions of Princes, the great number of poor Italian
Bishops, and the ignorance of the greatest part of the other, so managed, that
in stead of composing differences in Religion, things were so nicely defined,
that they were made irreconcilable. All those abuses, for which there had been
nothing but practice, and that much questioned before, were now, by the
Proviso's, and Reservations, excepted for the Privileges of the Roman See,
made warrantable. So that it had in all Particulars an Issue quite contrary to
what the several Parties concerned had expected from it, and has put the World
ever since out of the humor of desiring any more General Councils, as they are
accustomed to call them. The History of that Council was writ with as much
Life, and Beauty, and Authority, as had been ever seen in any humane Writing,
by Friar Paul of Venice, within half an Age of the time in which it was ended;
when the thing was yet fresh in Men's Memories, and many were alive who had been
present: and there was not one in that Age that engaged to write against it.
And a Judgment of the Histories of it.
But about forty years after, when Father Paul, and all his friends who knew
from what Vouchers he writ, were dead; Pallavicini, a Jesuit, who was made a
Cardinal, for this Service, undertook to answer him, by another History of that
Council, which, in many matters of Fact, contradicts Father Paul; upon the
credit (as he tells us) of some Journals and Memorials of such as were present,
which he perused, and cites upon all occasions. We see that Rome has been in
all Ages so good at forging those things which might be of use to its
Interests, that we know not how to trust that Shop of false Wares in any one
thing that comes out of it. And therefore it is not easy to be assured of the
truth and genuineness of any of the Materials, out of which the Jesuit
composed his Work. But as for the main Thread of the Story, both his and Father
Paul's Accounts do so agree, that whosoever compares them, will clearly see,
that all things were managed by Intrigues and secret Practices; so that it will
not be easy for a Man of common sense, after he has read over Pallavicini's
History to fancy that there was any extraordinary influence of the Holy Ghost
hovering over and directing their Councils. And the care they took for
palliating all the corcuptions then complained of was so apparent, that their
Historian had no other way by which to excuse it, but to set up a new
Hypothesis, which a French Writer since has wittily called the Cardinals New
Gospel; That there must be a Temporal Principality in the Church, that all
things which support that Principality are to be at least tolerated, though
they be far contrary to the Primitive Patterns, and to the first delivery of
the Gospel by Christ and his Apostles. That which was then set up, he accounts
a state of Infancy, to which Milk was proper; but the Church being since grown
to its full state and strength, other things are now necessary for the
maintaining and preserving of it.

But to return to Maurice, he having possessed the Emperor with an entire
confidence in him, gathered his Army together, took Ausburg, with many other
Imperial Cities; and displaced the Magistrates which the Emperor had put in
them, and restored their old ones, with the banished Ministers: so that every
thing began to put on a new face. Ferdinand King of the Romans did Mediate;
both on his own account, for the Turks were falling into Hungary; and on the
Empires, for the King of France was come with a great Army to the Confines of
the Empire: and the Constable, pretending that he only desired passage through
the Town of Metz, entered it, and possessed himself of it. Toul and Verdun fell
also into his Hands: and the French were endeavoring to be admitted into
Strasburg. The Emperor was now in great disorder, he had no Army about him;
those he had confided in were declared against him; his own Brother was not ill
pleased at his misfortune, the French were like to gain ground on his
Hereditary Dominions. Being thus perplexed, and irresolved, he did not send a
speedy Answer to Maurice's Demands, which he had sent by his Brother; for the
setting of the Landgrave at liberty, restoring the freedoms of the Empire, and
particularly in matters of Religion. But to lose no time the mean while,
Maurice marched on to Jnspruch, where the Emperor lay: and surprised a Pass to
which he had trusted, so that he was within two Miles of him before he was
aware of it. Upon this the Emperor rose from Supper in great have, and by Torch
light fled away to make his escape into Italy. He gave the Duke of Saxe his
liberty; but he generously resolved to follow him in this his calamity; and
perhaps he was not willing to owe his liberty to his Cousin Maurice. Thus all
that design, which the Emperor had been laying so many years, was now broken
off on a sudden: he lost all the advantages he had of his former Victories, and
was forced to set the Prisoners at liberty, and to call in the Proscriptions;
and in conclusion, the Edict of Passaw was made, by which the several Princes
and Towns were secured in the free exercise of their Religion.

I have made this digression, which I thought not disagreeable to the matter of
my History, to give account of the extreme danger in which Religion was in
Germany, and how strangely it was recovered; in which he who had been the chief
Instrument of the miseries it had groaned under, was now become its
unlooked-for deliverer. I have enlarged on some Passages that are in none of
the Printed Histories, which I draw from Melvils Memoires, who says he had them
from the Elector Palatines own Mouth.

The Emperor is much cast down.
But the Emperors misfortunes redoubled on him. For having made Peace in the
Empire, he would against all reason, or probability of success, sit down before
Metz. But the Duke of Guise defended the Place so against him, and the time of
the year was so unseasonable, being in December, that after a great loss of
Men, and vast expense of Treasure, he was forced to raise his Siege. From
thence he retired into Flanders; where his afflictions seized so violently on
him, that for some time he admitted none to come near him: Some said he was
frantic, others, that he was sullen and Melancholy. The English Ambassadors
at Brussels for many Weeks could learn nothing certain concerning him. Here, it
is said, he began to reflect on the vanity of the World; when, he who had but a
year before given Law to Christendom, was now driven to so low an ebb, that
as he had irrecoverably lost all his footing in Germany; so in all other things
his Councils were unlucky. It was one of the notablest turns of Fortune that
had been in many Ages; and gave a great demonstration, both of an overruling
Providence, that disposes of all humane Affairs at pleasure, and of a
particular care that God had of the Reformation, in thus recovering it when it
seemed gone without hope in Germany.

These Reflections made deep impressions on his mind, and were believed to have
first possessed him with the design which not long after he put in execution,
of laying down his Crowns, and retiring to a private course of Life. In his
retirement having time to consider things more impartially, he was so much
changed in his opinion of the Protestant Religion, that he who hitherto had
been a most violent opposer of it, was suspected of being turned to it before
he died.

1553.
Thus ended this Year; and now I come to the last and fatal Year of this young
Kings Life and Reign: The first thing done in it, A Regulation of the
Privy Council.
was, a regulation of the Privy Council, which was divided into so many
Committees, and every one of these had its proper Work, and days appointed for
the receiving and dispatching of all Affairs. In all these things a Method was
prescribed to them, of which the Reader will see a full account in the sixth
Paper of those that follow King Edwards Journal; King Edwards Remains, Number 6.
which Paper, though it is not all written with his Hand, as the others be, yet
it is in so many places interlined by him, that he seems to have considered it
much, and been well pleased with it. A new Parliament.
His second Parliament was opened on the first of March. On the sixth of March
it was moved in the House of Commons to give the King two Tenths and two
Fifteenths with a Subsidy for two years: It was long argued at first, and at
the passing the Bill it was again argued, but at last the Commons agreed to it.
The Preamble of it is a long Accusation of the Duke of Somerset, for involving
the King in Wars, wasting his Treasure, engaging him in much Debt, embasing the
Coin, and having given occasion to a most terrible Rebellion. In fine,
considering the great Debt the King was left in by his Father, the loss he put
himself to in the reforming the Coin, and they finding his temper to be set
wholly on the good of his Subjects, and not on enriching himself; therefore
they give him two Tenths, and two Fifteenths, with one Subsidy for two years.
Whether the debate in the House of Commons was against the Subsidies in this
Act, or against the Preamble, cannot be certainly known: but it is probable the
Debate at the engrossing the Bill was about the Preamble, which the Duke of
Northumberland and his Party were the more earnestly set on, to let the King
see how acceptable they were, and how hateful the Duke of Somerset had been.
The Clergy did also, for an expression of their affection and duty, give the
King six Shillings in the Pound of their Benefices. There was also a Bill sent
down from the Lords, That none might hold any Spiritual Promotion, unless he
were either Priest or Deacon: But after the third reading it was cast out. The
reason of it was, because many Noblemen and Gentlemen's Sons had Prebends given
them, on this pretense, that they intended to fit themselves by Study for
entering into Orders; but they kept these, and never advanced in their Studies:
upon which the Bishops prevailed to have the Bill agreed to by the Lords, but
could carry it no further.

Another Act passed for the suppressing the Bishopric of Duresme, The
Bishopric of Duresme suppressed, and two new ones appon ed.
which is so strangely misrepresented by those who never read more than the
Title of it, that I shall therefore give a more full account of it. It is set
forth in the Preamble, That that Bishopric being then void of a Prelate, so
that the Gift thereof was in the Kings pleasure: and the compass of it being so
large, extending to so many Shires so far distant, that it could not be
sufficiently served by one Bishop; and since the King, according to his godly
disposition, was desirous to have Gods Holy Word preached in these Parts, which
were wild and barbarous, for lack of good Preaching, and good Learning;
therefore he intended to have two Bishoprics for that Diocese: the one at
Duresme, which should have 2000 Marks Revenue; and another at Newcastle, which
should have 1000 Marks Revenue: and also to Found a Cathedral Church at
Newcastle, with a Deanery and Chapter, out of the Revenues of the Bishopric:
therefore the Bishopric of Duresme is utterly extinguished and dissolved, and
Authority is given for Letters Patents to erect the two new Bishoprics
together with the Deanery and Chapter at Newcastle: with a Proviso that the
Rights of the Deanery, Chapter, and Cathedral of Duresme should suffer nothing
by this Act.

When this Bill is considered, that dissolution that was designed by it will
not appear to be so sacrilegious a thing as some Writers have represented it.
For whosoever understands the value of old Rents, especially such as these were
near the Marches of an Enemy, where the Service of the Tenants in the War made
their Lands be set at very low rates, will know, that 3000 Marks of Rent being
reserved, besides the endowing of the Cathedral, which could hardly be done
under another thousand Marks, there could not be so great a Prey of that
Bishopric as has been imagined. Ridley, as himself writes in one of his
Letters, was named to be Bishop of Duresme, being one of the Natives of that
Country; but the thing never took effect. For in May, and no sooner, was the
Temporalty of the Bishopric turned into a County-Palatine, and given to the
Duke of Northumberland. But the Kings sickness, and soon after his death, made
that and all the rest of these designs prove abortive.

How Tonstall was deprived, I cannot understand. It was for misprision of
Treason, and done by Secular Men. For Cranmer refused to meddle in it. I have
seen the Commission given by Queen Mary to some Delegates to examine it: in
which it is said, That the Sentence was given only by Laymen; and that
Tonstal, being kept Prisoner long in the Tower, was brought to his Trial, in
which he had neither Counsel assigned him, nor convenient time given him for
clearing himself; and that after diverse Protestations, they had,
notwithstanding his Appeal, deprived him of his Bishopric. He was not only
turned out, but kept Prisoner, till Queen Mary set him at liberty.

At the end of this Parliament the King granted a free Pardon: concerning
which, this is only remarkable, That whereas it goes for a Maxim, that the
Acts of Pardon must be passed without changing any thing in them, the Commons,
when they sent up this Act of Pardon to the Lords, desired that some words
might be amended in it; but it is not clear what was done, for that same day
the Acts were passed, and the Parliament was dissolved.

In it the Duke of Northumberland had carried this Point, That the Nation made
a public Declaration of their dislike of the Duke of Somersets Proceedings;
which was the more necessary, because the King had let fall words concerning
his death, by which he seemed to reflect on it with some concern, and looked on
it as Northumberlands deed. But the Act had passed with such difficulty, that
either the Duke did not think the Parliament well enough disposed for him; or
else he resolved totally to vary from the Measures of the Duke of Somerset, who
continued the same Parliament long, whereas this that was opened on the first
was dissolved on the last day of March.

A Visitation for the Plate in the Churches.
Visitors were soon after appointed to examine, what Church-plate, Jewels, and
other Furniture, was in all Cathedrals and Churches; and to compare their
account with the Inventories made in former Visitations; and to see what was
embezeled, and how it was done. And because the King was resolved to have
Churches and Chapels furnished with that that was comely and convenient for
the Administration of the Sacraments; they were to give one or two Chalices of
Silver, or more, to every Church, Chapel, or Cathedral, as their discretions
should direct them; and to distribute comely Furniture for the Communion Table,
and for Surplices; and to sell the rest of the Linen, and give it to the Poor:
and to sell Copes, and Altar-Cloaths, and deliver all the rest of the Plate and
Jewels to the Kings Treasurer Sir Edm. Pecham. This is spitefully urged by one
of our Writers, who would have his Reader infer from it, that the King was ill
principled as to the matters of the Church, because when this Order was given
by him he was now in the 16th Year of his Age. But if all Princes should be
thus judged by all Instructions that pass under their Hands, they would be more
severely censured than there is cause. And for the particular matter that is
charged on the Memory of this young Prince, which, as it was represented to
him, was only a calling for the superfluous Plate and other Goods that lay in
Churches more for pomp than for use; though the applying of it to common uses,
except upon extreme necessities, is not a thing that can be justified; yet it
deserved not so severe a censure; especially the Instructions being Signed by
the King in his sickness; in which it is not likely that he minded Affairs of
that kind much, but set his Hand easily to such Papers as the Council prepared
for him.

These Instructions were directed, in the Copy that I have perused,
Instructions for the President of the North.
to the Earl of Shrewsbury, Lord President of the North: upon which occasion, I
shall here make mention of that which I know not certainly in what Year to
place, namely, the Instructions that were given to that Earl when he was made
President of the North. And I mention them the rather, because there have been
since that time some Contests about that Office, and the Court belonging to it.
There was by his Instructions a Council to be assistant to him; whereof some of
the Members were at large, and not bound to attendance, others were not to
leave him without license from him: and he was in all things to have a negative
Voice in it. For the other Particulars, I refer the Reader to the Copy, which
he will find in the Collection. Collection Number 56.
One Instruction among them belongs to Religion; that he and the other
Counselors, when there was at any time Assemblies of People before them,
should persuade them to be obedient chiefly to the Laws about Religion, and
especially concerning the Service set forth in their own Mother Tongue. There
was also a particular charge given them concerning the abolished Power of the
Bishop of Rome: whose abuses they were by continual inculcation so to beat into
the minds of the People, that they might well apprehend them, and might see
that those things were said to them from their Hearts, and not from their
Tongues only for Forms sake. They were also to satisfy them about the
abrogation of many Holy Days appointed by the same Bishop; who endeavored to
persuade the World that he could make Saints at his pleasure: which by leading
the People to idleness, gave occasion to many vices and inconveniences. These
Instructions were given after the Peace was made with Scotland; otherwise there
must have been a great deal in them relating to that War; but the Critical time
of them I do not know.

This Year Harly was made Bishop of Hereford, instead of Skip, who died the
last Year. And he being the last of those who were made so by Letters Patents,
The Form of the Bishops Letters Patents.
I shall give the Reader some satisfaction concerning that way of making
Bishops. The Patents began with the mention of the vacancy of the Sea, by
death, or removal: upon which the King being informed of the good
qualifications of such a one, appoints him to be Bishop, during his natural
Life, or so long as he shall behave himself well: giving him power to ordain
and deprive Ministers, to confer Benefices, judge about Wills, name Officials,
and Commissaries, exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, visit the Clergy,
inflict Censures, and punish scandalous Persons, and to do all the other parts
of the Episcopal Function that were found by the Word of God to be committed to
Bishops; all which they were to execute and do in the Kings Name and Authority.
After that in the same Patent follows the restitution of the Temporalties. The
day after, a Certificate in a Writ called a Significavit was to be made of
this, under the Great Seal, to the Archbishop, with a Charge to consecrate him.

The first that had his Bishopric by the Kings Patents was Barlow that was
removed from St. David's to Bath and Wells. They bear date the third of
February, in the second Year of the Kings Reign: and so Ferrar, Bishop of St.
David's, was not the first, as some have imagined, for he was made Bishop the
first of August that Year. This Ferrar was a rash indiscreet Man, and drew upon
himself the dislike of the Prebendaries of St. David's. He was made Bishop upon
the Duke of Somersets favor to him. But last Year many Articles were objected
to him: some, as if he had incurred a Praemunire for acting in his Courts not
in the Kings, but his own Name, and some for neglecting his Charge; and some
little indecencies were objected to him, as going strangely habited, traveling
on foot, whistling impertinently, with many other things, which if true, showed
in him much weakness and folly. The heaviest Articles he denied: yet he was
kept in Prison, and Commissioners were sent into Wales to examine Witnesses,
who took many Depositions against him. He lay in Prison till Queen Mary's time;
and then he was kept in on the account of his Belief. But his suffering
afterward for his Conscience, when Morgan, who had been his chief Accuser
before on those other Articles, being then made his Judge, condemned him for
Heresy, and made room for himself to be Bishop by burning him, did much turn
Peoples Censures from him, upon his Successor.

By these Letters Patents it is clear, that the Episcopal Function was
acknowledged to be of Divine appointment, and that the Person was no other way
named by the King than as Lay-Patrons present to Livings; only the Bishop was
legally authorized, in such a part of the Kings Dominions, to execute that
Function which was to be derived to him by Imposition of Hands. Therefore here
was no pretense for denying that such Persons were true Bishops, and for
saying, as some have done, that they were not from Christ, but from the King.

Upon this occasion it will not be improper to represent to the Reader how this
matter stands according to Law at this day, which is the more necessary,
because some superficial Writers have either mis-understood, or misrepresented
it. The Act that authorized those Letters Patents, and required the Bishops to
hold their Courts in the Kings Name, was repealed both by the 1 Mar. Chap. 2.
and 1, and 2 Phil. and Mary Chap. 8. The latter of these that repealed only a
part of it, was repealed by the 1 Eliz. Chap. 1. and the former by the 1 Jac.
Chap. 25. So some have argued, that since those Statutes which repealed this
Act of Edward the 6th 1. Par. Chap. 2. are since repealed, that it stands now
in full force. This seems to have some color in it, and so it was brought in
question in Parliament in the fourth year of King James: and great debate being
made about it, the King appointed the two Chief Justices to search into the
matter: they upon a slight enquiry agreed, that the Statute of Edw. the 6th was
in force by that Repeal; but the Chief Baron, and the other Judges, searching
the matter more carefully, found, that the Statute had been in effect repealed
by the first of Eliz. Chapter 1. where the Act of the 25 Hen. 8. Coke 2. Inst. P:
684, 685.
concerning the Election and Jurisdiction of Bishops, as formerly they had
exercised it, was revived: so that being in full force, the Act of Edw. the 6th
that repealed it, was thereby repealed. To this all the Learned Men of the Law
did then agree; so that it was not thought so much as necessary to make an
explanatory Law about it, the thing being indeed so clear, that it did not
admit of any ambiguity.

In May this Year the King by his Letters Patents authorized all Schoolmasters
to teach a new and fuller Catechism, compiled, as is believed, by Poinet.

These are all the Passages in which the Church is concerned this Year. The
Foreign Negotiations were important. For now the balance began to turn to the
French side; therefore the Council resolved to mediate a Peace between the
French and the Emperor. The Emperor had sent over an Ambassador in September
last year, to desire the King would consider the danger in which Flanders was
now, by the French Kings having Metz, with the other Towns in Lorrain, which
did in a great measure divide it from the assistance of the Empire: and
therefore moved, that according to the ancient League between England and the
House of Burgundy, they would enter into a new League with him. Upon this
occasion the Reader will find how the Secretaries of State bred the King to the
understanding of business, with relation to the Studies he was then about: for
Secretary Cecil set down all the Arguments for and against that League, with
little Notes on the Margent, relating to such Topics from whence he brought
them; King Edwards Remains, Number 5.
by which it seems the King was then learning Logic. It is the fifth of those
Papers after his Journal.

It was resolved on, to send Sir John Morison, A Treaty with the Emperor.
with Instructions to complement the Emperor upon his coming into Flanders, and
to make an offer of the Kings assistance against the Turks, who had made great
Depredations that year both in Hungary, Italy, and Sicily. If the Emperor
should, upon that, complain of the French King, and say, that he had brought in
the Turks, and should have asked assistance against him; he was to move the
Emperor to send over an Ambassador to treat about it, since he that was then
Resident in England was not very acceptable. These Instructions (which are in
the Collection) were Signed in September, Collection Number 57.
but not made use of till January this year. And then new Orders were sent to
propose the King to be a Mediator between France and the Emperor. Upon which,
the Bishop of Norwich, and Sir Phil. Hobbey were sent over, to join with Sir
John Morison: and Sir William Pickering, and Sir Tho. Chaloner, were sent into
France. In May the Emperor fell sick, and the English Ambassadors could learn
nothing certainly concerning him: but then the Queen of Hungary, and the Bishop
of Arras, treated with them. The Bishop of Arras complained, that the French
had begun the War, had taken the Emperors Ships at Barcelona, had robbed his
Subjects at Sea, had stirred up the Princes of Germany against him, had taken
some of the Towns of the Empire from him; while the French Ambassadors were all
the while swearing to the Emperor, that their Master intended nothing so much
as to preserve the Peace: so that now, although the French were making several
Overtures for Peace, they could give no credit to any thing that came from
them. In fine, the Queen and Bishop of Arras, promised the English Ambassadors
to let the Emperor know of the Kings offering himself to mediate; and
afterward told them, that the Emperor delayed giving answer till he were well
enough to do it himself.

On the 26th of May, the Ambassadors writ over that there was a Project sent
them out of Germany, of an Alliance, between the Emperor, Ferdinand King of the
Romans, the King of England, and the Princes of the Empire. They did not desire
that the King should offer to come into it of his own accord; but John
Frederick of Saxe would move Ferdinand to invite the King into it. This way
they thought would give least jealousy. They hoped the Emperor would easily
agree to the Conditions that related to the Peace of Germany, since he was now
out of all hopes of making himself Master of it. The Princes neither loved, nor
trusted him; but loved his Brother, and relied much on England. But the Emperor
having proposed, that the Netherlands should be included in the perpetual
League of the Empire, they would not agree to that, unless the Quota's of their
Contribution were much changed: for these Provinces were like to be the Seats
of Wars, therefore they would not engage for their defense, but upon reciprocal
advantages and easy terms.

When the English Ambassadors in the Court of France, desired to know on what
terms a Peace might be mediated, they found they were much exalted with their
success: so that (as they writ over on the first of May) they demanded the
restitution of Millan, and the Kingdoms of Sicily, Naples, and Navarre, the
Sovereignty of Flanders, Artois, and the Town of Tournay; they would also have
Siena to be restored to its liberty, and Metz, Toul, and Verdun, to continue
under the Protection of France. These terms the Council thought so
unreasonable, that, though they writ them over as News to their Ambassadors in
Flandars, yet they charged them not to propose them. But the Queen of Hungary
asked them what Propositions they had for a Peace, knowing already what they
were; and from thence studied to inflame the Ambassadors, since it appeared how
little the French regarded their Mediation, or the Peace of Christendom, when
they asked such high and extravagant things upon a little success.

On the 9th of June the Emperor ordered the Ambassadors to be brought into his
Bedchamber, whither they were carried by the Queen of Hungary. He looked pale,
and lean; but his Eyes were lively, and his Speech clear. They made him a
Complement upon his Sickness, which he returned with another for their long
attendance. Upon the matter of their Embassy, he said, the King of France had
begun the War, and must likewise begin the Propositions of Peace: But he
accepted of the Kings Offer very kindly, and said, They should always find in
him great inclinations to a just Peace. On the first of July the Council writ
to their Ambassadors. First, assuring them, that the King was still alive, and
they hoped he should recover; they told them, they did not find that the French
would offer any other terms than those formerly made: and they continued still
in that mind, that they could not be offered by them as Mediators; yet they
ordered them to impart them unto the Emperor as News, and carefully to observe
his looks and behavior upon their opening of every one of them.

But now the Kings death broke off this Negotiation, The Kings sickness.
together with all his other Affairs. He had last year, first the Measels, and
then the Smallpox, of which he was perfectly recovered: In his Progress, he
had been sometimes violent in his Exercises, which had cast him into great
Colds: but these went off, and he seemed to be well after it. But in the
beginning of January this year, he was seized with a deep Cough; and all
Medicines that were used did rather increase than lessen it; upon which a
suspicion was taken up, and spread over all the World, (so that it is mentioned
by most of the Historians of that Age) that some lingering Poison had been
given him: but more than Rumors, and some ill-favored Circumstances, I could
never discover concerning this. He was so ill, when the Parliament met, that he
was not able to go to Westminster; but ordered their first meeting, and the
Sermon, to be at White Hall. In the time of his sickness, Bishop Ridley
preached before him, and took occasion to run out much on Works of Charity; and
the obligation that lay on Men of high Condition to be eminent in good Works.
This touched the King to the quick: So that presently after Sermon he sent for
the Bishop. His care of the Relief of the Poor.
And after he had commanded him to sit down by him, and be covered, he resumed
most of the Heads of the Sermon, and said, he looked on himself as chiefly
touched by it: he desired him, as he had already given him the Exhortation in
general, so to direct him how to do his duty in that Particular. The Bishop,
astonished at this tenderness in so young a Prince, burst forth in Tears,
expressing how much he was overjoyed to see such inclinations in him: but told
him he must take time to think on it, and craved leave to consult with the Lord
Major, and Court of Aldermen. So the King writ by him to them to consult
speedily how the Poor should be relieved. They considered there were three
sorts of Poor; such as were so by natural infirmity or folly, as impotent
Persons, and Madmen, or Idiots; such as were so by accident, as sick, or
maimed Persons; and such as by their idleness did cast themselves into poverty.
So the King ordered the Gray-friars Church near Newgate, with the Revenues
belonging to it, to be a House for Orphans: St. Bartholomews near Smith-field
to be an Hospital: and gave his own House of Bridewell to be a Place of
Correction and Work for such as were wilfully idle. He also confirmed and
enlarged the Grant for the Hospital of St. Thomas in Southwark, which he had
erected and endowed in August last. And when he set his Hand to these
Foundations, which was not done before the 26th of June this Year: He thanked
God, that had prolonged his Life, till he had finished that design. So he was
the first Founder of those Houses, which, by many great Additions since that
time, have risen to be among the Noblest in Europe.

He expressed in the whole course of his sickness, great submission to the Will
of God, and seemed glad at the approaches of death; only the consideration of
Religion and the Church touched him much; and upon that account he said, he was
desirous of Life. About the end of May, Several Marriages.
or beginning of June, the Duke of Suffolks three Daughters were married: The
eldest, Lady Jane, to the Lord Guilford Dudley, the fourth Son of the Duke of
Northumberland, (who was the only Son whom he had yet unmarried:) The second,
the Lady Katharine, to the Earl of Pembroke's eldest Son, the Lord Herbert: The
third, the Lady Mary, who was crooked, to the Kings Groom-Porter Martin Keys.
The Duke of Northumberland married his two Daughters, the eldest to Sir Henry
Sidney, Son to Sir William Sidney, that had been Steward to the King when he
was Prince; the other was married to the Lord Hastings, Son to the Earl of
Huntington. The People were mightily inflamed against this insolent Duke, for
it was generally given out, that he was sacrificing the King to his own
extravagant ambition. He seemed little to regard their Censures, but attended
on the King most constantly, and expressed all the care and concern about him
that was possible. And finding that nothing went so near his Heart as the ruin
of Religion, which he apprehended would follow upon his death, when his Sister
Mary should come to the Crown: He is persuaded to leave the Crown to the Lady
Jane.
Upon that, he and his Party took advantage to propose to him to settle the
Crown by his Letters Patents on the Lady Jane Gray. How they prevailed with him
to pass by his Sister Elizabeth, who had been always much in his favor, I do
not so well understand. But the King being wrought over to this, the Duchess
of Suffolk, who was next in King Henry's Will, was ready to devolve her Right
on her Daughter, even though she should come afterward to have Sons. So on the
11th of June, Mountague that was Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and Baker,
and Bromley, two Judges, Which the Judges at first opposed.
with the Kings Attorney, and Solicitor, were commanded to come to Council.
There they found the King with some Privy-Councellors about him. The King told
them, he did now apprehend the danger the Kingdom might be in, if upon his
death his Sister Mary should succeed; who might marry a Stranger, and so change
the Laws and the Religion of the Realm. So he ordered some Articles to be read
to them, of the way in which he would have the Crown to descend. They objected,
that the Act of Succession, being an Act of Parliament, could not be taken away
by any such device: yet the King required them to take the Articles, and draw a
Book according to them: they asked a little time to consider of it. So having
examined the Statute of the first Year of this Reign, concerning Treasons, they
found that it was Treason, not only after the Kings death, but even in his
Life, to change the Succession. Secretary Petre in the mean while pressed them
to make have: When they came again to the Council, they declared they could not
do any such thing; for it was Treason; and all the Lords should be guilty of
Treason if they went on in it. Upon which, the Duke of Northumberland, who was
not then in the Council Chamger, being advertised of this, came in great fury,
calling Mountague a Traitor, and threatened all the Judges; so that they thought
he would have beaten them. But the Judges stood to their Opinion. They were
again sent for, and came, with Gosnold added to them, on the 15th of June. The
King was present, and he somewhat sharply asked them, Why they had not prepared
the Book as he had ordered them? They answered, That what ever they did would
be of no force without a Parliament. The King said, He intended to have one
shortly. Then Mountague proposed, that it might be delayed till the Parliament
met. But the King said, He would have it first done, and then ratified in
Parliament; and therefore he required them on their Allegiance to go about it;
and some Counselors told them, if they refused to obey that, they were
Traitors. This put them in a great consternation; and old Mountague, thinking
it could not be Treason what ever they did in this matter while the King lived,
and at worst, that a Pardon under the Great Seal would secure him, consented to
set about it, if he might have a Commission requiring him to do it, and a
Pardon under the Great Seal when it was done. Both these being granted him, he
was satisfied. The other Judges, But through fear all yielded except Judge
Hales.
being asked if they would concur, did all agree, being overcome with fear;
except Gosnald, who still refused to do it. But he also, being sorely
threatened, both by the Duke of Northumberland, and the Earl of Shrewsbury,
consented to it the next day. So they put the Entail of the Crown in Form of
Law, and brought it to the Lord Chancellor to put the Seal to it. They were all
required to set their Hands to it, but both Gosnald and Hales refused. Yet the
former was wrought on to do it, but the latter, though a most steady and
zealous Man for the Reformation, would upon no consideration yield to it: After
that the Lord Chancellor, for his Security, desired that all the Counselors
might set their Hands to it; which was done on the 21st of June by thirty three
of them; it is like, including the Judges in the Number. But Cranmer, as he
came seldom to Council after the Duke of Somersets Fall, so he was that day
absent on design. Cecil, in a Relation which he made one write of this
Transaction, for clearing himself afterward, says, That when he had heard
Gosnald and Hales declare how much it was against Law, he refused to set his
Hand to it as a Counselor, and that he only Signed as a Witness, to the Kings
Subscription. But Cranmer still refused to do it after they had all Signed it,
and said he would never consent to the disinheriting of the Daughters of his
late Master. Many Consultations were had to persuade him to it. Cranmer was
very hardly brought to consent to it.
But he could not be prevailed on, till the King himself set on him; who used
many Arguments, from the danger Religion would otherwise be in, together with
other Persuasions; so that, by his Reasons, or rather Importunities, at last he
brought him to it. But whether he also used that distinction of Cecils, that he
did it as a Witness, and not as a Counselor, I do not know: but it seems
probable, that if that liberty was allowed the one, it would not be denied the
other.

The Kings sickness becomes desperate.
But though the settling this business gave the King great content in his mind,
yet his Distemper rather increased than abated; so that the Physicians had no
hope of his recovery. Upon which, a confident Woman came, and undertook his
Cure, if he might be put into her Hands. This was done, and the Physicians were
put from him, upon this pretense, that they having no hopes of his recovery, in
a desperate Case desperate Remedies were to be used. This was said to be the
Duke of Northumberlands advice in particular; and it increased the Peoples
jealousy of him, when they saw the King grow very sensibly worse every day
after he came under the Woman's care: which becoming so plain, she was put from
him, and the Physicians were again sent for, and took him into their charge.
But if they had small hopes before, they had none at all now. Death thus
hastening on him, the Duke of Northumberland, who knew he had done but half his
work, except he had the Kings Sisters in his Hands, got the Council to write to
them in the Kings Name, inviting them to come and keep him company in his
sickness. But as they were on the way, on the sixth of July, his Spirits and
Body were so sunk, that he found death approaching; and so he composed himself
to die in a most devout manner. His whole exercise was in short Prayers and
Ejaculations. The last that he was heard to use was in these words: Lord God
deliver me out of this miserable and wretched Life, His last Prayer
and take me among thy Chosen; Howbeit not my Will but thine be done; Lord, I
commit my Spirit to thee. O Lord, thou know how happy it were for me to be
with thee: yet for thy Chosens sake send me Life and Health, that I may truly
serve thee. O my Lord God, bless my People, and save thine Inheritance; O Lord
God, save thy chosen People of England; O Lord God, defend this Realm from
Papistry, and maintain thy true Religion, that I and my People may praise thy
Holy Name, for Jesus Christ his sake. Seeing some about him, he seemed
troubled, that they were so near, and had heard him: but with a pleasant
countenance he said, he had been praying to God. And soon after, the Pangs of
death coming on him, he said to Sir Henry Sidney, who was holding him in his
Arms, I am faint, Lord have mercy on me, and receive my Spirit; and so he
breathed out his Innocent Soul. The Duke of Northumberland, according to Cecils
Relation, intended to have concealed his death for a fortnight, but it could
not be done.

His Death and Character.
Thus died King Edward the sixth, that incomparable young Prince. He was then in
the sixteenth Year of his Age, and was counted the wonder of that Time. He was
not only learned in the Tongues, and other Liberal Sciences, but knew well the
State of his Kingdom. He kept a Book, in which he writ the Characters that were
given him, of all the chief Men of the Nation, all the Judges,
Lord-Lieutenants, and Justices of the Peace over England: in it he had marked
down their way of living, and their zeal for Religion. He had studied the
matter of the Mint, with the Exchange, and value of Money; so that he
understood it well, as appears by his Journal. He also understood
Fortification, and designed well. He knew all the Harbors and Ports, both of
his own Dominions, and of France, and Scotland; and how much Water they had,
and what was the way of coming in to them. He had acquired great knowledge in
Foreign Affairs; so that he talked with the Ambassadors about them in such a
manner, that they filled all the World with the highest opinion of him that was
possible; which appears in most of the Histories of that Age. He had great
quickness of apprehension; and being mistrustful of his memory, used to take
Notes of almost every thing he heard: he writ these first in Greek Characters,
that those about him might not understand them; and afterward writ them out in
his Journal. He had a Copy brought him of every thing that passed in Council,
which he put in a Chest, and kept the Key of that always himself.

In a word, the natural and acquired perfections of his mind were wonderful;
but his Virtues and true Piety were yet more extraordinary. He was such a
Friend to Justice, that, though he loved his Uncle the Duke of Somerset much,
yet when he was possessed of a belief of his designing to murder his
Fellow-Councellors, he was alienated from him: and being then but fourteen, it
was no wonder if that was too easily infused in him. His chief Favorite was
Barnaby Fitz-Patrick, to whom he writ many Letters and Instructions when he
sent him to be bred in France. In one of his Letters to him, he writ, That he
must not think to live like an Ambassador, but like a private Gentleman, who
was to be advanced as he should deserve it. He allowed him to keep but four
Servants: he charged him to follow the company of Gentlemen, rather than of
Ladies: that he should not be superfluous in his Apparel: that he should go to
the Campaign, and observe well the Conduct of Armies, and the Fortification of
strong Places: and let the King know always when he needed Money, and he would
supply him. All these with many other directions the King writ with his own
Hand: and at his return, to let him see he intended to raise him by degrees, he
gave him a Pension only of 150 Pound. This Fitz-Patrick did afterward fully
answer the opinion this young King had of him. He was bred up with him in his
Learning; and as it is said, had been his whipping Boy, who, according to the
Rule of educating our Princes, was always to be whipped for the Kings faults. He
was afterward made by Queen Elizabeth Baron of Upper Ossory in Ireland, which
was his Native Country.

King Edward was tender and compassionate in a high measure: so that he was
much against the taking away the Lives of Heretics; and therefore said to
Cranmer, when he persuaded him to Sign the Warrant for the burning of Joan of
Kent, that he was not willing to do it, because he thought that was to send her
quick to Hell. He expressed great tenderness to the miseries of the Poor in his
sickness, as has been already shown. He took particular care of the Suits of
all poor Persons; and gave Dr. Cox special charge to see that their Petitions
were speedily answered, and used often to consult with him how to get their
matters set forward. He was an exact keeper of his word; and therefore, as
appears by his Journal, was most careful to pay his Debts, and to keep his
credit: knowing that to be the chief Nerve of Government; since a Prince that
breaks his Faith, and loses his Credit, has thrown up that which he can never
recover, and made himself liable to perpetual distrusts, and extreme contempt.

He had above all things a great regard to Religion. He took Notes of such
things as he heard in Sermons, which more specially concerned himself: and made
his measures of all Men by their zeal in that matter. This made him so set on
bringing over his Sister Mary to the same Persuasions with himself; that when
he was pressed to give way to her having Mass, he said, That he would not only
hazard the loss of the Emperors friendship, but of his Life, and all he had in
the World, rather than consent to what he knew was a sin: and he cited some
Passages of Scripture that obliged Kings to root out Idolatry; by which he said
he was bound in Conscience not to consent to her Mass; since he believed it was
Idolatry; and did argue the matter so learnedly with the Bishops, that they
left him, being amazed at his knowledge in Divinity. So that Cranmer took Cheek
by the Hand upon it, and said, He had reason all the days of his Life to
rejoice that God had honored him to breed such a Scholar. All Men who saw and
observed these qualities in him, looked on him as one raised by God for most
extraordinary ends; and when he died, concluded that the sins of England must
needs be very great, that had provoked God to take from them a Prince under
whose Government they were like to have seen such blessed times. He was so
affable and sweet natured, that all had free access to him at all times; by
which he came to be most universally beloved, and all the high things that
could be devised were said by the People to express their esteem of him. The
Fable of the Phoenix pleased most; so they made his Mother one Phoenix, and him
another, rising out of her Ashes. But graver Men compared him to Josiah; and
long after his death I find both in Letters and Printed Books they commonly
named him Our Josias, others called him Edward the Saint.

A Prince of such qualities; so much esteemed and loved, could not but be much
lamented at his death; and this made those of the Reformation abhor the Duke of
Northumberland, who they suspected had hastened him to such an untimely end:
which contributed, as much as any thing, to the establishing of Queen Mary on
the Throne; for the People reckoned none could be so unworthy to govern, as
those who had poisoned so worthy a Prince, and so kind a Master. I find nothing
of opening his Body for giving satisfaction about that which brought him to his
end; though his lying unburied till the eighth of August makes it probable that
he was opened.

But indeed the sins of England, did at this time call down from Heaven heavy
Curses on the Land. They are sadly expressed in a Discourse that Ridley writ
soon after, under the Title of the Lamentation of England: he says Lechery,
Oppression, Pride, Covetousness, and a hatred and scorn of Religion, were
generally spread among all People: chiefly those of the higher Rank. Cranmer
and he had been much disliked: the former for delivering his Conscience so
freely on the Duke of Somersets death; and both of them for opposing so much
the rapine and spoil of the Goods of the Church, which was done without Law or
Order. Nor could they engage any to take care of relieving the Poor, except
only Dobbs, who was then Lord Major of London. These sins were openly preached
against, by Latimer, Lever, Bradford, and Knox, who did it more severely, and
by others who did it plainly, though more softly. One of the main causes Ridley
gives of all these evils, was, that many of the Bishops, and most of the
Clergy, being all the while Papists in Heart, who had only complied to preserve
their Benefices, took no care of their Parishes, and were rather well pleased
that things were ill managed. And of this that good Bishop had been long very
apprehensive when he considered the sins then prevailing, and the Judgments
which they had reason to look for; as will appear by an excellent Letter, which
he sent about to his Clergy to set them on to such Duties as so sad a Prospect
required: It will be found in the Collection; Collection Number 58.
and though it belongs to the former Year, yet I choose rather to bring it in
on this occasion. These things having been fully laid open in the former parts
of this Work, I shall not insist on them here, having mentioned them only for
this cause, that the Reader may from hence gather, what we may still expect, if
we continue guilty of the same or worse sins, after all that illumination and
knowledge with which we have been so long blessed in these Kingdoms.

The END of the First BOOK.
engraved portrait of Queen Mary I MARIA ANGLIAE HISPANIAE andct REGINA
R. White sculp
Nata 18 Feb: 1516 Regnare cepit 6.to

royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE Julij 1553. Obijt 17.mo
November: 1558

Printed for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in S.t Paul's Church yard.



BOOK II. THE LJFE AND REIGN OF Queen MARY.
UPon the Death of King Edward, the Crown devolved, 1553. Q. Mary succeeds, but
is in great danger.
according to King Henry's Will, and the Act of Parliament, made in the 35th
Year of his Reign, on his Eldest Sister, the now Queen Mary. She was on her way
to London, in obedience to the Letters that had been writ to her, to come and
comfort her Brother in his Sickness; and was come within half a days Journey of
the Court, when she received an Advertisement from the Earl of Arundel, that
her Brother was dead; together with an account of what was done about the
Succession. The Earl also informed her, that the King's Death was concealed, on
design to entrap her before she knew of it; and therefore he advised her to
retire. Upon this, she knowing that the Duke of Northumberland was much hated
in Norfolk, for the great slaughter he had made of the Rebels, when he subdued
them in the third Year of the last Reign; And retires to Suffolk.
therefore chose to go that way to the Castle of Framlingham in Suffolk: Which
Place being near the Sea, she might, if her Designs should miscarry, have an
opportunity from thence to fly over to the Emperor that was then in Flanders.

At London, it seems, the whole Business of setting up the Lady Jane, had been
carried very secretly; since if Queen Mary had heard any hint of it, she had
certainly kept out of the way, and not adventured to have come so near the
Town. It was an unaccountable Error in the Party for the Lady Jane, that they
had not, immediately after the Seal was put to the Letters Patents, or at
furthest, presently after the King's Death, sent some to make sure of the
King's Sisters; instead of which they thus lingered, hoping they would have come
into their Toils, in an easier and less violent way. On the 8th of July, they
writ to the English Ambassadors at Brussels the news of the King's Death, but
said nothing of the Succession. On the 9th of July they perceived the King's
Death was known; for Queen Mary writ to to them, She writes to the Council.
from Kenning-Hall, that she understood the King her Brother was dead; which
how sorrowful it was to her, God only knew, to whose Will she did humbly submit
her Will. The Provision of the Crown to her, after his Death, she said, was
well known to them all; but she thought it strange, that he being three days
dead, she had not been advertised of it by them. She knew what Consultations
were against her, and what Engagements they had entered into; but was willing to
take all their Doings in good part, and therefore did give Pardon for all that
was past, to such as would accept of it, and required them to proclaim her
Title to the Crown in London.

Upon this Letter, they saw the death of the King could no longer be concealed;
so the Duke of Suffolk, and the Duke of Northumberland, went to Durham-House,
where the Lady Jane lay, to give her notice of her being to succeed to the
Crown, in the room of the deceased King. She received the News with great
sorrow for King Edward's Death; Who declare for the Lady Jane.
which was not at all lessened, but rather increased, by that other part of
their Message, concerning her being to succeed him.

Lady Jane's Character.
She was a Lady that seemed indeed born for a great Fortune; for as she was a
beautiful and graceful Person, so she had great Parts, and greater Virtues. Her
Tutor was Dr. Elmer, believed to be the same that was afterward made Bishop of
London by Queen Elizabeth. She had learned from him the Latin and Greek Tongues
to great ^erfection; so that being of the same Age with the late King, she
see^ed superior to him in those Languages. And having acquired the helps of
Knowledge, she spent her time much in the study of it. Roger Ascham, Tutor to
the Lady Elizabeth, coming once to wait on her at her Father's House in
Leicestershire, found her reading Plato's Works in Greek; when all the rest of
the Family were hunting in the Park: He asked her, How she could be absent from
such pleasant Diversions? She answered, The Pastimes in the Park were but a
shadow to the delight she had in reading Plato's Phedon, which then lay open
before her; and added, That she esteemed it one of the greatest Blessings that
God ever gave her, that she had sharp Parents, and a gentle Schoolmaster,
which made her take delight in nothing so much, as in her Study. She read the
Scriptures much, and had attained great knowledge in Divinity. But with all
these Advantages of Birth and Parts, she was so humble, so gentle, and pious,
that all People both admired and loved her, and none more than the late King.
She had a Mind wonderfully raised above the World, and at the Age wherein
others are, but imbibing the Notions of Philosophy, she had attained to the
practice of the highest Precepts of it. She was neither lifted up with the hope
of a Crown, nor cast down when she saw her Palace made afterward her Prison;
but carried her self, with an equal temper of Mind, in those great inequalities
of Fortune, that so suddenly exalted and depressed her. All the Passion she
expressed in it was, that which is of the noblest sort, and is the indication
of tender and generous Natures, being much affected with the Troubles her
Father and Husband fell in, on her account.

The mention of the Crown, when her Father, with her Father-in-Law, saluted
her, Queen, did rather heighten her disorder upon the King's Death. She said,
She knew, by the Laws of the Kingdom, Her unwillingness to accept of the Crown.
and by natural Right, the Crown was to go to the King's Sisters; so that she
was afraid of burdening her Conscience, by assuming that which belonged to
them; and that she was unwilling to enrich her self by the spoils of others.
But they told her, all that had been done was according to the Law, to which
all the Judges and Counselors had set their Hands. This joined with their
Persuasions, and the Importunities of her Husband, who had more of his Fathers
temper, than of her Philosophy in him, at length prevailed with her to submit
to it: Of which her Father-in-Law did afterward say in Council, She was
rather, by enticement of the Counselors, and force, made to accept of the
Crown, then came to it by her own seeking and request.

Upon this, order was given for proclaiming her Queen the next day. And an
Answer was writ to Queen Mary, signed by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the
Lord Chancellor, the Dukes of Suffolk and Northumberland; the Marquesses of
Winchester and Northampton; the Earls of Arundel, Shrewsbury, Huntington,
Bedford, and Pembrook; the Lords, Cobham and Darcy; Sir Thomas Cheyney, Sir
Robert Cotton, Sir William Petre, Sir William Cecil, Sir John Cheek, Sir John
Mason, Sir Edward North, and Sir Robert Bows, in all one and twenty; Council
writes to Q. Mary.
letting her know, That Queen Jane was now their Sovereign, according to the
Ancient Laws of the Land, and the late King's Letters Patents, to whom they
were now bound by their Allegiance. They told her, That the Marriage between
her Father and Mother, was dissolved by the Ecclesiastical Courts, according to
the Laws of God, and of the Land. That many noble Universities in Christendom
had consented to it; That the Sentence had been confirmed in Parliaments, and
she had been declared illegitimate, and uninheritable to the Crown. They
therefore required her to give over her Pretenses, and not to disturb the
Government; and promised, that if she showed her self Obedient, she should find
them all ready to do her any Service which in Duty they could.

The day following they proclaimed Queen Jane. Lady Jane proclaimed Queen.
Collection. Number 1.
The Proclamation will be found in the Collection. It sets forth, That the late
King had, by his Letters Patents, limited the Crown, that it should not descend
to his two Sisters, since they were both illegitimated by Sentences in the
Spiritual Courts, and Acts of Parliament, and were only his Sisters by the
Half-Blood, who (though it were granted they had been legitimate) are not
inheritable by the Law of England. It was added, That there was also great
cause to fear, that the King's Sisters might marry Strangers, and so change the
Laws of the Kingdom, and subject it to the Tyranny of the Bishops of Rome, and
other Foreign Laws. For these Reasons they were excluded from the Succession;
and the Lady Frances, Duchess of Suffolk, being next the Crown, it was
provided, that if she had no Sons at the death of the King, the Crown should
devolve immediately on her eldest Daughter Jane, and after her, and her Issue,
to her Sisters; since she was born within the Kingdom, and already married in
it. Therefore she was proclaimed Queen, promising to be most benign and
gracious to all her People, to maintain God's Holy Word, and the Laws of the
Land, requiring all the Subjects to obey and acknowledge her. When this was
proclaimed, great multitudes were gathered to hear it; but there were very few
that shouted with the Acclamations ordinary on such Occasions. And whereas a
Vintner's Boy did some-way express his scorn at that which was done, it was
ordered, that he should be made an Example the next day, by being set on a
Pillory, and having his Ears nailed to it, and cut off from his Head; which was
accordingly done; a Herald in his Coat, reading to the multitude that was
called together, by sound of Trumpet, the nature of his Offense.

Censures past upon it.
Upon this, all People were in great distraction; The Proclamation, opening the
new Queen's Title, came to be variously descanted on. Some who thought the
Crown descended by right of Blood, and that it could not be limited by
Parliament, argued, that the King having his Power from God, it was only to
descend in the natural way of Inheritance; therefore they thought the next Heir
was to succeed. And whereas the King's two Sisters were both by several
Sentences and Acts of Parliament, declared Bastards; and whether that was well
judged, or not, they were to be reputed such as the Law declared them to be, so
long as it stood in force; therefore they held that the Queen of Scotland was
to succeed; who, though she pretended this upon Queen Mary's Death, yet did not
claim now, because by the Papal Law, the Sentence against Queen Mary was
declared Null. Others argued, that though a Prince were named by an immediate
appointment from Heaven, yet he might change the course of Succession, as David
did, preferring Solomon before Adonijah: But this, it was said, did not belong
to the King's of England, whose right to the Crown, with the extent of their
Prerogative, did not come from any Divine Designation, but from a long
Possession, and the Laws of the Land: and that therefore the King might by Law
limit the Succession, as well as he and other Kings had in some Points limited
the Prerogative, (which was clearly Sir Thomas More's Opinion); and that
therefore the Act of Parliament, for the Succession of the King's Sisters, was
still strong in Law. It was also said, That if the Kin^'^ Sisters were to be
excluded for Bastardy, all Charles Brandon's Issue were in the same
predicament; since he was not lawfully married to the French Queen, his former
Wife Mortimer being then alive, and his Marriage with her was never dissolved;
(for though some English Writers say they were divorced, yet those who wrote
for the Queen of Scots Title, in the next Reign denied it); But in this the
difference was great between them; since the King's Sisters were declared
Bastards in Law, whereas this against Charles Brandon's Issue, was only a
Surmise. Others objected, That if the Blood gave an Indefeasible Title, How
came it that the L. Jane's Mother did not Reign? It is true, Maud the Empress,
and Margaret Countess of Richmond, were satisfied that their Sons, Henry the
Second, and Henry the Seventh, should reign in their Rights; but it had never
been heard of, that a Mother had resigned to her Daughter, especially when she
was yet under Age. But this was imputed to the Duke of Suffolk's weakness, and
the Ambition of the Duke of Northumberland. That Objection concerning the
Half-Blood, being a Rule of Common Law in the Families of Subjects, to cut off
from Step-Mothers the Inclinations and Advantages of destroying their Husbands
Children, was not thought applicable to the Crown: Nor was that of Ones being
born out of the Kingdom, which was hinted at to exclude the Queen of Scotland,
thought pertinent to this Case: since there was an Exception made in the Law
for the King's Children, which was thought to extend to all their Issue. But
all People agreed in this, that though by Act of Parliament, King Henry was
empowred to provide or limit the Crown, by his Letters Patents; yet that was a
Grant particularly to him, and did not descend to his Heirs: So that the
Letters Patents made by King Edward, could have no force to settle the Crown,
and much less when they did expressly contradict an Act of Parliament. The
proceeding so severely against the Vintners Boy, was imputed to the violent
temper of the Duke of Northumberland. And though when a Government is Firm, and
Factions are weak, the making some public Examples, may intimidate a Faction
otherwise disheartened; yet Severities, in such a juncture as this, when the
Council had no other support but the assistance of the People, seemed very
unadvised; and all thought it was a great Error to punish him in that manner.

This made them reflect on the rest of Northumberland's Cruelties; The Duke of
Northumberland much hated.
His bringing the Duke of Somerset, with those Gentlemen that suffered with
him, to their End, by a foul Conspiracy; but above all things, the Suspicions
that lay on him, of being the Author of the late King's untimely Death, enraged
the People so much against him, that without considering what they might suffer
under Queen Mary, they generally inclined to set her up.

The Lady Jane was proclaimed in many Towns near London, yet the People were
generally running to Queen Mary: Many declare for Q. Mary.
Many from Norfolk came to her, and a great Body of Suffolk Men gathered about
her, who were all for the Reformation. They desired to know of her, whether she
would alter the Religion set up in King Edward's Days; to whom she gave full
Assurances, that she would never make any Innovation or Change, but be
contented with the private Exercise of her own Religion. Upon this they were
all possessed with such a belief of her sincerity, that it made them resolve to
hazard their Lives and Estates in her Quarrel. The Earls of Bath and Suffolk
raised Forces, and joined with her; so did the Sons of the Lord Wharton and
Mordant; with many more.

Upon this the Council resolved to gather Forces for the dispersing of theirs,
The Council orders Forces to be sent against her.
and sent the Earl of Huntington's Brother to raise Buckinghamshire, and others
to other parts, ordering them to meet the Forces that should come from London,
at New Market. It was at first proposed to send the Duke of Suffolk to command
them; but the Lady Jane was so much concerned in her Father's preservation,
that she urged, he might not be sent; and he being but a soft Man, was easily
excused. So it fell next on the Duke of Northumberland, who was now much
distracted in his Mind. He was afraid, if he went away, the City might declare
for Queen Mary; nor was he well assured of the Council, who seemed all to
comply with him, rather out of fear, than good will. Cecil would not officiate
as Secretary, as himself relates; the Judges would do nothing; and the Duke
plainly saw, that if he had not (according to the custom of our Princes, on
their first coming to the Crown) gone with the Lady Jane, and the Council, into
the Tower, whereby he kept them as Prisoners, the Council were inclined to
desert him. This divided him much in his Thoughts. The whole success of his
Design depended on the dispersing of the Queen's Forces: And it was no less
necessary to have a Man of courage continue still in the Tower. There was none
there whom he could entirely trust, but the Duke of Suffolk, and he was so mean
spirited, that he did not depend much on him. But the progress the Queen's
Forces made, pressed him to go, and make head against her. So he laid all the
heavy Charges he could on the Council, to look to Queen Jane, and to stand
firmly to her Interests; and left London on the 14th of July, marching out with
2000 Horse, and 6000 Foot. But as he rode through Bishops-gate street, and
Shoreditch, though there were great Crowds looking on, none cried out to wish
him success, which gave a sad indication how ill they were affected to him.

And write to the Emperor.
The Council writ to the Emperor by one Shelley, whom they sent to give notice
of the Lady Jane's Succession, complaining that the Lady Mary was making Stirs,
and that his Ambassador had officiously meddled in their Affairs; but that they
had given Orders for reducing the Lady Mary to her Duty. They also desired the
continuance of his Friendship, and that he would command his Resident to carry
himself as became an Ambassador. Sir Philip Hobbey was continued Ambassador
there; the others were ordered to stay and prosecute the Mediation of the
Peace; but the Emperor would not receive those Letters; and in a few days there
went over others from Queen Mary.

Ridley preaches for the L. Jane's Title.
Ridley was appointed to set out Queen Jane's Title, in a Sermon at Paul's; and
to warn the People of the Dangers they would be in, if Queen Mary should reign:
which he did, and gave an account in his Sermon of what had passed between him
and her, when he went and offered to preach to her. At the same time the Duke
of Northumberland, at Cambridg, where himself was both Chancellor of the
University, and Steward of the Town, made the Vice Chancellor preach to the
same purpose. But he held in more general terms, and managed it so, that there
was no great Offense taken on either hand.

Q. Mary's Party grows strong.
But now the Queen had made her Title be proclaimed at Norwich; and sent Letters
all over England, requiring the Peers, and others of great Quality, to come to
her assistance. Some Ships had been sent about, to lie on that Coast for
intercepting her, if she should fly away; but those who commanded them were so
dealt with, that instead of acting against her, they declared for her. Sir
Edward Hastings having raised 4000 Men in Buckinghamshire, instead of joining
with the Duke of Northumberland, went over with them into her Service. Many
were also from all Places every day running to her, and in several Counties of
England she was proclaimed Queen. But none came in to the Duke of
Northumberland, so he writ earnestly to the Lords at London, to send him more
Supplies.

They understanding, from all the Corners of England, And the Council turn to
her.
that the Tide grew everywhere strong for the Queen, entered into Consultations
how to redeem their passed Faults, and to reconcile themselves to her. The Earl
of Arundel hated Northumberland on many accounts. The Marquess of Winchester
was famous for his dexterity in shifting sides, all ways to his own Advantage.
To them joined the Earl of Pembrook, the more closely linked to the Interests
of the Lady Jane, since his Son had married her Sister; which made him the more
careful to disentangle himself in time, To those, Sir Thomas Cheney, Warden of
the Cinque Ports, and Sir John Mason, with the two Secretaries, came over. It
was said, that the French and Spanish Ambassadors had desired an Audience in
some Place in the City; and it was proposed to give it in the Earl of Pembrooks
House; who being the least suspected, it was agreed to, by the Duke of Suffolk,
that they should be suffered to go from the Tower thither. They also pretended,
that since the Duke of Northumberland had writ so earnestly for new Forces,
they must go and treat with my Lord Mayor and the City of London about it. But
as soon as they were got out, the Earl of Arundel pressed them to declare for
Queen Mary: And to persuade them to it, he laid open all the Cruelty of
Northumberland, under whose Tyranny they must resolve to be enslaved, if they
would not now shake it off. The other consenting readily to it, they sent for
the Lord Mayor, with the Recorder, and the Aldermen; and having declared their
Resolutions to them, they rode together into Cheapside, And proclaimed her
Queen.
and there proclaimed Queen Mary, on the 19th of July: From thence they went to
Saint Paul's, where Te Deum was sung. An Order was sent to the Tower, to require
the Duke of Suffolk to deliver up that Place, and to acknowledge Queen Mary: and
that the Lady Jane should lay down the Title of Queen. To this, as her Father
submitted tamely, so she expressed no sort of Concern in losing that imaginary
Glory, which now had for nine days been rather a Burden, than any Matter of Joy
to her. They also sent Orders to the Duke of Northumberland to disband his
Forces, and to carry himself as became an Obedient Subject to the Queen. And
the Earl of Arundel, with the Lord Paget, were sent to give her an account of
it, who continued still at Framingham in Suffolk.

The Duke of Northumberland had retired back to Cambridg, The Duke of
Northumberland submits, and is taken.
to stay for new Men from London; but hearing how Matters went there, before
ever the Councils Orders came to him, he dismissed his Forces, and went to the
Marketplace, and proclaimed the Queen, flinging up his own Hat for joy, and
crying, God save Queen Mary. But the Earl of Arundel being sent by the Queen to
apprehend him; it is said, That when he saw him, he fell abjectly at his Feet
to beg his favor. This was like him, it being not more unusual for such
Insolent Persons to be most basely sunk with their Misfortunes, than to be out
of measure blown up with success. He was, on the 25th of July, sent to the
Tower, with the Earl of Warwick his eldest Son, With many more Prisoners who
were sent to the Tower of London.
Ambrose and Henry two of his other Sons. Some other of his Friends were made
Prisoners, among whom was Sir Thomas Palmer, the wicked Instrument of the Duke
of Somerset's fall, who was become his most intimate Confident; and Dr. Sands
the Vicechancellor of Cambridg.

Now did all People go to the Queen to implore her Mercy. She received them all
very favorably, except the Marquess of Northampton, Dr, Ridley, and Lord
Robert Dudley. The first of these had been a submissive fawner on the Duke of
Northumberland; the second had incurred her displeasure by his Sermon, and she
gladly laid hold on any color to be more severe to him, that way might be made
for bringing Bonner to London again; the third had followed his Father's
Fortunes. On the 27th, the Lords Chief Justices, Cholmley and Montague, were
sent to the Tower; and the day after, the Duke of Suffolk, and Sir John Cheek,
went after them; the Lady Jane and her Husband being still detained in the
Tower. Three days after an Order came to set the Duke of Suffolk at liberty,
upon engagement to return to Prison when the Queen required it, for it was
generally known that he had been driven on by Dudley; and as it was believed,
that he had not been faulty out of Malice, so his great weakness made them
little apprehensive of any Dangers from him; and therefore the Queen being
willing to express a signal Act of Clemency at her first coming to the Crown,
it was thought best to let it fall on him.

Now did the Queen come toward London, being met on the way by her Sister
Elizabeth, The Queen enters London.
with a thousand Horse, who had gathered about her, to show their Zeal to
maintain both their Titles, which in this late contest had been linked
together. She made her entry to London on the third of August, with great
solemnity and pomp. When she came to the Tower, the Duke of Norfolk, who had
been almost seven Years in it; Gardener, the Bishop of Winchester, that had
been five Years there; the Duchess of Somerset, that had been kept there near
two Years; and the Lord Courtney, (whom she made afterward Earl of Devonshire)
that was Son to the Marquess of Exeter, and had been kept there ever since his
Father was Attainted, had their Liberty granted them. So now she was peaceably
settled in the Throne, without any effusion of Blood; having broke through a
Confederacy against her, which seemed to be so strong, that if he that was the
Head of it, had not been universally odious to the Nation, it could not have
been so easily dissipated. She was naturally pious and devout, even to
superstition; had a generous disposition of Mind, but much corrupted by
Melancholy, which was partly natural in her, but much increased by the cross
Accidents of her Life, both before and after her Advancement; so that she was
very peevish, and splenetick, toward the end of her Life. When the Differences
became irreconcilable between her Father and Mother, She had been in danger in
her Father's Time.
she followed her Mothers Interests, they being indeed her own; and for a great
while could not be persuaded to submit to the King; who being impatient of
contradiction from any, but especially from his own Child, was resolved to
strike a terror in all his People, by putting her openly to death. Which her
Mother coming to know, writ her a Letter of a very devout strain, which will be
found in the Collections. Coll. Numb. 2.
In which, She encouraged her to suffer cheerfully, to trust to God, and keep
her heart clean. She charged her, in all things, to obey the King's Commands,
except in the Matters of Religion. She sent her two Latin Books, the one of the
Life of Christ, (which was perhaps the famous Book of Thomas a Kempis) and the
other St. Jerome's Letter. She bid her divert her self at the Virginals or Lute,
but above all things to keep her self pure, and to enter into no treaty of
Marriage, till these ill times should pass over; of which her Mother seemed to
retain still good hopes. This Letter should have been in my former Volumn, if I
had then seen it, but it is no improper Place to mention it here. At Court,
many were afraid to move the King for her; both the Duke of Norfolk and
Gardener looked on, and were unwilling to hazard their own Interests to
preserve her. But (as it was now printed, And was preserved by Cranmer's means.
and both these appealed to) Cranmer was the only Person that would adventure
on it. In his gentle way, he told the King, that she was young and indiscreet,
and therefore it was no wonder if she obstinately adhered to that which her
Mother, and all about her, had been infusing into her for many Years: but that
it would appear strange if he should for this Cause so far forget he was a
Father, as to proceed to Extremities with his own Child: that if she were
separated from her Mother, and her People, in a little time there might be
ground gained on her; but to take away her Life, would raise horror through all
Europe against him. By these means he preserved her at that time.

After her Mother's Death, in June following, she changed her note; She
submitted to her Father.
for besides the Declaration she then signed, which was inserted in the former
part of this Work; she writ Letters of such submission, as show how expert she
was at dissembling. Three of these to her Father, and one to Cromwell, I have
put in the Collection; in which she, Collect. Numb. 3, 4, 5, 6.
with the most studied Expressions, declaring her sorrow for her past
stubbornness, and disobedience to his most just and virtuous Laws, implores his
Pardon, as lying prostrate at his Feet: and considering his great Learning and
Knowledge, she puts her Soul in his Hand, resolving that he should for ever
thereafter direct her Conscience, from which she vows she would never vary.
This she repeats in such tender words, that it shows she could command her self
to say any thing that she thought fit for her ends. And when Cromwell writ to
her, to know what her Opinion was about Pilgrimages, Purgatory, and Relics;
she assures him she had no Opinion at all, but such as she should receive from
the King, who had her whole Heart in his keeping; and he should imprint upon
it, in these and all other Matters, whatever his inestimable Virtue, high
Wisdom, and excellent Learning, should think convenient for her. So perfectly
had she learned that style, that she knew was most acceptable to him. Having
copied these from the Originals, I thought it not unfit to insert them, that it
may appear how far those of that Religion can comply, when their Interest leads
them to it.

From that time this Princess had been in all Points most exactly compliant to
every thing her Father did. And after his Death, she never pretended to be of
any other Religion, than that which was established by him: So that all that
she pleaded for, in her Brother's Reign, was only the continuance of that way
of Worship, that was in use at her Father's Death. But now, being come to the
Crown, that would not content her; yet when she thought where to fix, she was
distracted between two different Schemes that were presented to her.

On the one hand, Gardener and all that Party, were for bringing Religion back
to what it had been at King Henry's Death; and afterward, The Designs for
changing Religion.
by slow degrees, to raise it up to what it had been before his breach with the
Papacy. On the other hand, the Queen, of her own Inclination, was much disposed
to return immediately to the Union of the Catholic Church, as she called it:
and it was necessary for her to do it, since it was only by the Papal Authority
that her Illegitimation was removed. To this it was answered, that all these
Acts and Sentences that had passed against her, might be annulled, without
taking any notice of the Pope. Gardiner's Policy.
Gardener finding these things had not such weight with her as he desired, for
she looked on him as a crafty temporizing Man, sent over to the Emperor, on
whom she depended much, to assure him, that if he would persuade her to make
him Chancellor, and to put Affairs into his Hands, he should order them so,
that every thing she had a mind to, should be carried in time. But Gardener
understood she had sent for Cardinal Pool; so he writ to the Emperor, that he
knew his Zeal for the Exaltation of the Popedom, would undo all; therefore he
pressed him to write to the Queen for moderating her heat, and to stop the
Cardinal's coming over. He said, that Pool stood Attainted by Law, so that his
coming into England would allarm the Nation. He observed, that upon a double
account they were averse to the Papacy: The one was, for the Church Lands,
which they had generally bought from the Crown on very easy terms, and they
would not easily part with them. The other was, The fear they had of Papal
Dominion and Power, which had been now for about 25 Years set out to the
People, as the most intolerable Tyranny that ever was. Therefore, he said, it
was necessary to give them some time to wear out these Prejudices; and the
precipitating of Councils might ruin all. He gave the Emperor also secret
Assurances of serving him in all his Interests. All this Gardener did the more
warily, because he understood that Cardinal Pool hated him as a false and
deceitful Man. Upon this the Emperor writ to the Queen several Letters with his
own hand, which is so hardly legible, that it was not possible for me, or some
others to whom I showed them, to read them, so well as to copy them out: and
one that was written by his Sister, the Queen of Hungary, and signed by him, is
no better; but from many half Sentences, I find, that all was with a design to
temper her, that she should not make too much have, nor be too much led by
Italian Counsels. Upon the return of this Message, the Seal, which had been
taken from Goodrick, Bishop of Ely, and put for some days in the keeping of
Hare, Master of the Rolls, was, on the 13th of August, given to Gardener, who
was declared Lord Chancellor of England, He is made Chancellor.
and the conduct of Affairs was chiefly put in his hands. So that now the
measure of the Queen's Councils, was to do every thing slowly, and by such sure
steps as might put them less in hazard.

The Duke of Northumb. and others Tried.
The first thing that was done, was, the bringing the Duke of Northumberland to
his Trial. The old Duke of Norfolk was made Lord High Steward; the Queen
thinking it fit to put the first Character of honor on him, who had suffered
so much for being the Head of the Popish Party. And here a subtle thing was
started, which had been kept a great Secret hitherto. It was said, the Duke of
Norfolk had never been truly attainted; and that the Act against him was not a
true Act of Parliament; so that without any Pardon, or restitution in Blood, he
was still Duke of Norfolk. This he had never mentioned all the last Reign, lest
that should have procured an Act to confirm his Attainder. So he came now in
upon his former Right, by which, all the Grants that had been given of his
Estate, were to be declared void by Common Law. The Duke of Northumberland,
with the Marquess of Northampton, and the Earl of Warwick, were brought to
their Trials. The Duke desired two Points might be first answered by the
Judges, in matter of Law. The one, Whether a Man acting by the Authority of the
Great Seal, and the Order of the Privy Council, could become thereby guilty of
Treason? The other was, Whether those who had been equally guilty with him, and
by whose Direction and Commands he had acted, could sit his Judges? To these
the Judges made answer, That the Great Seal of one that was not lawful Queen,
could give no Authority, nor Indemnity, to those that acted on such a Warrant:
and that any Peer that was not, by an Attainder upon Record, convicted of such
accession to his Crime, might sit his Judge, and was not to be challenged upon a
Surmise or Report. So these Points, by which only he could hope to have
defended himself, And condemned.
being thus determined against him, he confessed he was guilty, and submitted
to the Queen's Mercy. So did the Marquess of Northampton, and the Duke's Son,
the Earl of Warwick, who (it seems by this Trial) had a Writ for sitting in the
House of Peers; they were all three found guilty. Judgment also passed next
day, in a Jury of Commoners, against St. John Gates, and his Brother Sir
Humphrey; Sir Andrew Dudley, and Sir Thomas Palmer, confessing their
Indictments. But of all these it was resolved, that only the Duke of
Northumberlrnd, and Sir John Gates, and Sir Thomas Palmer, should be made
Examples: Heath, Bishop of Worcester, was employed to instruct the Duke, and to
prepare him for his Death. At his Death he professes he had been always a
Papist.
Whether he had been always in heart what he then professed, or whether he only
pretended it, hoping that it might procure him favor, is variously reported:
but certain it is, that he said, he had been always a Catholic in his Heart;
yet this could not save him. He was known to be a Man of that temper, so given,
both to revenge and dissimulation, that his Enemies saw it was necessary to put
him out of the way, lest if he had lived, he might have insinuated himself into
the Queen's favor, and then turned the danger upon them. So the Earl of
Arundel, now made Lord Steward of the Household, with others, easily obtained
that his Head should be cut off, together with Sir John Gates's, and Sir Thomas
Palmers.

On the 22d of August he was carried to the Place of Execution. On the way,
there was some expostulation between Gates and him; They, as is ordinary for
Accomplices in ill Actions, laying the blame of their Miseries on one another:
Yet they professed they did mutually forgive, and so died in Charity together.
It is said, that he made a long Speech, accusing his former ill Life, and
confessing his Treasons. But that part of it which concerned Religion, is only
preseved. In it, he exhorted the People to stand to the Religion of their
Ancestors, and to reject that of latter date, which had occasioned all the
misery of the foregoing thirty Years; and desired, as they would prevent the
like for the future, that they would drive out of the Nation these Trumpets of
Sedition, the new Preachers; that for himself, whatever he had otherwise
pretended, he believed no other Religion than that of his forefathers; in
which he appealed to his Ghostly Father, the Bishop of Worcester then present
with him; but being blinded with Ambition, he had made wreck of his Conscience,
by temporising, for which he professed himself sincerely penitent. So did he,
and the other two, end their days. Palmer was little pitied, as being believed
a treacherous Conspirator against his former Master, and Friend, the Duke of
Somerset.

His Character
Thus died the ambitious Duke of Northumberland. He had been, in the former
parts of his Life, a great Captain, and had the reputation of a wise Man: He
was generally successful, and they that are so, are always esteemed wise. He
was an extraordinary Man in a lower size, but had forgot himself much when he
was raised higher, in which his Mind seemed more exalted than his Fortunes. But
as he was transported by his Rage and Revenge out of measure, so he was as
servile and mean in his Submissions. Fox, it seems, was informed, that he had
hopes given him of his Life, if he should declare himself to be of the Popish
Religion, even though his Head were laid on the Block: but which way soever he
made that Declaration, either to get his Life by it, or that he had really been
always what he now professed; it argued that he regarded Religion very little,
either in his Life, or at his Death. But whether he did any thing to hasten the
late King's Death, I do not find it was at all enquired after: Only those who
considered how much Guilt disorders all People, and that they have a black
Cloud over their Minds, which appears, either in the violence of Rage, or the
abjectness of Fear, did find so great a change in his deportment, in these last
Passages of his Life, from what was in the former parts of it, that they could
not but think there was some extraordinary thing within him from whence it
flowed.

King Edwards Funeral.
And for King Edward's Death, those who had Affairs now in their Hands, were so
little careful of his Memory, and indeed so glad of his Death, that it is no
wonder they made little search about it. It is rather strange that they allowed
him such Funeral Rites. For the Queen kept a solemn Exequie, with all the other
Remembrances of the Dead, and Masses for him, used in the Roman Church, at the
Tower, on the 8th of August, the same day that he was buried at Westminster:
the Lord Treasurer, (who was the Marquess of Winchester, still continued in
that Trust) the Earls of Shrewsbury, and Pembrook, being the principal
Mourners. Day, that was now to be restored to his See of Chichester, was
appointed to preach the Funeral Sermon: In which he commended and excused the
King, but loaded his Government severely; and extolled the Queen much, under
whom he promised the People happy days. It was intended that all the Burial
Rites should have been according to the old Forms that were before the
Reformation. But Cranmer opposed this vigorously, and insisted upon it, That as
the King himself had been a zealous promoter of that Reformation, so the
English Service was then established by Law: upon this he stoutly hindered any
other way of officiating, and himself performed all the Offices of the Burial;
to which he joined the solemnity of a Communion. In these, it may be easily
imagined, he did every thing with a very lively sorrow; since as he had loved
the King beyond expression, so he could not but look on his Funeral, as the
Burial of the Reformation, and in particular as a step to his own.

On the 12th of August, The Queen declares she will force no Man's Conscience.
the Queen made an open declaration in Council, that although her Conscience
was stayed in the Matters of Religion, yet she was resolved not to compel or
strain others, otherwise than as God should put into their Hearts, a persuasion
of that Truth she was in; and this she hoped should be done by the opening His
Word to them, by godly, virtuous, and learned Preachers. Now all the deprived
Bishops looked to be quickly placed in their Sees again. Bonner went to St.
Paul's on the 13th of August, being Sunday, where Bourn, that was his Chaplain,
preached before him. He spoke honorably of Bonner, with sharp Reflections on
the Proceedings against him in the Time of King Edward. This did much provoke
the whole Audience, who as they hated Bonner, so could not hear any thing said
that seemed to detract from that King. A Tumult at Paul's Cross.
Hereupon there was a great Tumult in the Church; some called to pull him down,
others flung Stones, and one threw a Dagger toward the Pulpit with that force,
that it stuck fast in the timber of it; Bourn, by stooping, saved himself from
that danger: and Rogers, and Bradford, two eminent Preachers, and of great
credit with the People, stood up, and gently quieted the heat; and they, to
deliver Bourn out of their hands, conveyed him from the Pulpit, to a House near
the Church.

This was such an Accident as the Papists would have desired; for it gave them
a color to proceed more severely, and to prohibit Preaching, which was the
first step they intended to make. There was a Message sent to the Lord Mayor,
to give a strict charge, that every Citizen should take care of all that
belonged to him, and see that they went to their own Parish Church, and kept
the Peace; as also to acquaint them with what the Queen had declared in Council
on the 13th of August. And on the 18th, there was published an Inhibition in
the Queen's Name, to this effect; That she, An Inhibition of all preaching.
considering the great Danger that had come to the Realm, by the Differences in
Religion, did delare for her self, that she was of that Religion that she had
professed from her Infancy, and that she would maintain it during her time, and
be glad that all her Subjects would charitably receive it: Yet she did not
intend to compel any of her Subjects to it, till public Order should be taken
in it by common Assent: requiring all, in the mean while, not to move Sedition
or Unquietness, till such Order should be settled, and not to use the Names of
Papist, or Heretic, but to live together in Love, and in the Fear of God: but
if any made Assemblies of the People, she would take care they should be
severely punished: and she straightly charged them, that none should preach, or
expound Scripture, or print any Books, or Plays, without her special License.
And required her Subjects, that none of them should presume to punish any on
pretense of the late Rebellion, but as they should be authorized by her: Yet
she did not thereby restrain any from informing against such Offenders: She
would be most sorry to have cause to execute the severity of the Law, but she
was resolved not to suffer such Rebellious Doings to go unpunished, but hoped
her Subjects would not drive her to the extreme execution of the Laws.

When this was published, which was the first thing that was set out in her
Name since she had come to the Crown, it was much descanted on. Censures p^st
upon it.
The Profession she made of her Religion to be the same it had been from her
Infancy, showed it was not her Father's Religion, but entire Popery that she
intended to restore. It was also observed, that whereas before she had said
plainly she would compel none to be of it; now that was qualified with this,
till public Order should be taken in it; which was, till they could so frame a
Parliament, that it should concur with the Queen's Design. The equal forbidding
of Assemblies, or ill Names, on both sides, was thought intended to be a Trap
for the Reformed, that they should be punished if they offended, but the others
were sure to be rather encouraged. The restraint of preaching without License,
was pretended to be copied from what had been done in King Edward's Time: Yet
then there was a Liberty left for a long time to all to Preach in their own
Churches, only they might preach no where else without a License: And the power
of Licensing was also lodged at first with the Bishops in their several
Diocesses, and at last with the Archbishop of Canterbury, as well as with the
King; whereas now, at one stroke, all the Pulpits of England that were in the
hands of the Reformed, were brought under an Interdict; for they were sure to
obtain no Licenses. But the cunningest part of these Inhibitions, was, the
declaring that the Queen would proceed with rigor against all that were guilty
of the late Rebellion, if they should provoke her; many about London had some
way or other expressed themselves for it, and these were the hottest among the
Reformed: So that here was a sharp threatening hanging over them, if they should
express any more Zeal about Religion.

She requites the Service of the Men of Suffolk ill.
When this was put out, the Queen understanding, that in Suffolk, those of that
Profession took a little more liberty than their Neighbors, presuming on their
great Merit, and the Queen's Promises to them; there was a special Letter sent
to the Bishop of Norwich's Vicar, himself being at Brussels, to see to the
execution of these Injunctions, against any that should preach without License.
Upon this, some came from Suffolk to put the Queen in mind of her Promise. This
was thought insolent; and she returned them no other answer, But that they
being Members, thought to rule her that was their Head; but they should learn,
that the Members ought to obey the Head, and not to think to bear Rule over it.
One of these had spoken of her Promise with more confidence than the rest, his
Name was Dobbe; so he was ordered to stand three days in the Pillory, as having
said that which tended to the defamation of the Queen. And from hence all saw
what a severe Government they were to come under, in which the claiming of
former Promises, that had been made by the Queen when she needed their
Assistance, was to be accounted a Crime. But there was yet a more unreasonable
Severity showed to Bradford and Rogers, who had appeased the Tumult the Sunday
before, and rescued the Preacher from the Rage of the People. It was said, that
their appeasing it, so easily, showed what Interest they had with the People,
and was a presumption that they had set it on; so without any further Proof,
the one was put in the Tower, and the other confined to his House.

But now the deprived Bishops, who were Bonner of London, Gardener of
Winchester, Tonstall of Duresm, Heath of Worcester, The Popish Bishops restored.
and Day of Chichester, were to be restored to their Sees. I have only seen the
Commission for restoring Bonner and Tonstall; but the rest were no doubt in the
same strain, with a little variation. The Commission for Bonner bearing date
the 22th of August, was directed to some Civilians, setting forth, that he had
petitioned the Queen to examine the Appeal he had made from the Delegates that
had deprived him; and that therefore the Sentence against him being unjust and
illegal, he desired it might be declared to be of no effect. Upon which, these
did, without any great hesitation, return the Sentences void, and the Appeals
good. So thus they were restored to their Sees. But because the Bishopric of
Duresm was by Act of Parliament dissolved, and the Regalities of it, which had
bin given to the Duke of Northumberland, were now by his Attainder fallen into
the Queen's hand, She granted Tonstall Letters Patents, erecting that
Bishopric again of new; making mention that some wicked Men, to enrich
themselves by it, had procured it to be dissolved.

On the 29th of August Commission was granted to Gardener to give Licenses
under the Great Seal to such Grave, The Consultations among the Reformed
Doctors.
Learned and discreet Persons, as he should think meet and able to preach God's
Word. All who were so licensed, were qualified to preach in any Cathedral or
Parochial Church, to which he should think it convenient to send them. By this
the Reformers were not only out of hope to obtain any Licenses, but likewise
saw a way laid down for sending such Men as Gardener pleased into all their
Pulpits, to infect their People. Upon this they considered what to do. If there
had been only a particular Inderdiction of some private persons, the
considerations of Peace and Order being of a more public nature than the
consequence of any one Man's open Preaching could be, they judged it was to be
submitted to: but in such a case, when they saw this Interdiction was general,
and on design to stop their mouths till their Enemies should seduce the People,
they did not think they were bound in Conscience to give Obedience. Many of
them therefore continued to preach openly; others, instead of Preaching in
Churches, were contented to have only the Prayers and other Service there; but
for instructing their People, had private Conferences with them. The Council
hearing that their Orders had been disobeyed by some in London, two in
Coventry, and one in Amersham, they were sent for, and put in Prison. And
Coverdale Bishop of Exeter, and Hooper of Gloucester, being cited to appear
before the Council, they came and presented themselves on the 29th and 30th of
August; and on the first of September, Hooper was sent to the Fleet, and
Coverdale appointed to wait their pleasure.

At this time the Popish Party, growing now insolent over England, began to be
as forward in making Changes, before the Laws warranted them, as these of the
Reformation had been in King Edward's time: so that in many places they set up
Images, and the Latin Service, with the old Rites again. This was plainly
against Law; but the Council had no mind to hinder it; but on the other hand
encouraged it all they could. Upon which Judge Hales, The barbarous usage of
Judge Hales.
who thought he might with the more assurance speak his mind, having appeared
so steadily for the Queen, did at the Circuits in Kent, give a Charge to the
Justices to see to the execution of King Edward's Laws, which were still in
force and unrepealed. Upon this he was, without any regard to his former Zeal,
put first into the Marshalsea; from thence he was removed to the Counter, and
after that to the Fleet: where the good old Man was so disordered with the
Cruelties that the Warden told him were contriving against all that would not
change their Religion, that it turned his Brain, so that he endeavored to have
killed himself with a Penknife. He was after that, upon his Submission, set at
liberty; but never came to himself again: so he, not being well looked to,
drowned himself. This, with the usage of the Suffolk-Men, was much censured;
and from thence it was said, that no Merits or Services could secure any from
the Cruelties of that Religion. And it appeared in another signal Instance, how
the Actions of Men were not so much considered as their Religion. The Lord
Chief Justice Mountague, who had very unwillingly drawn the Letters Patents for
the Lady Jane's Succession, was turned out of his Place, kept six weeks in
Prison, fined in a Thousand pounds, and some Lands that had been given him by
King Edward, were taken from him; tho he had sent his Son with Twenty Men to
declare for the Queen, and had a great Family of Seventeen Children, six Sons
and eleven Daughters: whereas Judge Bromley that had concurred in framing the
Letters Patents without any reluctance, was made Lord Chief Justice: The true
Reason was, Bromley was a Papist in his heart, and Mountague was for the
Reformation.

In many other places, where the People were Popishly affected, they drove away
their Pastors. At Oxford, Peter Martyr was so ill used, that he was forced to
fly for his safety to Lambeth, where he could not look for any long protection,
Cranmer declared openly against the Mass.
since Cranmer himself was every day in expectation of being sent to Prison. He
kept himself quiet, and was contriving how to give some Public and Noble
Testimonies to the Doctrine that he had so long professed, and indeed had bin
the chief promoter of in this Church. But his quiet behavior was laid hold on
by his Enemies, and it was given out, that he was resolved to comply with every
thing the Queen had a mind to. So I find Bonner wrote to his Friend Mr.
Lechmore on the 6th of September, Bonners Insolence. Coll. Numb. 7.
in that Letter which is in the Collection. He gives him notice that the day
before he had bin restored to his Bishopric, and Ridley repulsed; for which he
is very witty. Ridley had a Steward for two Manours of his, whose name was
Shipside, his Brother-in-law; upon which he plays as if he had bin Sheepshead.
He orders Lechmore to look to his Estate, and he should take care at the next
Parliament that both the Sheepsheads and the Calvesheads should be used as they
deserved. He adds that Cranmer, whom in scorn he calls Mr. Canterbury, was
become very humble, and ready to submit himself in all things; but that would
not serve his turn: and it was expected that he should he sent to the Tower
that very day. These reports being brought to Cranmer, some advised him to fly
beyond Seas: he said he would not diswade others from that course, now that
they saw a Persecution rising; but considering the station he was in, and the
hand he had in all the Changes that were made, he thought it so indecent a
thing for him to fly, that no entreaties should ever persuade him to it.
Cranmer's Declaration. Coll. Numb. 8.
So he by Peter Martyr's advice, drew up a Writing, that I have put in the
Collection (in Latin, as it was at that time translated.) The substance of it
was to this effect; That as the Devil had at all times set on his Instruments
by Lies to defame the Servants of God, so he was now more than ordinarily
busy. For whereas King Henry had begun the correcting of the abuses of the
Mass, which his Son had brought to a further perfection: and so the Lords
Supper was restored to its first Institution, and was celebrated according to
the pattern of the Primitive Church; now, the Devil intending to bring the Mass
again into its room, as being his own invention, had stirred up some to give
out that it had been set up in Canterbury by his the said Cranmer's Order; and
it was said that he had undertaken to sing Mass to the Queens Majesty, both at
King Edwards Funeral, at Paul's, and other places: and though for these twenty
years he had despised all such vain and false reports, as were spread of him;
yet now he thought it not fit to lie under such misrepresentations. Therefore
he protested to all the World, that the Mass was not set up at Canterbury by
his order; but that a fawning hypocritical Monk (this was Thornton Suffragan of
Dover,) had done it without his ^nowledge; and for what he was said to have
undertaken to the Queen, her Majesty knew well how false that was: offering if
he might obtain her Leave for it, to maintain, that every thing in the
Communion Service that was set out by their most innocent and good Ring Edward,
was according to Christ's Institution, and the practice of the Apostles, and the
ancient Church for many Ages: to which the Mass was contrary, being full of
errors and abuses; and although Peter Martyr was by some called an ignorant
Man, he with him or other four or five, such as he should choose, would be
ready to defend not only their Book of Common Prayer, and the other Rites of
their Service, but the whole Doctrine and Order of Religion, set forth by the
late King, as more pure, and more agreeable to the Word of God, than any sort
of Religion that had been in England for a thousand years before it: provided
that all things should be judged by the Scriptures, and that he Reasonings on
both sides should be faithfully written down.

This he had drawn, Published without his knowledge.
with a Resolution to have made a public use of it: but Scory, who had bin
Bishop of Chichester, coming to him, he showed him the Paper, and bad him
consider of it. Scory indiscreetly gave Copies of it; and one of these was
publicly read in Cheapside, on the fifth of September. So on the eighth of
that month he was called before the Star Chamber and asked whether he was the
Author of that seditious Bill, that was given out in his name; and if so,
whether he was sorry for it. He answered, that the Bill was truly his; but he
was very sorry it had gone from him in such a manner; But owned by him before
the Council.
for he had resolved to have enlarged it in many things, and to have ordered it
to be affixed to the doors of Paul's, and of the other Churches in London, with
his hand and Seal to it. He was at that time, contrary to all men's expectation,
dismissed. Gardener plainly saw he could not expect to succeed him, and that
the Queen had designed that See for Cardinal Pool, so he resolved to protect
and preserve Cranmer all he could. Some moved that he should be only put from
his Bishopric, and have a small Pension assigned him, with a charge to keep
within a Confinement, and not to meddle with matters of Religion. He was
generally beloved for the gentleness of his temper; so it was thought that
proceeding severely with him, might Alienate some from them, and embroil their
affairs in the next Parliament. Others objected, that if he, who had been the
chief promoter of Heresy, was used with such tenderness, it would encourage the
rest to be more obstinate. And the Queen who had forgot the Services he did her
in her Father's time, remembering rather that he had pronounced the Sentence of
Divorce against her Mother, was easily induced to proceed severely. So on the
thirteenth of September both he and Latimer were called before the Council; He
and Latimer sent to the Tower.
Latimer was that day committed; but Cranmer was respited till next day, and
then he was sent to the Tower, both for matters of Treason against the Queen,
and for dispersing of seditious Bills. Tylor of Hadlee, and several other
Preachers, were also put in Prison; and upon an Information brought against
Horn Dean of Duresm, he was sent for.

The Foreigners, that were come over upon public Faith and encouragement, The
Foreigners sent out of England.
were better used: for Peter Martyr was preserved from the rage of his enemies,
and suffered to go beyond Sea. There was also an Order sent to John a Lasco and
his Congregation to be gone; their Church being taken from them, and their
Corporation dissolved. And an hundred seventy five of them went away in two
Ships to Denmark, on the seventeenth of September, with all their Preachers;
except two, who were left to look to those few, which stayed behind, and being
engaged in Trade, resolved to live in England, and follow their Consciences in
the matters of Religion in private, with the Assistance of those Teachers. But
a Lasco, after a long and hard passage, arriving at Denmark, was as ill
received there, as if it had heen a popish Country, when they understood that
he and his Company were of the Helvetian Confession: so that, though it was
December, and a very severe Winter, they were required to be gone within two
days, and could not obtain so much as liberty to leave their Wives or Children
behind them, till they could provide a place for them. From thence they went,
first to Lubeck, then to Wismar, and Hamburgh, where they found the disputes
about the manner of Christ's Presents in the Sacrament, had raised such violent
animosities, that after much barbarous usage, they were banished out of all
those Towns, and could find no place to settle in, till about the end of March,
that they came to Friseland, where they were suffered to plant themselves.

Many English fly beyond Sea
Many in England, seeing the Government was set on severe courses so early, did
infer that this would soon grow up to an extreme Persecution; so that above a
thousand Persons fled beyond Seas: most of them went in the company, and as the
Servants, of French Protestants, who having come over in King Edwards time,
were now required, as the Germans had been, to return into their own Country.
The Council understanding this, took care that no Englishman should escape out
of their hands; and therefore sent an Order to the Ports, that none should be
suffered to go over as Frenchmen, but those who brought Certificates from the
French Ambassador. Among those that had got over, some eminent Divines went;
who, either having no Cures, or being turned out of their Benefices, were not
under such ties to any Flock, so that they judged themselves disingaged and
therefore did not, as Hirelings leave their Flock to the Persecution then
imminent, but rather went to look after those who had now left England. The
chief of these that went at first were Cox, Sanders, Grindal, and Horn. Cox was
without any good color turned out, both of his Deanery of Christ-Church, and
his Prebendary at Westminster. He was put into the Marshalsea, but on the 19th
of August was discharged. Sancts was turned out for his Sermon before the Duke
of Northumberland at Cambridge: On what account Grindal was turned out, I know
not; Horn, soon after he got beyond Sea, printed an Apology for his leaving his
Country: he tells that he heard there was some Crimes against the State
objected to him, which made him come up from Duresm to clear himself: It was
said that three Letters had been written to him in the Queens name, requiring
him to come up, and intimating that they were resolved to charge him with
contempt, and other points of State. He protests that he had never received but
one, which was given him on the Road; but seeing how he was like to be used, he
withdrew out of England: upon which he takes occasion in that discourse to
vindicate the Preachers in King Edwards time, against whom it was now objected,
that they had neglected Fasting and Prayer, and had allowed the People all
sorts of Liberty: This he said was so false, that the ruling Men in that time
were much offended at the great freedom which the Preachers then took, so that
many of them would hear no more Sermons; and he says for himself, that though
Tonstal was now his great enemy, he had refused to accept of his Bishopric,
and was ill used, and threatened, for denying to take it.

All these things tended much to inflame the People. The Queen rewards those
who had served her.
Therefore great care was taken, first, to oblige all those Noblemen who had
assisted the Queen at her coming to the Crown; since a grateful acknowledgment
of past Services is the greatest encouragement, both to the same Persons to
renew them, and to others to undertake the like upon new occasions. The Earl of
Arundel was made Lord Steward; Sir Edward Hastings was made Master of the
Horse, and afterward Lord Hastings; Sir John Gage, Lord Chamberlain; Sir John
Williams, who had Proclaimed the Queen in Oxfordshire, was made Lord Williams;
and Sir Henry Jerningham, that first gathered the Men of Norfolk about her, was
made Captain of her Guard: but Ratcliff Earl of Sussex had done the most
considerable Service of them all; for to him she had given the chief Command of
her Army, and he had managed it with that Prudence, that others were thereby
encouraged to come in to her Assistance; so an unusual Honor was contrived for
him, that he might cover his head in her Presence: which passed under the Great
Seal the second of October; he being the only Peer of England in whom this
Honor was ever conferred, as far as I know. The like was granted to the Lord
Courcy Baron of Kingsale in Ireland, whose Posterity enjoy it to this day: but
I am not so well informed of that Family, as to know by which of our Kings it
was first granted. The Queen having summoned a Parliament to the tenth of
October was Crowned on the first of that month, by Gardener, who with ten other
Bishops, all in their Mitres, Coaps, and Crosiers, performed that Ceremony with
great Solemnity. The Queen is Crowned, and discharges all Taxes.
Day preaching the Coronation Sermon; who, it seems, was accounted the best
Preacher among them; since he was ordered to Preach both at the late Kings
Funeral, and now again at the Coronation.

But Gardener had prepared a Largess of an extraordinary nature for the Queen
to distribute that day among her People, besides her general Pardon; he caused
a Proclamation to be published, which did set forth, that whereas the good
Subjects of England had always exhibited Aid to their Princes, when the good of
the Public, and Honor of the Realm required it; and though the Queen, since
her coming to the Crown, found the Treasury was marvelously exhausted, by the
evil Government of late years, especially since the Duke of Northumberland bare
Rule; though she found her self charged with diverse great sums of her Father
and Brothers Debts, which for her own Honor, and the Honor of the Realm, she
determined to pay in times convenient and reasonable; yet having a special
regard to the welfare of of her Subjects, and accounting their loving hearts
and prosperity the chiefest Treasure which she desired, next to the Favor and
Grace of God; therefore, since in her Brothers last Parliament, two Tenths, two
Fifteenths, and a Subsidy both out of Lands and Goods, were given to him for
paying his Debts; which were now due to her; she of her great Clemency did
fully pardon and discharge these Subsidies; trusting her said good Subjects
will have loving consideration thereof for their parts, whom she heartily
requires, to bend themselves wholly to God, to serve him sincerely, and with
continual Prayer, for the honor and advancement of the Queen, and the
Commonwealth.

A Parliament summoned.
And thus matters were prepared for the Parliament; which was opened the tenth
of October. In the Writ of Summons, and all other Writs, the Queen retained
still the Title of Supreme Head. Tailor Bishop of Lincoln, and Harley Bishop of
Hereford came thither, resolving to justify their Doctrine. Most of the other
reformed Bishops were now in Prison: for besides these formerly mentioned, on
the fourth of October the Archbishop of York was put in the Tower, no cause
being given, but heinous Offenses only named in general. When the Mass begun,
it is said that those two Bishops withdrew, and were upon that never suffered
to come to their Places again. Bishops violently thrust out for not worshipping
the Mass.
But one Beal the Clerk of the Council in Queen Elizabeth's time, reports this
otherwise, and more probably; that Bishop Tailor took his place in his Robes,
but refusing to give any reverence to the Mass, was violently thrust out of the
House. He says nothing of Harley, so it is probable that he followed the other.
The same Writer also informs us, that in many places of the Country, Men were
chosen by Force and Threats; in other places those employed by the Court, Great
disorder in Elections.
did by violence hinder the Commons from coming to choose; in many places false
Returns were made; and that some were violently turned out of the House of
Commons: upon which reasons he concludes that it was no Parliament, since it
was under a Force; and so might be annulled, as the Parliament held at Coventry
in the 38th year of King Henry the 6th was, upon Evidence of the like Force,
declared afterward to be no Parliament. The Journals of the House of Lords in
this Parliament are lost; so there is no light to be had of their proceedings,
but from the imperfect Journals of the House of Commons.

On the second day of the Session, one moved in the House of Commons for a
review of King Edwards Laws. But that being a while argued, was at this time
laid aside, and the Bill for Tonnage and Poundage was put in. Then followed a
Debate upon Dr. Nowell's being returned from Loo in Cornwall, whether he being a
Prebendary of Westminster could sit in that House? and the Committee being
appointed to search fot Precedents, it was reported, that he being represented
in the Convocation House, could not be a Member of that House; so he was cast
out. The Bill of Tonnage and Poundage was sent up to the Lords, who sent it
down to the Commons to be reformed in two proviso's that were not according to
former Precedents. How far this was contrary to the Rights of the Commons, who
now say that the Lords cannot alter a Bill of Money, I am not able to
determine. The only public Bill that passed in this short Session was for a
Declaration of Treasons and Felonies: An Act for moderating some severe Laws.
by which it was ordained that nothing should be judged Treason, but what was
within the Statute of Treasons in the twenty fifth of Edward the third; and
nothing should be so judged Felony, that was not so before the 1st year of King
Henry the eight, excepting from any benefit of this Act, all such as had been
in Prison before the last of September; who were also excepted out of the Qeens
Pardon at her Coronation. Two private Bills also passed: the one for the
restoring of the Wife of the late Marquess of Exeter, who had been Attainted in
the 32 year of King Henry's Reign; and the other for her Son Edward Courtney
Earl of Devonshire. And so the Parliament was Prorogued from the 21 to the 24
of October, that their might be a Session of Parliament consisting only of Acts
of Mercy; though this Repeal of additional Treasons and Felonies, was not more
than what had passed in the beginning of King Edwards Reign, without the clogg
of so severe a proviso, by which many were cut off from the Favor designed by
it.

Some have thought, that since Treasons had been reduced by the second Act of
Edward the 6th to the standard of the 25th of Edward the third, that therefore
there was somewhat else designed by this Act, then barely the repealing some
late severe Acts, which being done the 1st of Edward 6th, needed not be now
repealed, if it imported no more. And since this Act as it is worded, mentions,
or rather excepts, those Treasons that are declared and expressed in the 25th
of Edward the 3d, they have inferred that the power of Parliaments declaring of
Treasons ex Post facto, which was reserved by that Statute, is hereby taken
away; and that nothing is now to be held Treason, but what is ennumerated in
that Statute. Yet this is still liable to Debate; since the one may be thought
to be declared and expressed in general words, as well as the other specialties
are in more particular words; and is also still in force. So nothing seems
comprehended within this Repeal, but the Acts passed in King Edwards Reign,
declaring other Crimes to be Treason: some are added in the same Act, and
others in that of the 3d and 4th of his Reign chap. 5. Nor is it likely that,
if the Parliament had intended to have delivered the Subjects from the
apprehensions of all Acts of Attainder, upon a Declaration of new Treasons,
they would not have expressed it more plainly; since it must have been very
grateful to the Nation, which had groaned heavily under Arbitrary Attainders of
late years.

When the Parliament met again, the first Bill the Commons entered on, was that
of Tonnage and Poundage, which they passed in two days. The Marriage of Queen
Katherine to King Henry Confirmed.
Then was the Bill about King Henry's Marriage with the Queens Mother sent down
on the 26th by the Lords, and the Commons passed it no the 28th: so strangly
was the stream turned, that a Divorce that had been for seven years much
desired by the Nation, was now repealed upon fewer days consultation. In the
Preamble it was said, That truth how much soever obscured and born down, will
in the end break out: and that therefore they declared that King Henry the 8th,
being lawfully married to Queen Katherine by the consent of both their Parents,
and the advice of the wisest Men in the Realm, and of the best and notablest
Men for learning in Christendom, did continue that state twenty years in which
God blessed them with her Majesty and other issue, and a course of great
happiness; but then a very few malicious Persons did endeavor to break that
happy agreement between them, and studied to possess the King, with a scruple
in his Conscience about it: and to support that, caused the Seals of some
Universities to be got against it, a few Persons being corrupted with money for
that end. They had also by sinistrous ways, and secret threatenings procured the
Seals of the Universities of this Kingdom, and finally Thomas Cranmer did most
ungodlily, and against Law, judge the Divorce, upon his own unadvised
understanding of the Scriptures, upon the Testimonies of the Universities, and
some bare and most untrue conjectures; and that was afterward confirmed by two
Acts of Parliament, in which was contained the Illegitimacy of her Majesty: But
that Marriage not being prohibited by the Law of God, and lawfully made, could
not be so broken; since what God has joined together, no Man could put
asunder: all which they considering, together with the many miseries that had
fallen on the Kingdom since that time, which they did esteem Plagues sent from
God for it; therefore they declare that Sentence given by Cranmer to be
unlawful, and of no force from the beginning: and do also repeal the Acts of
Parliament that had confirmed it.

By this Act, Gardener had performed his Promise to the Queen, of getting her
Illegitimation taken off, Which was much Censured.
without any relation to the Popes Authority. But in the drawing of it, he
showed that he was past all shame: when he could frame such an Act, of a
business which himself had so violently and servilely promoted. The falsehood
of that pretense of corrupting Universities has been shown in the former
Volumn: but it was all they had now to say. The laying it all upon Cranmer was
as high a pitch of malice and impudence as could be devised: for as Gardener
had been setting it on, long before Cranmer was known to King Henry; so he had
been joined with him in the Commission, and had given his assent to the
Sentence which Cranmer gave. Nor was the Divorce grounded merely upon Cranmers
understanding of the Scriptures, but upon the fullest and most studied
Arguments, that had perhaps been in any Age brought together in one particular
case: and both Houses of Convocation had condemned the Marriage before his
sentence. But because in the right of his See he was Legate to the Pope,
therefore to make the Sentence stronger, it went only in his name, though he
had but a small share in it, compared to what Gardener had.

By this Act, there was also a second Illegittimation brought on the Lady
Elizabeth, The Queens carries severely to the Lady Elizabeth.
to whom hitherto the Queen had been very kind, using her on all occasions with
the tenderness of a Sister: but from this time forwards she handled her more
severely. It was perhaps occasioned by this Act, since before they stood both
equally illegittimated; but now the Act that legitimated the Queen making her
most certainly a Bastard in Law, the Queen might think it now too much to use
her as she had done formerly. Others suggest a more secret reason of this
distaste. The new Earl of Devonshire was much in the Queens favor, so that it
was thought she had some inclinations to marry him; but he, either not
presuming so high, or really having an aversion to her, and an inclination to
her Sister, who of that moderate share of beauty that was between them, had
much the better of her, and was nineteen years younger, made his Addresses with
more than ordinary concern to the Lady Elizabeth, and this did bring them both
in trouble, as shall be afterward shown.

The next Bill that was sent from the Lords to the Commons, The Laws made by
King Edward repealed.
was for the repealing King Edward's Laws about Religion. It was sent down on
the 31st of October, and argued six days in the House of Commons: but in the
end it was carried, and sent back to the Lords. The Preamble of it sets forth
the great disorders that had fallen out in the Nation by the changes that had
been made in Religion, from that which their Forefathers had left them by the
Authority of the Catholic Church: thereupon all the Laws that had been made in
King Edwards time about Religion were now repealed; and it was Enacted that,
from the 20th of December next, there should be no other Form of Divine Service
but what had been used in the last year King of Henry the 8th, leaving it free
to all till that day, to use either the Books appointed by King Edward, or the
old ones at their pleasure.

Another Act was passed, which the Commons sent up to the Lords, An Act against
the affronting Priests.
against all those who by any overt Act should molest or disquiet any Preacher,
because of his Office, or for any Sermon that he might have Preached; or should
any way disturb them when they were in any part of the Divine Offices, that
either had been in the last year of King Henry, or should be afterward set
forth by the Queen; or should break or abuse the holy Sacrament, or break
Altars, Crucifixes, or Crosses, those that did any of these things should be
presented to the Justices of Peace, and be by them put in Prison, where they
should lie three Months, or till they were penitent for their Offenses: and if
any rescued them, they should be liable to the same punishment. But to this a
Proviso was added by the Lords, that this Act should no way derogate from the
Authority of the Ecclesiasti^^l Laws and Courts, who might likewise proceed
upon such Offenses: and a Certificate from the Ordinaries, that such Offenders
were punished by them, being brought to the Justices of Peace, they were to
proceed no further: or if the Justices made a Certificate that they had
punished them according to Law, the Ordinary might not punish them a second
time. But the Commons were now so heated, that they sent up another Bill to the
Lords against those who came not to Church, nor to Sacraments, after the old
Service should be again set up: the inflicting of the Punishments in these
cases being left to the Ecclesiastical Courts. This fell in the House of Lords,
not so much from any opposition that was made, as that they were afraid of
allarming the Nation too much, by many severe Laws at once. An Act against
unlawful Assemblies.


Another Law was made for securing the public Peace against unlawful and
rebellious Assemblies: that if any to the number of twelve or above, should
meet to alter any thing of Religion established by Law, and being required by
any, having the Queens Authority, to disperse themselves, should continue after
that an hour together, it should be Felony: or if that number met to break
Hedges or Parks, to destroy Deer or Fish, etc. and did not disperse upon
Proclamation, it should be Felony: or if any, by ringing of Bells, Drums, or
firing of Beacons, gathered the People together, and did the things before
mentioned, it was Felony: if the Wives or Servants of Persons so gathered,
carried Meat, Money, or Weapons to them, it should be Felony: and if any above
the number of two, and within twelve, should meet for these ends, they should
suffer a years imprisonment; empowering the Sheriffs or Justices to gather the
Country for the resistance of Persons so offending, with Penalties on all,
between eighteen and sixty, that, being required to come out against them,
should refuse to do it. When this Act was known, the People then saw clearly
how they had been deceived by the former Act, that seemed so favorable,
repealing all Acts of new Treasons and Felonies; since there was so soon after
it an Act passed that renewed one of the severest Laws of the last Reign, in
which so many things, that might flow from sudden heats, were made Felonies,
and a great many new and severe Proviso's were added to it. The Queens
discharge of the Subsidy was confirmed by another Act.

The Marquess of Northampton's 2d Marriage is annulled.
There followed two private Acts, which occasioned more Debate than the public
ones had done: The one was, the repeal of the Act that had confirmed the
Marquess of Northamptons Marriage: It was much argued in the House of Commons,
and on the 28th of November it was agreed to. It contains, that the Act of
confirming the Divorce, and the second Marriage, was procured more upon untrue
surmises and private respects, than for any public good, and increase of
virtue: and that it was an encouragement for sensual Persons, to practice by
false allegations that they might be separated from their Wives, rather then a
Precedent to induce People to live with their Wives in a godly sort: thereupon
the Act was repealed, and declared void and of no effect. In this it seems, the
Arguments that were against it in the House of Commons had so moderated the
Style of it, that it was not repealed as an Act sinful in it self, but it was
only declared that in that particular case the Divorce was unlawfully made: for
it is reasonable to believe that the Bishops had pu^ in the first draught of
the Bill, a simple repeal of it, and of all such Divorces, founded on the
indissolubleness of the Marriage Bond.

And the Duke of Norfolks Attainder.
The other Act was about the Duke of Norfolk, for declaring his Attainder void.
The Patentees that had purchased some parts of his Estate from the Crown,
desired to be heard to plead against it. But the Session of the Parliament
being near at an end, the Duke came down himself to the House of Commons on the
4th of December; and desired them earnestly to pass his Bill; and said, that
the difference between him and the Patentees was referred to Arbiters, and if
they could not agree it, he would refer it to the Queen. It was long argued
after that, but in the end it was agreed to. It sets forth, that the Act, by
which he was Attainted, had no special matter in it, but only Treasons in
general, and a pretense that out of the Parliaments care for the King, and his
Son the Prince, it was necessary to attaint him: That the Reasons they
pretended, were, his using Coats of Arms, which he and his Ancestors had and
might lawfully use. It further says, That the King died the next night after
the Commission was given for passing the Bill; and that it did not appear, that
the King had given his Assent to it: That the Commission was not signed by the
King's hand, but only by his Stamp; and that was put to the nether end, and
not to the upper part of the Bill, which showed it was done in disorder; and
that it did not appear that these commissioned for it had given the Royal
Assent to it. Upon which Considerations, that pretended Act is declared void
and null by the common Laws of the Land. And it is further declared, That the
Law was, and ever has been, that the Royal Assent should be given, either by
the King being present, or in his absence, by a Commission under the Great
Seal, signed with his hand, and publicly notified to the Lords and Commons.

The last Act of which I shall give an account, was the Confirmation of the
Attainders that had been made. On the 3d of November, Cranmer and others
attainted.
Archbishop Cranmer, the Lord Guilford Dudley, and the Lady Jane his Wife,
with two other Sons of the Duke of Northumberland, (which were all, except the
Lord Robert, who was reserved for greater Fortunes,) were brought to their
Trial. These all confessed their Endictments. Only Cranmer appealed to those
that judged him, how unwillingly he had consented to the exclusion of the
Queen; that he had not done it, till those whose profession it was to know the
Law had signed it: upon which he submitted himself to the Queen's Mercy. But
they were all attainted of High Treason, for levying War against the Queen, and
conspiring to set up another in her room. So these Judgments, with those that
had passed before, were now confirmed by Act of Parliament.

And now Cranmer was legally divested of his Archbishopric, But the Sea of
Canterbury is not declared void.
which was hereupon void in Law, since a Man that is attainted can have no
right to any Church-Benefice; his Life was also at the Queen's Mercy. But it
being now designed to restore the Ecclesiastical Exemption and Dignity to what
it had been anciently, it was resolved, that he should be still esteemed
Archbishop, till he were solemnly degraded, according to the Canon Law. The
Queen was also inclined to give him his Life at this time, reckoning, that
thereby she was acquitted of all the Obligations she had to him; and was
resolved to have him proceeded against for Heresy, that so it might appear she
did not act out of revenge, or on any personal account. So all that followed on
this against Cranmer, was a Sequestration of all the Fruits of his
Archbishopric; himself was still kept in Prison: Nor were the other Prisoners
proceeded against at this time. The Queen was desirous to seem willing to
pardon Injuries done against her self, but was so heated in the Matters of
Religion, that she was always inexorable on that Head.

Having given this Account of Public Transactions, I must relate next what
were more secretly carried on, but breaking out at this time, occasioned the
sudden Dissolution of the Parliament.

Cardinal Dandino, The Queen treats about a Reconciliation with Rome.
that was then the Pope's Legate at the Emperor's Court, sent over Commendone
(afterward a Cardinal) to bring him a certain Account of the Queen's
Intentions concerning Religion; he gave him in charge, to endeavor to speak
with her in private, and to persuade her to reconcile her Kingdom to the
Apostolic See. This was to be managed with great secrecy, for they did not
know whom to trust in so important a Negotiation: It seems, they neither
confided in Gardener, nor in any of the other Bishops. Commendone, being thus
instructed, went to Newport, where he gave himself out to be the Nephew of a
Merchant, that was lately dead at London; and hired two Servants to whom he was
unknown, and so he came over unsuspected to London. There he was so much a
Stranger, that he did not know to whom he should address himself. By accident
he met with one Lee, a Servant of the Queen's, that had fled beyond Sea during
the former Reign, and had been then known to him; so he trusted him with the
Secret of his Business in England. He procured him a secret Audience of the
Queen, in which she freely owned to him her Resolution of reconciling her
Kingdom to the Sea of Rome, and so of bringing all things back to the state in
which they had been before the Breach made by her Father: but she said, It was
absolutely necessary to manage that Design with great Prudence and Secresy,
lest in that Confusion of Affairs, the discovery of it might much disturb her
Government, and obstruct her Design. She writ by him to the Pope, giving him
assurance of her filial Obedience, and so sent Commendone to Rome. She also
writ by him to Cardinal Pool, and ordered Commendone to move the Pope, that he
might be sent over with a Legatine Power. Yet he that writ that Cardinal's Life
insinuates, that the Queen had another design in desiring that Pool might be
sent over; for she asked him, Whether the Pope might not dispense with the
Cardinal to marry, since he was only in Deacon's Orders? Before Commendone left
England, he saw the Duke of Northumberland executed, and soon after he made all
the haste that was possible to carry those acceptable Tidings to Rome; and by
his dexterity in this Negotiation, he laid the foundation of those great
Fortunes, to which he was afterward advanced. There was no small Joy in the
Consistory, when the Pope and the Cardinals understood, that a Kingdom, from
which they had drawn so much Wealth in former times, was now to become again
tributary to them. So there was a public rejoicing for three days, in which
the Pope said Mass himself, and distributed his ordinary Largess of
Indulgences, of which he was the more bountiful, because he hoped they should
come in credit again, and be purchased at the Rates at which they had been
formerly sold. Yet in the Consistory, Commendone did not positively say he was
sent by the Queen, that being only communicated to the Pope: all he told the
Cardinals, was, That he understood from very good hands, that the Queen was
very well disposed to that See, and that she desired, that a Legate might be
sent over with full Powers. Many of the Cardinals thought this was too bare a
Message; and that it was below the Papal Dignity, to send a Legate, till the
Pope was earnestly desired to do it, by an express Message, and an Embassy sent
by the Queen. But it was said, that Commendone had said nothing but by the
Queen's express Orders, who was yet in so unsettled a condition, that till she
held a Session of Parliament, it might much endanger her to appear openly in
such a Matter: They were to remember, how England had been lost by too much
stiffness formerly; and they were to imitate the Shepherd in the Parable, who
left his ninety nine Sheep, to seek the one that was strayed. So it was
granted, that Pool should go Legate, with a full Power. But Gardener coming to
know this, sent to the Emperor to stop his Journey; assuring him, that things
were going well on, and that his coming over would spoil all. At this time the
Emperor began to think of marrying his Son Philip to the Queen, who, tho she
was above nine years elder than he, But stopped in his Journey by the Emperor.
yet being but thirty seven years old, was not out of hopes of having Children.
The Emperor saw, that if England were united to the Spanish Crown, it would
raise that Monarchy to a great height, they should have all the Trade of the
World in their hands, and so enclose France, that it seemed as probable a step
to the Universal Monarchy, as that he had lately lost in Germany. When this
Match was first proposed, I do not know; but I have read some parts of a Letter
concerning it, (for it is not all legible) which was written by the Queen of
Hungary, and signed by the Emperor, in the beginning of November; this, tho it
was not the first Proposition, yet seems to have followed soon after it. The
Queen entertained the Motion easily, not trusting to the Affections of her
People, nor thinking it possible to have the Papal Authority set up, nor the
Church Lands restored, without a foreign Force to assist her. It is said, and
I have shown some ground to believe, that she had some Inclinations to Cardinal
Pool; and that the Emperor, fearing that might be an hindrance to his Design,
therefore the Cardinal's coming over was stopped, till the Queen was married to
his Son Philip. But of this I find no certain footsteps. On the contrary,
Gardener, whose eye was chiefly upon the Archbishopric of Canterbury, would
rather have promoted Pool's pretensions to the Queen; since her marrying a
Subject, and not a Stranger, would have made the Government much easier, and
more acceptable to the People; and it would have been the best thing he could
do for himself, if he could have persuaded her to marry him, who alone was like
to stand between him and that Dignity.

The true Account of it, is: The Emperor pressed her, first to settle the
State, and consummate her Marriage; and that would more easily make way for
what was to follow: For Gardener had assured him, the bringing in of the Papal
Power, and making up the Marriage, both at once, would be things of such ill
digestion, that it would not be easy to carry them together; and therefore it
was necessary to let a considerable Interval go between. This being resolved
on, it was apparent the Marriage ought to go first, as that which would give
them more strength to conclude the other. And this was the true reason of
stopping Cardinal Pool at A Town on the Danube.
Dilling; which the Emperor at first did by his own Authority, but afterward
got the Queen to send one to him to the same purpose. She sent Goldwell
(afterward Bishop of St. Asaph) to him, The Queen sent one to to him.
with the two Acts that were passed, for the justifying of her Mother's
Marriage, and for bringing all things back to the State in which they were at
her Father's Death. Thereby she let him see, that she was going forward in the
Business for which he was sent; but withal she told him, That the Commons, in
passing those Acts, had expressed great aversion to the taking of the Supremacy
from the Crown, or the restoring of the Pope's Power; and that they were much
alarmed, to hear he was coming over Legate; and it prejudiced her Affairs,
that the Message she had sent by Commendone, had been published in the
Consistory. Therefore she desired him to keep out of England, till he were
further advertised. But to let him see how much she depended on his Counsels,
she desired he would send her a List of such Persons as should be made Bishops;
for many were now to be turned out. To this (besides the Answer which he might
have writ to her self, that I have not seen,) he writ a copious Answer, in a
tedious Paper of Instructions, which he gave to Goldwell; the Conclusion of
which, summing up his whole Mind fully enough, Collections, Numb. 9.
I thought sufficient to put into the Collection, for the Instructions are
extreme long, and very full of words to little purpose. They seem to be of his
own handwriting, but of that I am not well assured, having seen nothing else
of his hand, except his Subscription.

The substance of it was this: He rejoiced much at the two Acts that were
passed, The Advice he sent to the Queen.
but yet he censures them both, because he observed some Defects in them: In
the Act for confirming her Mother's Marriage, he found fault that there was no
mention made of the Pope's Bulls, by the authority of which only it could be a
lawful Marriage. In the other, he did not like it, that the Worship of God, and
the Sacraments, were to be as they were in the end of her Father's Reign; for
then the People were yet in a State of Schism, and Schismatics have no right
to the Sacraments; the Pope's Interdict still lay on the Nation, and till that
were taken off, none could without Sin either administer or receive them. He
told her, that Commendone had said nothing in her Name to the Consistory, but
had spoken to them only on the Reports which, he said, he had heard of her from
good hands; and it was necessary to say somewhat, in order to the sending a
Legate: That many in the Consistory had opposed the sending of him, because
there was no express Desire sent about it; but it was carried, that he should
come over with very full Graces, and Power to reconcile the Kingdom on very
easy Terms. He also told her, he was afraid, that when the Pope and Cardinals
should hear that he was stopped, they would repent their Benignity, and take
this as an Affront, and recall him and his Powers, and send another, that would
not be so tender of the Nation, or bring with him such full Powers: That to
prevent this, he had sent one to the Pope and Cardinals, to mitigate their
displeasure, by letting them know, he was only stopped for a little while, till
the Act of Atttainder that stood against him was repealed; and to make a show
of going forward, he had sent his Household Stuff to Flanders, but would stay
where he was, till he had further Orders. He said, he knew this flowed chiefly
from the Emperor, who was for using such Political Courses, as himself had
followed in the Business of the Interim, and was earnest to have the State
settled, before she meddled with Religion; he had spoke with his Confessor about
it, and had convinced him of the Impiety of such Courses, and sent him to work
on him. He also told the Queen, he was afraid carnal Policy might govern her
too much, and that she might thereby fall from her simplicity in Christ, in
which she had hitherto lived. He encouraged her therefore to put on a Spirit of
Wisdom and Courage, and to trust in God, who had preserved her so long, and had
settled her on the Throne in so unlooked for a manner. He desired, she would
show as much Courage in rejecting the Supremacy, as her Father had done in
acquiring it. He confessed, he knew none in either House of Parliament fit to
propose that matter: the Spiritualty had all complied so far, had written and
declared for it so much, that it could not flow from them decently; and the
Temporalty being possessed of the Church Lands, would not willingly move it:
therefore he thought it best for her self to go to the Parliament, having
beforehand acquainted some few both of the Spiritualty and Temporalty with her
Design; and that she should tell both Houses, she was touched in her
Conscience, that she and her People were in a Schism from the Catholick-Church
and the Apostolic See; and that therefore she had desired a Legate to come
over to Treat about it; and should thereupon propose that the Attainder might
be taken off from him, that he might be capable to come on that Message. And he
protested, that he had never acted against the King, or Kingdom, but only with
design to reduce them to the Unity of the Church; neither before nor after the
Attainder: and whereas some might apprehend a thraldom from the Papacy, she
might give them assurance that they should see all things so well secured, that
there should no danger come to the Nation from it; and he assured them that he,
for his part, should take as much care of that, as any of all the Temporalty
could desire. What Recomendations he sent, for the Sees that were to be
declared vacant, I do not know.

When this Dispatch of his was brought into England, Gardener, But Gardiners
methods are preferred to him.
by the assistance of the Emperor, convinced the Queen that his method was
unpracticable, and that the Marriage must be first dispatched: and now Gardener
and he did declare open Enmity to one another. Gardener thought him a weak man,
that might have some speculative knowledge of abstracted Ideas, but understood
not the World, nor the genious of the English Nation. Pool, on the other hand,
thought him a false Man, that made Conscience of nothing, and was better at
Intrigues and Dissimulation, than the Government of the Church. But the Emperor
saw Gardener had so prudently managed this Parliament, that he concluded his
measures were rather to be followed than the Cardinals.

In the House of Commons it was given out that it was necessary to gain the
Queen to the Interest of the Nation, and to turn her from foreign Councils and
Aid, by being easy to her in the matter of Religion, and therefore they were
ready both to repeal the Divorce, The House of Commons displeased with the
Marriage with Spain.
and King Edwards Laws. But when they saw the design of the Marriage, and
uniting with Rome, was still carried on, they were all much alarmed: so they
sent their Speaker, and twenty of their House with him, with an earnest and
humble Address to her, not to marry a Stranger. This had so inflamed the House,
that the Court saw more could not be expected from them, unless they were
satisfied in that point. So on the 6th of December the Parliament was
dissolved. The Parliament is dissolved.
Upon that Gardener sent to the Emperor, to let him know that the Marriage was
like to meet with such opposition, that unless extraordinary Conditions were
offered, which all should see were much to the advantage of the English Crown,
it could not be carried without a general Rebellion. He also assured him, that
if great sums of money were not sent over to gratify the chief Nobility and
leading men in the Country, both for obliging them to his Interest, and
enabling them to carry Elections for the next Parliament, the opposition would
be such, that the Queen must lay down all thoughts of marrying his Son. Upon
this, the Emperor and his Son resolved to offer what Conditions the English
would demand; for Philip reckoned, if he once had the Crown on his Head, it
would be easy for him, with the assistance which his other Dominions might
give him, to make all these signify little. And for Money the Emperor borrowed
twelve hundred thousand Crowns, (which in English Money was four hundred
thousand pounds, for the Crown was then a Noble) and promised to send it over
to be distributed as Gardener and his Ambassadors should think fit: 1200000
Crowns sent into England to procure the consent of the Nation to the Marriage.
but made his Son bind himself to repay him that sum, when he had once attained
the Crown of England. And this the Emperor made so little a secret, that when,
a year after, some Towns in Germany, that had lent a part of this money,
desired to be repaid; he answered them, that he had lent his Son 1200000 Crowns
to marry him to the Queen of England, and had yet received of him only 300000
Crowns, but he had good security for the rest, and the Merchants were bound to
pay him 100000 lib. Sterling, and therefore he demanded a little more time of
them. All this was printed soon after at Strasburgh by the English there, in a
Book which they sent over to England; in which, both the Address made by the
Commons in Parliament, and this Answer of the Emperor's to the Towns, is
mentioned. And that whole Discourse, (which is in the form of an Address to the
Queen, the Nobility and the Commons,) is written with such gravity and
simplicity of Style, that as it is by much the best I have seen of this time:
so in these public Transactions, there is no reason to think it untrue. For
the things which it relates are credible of themselves; and though the sum
there mentioned was very great, yet he that considers that England was to be
bought with it, will not think it an extraordinary price. In that Discourse, it
is further said, that as Gardener corrupted many by Bribes, so in the Court of
Chancery, Common Justice was denied to all but those who came into these
Designs,

Having thus given an account of what was done in the Parliament, I shall next
show how the Convocation proceeded. The Proceedings of the Convocation.
Bonner being to preside in it, as being the first Bishop of the Province of
Canterbury, appointed John Harpsfield his Chaplain to preach: who took his Text
out of the twentieth of the Acts (verse 20) Feed the Flock. He run out in his
bidding Prayers, most profusely on the Queens Praises, comparing her to Deborah
and Esther, with all the servilest flatteries he could invent: next he bid them
pray for the Lady Elizabeth: but when he came to mention the Clergy, he
enlarged in the praises of Bonner, Gardener, Tonstal, Heath, and Day, so
grossly, that it seems the strains of flattering Churchmen at that time were
very course: and he run out so copiously in them, as if he had been to deliver
a Panegyric and not to bid the Beads. In his Sermon he inveighed against the
late Preachers, for not observing Fasts, nor keeping Lent, and for their
Marriages which he severely condemned,

Weston Dean of Westminster was presented Prolocutor by the lower House,
Disputes concerning the Sacrament
and approved of by Bonner. Whether any of the Bishops that had been made in
King Edwards time sat among them, I do not know. But in the lower House there
was great opposition made. There had been care taken that there should be none
returned to the Convocation, but such as would comply in all points. But yet
there came six Non-compliers, who being Deans or Archdeacons, had a right to
sit in the Convocation. These were Philpot Archdeacon of Winchester, Philips
Dean of Rochester, Haddon Dean of Exeter, Cheyney Archdeacon of Hereford,
Ailmer Archdeacon of Stow, and Young Chanter of St. David's. Weston the
Prolocuter proposed to them, on the 18th of October, that there had been a
Catechism printed in the last year of King Edwards Reign in the name of that
Synod, and as he understood it was done without their consents, which was a
pestiferous Book, and full of Heresies; There was likewise a very abominable
Book of Common Prayer set out; it was therefore the Queens pleasure that they
should prepare such Laws about Religion, as she would ratify with her
Parliament. So he proposed that they should begin with condemning those Books,
particularly the Articles in them contrary to the Sacrament of the Altar: and
he gave out two questions about it: Whether in the Sacrament, upon the
Sanctification of the Bread and Wine, all their substance did not vanish, being
changed into the Body and Blood of Christ? and, Whether the natural Body of
Christ was not corporally present in the Eucharist, either by the
Transubstantiation of the Elements into his Body and Blood, or by the
Conjunction of Concomitance, as some expressed it? The House was adjourned till
the 20th, on which day every Man was appointed to give in his Answer to these
Questions. All answered and subscribed in the affirmative, except the six
before mentioned. Philpot said, whereas it was given out that the Catechism was
was not approved by the Convocation, though it was printed in their name; it
was a mistake: for the Convocation had authorized a number of Persons to set
forth Ecclesiastical Laws, to whom they had committed their Synodal Authority;
So that they might well set out such Books in the name of the Convocation. He
also said, that it was against all order, to move Men to subscribe in such
points, before they were examined: and since the number of these on the one
side, was so unequal to those on the other side; he desired that Dr. Ridley,
Mr. Rogers, and two or three more, might be allowed to come to the Convocation.
This seemed very reasonable. So the lower House proposed it to the Bishops.
They answered, that these persons being Prisoners, they could not bring them:
but they should move the Council about it. A Message also was sent from some
great Lords, that they intended to hear the Disputation; so the House adjourned
till the 23d.

There was then a great appearance of Noblemen and others. The Prolocutor began
with a Protestation, that by this Dispute they did not intend to call the Truth
in doubt, to which they had all subscribed; but they did it only to satisfy
the objections of those few who refused to concur wtih them. But it was denied
to let any Prisoners or others assist them, for it was said, that that being a
Dispute among those of the Convocation, none but Members were to be heard in
it. Haddon, and Ailmer, foreseeing they should be run down with clamor and
noise, refused to dispute: Young went away: Cheyney being next spoke to, did
propose his Objections: that St. Paul calls the Sacrament Bread after the
Consecration: that Origin said, it went into the Excrement: and Theodoret said,
the Bread and Wine did not in the Sacrament depart from their former Substance,
Form, and Shape. Moreman was called on to answer him: He said, that St. Paul
calling it Bread, was to be understood thus, the Sacrament or Form of Bread. To
Origens Authority he answered nothing; but to Theodoret he said, the word they
render Substance stood in a more general signification, and so might signify
accidental Substance. Upon this, Ailmer, who had resolved not to Dispute, could
not contain himself, but said the Greek Word, (...), could not be so
understood, for the following words of Form and Shape belonged to the
Accidents, but that only belonged to the Substance of the Elements. Upon this
there followed a Contest about the signification of that word. Then Philpot
struck in, and said, the occasion of Theodorets writing, plainly showed, that
was a vain Cavil; for the Dispute was with the Eutychians, whether the Body and
humane Nature of Christ had yet an Existence distinct from the Divine Nature?
The Eutychians said, it was swallowed up by his Godhead; and argued from some
expressions used concerning the Sacrament, as if the presence of Christ in it
had swallowed up the Elements: against which, Theodoret, according to the
Orthodox Doctrine, argued to prove that there was in Christ a humane Nature,
not swallowed up; and said, that as in the Sacrament, notwithstanding the union
of Christ with the Elements, they did not depart from their Substance, Form,
and Shape; So the humane Nature of Christ, was not absorbed by its Union to the
Godhead. So it plainly appeared, this word Substance stood for the Nature of
the Elements. Moreman being straightened in answering this, Philpot said, if he
had not an Answer ready, he would desire him to think on one again their next
Meeting; upon this the Prolocutor checked him, as if he were bragging too soon.
He insisted on his Argument, but was commanded to be silent. Haddon upon that
proposed another Argument, from these Words of our Savior, The Poor you have
always with you, but Me you have not always: That therefore his Body was not in
the Sacrament. To this the Prolocutor answered, that Christ was not to be
always with us so as to receive our Alms; which is all that was intended by
that place: But Haddon brought a copious Citation out of St. Austin, applying
that very Place to prove that Christ's natural Presence was no more on Earth,
after his Ascension into Heaven. To this Dr. Watson opposed another place of
St. Austin, and some dispute was about those Places: After that, Haddon read
more Authorities of Fathers, asserting that Christ was in Heaven and not on
Earth; the Words of the Institution did plainly express it; both because the
Sacrament was to be in remembrance of Christ, and because it was to continue
until his coming again. But to this they said, he was not on Earth in a bodily
manner; and they endeavored to take away the Force of the Argument from the
Words, until his coming again, by some other Acceptions of the Word [until.]
But Haddon asked them, whether they thought Christ did eat his own natural
Body, when he instituted and took the Sacrament? they said he did. Upon that he
answered, that that was so absurd, that he thought it needless to argue more
with those who could yield it, and so he sat down. Philpot argued, that Christ
could not receive his own Body in the Sacrament, since it was given for the
Remission of Sins, of which he was not capable, having no Sin; Weston answered,
he might receive it, as well as he Baptized: But Philpot answered, he was
baptized, as he said himself, to be an example to others. So ended this days
Dispute.

On the 25 Philpot, who was ordered to begin that Day, had prepared a long
Discourse in Latin: But Weston interrupted him, and said, He must make no
Speech, he was only to propose his Arguments, and that in English; though it
had been before ordered that the Dispute should be in Latin, Then Philpot went
to explain what sort of Presence he would dispute against, and what he allowed.
Here Weston again interrupted him, and bid him form his Argument. Upon that he
fell down on his Knees, and begged of the Lords, and Privy Counselors that
were present, That he might have leave to speak his Mind: Which they granted
him; so, he said, For their Sacrifice of the Mass, he would prove that it was
no Sacrament at all, and that Christ was no way present in it; which if he
should not do, before the Queen and her Council, against any six that would
maintain the contrary, he should be willing to be burnt before the Court Gates.
Upon this there was great out-crying, that he was mad, and talked idely; and
Weston threatened to send him to Prison. But this noise being laid, and he
claiming the privilege of the House for the freedom of Speech, was required to
go on to an Argument. Then he proved that Christ was in Heaven; for himself
said, I leave the World, and go to my Father: And to prove there was no
ambiguity in these words, he observed, that his Disciples said upon this, Now
thou speak plainly, without any Parable. It was answered, by Dr. Chedsey,
That those words were only meant of his visible Ascension, but did not exclude
his invisible presence; and he cited some words of Chrysostom's, That Christ
took his Flesh with him, and also left his Flesh behind him. Weston, and the
rest said, That Authority was unanswerable; and for a while would not hear his
Answer. But Philpot showed him, that Chrysostom's words must be understood in a
large sense, as Believers are said to be Flesh of his Flesh; for that Father
applies that also to Baptism, from these words, As many as are baptized into
Christ, have put on Christ; so the Flesh that Christ left on Earth, according
to him, is not the Corporal Presence in the Sacrament. Upon this, Pie, Dean of
Chichester, whispered somewhat to the Prolocutor; who thereupon said to
Philpot, That he had disputed enough. He answered, That he had a dozen of
Arguments, and they were enjoining him silence, before he had got through one
of them. They threatened to send him to Prison if he spoke more. He said, That
was far from the promise they had made of hearing them fully; and from what was
preached last Sunday at Paul's, That all things should be answered in this
Disputation. But Pie said, He should be answered another way. Philpot replied,
There was a Company of them now got together, who had heretofore dissembled
with God and the World; and were now met to suppress God's Truth, and to set
forth false Devices, which they were not able to maintain. After this Ailmer
stood up, and brought many Authorities out of Greek Authors, to prove that
(...) in Theodoret, could only be understood of the substance of Bread and
Wine: and Moreman desired a days time to consider of them. Then Peru, though he
had subscribed with the rest, brought some Arguments against
Transubstantiation; for which the Prolocutor chid him, since he had before
subscribed. Ailmer answered, That it was against the freedom of the House, for
any to be so chid for delivering his Conscience. It was now become late, so
they adjourned to the 27th.

Then they again disputed about Theodorets words, where Haddon showed that he
said the Symboles retained the same Substance that they had before. After that
Cheyney fell to argue about those words; he acknowledged a real Presence, but
denied Transubstantiation, and pressed Theodoret's Authority so closs, that
Watson said he was a Nestorian; and if Theodoret, who was but one, was of their
side, there was above a hundred Fathers against them. Upon this Cheyney quoted
Ireneus, who had said, that our flesh was nourished by the Bread and Wine in
the Sacrament, He also cited Hesychius, who said, that in the Church of
Jerusalem, the Symboles that were not consumed in the Communion, were burnt
afterward; he desired to know whether the Ashes were the Body of Christ, or
what it was that was burnt. To all this Harpsfield made a long Answer
concerning Gods Omnipotence, and the weakness of men's understandings, that
could not comprehend Divine Mysteries. But Cheyney still asked what it was that
was burnt? Harpsfield replied, it was either the Substance of Bread, or the
Body of Christ; and afterward said it was a Miracle: At that Cheyney smiled,
and said then he could say no more. Weston asked, whether there was not enough
said in answer to these men's Objections? Many of the Clergy cried out, Yes,
Yes: But the multitude with repeated cries said, No, No: Weston said, he spoke
to those of the House, and not to the rude Multitude. Then he asked those
Divines, whether they would now for three days answer the Arguments that should
be put to them? Haddon, Cheyney and Ailmer, said they would not: But Philpot
offered to do it. Woston said, he was a mad man, and fitter to be sent to
Bedlam. Philpot said, he that had carried himself with so much Passion, and so
little Indifferency, deserved a Room there much better. Weston neglecting him
turned to the Assembly, and said, they might see what sort of men these were,
whom they had now answered three days; but tho they had promised it, and the
Order of Disputation did require it, that they should answer in their turn
three days, they now declined it. Upon that, Ailmer stood up and answered, that
they had made no such Promise, nor undertaken any such Disputation; but being
required to give their Reasons, why they would not subscribe with the rest,
they had done it, but had received no Answer to them, and therefore would enter
into no further Disputation before such Judges, who had already determined and
subscribed those Questions. So the House was adjourned to the 30th. and then
Philpot appeared to answer, but desired first leave to prosecute his former
Argument, and urged that since Christ as man is like us in all things without
sin, therefore as we are restrained to one place at a time, so is Christ but in
one place, and that is Heaven; for St. Peter says, the Heavens must contain him
till the Restitution of all things. To this it was answered, that Christ being
God, his Omnipotence was above our understanding: and that to shut him in one
place, was to put him in Prison. Philpot said, he was not speaking of his
Divine Nature, but that as he was man he was like us: And for their saying that
Christ was not to be imprisoned in Heaven, he left to all men to judge whether
that was a good answer or not. Much discourse following upon this, the
Prolocutor commanded him to come no more into the House. He answered, he
thought himself happy to be out of their Company. Others suggesting to the
Prolocutor, that it would be said the meetting was not free, if men were put
out of the House for speaking their minds: He said to him he might come, so he
were decently Habited, and did not speak but when he commanded him. To this he
answered, that he had rather be absent altogether. Weston concluded all, by
saying, you have the Word, but we have the Sword: Truly pointing out wherein
the strength of both Causes lay.

This was the Issue of that Disputation, which was soon after Printed in
English: and in Latin by Volerandus Polanus, Censures past upon it.
and is inserted at large in Fox's Acts and Monuments. What account the other
side gave of it, I do not find. But upon all such occasions, the prevailing
party, when the inequality was so disproportioned, used to carry things with
so much noise and disorder, that it was no vvonder the Reformers had no mind
to engage in this Dispute. And those who reflected on the way of proceeding
in King Edwards time, could not but confess things had been managed with much
more Candor and Equality. For in this very Point, there had been, as was
formerly shown, Disputes for a Year together, before there was any
Determination made: so that all men were free at that time to deliver their
Opinions without any fear, and then the Disputes were in the Universities,
where, as there were a great Silence, and Collection of Books, so the
Auditors were more capable of being instructed by them: But here the Point was
first determined, and then disputed: And this was in the midst of the disorder
of the Town, where the Privy Council gave all possible encouragement to the
prevailing Party.

The last thing I find done this year, was, the restoring Veisey to be Bishop
of Exeter, which was done on the 28th of December. In his Warrant for it under
the great Seal, it is said, that he, for some just troubles both in Body and
Mind, had resigned his Bishopric to King Edward, to which the Queen now
restored him. And thus ended this year. Foreign Affairs did not so much
concern Religion, as they had done in the former Reign, which as it made me
give some account of them then, so it causes me now not to prosecute them so
fully.

In the beginning of the next year, 1554. Ambassadors sent from the Emperor
for the marriage.
the Emperor sent over the Count of Egmont and some other Ambassadors to make
the Proposition and Treaty of Marriage, betwixt his Son and the Queen. In the
managing of this Treaty, Gardener had the chief hand: for he was now the Oracle
at the Council Board: He had thirty years Experience in Affairs, a great
Knowledge of the Courts of Christendom, and of the State of England, and had
great Sagacity, with a marvelous Cunning, which was not always regulated by
the Rules of Candor and Honesty. He in drawing the Articles of the Marriage had
a double design: the one was, to have them so framed that they might easily
pass in Parliament; And the other was, to exclude the Spaniards from having any
share in the Government of England, which he intended to hold in his own
hands. The Articles agreed.
So the Terms on which it was agreed were these.

The Queen should have the whole Government of England, with the giving of
Offices and Benefices, in her own hands: so that tho Philip was to be called
King, and his Name was to be on the Coin, and the Seals, and in Writts, yet her
hand was to give force to every thing without his. Spaniards should not be
admitted into the Government, nor to any Offices at Court. 1553.
The Laws should not be altered, nor the Pleadings put into any other Tongue.
The Queen should not be made to go out of England, but upon her own desire. The
Children born in the Marriage should not go out of England, but by the consent
of the Nobility. If the Queen outlived the Prince, She should have 60000 l. a
year out of his Estate, 40000 out of Spain, and 20000 of it out of the
Netherlands. If the Queen had Sons by him, they should succeed, both to her own
Crowns, and the Netherlands, and Burgundy: And if the Archduke Charles,
Philip's only Son died, they should succeed to all Her and His Dominions: If
she had only Daughters, they should succeed to her Crowns, and the Netherlands,
if they married by their Brothers consent: or otherwise, they should have such
Portions, as was ordinarily given to those of their Rank: But if the Queen had
no Issue, the King was not to pretend to any part of the Government after her
death; but the Crown was to descend according to the Laws of England to her
Heirs. There was to be a perpetual League betwixt England and Spain; but this
was not to be in prejudice of their League with France, which was still to
continue in force.

These were the Conditions agreed on, and afterward confirmed in Parliament;
by which it appears the Spaniards were resolved to have the Marriage on any
Terms; reckoning that if Prince Philip were once in England, he could easily
enlarge his Authority, which was hereby so much restrained.

The Match generally disliked.
It was now apparent, the Queen was to Marry the Prince of Spain; which gave
an universal discontent to the whole Nation. All that loved the Reformation
saw, that not only their Religion would be changed, but a Spanish Government
and Inquisition would be set up in its stead. Those who considered the Civil
Liberties of the Kingdom, without great regard to Religion, concluded that
England would become a Province to Spain; and they saw how they governed the
Netherlands, and heard how they ruled Milan, Naples, and Sicily: but above all,
they heard the most Inhumane things that ever any Age produced, had been Acted
by them in their new conquest in the West Indies.

It was said, what might they expect, but to lie at the mercy of such
Tyrannical Masters, who would not be long kept within the Limits, that were now
prescribed? All the great conditions now talked of, were but the guilding the
Pill, but its operation would be fatal, if they once swallowed it down. These
things had Influence on many; But the chief Conspirators were the Duke of
Suffolk, Plots to oppose it
Sir Thomas Wiat, and Sir Peter Carew: The one was to raise the Mid-land
Counties, the other to raise Cornwall, and Wiat was to raise Kent: Hoping by
rising in such remote places, so to distract the Government, that they should
be able to engage the Commons, who were now as much distasted with the Queen,
as they had been formerly fond of her.

Are discovered.
But as Carew was carrying on his Design in the West, it came to be discovered;
and one that he had trusted much in it, was taken: upon that Carew fled over
into France. Wiat was in Kent when he heard this; but had not yet laid his
Business as he intended. Therefore fearing to be undone by the Discovery that
was made, he gathered some Men about him, and on the 25th of January, went to
Maidston. There he made Proclamation, Wiat breaks out.
that he intended nothing, but to preserve the Liberty of the Nation, 1554.
and keep it from coming under the Yoke of Strangers; which, he said, all the
Council, one or two excepted, were against: and assured the People, that all
the Nobility, and chief Men of England, would concur with them. He said nothing
of Religion, but in private assured those that were for the Reformation, that
he would declare for them. One Roper came and declared him and his Company
Traitors; but he took him, with some Gentlemen that were gathering to oppose
him. From thence he went to Rochester, and writ to the Sheriff of Kent,
desiring his Assistance against the Strangers, for there were already, as he
said, an hundred Armed Spaniards landed at Dover. The Sheriff sent him word,
That if he, and those with him, had any Suits, they were to make them to the
Queen on their knees, but not with Swords in their hands; and required them to
disperse, under pain of Treason. Wiat kept his Men in good order, so that they
did no hurt, but only took all the Arms they could find.

At the same time, one Isley and Knevet gathered People together about
Tunbridg, and went to join with Wiat. The Queen sent down a Herald to him with
a Pardon, if he would disperse his Company in 24 hours; but Wiat made him
deliver his Message at the end of Rochester Bridge, and so sent him away. The
High Sheriff gathered together as many as he could, and showed them how they
were abused by Lies; there was no Spaniards landed at all: and those that were
to come, were to be their Friends and Confederates against their Enemies. Those
that he brought together, went to Gravesend to meet the Duke of Norfolk, and
Sir Hen. Jerningham, who were come thither with 600 Men from London; and they
hearing that Knevet was in his way to Rochester, went, and intercepted, and
routed him; sixty of his Men were killed, the rest saved themselves in the
Woods.

The News of this disheartened Wiat much; who was seen to weep, and called for a
Coat, which he stuffed with Angels, designing to have escaped. But the Duke of
Norfolk marching to Rochester with 200 Horse, and 600 Foot, commanded by one
Bret; they were wrought on, by a pretended Desertor, Harper, who seemed to come
over from Wiat: he persuaded the Londoners, The Londoners revolt.
that it was only the preservation of the Nation from the Spaniards that they
designed; and it was certain none would suffer under that Yoke more than they.
This had such an effect on them, that they all cried out, We are all English
Men; and went over to Wiat. So the Duke of Norfolk was forced to march back.
And now Kent was all open to Wiat, who thereupon sent one to the Duke of
Suffolk, pressing him to make haste and raise his Country: but the Bearer was
intercepted. Upon that, the Earl of Huntington was sent down with some Horse to
seize on him. The Duke was at all times a mean-spirited Man, but it never
appeared more than now: For after a faint endeavor to raise the Country, he
gave it over, and concealed himself in a private House; but was betrayed by him
to whom he had trusted himself, into the hands of the Earl of Huntington, and
so was brought to the Tower.

Wiat's Party increasing, they turned toward London. As they came to Debtford,
Sir Edward Hastings, and Sir Thomas Cornwallis, came to them, in the Queen's
Name, to ask what would content them? Wiat desired that he might have the
Command of the Tower, that the Queen might stay under his Guard; and that the
Council might be changed. Upon these extravagant Propositions, Wiat's Demands.
there passed high words, and the Privy Counselors returned to the Queen.
After this she went into Guild Hall, and there gave an account of her Message
to Wiat, and his Answer. And for her Marriage, she said, she did nothing in it
but by advice of her Council, and spoke very tenderly of the love she bore to
her People, and to that City. On the 31, Wiat was become 4000 strong, and came
near Southwark. He came to Southwark.
On the 2d of February he fell into Southwark. Some of his Company had a mind
to have broken into Winchester-House, and robbed it; but he threatened to hang
any that should do it. He was put in hope, that upon his coming to Southwark,
London would have declared for him; but in that he was deceived. The Bridge was
fortified, so that he found it was not possible to force it. Here he held a
Council of War with his Officers; some were for turning back into Kent, to
disperse a Body of Men that the Lord. Abergaveny had gathered together: but he
said, That was a small Game. The strength of their Party was in London, and
therefore it was necessary for him to be there as soon as he could: for though
they could not open the Bridge to him, yet he was assured, if he were on the
other side, many would come out to him. Some were for crossing over to Essex,
where they heard the People were well-affected to them; but they had not Boats
enough, so he marched to get over at Kingston-Bridg.

On the 4th they came to Kingston, He crossed the Thames at Kingston.
where the Queen had ordered the Bridge to be cut; but his Men repairing it, he
crossed the River that Night; and though he lost much time, by the mending of
one of his Carriages that broke by the way, he was at Hide-Park by nine of the
Clock next Morning, it being Ash Wednesday.

The Earl of Pembroke had gathered a good Body of Men to have fallen on him,
But is defeated.
for his Men were now in great disorder; but they looked on, to let him cast
himself into their hands. He did not march by Holborn, as some advised, but
came down to Charing-crass. There the Lord Clinton fell in between the several
Bodies of his Men, and dispersed them so, that he had not 500 left about him:
But with those that remained, he passed through the Strand, and Fleetstreet, to
Ludgate, where he stopped, in hope to have found the Gates opened to him. That
hope failing, he returned back; and being now out of all heart, And taken.
was taken at Temple Bar by a Herald. All this while the Queen showed great
courage, she would not stir out of Whitehall, nor go by Water to the Tower, as
some advised her, but went with her Women and Priests to her Devotions.

This was a Rebellion, both raised and dispersed, in as strange a ma^mer as
could have been imagined. Wiat was a popular and stout Man, but had not a Head
for such an Undertaking, otherwise the Government was so feeble, that it had
not been a difficult thing to have driven the Queen to great straits. It was
not at all raised upon pretense of Religion; which, according to the printed
Account set out by the Queen's Order, was not so much as once named. And yet
some of our own Writers say, That Poinet, Poinet was not in that Rebellion.
the late Bishop of Winchester, was in it. But this is certainly false, for so
many Prisoners being taken, it is not to be imagined but this would have been
found out, and published, to make that Religion more odious: and we cannot
think but Gardener would have taken care that he should have been attainted in
the following Parliament.

Christophorson soon after writ a Book against Rebellion, in which he studies
to fasten this Rising on the Preachers, of the New Religion, as he calls it;
and gives some presumptions, that amount to no more, but little flourishes of
his Wit, but never names this, which had been a decisive proof. So that it is
but a groundless Fiction, made by those who have either been the Authors, or at
least have laid down the Principles of all the Rebellions in the Christian
World, and yet would cast that blame on others, and exempt themselves from it;
as if they were the surest Friends of Princes, while they design to enslave
them to a Foreign Power, and will neither allow them to Reign, nor to Live,
but at the mercy of the Head of that Principality, to which all other Powers
must bend; or break, if they meet with an Age that is so credulous and
superstitious, as to receive their Dictates.

This raw, and soon-broken Rebellion, was as lucky to Gardener, and those who
set on the Marriage, as if they had projected it; for now, the People were much
disheartened, and their own Designs as much fortified: since, as some Fevers are
Critical, and cast out those Latent Distempers, which no Medicines could
effectually purge away; and yet if they were not removed, must in the end
corrupt the whole Mass of Blood; so in a weak Government, to which the People
are ill-affected, ill-digested, Rebellions raise the Prince higher, and add as
much Spirit to his Friends, as they take from the Faction against him, and give
a Handle to do some things, for which otherwise it were not easy, either to
find Colors or Instruments.

One effect of this was, the proceeding severely against the Lady Jane, and her
Husband, The L. Jane and her Husband executed.
the Lord Guilford, who both suffered on the 12th of Feburary. The Lady Jane
was not much disordered at it; for she knew, upon the first Jealousy, she must
be the Sacrifice; and therefore had now lived six months in the continual
meditations of Death. Fecknam, afterward Abbot of Westminster, was sent to her
by the Queen, three days before, to prepare her to Die. He had a long
conversation with her: But she answered him with that calmness of Mind, and
clearness of Reason, that it was an astonishing thing to hear so young a
Person, of her Sex and Quality, look on Death, so near her, with so little
disorder, and talk so sensibly, both of Faith, and Holiness, of the Sacrament,
the Scriptures, and the Authority of the Church. Fecknam left her, seeing he
could work nothing on her: But procured, as is said, the continuance of her
Life three days longer, and waited on her on the Scaffold. She writ to her
Father to moderate his Grief for her Death, (which must needs have been great,
since his Folly had occasioned it). She expressed her sense of her Sin, Her
preparation for Death.
in assuming the Royal Dignity, though he knew how unwillingly she was drawn to
it; and that in her Royal Estate, her enforced Honor had never defiled her
innocent Heart. She rejoiced at her approaching End, since nothing could be to
her more welcome, than to be delivered from that Valley of Misery, into that
Heavenly Throne, to which she was to be advanced, where she prayed that they
might meet at last.

There was one Harding, that had been her Father's Chaplain, and that was a
zealous Preacher in King Edward's Days; before whose Death, he had animated the
People much to prepare for Persecution, and never to depart from the Truth of
the Gospel; but he had now fallen away himself. To him she writ a Letter full
of severe expostulations, and threatenings, for his Apostasy; but it had no
effect on him. It is of an extraordinary strain, full of Life in the Thoughts,
and of Zeal, if there is not too much, in the expressions. The Night before her
Execution, she sent her Greek Testament, which she had always used, to her
Sister; with a Letter in the same Language, in which, in most pathetick
Expressions, she sets out the value that she had of it, and recommended the
study and practice of it earnestly to her. She had also composed a very devout
Prayer for her Retirements; and thus had she spent the last moments of her
Life. She expressed great tenderness, when she saw her Husband led out first;
but soon overcame it, when she considered how closely she was to follow him. He
had desired to take leave of her before he died, but she declined it, since it
would be rather an increase of Grief, than any addition of Comfort to them. She
said, she hoped they would shortly meet, and be united in a happier State; and
with a settled Countenance, she saw them bring back the beheaded Body to the
Chapel, where it was to be buried. When she was brought to the Scaffold, which
was raised for her within the Tower, to prevent the compassion, which her dying
more publicly might have raised; she confessed, she had sinned in taking the
Queen's Honor, when it was given her; she acknowledged the Act was unlawful,
as was also her consenting to it; but, she said, it was neither procured nor
desired by her. She declared, that she died a true Christian, and hoped to be
saved only by the Mercy of God in the Blood of Christ. She acknowledged that
she had too much neglected the Word of God, and had loved her self and the
World too much, for which that punishment had come justly to her from God: but
she blessed him that had made it a means to lead her to Repentance. Then,
having desired the Peoples Prayers, she kneeled down, and repeated the 51
Psalm: Then she undressed her self, and stretched out her Head on the Block,
and cried out, Lord, into thy hands I recommend my Spirit; and so her Head was
cut off.

All People lamented her sad and untimely end, which was not easily consented
to, even by the Queen her self. Her Death had a most violent operation on Judge
Morgan, that had pronounced the Sentence: soon after he fell mad, and in all
his ravings, still called to take away the Lady Jane from him. Indeed the blame
of her Death was generally cast on her Father, rather than on the Queen, since
the Rivalry of a Crown is a point of such niceness, that even those who
bemoaned her Death most, could not but excuse the Queen, who seemed to be
driven to it, rather from Considerations of state, then any Resentment of her
own. Her Father's Execution.
On the 17 of February, was the Duke of Suffolk tried by his Peers, and
condemned: He suffered on the 21. He would have died more pitied for his
Weakness, if his Practices had not brought his Daughter to her end. Next, Wiat
was brought to his Trial, where in most abject words he begged his Life, and
offered to promote the Queen's Marriage, if they would spare him; but for all
that he was engraved portrait of Lady Jane Gray EFFIGIES IANAE GRAIAE HENRICI
VIII PRONEPTIS EX SORORE
R. White sculp
blazon or coat of arms

Nata 1537. cc Guildfordice Dudley Conjugata 1553.

Maij Regina Declaritur 1553 Iul: 10. Capite Plectitur 1553/4. Feb: 12.

Printed for Richd. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church yard.

Beheaded. Bret was Hanged in Chains at Rochester. In all fifty eight were
Executed in several places, whose Attainders were confirmed by an Act of the
following Parliament, 600 of the Rabble were appointed to come before the
Queen with Halters about their Necks, and to beg their Lives, which she
granted them; and so was this Storm dissipated; only the Effusion of Blood
after it, was thought too liberal, and this Excess of Punishment was
generally cast on Gardener, and made him become very hateful to the Nation;
which has been always much moved at a Repetition of such sad Spectacles.

The Earl of Devonshire, and the Lady Elizabeth, The Lady Elizabeth unjustly
suspected for Plotting,
came to be suspected of the Plot, as if the rising in the West had been set on
by the Earl, with design, if it had succeeded, to have married the Lady
Elizabeth, and put her in the Queen's Room. Wiat did at his death clear them of
any occasion to his Confederacies. Yet the Queen who was much alienated from
her Sister upon old Scores, was not unwilling to find a pretense for using her
ill; so she was made a Prisoner. And the Earl of Devonshire had, upon the
account formerly mentioned, offended the Queen, who thought her kindness ill
requited, Many deserve proceedings.
when she saw he neglected her, and preferred her Sister; so he was again put
into Prison. Sir Nicholas Throgmorton was also charged with that same Guilt,
and broughr to his Trial, which lasted Ten hours; But was acquitted by the
Jury: Upon which they were cast into Prison, and severely Fined, some in 2000
l. and some in a 1000 Marks. This was fatal to his Brother Sir John, who was
cast by the Jury, upon the same Evidence that his Brother had been acquitted:
But he protested his innocence to the last. Sir John Cheek had got beyond Sea,
finding he was also suspected and sought after; and both Sir Peter Carew, and
he, hoping that Philip would be glad, at his first admission to the Crown of
England, to show Acts of Favor, went into Flanders; where, upon assurances
given of Pardon and Mercy, they rendered themselves. But upon their coming into
England, they were both put into the Tower. Carew made his escape, and was
afterward employed by Queen Elizabeth in her Affairs in Ireland. Cheek was at
this time discharged, but upon some new Offense, he was again taken in
Flanders, in May 1556. and was prevailed upon to renounce his Religion, and
then he was set at liberty; but was so sadly affected at the unworthiness of
that Action, that it was believed to have cast him into a Languishing, of which
he soon after died. There was a base Imposture set up at this time, of one that
seemed to speak from a Wall with a strange sort of voice. Many seditious things
were uttered by that voice, which was judged of variously. Some called it the
Spirit of the Wall. The Imposture of the Spirit in the Wall.
Some said it was an Angel that spoke: And many mavelous things were reported
of it; But the matter being narrowly enquired into, it was found to be one
Elizabeth Crofts, a Girl, who from a private hole in the Wall, with the help
of a Whistle, had uttered those words. She was made to do Penance openly at
Paul's for it: But by the account then Printed of it, I do not find any
Accomplices were found; except one Drake, to whom no particular Character is
added. So it seems it was a Trick laid Betwixt these two; for what purpose I
cannot find. Sure enough in those Times, it was not laid to the charge of the
Preachers of the Reformation. Which I the rather take notice of, because of the
Malignity of one of our Historians, who has laid this to the charge of the
Zuinglian Gospellers, tho all the proof he offers for casting it on them, is in
these words; For I cannot consider this but as a Plot of theirs; And sets it up
in opposition to the notorious Imposture of the Maid of Kent, mentioned in the
former Volume, and says, Let not the Papists be more charged with that, since
these were now as faulty.

The two instructions to the Bishops. Col. Number 10.
The Nation being now settled, the Queen did next give Instructions to the
Bishops to proceed to visit the Clergy, according to some Articles which she
sent them, which will be found in the Collections. In those, after a long and
invidious Preamble of the disorders that had been in the time of King Edward,
she commanded them, to execute all such Ecclesiastical Laws as had been in
force in her Father's Reign: That the Bishops should in their Courts proceed no
more in the Queen's Name: That the Oath of Supremacy should be no more Exacted
of any of the Clergy: That none suspect of Heresy should be admitted to
Orders: That they should endeavor to repress Heresy, and punish Heretics:
That they should suppress all naughty Books, and Ballads: That they should
remove all married Clergy men, and separate them from their Wives; but for
those that renounced their Wives, they might put them into some other Cure, or
reserve a Pension out of their Benefice for them: That no religious Man who had
professed Chastity, should be suffered to live with his Wife: That care should
be taken of vacant Churches: That till they were provided, the people should go
to the Neighboring Churches: That all the Ceremonies, Holy Days, and Fasts,
used in King Henry's time, should be again observed: That those who were
ordained by the new Book in King Edwards time, not being ordained in very deed,
The Bishop, if they were otherwise sufficient, should supply what was
vvanting before, and so admit them to Minister: That the Bishops should set
forth an uniform Doctrine of Homilies; and compel the people to come to Church,
and hear Divine Service: That they should carefully look to all Schoolmasters
and Teachers of Children: And that the Bishops should take care to set forth
the Premises, with all kind of Virtue, godly Living, and good Example;
Proceedings against the Bishops that adhered to the Reformation.
and endeavor to keep down all sort of Vice.

These were Signed on the 4 of March, and Printed, and sent over the Kingdom.
But to make the Married Bishops Examples of the severity of their proceedings;
the Queen gave a special Commission to Gardener, Tonstall, Bonner, Parfew
Bishop of St. Asaph, Day, and Kitchen of Landaffe, making mention, that with
great grief of heart she had heard, that the Archbishop of York, the Bishops of
St. David's, Chester and Bristol, had broken their Vows, and defiled their
Function, by contracting Marriage; therefore those, or any three of them, are
empowered to call them before them; and if the Premises be found to be true,
Col. Number 11. 12.
to deprive, and turn them out of their Bishoprics: This I have put into the
Collection, with another Commission to the same Persons, to call the Bishops of
Lincoln, Gloucester and Hereford, before them; in whose Patents it was provided
that they should hold their Bishoprics so long as they behaved themselves
well: and since they, by preaching Erroneous Doctrine, and by inordinate Life
and Conversation, as she credibly understood, had carried themselves contrary
to the Laws of God, and the Practice of the universal Church, these or any two
of them, should proceed against them, either according to Ecclesiastical
Canons, or the Laws of the Land, and declare their Bishoprics void, as they
were indeed already void: Thus were Seven Bishops all at a dash turned out.
It was much censured, that there having been Laws made, allowing Marriage to
the Clergy, the Queen should by her own Authority, upon the repealing these
Laws, turn out Bishops for things that had been so well warranted by Law: for
the Repeal was only an Annulling of the Law for the Future, but did not void it
from the beginning: so that, however it might have justified proceedings
against them for the Future, if they had lived with their Wives; yet it could
not warrant the punishing them for what was past: And even the severest Popes,
or their Legates, who had pressed the Coelibate most, had always before they
proceeded to deprive any Priests for Marriage, left it to their choice, whether
they would quit their Wives, or their Benefices: but had never summarily turned
them out for being married: And for the other Bishops, it was an unheard of way
of procedure, for the Queen before any process was made, to empower Delegates
to declare their Sees void, as they were indeed aIready void. This was to give
Sentence before hearing. And all this was done by virtue of the Queens
Supremacy; for tho she thought that, a sinful and Schismatical Power, yet she
was easily persuaded to use it against the Reformed Clergy, and to turn them
out of their Benefices upon such unjust and Illegal pretenses. So that now the
proceedings against Gardener and Bonner, in which were the greatest Stretches
made that had been in the last Reign, were far outdone by those new Delegates.
For the Archbishop of York, tho he was now turned out, yet he was still kept
Prisoner; till King Philip, among the Acts of Grace he did at his coming over,
procured his Liberty. But his See was not filled till February next; for then
Heath had his Conge d'elire. On or before the 18th of March this Year, were
those other Sees declared Vacant. For that day did the Conge d'elire go out to
the Deans and Chapters of St. David's, Lincoln, Hereford, Chester, Gloucester,
and Bristol: sor Morgan, White, Parfew, Coats, Brooks and Holyman. Goodrick
of Ely died in April this Year. He seems to have complied with the time, as he
had done often before: for he was not at all cast into any trouble, which it
cannot be imagined he could have escaped, since he had put the great Seal to
the Patents for the Lady Jane, if he had not Redeemed it by a ready consenting
to the changes that were to be made. He was a busy secular spirited Man, and
had given himself up wholly to Factions and Intrigues of State: so that, tho
his opinion had always leaned to the Reformation, it is no wonder if a man so
tempered would prefer the keeping of his Bishopric before the Discharge of his
Conscience. Thirleby of Norwich was Translated to Ely, and Hopton was made
Bishop of Norwich. But Scory, that had been Bishop os Chichester, tho upon
Day's being restored, he was turned out of his Bishopric, did comply merely:
He came before Bonner, and Renounced his Wife, and did Penance for it, and had
his Absolution under his Seal, the 14th of July this Year: which is in the
Collection. Number 13.
But it seems this was out of fear; for he soon after fled out of England, and
lived beyond Sea until Queen Elizabeth's days: and then he came over; But it
was judged indecent to restore him to his former See, where it is likely this
Scandal he had given, was known; and so he was made Bishop of Hereford. The
Bishop of Bath and Wales, Barlow, was also made to Resign, as appears by the
Conge d'elire for Bourn to succeed him, dated the 19th of March. Therein it is
said that the Sea wss Vacant by the Resignation of the former Bishop; tho in
the Election, that was made on the 28th of March, it is said the Sea was vacant
by the Removal or Deprivation of their former Bishop. But I incline to believe
it truer, that he did resign; since he is not mentioned in the Commissions
formerly spoken of. But that was not all; for at this time a Book was set out
in his Name, whether written by him, or Forged and laid on his Name, I cannot
judge: in which he retracts his former errors, and speaks of Luther and
Oecolampadius, and many others, with whom he says he had familiarly conversed:
with great bitterness. He also accuses the Gospellers in England, of Gluttony,
Hypocrisy, Pride, and ill Nature: And indeed it is one of the most Virulent
Invectives against the Reformation, that was written at that time: But it is
not likely, if he had turned so heartily as the Strain of that Book runs, that
he would have been quite thrown out; especially, since he had never Married; so
I rather look on it as a Forgerie cast on his Name, to disgrace the
Reformation. He fled beyond Sea, where he lived till the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign; and then it seems there was some offense taken at his former
behavior; for he was not restored to Bath and Wales, but put into Chichester,
that was a much meaner Bishopric. Thus I have given a clear account, and free
of all Partiality or Reservation, of the changes made in the most of the Sees
in England. The two Archbishops, Cranmer and Holgate; the Bishops, Ridley,
Poinet, Scory, Coverdale, Tailor, Harvey, Bird, Bush, Hooper, Ferrar, and
Barlow, were all removed; Rochester was void, and Griffins was put into it this
April. Goddrick dying now, Thirleby succeeded him; and Sampson of Coventry and
Litchfield dying soon after, Bayn succeeded him. So here were sixteen new
Bishops brought in, which made no small change in the Church.

The Mass every where set up.
When this done, the Bishops went about the executing of the Queen's
Injunctions. The New Service was everywhere cast out, and the Old Ceremonies
and Service were again set up. In this Business, none was so hot as Bonner; for
the Act that repealed King Edward's Laws, being agreed to by the Commons, to
whom the Lords had sent it; he, without staying for the Royal Assent, did that
very Night set up the Old Worship at Paul's, on St. Katherines day; and it being
the custom, that on some Holy Days, the Quire went up to the Steeple to sing
the Anthems, that fell to be on that Night; which was an antic way of
beginning a form of Worship, to which the People had been long disused: And the
next Day, being St. Andrew's, he did officiate himself, and had a solemn
Procession.

The most eminent Preachers in London, were either put in Prison, or under
Confinement; and as all their Mouths had been stopped, by the prohibiting of
Sermons, unless a License were obtained; so they were now to be fallen on for
their Marriages. Parker estimates it, that there were now about 16000
Clergymen in England: and of these, 12000 were turned out upon this account;
some, he says, were deprived without Conviction, upon common Fame; some were
never cited to appear, and yet turned out: Many that were in Prison, were
cited, and turned out for not appearing; though it was not in their Power: Some
were induced to submit, and quit their Wives for their Livings: They were all
summarily deprived. Nor was this all; but after they were deprived, they were
also forced to leave their Wives; which piece of severity was grounded on the
Vow, that (as was pretended) they had made: though the falsehood of this Charge
was formerly demonstrated.

To justify this severity of Procedure, many were set to write against the
Marriage of the Clergy. Books against the marriage of the Clergy.
Smith, of whom I made mention in the former Book, that had then so humbly
recanted and submitted, did now appear very boldly, and reprinted his Book,
with many Additions. But the most studied Work was set out by Martin, a Doctor
of the Laws. It was certainly, for most part Gardiner's Work, and I have seen
the Proof Sheets of a great part of it, dashed and altered in many places, by
Gardiner's hand. This Martin had made his Court to Cranmer in former times. He
had studied the Law at Bourges, where Francis Balduin, one of the celebrated
Lawyers of that time, had publicly noted him for his lewdness, as being not
only overrun himself with the French Pox; but as being a Corrupter of all the
University, which Balduin certified in a Letter to one in England, that took
care to print it.

It was also printed, that Bonner had many Bastards: and himself was believed
to be the Bastard of one Savage, a Priest in Leicestershire, that had been
Bastard to Sir John Savage of Cheshire. Which Priest, by Elizabeth Frodshum,
the Wife of one Edmond Bonner, had this Edmond now Bishop of London; and it
seems his Mother did not soon give over those her lewd Courses, for Wymsly,
Archdeacon of London, was another of her Bastards. That Kennel of the
uncleanness of the Priests and Religious Houses, was again, on this occasion,
racked, and exposed, with too much indecency: for the married Priests, being
openly accused, for the impurity and sensuality of their Lives, thought it was
a just piece of self-defence, to turn these Imputations back on those who
pretended to Chastity, and yet led most irregular Lives, under that appearance
of greater strictness.

This was the state in which things were, when the New Parliament A New
Parliament.
met on the 2d of April. Gardener had beforehand prepared the Commons, by
giving the most considerable of them Pensions; some had 200, and some a 100 l.
a Year, for giving their Voices to the Marriage. The first Act that passed,
seemed of an odd nature, and has a great Secret under it. The Speaker of the
House of Commons brought in a Bill, declaring, That whereas the Queen had of
right succeeded to the Crown; but, because all the Laws of England had been
made by Kings, The Regal Power asserted to be in a Queen, as well as a King.
and declared the Prerogatives to be in the King's Person; from thence some
might pretend that the Queen had no right to them; it was therefore declared to
have been the Law, that these Prerogatives did belong to the Crown, whether it
were in the hands of Male or Female: and whatsoever the Law did limit and
appoint for the King, was of right also due to the Queen, who is declared to
have as much Authority as any other her Progenitors.

Many in the House of Commons wondered what was the intention of such a Law;
and as People were at this time full of jealousy, The Secret Reasons for that
Act.
one Skinner, a Member of the House, (who in Queen Elizabeth's time took
Orders, and was made Dean of Duresm) said, he could not imagine why such a
frivolous Law was desired, since the thing was without dispute: E* M. SS. D.
Gul. Petyt.
and that, that which was pretended, of satisfying the People, was too slight:
he was afraid there was a trick in these words, That the Queen had as great
Authority as any of her Progenitors; on which perhaps it might be afterward
said, She had the same Power that William the Conqueror exercised, in seizing
the Lands of the English, and giving them to Strangers; which also Edward the
First did upon the conquest of Wales. He did not know what relation this might
have to the intended Marriage, therefore he warned the House to look well to
it; so a Committee being appointed to correct it, such words were added, as
brought the Queen's Prerogative under the same Limitations, as well as it
exalted it to the height of her Progenitors. But one Fleetwood, afterward
Recorder of London, told the Earl of Leicester the secret of this, in Queen
Elizabeth's Time, who writ down his Discourse, and from thence I have copied
it. There was one that had been Cromwell's Servant, and much employed by him in
the suppression of Monasteries: he was a Man of great Notions, but very busy
and factious; so having been a great stickler for the Lady Jane, he was put in
the Fleet, upon the Queen's first coming to the Crown: yet within a month he
was discharged; but upon the last Rising, was again put up, and indicted of
High Treason: He had great Friends, and made application to one of the
Emperor's Ambassadors, that was then the Chancellor of the Duchy of Milan, and
by his means he obtained his Liberty. Being brought to him, he showed him a new
Platform of Government, which he had contrived for the Queen. She was to
declare her self a Conqueror; or that she having succeeded to the Crown by
Common Law, was not at all to be limited by the Statute Laws, since those were
only restrictions upon the Kings, but not on the Queens of England; and that
therefore all those Limitations of the Prerogative, were only binding in the
Persons of Kings, but she was free from them: Upon this, he showed how she
might establish Religion, set up the Monasteries, raise her Friends, and ruin
her Enemies, and Rule according to her Pleasure. The Ambassador carried this to
the Queen, and seemed much pleased with it, but desired her to read it
carefully, and keep it as a great Secret.

As she read it, she disliked it, and judged it contrary to the Oath she had
made at her Coronation: and thereupon sent for Gardener, and charged him, as he
would answer before the Judgment Seat of God, at the general Day of the Holy
Doom, that he would consider the Book carefully, and bring her his Opinion of
it next day, which fell to be Maundy Thursday. So, as the Queen came from her
Maundy, he waited on her into her Closet, and said these words; My good and
most gracious Lady, I intend not to pray your Highness, with any humble
Petitions, to name the Devisers of this new invented Platform: but here, I
say, That it is pity that so noble and virtuous a Lady, should be endangered
with the pernicious Devices of such lewd and subtle Sycophants; for the Book is
naught, and most horrible to be thought on. Upon this the Queen thanked him,
and threw the Book into the Fire; and charged the Ambassador, that neither he,
nor any of his Company, should receive more such Projects from any of her
People. This made Gardener apprehended, that if the Spaniards began so soon to
put such Notions into the Queen's Head, they might afterward, when she was in
their Hands, make somewhat of them; and therefore, to prevent such Designs for
the future, he drew the Act; in which, though he seemed to do it as an
Advantage to the Queen, for the putting of her Title beyond dispute; yet he
really intended nothing by it, but that she should be restrained by all those
Laws, that the former Kings of England had consented to: And because King Henry
the Seventh, though his best right to the Crown flowed from his Marriage to the
Heir of the House of York, had yet taken the Government wholly into his own
hands; he, fearing lest the Spaniards should pretend to such a Power by the
Authority, which Marriage gives the Husband over the Wife, got the Articles of
the Marriage to be ratified in Parliament; by which they not only confirmed
those agreed on, but made a more full explanation of that part of them, which
declared the entire Government of the Kingdom to belong only to the Queen.

To this the Spaniards gave too great an occasion, Great Jealousies of the
Spanish Power.
by publishing King Philip's Pedigree, whom they derived from John of Gaunt.
They said, this was only done to conciliate the favor of the Nation, by
representing him not a stranger, but a Native: But this gave great offense;
concerning which I have seen a little Book that was then printed; It was there
said, That King Henry the Seventh came in, pretending only to marry the Heir of
the House of York: But he was no sooner on the Throne, than he declared his own
Title, and kept it his whole Life. So it was said, the Spaniard would call
himself Heir of the House of Lancaster, and upon that Pretension, would easily
wrest the Power out of the Queen's hands, who seemed to mind nothing but her
Devotions. This made Gardener look the better to the securing of the Liberties
of the Crown and Nation; so that it must be acknowledged, that the preserving
of England out of the hands of the Spaniards at that time, seems to be almost
wholy owing to him.

In this Parliament, the Marquess of Northampton was restored in Blood. And
the Act for restoring the Bishopric of Duresm The Bishopric of Duresm
restored.
not having gone through the last Parliament when it was dissolved, was now
brought in again. The Town of Newcastle opposed it much, when it came down to
the Commons. But the Bishop of Duresm came to them on the 18th of April, and
gave them a long account of all his Troubles, from the Duke of Northumberland,
and desired that they would dispatch his Bill. There were many Proviso's put
into it, for some that were concerned in Gateside; but it was carried in the
House, That, instead of these Proviso's, they should send a Desire to him,
recommending those Persons to his Favor: So upon a Division, there were 120
against it, and 201 for it. After this, came the Bill confirming the Attainders
of the Duke of Suffolk, and fifty eight more, who were attainted for the late
Rebellion. The Lords put in a Proviso, excepting Entailed Lands out of their
Forfeitures; but the Commons rejected the Proviso, and passed the Bill. Then
did the Commons send up a Bill for reviving the Statutes made against Lollardy:
which being read twice by the Lords, was laid aside. The Commons intended
next to have revived the Statute of the Six Articles: but it did not agree
with the Design at Court, to take any notice of King Henry's Acts; so this
was let fall. Then they brought in another Bill to extirpate Erroneous
Opinions and Books; but that was at the third reading laid aside. After that
they passed a particular Bill against Lollardy in some Points, as the eating of
flesh in Lent; but that also being sent up to the Lords, was at the third
reading laid aside, by the major part of the House; so forward were the Commons
to please the Queen, or such Operation had the Spanish Gold on them, that they
contrived four Bills in one Session, for the prosecution of those they called
Heretics. But to give some content on the other hand, they passed a Bill, that
neither the Bishop of Rome, nor any other, should have any Power to Convene, or
trouble any, for possessing Abbey Lands: This was sent up to the Lords, but
laid aside at that time, assurance being given, that the Owners of those Lands
should be fully secured. The Reason of laying it aside, was, that since by Law
the Bishop of Rome had no Authority at all in England, it was needless to pass
an Act against his Power in that particular, for that seemed to assert his
Power in other things: and since they were resolved to reconcile the Nation to
him, it was said, that it would be indecent to pass an Act that should call him
only Bishop of Rome, which was the Compellation given him during the Schism;
and it was preposterous to begin with a Limitation of his Power, before they
had acknowledged his Authority: So this was laid aside, and the Parliament
ended on the 25th of May.

But the Matters of the Convocation are next to be related. Those of the
Reformation complained everywhere, that the Disputes of the last Convocation
had not been fairly carried; that the most eminent Men of their Persuasion were
detained in Prison, and not admitted to it: that only a few of them, that had a
right to be in the House, were admitted to speak, and that these were much
interrupted. So that it was now resolved to adjourn the Convocation for some
time, and to send the Prolocutor with some of their number to Oxford, that the
Disputations might be, in the presence of that whole University. And since
Cranmer and Ridley were esteemed the most Learned Men of that Persuasion, they
were, by a Warrant from the Queen, removed from the Tower of London, to the
Prisons at Oxford. And though Latimer was never accounted very Learned, and was
then about eighty Years of Age, yet he having been a celebrated Preacher, who
had done the Reformation no less Service by his Labors in the Pulpit, than
others had done by their abler Pens; he was also sent thither to bear his share
in the Debates.

Some sent to Oxford to disput with Reformeed Bishops.
Those who were sent from the Convocation, came to Oxford on the 13th of April,
being Friday. They sent for those Bishops on Saturday, and assigned them
Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, every one of them his day, for the defending of
their Doctrine: but ordered them to be kept apart. And that all Books and Notes
should be taken from them. Three Questions were to be disputed.

1. Whether the natural Body of Christ was really in the Sacrament? 2. Whether
any other Substance did remain, but the Body and Blood of Christ? 3. Whetter in
the Mass there was a Propitiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of the Dead and
Living?
When Cranmer was first brought before them, the Prolocutor made an Exhortation
to him, to return to the Unity of the Church. To which he answered, with such
gravity and modesty, that many were observed to weep: He said, He was as much
for Unity as any, but it must be an Unity in Christ, and according to the
Truth. The Articles being showed him, he asked, Whether by the Body of Christ
they meant an Organical Body: They answering, It was the Body that was born of
the Virgin: Then, he said, he would maintain the Negative of these Questions.

On the 16th, when the Dispute with Cranmer Cranmer Disputes.
was to begin, Weston, that was Prolocutor, made a stumble in the beginning of
his Speech; for, he said, Ye are this day assembled to confound the detestable
Heresy of the Verity of the Body of Christ in the Sacrament. This Mistake set
the whole Assembly a laughing; but he recovered himself, and went on: he said,
It was not lawful to call these things in doubt, since Christ had so expressly
affirmed them, that to doubt of them, was to deny the Truth and Power of God.
Then Chedsey urged Cranmer with the words, This is my Body: To which he
answered, That the Sacrament was effectually Christ's Body, as broken on the
Cross; that is, His Passion effectually applied. For the explanation of this,
he offered a large Paper containing his Opinion: of which I need say nothing,
since it is a short abstract of what he writ on that Head formerly; and of that
a full account was given in the former Book. There followed a long Debate about
these words. Oglethorp, Weston, and others, urged him much, that Christ making
his Testament, must be supposed to speak Truth, and plain Truth; and they run
out largely on that. Cranmer answered, That figurative Speeches are true; and
when the Figures are clearly understood, they are then plain likewise. Many of
Chrysostom's high Expressions about the Sacrament were also cited; which
Cranmer said, were to be understood of the Spiritual Presence received by
Faith. Uponthis much time was spent, the Prolocutor carrying himself very
undecently toward him, calling him, an unlearned, unskilful, and impudent Man:
There were also many in the Assembly that often hissed him down, so that he
could not be heard at all; which he seemed to take no notice of but went on as
often as the noise ceased. Then they cited Tertullian's words, The Flesh is fed
by the Body and Blood of Christ, that so the Soul may be nourished by God. But
he turned this against them, and said, hereby it was plain, the Body as well as
the Soul received Food in the Sacrament; therefore the Substance of Bread and
Wine must remain, since the Body could not be fed by that Spiritual Presence of
the Body of Christ. Tresham put this Argument to him, Christ said, as he lived
by the Father, so they that eat his Flesh should live by him; but he is by his
Substance united to his Father, therefore Christians must be united to his
Substance: To this Cranmer answered, That the Similitude did not import an
equality, but a likeness of some sort; Christ is essentially united to his
Father; but Believers are united to him by Grace; and that in Baptism, as well
as in the Eucharist. Then they talked long of some words of Hilary's,
Ambrose's, and Justin's. Then they charged him, as having mistranslated some of
the Passages of the Fathers in his Book; from which he vindicated himself,
saying, that he had all his Life, in all manner of things, hated falsehood.

After the Dispute had lasted from the Morning till two of the Clock, it was
broke up: and there was no small Triumph, as if Cranmer had been confounded in
the Opinion of all the Hearers, which they had expressed by their Laughter and
Hissing. There were Notaries that took every thing that was said; from whose
Books Fox did afterward print the account of it, that is in his great Volume.

The next day Ridley And Ridley.
was brought out; and Smith, who was spoke of in the former Book, was now very
zealous to redeem the prejudice which that compliance was like to be to him in
his Preferment: So he undertook to dispute this day. Ridley began with a
Protestation, declaring, That whereas he had been formerly of another mind
from what he was then to maintain, he had changed upon no worldly
consideration, but merely for love of the Truth, which he had gathered out of
the Word of God, and the Holy Fathers: but because it was God's Cause he was
then to maintain, he protested that he might have leave afterward to add, or
to change, as upon better consideration he should see cause for it. He also
desired he might have leave to speak his mind without interruption; which
though it was promised him, yet he was often stopped, as he went on explaining
his Doctrine. He argued against the Corporal Presence, as being contrary to the
Scriptures that spoke of Christ's leaving the World; as being against the
Article of his sitting at the right hand of God; and against the nature of the
Sacrament, which is a Remembrance; he showed, that by it the Wicked receive
Christ no less than the Godly; that it is against nature to swallow down a
living Man; that this Doctrine introduced many extraordinary Miracles, without
any necessity; and must have given advantage to the Heretics, who denied
Christ had a real Body, or a true humane Nature; and that it was contrary to
the Doctrine of the Fathers: He acknowledged that it was truly the Communion
of his Body, that is, of Christ's Death, and of the Heavenly Life given by him:
and did, in a strong nervous Discourse, as any I ever saw on that Subject,
gather together the chief Arguments for his Opinion.

Smith argued, That notwithstanding Christ's being at the right Hand of God, he
was seen on Earth: Ridley said, he did not deny but he might come and appear on
Earth, but that was for a moment, to convince some, and comfort others, as St.
Paul, and St. Stephen; though, he said, it might be they saw him in Heaven; but
he could not be, at the same time, both in Heaven and on Earth. They returned
often to Chrysostom's words, and pressed him with some of Bernard's: but as he
answered the Sayings of the former, that they were Rhetorical and Figurative;
so he excepted against the judgment of the latter, as living in an Age when
their Opinion was generally received. The Dispute held till Weston grew weary,
and stopped all; saying, You see the obstinate, vainglorious, crafty, and
inconstant mind of this Man; but you see also the force of Truth cannot be
shaken; therefore cry but with me, Truth has the Victory. This being ecchoed
again by the Audience, they went away with great Triumph; and now they reckoned
the hardest part of their Work was over, since Latimer only remained.

Latimer And Latimer.
being next day brought forth, told them, He had not used Latin much these
twenty Years, and was not able to Dispute, but he would declare his Faith, and
then they might do as they pleased. He declared, That he thought the Presence
of Christ in the Sacrament to be only Spiritual, since it is that by which we
obtain Eternal Life, which flows only from Christ's abiding in us by Faith;
therefore it is not a bare naked sign: but for the Corporal Presence, he looked
on it as the Root of all the other Errors in their Church: He enlarged much
against the Sacrifice of the Mass: And lamented that they had changed the
Communion into a private Mass; that they had taken the Cup away from the
People; and instead of Service in a known Tongue, were bringing the Nation to a
Worship that they did not understand. He perceived they laughed at him; but he
told them, they were to consider his great Age, and to think what they might be
when they came to it. They pressed him much to answer their Arguments: He said,
his Memory was gone, but his Faith was grounded on the Word of God; he was
fully convinced by the Book which Dr. Cranmer had written on that Subject.

In this whole Disputation, as Ridley wrote of it, Censures past upon it.
there was great disorder, perpetual Shoutings, Tauntings, and Reproaches; so
that it looked liker a Stage, than a School of Divines; and the Noise and
Confusions, with which he had been much offended when he was in the Sorbone,
were modest, compared to this.

On April 28, they were again brought to St. Mary's; where Weston told them,
They were overcome in the Disputation, therefore he required them to subscribe
with the rest. Cranmer objected against their way of Disputing; he said, they
would not hear any one argue against their Errors, or defend the Truth; that
oftentimes four or five of them were speaking at once, so that it was
impossible for any to hear, or to answer all these: In conclusion, he refused
to subscribe. Ridley and Latimer made the same Answers. So they were all judged
Heretics, and the Fautors of Heresy. Then they were asked, Whether they
intended to turn? They answered, That they would not turn: so they were judged
Obstinate Heretics, and declared to be no more Members of the Church.

Upon which Cramer answered; From this your Judgment and Sentence, I appeal to
the just judgment of Almighty God, trusting to be present with him in Heaven,
for whose Presence on the Altar I am thus condemned.

Ridley answered; Although I be not of your Company, yet I doubt not but my
Name is written in another Place, whither this Sentence will send us sooner
than we should by the course of Nature have come.

Latimer answered; I thank God most heartily that he has prolonged my Life to
this end, that I may in this case glorify God with this kind of Death.

To them Weston answered; If you go to Heaven with this Faith, 'then I will
never come thither, as I am thus persuaded.

After this, there was a solemn Procession in Oxford, the Host being carried by
Weston the Prolocutor; who had been (as himself said in this Disputation) six
Years in Prison in King Edward's Time. This gave him now great repute, though
he was known to be a constant Drunkard. Ridley wrote to him, desiring to see
what the Notaries had written, and that he might have leave to add in any part,
as had been promised him; but he had no Answer. On the 23d of April, the
Commissioners, sent from the Convocation, returned to London. Cranmer sent a
Petition sealed, by Weston, to be delivered to the Council; in which he
earnestly begged their favor with the Queen, that he might be pardoned for his
Treason, since they knew how unwillingly he consented to the Patents for
excluding her. He also complained of the disorder in the Disputes lately had;
saying, that he was not heard, nor suffered to propose his Arguments; but all
was shufled up in a day, though he had Matter on that Subject for twenty days
work; that it looked like a Design to shut up all things in haste, and make a
Triumph, and so to condemn them of Heresy: He left it to their Wisdom to
consider, if this was an indifferent way of handling such a Matter. Weston
carried this Petition half way, and then opening it, and finding what it
contained, he sent it back, and said, he would deliver no such Petition.
Cranmer was so kept, that though Ridley and Latimer could send to one another,
yet it was not easy for them to send to him, without giving Money to their
Keepers. In one of Ridley's Letters to Cranmer, he said, he heard they intended
to carry down Rogers, Crome, and Bradford, to Cambridg, and to make such a
Triumph there, as he had lately made of them at Oxford: He trusted, the day of
their deliverance out of all their Miseries, and of their entrance into
perpetual Rest, and perpetual Joy and Felicity, drew nigh: He prayed God to
strengthen them with the mighty Spirit of his Grace: He desired Cranmer to pray
for him, as he also did for Cranmer. As for the Letters which these and the
other Prisoners writ in their Imprisonment, Fox gathered the Originals from all
People that had them: and Sir Walter Mildmay, the Founder of Emanuel College,
procured them from him, and put them into the Library of that College, where I
saw them: but they are all printed by Fox, so that the Reader, who desires to
see them, may find them in his Acts and Monuments. Of them all, Ridley writ
with the greatest connection and force, both in the Matter, and in the way of
Expression.

The Prisoners in London set out in writing their Reasons against disputing by
word of mouth.
This being now over, there was great boasting among all the Popish Party, as if
the Champions of the Reformation had been foiled. The Prisoners in London
hearing they intended to insult over them, as they had done over those at
Oxford, set out a Paper, to which the late Bishops of Exeter, St. David's, and
Gloucester, with Tailor, Philpot, Bradford, Crome, Sanders, Rogers, and
Lawrence, set their Hands, on the 8th of May.

The substance of it was; That they, being Prisoners, neither as Rebels,
Traitors, nor Transgressors of any Law, but merely for their Conscience to God
and his Truth, hearing it was intended to carry them to Cambridg to dispute,
declared they would not dispute, but in Writing, except it were before the
Queen and her Council, or before either of the Houses of Parliament: and that
for these Reasons.

1. It was clear, that the Determinations of the Universities were already
made; they were their open Enemies, and had already condemned their Cause
before they had heard it, which was contrary both to the Word of God, and the
Determinations they had made in King Edward's Time.

2. They saw the Prelates and Clergy were seeking neither to find out the Truth,
nor to do them good, otherwise they would have heard them, when they might have
declared their Consciences without hazard; but that they sought only their
destruction, and their own glory.

3. They saw that those who were to be the Judges of these Disputes, were their
inveterate Enemies; and by what passed in the Convocation House last Year, and
lately at Oxford, they saw how they must expect to be used.

4. They had been kept long Prisoners, some nine or ten months, without Books,
or Papers, or convenient places of study.

5. They knew they should not be heard to speak their minds fully, but should
be stopped, as their Judges pleased.

6. They could not have the nomination of their Notaries, who would be so
chosen, that they would write and publish what their Enemies had a mind to.
Therefore they would not engage in public Disputes, except by Writing: but
they would give a Summary of their Faith, for which they would be ready to
offer up their Lives to the Halter, or the Fire, as God should appoint.

They declared, That they believed the Scriptures to be the true Word of God,
and the Judge of all Controversies in the Matters of Religion; and that the
Church is to be obeyed, as long as she follows this Word. That they believed
the Apostles Creed; and those Creeds set out by the Councils of Nice,
Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon, and by the first and fourth Councils of
Toledo; and the Symboles of Athanasius, Ireneus, Tertullian, and Damasus. That
they believed Justification by Faith; which Faith was not only an Opinion, but
a certain persuasion wrought by the Holy Ghost, which did illuminate the Mind,
and suppled the Heart to submit it self unfeignedly to God. That they
acknowledged an Inherent Righteousness, yet Justification, and the Pardon of
Sins, they believed came only by Christ's Righteousness imputed to them. They
thought the Worship of God ought to be in a Tongue understood by the People;
that Christ only, and not the Saints, were to be prayed to; that immediately
after Death, the Souls pass either to the State of the Blessed, or of the
Damned, without any Purgatory between; that Baptism and the Lord's Supper are
the Sacraments of Christ, which ought to be administered according to his
Institution: and therefore they condemned the denying the Chalice,
Transubstantiation, the Adoration, or the Sacrifice of the Mass; and asserted
the lawfulness of Marriage to every Rank of Men. These things they declared
they were ready to defend, as they often had before offered: and concluded,
charging all People to enter into no Rebellion against the Queen, but to obey
her in all Points, except where her Commands were contrary to the Law of God.

In the end of this Month, the Lady Elizabeth was taken out of the Tower, and
put into the Custody of the Lord Williams; who waited on her to Woodstock, and
treated her with great civility, and all the respect due to her Quality: but
this not being so acceptable to those who governed, she was put under the
Charge of Sir Hen. Benefield, by whom she was more roughly handled.

On the 20th of July, Prince Philip landed at Southampton. Prince Philip Lands.
When he set foot to Land first, he presently drew his Sword, and carried it a
good way naked in his Hand. Whether this was one of the Forms of his Country, I
know not: but it was interpreted as an Omen, that he intended to Rule England
with the Sword: though others said, it showed, he intended to draw his Sword in
defense of the Nation. The Mayor of Southampton brought him the Keys of the
Town, an expression of Duty always paid to our Princes; he took them from him,
and gave them back without speaking a word, or expressing by any sign that he
was pleased with it. His stiffness amazed the English, who use to be treated by
their Kings with great sweetness on such occasions: and so much gravity in so
young a Man was not understood, but was looked on as a sign of vast pride and
moroseness. The Queen met him at Winchester; And is married to the Queen.
where, on the 25th of July, Gardener married them in the Cathedral, the King
being then in the 27th, and the Queen in the 38th Year of her Age. They were
presented from the Emperor by his Ambassador, with a resignation of his Titular
Kingdom of Jerusalem, and his more valuable one of Naples, which were Pledges
of that total resignation that followed not long after.

So on the 27th of July they were proclaimed by their new Titles; Philip and
Mary, King and Queen of England, France, Naples, Jerusalem, and Ireland;
Princes of Spain and Sicily, Defendors of the Faith; Archdukes of Austria;
Dukes of Milan, Burgundy, and Brabant; Counts of Habspurg, Flanders, and Tirol:
Spain having always delighted in a long enumeration of pompous Titles.

It was observed, how happy Marriages had been to the Austrian Family; who,
from no extraordinary Beginnings, had now, in eighty Years time, been raised by
two Marriages; first, with the Heir of Burgundy and the Netherlands, and then
with the Heir of Spain, to be the greatest Family in Christendom: and the
Collateral Family, by the Marriage of the Heir of Bohem and Hungary, was now
the greatest in the Empire. And surely if Issue had followed this Marriage, the
most extraordinary success possible would have seemed to be entailed on them.
But there was no great appearance of that; for as the Queen was now far
advanced in Years, so she was in no good state of Health; a long course of
Discontent, had corrupted both the health of her Body, and the temper of her
Mind: Nor did the Matter alter much by her Marriage, except for the worse. The
King's wonderful Gravity and Silence, gained nothing upon the English; but his
Magnificence and Bounty was very acceptable. He brought after him a vast Mass
of Wealth; He brings a great Treasure with him to England.
seven and twenty Chests of Bullion, every Chest being a Yard and some Inches
long; which were drawn in twenty Carts to the Tower; after which came ninety
nine Horse, and two Carts, loaded with coined Gold and Silver. This great
Wealth was perhaps the Sum that was formerly mentioned, which was to be
distributed among the English; for it is not improbable, that though he
empowred his Ambassadors, and Gardener, to promise great Sums to such as should
promote his Marriage, yet that he would not part with so much Money till it was
made sure; and therefore he ordered this Treasure to be brought after him; (I
mention it here, yet it came not into England till October and January
following) He made his entry into London with great state.

At his first settling in England, he obtained of the Queen, Act of Favor done
by him.
that many Prisoners should be set at Liberty; among whom the chief were, the
Archbishop of York, and ten Knights, with many other Persons of Quality.
These, I suppose, had been committed, either for Wiat's Rebellion, or the
Business of the Lady Jane; for I do not believe, any were discharged that were
imprisoned on the account of Religion. As for this Archbishop, though he went
along in the Reformation, yet I find nothing that gives any great Character of
him. I never saw any Letter of his, nor do I remember to have seen any
honorable mention made of him any where; so that he seems to have been a soft
and weak Man; and except those little Fragments of his Opinions in some Points
about the Mass, (which are in the Collection) I know no remains of his Pen. It
seems he did at this time comply in Matters of Religion, for without that, it
is not probable that either Philip would have moved for him, or that the Queen
would have been easily entreated.

The Intercessions that Philip made for the Lady Elizabeth, He preserves the
Lady Elizabeth.
and the Earl of Devonshire, did gain him the Hearts of the Nation, more than
any thing else that he ever did. Gardener was much set against them, and
studied to bear down the declaration that Wiat had made of their Innocence all
that he could; but it was made so openly on the Scaffold, that it was not
possible to suppress it. Before, in his Examinations, Wiat had accused them,
hoping to have saved himself by so base an Action; but he redeemed it all he
could at his Death. This had broken Gardiner's Design, who thought all they did
about Religion, was but half work, unless the Lady Elizabeth were destroyed.
For he knew, that though she complied in many things, yet her Education had
been wholly under the Reformed: and which was more to him, who judged all
People by their Interest, he reckoned that Interest must make her declare
against the Papacy, (since otherwise she was a Bastard) if ever she should
outlive her Sister.

Philip opposed this, at first, upon a generous Account, to recommend himself,
by obtaining such Acts of Favor to be done by the Queen. But afterward, when
the hopes of Issue failed him by his Marriage, he preserved her, out of
Interest of State: for if she had been put out of the way, the Queen of
Scotland (that was to be married to the Dolphin) was to succeed; which would
have made too great an Accession to the French Crown: and besides, as it
afterward appeared, he was not without hopes of persuading her to marry
himself, if her Sister should die without Issue. For the Earl of Devonshire, he
more easily obtained his freedom, though not till some months had passed. That
Earl being set at liberty, finding he was to lie under perpetual Distrusts, and
that he might be, perhaps upon the first Disorder, again put into the Tower, to
which his Stars seemed to condemn him, resolved to go beyond Sea; but died
within a Year after, as some say, of Poison.

All this I have laid together, (though it fell not out all at once) that I
might give a full account of all the Acts of Grace that Philip did in England;
He was little beloved by the English.
But for the rest of his Behavior, it was no way acceptable to the People, for
as he engaged the Nation in all his Interests, so that henceforth, during this
Reign, England had no share in the Consultations of Europe, but was blindly led
by him, which proved fatal to them in the conclusion, by the ignominious loss
of Calais; So his temper and way of deportment seemed most ridiculous, and
extravagantly formal, to the English Genius, which naturally loves the mean,
between the excessive jollity and talkativeness of the French, and the sullen
staiedness of the Spaniard; rather enclining more to the briskness of the one,
than the superciliousness of the other: And indeed his Carriage was such here,
that the acting him and his Spaniards, was one of the great Diversions of Queen
Elizabeth's Court. The Hall of the Court was almost continually shut all his
Time, and none could have access, unless it were first demanded, with as much
formality as Ambassadors use in asking Audience: So that most of the Nobility
left the Court, few staying but the Officers of the Household.

Gardener magnifies him much in a Sermon.
Gardener had now the Government put entirely in his Hands; And he, to make his
Court the better with the new King, preached at St. Paul's the 30th of
September, where, after he had inveighed long against the Preachers in King
Edward's Time, which was the common Subject of all their Sermons, he run out
much in commendation of the King; affirming him to be as wise, sober, gentle,
and temperate, as any Prince that ever was in England; and if he did not prove
so, he was content that all his Hearers should esteem him an impudent Liar. The
State of the Court continued in this posture till the next Parliament.

But great Discontents did now appear everywhere. The severe Executions after
the last rising, the Marriage with Spain, and the overturning of Religion,
concurred to alienate the Nation from the Government. This appeared no where
more confidently than in Norfolk, where the People, reflecting on their
Services, thought they might have the more leave to speak.

There were some malicious Rumors spread, that the Queen was with Child before
the King came over. This was so much resented at Court, that the Queen writ a
Letter to the Justices there, (which is in the Collection) to enquire into
those false Reports, and to look to all that spread false News in the County.
Coll. Numb. 14.
The Earl of Sussex, upon this, examined a great many, but could make nothing
out of it. It flowed from the officiousness of Hopton, the new Bishop of
Norwich; who thought to express his Zeal to the Queen, whose Chaplain he had
long been, by sending up the Tales of the Country to the Council Table; not
considering how much it was below the Dignity of the Government, to look after
all vain Reports.

Bonner's Carriage in his Visitation.
This Summer the Bishops went their Visitations, to see every thing executed
according to the Queen's Injunctions. Bonner went his with the rest. He had
ordered his Chaplains to draw a Book of Homilies, with an Exposition of the
Christian Religion. He says, in his Preface to it, that he and his Chaplains
had compiled it; but it is likely he had only the Name of it, and that his
Chaplains composed it. Yet the greatest, and indeed, the best part of it was
made to their hands, for it was taken out of the Institution of a Christian
Man, set out by King Henry; only varied in those Points, in which it differed
from what they were now about to set up: So that concerning the Pope's Power,
since it was not yet established, he says nothing, for, or against it.

The Articles upon which he made his Visitation, will be found in the
Collection, Coll. Numb. 15.
and by these we may judge of all the other Visitations over England. In the
Preface, he protests he had not made his Articles out of any secret grudg or
displeasure to any; but merely for the discharge of his Conscience toward God
and the World. The Articles were; Whether the Clergy did so behave themselves
in Living, Teaching, and Doing, that in the judgment of indifferent Men, they
seemed to seek the Honor of God, of the Church, and of the King and Queen?
Whether they had been Married, or were taken for Married? and whether they were
Divorced, and did no more come at their Wives? or whether they did defend their
Marriages? Whether they did reside, keep Hospitality, provide a Curat in their
absence? And whether they did devoutly celebrate the Service, and use
Processions? Whether they were suspect of Heresy? Whether they did haunt
Alehouses and Taverns, Bowling-Allies, or suspect Houses? Whether they
favored, or kept company with any suspect of Heresy? Whether any Priest lived
in the Parish, that absented himself from Church? Whether these kept any private
Conventicles? Whether any of the Clergy was Vicious, blasphemed God or his
Saints, or was guilty of Simony? Whether they exhorted the People to Peace and
Obedience? Whether they admited any to the Sacrament, that was suspect of
Heresy, or was of an ill Conversation, an Oppressor, or Evil-Doer? Whether they
admitted any to preach that were not licensed, or refused such as were? Whether
they did officiate in English? Whether they did use the Sacraments aright?
Whether they visited the Sick, and administered the Sacraments to them? Whether
they did marry any, without asking the Banes three Sundays? Whether they
observed the Fasts and Holy Days? Whether they went in their Habits and
Tonsures? Whether those that were ordained schismatically, did officiate
without being admitted by the Ordinary? Whether they set Leases, for many
Years, of their Benefices? Whether they followed Merchandise or Usury? Whether
they carried Swords or Daggers, in Times or Places not convenient? Whether they
did once every quarter expound to the People in the Vulgar Tongue, the Apostles
Creed, Ten Commandments; the Two Commandments of Christ for loving God and our
Neighbor, the Seven Works of Mercy, Seven deadly Sins, Seven principal
Virtues, and the Seven Sacraments? These were the most considerable Heads on
which he visited.

One thing is remarkable, that it appears, both by these, No Reordination of
those ordained in King Edwards Time.
and the Queen's Injunctions, that they did not pretend to re-ordain those that
had been ordained by the New Book in King Edward's Time; but to reconcile them,
and add those things that were wanting; which were, the Anointing, and giving
the Priestly Vestments, with other Rites of the Roman Pontifical. In this Point
of re-ordaining such as were ordained in Heresy or Schism, the Church of Rome
has not gone by any steady Rule: For though they account the Greek Church to be
guilty, both of Heresy and Schism, they receive their Priests without a New
Ordination. Yet after the time of the Contests between Pope Nicolaus and
Photius, and much more after the outrageous heats at Rome, between Sergius and
Formosus, in which the dead Bodies of the former Popes were raised and dragged
about the Streets by their Successors, they annulled the Ordinations, which
they pretended were made irregularly.

Afterward again, upon the great Schism between the Popes of Rome and Avignon,
they did neither annul nor renew the Orders that had been given: But now, in
England, though they only supplied at this time the Defects, which they said
were in their former Ordination: yet afterward, when they proceeded to burn
them that were in Orders, they went upon the old Maxim; That Orders given in
Schism were not valid (...) they did not esteem Hooper nor Ridley Bishops, and
therefore only d^gr^ded them from Priesthood; though they had been ordained by
their own Forms, saving only the Oath to the Pope; but for those who were
ordained by the new Book, they did not at all degrade them, supposing no^ ^hey
had no true Orders by it.

Bonner, in his Visitation, took great care to see all things were every where
done according to the old Rules, which was the main thing intended; other
Points being put in for form. When he came to Hadham, he prevented the Doctor,
who did not expect him so soon by two hours, so that there was no ringing of
Bells, which put him in no small disorder: And that was much increased, when he
went into the Church, and found neither the Sacrament hanging up, nor a Rood
set up: thereupon he fell a railing, swearing most intemperately, calling the
Priest an Heretic, a Knave, with many other such goodly words. The Priest
said, all these things should be amended speedily; and knowing that a good
Dinner was the best way to temper Bishop Bonner, he desired him to go and dine
at his House: but Bonner took it so ill, Bonner's rage.
that Hadham, which was one of his own Churches, was an ill Example to those
about it, that he lost all patience; and reaching at Dr. Bricket (that was the
Parson's Name) to beat him, he misguided the stroke, which fell on Sir Thomas
Josselin's Ear with great force. Fecknam, then Dean of Paul's in Dr. May's room,
studied to appease Josselin, and said to him, That the Bishop's being so long
in the Marshalsea, had so disordered him, that in his Passion he knew not what
he did; but when he came to himself, he would be sorry for what he had done.
Josselin answered, he thought, now that he was taken out of the Marshalsea, he
should be carried to Bedlam. But Bonner continued in his Fury; and though he
had purposed to stay at his House there some days, and had ordered Provisions
to be made; yet he would needs be gone, though it disordered the rest of his
Visitation, for he came to every place sooner than he intended, or had given
notice.

The Carvers, and makers of Statues, had now a quick Trade, for Roods and other
Images, which were to be provided for all Places. Bonner had observed, that in
most Churches the Walls were painted with places of Scripture; and in many
places there were Passages written, that either favored the Marriage of the
Clergy, or were against the Corporal Presence, and the Sacrifice of the Mass,
and the multiplicity of the Ceremonies of the Church: So he did, at his return,
send out Episcopal Letters, on the 24th of October, to raze all those
Paintings. Upon this it was generally said, That the Scriptures must be dashed
out to make way for the Images, since they were so contrary one to another,
that they could not decently stand together. There were many ludicrous things
every where done in derision of the old Forms, and of the Images: Many Poems
were printed, with other ridiculous Representations of the Latin Service, and
the Pageantry of their Worship. But none occasioned more laughter, than what
fell out at Paul's the Easter before; the custom being to lay the Sacrament into
the Sepulcher, at the Even Song on Good Friday, and to take it out by break of
day on Easter Morning: At the time of the taking of it out, the Quire sung
these words, Surrexit, non est hic, He is risen, he is not here: The Sacrament
stolen.
But then the Priest looking for the Host, found it was not there indeed, for
one had stolen it out; which put them all in no small disorder, but another
was presently brought in its stead. Upon this a Ballad followed, that their God
was stolen and lost, but a new one was made in his room. This Railery was so
salt, that it provoked the Clergy much. They offered large Rewards to discover
him that had stolen the Host, or had made the Ballad, but could not come to
the knowledge of it. But they resolved, e're long, to turn that mirth and
pleasantness of the Heretics, into severe mourning.

And thus Matters went on to the 11th of November, A New Parliament.
when the third Parliament was summoned. In the Writ of Summons, the Title of
Supreme Head of the Church was left out, though it was still by Law united to
the other Royal Titles: And therefore this was urged, in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, as a good reason for annulling that Parliament, since it was
not called by a lawful Writ. Now was Cardinal Pool allowed to come into
England. The Emperor had this Summer brought him to Flanders, where, to make
a-mends for the rudeness of stopping him on his way, he desired him to mediate
a Peace between France and him; but that had no effect. It soon appeared, that
all things were so well prepared by Gardiner's Policy; and the Spanish Gold,
that it would be an easy Matter to carry every thing in this Session. The Lord
Paget, and the Lord Hastings, were sent from the King and Queen to bring the
Cardinal over. At the opening of the Parliament, it was an unusual sight, to
see both King and Queen ride in state, and come into it with two Swords of
State, and two Caps of Maintenance carried before them: The Swords were
carried, one by the Earl of Pembroke, the other by the Earl of Westmoreland;
and the Caps, by the Earls of Arundel and Shrewsbury. The first Bill put into
the Lords House, was the Repeal of the Attainder of Cardinal Pool: The
Attainder of Cardinal Pool repealed.
it began on the 17th, and was sent down to the Commons on the 19th, who read
it three times in one day, and sent it up. This Bill being to be passed before
he could come into England, it was questioned, in the House of Commons, Whether
the Bill could be passed without making a Session, which would necessitate a
Prorogation? It was resolved it might be done; so on the 22d the King and Queen
came, and passed it. It set forth, that the only reason of his Attainder, was,
because he would not consent to the unlawful Separation and Divorce between
King Henry, and his most godly, virtuous, and lawful Wife, Queen Katherine:
Therefore they considering the true and sincere Conscience of the Cardinal in
that Point, and his other many godly Virtues and Qualities, did repeal that Act.

He comes to Eondon.
On the 24th he came to London, but without the Solemnities of a Legates Entry,
because the Pope's Authority was not yet set up by Law. What Cardinal Pool,
Instructions were, I do not know; nor is it fully understood, by Learned Men,
what was the Power of a Legate a Latere in those Days. But I found, in the
King's Paper Office, the Original Bull of Cardinal Beaton's Legatine Power in
Scotland, which it seems was intercepted by some of the King's Ships, in the
passage b^ Sea thither; or was sent up to London by those who killed him, an^
possessed themselves of his Castle and Goods. And I having mentioned this Bull
to those Learned Men, by whose direction I have governed my self in this Work,
I did, by their advice, give it a room in the Collection, Col. Number 17.
though it be large; since, no doubt, Cardinal Pool's Bull was in the same
form. In it the Reader will clearly perceive what Autho^i^^ was lodged in the
Legates, to overthrow and dispense with almost all t^^ Rules and Canons of the
Church; only some peculiar things, (which were more conspicuously scandalous)
were still reserved to the Apostolic See it self; whose singular Privilege it
has been always esteemed to dispense with the best things, and allow of the
worst; so the Pretenders to those Graces, paid proportionably for them; this
Authority was too Sacred to be trusted, even to a Legate, it being the
Prerogative of the Popes themselves, to be the most eminent Transgressors of
all Canons and Constitutions.

The Cardinal first declared what his Designs and Powers were to the King and
Queen; and then on the 27th a Message was sent to the Parliament to come and
hear him deliver his Legation; which they doing, he made them a long Speech,
And makes a Speech to the Parliament.
inviting them to a Reconciliation with the Apostolic See, from whence he was
sent by the common Pastor of Christendom, to reduce them, who had long strayed
from the Enclosure of t^^ Church. This made some emotion in the Queen, which
she fondly thought was a Child quickened in her Belly: this redoubled the Joy,
some not sparing to say, The Queen is believed to be with Child.
that as John Baptist leaped in his Mothers Belly at the Salutation of the
Virgin, so here a happy Omen followed on this Salutation from Christ's Vicar.
In this, her Women, seeing that she firmly believed her self with Child,
flattered her so far, that they fully persuaded her of it. Notice was given of
it to the Council, who that night writ a Letter to Bonner about it, ordering a
Te Deum to be sung at St. Paul's, and the other Churches of London, and that
Collects should be constantly used for bringing this to a happy perfection. All
that night, and next day, there was great joy about the Court and City.

On the 29th, the Speaker reported to the Commons the substance of the
Cardinal's Speech; and a Message coming from the Lords for a Conference of some
of their House, with the Lord Chancellor, four Earls, four Bishops, and four
Lords, to prepare a Supplication for their being reconciled to the Sea of Rome;
it was consented to: and the Petition being agreed on at the Committee, was
reported, and approved of by both Houses. It contained an Address to the King
and Queen.

engraved portrait of Cardinal Reginald Pole EFFIGIES REGINALDI POLI CARDINALIS.

R White sculp:
engraved coat of arms

Natus Anno 1500. Maij. cc Cardinalis. S. Marioe in Cosmedin 1536. Maij 22

Consecr: Archiepisc: Cantuariensis, 1555/6. Mar: 22. Obijt 1558. Nov: 17.

Printed for Rich: Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church yard.



That whereas they had been guilty of a most horrible Defection and Schism from
the Apostolic See, The Parliaments Petition to be reconciled to the Sea of
Rome.
they did now sincerely repent of it; and in sign of their Repentance, were
ready to repeal all the Laws made in prejudice of that See: therefore since the
King and Queen had been no way defiled by their Schism, they pray them to be
Intercessors with the Legate to grant them Absolution, and to receive them again
into the Bosom of the Church.

So this being presented by both Houses on their Knees, to the King and Queen,
they made their Intercession with the Cardinal, who thereupon delivered himself
in a long Speech.

He thanked the Parliament for repealing the Act against him, The Cardinal
makes a long Speech.
and making him a Member of the Nation, from which he was by that Act cut off:
In recompense of which, he was now to reconcile them to the Body of the Church.
He told them, The Apostolic See cherished Britain most tenderly, as the first
Nation that had publicly received the Christian Faith. The Saxons were also
afterward converted by the means of that See; and some of their King's had
been so devoted to it, that Offa, and others, had gone to visit the Thresholds
of the Apostles. That Adrian the fourth, an English Pope, had given Ireland to
the Crown of England: and that many mutual Marks of reciprocal kindness had
passed between that common Father of Christendom, and our Kings, their most
beloved Sons: but none more eminent than the bestowing on the late King, the
Title of Defender of the Faith. He told them, That in the Unity with that See,
consisted the happiness and strength of all Churches: that since the Greeks had
separated from them, they had been abandoned by God, and were now under the
Yoke of Mahometans. That the Distractions of Germany did further demonstrate
this; but most of all, the Confusions themselves had felt, ever since they had
broken that Bond of Perfection. That it was the Ambition and Craft of some,
who for their private Ends began it, to which the rest did too submissively
comply; and that the Apostolic See might have proceeded against them for it,
by the assistance of other Princes; but had stayed looking for that Day, and
for the Hand of Heaven. He run out much on the commendation of the Queen, and
said, God had signally preserved her, to procure this great Blessing to the
Church. At last he enjoined them for Penance, to repeal the Laws they had made;
and so, in the Pope's Name, And grants them Absolution.
he granted them a full Absolution, which they received on their Knees; and he
also absolved the whole Realm from all Censures.

The rest of the day was spent with great solemnity and triumph; all that had
been done, was published next Sunday at Paul's. There was a Committee
appointed, by both Houses, to prepare the Statute of Repeal, which was not
finished before the 25th of December; and then, the Bishop of London only
protesting against it, because of a Proviso put in for the Lands which the Lord
Wentworth had out of his Bishopric, it was agreed to, and sent to the
Commons. They made more have with it, for they sent it back the 4th of
January, with a desire that twenty Lines in it, which concerned the Sea of
London, and the Lord Wentworth, might be put out, and two new Proviso's added.
One of their Proviso's was not liked by the Lords, who drew a new one; to
which the Viscount Montacute, and the Bishops of London and Coventry,
dissented. The twenty Lines of the Lord Wentworth's Proviso were not put out;
but the Lord Chancellor took a Knife, and cut them out of the Parchment, and
said, Now I do truly the Office of a Chancellor; the word being ignorantly
derived by some from Cancelling. It is not mentioned in the Journal, that this
was done by the Order of the House; but that must be supposed, otherwise it
cannot be thought the Parliament would have consented to so unlimited a Power
in the Lord Chancellor, as to raze or cut out Proviso's at his pleasure.

The Act of Repealing all Laws against that See.
By the Act is set forth, their former Schism from the Sea of Rome, and their
Reconciliation to it now; upon which, all Acts passed since the 20th of Henry
the Eighth, against that See, were specially enumerated and repealed: There it
is said, that for the removing of all Grudges that might arise, they desired
that the following Articles might, through the Cardinal's Intercession, be
established by the Pope's Authority.

1. That all Bishoprics, Cathedrals, or Colleges, now established, might be
confirmed for ever.

2. That Marriages, made within such degrees as are not contrary to the Law of
God, but only to the Laws of the Church, might be confirmed, and the Issue by
them declared legitimate.

3. 'That all Institutions into Benefices might be confirmed.

4. 'That all Judicial Processes might be also confirmed.

A Proviso for Church Lands.
And finally, That all the Settlements of the Lands, of any Bishoprics,
Monasteries, or other Religious Houses, might continue as they were, without
any trouble by the Ecclesiastical Censures or Laws.

And to make this pass the better, a Petition was procured from the Convocation
of Canterbury, A Petition from the Convocation about it.
setting forth, That whereas they, being the Defenders and Guardians of the
Church, ought to endeavor, with all their strength, to recover those Goods to
the Church, which in the Time of the late Schism had been, alienated; yet
having considered well of it, they saw how difficult, and indeed impossible,
that would prove, and how much it would endanger the public Peace of the
Realm, and the Unity of the Church; therefore they preferring the public
Welfare, and the Salvation of Souls, to their own private Interests, did humbly
pray the King and Queen to intercede with the Legate, that according to the
Powers given him by the Pope, he would settle and confirm all that had been
done in the alienation of the Church and Abbey Lands, to which they, for their
Interests, did consent: and they added an humble Desire, That those things
which concerned the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and Liberty, might be
reestablish'd, that so they might be able to discharge the Pastoral Cure
committed to them. Upon this, the Cardinal granted a full Confirmation of those
things: ending it, with a heavy charge on those who had the Goods of the Church
in their hands, that they would consider the Judgments of God that fell on
Belshazar, for his profane using the Holy Vessels, though they had not been
taken away by himself, but by his Father. And he most earnestly exhorted them,
that at least they would take care, that out of the Tithes of Parsonages, or
Vicarages, those who served the Cures, might be sufficiently maintained and
encouraged. This was confirmed in Parliament, where also it was declared, That
all Suits about these Lands, were only to be in the Queen's Courts, and not in
the Ecclesiastical Courts: and if any should, upon the pretense of any
Ecclesiastical Authority, disturb the Subjects in their possession, they were
to fall into a Praemunire. It was also declared, that the Title of Supreme Head,
never of right belonged to the Crown; yet all Writings, wherein it was used,
were still to continue in force; but that hereafter, all Writings should be of
force, in which, either since the Queen's coming to the Crown, or afterward,
that Title should be, or had been omitted. It was also declared, that Bulls
from Rome might be executed; that all Exemptions that had belonged to Religious
Houses, and had been continued by the Grants given of them, were repealed, and
these Places were made subject to the Episcopal Jurisdiction, excepting only
the Privileges of the two Universities, the Churches of Westminster and
Windsor, and the Tower of London. But for encouraging any to bestow what they
pleased on the Church, the Statutes of Mortmain were repealed for twenty Years
to come; provided always, that nothing in this Act should be contrary to any of
the Rights of the Crown, or the Ancient Laws of England: but that all things
should be brought to the State they were in at the 20th Year of her Father's
Reign, and to continue in that condition.

For understanding this Act more perfectly, An Address made by ^he Inferior
Clergy.
I shall next set down the Heads of the Address which the Lower House of
Convocation made to the Upper; for most of the Branches of this Act had their
first rise from it; I have put it in the Collection, Coll. Numb. 16.
having found it among Archbishop Parker's Papers. In it they petitioned the
Lords of the Upper House of Convocation, to take care, that by their consent to
the settlement of the Church Lands, nothing might be done in prejudice of any
just Title they had in Law to them: as also, it being said, in the Grant of
Chantries to King Edward, that Schools and Hospitals were to be erected in
several parts of the Kingdom; they desired that some regard might be had to
that: Likewise, that the Statutes of Mortmain might be repealed: and whereas
Tithes had been at all times appointed for the Ecclesiastical Ministry,
therefore they prayed that all Impropriations might be dissolved, and the
Tithes be restored to the Church. They also proposed 27 Articles of things meet
to be considered for the Reformation of the Church. Namely, That all who had
preached any Heretical Doctrine, should be made openly to recant it: that
Cranmer's Book of the Sacrament, the late Service Books, with all Heretical
Books, should be burnt; and all that had them, should be required to bring them
in; otherwise they should be esteemed the favorers of Heresy: That great care
should be had of the Books that were either printed or sold. That the Statutes
made against Lollards, might be revived, and the Church restored to its former
Jurisdiction. That all Statutes for Pluralities, and Non-residence, might be
repealed, that so Beneficed Men might attend on their Cures: That Simoniacal
Pactions might be punished; not only in the Clergy that made them, but in the
Patrons, and in those that mediated in them; that the Liberties of the Church
might be restored according to the Magna Charta; and the Clergy be delivered
from the heavy Burdens of First Fruits, Tenths, and Subsidies: That there might
be a clear explanation made of all the Articles of the Praemunire; and that none
should be brought under it, till there were first a Prohibition issued out by
the Queen in that Particular; and that disobedience to it, should only bring
them within that Guilt: That all Exemptions should be taken away; all Usury be
forbid; all Clergy Men obliged to go in their Habits. The last was, That all
who had spoiled Churches without any Warrant, might be obliged to make
restitution.

The Laws against Heretics revived.
The next Act that was brought in, was for the reviving the Statutes made by
Richard the Second, Henry the Fourth, and Henry the Fifth, against Heretics;
of which an account was given in the first Book of the former Part. The Act
began in the House of Commons; who, as was observed in the former Parliament,
were much set on Severities. It was brought in on the 12th of December, and
sent up to the Lords on the 15th, who pasied it on the 18th of that month. The
Commons put in also another Bill, for voiding all Leases made by married
Priests. It was much argued among them; and the first Draught being rejected, a
new one was drawn, and sent up to the Lords, on the 19th of December: but they
finding it would shake a great part of the Rights of the Church Lands, that
were made by Married Priests, or Bishops, laid it aside. Thus did the servile
and corrupted House of Commons run so fast, that the Bishops themselves were
forced to moderate their Heats. They all understood how much the Queen was set
upon having the Church raised as high as could be, and saw there was nothing so
effectual to recommend any to her Favor, as to move high in these Matters: And
though their Motions were thought too violent, and rejected, yet their
Affections were thereby discovered; so that they knew they should be looked on
as Men deeply engaged in these Interests.

An Act declaring Treasons.
After this, the Bill of Treasons was brought in. This was also argued for some
days in the House of Commons, but at last agreed to. By it, any who denied the
King's Right to the Title of the Crown, with the Queen's, or endeavored to put
him from it, together with them that did several other Offenses, were to
forfeit all their Goods, and to be imprisoned during Life; and Clergy Men were
to be deprived by their Ordinaries: In these cases, the second Offense was to
be Treason. But if any should compass the King's Death, and utter it by any
overt Deed, during his Marriage to the Queen, the first Offense of this kind
should be Treason. It was also enacted, that the Parliament having petitioned
the King, that if the Queen died with any Issue, he would take on him the
Government of them, till they came of Age; to which he had assented; therefore,
if the Queen died before her Children came to be of Age, the Government of the
Kingdom should be in the King's Hands; if it were a Son, till he were eighteen;
or if a Daughter, till she was fifteen Years of Age: And in all that time, the
conspiring his Death was to be Treason. The Witnesses were to be brought before
the Parties; and none was to be tried for any words, but within six months
after they were spoken.

Another against seditious words.
Another Act passed, upon a Report made of some Heretical Preachers, who had, as
was informed, prayed in their Conventicles, that God would turn the Queen's
Heart from Idolatry to the true Faith, or else shorten her days, and take her
quickly out of the way: All therefore that so prayed for taking away the
Queen's Life, were to be judged Traitors; but if they showed themselves
penitent for such Prayers, they were not to be condemned of Treason, but put to
any Corporal Punishment, other than Death, at the Judges Discretion. This was
passed in great haste, for it was thrice read in the House of Lords, and passed
on the 16th of January, in which the Parliament was Dissolved.

There was another Act past, against those that spread Lying Reports of any
Noblemen, Judges, or great Officers; that such as spread them, should be
imprisoned till they brought their Authors, according to former Acts. If any
spread such Reports of the King and Queen, they were to be set on a Pillory,
and pay 100 l. or have their Ears cut off, and be three months Prisoners: and
they were to pay 100 Merks, and suffer one months Imprisonment, though they had
Authors for them, if they reported them maliciously: But if their Reports
tended to the stirring of any Insurrection, they were to lose their right
Hands; and upon a second Offense to suffer Imprisonment during their Lives; but
they were to be proceeded against within three months after the words so spoken.

All the Bills being ended, the Parliament was dissolved on the 16th of
January, to Gardiner's Gardener is in great esteem.
no small joy. He had now performed all that he had undertaken to the Queen, or
the Emperor: Upon which he had the Reputation that he was formerly in, of a
great Statesman, and a dextrous manager of Affairs, much confirmed and raised;
since he had brought about, in so small a time, so great a change, where the
Interests of those who consented to it, seemed to lead them another wav. To
those who had apprehended the Tyranny of Rome, he had said, That as our former
Kings had always kept it under in a great measure; so there was less danger of
that now, since they saw that all Princes had agreed to preserve their own
Rights entire, against the Pope's Pretensions. He showed them, that therefore
all the Old Laws against Provisions from Rome, were still kept in force. And so
upon Cardinal Pool's being called over, there was a Commission sent him, under
the Great Seal, bearing date the 10th of November, authorizing him to exercise
his Legatine Power in England. By this he showed them that no Legate should ever
come into England to execute any Power, till his Faculties were seen and
approved by the Queen. Others thought this was but a vain Imagination; for if
the Papacy were once fully established, and People again brought under the old
Superstition, of esteeming the Popes Christ's Vicars, and the infallible Heads
of the Church, it would not be possible to retain the People in their
Obedience, since all the assistance that the Princes of Christendom of this
time had from their Subjects in their Wars with the Popes, flowed chiefly from
this, that they generally did no more submit implicitly to their Priests. But
if once that blind Obedience were restored, it would be easy for the Priests,
by their private dealings in Confession, to overturn Governments as they pleased.

But that which stuck most, was, That the Church Lands were, Great fear about
the Church Lands.
by the Cannon Law, so indissolubly annexed to the Church, that they could not
be separated from it. To this it was answered, that they should secure it by a
Law at Rome, and should confirm all the Alienations that had been made, both by
consent of the Clergy, and by the Pope's Authority committed to the Legate. Yet
even that did not satisfy many who found some Laws in the Canon, so strict,
that the Pope himself could not dispense with them: If the Legate did it, the
Pope might refuse to confirm it, and then it was nothing: and what one Pope
did, another often recalled. So it was said, that this Confirmation was but an
Artifice, to make it pass the more easily. Besides, all observed, that in the
Cardinal's Confirmation of those Lands, there was a charge given to all, to be
afraid of the Judgments of God that fell on Belshazar for using the Holy
Vessels; which was, to pardon the thing, and yet to call it a Sacrilege, for
which they might look for the Vengeance of God. So that the Cardinal did at the
same time both bind and loose; and it was plain, both by that Clause, and the
Repeal of the Statute of Mortmain, that it was designed to possess People with
the Opinion of the Sin of retaining Church Lands. It was thought this
Confirmation, was rather an Indemnity and Permission to keep them, than a
declaring the Possessors had any lawful Title to them: So that when Men were
near Death, and could no longer enjoy those Lands themselves, it was not to be
doubted, but the Terrors of Sacrilege, and the Punishments due to it, with the
hope of that relief and comfort that Soul-Masses might bring them in Purgatory,
would prevail with many of them, to make at least great, if not entire,
Restitutions.

This Point being carried by those who did not understand what future danger
their Estates were in, but considered the present Confirmation, and the other
Advantages which they were to have for consenting to this Act; all the rest
passed with no opposition. The Act about the proceeding against Heretics,
passed more easily than any thing that had been proposed: So it seems the
opposition that was made to other Acts, came not from any that favored the
Reformation, otherwise this would have found some resistance. But now it was
the only way to the Queen's Favor, and to Preferment, to run down that which
was called Heresy.

Consultations about the way of dealing with Heretics.
After the Dissolution of the Parliament, the first thing taken into
consideration was, what way to proceed against the Heretics. Cardinal Pool had
been suspected to favor the Protestants, but seemed now to be much alienated
from them: and therefore when Tremellius, who had declared himself a
Protestant, came to him at Brussels, he would not see him, though he was his
Godfather. He came over into England, much changed from that freedom of
Conversation he had formerly practiced: he was in reserves to all People, spoke
little, and had put on an Italian Temper, as well as behavior: he brought over
two Italians, Priuli and Ormaneto, who were his only Confidents. He was a Man
of a generous and good disposition; but knew how jealous the Court of Rome
would be of him, if he seemed to favor Heretics; therefore he expressed great
detestation of them. Nor did he converse much with any that had been of that
Party, but the late Secretary Cecil, who, though he lived for the most part
privately at his House near Stamford, where he afterward built a most sumptuous
House; and was known to favor the Reformation still in his Heart; yet in many
things he complied with the Time, and came to have more of his confidence than
any English Man.

The Cardinal professed himself an Enemy to extreme Proceedings. The Cardinal
is for moderate Courses.
He said, Pastors ought to have Bowels, even to their straying Sheep: Bishops
were Fathers, and ought to look on those that erred as their sick Children, and
not for that, to kill them: He had seen, that severe Proceedings did rather
inflame than cure that Disease: There was a great difference to be made between
a Nation uninfected, where some few Teachers came to spread Errors; and a
Nation that had been overrun with them, both Clergy and Laity. The People were
not so violently to be drawn back, but were to have time given them to recover
out of those Errors, into which they had been led by the Compliance and
Writings of their Prelates. Therefore he proposed, that there should be a strict
Reformation of the Manners of the Clergy, carried on. He had observed, in every
Country of Christendom, that all the best and wisest Men acknowledged, that the
Scandals and Ignorance of the Clergy, had given the entrance to Heresy: So he
moved, that there might be a reviving of the Rules of the Primitive Church; and
then, within a little time, Men might by degrees be brought over. I have not
found that he proposed the receiving the Council of Trent; which is the more
strange, since he had been himself one of the Legates at the first Session of
it: but it seems, it was not thought seasonable to propose it, till the Council
were first ended and dissolved.

On the other hand, Gardener, But Gardener is for violent ones.
who had no great sense of Ecclesiastical Matters, but as they served Intrigues
of State; and being himself of such a temper, that severe Proceedings wrought
much on him; judged that the executing the Laws against the Lollards, was that
in which they were chiefly to trust. He was confident, the Preachers then in
Prison, were Men of such tempers, that, if they saw they were to be burnt, they
would comply; or if they stood out, and were burnt, that would so terrify the
rest, that the whole Nation would soon change. He remembered well how the
Lollards grew in England, only upon Cardinal Wolsey's slackning the execution
of the Laws against them: And upon the passing of the Statute of the Six
Articles, many submitted; so that if King Henry had not discouraged the
vigorous execution of that Act, all had turned. He did not deny, but a
Reformation of the Clergy was a good and fit mean; but said, that all Times
could not bear such things; and if they went to reform their Manners, the
Heretics would from thence take advantage of raising clamours against a
scandalous Clergy; which would increase, rather than lessen the aversion the
People had to their Pastors. So Gardener complained, that Pool, by his
intention of coming over too hastily, had almost precipitated all things; and
now, by his gentle proceedings, would as much prejudice them another way. All
these Reasonings, were such as became a Man of Gardiner's temper, which being
servile, and abject, made him measure others by himself.

He was also at this time highly provoked, by the reprinting of his Books of
True Obedience, which he had writ in the Time of King Henry, and to which
Bonner had made the Preface. In these Books, Gardener had not only argued
against the Pope's Supremacy, and for the Kings, but had condemned the King's
Marriage with Queen Katherine, calling it often incestuous, and unlawful; and
had justified the King's Divorcing her, and marrying his most godly and
virtuous Wife, Queen Ann. This being reprinted in Strasburg, was now conveyed
into England; and it was acknowledged to be a handsome piece of Spite in the
reformed, thus to expose him to the World. But though this netled him much, yet
he was confident enough, and excused himself, that he had erred through fear
and weakness, as St. Peter had done; though it was an unreasonable thing, to
compare an Error of near thirty Years continuance, to the sudden denial of St.
Peter, that was presently expiated with so true and sincere a Repentance.

To which the Queen inclined.
Between these two Councils, the Queen would have a mean way taken, to follow
both in part. She encouraged Pool to go on in the correcting the Manners of the
Clergy; and likewise pressed Gardener to proceed against the Heretics.

She also sent Ambassadors to Rome; who were the Viscount Montacute, the Bishop
of Ely, and Sir Edward Carn, one to represent every State of the Kingdom; to
make her Obedience to the Pope, and to obtain a Confirmation of all those
Graces Cardinal Pool had granted in his Name.

1555.
On the 23d of January, all the Bishops went to Lambeth, to receive the
Cardinal's Blessing and Directions. He wished them to return to their Cures,
and treat their Flocks with all gentleness, and to endeavor rather to gain
them that way, than to use Extremity and Rigor. And on the 25th, there was a
solemn Procession through London; there went first 160 Priests, all in their
Copes, eight Bishops next, and last of all came Bonner himself, carrying the
Host; to thank God for reconciling them again to his Church; and Bonefires were
burning all the Night. And to keep up a constant remembrance of it, it was
ordered, that St. Andrew's day should be still observed as the Anniversary of
it, and be called The Feast of the Reconciliation; and Processions, with all
the highest Solemnities they at any time use, were to be on that day.

They begin with Rogers, and others.
But now they turned wholly to the Prosecution of the Heretics. There had been
thirty of them taken at a Meeting near Bow Church, where one Rose, a Minister,
gave them the Communion according to the English Book of Service; so they were
all put in Prison. On the 22d of January, Rogers, with others, were brought
before the Council; He had been a Prebendary of Paul's, and in a Sermon, after
the Queen was come to London, had zealously asserted the Doctrine he had
formerly preached; and as it has been shown, was confined to his House, upon
the Tumult that had been at Paul's. He was much pressed to fly over into
Germany, but he would not hearken to it, though the Necessities of ten Children
were great Temptations. He was esteemed one of the most Learned of the
Reformers, so that when those of the Convocation were required to Dispute; they
desired that Ridley and he might be suffered to come and join with them. It was
resolved to begin with him, and some others, at the Council Board, to see if
they could be easily brought over.

He was accordingly brought before the Council; where being asked by Gardener.
Whether he would knit himself to the Catholic Church, and receive the Pope as
the Supreme Head? He said, He knew no other Head of the Church but Christ; and
for the Pope, Who refusing to comply.
he had no more Authority in England, than any other Bishop, either by the Word
of God, or the Authority of the Church, for 400 Years after Christ. But they
objecting, that he had acknowledged King Henry to be Supreme Head: He answered,
He never acknowledged him so to be Supreme, as to forgive Sins, bestow the Holy
Ghost, or be a Judge above the Word of God. But as he was going to explain
himself, Gardener pressed him to Answer plainly. He Objected to Gardener, That
all the Bishops had for many Years preached against the Pope. Gardener said,
They were forced to it, by the Cruelty of the Times; but they would Argue no
more with him: Now Mercy was offered, if he rejected it, Justice must come
next. Rogers said, If they had been pressed to deny the Pope's Power by
Cruelty, would they now by the same Motives force others to acknowledge it? for
his part he would never do it. Other ten were called in, one after another; and
only one of them, by the Lord Effingham's Favor, was let go upon a general
Question, if he would be an Honest Man; but all the rest answering resolutely,
were sent back to Prison, and were kept much stricter than formerly; none being
suffered to come near them.

On the 28th of January, the Bishops of Winchester, London, Duresm, Were judged.
Salisbury, Norwich, and Carlisle, sat in St. Mary Overies in Southwark; where
Hooper was first brought before them. It needs not to be doubted, but Bonner
remembered that he had informed against him, when he was deprived in King
Edward's Time. He had been summoned to appear before the Queen, soon after she
came to the Crown: and it was pretended, he owed her great Sums of Money: Many
advised him not to appear, for that it was but a pretense to put him, and a
great many more in Prison, where they would be kept till Laws were made to
bring them out to a Stake. But he would not withdraw; so now he and Mr. Rogers
were singled out and begun with. They were asked, Whether they would submit, or
not? they both refused to submit. Rogers being much pressed, and continuing
firm in his Resolutions; Gardener said, It was vainglory in him to stand out
against the whole Church. He protested it was his Conscience, and not
Vainglory, that swayed him; for his part, he would have nothing to do with the
Antichristian Church of Rome. Gardener said, by that he condemned the Queen,
and the whole Realm, to be of the Church of Antichrist: Rogers said, The Queen
would have done well enough, if it had not been for his counsel. Gardener said,
the Queen went before them in those Counsels, which proceeded of her own
motion. Rogers said, He would never believe that. The Bishop of Carlisle said,
they could all bear him witness to it. Rogers said, they would all witness for
one another. Upon that, the Comptroller, and Secretary Bourn, being there,
stood up in Court and attested it. Then they asked Rogers, What he thought of
the Sacrament? He said, It was known he had never meddled in that Matter, and
was suspected by some to be of a contrary Opinion to many of his Brethren, but
yet he did not allow of their Corporal Presence. He complained, that after he
had been confined half a Year in his House, they had kept him a Year in
Newgate, without any Fault; for they could not say he had broken any of their
Laws, since he had been a Prisoner all the while; so that merely for his
Opinion they were now proceeding against him. They gave Hooper and him time
till next morning, to consider what they would do: but they continuing in their
former Resolution; were declared obstinate Heretics, And Condemned.
and appointed to be degraded, and so to be delivered into the Sheriffs hands.
Hooper was only degraded from the Order of Priesthood. Then Rogers desired he
might be suffered to speak with his Wife, concerning his ten Children: They
answered, She was not his Wife, and so denied it. Upon this they were led away
to Newgate.

On the 4th of February, early in the morning, Rogers was called upon to make
ready for Smithfield: He was so fast asleep, that he was not easily awakened;
he put on his Clothes carelessly, being, as he said, Rogers Martyrdom.
so soon to lay them off. When he was brought to Bonner to be degraded, he
again renewed his desire to see his Wife, but could not obtain it. He was led
to Smithfield, where he was not suffered to make any Speech to the People: so,
in a few words, he desired them to continue in that Doctrine which he had
taught them, and for which he had not only patiently suffered all the
bitterness and cruelty that had been exercised on him, but did now most gladly
resign up his Life, and give his Flesh to the consuming Fire, for a testimony
to it. He repeated the 51 Psalm, and so fitted himself for the Stake. A Pardon
was brought, if he would recant: but he chose to submit to that severe, but
short punishment, rather than put himself in danger of Everlasting Burnings, by
such an Apostasy: So the Fire was set to him, which consumed him to Ashes.

Hoo^er burnt at Gloucester.
For Hooper, after they had degraded him, they resolved to send him to
Gloucester: At which he much rejoiced, hoping by his Death to confirm their
Faith, over whom he had been formerly placed. He was carried thither in three
days. After he came, he had one days interval given him, which he spent in
Fasting and Prayer. Some came to persuade him to accept of the Queen's Mercy,
since Life was sweet, and Death was bitter. He Answered, The Death that was to
come after was more bitter, and the Life that was to follow was more sweet. As
some of his Friends parted with him, he shed some Tears, and told them, All his
Imprisonment had not made him do so much.

On the 9th he was led out to his Execution; where, being denied leave to
speak, but only to pray, in the strain of a Prayer, he declared his belief.
Then the Queen's Pardon being showed him, he desired them to take it away. He
prayed earnestly for strength from God, to endure his Torment patiently; and
undressed himself, and embraced the Reeds. When he was tied to the Stake with
Iron Chains, he desired them to spare their pains, for he was confident he
should not trouble them. The Fire was put to him, but the Wood being green,
burnt ill, and the Wind blew away the flame of the Reeds: He prayed often, O
Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy on me, and receive my Soul; and called to
the People, for the Love of God, to bring him more Fire, for the Fire was
burning his nether Parts, but did not reach his Vitals. The Fire was renewed,
but the Wind still blew it away from rising up to stifle him, so that he was
long in the Torment. The last words he was heard to say, were, Lord Jesus
receive my Spirit. One of his Hands dropped off before he died; with the other
he continued to knock on his Breast some time after; and was in all near three
quarters of an hour a burning.

Next these, was Sanders condemned, Sanders burnt at Coventry.
and sent to Coventry to be burnt, where he suffered on the 8th of February. He
had been made a Prisoner for Preaching, notwithstanding the Queen's
Prohibition, and was condemned for refusing to conform to the New Laws. When he
was led out to the Stake, a Pardon was likewise offered him: But he said, He
held no Heresies, but the blessed Gospel of Christ; and that he would never
recant. When he came to the Stake, he embraced it, and said, Welcome the Cross
of Christ, welcome Everlasting Life; and so he was burnt.

Dr. Tailor followed next, who was Parson of Hadley. And Tailor at Hadley.
Some of his neighboring Priests came to Hadley, and resolved to say Mass in
his Church. He went thither, and openly declared against it, but was by
violence thrust out of the Church. Gardener being informed of this, writ for
him to come up. Many of his Friends wished him to go out of the way: He said,
He must follow Christ, the good Shepherd, who not only fed his Flock, but died
for it. He was old, and thought he should never be able, at any other time, to
do his good God such Service as he was then called to; so he went with much
cheerfulness. Gardener received him with his ordinary Civilities, of Traitor,
Villain, Heretic, and Knave. He answered, He was none of these; and put
Gardener in mind of the Oaths he had sworn, both to King Henry and King Edward.
Gardener said, An unlawful Oath was not to be kept; and charged him for
hindering Mass to be said at his Church. He said, He was by Law Parson of
Hadley, and no Man had a right to come thither, and defile his Church and
People with Idolatry. After some Discourse on that Head, he was sent to the
Kings Bench Prison; and being carried before the Council on the 22d of January,
he refused to turn. After that he was condemned, and degraded: And it was
resolved to send him to Hadley to be burnt there. All the way he expressed
great cheerfulness. When he was brought to the Stake, he said to the People, he
had taught them nothing but God's Holy Word, and was now to Seal it with his
Blood: But one of the Guard struck him over the Head, and made him give over
speaking. Then he went to his Prayers, and so to the Stake, where he was put in
a Pitched Barrel; as the Faggots were laying about him, one flung a Faggot at
his Head, which broke it, and fetched a great deal of Blood; but all he said,
was, Oh Friend, I have harm enough, what needed that? He repeated the 51 Psalm
in English; at which one of the Guard struck him over the Mouth, and bid him
speak Latin. He continued in his Ejaculations to God, till the Fire was
kindled; and one of the Guard cut him in the Head with his Halbert, so that his
Brains fell out. This was done on the 9th of February.

Bradford was also at the same time condemned, but his Execution was respited.

Soon after the Condemnation of these Men, fix others were apprehended on the
account of Heresy.

By this Gardener saw, that what he had expected did not follow; for he thought
a few severe instances would have turned the whole Nation: but finding he was
disappointed, Gardener is disiappointed.
he would meddle no more in the condemning of them; but left the whole matter
wholly to Bonner, who undertook it cheerfully, being naturally savage and
brutal, and retaining deep resentments for what had befallen himself in King
Edwards time.

These Cruelties are much considered.
The whole Nation stood amazed at these Proceedings, and the burning of such
Men, only for their Consciences, without the mixture of any other thing, so
much as pretended against them. And it was looked upon as a horrible cruelty,
because those Men had acted nothing contrary to the Laws; For they were put in
Prison, at first for smaller matters, and there kept, till those Laws were
past, by which they were now burnt. So that, remembering Gardiners Plea for
himself in his imprisonment, when he desired to be first Tried, and discharged
in the particular for which he was committed, before new matter was brought
against him; all Men saw now, how much more justly those men might have
demanded the like at his hands. But now the spirit of the two Religions showed
it self. In King Edwards time, Papists were only turned out of their Benefices,
and at most imprisoned; and of those there were but very few: but now, that
could not serve turn, but barbarous Cruelties must be executed, on innocent
Men, only for their Opinions. One piece of Severity was taken notice of among
the rest: The Council sent for those who were to be burnt in the Country, and
required of them a promise to make no Speeches; otherwise they threatened to cut
out their Tongues immediately: so they to avoid that butchery, promised to obey
those cruel Orders.

The manner of Hooper's death, Reflections made on Hooper's Death.
made those who judged too critically of Divine Providence, reflect on the
dissension that had been raised by him about the Vestments; as if he, who had
kindled that fire, had suffered now more than ordinary for that reason. But all
that difference was at an end before this; for Ridley and he, between whom
there had been the greatest animosity, becoming Partners in the same
sufferings, were perfectly reconciled to each other. He writ twice to Ridley,
who writ him an answer, as soon as he could convey it; in which he declared,
how entirely he was knit to him, tho in some circumstances of Religion they had
formerly Jarred a little: it was Hoopers wisdom, and his own simplicity, that
had divided them; every one following the abundance of his own sense; but now
he assured him, that in the Bowels of Christ he loved him in the Truth and for
the Truth. He encouraged him to prepare for the day of his dissolution; after
which they should triumph together in eternal Glory: he expressed great Joy for
what he heard of Cranmers godly and fatherly constancy, whose integrity, and
uprightness, gravity, and innocence, was known to the whole Nation: and he
blessed God that had given, in his reverend old age, such a Man to be the
witness of his Truth: for miserable and hard-hearted was he, whom the Godliness
and constant confession of so worthy, so grave, and so innocent a man, would
not move to acknowledge and confess his Truth,

It had been happy if the fires that consumed those good Men, had put an end to
these Contests: and if those that have been since engaged in the like, will
reflect more on the sense they had of them when they were now preparing for
Eternity, than on the heats they were put in concerning them, when perhaps ease
and plenty made their Passions keener, they may from thence be reduced to have
more moderate thoughts of such matters.

If the English Nation was dissatisfied with what was done since the beginning
of this Reign, These Burnings were disliked by the Nation.
it cannot be imagined but their discontent received a great increase by what
was now acted. Those that favored the Reformation were awakened to have more
serious thoughts about it; since they saw those that had preached it, dyed so
patiently and resolutly, rather than they would deny it. It begot in them
greater tenderness to their memories, and a more violent aversion to their
Persecutors. The rest of the Nation that neither knew nor valued Religion much,
yet were startled at the severity and strangeness of these proceedings; and
being naturally of relenting and compassionate Tempers, were highly disaffected
to the King, from whom they believed that this flowed. The Queen had before
declared, she would force no body in these points; so they thought it not
reasonable nor decent to charge her with it. Gardener, with the other Bishops
and Privy Councelours had openly in Court purged themselves of it; and laid it,
on the Queen being therein more careful of their own credit, than of her
honor; so now, it could fall no where but on the King; the sowreness of whose
temper, together with his bigotry for that Religion, made it reasonable enough
to impute it to him: besides, he had been bred in Spain, where the Inquisition
was let loose on all that were suspected of Heresy, without any restraint: and
his Father had, during his whole Reign, been always, as far as he safely could
be, a persecutor of Protestants. Philip could not but see that all was cast on
him; The King purges himself of them.
and understanding that thereby he should become unacceptable to the Nation,
and so not be able to carry on his Design of making himself Master of England,
he was something concerned to clear himself of these Imp^^ations. Therefore
Alphonsus a Franciscan Friar that was his Confessor, in a Sermon before him on
the 10th of February preached largely against the taking away of Peoples lives
for Religion; and in plain terms, inveighed against the Bishops for doing it:
he said, they had not learned it in Scripture, which taught Bishops in the
spirit of meekness to instruct those that opposed them; and not to burn them
for their Consciences. This startled the Bishops; since it was now plain, But
they are prosecuted by the Clergy.
that the Spaniards disovvned these extreme courses; and hereupon there was a
stop for several weeks put to any further severities. But the Popish Clergy,
being once engaged in blood, have been always observed to become the most
brutally cruel of any sort of men; so that it was not easy to restrain them;
and therefore they resolved, rather than the Heretics should not be prosecuted
any further, to take the blame of it avowedly on themselves.

There was at this time a Petition Printed, A Petition against Persecution.
and sent over from some beyond Sea, to the Queen, in which they set before her
the danger of her being carried away by a blind zeal, to persecute the members
of Christ, as St. Paul was before his conversion: They put her in mind, how
Cranmer had preserved her in her Fathers time; so that she had more reason to
believe he loved her, and would speak truth to her, than all the rest of her
Clergy; whom they compared to be Jezabel's Prophets. They gathered many
Passages out of Gardiner's, Bonner's, and Tonstal's Writings, against the
Pope's Supremacy, and her Mother's Marriage; and showed, that they were Men
that, by their own confession, had no conscience in them, but measured their
Actions and Professions by their Fears, and Interests; and averred that it was
known that many of that Faction did openly profess, that if they lived in
Turkey, they would comply with the Religion of the Country. They said, that the
Turks did tolerate Christians, and the Christians did in most places suffer
Jews; but the Persecution now set on foot, was like that which the Scribes and
Pharisees raised against the Apostles; for they then pretended that they had
been once of their Religion, and so were Apostates, and Heretics. They also
said, (but by a common mistak^) That the first Law for Burning in England, was
made by Henry t^^ Fourth; who to gratify the Bishops that had helped him to
depose Ki^^ Richard the Second, and to advance himself to the Throne, (...)
were, in recompense of that Service, had granted them that Law^ which was both
against all humanity, and more particularly against the mercifulness of the
Christian Religion.

They remembered her, that in King Edward's Time, none of the Papists had been
so used: and in conclusion they told her, She was trusted by God with the
Sword, for the protection of her People, as long as they did well; and was to
answer to him for their Blood, if she thus delivered them to the Mercy of such
Wolves.

From the Queen, the Address is turned to the Nobility, warning them of the
Danger, of not only losing their Abbey Lands, but all their Liberties; and
being brought under a Spanish Yoke, which had ruined many of the best Countries
in the World: They are told, they must resolve to come under heavy Taxes, and a
general Excise, such as was in the Netherlands; and that all this would come
justly on them, who had joined ^n the Reformation, for base ends, to get the
Church Lands; and now, thinking those were secured to them, forsook it: but for
all these things they were to answer heartily to God.

From them, it turns to the People, and exhorts them to repent of their great
sins, which had brought such Judgments on them: and in the end, begs the Queen
will at least be as favorable to her own People, as she had been to the
Strangers, to whom she allowed a free passage to Foreign Parts.

This Discourse is writ in a strong and good Style, much beyond the rate of the
other Books of that time. Upon this, some were set on work to write in defense
of such Proceedings; so a Book was set out about it, with diverse Arguments, of
which the substance follows.

They said, The Jews were commanded to put Blasphemers to death; and those
Heretics were such, Arguments for persecuting Heretics.
for they blasphemed the Sacrament of the Altar, which was the Body of Christ,
and called it a piece of Bread. They noted also, that the Heathens had
persecuted Christians; and if they had that Zeal for their false Religion, it
became Christians to be much more zealous for theirs: they made use of that
Expression in the Parable, Compel them to enter in; and of St. Paul's, I would
they were cut off that trouble you. They alleged, that St. Peter had, by a
Divine Power, struck Ananias and Saphira dead; which seemed a good Warrant for
the Magistrate to put such Persons to Death. They said, that the Heretics
themselves were for Burning, when they had Power; and that those that died then
by their hands, had expressed as much Courage in their Deaths, and Innocence in
their Lives, as they had ever done: they cited St. Austin, who was for
prosecuting the Donatists; and though he had been once of anothet mind, yet
finding Severities had a good effect on them, he changed, and was for fining or
banishing of them. These were the Arguments for and against those Proceedings.

But leaving them to the Reader's Judgment, I proceed in the History. I intend
not to write a pompous Martyrology, and therefore hereafter I shall only name
the Persons that suffered, with the Reasons for which they were condemned: but
except in a very few Instances, I shall not enlarge on the manner of their
Trial and Sufferings; which being so copiously done by Fox, there is nothing
left for any that comes after him. In some private Passages, which were brought
to him upon flying Reports, he made a few Mistakes, being too credulous; but in
the Account he gives from Records, or Papers, he is a most exact and faithful
Writer; so that I could never find him in any prevarication, or so much as a
designed concealment. He tells the Good and the Bad, the Weakness and Passion,
as well as the Constancy and Patience of those good Men, who sealed their Faith
with their Blood; who were not all equal in Parts, nor in Discretion; but the
weaker any of them were, it argued the more cruelty in their Persecutors, to
proceed so severely against such inconsiderable Persons.

The first Intermission being over, on the 16th of March, They proceed to burn
more.
Thomas Thompkins, a Weaver in Shorditch, was burnt in Smithfield, only for
denying the corporal Presence of Christ in the Sacrament. Bonner kept him many
months in his House, hoping to have wrought on him by fair means; but those
having no effect, one day he tore out a great deal of the Hair of his Beard;
but to conceal that, made his Beard be clean shaved: And another time he held
his hand in the Flame of the Candle, so long, till the Sinews and Veins shrunk
and burst, and spurted in Harpsfield's Face that was standing by, who,
interposing with Bonner, got him to give over any further cruelty at that time.

The next that suffered, was one William Hunter of Brentwood, an Apprentice of
nineteen Years old; who had been drawn on in discourse by a Priest, till he
brought him to deny the Presence in the Sacrament; and then was accused by him.
His own Father was made to search for him to bring him to Justice; but he, to
save his Father from trouble, rendered himself. Bonner offered him 40 l. if he
would change, so mercenary a thing did he think Conscience to be: But he
answered, if they would let him alone, he would keep his Conscience to himself,
but he would not change; so he was condemned and sent to be burnt near his
where he suffered on the 20th of March.

On the same day, Causton and Higbed, two Gentlemen of good Estates, and great
Esteem, were burnt near their own Houses in Essex.

On the 28th of March, William Pigot was burnt at Braintree, and Stephen Knight
at Malden; and on the 29th, John Lawrence, a Priest, Fathers House, was burnt
at Colchester.

In all their Processes, the Bishops brought no Witnesses against them; but did
only exhibit Articles to them, according to the way of those Courts, called,
Ex Officio; and required them to make Answers; and upon their Answers, which
were judged Heretical, they condemned them; so that all this was singly for
their Consciences, without the pretense of any other Matter.

Ferrar, Bishop of St. David's, condemned, and burnt.
Ferrar, that had been Bishop of St. David's, being dealt with by Gardener to
turn, and refusing to do it, was sent down to Carmart hen; where his Successor
Morgan sat upon him; and gave him Articles about the Marriage of Priests, the
Mass, and some other things: To which his Answers being found Heretical, he was
condemned. He put in an Appeal to Cardinal Pool, but it was not received. Yet
it seems, that delayed the Execution till they heard from him; for though he
was condemned on the 13th, he was not burnt before the 30th of March.

About that time was Rawlins White, an honest poor Fisherman, burnt at
Cardiff; it was in March, but the day is not mentioned: He was very Ancient,
and was put in Prison, only because he had put his Son to School, that he
might hear the Bible read by him. After a Years Imprisonment, the Bishop of
Landaff condemned him, upon Articles, to which he answered as an Heretic.

On the 24th of April, George March, a Priest, was burnt at Ghester, being
judged, as the others had been; only at his Death, there was a new Invention of
Cruelty, a Firkin of Pitch was hung over his Head, that the Fire melting it, it
might scald his Head as it dropped on it.

One wounds a Priest at the Altar, and is burnt for Heresy himself, condemning
his former Act.
After this, one Flower, that had been in Orders, but was a rash indiscreet Man,
went on Easter day into St. Margarets Church in Westminster, and there with a
Knife, struck at, and wounded the Priest, as he was officiating. He for some
time justified what he had done, as flowing from Zeal; but afterward he
sincerely condemned it. Bonner, upon this, proceeding against him as an
Heretic, condemned him to the Fire; and he was burnt on the 24th of April, in
Westminster Churchyard. This Fact was condemned by all the Reformed, who knew
that the Wrath of Man was not the way to accomplish the Righteousness of God.
In the Jewish Government, some extraordinary Persons did execute Vengeance on
notorious Offenders; but that Constitution was in all its Policy regulated by
the Laws given by Moses; in which such Instances were proposed as Examples,
whereby they became a part of the Law of that Land; so that in such Cases, it
was certainly lawful to execute Punishment in that way; so in some Kingdoms,
any Man that finds an outlawed Person, may kill him: but where there is no
Law vvarranting such things, it is certainly against both Religion, and the
Laws of all Society and Government, for private Persons to pretend to the
Magistrates right, and to execute Justice upon any account whatsoever.

There was at this time a second stop put to the execution of Heretics, for
till the end of May, more fires were not kindled; People grew generally so
enraged upon it, that they could not bear it. I shall therefore now turn my
self to other things, that will give the Reader a more pleasing entertainment.

The Queen resolves to surrender up all the Church Lands that were in her hands.
On the 28th of March, the Queen called for the Lord Treasurer, Sir Robert
Rochester Comptroller, Sir William Petre Secretary of State, and Sir Francis
Inglefield Master of the Wards. She said, She had sent for them to declare her
Conscience to them concerning the Church Lands that continued still in the
Crown: She thought they were taken away in the time of the Schism, and by
unlawful Means, therefore she could not keep them with a good Conscience; so
she did surrender and relinquish them. If they should tell her, That her Crown
was so poor, that she could not well maintain her Dignity, if she parted with
them; she must tell them, She valued the Salvation of her Soul more than ten
Kingdoms; and thanked God, her Husband was of the same mind: and therefore she
was resolved to have them disposed, as the Pope, or his Legate should think fit;
so she ordered them to go with the Lord Chancellor, to whom she had spoken of
it before, and wait on the Legate, and signify it to him, together with the
value of those Lands. This flowed from the strictness of the Queen's
Conscience, who then thought her self near the time of her delivery, and
therefore would not have such a load lie on her; of which she was the more
sensible, by reason of a Bull which Pope Julius had made, excommunicating all
that kept any Abbey or Church Lands; and all Princes, Prelates, and Magistrates,
that did not assist in the execution of such Bulls. Some said, this related to
the Business of England; but Gardener said, it was only made for Germany; and
that Bulls had no Authority, unless they were received in England. This did
not satisfy the People much; for if it was such a sin in Germany, they could
not see, but it was as bad in England: And if the Pope had his Authority from
Christ and St. Peter, his Bulls ought to take place everywhere.

Pope Julius died soon after this, on the 20th of March; Pope Julius dies, and
Marcellus succeeds.
and on the 6th of April after, Cardinal Marcellus Cervinus was chosen Pope; a
Man of great gravity and innocence of Life. He continued to keep his former
Name, which had not been done a great while, except by Adrian the 6th, between
whose temper, and this Man, there was a great resemblance. He presently turned
all his Thoughts (as Adrian had done) to a Reformation of the Corruptions of
that See; and blamed his Predecessors much who had always put it off: he
thought nothing could make the Papacy more reverenced, than to cut off their
excessive and superfluous Pomp; whereby they would be the more esteemed all the
World over, and might, on surer grounds, expect the protection of God. He had
been one of the Legates at Trent, and there observed what was represented as the
root of all Heresy and Disorder, that the Clergy were generally corrupted, and
had, by many Exemptions procured from Rome, broken all the Primitive Rules.
Upon his first Election, he called for the Cardinal of Mant^a, and having
observed him to be a Man of great probicy, told him, he knew it was ordinary
for all Popes, at their first coming to the Throne, to talk of Reformation; but
he would talk little, being resolved to do more; only he opened his mind to
him, that if ever he went back from it, he might have this check upon him, that
so honest a Man as he was, would know him to be a Knave, and a Hypocrite. He
would suffer none of his Friends that were in remote parts, to come to Rome;
nor his Nephews, that were in Rome, to come within the Court: He was resolved
to have sent all Priests and Bishops home to their Benefices; and talked much
of their Non residence with great detestation: He would not change his Table,
nor his Custom of making one read to him when he was sitting at it. One day,
after a long musing at Dinner, he said, he remembered the words of Hadrian the
Fourth, That the Pope was the most miserable of all Men; his whole Life was
bitterness, his Chair was full of Thorns, and his way of Briars; and then
leaning with his Hand on the Table, he said, I do not see how they can be saved
that hold this high Dignity. These Thoughts did so affect him, that on the 12th
day after that he was chosen Pope, he sickned, and died ten days after. These
things are reported of him by the Learned Onuphrius, who knew him well: and
they will not be thought impertinent to have a room in this Story.

The Queen recommends Card Pool t^ the Popedom, upon Ma^cellus's death.
As soon as the News of his Death came to England, the Queen writ, on the 29th
day of May, to Gardener, the Earl of Arundel, and the Lord Paget, who were
then at Calais, mediating a Peace between the French and Spaniard; which they
could not effect, but only procured a Truce: She desired them to deal with the
Cardinal of Lorrain, the Constable, and the other French Commissioners, to
persuade their Master to set up Cardinal Pool, that he might succeed in that
Chair, since he seemed every way the fittest Person for it: adding, Coll. Numb.
18.
(as will appear by the Letter which is in the Collection) that she had done
this without his knowledge or consent. This could not come in time to Rome,
vvhereon the 23d of that month, Caraffa was chosen Pope, who was called Paul
the Fourth; Paul the 4th chosen Pope.
and who was as different from his Predecessor as any Man could be. He had
put on an appearance of great strictness before; and had set up a Religious
Order of Monks, called Theatines: But upon his coming to the Popedom, he put on
the greatest Magnificence possible, and was the highest Spirited, and bloodiest
Pope, that had been since Julius the Second's Time.

He took it for a great Honor, that on the day of his Election, the English
Ambassadors entered Rome, The English Ambassadors come to Rome.
with a great Train of 140 Horse of their own Attendants. On the 23 of June, in
the first Consistory after he was Crowned, they were heard. They fell prostrate
at his Feet, and acknowledged the Steps and Faults of their Schism, enumerating
them all; for so the Pope had ordered it; confessing they had been ungrateful
for the many Benefits they had received from that Church, and humbly asking
pardon for them. The Pope held some Consultation, whether he should receive
them, since in their Credentials, the Queen styled her self Queen of Ireland:
that Title being assumed by King Henry, in the Time of Schism. It seemed hard
to use such Ambassadors ill: but on the other hand, he stood upon his Dignity,
and thought it belonged only to his See to erect Kingdoms: therefore he
resolved so to temper the Matter, that he should not take notice of that Title,
but should bestow it as a Mark of his Favor. So on the 7th of June, he did in
private erect Ireland into a Kingdom; and conferred that Title on the King and
Queen, and told them, that otherwise he would not suffer them to use it in
their Public Audience. And it is probable, it was the Contest about this, that
made the Audience be delaied almost a month after their Arrival. This being
adjusted, he received the Ambassadors graciously, and pardoned the whole
Nation: and said, That in Token of his esteem of the King and Queen, he gave
them the Title of the Kingdom of Ireland, by that Supreme Power which he had
from God, who had placed him over all Kingdoms, to supplant the Contumacious,
and to build new ones. But in his private Discourses with the Ambassadors, he
complained that the Church Lands were not restored: which, he said, was by no
means to be endured; The P. presses the restoring of the Church Lands.
for they must render all back to the last farthing; since they belonged to
God, and could not be kept without their incurring Damnation: He said, he would
do any thing in his power, to gratify the King and Queen; but in this his
Authority was not so large, as to profane the things dedicated to God. This
would be an Anathema, and a Contagion on the Nation, which would bring after it
many Miseries; History of the Council of Trent.
therefore he required them to write effectually about it: he repeated this to
them every time he spoke to them; and told them also, that the Peterpence must
be paid in England, and that he would send a Collector to raise it: he himself
had been employed in that office when he was young, and he said he was much
edified to see the forwardness of the People, especially those of the meaner
sort, in paying it: and told them they must not expect S. Peter would open
Heaven to them, so long as they usurped his Goods on Earth.

The Ambassadors seeing the Pope's haughty temper, that he could endure no
contradiction, answered him with great submission; and so gained his Favor
much; but knew well that these things could not be easily effected; and the
Viscount Montacute was too deeply concerned in the matter himself, to solicit
it hard: for almost his whole Estate consisted of Abbey Lands. Thus was this
business rather laid over, than fully settled.

But now to return to the Affairs in England. Instructions sent to the Justices
for earching after all sus^ected of Heresy.
There came Complaints from all places, that the Justices of Peace were remiss
in the matters of Religion; and particularly in Norfolk, that these things were
ill looked to: So Instructions were sent thither, (which will be found in the
Collections) requiring the Justices to divide themselves into ten or twelve
Districts; that they might more narrowly look into all particulars: Collect.
Numb. 19.
that they should encourage the Preachers sent to instruct that County, and
turn out such as did not come to Church, or conform in all things, but chiefly
the Preachers of Heresy: that the Justices and their Families should be good
examples to the rest: that they should have one or two in every Parish to be
secretly instructed, for giving information of every thing in it; and should
look strictly to all vagabonds, that wandered about, and to such as spread false
reports. This was thought to have so much of the Inquisition in it, that it was
imputed to the Counsels of the Spaniards. And they seemed to have taken their
pattern from the base Practices of those called Delatores, that are set out by
Tacitus as the greatest abuse of Power that ever was practiced by the ill
Emperors that succeeded Augustus; who going into all companies, and complying
with what might be acceptable to them, engaged Men into discourses against the
State; and then gave such Informations against them, which without their
discovering themselves by being brought to prove them, were made use of to the
ruin of the accused Persons. This was certainly very contrary to the freedom of
the English temper, and helped to alienate them the more from the Spaniards. But
it may be easily imagined that others were weary of severities, when Bonner
himself grew averse to them: He complained, Bonner grows unwilling to persecute
any more,
that the matter was turned over upon him, the rest looking on, and leaving the
execution of these Laws wholly to him. So when the Justices and Sheriffs sent
up Heretics to him, 1554. But is required to proceed by the King and Queen.
he sent them back and refused to meddle further. Upon which the King and Queen
writ to him on the 24th of May, complaining of this, and admonished him to have
from henceforth more regard to the Office of a good Pastor and Bishop; and when
such Offenders were brought to him, to endeavor to remove them from their
Errors; or if they were obstinate, to proceed against them according to Law.
This Letter he caused to be put in his Register, from whence I copied it, and
have placed it in the Collections. Coll. Number 20.
Whether he procured this himself, for a color to excuse his Proceedings; or
whether it was sent to him by reason of his slackness; is not certain: but the
latter is more probable, for he had burnt none during five weeks; but he soon
redeemed that loss of time.

The Queens delivery is expected, but in vain.
At this time the Nation was in expectation of the Queen's Delivery. And on the
third of May the Bishop of Norwich writ a Letter to the Earl of Sussex, of
which I have seen the Original, that news was brought him from London, that the
Queen had brought forth a Noble Prince; for which he had Te Deum solemnly sung
in his Cathedral, and in the other Churches thereabout. He adds in the
Postscript, that the News was confirmed by two other Hands. But, tho this was
without any ground, the Queen continued still in her opinion that she was with
Child: and on the 29th of May, Letters were written by the Council to the Lord
Treasurer, to have Money in readiness, that those who were appointed to carry
the joyful news of the Queens happy Delivery, might be speedily dispatched. In
the beginning of June she was believed to be in Labor, and it flew over London
again that she had brought forth a Son. The Priests had settled all their hopes
on that; so they did every where sing Te Deum, and were transported into no
small Ecstasies of Joy. One more officious than the rest, made a Sermon about
it, and described all the lineaments of their young Prince: but they soon found
they were abused. It was said, that they had been deceived, and that the Queen
had no great Belly; But Melvil in his Memoirs says, he was assured from some of
her Women, that she did cast forth at several times some Moles and unformed
pieces of flesh. So now there was small hopes of any Issue from her. This
increased the sowrness of her temper; and King Philip, being so much younger
than she, growing out of conceit with her, did not much care for her; but left
her some months after. He saw no hope of Children, and finding that it was not
possible for him to get England in his hands without that; gave over all his
Designs about it: so having lived with her about fifteen months after their
first Marriage, he found it necessary to look more after his Hereditary Crown,
and less after his Matrimonial one; and henceforth he considered England rather
as a sure Ally, that was to adhere firmly to his Interests, than as a Nation
which he could ever hope to add to his other Crowns. All these things concurred
to increase the Queen's Melancholy Humors, and did cast her into an ill state
of Health: so that it was not probable she could live long. Gardener upon that,
set himself much to have the Lady Elizabeth put out of the way; but, as it was
formerly said, King Philip preserved her.

Proceedings against Heretics.
And thus Affairs went on, as to Civil matters, till the meeting of the next
Parliament in October following. But I now return to the Proceedings against
the poor men called Heretics; who were again, after a short intermission,
brought to new Sufferings. John Cardmaker, 1555.
that had been Divinity-Reader at S. Paul's, and a Prebendary at Bath; and John
Warn, an Upholster in London, were both burnt in Smithfield, on the 30th of
May, for denying the Corporal presence; being proceeded against ex Officio. On
the 4th of June, there was a piece of Pageantry acted on the Body of one Tooly;
who being executed for a Robbery, did at his death say something that savoured
of Heresy: upon which the Council writ to Bonner to enquire into it, and to
proceed according to the Ecclesiastical Laws. He thereupon formed a Process,
and cited the dead Body to answer the Points objected to him; but he, to be
sure, neither appearing nor answering, was condemned and burnt. After this, on
the 10th of June, Thomas Hawks, a Gentleman in Essex, who had lived much in
the Court, was also burnt at Coxhall: and on the same day John Simpson, and
John Ardeley, two Husbandmen, were also burnt in Essex. Thomas Watts, a
Linen-Draper, was burnt at Chelmsford. On the 9th, Nicholas Chamberlain, a
Weaver, was burnt at Colchester; and on the 15th, Thomas Osmond, a Fuller, was
burnt at Manning-tree; and the same day William Bamford, a Weaver, was burnt at
Harwich.

These, with several others, had been sent up by the Earl of Oxford, to Bonner,
because they had not received the Sacrament the last Easter, and were suspected
of Heresy: and Articles being given to them, they were upon their Answers
condemned, and sent to be burnt in the places where they had lived. But upon
this occasion, The Council writ to the Lords in Essex to gather the Gentry, and
assist at these Burnings.
the Council fearing some Tumult, or violent Rescue, writ to the Earl of
Oxford, and the Lord Rich, to gather the Country, and to see the Heretics
burnt. The Earl of Oxford, being some way indisposed, could only send his
People to the Lord Rich, who went and obeyed the Orders that had been sent him;
for which, Letters of Thanks were written to him; and the Council understanding
that some Gentlemen had come to the burning at Colchester, that had not been
writ to, but as the words of the Letter have it, had honestly and of themselves
gone thither, writ to the Lord Rich to give them the Council's thanks for their
Zeal. I find in the Council Books, many Entries made, of Letters writ to
several Counties, to the Nobility and Gentry to assist at these Executions: and
such as made excuses, were always after that looked on with an ill eye, and
were still under great jealousy.

After these, followed the Execution of Bradford in July; Bradford's Martyrdom.
He had been condemned among the first, but was not burnt till now. He had been
a Prebendary of St. Paul's, and a celebrated Preacher, in the end of King
Edwards days. He had preserved Bourn in the tumult at Pauls-Cross; and that
afternoon, preaching at Bow-Church, he severely reproved the people for the
disorder at Paul's, but three days after, was put in Prison, where he lay,
removed from one Prison to another, near three years; wherever he came, he
gained so much on the Keepers, that they suffered Preach and give the Sacrament
to his Fellow Prisoners. He was one of those that were carried before the
Council on the 22d of January, where Bonner accused him of the Tumult at Paul's;
though all he pretended to prove it by, was, that his way of speaking to the
People showed, he thought he had some Authority over them, and was a
presumption that he had set on the Sedition. Bradford appealed to God that saw
his Innocence, and how unworthily he was requited for saving his Enemies, who
rendered him evil for good. At last refusing to conform himself to the Laws, he
was condemned with the rest on the 31. of Jan. where that Rescue was again laid
to his Charge, together with many Letters he had written over England, which
(as the Earl of Darby informed the Parliament) had done more hurt than he could
have done, if he had been at liberty to Preach. He said, since he understood
that they acted by a Commission which was derived from the Pope, he could not
answer them, having sworn never to acknowledge that Authority: What he had done
at Paul's, was at Bourn's earnest desire, who prayed him for the Passion of
Christ, to speak to the People; upon which he stepped up to the Pulpit, and had
almost been killed with the Dagger that was thrown at Bourn, for it touched his
Sleeve. But in the points of Religion, he professed his Faith so constantly,
that for that cause he was condemned. Yet the saving of Bourn was so publicly
known, that it was thought undecent to proceed against him so quick as they did
with the rest. So both Heath Archbishop of York, and Day Bishop of Chichester,
Weston, Harpsfield, and the King's Confessor, and Alphonsus a Castro, went to
see him, and endeavored to gain him: but all to no purpose. It looks very ill
in Bourn that he never interposed for Bradford, nor came once to visit him: and
as when Bradford was before the Council, Bourn's Brother the Secretary was very
sharp upon him; so when he was brought to his Trial, Bourn himself then Bishop
of Bath and Wells being present, did not open his mouth for him, though he
appealed to him, as to the business of the Tumult. With Bradford one John
Lease, an Apprentice of nineteen years old, was lead out to be burnt, who was
also condemned upon his answers to the Articles exhibited to him, When they
came to the Stake, they both fell down and Prayed. Then Bradford took a Faggot
in his hands and kissed it; and so likewise kissed the Stake, expressing
thereby the joy he had in his Sufferings: and cried, O England, repent, repent,
beware of Idolatry and false Antichrists! But the Sheriff hindering him to speak
any more, he embraced his Fellow Sufferer, and prayed him to be of good
comfort, for they should Sup with Christ that night. His last words were,
Strait is the way and narrow is the gate that leads into eternal Life, and
few there be that find it.

Now the Persecution was carried on to other places, Bonner stopping in it
again. But Thornton Suffragan of Dover, Harpsfield Archdeacon of Canterbury,
and some others, resolved likewise to show their zeal. This Thornton had from
the first change made by King Henry been the most officious and forward in
every turn; and had been the first in this Reign, that had set up the Mass at
Canterbury. He was much despised for it by Cardinal Pool, but Pool could not
hinder the fury of those men, without drawing on himself the Pope's
indignation. The Pope was his professed and inveterate Enemy: but knew not how
to vent his hatred to him, since he had done such an eminent service to the
Church, as the reconciling of England. Gardener understanding this, sent
secretly to Rome, to give ill Characters of Pool, which the ill-natured Pope
was ready enough to receive. Gardener designed to be made a Cardinal; and to
get Pool recalled, and himself made Archbishop of Canterbury. The Pope was
resolved, on the first occasion, to take the Legatine power from Pool, and give
it to Gardener, but Pool was so much in the Queens favor, that this required
some time to bring it about. This made Gardener study to preserve Cranmer, as
long as he lived. It seemed more reasonable to have begun with him, who had
indeed been the chief Author of the Reformation, and promoter of that they
called Heresy: nor had Gardener such kindness for him, as to interpose on his
account; but he knew, that as soon as he was burnt, Pool would be presently
invested in the Sea of Canterbury. Therefore he suggested, that if he could be
any way brought off, it would be the most effectual means possible to extirpate
Heresy: for if he who had so much set on these Doctrines, did forsake them, it
would confound the whole Party, and bring over at least all that were weak or
staggering; whereas on the other hand, if he died resolutly for it, his death
would confirm them all very much. This was a color good enough to preserve
him. But why the Sea of Canterbury was not declared vacant, since he was now
pronounced an obstinate Heretic, I do not so well apprehend: whether there was
any thing in the Pall, or the latter inventions of the Canonists, that made it
necessary not to fill his See so long as he lived, I know not. Pool being in
these circumstances, durst neither offend those at Rome, nor openly hinder the
prosecution of Heretics: which it seems he would have done more steadily, if
it had not been for fear of the Popes taking thereby advantages against him,
who had before given out in the Conclave, that he was a favourer of Heresy;
and therefore would the more easily be induced to believe any thing that might
be written over to Rome to his prejudice.

Those that sat in Canterbury to judge the Heretics, had four Men brought
before them, two Priests, Bland, and Frankesh; and Shiterden, and Midleton, two
Laymen. They were condemned upon their Answers to the Articles, exhibited to
them, and burnt at Canterbury Some burnt at Canterbury.
the 25th of June: and in July Margery Polley was burnt at Tunbridge on the
like account; who was the first Woman that suffered in this Reign. Christopher
Ward was Condemned with her, and burnt in Darford. On the 22d. of July, Dirick
Carver was burnt at Lewis; and on the 23d John Launder was burnt at Stoning.
They had been taken in London; and brought before Bonner; but he would not
meddle with them, and desired they might be sent to their own Ordinaries: One
of them being of Surrey was within Gardiners Jurisdiction, who resolved to
proceed no more against the Heretics, so he procured a Letter from the Council
to Bonner, requiring him to proceed against them, who thereupon presently
condemned them.

There were at this time several discoveries of Plottings in several Counties,
especially in Dorsetshire, and Essex; Pretended Plots, and some put to the
Torture to make Discovery.
but the nature of these Plots is not set down in the Council Books. Some were
taken and put in the Tower: Two or three Privy Counselors were sent thither on
the 9th of June, with a Letter from the Council to the Lieutenant of the Tower,
to put them to the Torture, according to their discretions: yet nothing
following upon this, it is probable these were only surmises devised by the
Clergy, to set on the Council more severely against them, whose Ruin they were
contriving by all the ways they could think on.

There was also an outrage committed on two Friars, Peyto and Elston who were
Franciscans of the Observance, They had spoken sharply against King Henry in
the business of the Divorce, and had fled beyond Sea on that account: The Q^.
rebuilds the Franciscan's house at Greenwich.
therefore the Queen had sent for them, and not only procured the Attainder
that had passed against them, to be repealed in the last Parliament, but made
Peyto her Confessor: and being resolved to raise Religious Houses in England
again, she had begun with their Order, the Franciscans of the Observance, and
with their House at Greenwich, which was the first that was suppressed; as was
shown in the former Book; and therefore she ordered that to be rebuilt this
Summer. So Elston and Peyto going down by water, there were Stones flung at
them by some that were a Shore in London. This the Queen resented highly; so
she sent the Lord Treasurer to the Lord Mayor, requiring him to make
Proclamation of a Reward to any that should discover those who had done it: but
it could not be found out. She ordered all Sir Thomas Mores's Works to be
printed Sir Th. More's Works Printed.
together in one Volumn, which were in the Press this Year: and it was given
out as an extraordinary thing, that King Edward had died, and she succeeded to
the Crown, that very day in which he was beheaded. But in publishing his Works,
one piece of Fraud has occurred to me since the former Part was printed. But
his Letter about the Nun of Kent was left out.
I have seen the Manuscript out of which his Letters were printed, where the
Originals of the Letters that he writ to his Daughter, Mris Roper, are; with
the Copies of those that he writ to Cromwell. But among these, there is a long
Letter concerning the Nun of Kent, in which he speaks fully of her Hypocrisy,
and other Villainies. It contains many remarkable passages concerning her, of
the high opinion he at first had of her; how he was led into it, and how he was
afterward convinced, That she was the most false dissembling Hypocrite that
had been known, and guilty of the most detestable Hypocrisy, and devilish
dissembled Falsehood; and he believed, that she had communication with an evil
Spirit. This Letter was at that time concealed, but not destroyed: So I find
the conjecture I made about it, in my former Part, has proved true; though I
did not then hope to come by the Letter it self, as I have done since. It seems
it was resolved to raise the Credit of that Story; and since the Nun was
believed to be both a Martyr and a Prophetess, it is like she might have been
easily gotten to be Canonized; and therefore so great a Testimony from such a
Man, was not thought fit to be left in her way. Coll. Number 21.
The Letter I have put into the Collections.

Concerning this Edition of Sir Thomas Mores's Works, I shall recall to the
Reader's mind, what was said in the former Part about his Life, pretended to be
writ by Rastal; Rastal published his works, but did not write his Life.
was now the publisher of his Works, and so much encouraged in it, that the
Queen promoted him soon after to be a Judge; and so it is not likely, that
Rastal ever writ any such Book, otherwise he had now prefixed it to this
Edition. Nor is it probable that the stories, which Sanders vented in his name
afterward, concerning Ann Boleyn, or Queen Elizabeth's Birth, were then so much
as contrived: otherwise it is not credible, that they should not have been
printed at this time; since the Lady Elizabeth being the only object of the
fear and jealousy of the popish Party, was now out of the Queens favor, and a
Prisoner: so that we cannot doubt but all such Stories would have bin very
acceptable to the Queen, and the Clergy would have taken care to have published
them, for the defaming her, and blasting her Title. And therefore these things
seem to be afterward contrived in revenge, when Queen Elizabeth began to
proceed severely against that Party, after the many and repeated Conspiracies
they had engaged in against her Life.

But now the Queen The Queen restores all he Church Lands that ^elonged to the
Crown. Col. Number 22.
resolved to endow so many Religious Houses, as the Revenues of the Church that
were in her hands, could maintain: and about that, and some other particulars,
she writ some directions to the Council with her own hand, which will be found
in the Collections. I have seen two Copies of these that differ a little, but I
follow that which seemed to me to be best derived from the Original. She
desired, That those who had Commission to treat with the Cardinal, about the
goods of the Church, might wait on him once a week, to finish that and some
other matters that were to be prepared for the Parliament: She particularly
recommended the care of having good Preaching encouraged, which she wished
might be well looked to; and she advised a general Visitation both of the
Universities and Churches, to be made, by such as the Cardinal and they should
think fit. As for the punishment of Heretics, she wished it might not be done
rashly; yet she would have Justice done, on those who by Learning studied to
deceive the simple: but would have it so managed, that the People might see,
they were not condemned but upon just occasions: and therefore ordered that
some of the Council should be present at all the burnings about London; and
that there should be every where good Sermons at those times: She also verily
believed, that many Benefices should not be in one man's hand; but that every
Priest ought to look to his Cure, and reside upon it. And she looked on the
Pluralities over England, to be a main cause of the want of good Preachers;
whose Sermons if joined with a good Example would do much good; and without
that, she thought their Sermons would profit little.

And now I return to the Burnings, More Heretics burnt.
from which I am not unwilling frequently to break off, since a continued
relation of such things cannot be but an ungrateful entertainment to the
Reader. In July one Juxon was burnt at Chichester: On the 2d of August James
Abeys was burnt at Bury in Suffolk. On the 8th of August Denly a Gentleman was
burnt at Vxbridge, and Robert Smith at Waybridge. On the 26th George Tankervil
was burnt at St. Albans. And on the 28th of August Patrick Packingham also was
burnt there: On the 31st of August one Newman was burnt at Saffron Walden in
Essex, and Robert Samuel a Preacher was burnt at Ipswich. There were also in
August, six burnt in one Fire at Canterbury. Elizabeth VVarne burnt at
Stratford Le-Bow, Stephen Whorwood at Stratford, Thomas Fust at Ware, and
William Hall at Barnet; but of their sufferings the days are not marked. In
September on the 6th day of the month George Catmer, and four others were burnt
at Canterbury. On the 20th Robert Glover a Gentleman, and one Cornelius Bangey
were burnt at Coventry: The same month, but we know not on what days, William
Allen was burnt at Walsingham, Roger Coo at Yerford, Thomas Cob in Thetford.
Thomas Haywood, and John Garaway, at Lichfield were also burnt on the same
account. On the 16th of October following, William Woley, and Robert Pigot,
were burnt at Ely; where Shaxton, that had been Bishop of Salsbury in King
Henry's time, and quitted his Bishopric on the account of the six Articles,
but in the end of that Reign recanted, and was now Bishop Suffragan of Ely,
condemned them. It is enough to have named all these, who were burnt merely by
the Proceedings Ex Officio: for being forced, either to accuse themselves, or
to die however, they chose rather plainly to answer those Articles that were
ministered to them, and so were condemned for their Answers.

Ridley and Latimer burnt at Oxford.
But on the 16th of October Ridley and Latimer offered up their lives at Oxford,
on which it may be expected I should enlarge a little. The Bishops of Lincoln,
Gloucester, and Bristol, were sent to Oxford by a special Commission from the
Cardinal to proceed against them. As soon as Ridley heard they proceeded in the
name of the Pope, by authority from the Cardinal, he put on his Cap, having
stood bare headed before that, because he would express no sign of Reverence to
those who acted by such a Commission. He said, he paid great respect to the
Cardinal as descended from the Royal Family, and a man endued with such
Learning and Virtue; that therefore he honored and reverenced him: but for his
Legatine Authority from the Bishop of Rome, he utterly renounced it; and
therefore would show no Reverence to that Character: and so putting off his Cap
as he spoke of him on other respects, he put it on again when he named his
being Legate; and being required to put it off, refused to do it on that
account: but one of the Beadles did it for him. After that the Bishop of
Lincoln made him a long exhortation to recant, and acknowledge the Sea of Rome;
since Christ had built his Church on St. Peter, and the Fathers had all
acknowledged the pre-eminence of that See, and himself had been once of that
opinion. To which he answered, it was upon the Faith which St. Peter confessed,
that Christ had founded his Church; he acknowledged, the Bishops of Rome had
been held in great esteem, both for the dignity of the City, and the worthiness
of the Bishops that had sat in it; but they were only esteemed Patriarchs of
the West; and the Church had not then thought of that Power, to which they had
since advanced themselves: he confessed he was once of their mind, but it was
as St. Paul had been a Persecutor: he had seen since such spots in the Church
of Rome, that he could never return to it. Upon this followed much discourse:
In conclusion they objected to him some Articles, about those Opinions which he
had maintained a year and an half before that, in the Schools; and required him
to make his answers to them. He began with a Protestation, that by answering
them he did not acknowledge the Popes Authority, and then answered them as he
had done before. Latimer used the like protestation, and answers. So they were
allowed one nights respite to consider better, whether they would recant or
not; but next day they, appearing, and adhering to the Answers they had made,
were declared obstinate Heretics, and ordered to be degraded, and so delivered
over to the Secular Power.

After that, new attemps were made on Ridley to persuade him to accept of the
Queens Mercy; but all being to no purpose, the Writ was sent down to burn them.
The night before the Execution, Ridley was very joyful, and invited the Mayor
and his Wife, in whose House he was kept, to be at his Wedding next day: at
which when the Mayor's Wife wept, he said he perceived she did not love him:
but he told her, tho his breakfast would be sharp, he was sure his Supper would
be sweet: he was glad to hear that his Sister would come, and see him die; and
was in such composure of mind, that they were all amazed at it. Next morning
being the 16th they were led out to the place of Execution, which was before
Baliol College: they looked up to the Prison to have seen Cranmer; but he was
then engaged in Dispute with some Friars, so that he was not in his Window; but
he looked after them with great tenderness, and kneeling down prayed earnestly,
that God would strengthen their Faith and Patience in that their last but
painful Passage. When they came to the Stake, they embraced one another with
great affection, Ridley saying to Latimer, Be of good heart, Brother, for God
will either assuage the fury of the Flame, or enable us to abide it. Doctor
Smith was appointed to Preach, and took his Text from these words, If I give my
body to be burnt, and have no Charity, it profits nothing. He compared their
dying for Heresy, to Judas's hanging himself; and warned the People to beware
of them, with as much bitterness as he could express. The best of it was, the
Sermon lasted not above a quarter of an hour. When he had done, Ridley was
going to answer him; and the Lord Williams, that was appointed by the Queen to
see the Execution, was inclined to hear him: but the Vice Chancellor said,
Except he intended to recant, he was not to be suffered to speak. Ridley
answered, He would never deny his Lord, nor those Truths of his of which he was
persuaded; God's Will be done in him: he committed himself to God, who would
indifferently judge all. Then he addressed himself to the Lord Williams, and
said, Nothing troubled him so much, as that he had received Fines of some, who
took Leases of him when he was Bishop of London; and these Leases were now
voided: He therefore humbly prayed, that the Queen would give order, that those
might be made good to the Tenants, or that the Fines might be restored out of
his Goods which he had left in his House, and were of far greater value than
those Fines would amount to; and that some pity might be had of Shipside his
Brother in law, who was turned out of a place he had put him in, and had now
attended on him with great care. Then they both prayed and fitted themselves
for the Stake: Latimer saying to Ridley, Be of good comfort, we shall this day
light such a Candle in England, as I trust by God's Grace shall never be put
out. Then Gunpowder being hanged about their Bodies in great quantities to
hasten their death, the Fire was put to, and Latimer was with the first Flame,
the Powder taking fire, put out of pain, and died immediately. But Ridley had a
more lingering Torment, for they threw on the fire so much wood, that the Flame
could not break through it: so that his Legs were almost consumed before this
was observed, and then, one opening the Passage to the Flame, it put an end to
his Life.

Thus died these two excellent Bishops: the one for his Piety, Learning, and
solid Judgment, the ablest Man of all that advanced the Reformation; and the
other for the plain simplicity of his Life, esteemed a truly primitive Bishop
and Christian. Of his care of his Bishopric, the Instructions he gave at his
Visitation, chiefly of the Monasteries, will give a good Evidence: and
therefore I have put them in the Collection, Coll. Number. 24.
as they were copied from the Register of Worcester, by that Ingenious and
worthy Counselor Mr. Summers; who out of his Zeal to the Reformation, searched
all the Books there, that he might gather from them such things as he thought
could be of use to this Work. Bonner had made an ill Retribution to Ridley, for
the kindness he had showed his Friends when he was in possession at London: for
he had made Bo^ner's Mother always dine with him, when he lived in his
Country House of Fulham, and treated her as if she had been his own Mother;
besides his kindness to his other Friends. Heath, then Bishop of Worcester, had
bin kept Prisoner a Year and a half in Ridley's House, where he lived as if he
had bin at his own; and Heath used always to call him the best learned of all
the Party: yet he so far forgot gratitude and humanity, that though he went
through Oxford when he was a Prisoner there, he came not to see him. When they
lay in the Tower, both Cranmer and they were, by reason of the number of
Prisoners, put into one Chamber for some months; but after they came to Oxford,
they could sca^c^ send Messages to one another: and men had laid off humanity
so much, that all the while they lay there none of the University waited on
them: that favored their Doctrine were then left, and of the rest, it is no
wonder that none came to visit them; nor did they supply them with any thing
they needed: for all the Charity that was sent to them, came from London.

This Summer there was a strict search made after all the Goods of the Church,
that had bin embezelled: and all that had bin Visiters, either in King Henry or
K. Edward's time, Suits about the spoils of Churches.
were brought into Suits about it, but many compounded, and so purchased their
quiet, by an off r to the Church of some large Gratuity: and according to the
greatness thereof their affection to the Church was measured. Many of those did
favor the Reformation, which made them give the more bountifully, that so they
might come under good Characters, and be the less suspected.

The Parliament was opened on the 21st of October. The Chancellor came thither,
Gardiner's Sick^ess and Death.
both then, and on the 23d, but could come no more It was reported, that he had
stayed long for dinner, that day that Ridley and Latimer were to be burnt, till
one should bring him word, that the fire was set to them: but the Messenger
coming Post, did not reach London till four a Clock in the afternoon, and that
he then went cheerfully to dine; but was at Dinner struck with the illness, of
which he died. It was a suppression of Urine, which held him till the 12th of
November, on which he died. He had great remorse for his former life; and Day
Bishop of Chichester coming to him, and comforting him with the assurance of
Justification through the Blood of Christ; he answered him, He might speak of
that to him or others in his condition; but if he opened that gap again, and
preached that to the People, then farewell all together. He often repeated
those words, Erravi cum Petro, sed non flevi cum Petro, I have erred with
Peter, but I have not mourned with him. He was of a nobler descent than is
commonly known. For though he took the name Gardener from his supposed Father,
yet he was then believed to be the base Son of Richard Woodvil, that was
Brother to Queen Ann, Wife to King Edward the 6th: so that he was of kin to
King Henry the 8th in the second and third degree of Consanguinity; which might
be the cause that he was so suddenly advanced to the Bishopric of Winchester.
This is mentioned by Sir Edward Hobby, in a Letter he writ to one of those that
had fled beyond Sea, giving him an account of his Death: where he says of him,
he was a Man of higher engraved portrait of Bishop Stephen Gardener EFFIGIES
STEPHANI GARDINERI EPISCOPI WINTONIENSIS
H. Holben pinxit.
R. White sculp
engraved coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



Natus Burioe fit Episcopus Wintoniensis 1531. Dec. 5.

Cancellarius Anglioe 1553. Aug. 23. Obijt 1555. Nov: 12.

Printed for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church yard.

descent than he was commonly reputed; and on the Margent it is said, he was
Nephew to a Queen of England. This explains that which I find objected both to
him and Bonner in one of the Books that were written in the defense of the
married Clergy; that no wonder they were such enemies to Marriage, since both
of them were born in Adultery. He was a Man well skilled in the Canon and Civil
Laws, and moderately in Divinity. He had a good Style in Latin, and understood
the Greek well; but his strength lay in deep dissimulation, a quickness of
apprehension, a great prospect of affairs, a close and artificial way of
concealing his mind, and insinuating himself into the affections and
confidences of other persons. He did comply all Henry the 8ths time; and would
willingly have done the like in King Edwards time, but that Cranmer knew him
too well to be directed by him, and handled him as he deserved. But the usage
he then met with, so recovered him with Queen Mary, that she put him in the
greatest Trusts; and now, when a Cardinals Hat was like to fall on his Head, he
was carried off, and all his ambitious Projects fell with him. Of his servile
compliance in promoting King Henrie's Divorce, I have found fresh Instances,
besides those that are mentioned in the former Volumn. When he went to Rome, in
the Year 1529, Anne Boleyn writ a very kind Letter to him, which I have put in
the Collection. Coll. Number. 25.
By it the Reader will clearly perceive that he was then in the secret of the
King's designing to marry her, as soon as the Divorce was obtained. There is
another particular in that Letter, which corrects a Conjecture which I set down
in the beginning of the former Book, concerning the Cramp-Rings that were
blessed by King Henry; which I thought might have been done by him after he was
declared Head of the Church. That part was printed before I saw this Letter;
But this Letter shows they were used to be blessed before the Separation from
Rome; for Anne Boleyn sent them as great Presents thither. The use of them had
been (it seems) discontinued in King Edwards time; but now under Queen Mary it
was designed to be revived; and the Office for it was written out in a fair
Manuscript, yet extant; of which I have put a Copy in the Collection. Coll.
Number. 26.
But the silence in the Writers of that time makes me think it was seldom, if
ever, practiced. But to return to Gardiners officious compliance in the matter
of the Divorce, I have put in the Collection a Letter of his to King Henry,
Coll. Number. 27.
written in such confidence to him, that even Cardinal Woolsey was not to see
it. In it he sets out the Pop's timorousness so plainly, that he writes he saw
nothing but the fear he was in of the Emperors Forces, kept him from granting
what was desired; therefore he advised the King to do the business once in
England, and then leave it to the Emperor to complain; not doubting but he
would be put off by as many Delays as were now used in the King's business.

Heath Archbishop of York had the Seals in February after; they having been
during that interval, in the hands of Sir Nicholas Hare, then Master of the
Rolls; and he was made Chancellor during the Queen's pleasure. The Queen also,
considering that Whitehall had been taken from the Sea of York, had a scruple
in her Conscience against living in it; but Heath and she agreed it thus:
Suffolk-Place by the Duke's Attainder, was now in the Queen's hands; so she
gave that to the Sea of York, which Heath sold, and converted it to Tenements,
and purchased another House near Charing Cross, which from thence forward was
called York-House.

The temper of the Parliament is much changed.
But, for the Parliament, it was now much changed; Men's minds were much
alienated from the Clergy, and also from the Queen, who minded nothing else but
to raise them to great wealth and power again. On the 28th of October it was
moved in the House of Commons to give a Subsidy, and two Fifteenths, for paying
the Debts of the Crown, but it was opposed with great vehemence. It was said,
that the Queen had profusely given away the Riches of the Crown, and then
turned to the Laity to pay her Debts: why did she not rather turn it to the
Spiritualty? But it was answered, that the Convocation had given her a Subsidy
of six shillings in the pound; and the Queen asked now, after almost three
years Reign, nothing but what she had discharged her Subjects of, at her first
coming to the Crown. Yet the heats grew such, that on the 1st of November
Secretary Petre brought a Message from her, that she thanked them that had
moved for two Fifteenths for her, but she refused it: so the Subsidy was agreed
on. On the 29th of November the Queen sent for the House of Commons. The Queen
discharges the Clergy of Tenths and First Fruits.
When they were come, she said to them, she could not with a good Conscience
take the Tenths and First Fruits of Spiritual Benefices: It was a Tax her
Father laid on the Clergy, to support his Dignity of Supreme Head; of which
since she was divested, she would also discharge that. Then the Legate made a
speech to show that Tithes and Impropriations of spiritual Benefices were the
Patrimony of the Church; and ought to return to it. The Queen upon that,
declared, that she would surrender them up likewise to the Church. Then one
Story of the House of Commons kneeled down, and said to the Queen, That the
Speaker did not open to her their Desire that Licenses might be restrained.
This was a great Affront to the Speaker; so he returning to the House,
complained of Story. This Member thought he might assume more liberty; for in
Edward the 6th's time, when the Bill for the first Book of the English Service
passed, he spoke so freely against it, with such reflections on the King and
the Protector, that he was put in the Sergeants hands, and sent to the Tower.
The words he had said, were, Woe unto thee O England, when thy King is a Child;
Eccles. 10.16.
and an Impeachment was drawn against him. But upon his Submission, the House
ordered the Privy Counselors to declare to the Protector, that it was their
Resolution that he should be enlarged: and they desired that the King would
forgive his Offense against him and his Council: now he had indiscreetly
appeared against all Licenses from Rome, thinking he had a privilege to talk
more freely; Journ. Dom. Com.
but he confessed his Fault, and the House, knowing that he spoke from a good
zeal, forgave him. He was afterward condemned for Treason in Queen Elizabeth's
Reign.

On the 23d of November, the Bill for suppressing the First Fruits and Tenths,
and the resigning up all Impropriations, that were yet in the Queens Gift, to
the Church, to be disposed of as the Legate pleased, for the relief of the
Clergy, was brought into the House. It was once thought fit to have the
surrender of Impropriations left out: for it was said, the Queen might do that
as well by Letters Patents; and if it were put into the Bill, it would raise
great Jealousies; since it would be understood, that the Queen did expect that
the Subjects should follow her example; but it was resolved, by all means
possible, to recover the Tithes to the Church; so it was put into the Bill. It
was long argued; some said, the Clergy would rob the Crown, and the Nation
both: and that the Laity must then support the Dignity of the Realm. It was
particularly committed to Sir William Cecil and others to be examined by them.
On the 13th of December the House divided about it, 126 were against it, and
193 were for it.

There was a Bill sent down against the Countess of Sussex, Against thos^, that
had fled Beyond Sea, rejected.
who had left her Husband, and gone into France, where she lived openly in
Adultery, and bare Children to others. A Bill was put in, to the same purpose,
in the first Parliament of this Reign, to take her Jointure from her, and
declare her Children Bastards; and was then cast out by the Commons; and had
now again the same fate. Another Bill was put in against the Duchess of
Suffolk and others, who had gone beyond Sea, to require them to return, under
severe punishments: but tho it was agreed to by the Lords, yet, upon a division
of the House of Commons, it was carried in the Negative. The greatest and
wealthiest of those who favored the Reformation, seeing in how ill a condition
they must be in, if they stayed in England, were gone beyond Sea: so it was
now endeavored to force them to return, or to make them lose their Estates:
but the Commons thought they had already consented to too severe Laws against
them, and therefore would add no more. The Duchess of Suffolk had been
persecuted while she was in the Netherlands, but narrowly escaped. Another Bill
was put in, for the incapacitating of several Persons from being Justices of
Peace; but was cast out by the Commons at the first reading. This was chiefly
against such as were suspected of remissness in the prosecuting of Heretics:
but the Commons would do nothing to encourage that; nor was it necessary, since
it was in the Queen's power to leave out of the Commission such as she excepted
to: but it showed the Zeal of some, who had a mind to recommend themselves by
such motions.

There was a Complaint put into the House of Commons, An Act debarring one
from the benefit of Clergy.
by the Wife of one Rufford against Bennet Smith, who had hired two Persons to
kill her Husband: and which, as the Act passed about it says, was one of the
most detestable Murders that had ever been known in England. But Smith that had
hired, and afterward paid the Murderers, might by the Law claim, and have the
benefit of Clergy. It is, and has been, an ancient custom in this Nation, that
for some Crimes, those who can read, are not to suffer Death. This was at first
done with a declaration, that either they had vowed, or were then resolved to
enter into Orders; which was the cause that no Bigami, that is, none that had
been twice married, or such as married Widows, were capable of it; because
such could not receive Orders: and the Reading was only to show that they
were in some sort qualified for Orders: tho afterward, the Reading, without
any such Vow or Promise, was all that was required, to give one the benefit of
Clergy. This was granted as an Appendix of the Ecclesiastical Immunity; for the
Churchmen were not satisfied that their own Persons should be exempted from
punishment, but would needs have all that resolved to come among them, be
likewise preserved from the punishment due to those Crimes, which they had
formerly committed. ted. So Rufford's Wife petitioning, that Smith might by Act
of Parliament be debarred that benefit; they sent her to the Queen, to beg,
That she would order Smith to be brought from the Tower, where he was then
kept, to the Bar of their House: which being done, the other Partners and
Actors confessed all: and tho he at first denied, yet he afterward confessed.
So the Bill was sent up by the Commons to the Lords, where it was much opposed
by the Clergy; who would not consent that any diminution should be made of
their ancient Privileges: but the heinousness of the Fact wrought so much on
the greater part, that it was passed; The Earls of Arundel and Rutland, the
Bishops of London, Worcester, Norwich, and Bristol, the Lords Abergaveny,
Fitzwater, and Lumley, protesting. Pates was now Bishop of Worcester, upon
Heath's translation to York. He was (as some say) designed to be Bishop of that
See by King Henry upon Latimer's Resignation; but being engaged in a
correspondence with the Pope and Cardinal Pool, he fled beyond Sea. But the
truth is, that upon the Death of Jerome de Ghinuci, he was at Rome made Bishop
of Worcester by the Pope, and was thereupon Attainted: But his Attainder had
bin repealed by the former Parliament, and so he was restored to that See.

On the 9th of December the Parliament was dissolved. And the day following Sir
Anthony Kingston, Sir Anthony Kingston put in the Tower for his behavior in
the House of Commons. Ex Lib. Council.
who had bin a main Stickler in it, and had one day taken the Keys of the
House from the Sergeant; which (it seems,) was not displeasing to the major
part of the House, since they did nothing upon it; was sent to the Tower: and
that same day, (as it is in the Council Books,) the Bishop of Ely delivered to
the Lord Treasurer the Popes Bull, confirming the King and Queens Title to
Ireland; bearing date the 7th of June. Kingston lay in the Tower till the 23d.
of the month and then he submitted, and asked pardon, and was discharged. But
he was next year accused to have engaged in a Design with some others, to have
robbed the Exchequer of 50000 lib. Whereupon six of them, Vdal, Throgmorton,
Petham, Daniel, Stanton, and White, were Executed for Felony. What Evidence was
brought against them I do not know. But Kingston died on his way to London.

Card. Pool in Convocation makes Canons for Reforming the Clergy. Rot. Pat.
1st. Par. 3. Reg.
From the Parliament I turn next to the Convocation: where the Cardinal was now
at more liberty, being delivered from Gardiners Jelousies and Opposition. He
obtained of the Queen on the 2d of November a Warrant under the great Seal,
giving him License to hold a Synod. The License he had formerly taken out, is
made mention of: and to avoid all ambiguities, which might arise from the Laws
or Prerogatives of the Crown, she authorized him to call that, or any other
Synod after, and to decree what Canons he should think fit: she also authorized
the Clergy, to meet, consent to, and obey those Canons, without any danger of
the Law. This was thought safe on both sides; both for preserving the Rights of
the Crown, and securing the Clergy from being afterward brought within the
statute of Praemunire, as they had been upon their ^^nowledging Cardinal
Woolseys Legatine power. To this Convocation Pool proposed a Book he had
prepared, which was afterward printed with the Title of The Reformation of
England by the Decree of Cardinal Pool; and is now put into the Volumes of the
Councils.

The Heads of Pools Reformation.
The first Decree is, that there should be constantly a remembrance of the
Reconciliation now made with Rome, in every Mass: besides, a Procession, with
other Solemnities, on the Anniversary of it. He also confirmed the
Constitutions of Otho, and Otho bonus, forbidding the reading of all Heretical
Books; and set forth the Catholic Faith, in the words of that Exposition of
it, which P. Eugenius sent from the Council of Florence to those of Armenia.

The 2d was, for the careful administering and preserving of the Sacraments; and
for the putting away of all Feasting in the Festivities of the Dedications of
Churches.

The 3d exhorts the Bishops to lay aside all secular Cares, and give themselves
wholly to the Pastoral Office; and to reside in their Diocese, under the
highest pains. Their Chanons are also required to reside, and also other Clergy
Men. All Pluralities of Benefices with Cure, are simply condemned: and those
who had more Benefices with cure, were required within two months to resign
all, but one: otherwise it was to be declared that they had forfeited them all.

The 4th is, that whereas the residence of Bishops could not be of great use,
unless they became truly Pastors to their Flock; which was chiefly done by
their preaching the Word of God; that had been, contrary to the Apostles
Practice, much neglected by many: therefore he requires them to preach every
Sunday or Holy day; or if they were disabled, to find other fit Persons to do
it. And they were also in private to instruct and exhort their People; and all
the other inferior Clergy; and to endeavor to persuade them to the Catholic
Faith; or if need were, to use threatenings. And because of the great want of
good Preachers, the Cardinal declared he would take care there should be
Homilies set out, for the instruction of the Nation. In the mean while, every
Bishop was to be sending such as were more eminent in preaching, over their
Diocese, thereby to supply the defects of the rest.

The 5th is, about the lives of the Bishops; that they should be most strict
and exemplary: that they should lay aside all Pride and Pomp; should not be
clothed in Silk, nor have rich Furniture; and have frugal Tables, not above
three or four dishes of Meat; and even so many he rather allows, considering
the present time, than approves: that at their Table the Scriptures, or other
good Books, should be read, mixed with pious discourses: that they should not
have too great numbers of Servants or Horses: but that this Parsimony might
appear not to flow from Avarice, they were to lay out the rest of their
Revenues on the Poor, and for breeding young Scholars, and other works of
Piety. All the same Rules he sets to the inferior Clergy, with a due proportion
to their Stations and Profits.

The 6th is, about giving Orders; They were not to be rashly given, but upon a
strict previous Examen. Every one that was to be Ordained, was to give in his
Name a long time before, that there might be time to inquire carefully about
him. The Bishops were charged not to turn over the Examination upon others, and
think their work was only to lay on their hands: but were to examine diligently
themselves, and not superficially. And to call to their assistance such as they
knew to be pious and learned, and in whom they might confide.

The 7th was, about conferring Benefices, which in some sort came also within
that charge, Lay hands suddenly on no Man. They were to lay aside all partialty
in their choice, and seek out the most deserving: and to make such as they put
in Benefices bind themselves by Oath to reside.

The 8th was, against giving the Advousons of Benefices before they were vacant.

The 9th was about Simony.

The 10th against the Alienations of any of the Goods of the Church.

The 11th was, that in every Cathedral there should be a Seminary for supplying
the Diocese: of whom two Ranks were to be made; the one, of those who learned
Grammar; the other, of those who were grown up, and were to be ordained
Acholyths; and these were to be trained up in Study and Virtue, till they were
fit to serve in the Church. And a Tax of the fourth penny was laid on the Clergy
for their maintenance.

The 12th was about Visitations.

These were all finished, agreed to, and published by him in February next Year.

In these Decrees mention is made of Homilies, which were intended to be
published: Ex Manuscr. Col. C.C. Cant.
and among Archbishop Parker's Papers, I find, the Scheme he had of them was
thus laid: He designed four Books of Homilies. The first, of the controverted
points, for preserving the People from Error: The 2d. for the Exposition of the
Creed, and ten Commandments, the Lords Prayer, the Salutation of the Virgin,
and the Sacraments: The 3d. was to be for the Saints days, and the Sundays and
Holy days of the year; for explaining the Epistles and Gospels: and the fourth
was concerning Virtues and Vices, and the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church.

By all these it may appear, how well tempered this Cardinal was. He never set
on the Clergy to Persecute Heretics, Pool's Designs for Reforming the Church.
but to reform themselves: as well knowing, that a strict exemplary Clergy can
soon overcome all Opposition whatsoever, and bear down even truth it self. For
the common People are generally either so ignorant, or so distracted with other
affairs, that they seldom enter into any exact discussion of speculative
points, that are disputed among Divines: but take up things upon general
notions and prejudices; and none have more influence on them, than the scandals
or strict lives of Churchmen. So that Pool, intending to correct all those,
laid down good Rules, to amend their lives, to throw out those crying scandals
of Pluralities and Non-residence; to oblige Bishops to be exact in their
Examinations before Orders, and in conferring Benefices on the most deserving,
and not to be biassed by partial affections. In this last thing himself was a
great Example. For tho he had an only Brother, (so I find him called in one of
the Cardinals Commissions to him with some others, tho I believe he was a
Bastard Brother) David, that had continued all King Henry's time in his
Arch-Deaconry of Darby; he, either to punish him for his former compliance, or
to show he had no mind to raise his kindred, did not advance him, till after he
had been two years in England: and then he gave him only the Bishopric of
Peterborough, one of the poorest of the Bishoprics; which considering his
n^arness to the Crown, and high Birth, was a very small preferment. But above
all, that Design of his to have Seminaries in every Cathedral for the planting
of the Diocese, shows what a wise prospect he had of the right methods of
recovering a Church, which was overrun, as he judged, with Heresy. It was the
same that Cranmer had formerly designed; but never took effect. Certainly,
Persons formed from their Childhood, with others Notions, and another method of
living, must be much better fitted for a holy Character, than those that have
lived in the pleasures and follies of the world; who, unless a very
extraordinary change is wrought in them, still keep some of their old Customs
about them, and so fall short of that gravity and decency, that becomes so
Spiritual a Function.

He showed the weakness of his Spirit in one thing, that being against Cruel
Proceedings with Heretics, he did not more openly profess it: but both
suffered the other Bishops to go on, and even in Canterbury, now sequestered in
his hands, and soon after put under his care, he left those poor men to the
Cruelties of the brutal and fierce Popish Clergy. In this he was to be pitied,
that he had not Courage enough to contend with so haughty a Pope as Paul the
4th was: who thought of no other way of bearing down Heresy, but by setting up
the Inquisition every where: so Pool, it seems, judged it sufficient for him,
not to act himself, nor to set on any; and thought he did enough, when he
discouraged it in private; but yet he granted Commissions to the other Bishops
and Archdeacons to proceed against those called Heretics. He was not only
afraid of being discharged of his Legation, and of losing the Archbishopric of
Canterbury, which was now ready to fall upon him; but he feared to be sent for
to Rome, and cruelly used by the Pope, who remembered all the Quarrels he
formerly had with any of the Cardinals, and put Card. Merone (that was Pool's
great Friend) in Prison, upon suspicion of Heresy. All these things prevailed
with Pool to give way to the Persecution; and it was thought, that he himself
hastened the Execution of Cranmer, longing to be invested with that See; which
is the only personal blemish I find laid on him.

One remarkable thing of him was, his not listening to the Proposition the
Jesuits made him, of bringing them into England. That Order had been set up
about twelve years before this, and was in its first Institution chiefly
designed for propagating the Doctrines of that Church in Heretical or Infidel
Countries; to which was afterward added, the Education of Children. It was not
easily allowed of at Rome, because the Bishops did universally complain of the
great numbers of exempted Regulars; and therefore at first it was limited to a
small number; which Restriction was soon taken off. They, besides the Vows of
other Orders took one, for a blind and universal Obedience to the Sea of Rome:
And because they were much to be employed, they were dispensed with, as to the
hours of the Quire, which made them be called a Mungrel Order between the
Regulars and Seculars. They have since that time, by their care in educating
Youth, by their indefatigable Industry, and chiefly by their Accommodating
Pennances, and all the other Rules of Religion, to the Humors and Inclinations
of those who confess their Sins to them, drawn almost all the World after them:
and are raised now to that height both of Wealth and Power, that they are
become the Objects of the Envy and Hatred of all the rest of their own Church.
They suggested to Pool, That whereas the Queen was restoring the Goods of the
Church that were in her hands, it was but to little purpose to raise up the old
Foundations; for the Benedictine Order was become rather a Clog than a Help to
the Church: they therefore desired that those Houses might be assigned to them,
for maintaining Schools and Seminaries, which they should set on quickly: and
they did not doubt but by their dealing with the Consciences of those who were
a dying, they should soon recover the greatest part of the Goods of the Church.
The Jesuits were out of measure offended with him, for not entertaining their
Proposition; which I gather from an Italian Manuscript which my most worthy
Friend Mr. Crawford found in Venice, when he was Chaplain there to Sir Thomas
Higgins, his Majesty's Envoy to that Republic: but how it came that this
motion was laid aside, I am not able to judge.

There passed nothing else remarkable this Year, but that in the end of
November, John Web a Gentleman, George Roper, and Gregory Park were burnt all
at at one Stake in Canterbury. And on the 18th of December, Philpot, Philpots
Martyrdom.
that had disputed in the Convocation, was burnt in Smithfield. He was, at the
end of that meeting, put in Prison for what he had said in it; tho liberty of
speech had been promised; and the nature of the meeting did require it. He was
kept long in the Stocks in the Bishop of London's Coal-house, and many
conferences were had with him, to persuade him to change. By what Bonner said
in one of them, it appears that he hoped they should be better used upon
Gardiners death: for Bonner told him, he thought, because the Lord Chancelour
was dead, they would burn no more; but he should soon find his Error, if he did
not recant. He continued steadfast in his Persuasion, and pleaded that he had
never spoken nor written against their Laws, since they were made, being all
the while a Prisoner, except what he had said in Conference with them; yet this
prevailed not with Bonner, who had as little Justice as Mercy in his temper. On
the 16th of December he was condemned, and delivered to the Sheriffs. He was at
first laid in Irons, because he was so poor that he could not fee the Jaylour;
but next day these were by the Sheriffs order taken off. As he was led into
Smithfield on the 18th, he kneeled down, and said, I will pay my Vows in thee O
Smithfield. When he was brought to the Stake, he said, Shall I disdain to
suffer at this Stake, since my Redeemer did not refuse to suffer on the Cross
for me? He repeated the 106th, 107th, and 108th Psalms, and then fitted himself
for the Fire, which consumed him to Ashes. So this Year ended, in which there
were sixty seven burnt for Religion; and of those, four were Bishops, and
thirteen were Priests.

Foreign Affairs.
In Germany a Diet was held at Ausburg, where the Peace of Germany was fully
settled: and it was decreed, that the Princes of the Ausburg Confession should
have the free liberty of their Religion; and that every Prince might in his own
State establish what Religion he pleased; excepting only the Ecclesiastical
Princes, who were to forfeit their Benefices if they turned. Those of Austria,
and Ferdinand's other Hereditary Dominions, desired freedom for their
Consciences: but Ferdinand refused it; yet he appointed the Chalice to be given
in the Sacrament. The Duke of Bavaria did the like in his Dominions. At all
this the Pope was highly offended, and talked of deposing Ferdinand. He had
nothing so much in his mouth, as the Authority former Popes had exercised, in
deposing Princes at their pleasure. He had sworn to the Cardinals, before he
was chosen, that he would make but four Cardinals in two Years; but he created
seven within one half Year, and would not hear the Consistory argue against it,
1556.
or remember him of his Promise; but said, his Power was absolute, and could
not be limited. One of these Cardinals was Gropper the Dean of Colen, a man of
great Learning and Virtues, but inconstant and fearful, as was shown in the
former Book: he refused to accept of that Dignity so generally sought after in
their Church; and was more esteemed for rejecting it, than others were that had
by their Ambition aspired to it.

In the end of this year, and the beginning of the next, a memorable thing fell
out; of which if I give a large account, I do not fear to be much censured by
the Reader for it; especially since it is not impertinent to this work, the
King and Queen being so much concerned in it. It was, Charles the 5ths Charles
the 5th's Resignation.
laying down, first some of his hereditary Dominions in October this year; and
the rest, with the Empire, not long after. He had now enjoyed, the one, forty
years, and the other thirty six. He was much disabled by the Gout, which had
held him, almost constantly, for several years: he had been in the greatest
Fatigues that ever any Prince had undergone, ever since the 17th year of his
age: he had gone, nine times into Germany, six times into Spain, seven times
into Italy, four times into France; had been ten times in the Netherlands, had
made two Expeditions into Africa, and been twice in England, and had crossed
the Seas eleven times. He had not only been a Conqueror in all his Wars, but
had taken a Pope, a King of France, and some Princes of Germany, Prisoners,
besides a vast accession of Wealth and Empire from the West Indies. But he now
growing out of love with the Pomp and Greatness of the World, began to have
more serious thoughts of another Life; which were much increased in him by the
answer one of his Captains gave him, when he desired Leave to retire, and being
asked the reason, said, that between the affairs of the World, and the hour of
death, there ought to be some interval. He found his for tune turned: his
Designs in Germany were blasted: In the Siege of Mets, he saw he could no more
command Triumphs to wait on him; for though his Army consisted of 100000 Men,
yet he was forced to raise his Siege with the loss of 40000 Men: and though his
Wars had been this year more sucessful, both in Italy and Flanders, yet he
thought he was too old to deal with the King of France. It was thought, his Son
set this forward; who had left England in discontent; being weary both of His
Queen, and of holding a titular Crown, only in her Right, being excluded from
the Government. All these things concurring, made the Emperor in a solemn
Assembly at Brussels on the 25th of October in the presence of his Son, and
Maximilian King of Boheme, and of the Duke of Savoy, and his two Sisters the
Queens Dowagers of France and Hungary, with a vast number of others of lower
quality, first give his Son the Golden Fleece, and so resign the headship of
that Order to him; and then, the Dukedomes of Burgundy, and Brabant, and the
other Provinces of the Netherlands. Two months after that, he resigned all his
other Hereditary Dominions: and the next year, he sent a Resignation of the
Empire to the Diet, who thereupon did choose his Brother Ferdinand Emperor; to
which the Pope made great exceptions; for he said, the Resignation ought to
have been only to him, and that being made as it was, it was null; and upon
that he would not acknowledge the new Emperor.

Charles staid sometime in Flanders in a private House. For he left all his
Palaces; and had but little company about him. It is said, that when Seld his
Brother's Secretary, being sent to him, was leaving him once late at night, all
the Candles on the Stairs being burnt out, and none waiting to light him down,
the late Emperor would needs carry the Candle down after him: the other, as may
be well imagined, being much confounded at it, the Emperor told him, He was now
a private Man; and his Servants knowing there was nothing now to be had by
attending, did not wait carefully. He bad him tell his Brother, what a change
he had seen in him, and how vain a thing the attendance of Courtiers was; since
he was so soon forsaken by his own Servants. He reserved but 100000 Crowns a
year for his own use: and sixty Servants. But at his coming into Spain, he
found even that small Pension was not readily paid; at which he was observed
to be much displeased. He retired to a place in the Confines of Castile and
Portugal, which he had observed in his Hunting to be fit for a retreat, by
reason of the pleasantness of the Situation, and the temperatness of the Air:
and there he had ordered a little Appartment of seven Rooms fourteen foot
square, to be built for him. He kept only twelve servants about himself and
sent the rest to stay in the neighboring Towns.

He gave himself at first much to mechanical Curiosities, and had great
varieties of Clocks, and some other motions, which surprised the ignorant
Monks, who were afraid they were the performances of Magic; especially his
Machines of Birds of wood that did fly out and come back, and the
representations of Armies, that by Springs engaged and fought. He also designed
that great work of carrying the Tago up a Hill near Toledo; which was
afterward done at a vast charge. He gave himself to Gardening, and used to
Graft and Imp with his own hand; and keeping but one Horse, rid abroad some
times, attended only by one Footman.

The making of Clocks was not then so perfect, as it is since: so that he could
never bring his Clocks to strike in the same minute: and he used upon that to
say, he saw the Folly of endeavoring to bring all Men to be of the same mind
in Religion, since he could not bring Machines to agree exactly.

He set himself also much to study; and in the second year of his retirement,
went oftener to the Chapel, and ^o the Sacrament, than he had done at first:
He used also to Discipline himself, with a Cord, which, after his death, having
some marks of the severity he had put himself to, was laid up among his Sons
chiefest Rarities. But amidst all this, it was believed he became in most
points to be of the belief of the Protestants, before he died: and as his
Confessor was burnt afterward for Heresy, so Miranda the Arch-Aishop of
Toledo, who used to come often to him, was upon the same suspicions kept long
in Prison. Near the end of two years, at the Aniversary of his Mothers Funeral,
who had died but a few years before, having lived long mad; he took a conceit,
that he would see an Obit made for himself, and would have his own Funeral
Rites performed; to which he came himself with the rest of the Monks, and
prayed most devoutly for the Rest of his own Soul; which set all the Company on
weeping. Two days after, he sickned of a Fever, of which he died on the 21st
of September 1558. A rare and great instance of a mind surfeited with the Pomps
and Glories of the World, seeking for that Quiet in retirement, which he had
long in vain searched after in Palaces and Camps.

And now I return to the Affairs of England. The 21st of March was Cranmer
Cranmer's Trial.
brought to the end of all his Afflictions, and received his Crown. On the 12
of September the former year, Brooks Bishop of Gloucester, came to Oxford, as
the Popes Subdelegate: and Martin, and Story, Commissioners from the King and
Queen, sat with him in St. Mary's, to judge him. When he appeared before them,
he paid a low reverence to them that sat in the King and Queen's Name: but
would give none to Brooks, since he sat by an Authority from the Pope, to
which he would pay no respect. Then Brooks made a long Speech, to set forth his
Apostasy and Heresy, his Incontinence, and finally his Treason; and exhorted
him to repent: and insinuated to him great hopes of being restored to his See
upon it. After this, Martin made a Speech of the difference between the Civil
and Ecclesiastical Authority.

When they had done, Cranmer first kneeled down, said the Lord's Prayer; next
he repeated the Apostles Creed: the (...) told them he would never acknowledge
the Bishop of Room's Authority; he owned his Allegiance to the Crown, according
to the Oath he had often sworn; and the submitting to the Pope was directly
contrary to that: he could not serve two Masters. He said, the Bishops of Rome
not only set up Pretensions that were contrary to the Power of Princes, but
they had also made Laws contrary to those made by God: instancing it in the
Worship of an unknown Tongue, the denying the Chalice to the People, the
pretending to dispose of Crowns, and exalting themselves above every Creature;
which showed them not to be the Vicars of Christ, but to be Antichrists, since
all these things were manifestly contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, that was
delivered in the Gospel. He remembered Brooks, that he had sworn to the King's
Supremacy. Brooks said, it was to K. Henry the 8th, and that Cranmer had made
him swear it. To which Cranmer replied, that he did him wrong in that; for it
was done in his Predecessor Warham's time, who had asserted the King's
Supremacy; and it was also sent to be discussed in the Universities, and they
had set their Hands and Seals to it; and that Brooks, being then a Doctor, had
signed it with the rest: so that all this being done before he came to be
Archbishop, it ought not to be called his deed.

After this, Story made another Speech, of the Authority of the Church;
magnifying the Sea of Rome, and enlarging on those Arguments commonly insisted
on; and desired Brooks would put Cranmer to make a plain Answer, and cut off
all Debates. Then followed a long Discourse between Martin and Cranmer: in
which Martin objected, that he had once sworn to the Pope when he was
consecrated, but that aspiring to be Archbishop, he had changed his mind in
compliance to King Henry; That he had condemned Lambert of Heresy, for denying
the Presence of Christ in the Sacrament, and afterward turned to that himself.
To all this Cranmer answered, pretending that never man came more unwillingly
into a Bishopric than he did to his. That he was so far from having aspired to
it, that tho the King had sent one post to him, to come over to be consecrated,
he being then in Germany; yet he had delayed his Journey seven weeks, hoping
that in all that time the King might have forgot him: That at his Consecration
he publicly explained his meaning in what sense he swore to the Pope, so that
he did not act deceitfully in that particular: And that when he condemned
Lambert, he did then believe the Corporal Presence; which he continued to do,
till Dr. Ridley showed him such Reasons and Authorities as persuaded him to
change his Mind, and then he was not ashamed to retract his former Opinion.
Then they objected his having been twice married, his keeping his Wife secretly
in King Henry's time, and openly in King Edward's Reign; his setting out
Heretical Books and Articles, and compelling others to subscribe them: his
forsaking the Catholic Church, and denying Christ's Presence in the Sacrament
of the Altar; and disputing against it so publicly lately at Oxford. He
confessed his living in Marriage, and that he thought it was lawful for all Men
to marry; and that it was certainly better to do so, than to lie with other
Men's Wives, as many Priests did: He confessed all the other Articles; only he
said, he had never for^^ any to subscribe.

After this, TR^ made a long Speech to him, with many of the common Argumen^^
concerning the Pope's Power, and the Presence in the Sacrament: to which
Cranmer made another large Answer. Then many Witnesses were examined upon the
Points they had heard Cranmer defend in the Schools; and in conclusion they
cited him to appear before the Pope within eighty days, to answer for all those
things which were now objected to him. He said, he would do it most willingly,
if the King and Queen would send him: but he could not go, if he were still
detained a Prisoner.

After this he was sent back to Prison, where he lay till the 14th of February
this Year: and then Bonner and Thirleby were sent down to degrade him. Bonner
desired this Employment, as a pleasant Revenge on Cranmer, who had before
deprived him: but it was forced on the other, who had lived in great friendship
with Cranmer formerly, and was a gentle and good natured Man, but very
inconstant and apt to change. They had Cranmer brought before them, and then
they caused to read their Commission, which declared him Contumax for not
coming to Rome, and required them to degrade him. They clothed him in
Pontifical Robes, a Miter and the other Garments, with a Crosier in his hand:
but the Robes were made of Canvass, to make him show more ridiculous in them.
Then Bonner made a Speech full of Jeers; This is the Man that despised the
Pope, and is now judged by him: This is the Man that pulled down Churches, and
is now judged in a Church: This is the Man that contemned the Sacrament, and is
now condemned before it: with other such Expressions, at which Thirleby was
much offended, and pulled him often by the Sleeve, desiring him to make an end:
and challenged him afterward, that he had broke the Promise he had made to him
before, of treating him with respect. And he was observed to weep much all the
while: He protested to Cranmer, that it was the most sorrowful Action of his
whole Life, and acknowledged the great Love and Friendship that had been
between them; and that no Earthly Consideration, but the Queen's Command, could
have induced him to come, and do what they were then about: He shed so many
Tears, that often he stopped, and could not go on in his discourse for the
abundance of them. But Cranmer said, his Degradation was no trouble to him at
all; he reckoned himself as long ago cut off from all dependence and communion
with the Sea Rome; so their doing it now with so much Pageantry did not much
affect him: only he put in an Appeal from the Pope, to the next free General
Council: he said, he was cited to Rome, but all the while kept a Prisoner; so
there was no reason to proceed against him in his absence, since he was willing
to have gone thither and defended his Doctrine: he also denied any authority
the Pope had over him, He is degraded.
or in England: and therefore appealed from his Sentence. But notwithstanding
that, he was degraded, and all that ludicrous Attire was taken, piece after
piece, from him, according to the Ceremonies of Degradation, which are in use
in the Church of Rome.

But there were new Engines contrived against him. Many had been sent to confer
with him, both English and Spanish Divines, to persuade him to recant: he was
put in hopes of Life and Preferment again, and removed out of Prison to the
Dean's Lodgings at Christ-Church; where all the Arguments that could be
invented, were made use of to turn him from his former persuasion: And, in
conclusion, as St. Peter himself had with Curses denied his Savior, so he who
had resisted now almost three years, was at last overcome; and human infirmity,
the fears of Death, and the hopes that were given him, prevailed with him to
set his Hand to a Paper, He recants.
renouncing all the Errors of Luther and Zwinglius, acknowledging the Pope's
Supremacy, the seven Sacraments, the Corporal Presence in the Eucharist,
Purgatory, Prayer for departed Souls, the Invocation of Saints; to which was
added, his being sorry for his former Errors; and concluded, exhorting all that
had been deceived by his Example or Doctrine, to return to the unity of the
Church: and protesting that he had signed it willingly, only for the discharge
of his own Conscience.

Fox, and other later Writers from him, have said, that one reason of this
Compliance, was, that he might have time to finish his Answer to Gardiner's
Book, against that which he had written concerning the Sacrament: and Fox has
printed the Letter which he avouches to prove this by. But the good Man (it
seems) read the Letter very carelessly; for Cranmer says no such thing in it;
but only, that he had appealed to the next General Council, to try if that
could procure him a longer delay, in which he might have time to finish his
Book: and between these two, there is a great difference. How long this was
signed before his Execution, I find it no where marked, for there is no Date
put to his Subscription.

Cranmer's Recantation was presently printed, and occasioned almost equally
great, Insultings on the one hand, and Dejection on the other. But the Queen
was not at all wrought on by it: and was now forced to discover that her
private Resentments governed her in this matter; which before she had disowned.
She was resolved he should be made a Sacrifice, for giving the Judgment of
Divorce in her Mother's Marriage; and tho hitherto she had pretended only Zeal
for Religion, yet now when that could be no more alleged, yet she persisted in
her Resolution of having him burnt: She said, since he had bin the great
Promoter of Heresy that had corrupted the whole Nation; that must not serve his
turn, which would be sufficient in other cases: It was good for his own Soul,
and might do good to others, that he repented; but yet she ordered the Sentence
to be executed. The Writ went out the 24th of February, Coll. Number. 28.
which will be found in the Collection. Heath took care, not only to enroll the
Writ, but the Warrant sent to him for issuing it, which is not ordinary. It Is
like he did it, to leave it on Record to Posterity, that he did it not in
course, as he did other Writs, but had a special Order from the Queen for it.
The long time that passed between the date of the Writ, and the execution of
it, makes it probable that he made the formerly mentioned Recantation, after
the Writ was brought down; and that the fears of Death, then before his Eyes,
did so far work on him, that he signed the Writing: but when the second Order
was sent down to execute the former, he was dealt with to renew his
Subscription, and then to write the whole over again, which he also did; all
this time being under some small hopes of Life: but conceiving likewise some
jealousies that they might burn him, he writ secretly a Paper, containing a
sincere Confession of his Faith, such as flowed from his Conscience, and not
from his weak fears; and being brought out, he carried that along with him. He
was carried to S. Mary's, and set on a place raised higher for him to be more
conspicuously seen. Cole Provost of Eaton preached: he ran out in his Sermon on
the Mercy and Justice of God, which two Attributes do not oppose or justle out
one another: he applied this to Princes that were Gods on Earth, who must be
just, as well as merciful; and therefore they had appointed Cranmer that day
to suffer: he said it was he that had dissolved the Marriage between the
Queen's Father and Mother, had driven out the Pope's Authority, had been the
fountain of all the Heresies in England; and since the Bishop of Rochester and
Sir Tho. More had suffered for the Church, it was meet that others should
suffer for Heresy: and as the Duke of Northumberland had suffered in More's
room, so there was no other Clergyman that was equal or fit to be balanced
with Fisher but he. Then he turned to Cranmer, and magnified his Conversion,
which he said was the immediate Hand of God; that none of their Arguments had
done it, but the inward working of God's Spirit: He gave him great hopes of
Heaven, and assured him there should be Dirges and Masses said for his Soul, in
all the Churches in Oxford.

All this while Cranmer expressed great inward confusion, lifting up his Eyes
often to Heaven, and then letting them fall downward, as one ashamed of
himself; and he often poured out floods of tears. In the end, when Cole bid him
declare his Faith; he first prayed, with many moving expressions of deep
remorse and inward horror: Then he made his Exhortation to the People, First,
Not to love or set their hearts on the things of the World: to obey the King
and Queen out of conscience to God: to live in mutual Love: and to relieve the
Poor according to their abundance. Then he came to that, on which, he said, all
his past Life, and that which was to come, did hang; being now to enter either
into the joys of Heaven, or the pains of Hell. He repeated the Apostles Creed,
and declared his belief of the Scriptures; and then he spoke to that, which he
said troubled his Conscience, more than any thing he had ever done in his whole
Life: which was, the subscribing a Paper contrary to the Truth, and against his
Conscience, out of the fear of Death, and the love of Life: and when he came to
the Fire, he was resolved that Hand that had signed it, should burn first. He
rejected the Pope as Christ's enemy, and Antichrist; and said, he had the same
belief of the Sacrament, which he had published in the Book he writ about it.

Upon this, there was a wonderful Confusion in the Assembly: Those who hoped to
have gained a great Victory that day, seeing it turning another way, were in
much disorder: They called to him to dissemble no more. He said, he had ever
loved Simplicity, and, before that time, had never dissembled in his whole
Life. And going on in his discourse, with abundance of tears, they pulled him
down, and led him away to the Stake, which was set in the same place where
Ridley and Latimer were burnt. All the way the Priests upbraided him for his
changing: but he was minding another thing.

When he came to the Stake, he first prayed, He suffers Myrtyrdome with great
constancy* of Mind.
and then undressed himself: and being tied to it, as the Fire was kindling, he
stretched forth his Right Hand toward the Flame; never moving it, save that
once he wiped his Face with it, till it was burnt away: which was consumed
before the Fire reached his Body. He expressed no disorder for the pain he was
in: sometimes saying, that unworthy Hand! and often crying out, Lord Jesus,
receive my Spirit. He was soon after quite burnt.

But it was no small matter of Astonishment, to find his Heart entire, and not
consumed among the Ashes: which tho the Reformed would not carry so far, as to
make a Miracle of it, and a clear proof that his Heart had continued true, tho
his Hand had erred; yet they objected it to the Papists, that it was certainly
such a thing, that if it had fallen out in any of their Church, they had made
it a Miracle.

Thus did Thomas Cranmer end his days, in the sixty seventh year of his Age. He
was a Man raised of God for great Services; His Character.
and well fitted for them. He was naturally of a mild and gentle temper, not
soon heated, nor apt to give his Opinion rashly of things, or persons: and yet
his Gentleness, tho it often exposed him to his Enemies, who took advantages from
it to use him ill, knowing he would readily forgive them; did not lead him into
such a weakness of Spirit, as to consent to every thing that was uppermost: for
as he stood firmly against the six Articles in K. Henry's time, notwithstanding
all his heat for them; so he also opposed the Duke of Somerset in the matter of
the sale and alienation of the Chantry Lands, and the Duke of Northumberland
during his whole Government; and now resisted unto Blood: so that his meekness
was really a virtue in him, and not a pusillanimity in his temper. He was a Man
of great Candor. He never dissembled his Opinion, nor disowned his Friend: two
rare qualities in that Age, in which there was a continued course of
dissimulation, almost in the whole English Clergy and Nation, they going
backward and forward, as the Court turned. But this had got him that esteem
with King Henry, that it always preserved him in his days. He knew, what
Complaints soever were brought against him, he would freely tell him the truth:
so instead of asking it from other hands, he began at himself. He neither
disowned his esteem of Queen Anne, nor his friendship to Cromwell, and the Duke
of Somerset in their misfortunes; but owned, he had the same thoughts of them
in their lowest Condition that he had in their greatest State.

He being thus prepared by a candid and good nature, for the searches into
Truth, added to these a most wonderful diligence: for he drew out of all the
Authors that he read, every thing that was remarkable, digesting these
Quotations into Common-places. This begat in King Henry an admiration of him:
for he had often tried it, to bid him bring the Opinions of the Fathers and
Doctors upon several questions; which he commonly did, in two or three days
time: This flowed from the copiousness of his common place Books. He had a good
judgment, but no great quickness of apprehension, not closeness of Style, which
was diffused and unconnected: therefore when any thing was to be penned that
required more Nerves, he made use of Ridley. He laid out all his Wealth on the
poor, and pious uses: He had Hospitals and Surgeons in his House for the King's
Seamen; He gave Pensions to many of those that fled out of Germany into
England; and kept up that which is Hospitality indeed at his Table, where great
numbers of the honest and poor neighbors were always invited, instead of the
Luxury and Extravagance of great Entertainments, which the vanity and excess of
the Age we live in, has honored with the name of Hospitality, to which too
many are led by the Authority of Custom to comply too far. He was so humble and
affable, that he carried himself in all conditions at the same rate. His last
Fall was the only blemish of his life; but he expiated it, with a sincere
repentance, and a patient Martyrdom. He had been the chief advancer of the
Reformation in his Life; and God so ordered it, that his death should bear a
proportion to the former parts of his life, which was no small Confirmation to
all that received his Doctrine, when they heard how constantly he had at last
sealed it with his Blood. And tho it is not to be fancied that King Henry was a
Prophet, yet he discovered such things in Cranmers temper as made him conclude
he was to die a Martyr for his Religion: and therefore he ordered him to change
his Coat of Arms and to give Pelicans instead of Cranes which were formerly the
Arms of his Family: Intimating withal, that as it is reported of the Pelican,
that she gives her Blood to feed her young ones; so he was to give his Blood
for the good of the Church. That King's kindness to him subjected him too much
to him: for great Obligations do often prove the greatest snares to generous
and noble minds. And he was so much overborn by his respects to him, and was
so affected with King Henry's Death, that he never after that shaved his Beard,
but let it grow to a great length: which I the rather mention, because the
Pictures that were afterward made for him, being taken according to what he
was at his Death, differ much from that which I have put in my former Volume.
Those who compared modern and ancient Times, found in him so many and excellent
qualities, that they did not doubt to compare him to the greatest of the
Primitive Bishops; not only to the Chrysostomes, Ambroses, and Austines, but to
the Fathers of the first Rate that immediately followed the Apostles, to the
Ignatius's, Policarps, and Cyprians. And it seemed necessary that the
Reformation of this Church, which was indeed nothing else but restoring of the
Primitive and Apostolical Doctrine, should have been chiefly carried on by a
Man so eminent in all Primitive and Apostolical Virtues. And to those who
upbraided the Reformed with his Fall, it was answered, That Liberius, whom they
so much magnify, had fallen as foully upon a much slighter Temptation, only out
of a desire to reenter to his See, from which he had been banished, and that he
persisted much longer in it.

But now I shall give account of the rest that were burnt this year. On the
27th of Jan. Tho. Wirtle a Priest, Bartlet Green a Gentleman, Tho. Brown, John
Tudson, and John Went, three Tradesmen, Isabel Foster, Others suffered on the
like account.
and Joan Warn, having all been presented because they came not to Church;
Articles were put to them, and upon their Answers they were all condemned, and
burnt in Smithfield at the same Stake. And on the 31st of that Month, John
Lomas, and four Women, were burnt at Canterbury. They were presented, because
they came not to Confession; whereupon Articles being given them, they were
found guilty of Heresy, and burnt in one Fire. In the beginning of March two
Women were burnt at Ipswich: Three Tradesmen were burnt in Salisbury on the
24th of March. On the 29th of April, Robert Drakes a Priest, William Tyms a
Deacon, and four Tradesmen that were sent out of Essex, because they came not
to Church, were condemned, and all burnt together in Smithfield. John Hanpole,
and Joan Booek, were burnt at Rochester on the first of April: and on the
second John Hallier a Priest was burnt in Canterbury.

Six Tradesmen were sent up from Colchester: and the Bishop of London, who had
hitherto kept his Prisoners for some time to see if he could prevail with them,
growing weary of that fruitless labor, and becoming by many Acts of cruelty
less sensible of those affections which belong to humane Nature, did without
any more ado exhibit the Articles to them; and they answering in the way he
accounted Heresy, he gave them time to consider if they would recant, till the
Afternoon: but they continuing in the same mind, he condemned them, and sent
them back to Colchester, where they were all burnt in one Fire.

On the 15th of May he gave yet a more astonishing instance of his barbarity.
Laverock an old Criple, a Man of sixty eight years old, and Jo. Ap-price a
blind Man, were upon the like account condemned, and burnt in the same Fire at
Stratford-le-bow; they comforting one another, that they were now to be freed
of their lameness, and blindness. The day after, three Women were burnt in
Smithfield: another blind Man, with a Tradesman, were burnt at Gloucester this
Month. On the 21st of the Month three were burnt at Beckles in Suffolk. On the
6th of June four Men were burnt at Lewis in Sussex. Another was burnt there on
the 20th, and one was burnt at Leicester on the 26th. But on the 27th of June,
Bonner made an unheard of Execution of thirteen, whereof eleven were Men, and
two Women, all burnt in one Fire in Stratfordle-Bow. He had condemned in all
sixteen, but, by what Intercession I do not know, three of them were preserved
by a Warrant from Cardinal Pool. It seems Bonner thought it not worth the
while, to burn those singly, and therefore sent them in such droves to the
Stake: but whether the horror of this Action, or the discontent, because the
Cardinal had saved some of them, wrought on him, I know not; the latter being
the more likely; he burnt no more till April next Year.

The 30th of June three were burnt at Bury in Suffolk: A strange barbarity at
Gernsy of burning a Child, born in the Fire.
On the 16th of July three Men were burnt at Newberry. But this July there was
done in Gernsey an Act of as great inhumanity, as ever was recorded in any Age.
A Mother and her two Daughters, were burnt at the same Stake; and one of them a
married Woman, big with Child, when she was in the Fire, the violence of it
bursting her Belly, a Boy fell out into the Flame, that was snatched out of it
by one that was more merciful than the rest: but after they had a little
consulted about it, the Infant was thrown in again, and there was literally
baptized with Fire. There were many Eyewitnesses of this, who attested it
afterward in Queen Elizabeth's time, when the matter was enquired into, and
special care was taken to have full and evident Proofs of it. For indeed the
Fact was so unnatural, that a Man must either be possessed with a very ill
opinion of the Actors, or be well satisfied about the number and credibility of
the Witnesses, before he could believe it, But Lies and Forgeries are seldom
made of Actions done in the Face of the Sun, and before so great an Assembly as
was present at this. Therefore complaint being made of it to Queen Elizabeth,
the Dean of Garnsey was put in Prison for it; and afterward, he, and nine
more, that were all accessory to it, took out their Pardons. So merciful was
the Government then, to pardon an Action of such a monstrous nature, because
done with some color of Law; since, it was said, the Mother was condemned to
be burnt, and no exception was made of her Belly. On the 18th of July two Women
and one Man were burnt at Greenstead. On the first of August Joan Wast, a blind
Woman, was burnt at Darby. On the 8th of September one was burnt at Bristol;
and another in the same place on the 25th of that Month. On the 24th four were
burnt at Mayfield in Sussex. On the 27th a Man and a Woman were burnt at
Bristol: And on the 12th of October a Man was burnt at Nottingham. And thus
ended the burning this Year: those that suffered were in all eighty five. All
these Persons were presented as suspect of Heresy, and were required to answer
the Questions that the Bishop put to them; which related to the Corporal
Presence in the Sacrament, the necessity of Auricular Confession, or the
Sacrifice of the Mass: and upon the Answers they made, were condemned to the
Fire: But none of them were accused of any violence committed on the Persons of
any Churchman, or of any affront put on their Religion; and all their
Sufferings were merely for their Conscience, which they kept as private as they
could: so that it rather appeared in their abstaining from the Communion of a
Church which, they thought, had corrupted the chief parts of Worship, than in
any thing they had said or done. It was an unusual and an ungrateful thing to
the English Nation, that is apt to compassionate all in misery, to see four,
five, six, seven, and once thirteen burning in one Fire: and the sparing
neither Sex nor Age, nor Blind nor Lame, but making havoc of all equally, and
above all, the barbarity of Gernsey, raised that horror in the whole Nation,
that there seems ever since that time, such an abhorrence to that Religion to
be derived down from Father to Son, that it is no wonder an aversion so deeply
rooted, and raised upon such grounds, does upon every new provocation, or
jealousy of returning to it, break out in most violent and convulsive Symptoms.

But all those Fires did not extinguish the Light of the Reformation, The
Reformation spreads for all the Persecution.
nor abate the love of it. They spread it more, and kindled new heats in Men's
minds: so that what they had read of the former Persecutions under the
Heathens, seemed to be now revived. This made those who loved the Gospel meet
often together, though the malice of their Enemies obliged them to do it with
great caution and secrecy: yet there were sometimes at their Meetings about
200. They were instructed and watched over by several faithful Shepherds, who
were willing to hazard their Lives, in feeding this Flock committed to their
care. The chief of these were Scambler, and Bentham, afterward promoted by
Queen Elizabeth to the Sees of Peterborough, and Litchfield: Foul, Bernher,
and Rough a Scotch-man, that was afterward condemned, and burnt by Bonner.
There was also care taken, by their Friends beyond Sea, to supply them with
good Books; which they sent over to them for their instruction, and
encouragement. These that fled beyond Sea went at first for the most part to
France, where, though they were well used, in opposition to the Queen, yet they
could not have the free exercise of their Religion granted them: so they
retired to Geneva, and Zurick, and Arraw, in Switzerland; and to Strasburg, and
Frankfort, in the upper Germany; and to Emden in the lower.

At Frankfort an unhappy difference fell in among some of them, The Troubles at
Frankfort among the English there.
who had used before the English Liturgy, and did afterward comply with it,
when they were in England, where it had Authority from the Law: yet they
thought that being in Foreign Parts they should rather accomodate their
Worship to those among whom they lived; so in stead of the English Liturgy,
they used one near the Geneva and French Forms. Others thought, that when those
in England who had compiled their Liturgy, were now confirming what they had
done with their Blood; and many more were suffering for it; it was an high
contempt of them, and their sufferings, to depart from these Forms. This
contradiction raised that heat, that Dr. Cox, who lived in Strasburg with his
Friend Peter Martyr, went thither; and being a Man of great reputation,
procured an Order from the Senate, that the English Forms should only be used
in their Church. This dissension, being once raised, went further than perhaps
it was at first intended. For those who at first liked the Geneva way better,
that, being in Foreign Parts, they might all seem to be united in the same
Forms; now began to quarrel with some things in the English Liturgy: and Knox,
being a Man of a hot temper, engaged in this matter very warmly; and got his
Friend Calvin to write somewhat sharply of some things in the English Service.
This made Knox and his Party leave Frankfort, and go to Geneva. Knox had also
written indecently of the Emperor, which obliged the Senate of Frankfort to
require him to be gone out of their Bounds. There fell in other Contests, about
the censuring of offenses; which some of the Congregation would not leave in
the Hands of the Ministers only, but would have it shared among the whole
Congregation. Upon these matters there arose great debates, and many Papers
were written on both sides, to the great grief of Parker and others, who lived
privately in England; and to the scandal of the strangers, who were not a
little offended to see a company of People fly out of their Country for their
Consciences, and in stead of spending their time in Fasting and Prayer for
their persecuted Brethren at home, to fall into such quarrels about matters
which, themselves acknowledged, were not the Substantials of Religion, nor
Points of Conscience: in which certainly they began the Breach, who departed
from that way of Worship, which they acknowledged was both lawful and good: but
there followed too much animosity on both sides, which were the Seeds of all
those differences that have since distracted this Church.

They who reflected on the Contests that the Novatians raised, both at Rome,
and Carthage, in Cyprians time; and the Heats the Donatists brought into the
African Churches, soon after the Persecution was over; found somewhat parallel
both to these Schisms now during the Persecution, and to those afterward
raised when it was over.

Pool is made Archbishop of Canterbury.
I now return to the Affairs of England. On the 22d of March, the very day after
Cranmer was burnt, Pool was consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury by the
Archbishop of York, the Bishops of London, Ely, Worcester, Lincoln, Rochester,
and St. Asaph. He had come over only a Cardinal Deacon; and was last Winter
made a Priest, and now a Bishop. It seems he had his Conge d'Elire with his
Election, and his Bulls from Rome, already dispatched before this time. The
Pope did not know with what face to refuse them, being pressed by the Queen on
his account, though he wanted only a color to wreak his revenge on him; to
which he gave vent upon the first opportunity that offered it self. It seems,
Pool thought it indecent to be consecrated as long as Cranmer lived; yet his
choosing the next day for it, brought him under the suspicion of having
procured his death: so that the words of Elijah to Ahab concerning Naboth, were
applied to him, Thou have killed and taken possession. On the 28th of that
Month he came in State through London, to Bow-Church; where the Bishops of
Worcester, and Ely, after the former had said Mass, put the Pall about him.
This was a Device set up by Pope Paschall the second in the beginning of the
twelfth Century, for the engaging of all Archbishops to a more immediate
dependence on that See: they being, after they took the Pall, to act as the
Popes Legates born, (as the Phrase was) of which it was the Ensign. But it was
at the first admitted with great contradiction both by the Kings of Sicily, and
Poland, the Archbishops of Palermo, and Gnesna, being the first to whom they
were sent; all Men wondering at the novelty of the thing, and of the Oath which
the Popes required of them at the delivery of it. This being put on Pool, he
went into the Pulpit, and made a cold Sermon, about the Beginning, the Use, and
the Matter of the Pall, without either Learning or Eloquence. The Subject could
admit of no Learning; and for Eloquence, though in his younger days when he
writ against King Henry his Style was too luxuriant and florid, yet being
afterward sensible of his excess that way, he turned as much to the other
Extreme, and cutting off all the Ornaments of Speech, he brought his Style to a
flatness that had neither life nor beauty in it.

Some more Religious Houses endowed.
All the Business of England this Year, was the raising of Religious Houses.
Greenwich was begun with last Year. The Queen also built a House for the
Dominicans in Smithfield, and another for the Franciscans: and they being
Begging Orders, these Endowments did not cost much. At Sion near Brainford
there had been a Religious House of Women of the Order of St. Bridget. That
House was among the first that had been dissolved by King Henry the eighth, as
having harbored the Kings Enemies, and been Accomplices to the Business of the
Maid of Kent. The Queen anew Founded a Nunnery there. She also Founded a House
for the Carthusians at Sheen near Richmond, in gratitude to that Order for
their Sufferings upon her Mothers account. From these she went to a greater
Foundation, but that which cost her less: for she suppressed the Deanery, and
the Cathedral of Westminster; and in September this Year, turned it into a
Monastery; and made Fecknam, Dean of Paul's, the first Abbot of it. I have not
met with her Foundation of it, which perhaps was razed out of the Records in
the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign; for it is not enrolled among the other
Patents of this Year. But on the 23d of September, she gave Warrants for
Pensions to be paid to the Prebends of Westminster, till they were otherwise
provided: and about that time Fecknam was declared Abbot; though the solemn
Installment of him, and fourteen other Monks with him, was not done till the
21st of November.

There had been many Searches and Discoveries made, in the former Reign, of
great disorders in these Houses; All the former Records concerning them are
razed.
and at the dissolution of them many had made Confession of their ill Lives,
and gross Superstition; all which were laid up and Recorded in the Augmentation
Office. There had been also in that state of things, which they now called, The
late Schism, many Professions made by the Bishops and Abbots, and other
Religious Men, of their renouncing the Popes Authority, and acknowledging the
Kings Supremacy: therefore it was moved, that all these should be gathered
together and destroyed. So on the 23d of September, the^e was a Commission
granted to Bonner, and Cole, (the new Dean of Paul's in Fecknams room) and Dr.
Martin, to search all Registers; to find out both the Professions made against
the Pope, and the Scrutinies made in Abbeys; which, as the Commission that is
in the Collection Collection Number 29.
sets forth, tended to the subversion of all good Religion and Religious
Houses: These they were to gather, and carry to the Cardinal, that they might
be disposed of as the Queen should give order. It is not upon Record how they
executed this Commission, but the effects of it appear in the great
defectiveness of the Records, in many things of consequence, which are razed
and lost. This was a new sort of Expurgation, by which they intended to leave
as few footsteps to Posterity, as ^hey could, of what had been formerly done.
Their care of their own credits led them to endeavor to suppress the many
Declarations themselves had formerly made, both against the Sea of Rome, the
Monastic Orders, and many of the old Corruptions, which they had disclaimed.
But many things escaped their diligence; as may appear by what I have already
Collected: and considering the pains they were at, in vitiating Registers, and
destroying Records; I hope the Reader will not think it strange, if he meets
with many defects in this Work. In this Search, they not only took away what
concerned themselves, but every collateral thing that might inform or direct
the following Ages how to imitate those Precedents: and therefore, among other
Writings, the Commission that Cromwell had to be Vicegerent was destroyed: but
I have since that time met with it, in a Copy that was in the Cotton Library,
which I have put in the Collection. Collection Number 30.
How far this resembled the endeavors that the Heathens used in the last and
hotest Persecution, to burn all the Registers of the Church, I leave to the
Reader. The Abbey of Westminster being thus set up, some of the Monks of
Glassenbury, who were yet alive, were put into it. And all the rest of the old
Monks that had been turned out of Glaslenbury, Endeavors to raise the Abbey of
Glassenbury.
and who had not married since, were invited to return to this Monastery. They
began to contrive how to raise their Abbey again, which was held the
Ancientest, and was certainly the richest in England: and therefore they moved
the Queen and the Cardinal, that they might have the House and Site restored
and repaired, and they would by Labor and Husbandry maintain themselves; not
doubting but the People of the Country would be ready to contribute liberally
to their subsistence. The Queen and Cardinal liked the Proposition well; so the
Monks wrote to the Lord Hastings, then Lord Chamberlain, to put the Queen in
mind of it, and to follow the Business till it were brought to a good Issue;
which would be a great Honor to the Memory of Joseph of Arimathea who lay
there, whom they did heartily beseech to pray to Christ for good success to his
Lordship. This Letter I have put in the Collection Collection Number 31.
copied from the Original. What followed upon it, I cannot find. It is
probable, the Monks of other Houses made the like endeavors, and every one of
them could find some rare thing belonging to their House, which seemed to make
it the more necessary to raise it speedily. These of St. Albans could say, the
first Martyr of England lay in their Abbey: those of St. Edmundbury had a King
that was Martyred by the Heathen Danes: those of Battle could say, they were
Founded for the remembrance of William the Conquerors Victory, from whence the
Queen derived her Crown: and those of St. Austins in Canterbury had the Apostle
of England laid in their Church. In short, they were all in hopes to be
speedily restored. And though they were but few in Number, and to begin upon a
small Revenue, yet as soon as the belief of Purgatory was revived, they knew
how to set up the old Trade anew; which they could drive with the greater
advantage; since they were to deal with the People by a new Motive, besides the
old ones formerly used, that it was Sacrilege to possess the Goods of the
Church; of which it had been robbed by their Ancestors. But ^n this it was
necessary to advance slowly: since the Nobility and Gentry were much allarumed
at it; and at the last Parliament, many had laid their Hands to their Swords in
the House of Commons, and said the^ would not part with their Estates; but
would defend them: yet some that hoped to gain more favor from the Queen, by
such compliance did Found Chantries for Masses for their Souls. In the Records
of the last Years of Queen Mary's Reign, there are many Warrants granted by her
for such Endowments: for though the Statute of Mortmain was repealed; yet for
greater security it was thought fit to take out such Licenses. This is all I
find of our home Affairs this Year.

Foreign Affairs.
Foreign Affairs were brought to a quieter state. For by the Mediation of
England, a Truce for five Years was concluded between France and Spain: and the
new King of Spain was inclined to observe it faithfully; that so he might be
well settled in his Kingdoms, before he engaged in War: but the violent Pope
broke all this. He was much offended with the Decree made at Ausburg for the
liberty of Religion; and with Ferdinand for ordering the Chalice to be given to
his Subjects; and chiefly, for his assuming the Title of Emperor without his
approbation. Upon this last provocation the Pope sent him word, that he would
let him know, to his grief, how he had offended him. He came to talk in as
haughty a Style, as any of all his Predecessors had ever done, that he would
change Kingdoms at his pleasure. He boasted that he had made Ireland a Kingdom:
The Pope is extravagantly insolent.
that all Princes were under his Feet, (and as he said, that, he used to tread
with his Feet against the ground;) and he would allow no Prince to be his
Companion, nor be too familiar with him: nay, rather than be driven to a mean
Action, he would set the whole World on fire. But to pretend to do somewhat for
a Reformation, he appointed a Congregation to gather some Rules for the
condemning of Simony. These he published, and said, having now reformed his own
Court, he would next reform the Courts of Princes: and because they had
complained much of the corruptions of the Clergy, and Court of Rome; he
resolved to turn the matter on them, and said, he would gather all the abuses
that were in their Courts and reform them. But he was much provoked by an
Embassy that came from Poland, to desire of him, that they might have the Mass
in their own Tongue, and the Communion in both kinds; that their Priests might
be allowed to marry, that they might pay Annates no more to Rome, and call a
National Council in their own Kingdom. These things put him out of all
patience, and with all the bitterness he could use, he expressed how detestable
they were to him. He then said, he would hold a Council; not that he needed
one, for himself was above all: but it should never meet in Trent, to which it
had been a vain thing to send about sixty Bishops of the least able, and forty
Doctors of the most insufficient, as had been twice done already: that he would
hold it in the Lateran, as many of his Predecessors had done: he gave notice of
this to the Ambassadors of all Princes: he said he did that only in courtesy,
not intending to ask their advice or consent, for he would be obeyed by them
all. He intended in this Council to reform them and their Courts, and to
discharge all Impositions which they had laid on the Clergy: and therefore he
would call it whether they would or not, and if they sent no Prelates to it, he
would hold it with those of his own Court: and would let the World see what the
Authority of that See was, when it had a Pope of courage to govern it.

But after all these Imperious humors of his, He breaks the Truce between
France and Spain, absolving the French King from his Oath.
which sometimes carried him to excesses, that seemed not much different from
madness; he was heartily troubled at the Truce between the French and the
Spaniards. He hates the Spaniards most, because they supported the Colonesi,
whom he designed to ruin. And therefore he sent his Nephew into France, with a
Sword and Hat which he had Consecrated, to persuade the King to break the
Truce; offering his assistance for the Conquest of the Kingdom of Naples, to
the use of one of the younger Sons of France: though it was believed he
designed it for his own Nephew. He also sent the French King an Absolution from
his Oath that he had sworn for the maintaining of the Truce, and promised to
create what Cardinals he pleased, that so he might be sure of a Creature of his
own to succeed in the Popedom. Yet the Pope dissembled his design in this, so
closely, that he persuaded Sir Edward Caru, that was then the Queens Ambassador
at Rome, that he desired nothing so much as a general Peace: and he hoped, as
the Queen had mediated in the Truce, she would continue her endeavors till a
perfect Peace were made. He said, he had sent two Legates to procure it; and
since he was the Common Father of Christendom, God would impute to him, even
his silence in that matter, if he did not all he could to obtain it. He
complained much of the growth of Heresy in Poland, and in the King of the
Romans's Dominions. For the repressing of it, he said, he intended to have a
General Council: and in order to that it was necessary there should be a Peace;
since a Truce would not give sufficient encouragement to those who ought to
come to the Council. He said, he intended to be present at it himself, and to
hold it in the Church of St. John in the Lateran: for he thought Rome, being
the Common Country of all the World, was the meetest Place for such an
Assembly: and he, being so very old, could go no where out of Rome; therefore
he was resolved to hold it there. But he said, he relied chiefly on the
assistance of the Queen, whom he called, That Blessed Queen, and his most
Gracious and loving Daughter: and holding her Letters in his Hand, he said,
they were so full of respect and kindness to him, that he would have them read
in the Consistory: and made a Cross over her Subscription. It was no wonder
such discourses, with that way of deportment, deceived so honest and
plain-hearted a Man as Caru was; as it will appear from the Letter that he writ
over upon this occasion to the Queen, Collection Number 32.
which I have put in the Collection. But it soon appeared on what design he had
sent his Legate to France; for he pressed that King vehemently to break the
Truce, and renew the War. To this the French King being persuaded by the
Cardinal of Lorrain, and Duke of Guise, consented, though all the rest about
him dissuaded him from such a dishonorable breach of Faith, or meddling more in
the War of Italy, which had been always fatal to their People. The Colonesi had
been furnished with assistance from Naples; upon which, the Pope had it
proposed in the Consistory, that the King of Spain, by giving them assistance,
had lost his Territories: and being then assured of assistance from France, he
began the War, imprisoning the Cardinals and Prelates of the Spanish Faction;
and the Ambassadors of Spain and England; pretending they kept correspondence
with the Colonesi that were Traitors. He also sent to raise some Regiments
among the G^isons. But when they came, some told him they were all Heretics,
and it would be a reproach for him to use such Soldiers: he understanding they
were good Troops, said, He was confident God would convert them, and that he
looked on them as Angels sent by God for the defense of his Person. Upon this
breaking out of the Popes, the Duke of Alva, that was then in Naples, being
himself much devoted to the Papacy, did very unwillingly engage in the War. He
first used all ways to avoid it; and made several Protestations of the
Indignities that his Master had received, and his unwillingness to enter into a
War, with him that should be the Common Father of Christendom. But these being
all to no purpose, he fell into Campania, and took all the Places in it, which
he declared he held for the next Pope: he might also have taken Rome it self,
but the Reverence he had for the Papacy restrained him.

This being known in England, was a great grief to the Queen and Cardinal, who
saw what advantages those of the Reformation would take from the Popes
absolving Princes from the most Sacred Ties of Humane Societies; since the
breach of Faith and public Treaties was a thing abhorred by the most depraved
Nations: and when he, who pretended to be the Vicar of Christ who was the
Prince of Peace, was kindling a new Flame in Christendom, these things were so
scandalous, that they knew they would much obstruct and disorder all their
designs. And indeed the Protestants every where were not wanting to improve
this all they could. It seemed a strange thing, that in the same Year, a great
Conqueror, that had spent his Life in Wars and Affairs, should in the 56th Year
of his Age retire to a Monastery: and that a Bishop at eighty, who had
pretended to such abstraction from the World that he had formerly quitted a
Bishopric to retire into a Monastery, should now raise such a War, and set
Europe again in a flame.

In the beginning of the next Year was the Visitation of the Universities.
1557. The Visitation of the Universities.
To Cambridge Pool sent Scot Bishop of Chester, his Italian Friend Ormaneto,
with Watson, and Christopherson, the two Elect Bishops of Lincoln, and
Chichester, (in the rooms of White, removed to Winchester; out of which Pool
reserved a Pension of 1000 l. and of Day that was dead) with some others. When
they came thither, on the 11th of January they put the Churches of St. Mary's
and St. Michaels under an Interdict; because the Bodies of Bucer, and Fagius,
two Heretics, were laid in them. The University Orator received them with a
Speech, that was divided between an Invective against the Heretics, and a
Commendation of the Cardinal, who was then their Chancellor. They went through
all the Colleges, and gathered many Heretical Books together, and observed the
Order used in their Chapels. When they came to Clare-Hall, they found no
Sacrament; Ormaneto asked the Head, Swinburn, how that came; he answered, The
Chapel was not yet Consecrated: Then Ormaneto chid him more for officiating so
long in it; but trying him further, he found he had many Benefices in his
Hands; for which he reproved him so severely, that the poor Man was so
confounded that he could answer nothing to the other Questions he put to him.
But Christopherson himself, being Master of Trinity College, did not escape.
Ormaneto found, he had mis-applied the Revenues of the House, and had made a
Lease of some of their Lands to his Brother-in-law below the value: Ormaneto
tore the Lease to pieces, and chid him so sharply, that he, fearing it might
stop his preferment, fell sick upon it.

Then followed the Pageantry of burning the two Bodies of Bucer, and Fagius.
They were cited to appear, or if any would come in their Name, they were
required to defend them: so after three Citations, the dead Bodies not rising
to speak for themselves, and none coming to plead for them, (for fear of being
sent after them) the Visitors thought fit to proceed. On the 26th of January
the Bishop of Chester made a Speech, showing the earnestness of the University
to have Justice done; to which they, the Commissioners, though most unwilling,
were obliged to condescend: therefore, having examined many Witnesses of the
Heresies that Bucer and Fagius had taught, they judged them obstinate
Heretics; and appointed their Bodies to be taken out of the Holy Ground, and
to be delivered to the Secular Power. The Writ being brought from London, on
the 6th of February their Bodies were taken up, and carried in Coffins, and
tied to Stakes, with many of their Books, and other Heretical Writings, and all
were burnt together. Pern preached at it; who as he was that Year
Vice Chancellor, so he was in the same Office four years after this; when by
Queen Elizabeth's Order, public Honors were done to the Memories of those two
learned Men; and Sermons and Speeches were made in their Praise: but Pern had
turned so often, and at every one was so zealous, that such turnings came to be
nicknamed from him. On the Feast of Purification, Watson preached at Cambridge;
where to extol the Rites and Processions of the Catholics, and their carrying
Candles on that day, he said, Joseph and the Blessed Virgin had carried Wax
Candles in Procession that day, as the Church had still continued to do from
their Example: which was heard not without the laughter of many.

The Cardinal did also send Ormanet, and Brooks Bishop of Gloucester, with some
others, to Visit the University of Oxford. They went over all the Colleges as
they had done at Cambridge; and burnt all the English Bibles, with such other
Heretical Books as could be found. Then they made a Process against the Body of
Peter Martyrs Wife, that lay buried in one of the Churches: but she being a
Forreigner that understood no English, they could not find Witnesses that had
heard her utter any Heretical Points; so they gave advertisement of this to the
Cardinal, who thereupon writ back, That since it was notoriously known, that
she had been a Nun, and had married contrary to her Vow, therefore her Body was
to be taken up, and buried in a Dunghill, as a Person dying under
Excommunication. This was accordingly done. But her Body was afterward taken
up again in Queen Elizabeth's time, and mixed with St. Fridiswides Bones, that
she might run the same Fortune with her in all Times coming.

While these things were doing, there was great Complaints made, that the
Inferior Magistrates grew every where slack in the searching after, and
presenting of Heretics: Great Endeavors used to set forward the Persecution
most vigorously.
they could not find in the Counties a sufficient number of Justices of Peace,
that would carefully look after it: and in Towns they were generally harbored.
Letters were written to some Towns, as Coventry, and Rye, which are entered in
the Council-Books, recommending some to be chosen their Majors, who were
zealous Catholics. It is probable that the like Letters might have been
written to other Towns; for the Council-Books for this Reign are very imperfect
and defective. But all this did not advance their design. The Queen understood
that the Numbers of the Heretics rather increased than abated: so new Councils
were to be taken. I find it said, That some advised that Courts of Inquisition,
like those in Spain, might be set up in England. In Spain the Inquisitors, who
were then all Dominicans, received private Informations; and upon these laid
hold on any that were delated or suspected of Heresy; and kept them close in
their Prisons till they formed their Processes: and by all the ways of torture
they could invent, forced from them Confessions, either against themselves, or
others, whom they had a mind to draw within their Toils. They had so unlimited
a Jurisdiction, that there was no Sanctuary that could secure any from their
Warrants; nor could Princes preserve or deliver Men out of their Hands: nor
were their Prisoners brought to any public Trial, but tried in secret: one of
the Advocates of the Court, was for Forms sake assigned to plead for them: but
was always more careful to please the Court, than to save his Client. They
proceeded against them, both by Articles, which they were to answer, and upon
Presumptions: and it was a rare thing for any to escape out of their Hands,
unless they redeemed themselves, either by great Presents, or by the discovery
of others. These had been set up first in the County of Toulouse, for the
extirpation of the Albigenses; and were afterward brought into Spain, upon
Ferdinand of Arragons driving the Moors out of it, that so, none of those might
any longer conceal themselves in that Kingdom; who being a false and crafty
sort of Men, and certainly Enemies to the Government, it seemed necessary to
use more than ordinary severity to drive them out. But now those Courts
examined Men suspected of Heresy, as well as of Mahometanisme; and had indeed
effectually preserved Spain from any change in Religion. This made the present
Pope earnest with all the Princes of Christendom, to set up such Courts in
their Dominions; and Philip was so much of the same mind, that he resolved to
have them set up in Flanders; which gave the first Rise to those Wars, that
followed afterward there, and ended in the loss of the seven Provinces.

In England they made now in February a good step toward it. A Design to set
up the Inquisition in England.
For a Commission was given to the Bishops of London, and Ely, the Lord North,
Secretary Bourne, Sir John Mordant, Sir Francis Englefield, Sir Edward
Walgrave, Sir Nicholas Hare, Sir Tho. Pope, Sir Roger Cholmly, Sir Richard
Read, Sir Tho. Stradling, Sir Rowland Hall, and Sergeant Rastall; Cole Dean of
Paul's, William Roper, Randulph Cholmley, and William Cook, Tho. Martin, John
Story, and John Vaughan, Doctors of the Law: That since many false Rumors were
published among the Subjects, and many Heretical Opinions were also spread
among them; therefore they, or any three of them, were to enquire into those,
either by Presentiments by Witnesses, or any other politic way they could
devise: and to search after all Heresies; the Bringers in, the Sellers, or
Readers, of all Heretical Books: they were to examine, and punish, all
misbehaviours, or negligences, in any Church or Chapel; and to try all Priests
that did not preach of the Sacrament of the Altar; all Persons that did not
hear Mass, or come to their Parish Church to Service, that would not go in
Processions, or did not take Holy Bread, or Holy Water: and if they found any
that did obstinately persist in such Heresies, they were to put them into the
Hands of their Ordinaries, to be proceeded against according to the Laws:
giving them full Power to proceed, as their Discretions and Consciences should
direct them: and to use all such means as they could invent, for the searching
of the Premises: empow'ring them also to call before them such Witnesses as
they pleased, and to force them to make Oath of such things as might discover
what they sought after. This Commission I have put in the Collection.
Collection Number 33.
It will show how high they intended to raise the Persecution, when a Power of
such a nature, was put into the Hands of any three of a number so selected.
Besides this, there were many subordinate Commissions issued out. This
Commission seems to have been granted the former Year, and only renewed now:
for in the Rolls of that Year, I have met with many of those subaltern
Commissions, relating to this, as superior to them. And on the eighth of March
after this, a Commission was given to the Archbishop of York, the Bishop
Suffragan of Hull, and diverse others, to the same effect: but with this
limitation, that if any thing appeared to them so intricate, that they could
not determine it, they were to refer it to the Bishop of London and his
Colleagues, who had a larger Commission. So now, all was done that could be
devised for extirpating of Heresy, except Courts of Inquisition had been set
up; to which, whether this was not a previous step to dispose the Nation to it,
the Reader may judge.

I shall next give an account of the Burnings this Year. On the 15th of January
six Men were burnt in one Fire at Canterbury; and at the same time, Proceedings
against the Heretics.
two were burnt at Wye, and two at Ashford, that were condemned with the other
six. Soon after the forementioned Commission, two and twenty were sent up from
Colchester to London: yet Bonner, though seldom guilty of such gentleness, was
content to discharge them. As they were led through London, the People did
openly show their affection to them, above a thousand following them: Bonner
upon this writ to the Cardinal, that he found they were obstinate Heretics;
yet since he had been offended with him for his former Proceedings, he would do
nothing till he knew his pleasure. This Letter is to be found in Fox. But the
Cardinal stopped him; and made some deal with the Prisoners to Sign a Paper, of
their professing that they believed that Christ's Body and Blood was in the
Sacrament; without any further explanation: and that they did submit to the
Catholic Church of Christ; and should be faithful Subjects to the King and
Queen, and be obedient to their Superiors both Spiritual and Temporal according
to their duties. It is plain, this was so contrived, that they might have
Signed it without either prevaricating or dissembling their Opinions: for it is
not said, That they were to be subject to the Church of Rome, but to the Church
of Christ: and they were to be obedient to their Superiors according to their
duties, which was a good reserve for their Consciences. I stand the longer on
this, that it may appear how willing the Cardinal was to accept of any show of
submission from them, and to stop Bonners rage. Upon this they were set at
liberty. But Bonner got three Men and two Women presented to him in London in
January, and after he had allowed them a little more time than he had granted
others, they standing still firm to their Faith, were burnt at Smithfield on
the 12th of April. After that, White, the new Bishop of Winchester, condemned
three, who were burnt on the third of May in Southwark; one of these, Stephen
Gratwick, being of the Diocese of Chichester, appealed from him to his own
Ordinary: whether he expected more favor from him, or did it only to gain
time, I know not: but they brought in a Counterfeit, who was pretended to be
the Bishop of Chichester, (as Fox has printed it from the account written with
the Man's own Hand) and so condemned him. On the seventh of May, three were
burnt a Bristol. On the 18th of June, two Men, and five Women, were burnt at
Maidston: and on the 19th, three Men, and four Women, were burnt at Canterbury;
fourteen being thus in two days destroyed by Thornton and Harpsfield: in which
it may seem strange, that the Cardinal had less influence to stop the
Proceedings in his own Diocese, than in London: but he was now under the Popes
disgrace, as shall be afterward shown. On the 22d of June, six Men, and four
Women, were burnt at Lewis in Sussex, condemned by White; for Christopherson,
Bishop Elect of Chichester, was not yet consecrated. On the 13th of July two
were burnt at Norwich: On the second of August ten were burnt at Colchester,
six in the Morning, and four in the Afternoon: they were some of those who had
been formerly discharged by the Cardinals Orders; but the Priests in the
Country complained, that the mercy showed to them had occasioned great
disorders among them; Heretics and the favorers of them growing insolent upon
it; and those who searched after them being disheartened: so now, Bonner being
under no more restraints from the Cardinal, new Complaints being made that they
came not to Church, condemned them upon their Answers to the Articles, which he
objected to them.

At this time one George Eagle, a Tailor, who used to go about from place to
place, and to meet with those who stood for the Reformation, where he prayed
and discoursed with them about Religion; and from his indefatigable diligence
was nicknamed Trudge-over, was taken near Colchester, and was condemned of
Treason for gathering the Queens Subjects together; though it was not proved,
that he had ever stirred them up to Rebellion; but did it only (as himself
always protested) to encourage them to continue steadfast in the Faith: he
suffered as a Traitor. On the fifth of August one was burnt at Norwich; and on
the 20th a Man, and a Woman more, were burnt at Rochester: One was also burnt
at Litchfield in August, but the day is not named.

The same Month, a Complaint was brought to the Council, of the Magistrates of
Bristol, that they came seldom to the Sermons at the Cathedral; so that the
Dean and Chapter used to go to their Houses in Procession, with their Cross
carried before them, and to fetch them from thence: upon which, a Letter was
written to them, requiring them to conform themselves more willingly to the
Orders of the Church, to frequent the Sermons, and go thither of their own
accord. On the 17th of September three Men, and one Woman, were burnt at
Islington near London: and on the same day two Women were burnt at Colchester.
On the 20th a Man was burnt at Northampton: and in the same Month one was burnt
at Laxefield in Suffolk. On the 23d a Woman was burnt at Norwich. There were
seventeen burnt in the Diocese of Chichester, about this time: one was a
Priest, thirteen were Laymen, and three Women: but the day is not marked. On
the 18th of November three were burnt in Smithfield. On the 12d of December
John Rough a Scotchman was burnt, whose suffering was on this occasion. On the
12th of December there was a private Meeting of such as continued to Worship
God according to the Service set out by King Edward, at Islington; where he was
to have administered the Sacrament, according to the Order of that Book. The new
Inquisitors had corrupted one of this Congregation to betray his Brethren; so
that they were apprehended as they were going to the Communion. But Rough being
a Stranger, it was considered by the Council whether he should be tried as a
Native. He had a Benefice in Yorkshire in King Edwards days; so it was
resolved, and signified to the Bishop of London, that he should be proceeded
against as a Subject. Thereupon Bonner objected to him, his condemning the
Doctrine of the Church, and setting out the Heresies of Cranmer and Ridley
concerning the Sacrament, and his using the Service set out by King Edward;
that he had lived much with those who for their Heresies had fled beyond Sea;
that he had spoken reproachfully of the Pope and Cardinals, saying, That when
he was at Rome, he had seen a Bull of the Popes that licensed Stews, and a
Cardinal riding openly with his Whore with him: with several other Articles.
The greatest part of them he confessed, and thereupon he, with a Woman that was
one of the Congregation, was burnt in Smithfield. And thus ended the Burnings
this Year; seventy nine in all being burnt.

These severities against the Heretics, made the Queen show less pity to the
Lord Stourton, The Lord Stourton hanged for Murder.
than perhaps might have been otherwise expected. He had been all King Edwards
time a most zealous Papist, and did constantly dissent in Parliament from the
Laws then made about Religion. But he had the former Year murdered one Argall
and his Son, with whom he had been long at variance: and after he had knocked
them down with Clubs, and cut their Throats, he buried them fifteen Foot under
ground, thinking thereby to conceal the Fact: but it breaking out, both he and
four of his Servants were taken, and indicted for it. He was found guilty of
Felony, and condemned to be hanged with his Servants, in Wilt-shire, where the
Murder was committed. On the sixth of March they were hanged at Salisbury. All
the difference that was made in their Deaths, being only thus, That whereas his
Servants were hanged in common Halters, one of Silk was bestowed on their Lord.
It seemed an indecent thing, when they were proceeding so severely against Men
for their Opinions, to spare one that was guilty of so foul a Murder, killing
both Father and Son at the same time. But it is strange, that neither his
Quality, nor his former zeal for Popery, could procure a change of the
Sentence, from the more infamous way of hanging, to beheading; which had been
generally used to Persons of his Quality. It has been said, and it passes for a
Maxim of Law, That though in Judgments of Treason the King can order the
Execution to be by cutting off the Head, since it being a part of the Sentence,
that the Head shall be severed from the Body, the King may in that Case remit
all the other parts of the Sentence except that; yet in Felonies the Sentence
must be Executed in the way prescribed by Law; and that if the King should
order beheading in stead of hanging, it would be Murder in the Sheriff, and
those that Execute it: So that in such a Case they must have a Pardon under the
Great Seal for killing a Man unlawfully. But this seems to be taken up without
good Grounds, and against clear Precedents: For in the former Reign the Duke of
Somerset, though condemned for Felony, yet was beheaded. And in the Reign of
King Charles the first, the Lord Audley, being likewise condemned for Felony,
all the Judges delivered their Opinons, that the King might change the
Execution from hanging to beheading, which was done, and was not afterward
questioned. So it seems the hanging the Lord Stourton flowed not from any
scruple as to the Queens Power of doing it lawfully, but that on this occasion
she resolved to give a public Demonstration of her Justice and Horror at so
cruel a Murder; and therefore she left him to the Law, without taking any
further care of him. On the last of February he was sent from London, with a
Letter to the Sheriff of Wilt-shire, to receive his Body, and execute the
Sentence given against him, and his Servants; which was accordingly done, as
has been already shown. Upon this, the Papists took great advantage to commend
the strictness and impartiality of the Queens Justice; that would not spare so
zealous a Catholic, when guilty of so foul a Murder. It was also said, That
the killing of Men's Bodies was a much less crime, than the killing of Souls,
which was done by the Propagators of Heresy; and therefore if the Queen did
thus execute Justice on a Friend, for that which was a lesser degree of Murder,
they who were her Enemies, and guilty of higher Crimes, were to look for no
mercy. Indeed, as the Poor Protestants looked for none, so they met with very
little; but what the Cardinal showed them: and he was now brought under trouble
himself, for favoring them too much, it being that which the Pope made use of
to cover his malice against him.

Now the War had again broken out between France and Spain, and the King
studied to engage the English to his assistance. The Queen had often complained
to the French Court, that the Fugitives, who left her Kingdom, had been well
entertained in France. She understood that the practices of Wiat, and of her
other rebellious Subjects, were encouraged from thence: particularly of Ashton,
who went often between the two Kingdoms, and had made use of the Lady
Elizabeth's Name to raise Seditions, as will appear by a Letter, (that is in the
Collection Collection Number 34.
) which some of the Council writ to one that attended that Princess. She was
indeed the more strictly kept, and worse used upon that occasion. But besides,
it so happened, that this Year one Stafford had gone into France, and gathered
some of the English Fugitives together, and with Money and Ships, that were
secretly given him by that Court, had come and seized on the Castle of
Scarborough: from whence he published a Manifesto against the Queen, that by
bringing in the Spaniards, she had fallen from her Right to the Kingdom; of
which he declared himself Protector. The Earl of Westmorland took the Castle on
the last of April, and Stafford, with three of his Accomplices, being taken,
suffered as Traitors on the 28th of May. The Queen becomes jealous of the
French.
His coming out of France added much to the Jealousy, though the French King
disowned that he had given him any assistance. But Dr. Wotton, who was then
Ambassador there, resolved to give the Queen a more certain discovery of the
inclinations of the French, that so he might engage her in the War, as was
desired by Philip: He therefore caused a Nephew of his own to come out of
England, whom when he had secretly instructed, he ordered him to desire to be
admitted to speak with the French King; pretending that he was sent from some
that were discontented in England, and desired the French Protection. But the
King would not see him, till he had first spoken with the Constable. So Wotton
was brought to the Constable, and Melvill, from whose Memoirs I draw this, was
called to interpret. The young man first offered him the Service of many in
England; that, partly upon the account of Religion, partly for the hatred they
bore the Spaniards, were ready, if assisted by France, to make stirs there. The
Constable received and answered this but coldly; and said, He did not see what
Service they could do his Master in it. Upon which, he replied, They would put
Calais into his Hands. The Constable not suspecting a Trick, started at that,
and showed great joy at the Proposition; but desired to know, how it might be
effected. Young Wotton told him, there were a thousand Protestants in it, and
gave him a long formal Project of the way of taking it: with which the
Constable seemed pleased, and had much discourse with him about it; he promised
him great Rewards, and gave him directions how to proceed in the Design. So the
Ambassador having found out what he had designed to discover, sent his Nephew
over to the Queen; who was thereupon satisfied, that the French were resolved
to begin with her, if they found an opportunity. Her Husband King Philip
finding it was not so easy by Letters or Messages, to draw her into the War,
came over himself about the 20th of May, and stayed with her till the beginning
of July. And denounces War.
In that time he prevailed so far with her and the Council, that she sent over
a Herald with a formal Denunciation of War, who made it at Rhemes, where the
King then was, on the seventh of June. Soon after she sent over 8000 Men, under
the Command of the Earl of Pembroke, to join the Spanish Army, that consisting
of near 50000 Men, sat down before St. Quintin. The Constable was sent to
raise the Siege, with a great Force, and all the chief Nobility of France. When
the two Armies were in view of one another, The great defeat given the French
at St. Quintin.
the Constable intended to draw back his Army; but by a mistake in the way of
it, they fell in some disorder. The Spaniards upon that, falling on them, did,
with the loss only of fifty of their Men, gain an entire Victory: 2500 were
killed on the Place; the whole Army was dispersed, many of the first Quality
were killed, the Constable with many others were taken Prisoners. The French
King was in such a consternation upon it, that he knew not which way to turn
himself. Now all the French cursed the Popes Counsels, for he had persuaded
their King to begin this War, and that with a manifest breach of his Faith.
This Action lost the Constable that great reputation, which he had acquired and
preserved in a course of much success; and raised the credit of the Duke of
Guise, who was now sent for in all have, to come with his Army out of Italy,
for the preservation of his own Country. France indeed was never in greater
danger than at that time. For if King Philip had known how to have used his
Success, and marched on to Paris, he could have met with no resistance. But he
sat down before St. Quintins, which Coligny kept out so long, till the first
terror was over, that so great a Victory had raised: and then, as the French
took Heart again, so the Spaniards grew less, as well in strength as
reputation, and the English finding themselves not well used, returned home
into their Country.

As soon as the Pope heard, that England had made War upon France, he was not a
little inflamed with it: and his wrath was much heightened, when he heard of the
defeat at St. Quintins; and that the Duke of Guise Army was recalled out of
Italy; by which he was exposed to the mercy of the Spaniards. He now said
openly, they might see how little Cardinal Pool The Pope is offended with
Cadrinal Pool.
regarded the Apostolic See, when he suffered the Queen to assist their
Enemies, against their Friends. The Pope being thus incensed against Pool,
sought all ways to be revenged of him. At first he made a Decree (in May this
Year) for a General Revocation of all Legates and Nuntio's in the King of
Spains Dominions; and among these, Cardinal Pool was mentioned with the rest.
But Carne, understanding this, went first to the Cardinals, and informed them
what a prejudice it would be to their Religion, to recall the Cardinal, while
things were yet in so unsettled a state in England. Of this they were all very
sensible, and desired him to speak to the Pope about it. So in an Audience he
had of him, he desired a Suspension might be made of that Revocation. The Pope
pretended he did it in General, in all the Spanish Dominions; yet he promised
Carne to propose it to the Congregation of the Inquisition, but he was resolved
not to recall it; and said, it did not consist with the Majesty of the Place he
sat in, to revoke any part of a Decree which he had solemnly given. In the
Congregation the Pope endeavored to have got the Concurrence of the Cardinals,
but they were unwilling to join in it. So he told Carne, that though he would
recall no part of his Decree, yet he would give Orders that there should be no
Intimation made of it to Cardinal Pool: and that if the Queen writ to him to
desire his Continuance in England, it might be granted: He also let fall some
words to Carne of his willingness to make Peace with King Philip; and indeed at
that time he was much distasted with the French. Of this Carne advertised the
King, though he was then so much better acquainted with the Popes dissimulation
than formerly that he did not lay much weight on what he said to him; as will
appear by the dispatch he made upon this occasion, which is in the Collection.
Whether the Queen did upon this write to the Pope or not, Collection Number 35.
I do not know. It is probable she did: for this matter lay asleep till
September; and then the Pope did not only recall Pool, but intended to destroy
him. He did not know where to find a Person to set up against the Cardinal,
since Gardener was dead, and none of the other Bishops in England were great
enough, or sure enough to him, to be raised to so high a Dignity. Peito the
Franciscan Friar seemed a Man of his own temper, because he had railed against
King Henry so boldly to his face: and he being chosen by the Queen to be her
Confessor, was looked on as the fittest to be advanced. So the Pope wrote for
him into England; and when he came to Rome, made him a Cardinal; and sent over
his Bulls, declaring that he recalled Pools Legatine Power, And recalls his
Legatine Power.
and required him to come to Rome, to answer for some Accusations he had
received of him, as a favourer of Heretics. This might have perhaps been
grounded on his discharging that Year so many delated of Heresy, upon so
ambiguous a submission as they had made. The Pope also wrote to the Queen, that
he was to send over Cardinal Peito with full power, requiring her to receive
him as the Legate of the Apostolic See. The Queen called for the Bulls, and
according to the way formerly practiced in England, and still continued in
Spain, when Bulls that were unacceptable were sent over, she ordered them to be
laid up without opening them. It has been shown in the former part, how
Archbishop Chicheley, when he was so proceeded against by Pope Martin,
appealed to the next General Council; and some that desired to see the Form of
such Appeals in those Ages, have thought it an Omission in me, that I had not
published his Appeal in the Collection of Records, at the end of that Work:
therefore upon this occasion, I shall refer the Reader to it, which he will
find in the Collection. But now, Collection Number 36.
Cardinal Pool resolved to behave himself with more submission. For though the
Queen had ordered the Popes Breve to him, not to be delivered, yet of himself
he laid down the Ensigns of his Legatine Power: and sent Ormaneto, who had the
Title of the Popes Datary, and was his Friend and Confident, to give an account
of his whole behavior in England; and to clear him of these Imputations of
Heresy. This he did, with so much submission, that he mollified the Pope: only
he said, that Pool ought not to have consented to the Queens joining in War
with the Enemies of the Holy See. The Queen refuses to admit of Cardinal Peito
the new Legate.
Peito had begun his Journey to England: but the Queen sent him word, not to
come over; otherwise she would bring him, and all that owned his Authority,
within the Praemunire. So he stopped in his Journey; and dying in April
following, enjoyed but a short while his new Dignity; together with the
Bishopric of Salisbury, to which the Pope had advanced him, clearly contrary
to the old Law then in force against Provisions from Rome.

This Storm against Pool went soon over, by the Peace that was made between
Philip and the Pope, of which it will not be unpleasant to give the Relation.
The Duke of Guise having carried his Army out of Italy, the Duke of Alva
marched toward Rome, and took and spoiled all Places on his way. When he came
near Rome, all was in such confusion, that he might have easily taken it; but
he made no assault. The Pope called the Cardinals together, and setting out the
danger he was in, with many Tears, said, he would undauntedly suffer
Martyrdom: which they, who knew that the trouble he was in, flowed only from
his restless ambition and fierceness, could scarce hear without laughter. The
Duke of Alva was willing to treat. A Peace made between the Pope and the King
of Spain.
The Pope stood high on the Points of Honor; and would needs keep that entire,
though he was forced to yield in the chief matters: he said, rather than lose
one jot that was due to him, he would see the whole World ruined; pretending,
it was not his own Honor, but Christ's, that he sought. In fine, the Duke of
Alva was required by him to come to Rome, and on his Knees to ask pardon, for
invading the Patrimony of the Church; and to receive Absolution for himself,
and his Master. He being superstitiously devoted to the Papacy, and having got
satisfaction in other things, consented to this. So the Conqueror was brought
to ask pardon, and the vain Pope received him, and gave him Absolution, with as
much haughtiness and state as if he had been his Prisoner. This was done on the
14th of September, and the news of it being brought into England on the 6th of
October: Letters were written by the Council to the Lord Major and Aldermen of
London, requiring them to come to St. Paul's, where high Mass was to be said,
for the Peace now concluded between the Pope and the King, after which,
Bonfires were ordered. One of the secret Articles of the Peace, was the
restoring Pool to his Legatine Power.

The beginnings of a War between England and Scotland.
War being now proclaimed between England and France, the French sent to the
Scottish Queen Regent, to engage Scotland in the War with England. Hereupon a
Convention of the Estates was called. But in it there were two different
Parties. Those of the Clergy liked now the English Interest, as much as they
had been formerly jealous of it; and so refused to engage in the War: since
they were at Peace with England. They had also a secret dislike to the Regent,
for her kindness to the Heretical Lords. On the other hand, those Lords were
ready enough to gain the protection of the Regent, and the favor of France;
and therefore were ready to enter into the War; hoping that thereby they should
have their Party made the stronger in Scotland, by the entertainment that the
Queen Regent would be obliged to give to such as should fly out of England, for
Religion. Yet the greater part of the Convention were against the War. The
Queen Regent thought at least to engage the Kingdom in a defensive War, by
forcing the English to begin with them. Therefore she sent D'Oisel, who was in
chief command, to fortify Aymouth; which by the last Treaty with England, was
to be unfortified. So the Governor of Berwick making Inroads into Scotland for
the disturbing of their Works; upon that, D'Oisel began the War, and went into
England, and besieged Warke Castle. The Scottish Lords upon this, met at
Edinburgh, and complained that D'Oisel was engaging them in a War with England,
without their consent; and required him to return back, under pain of being
declared an Enemy to the Nation: which he very unwillingly obeyed. But while he
lay there, the Duke of Norfolk was sent down with some Troops, to defend the
Marches. There was only one Engagement between him and the Kers; but after a
long dispute, they were defeated, and many of them taken. The Queen Regent
seeing her Authority was so little considered, writ to France, to hasten the
Marriage of her Daughter to the Dolphin; for that he being thereupon invested
with the Crown of Scotland, the French would become more absolute. Upon this a
Message was sent from France to a Convention of Estates that sat in December,
to let them know, that the Dolphin was now coming to be of Age, and therefore
they desired they would send oversome, to treat about the Articles of the
Marriage. They sent the Archbishop of Glasgow, the Bishop of Orkney, the Prior
of St. Andrews, who afterward was Earl of Murray, the Earls of Rothes, and
Cassils, the Lord Fleeming; and the Provosts of Edinburgh and Mountrose; some
of every Estate, that in the Name of the three Estates they might conclude that
Treaty.

These Wars coming upon England, when the Queens Treasure was quite exhausted,
it was not easy to raise Money for carrying them on. They found such a
backwardness in the last Parliament, that they were afraid, the supply from
thence would not come easily, or at least, that some favor would be desired
for the Heretics. Therefore they tried first to raise Money by sending Orders
under the Privy Seal, for the borrowing of certain Sums. But though the Council
writ many Letters, to set on those Methods of getting Money; yet they being
without, if not against Law, there was not much got this way: so that after
all, it was found necessary to summon a Parliament, to assemble on the 20th of
January. In the end of the Year the Queen had Advertisements sent her from the
King, that he understood the French had a design on Calais; but she, either for
want of Money, or that she thought the place secure in the Winter, did not send
these Supplies that were necessary; and thus ended the Affairs of England this
Year.

In Germany, there was a Conference appointed, The Affairs of Germany.
to bring matters of Religion to a fuller settlement. Twelve Papists and twelve
Protestants were appointed to manage it. Julius Pflugius, that had drawn the
Interim, being the chief of the Papists, moved, that they should begin first
with condemning the Heresy of Zuinglius. Melancthon, upon that, said it was
preposterous to begin with the condemnation of errors, till they had first
settled the Doctrines of Religion. Yet that which the Papists expected, followed
upon this: for some of the fiercer Lutherans, being much set against the
Zuinglians, agreed to it. This raised heats among themselves, which made the
Conference break up, without bringing things to any issue. Upon this occasion,
Men could not but see that Artifice of the Roman Church, which has been often
used before and since, with too great success. When they cannot bear down those
they call Heretics with open force, their next way is to divide them among
themselves, and to engage them into Heats about those lesser matters, in which
they differ; hoping that by those animosities their endeavors, which being
united, would be dangerous to the common Enemy, may not only be broken, but
directed one against another. This is well enough known to all the Reformed;
and yet many of them are so far from considering it, that upon every new
occasion they are made use of to serve the same designs; never reflecting upon
the advantages that have been formerly taken from such contentions.

In France, A Persecution of Protestants in France.
the number of the Protestants was now increased much; and in Paris, in
September this Year, there was a Meeting of about 200 of them in St. Germains
to receive the Sacrament according to the way of Geneva: which being known to
some of their Neighbors, they furnished themselves with Stones to throw at
them when they broke up their Meeting. So when it was late, as they went home,
Stones were cast at some of them: and the enraged Zealots forced the doors, and
broke in upon the rest. The Men, drawing their Swords, made their way through
them, and most of them escaped: but 160 Women, with some few Men, delivered
themselves Prisoners to the Kings Officers that came to take them. Upon this
there were published all the blackest calumnies that could be devised, of the
loose and promiscuous embraces that had been in this Meeting: and so exactly
had their Accusers copied from what the Heathens had anciently charged on the
Meetings of the Christians, that it was said, they found the Blood of a Child,
whom they had Sacrificed and eaten, among them, These things were confidently
told at Court, where none durst contradict them, for fear of being judged a
favourer of them. But afterward there was printed an Apology for the
Protestants. In it they gloried much, that the same false accusations by which
the Heathens had defamed the Primitive Christians, were now cast on them. Those
that were taken were proceeded against: Six Men and one Woman were burnt. It
had gone further, if there had not come Envoys, both from the German Princes,
and the Cantons of Switzerland, to interpose for them: upon which, since the
King needed assistance in his Wars, especially from the latter, the Prosecution
was let fall. The Pope was much troubled, when he heard that the King would
exercise no further severity on the Heretics: and though himself had hired
them in his Wars, yet he said, the Affairs of France could not succeed, as long
as their King had so many Heretics in his Army. That King had also made two
Constitutions that gave the Pope great offense: the one, that Marriages made by
Sons under thirty, and Daughters under twenty five, without their Fathers
consent, should be void; the other was for charging the Ecclesiastical
Benefices with a Tax, and requiring all Bishops and Curates to reside on their
Benefices. So scandalous a thing was Non-residence then held, that every where
the Papists were ashamed of it. Upon which the Pope complained anew, that the
King presumed to meddle with the Sacraments, and to tax the Clergy.

The beginning of the next Year was famous for the loss of Calais. 1558. Calais
is besieged.
The Lord Wentworth had then the command of it; but the Garrison consisted only
of 500 Men, and there were not above 200 of the Townsmen, that could be
serviceable in a Siege. The Duke of Guise, having brought his Army out of
Piedmont, was now in France, and being desirous, when the Constable was a
Prisoner, to do some great Action which might raise him in reputation above the
other, who was his only Competitor in France, set his thoughts on Calais, and
the Territory about it. There were two Forts on which the security of the Town
depended. The one Newnambridge, a Mile from it, that commanded the Avenues to
it from the Land; from which to the Town there was a way raised thorough a
Marsh lying on both hands of it. On the other side, to the Sea, the Fort of
Risbanck commanded the Harbor; so that the whole strength of the Place, lay in
those two Forts.

On the first of January the Duke of Guise came and sat down before it. The
Governor having but a small Force within, did not think fit to weaken it by
sending such Supplies as those Forts required; so they were taken without any
opposition. Then the Town being thus shut up, the Enemy pressed it hard, and
drew the Water out of its Current, by which the Ditches about the Town and
Castle were drained; and having prepared devices for their Soldiers to pass
them without sticking in the Mire, they made the Assault; after they had opened
a great breach by their Ordnance: and when the Sea was out, others crossed on
that side, and fo carried the Castle by Storm; which the Governor had looked
on as impregnable, and so had brought his chief Force to the defense of the
Town. Seeing the Castle thus unexpectedly lost, he did all he could with his
small Force to regain it; but being still repulsed, and having lost 200 of his
best Men, he was forced to render the Place on the 7th of January. By their
Articles, And taken.
all the Townsmen and Soldiers were to go whither they pleased, only he and
fifty more were to be Prisoners of War. Thus in one Weeks time, and in Winter,
was so strong a Town lost by the English, that had been for many Ages in their
Hands. It was taken 210 years ago by Edward the third after the Battle of
Cressy; and was still called the Key of France, as long as it continued in
English Hands. But now, in a time of War, it was in as ill a condition, as if
they had been in the profoundest Peace: And though Philip had offered to put
Men into it, yet the English, being jealous that those Advertisements were but
Artifices of his, to persuade them to admit a Spanish Garrison into it, left it
in so naked a condition, that the Governor could do little to preserve it. But
yet, that it might appear he had not been too careful of himself, he was
content to agree that he should be a Prisoner of War.

From this, the Duke of Guise went to Guisnes, Guisnes and the rest of that
Territory taken by the French.
commanded by the Lord Gray; whose Garrison consisted of about 1100 Men: but
the loss of Calais had much disheartened them. At the first impression the
French carried the Town, and the Garrison retired into the Castle: but Gray;
breaking out on the Soldiers that were fallen to plundering, did beat them out
again, and burnt the Town. The French battered the Castle, till they made a
breach in the Outworks of it, which they carried, after a long resistance, in
which the English lost 300. So the Lord Gray was fain to render it; He, and all
the Officers, being made Prisoners of War. There was another Castle in that
little County, Hammes, which lay in such a Marish, that it was thought
inaccessible: but the Garrison that was in it, abandoned it, without staying
till the Enemy came before them. The French Writers speak more meanly of the
resistance made by the Lord Gray, than of that made by the Lord Wentworth: for
there went out of Guisnes about 800 Soldiers, whereas there went not out of
Calais above 300. But one of our own Writers magnifies the Lord Gray, and
speaks dishonourably of the Lord Wentworth, adding, which was an Invention of
his own, that he was attainted for the losing of Calais. All that Historians
ground for it, is only this, that there was indeed a Mock-citation issued out
against the Lord Wentworth; to which he could not appear, being not freed from
his imprisonment by the French all this Reign: but he came over in the
beginning of the next, when, the Treaty of Peace being on foot, he obtained his
liberty, and was tried by his Peers in the first Parliament in Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, and acquitted. It was, as he alleged for himself, his misfortune to be
employed in a Place, where he had not so much as a fourth part of that Number
of Men that was necessary to hold out a Siege. But in the declinations of all
Governments, when losses fall out, they must be cast on those that are
entrusted, to excuse those who are much more guilty, by neglecting to supply
them as the Service required. Among the Prisoners, one of the chief was Sir
Edward Grimston, the Comptroller of Calais, and a Privy-Counsellor: He had
often, according to the duty of his Place, given advertisement of the ill
condition the Garrison was in. But whether those to whom he writ were corrupted
by French Money, or whether the Low state of the Queens Treasury made that they
were not supplied, is not certain. It was intended he should not come over to
discover that; and therefore he was let lie a Prisoner in the Bastile; and no
care was taken of him or the other Prisoners: The Ransom set on him was so
high, that having lost a great estate, which he had purchased about Calais, he
resolved not to do any further prejudice to his Family by redeeming his liberty
at such a rate; and intended either to continue a Prisoner, or make his escape.
He lay above two years in the Bastile, and was lodged in the top of it: at the
end of that time he procured a File, and so cut out one of the Bars of the
Window, and having a Rope conveyed to him, he changed Clothes with his Servant,
and went down on the Rope, which proving a great deal too short, he leaped a
great way, and having done that before the Gates were shut, made his escape
without being discovered. But his Beard, which was grown long, made him fear he
should be known by it. Yet by a happy Providence he found in the Pockets of his
Servants Clothes a pair of Scissars, and going into the Fields, did so cut his
Beard, that he could not have been known; and having learnt the Art of War in
the Company of the Scotch Guard de Mauche, he spoke that Dialect: So he passed
as a Scotch Pilgrim; and by that means escaped into England. And there he
offered himself to a Trial, where, after the Evidence was brought, his
Innocence did so clearly appear, that the Jury were ready to give their Verdict
without going from the Bar. So he was acquitted, and lived to a great Age,
dying in his 98th Year. He was Great-Grand-father to my Noble-Patron and
Benefactor Sir Harbotle Grimston, which has made me the more willing to enlarge
thus concerning him, to whose Heir I owe the chief opportunities and
encouragements I have had in composing this Work.

Now the Queen had nothing left of all those Dominions that her Ancestors had
once in France, but the Isles of Jersey, Gernsey, Alderney, and Sarke. The last
of these, being a naked Place, only inhabited by some Hermites; but having the
advantage of a Harbor, the French made themselves Masters of it. Sarke taken
by the French.
The strength of it consisted in the difficulty of the ascent: the little Fort
they had, being accessible but in one place, where two could only go up
abreast. So an ingenious Fleming resolved to beat them out of it: He came
thither, and pretending he had a Friend dead in his Ship, offered them a good
Present, if he might bury him within their Chapel. The French consented to it,
if he would suffer himself and his Men to be so narrowly searched, that they
might not bring so much as a Knife a-shoar. This he consented to; And retaken
by an Ingenious Stratagem.
and as he landed with his Coffin, the Frenchmen were to send some to his Ship
to receive the Present. So the Coffin being carried into the Chapel, and the
French apprehending nothing from unarmed Men; the Coffin was opened, which was
full of good Arms, and every man furnishing himself they broke out upon the
French, and took them all; as their Companions in the Ship did those who went
a-board to bring the Present.

The news of the loss of Calais, filled England with great discontent. Great
discontents in England.
Those who were otherwise dissatisfied with the conduct of Affairs, took great
advantages from it, to disparage the Government, which the Queen had put into
the Hands of Priests, who understood not War, and were not sensible of the
Honor of the Nation. It was said, they had drained her Treasury by the
restitutions and foundations they got her to make; and being sensible how much
the Nation hated them, they had set the Queen on other ways of raising Money
than by a Parliament; so that never did the Parliament meet, with greater
disorder and trouble, than now. But that loss affected none so deeply as the
Queen her self; who was so sensible of the dishonor of it, that she was much
oppressed with melancholy, and was never cheerful after it. Those who took on
them to make Comments on Divine Providence, expounded this loss as their
affections led them. Those of the Reformation said, it was Gods heavy Judgment
upon England, for rejecting the light of his Gospel, and persecuting such as
still adhered to it. But on the other hand, the Papists said, Calais could not
prosper, since it had been a Receptacle of Heretics, where the Laws against
them had never been put in execution. King Philip, as soon as he heard of this
loss, wrote over to England, desiring them to raise a great Force with all
possible have, and send it over to recover Calais before it was fortified: and
he would draw out his Army, and join with them; for if they did not retake it
before the season of working about it came on, it was irrecoverably lost. Upon
which, there was a long Consultation held about it. They found they could not
to any purpose send over under 20000 Men; the Pay of them for five Months would
rise to 170000 l. Garrisons, and an Army against the Scots, and securing the
Coasts against the French, would come to 150000 l. The setting out of a Fleet;
and an Army by Sea, would amount to 200000 l. and yet all that would be too
little, if the Danes and Swedes, which they were afraid of, should join against
them. There was also great want of Ammunition and Ordnance, of which they had
lost vast quantities in Calais and Guisnes. All this would rise to above 520000
l. and they doubted much whether the People would endure such Impositions, who
were now grown stubborn, and talked very loosely. So they did not see how they
could possibly enter into any Action this Year. One Reason, among the rest, was
suggested by the Bishops, they saw a War would oblige them to a greater
moderation in their Proceedings at home: they had not done their Work, which
they hoped a little more time would perfect; whereas a slack'ning in that,
would raise the drooping Spirits of those whom they were now pursuing. So they
desired another Year to prosecute them, in which time they hoped so to clear
the Kingdom of them, that with less danger they might engage in a War, the Year
after. Nor did they think it would be easy to bring new raised Men, to the
hardships of so early a Campaign; and they thought the French would certainly
work so hard in repairing the breaches, that they would be in a good condition
to endure a strait and long Siege. All this they wrote over to the King on the
first of February, as appears from their Letter, which will be found in the
Collection. Collection Number 37.


A Parliament is called.
The Parliament was opened on the 20th of January, where the Convocation, to be
a good Example to the two Houses, granted a Subsidy of eight Shillings in the
Pound, to be paid in four Years: In the House of Peers, the Abbot of
Westminster, and the Prior of St. John of Jerusalem, took their Places
according to their Writs. Tresham, that had given great assistance to the Queen
upon her first coming to the Crown, was now made Prior. But how much was done
toward the endowing of that House, which had been formerly among the richest
of England, I do not know. On the 24th of January the Lords sent a Message to
the Commons, desiring that the Speaker, with ten or twelve of that House,
should meet with a Committe^ of the Lords; which being granted, the Lords
proposed, that the Commons would consider of the defense of the Kingdom. What
was at first demanded, does not appear; but after several days arguing about
it, they agreed to give one Subsidy, a Fifteenth, and a Tenth; and ordered the
Speaker to let the Queen know what they had concluded: who sent them her hearty
Thanks for it. Then, Complaints being made of some Frenchmen that were not
Denizens, it was carried, that they should go out of the Kingdom, and not
return during the War. The Abbot of Westminster, finding the Revenues of his
House were much impaired, thought, that if the old Privileges of the Sanctuary
were confirmed, it would bring him in a good Revenue from those that fled to
it: so he pressed for an Act to confirm it. He brought a great many ancient
Grants of the Kings of England, which the Queen had confirmed by her Letters
Patents; but they did not prevail with the House, who proceeded no further in
it. In this Parliament the Procurers of wilful Murder were denied the Benefit
of Clergy; which was carried in the House of Lords by the greater number, as it
is in their Journals. The Bishops did certainly oppose it, though none of them
entered their dissent. Sir Ambrose, and Sir Robert Dudley, two Sons of the late
Duke of Northumberland, were restored in Blood. The Countess of Sussex's
Jointure was taken from her for her living in Adultery so publicly, as was
formerly mentioned. In the end of the Session a Bill was put in, for the
confirming of the Queens Letters Patents: It was designed chiefly for
confirming the Religious Foundations she had made. As this went through the
House of Commons, one Coxley said, He did not approve such a general
Confirmation of those she had given, or might give: lest this might be a color
for her to dispose of the Crown from the right Inheritors. The House was much
offended at this, and expressed such dislike at the imagination that the Queen
would alienate the Crown; that they both showed their esteem for the Queen, and
their resolution to have the Crown descend after her death to her Sister.
Coxley was made to withdraw, and voted guilty of great irreverence to the
Queen. He asked pardon, and desired it might be imputed to his youth: yet he
was kept in the Sergeants Hands, till they had sent to the Queen to desire her
to forgive his offense. She sent them word, that at their suit she forgave it;
but wished them to examine him, from whence that motion sprung. There is no
more entered about it in the Journal, so that it seems to have been let fall.
The Parliament was, on the seventh of March, prorogued to the seventh of
November.

Soon after this, the King of Sweden sent a Message secretly to the Lady
Elizabeth, The King of Sweden treats a Marriage with the Lady Elizabeth.
who was then at Hatfield, to propose Marriage to her. King Philip had once
designed to marry her to the Duke of Savoy, when he was in hope of Children by
the Queen: but that hope vanishing, he broke it off, and intended to reserve
her for himself. How far she entertained that motion, I do not know: but for
this from Sweden, she rejected it, since it came not to her by the Queens
direction. But to that it was answered, the King of Sweden would have them
begin with her self, judging that fit for him as he was a Gentleman; and her
good liking being obtained, he would next, as a King, address himself to the
Queen. But she said, as she was to entertain no such Propositions unless the
Queen sent them to her; so if she were left to her self, she assured them she
would not change her state of Life. Upon this, the Queen sent Sir Tho. Pope to
her, in April, to let her know how well she approved of the Answer she had made
to them; but they had now delivered their Letters, and made the Proposition to
her, in which she desired to know her mind. She thanked the Queen for her
favor to her, but bade Pope tell her, that there had been one or two noble
Propositions made for her in her Brother King Edwards time; and she had then
desired to continue in the state she was in, which of all others pleased her
best, and she thought there was no state of Life comparable to it: She had
never before heard of that King, and she desired never to hear of that Motion
more: She would see his Messenger no more, since he had presumed to come to her
without the Queens leave. Then Pope said, he did believe, if the Queen offered
her some Honorable Marriage, she would not be averse to it: She answered, What
she might do afterward she did not know; but protested solemnly, that as she
was then inclined, if she could have the greatest Prince in Christendom, she
would not accept of him; though perhaps the Queen might think, this flowed
rather from a Maids modesty, Which is rejected by her.
than any settled determination in her. This I take from a Letter Pope wrote
about it, which is in the Collection. Yet her Life at this time was, Collection
Number 38.
neither so pleasant, nor so well secured, but that, if her aversion to a
married state had not been very much rooted in her, it is not unlikely, she
would have been glad to be out of the Hands of her unkind Keepers; who grew the
more apprehensive of her, the more they observed her Sister to decay: and, as
the Bishops did apprehend, she would overthrow all that they had been building,
and cementing with so much Blood; so some of them did not spare to suggest the
putting of her out of the way: and now that she is so near the Throne, in the
Course of this History, I shall look back through this Reign, to give account
of what befell her in it.

She was hardly used all this Reign.
When she was suspected to be accessory to Wiats Conspiracy; the day after his
breaking out, the Lord Hastings, Sir Tho. Cornwallis, and Sir Richard
Southwell, were sent for her to come to Court. She then lay sick at her House
at Ashridge: but that excuse not being accepted, she was forced to go: so being
still ill, she came by slow Journeys to the Queen. She was kept shut up in
private at Court, from the fourth of March to the 16th, and then Gardener, with
nineteen of the Council, came to examine her about Wiats Rebellion. She
positively denied she knew any thing of it, or of Sir Peter Carew's designs in
the West, which they also objected to her. In conclusion, they told her the
Queen had ordered her to be sent to the Tower, till the Matter should be
further enquired into; and though she made great Protestations of her
Innocence, yet she was carried thither, and led in by the Traitors Gate; all
her own Servants being put from her. Three Men, and as many Women, of the
Queens Servants, were appointed to attend on her; and no Person was suffered to
have access to her. Sir John Gage, who was the Lieutenant of the Tower, treated
her very severely, kept her closely shut up, without leave to walk either in
the Galleries, or on the Leads; nor would he permit her Servants to carry in
her Meat to her, but he did that by his own Servants. The other Prisoners were
often examined about her, and some were put to the Rack, to try if they could
be brought any way to accuse her: but though Wiat had done it, when he hoped to
have saved his own Life by so base an Action; yet he afterward denied that she
knew any of their designs: and lest those denials he made at his Examinations
might have been suppressed, and his former Depositions be made use of against
her, he declared it openly on the Scaffold at his death. After some days close
Imprisonment, upon great intercession made by the Lord Chandois, then Constable
of the Tower, it was granted that she might sometimes walk in the Queens Rooms,
in the presence of the Constable, the Lieutenant, and three Women, the Windows
being all shut. Then she got leave to walk in a little Garden for some Air; but
all the Windows that opened to it were to be kept shut, when she took her Walk:
and so jealous were they of her, that a Boy of four years old was severely
threatened, and his Father sent for and chid, for his carrying Flowers to her.
The Lord Chandois was observed to treat her with too much respect; so he was
not any more trusted with the charge of her, which was committed to Sir Hen.
Benefield. About the middle of May she was sent, under the Guard of the Lord
Williams, and Benefield, to Woodstock. She was so straightly kept, and Benefield
was so sullen to her, that she believed they intended to put her privately to
death. The Lord Williams treated her nobly at his House on the way, at which
Benefield was much disgusted. When she was at Woodstock, she was still kept
under Guards, and but seldom allowed to walk in the Gardens, none being
suffered to come near her. After many Months Imprisonment, she obtained leave
to write to the Queen; Benefield being to see all she wrote. It was believed
that some were sent secretly to kill her; but the Orders were given so
strictly, that none of them could come near her, without a Special Warrant; and
so she escaped at that time. But after King Philip understood the whole Case,
he broke all those designs, as was formerly shown; and prevailed to have her
sent for to Court. When she came to Hampton Court, she was kept still a
Prisoner. Many of the Council, Gardener in particular, dealt often with her, to
confess her offenses, and submit to the Queens mercy. She said, she had never
offended her, not so much as in her thoughts; and she would never betray her
own Innocence by such a Confession. One night when it was late, she was sent
for by the Queen, before whom she kneeled down, and protested she was, and ever
had been, a most faithful Subject to her. The Queen seemed still to suspect
her, and wished her to confess her guilt; otherwise she must think, she had
been unjustly dealt with: She answered, That she was not to complain, but to
bear her burden, only she begged her to conceive a good opinion of her. So they
parted fairly, which King Philip had persuaded the Queen to; and being afraid
that the sowrness of the Queens temper, might lead her into passion, he was
secretly in a corner of the Room, to prevent any further breach, in case she
should have been transported into new heats: but there was no occasion given
for it. Soon after that, she was discharged of her Guards, and suffered to
retire into the Country; but there were always many Spies about her, and she,
to avoid all suspicion, meddled in no sort of business, but gave her self wholly
to Study. And thus she passed these five years, under no small fears and
apprehensions; which was perhaps a necessary preparation for that high degree
to which she was soon after advanced, and which she held in the greatest and
longest course of Prosperity and Glory, that ever any of her Sex attained to.

The Bishops, when the Parliament was sitting, The Progress of the Persecution.
did always intermit their cruelties: but as soon as it was over, they fell to
them afresh. On the 28th of March, Cuthbert Simpson, that was in Deacons
Orders, with two others, were burnt in Smithfield. Simpson had been taken with
Rough, that suffered the Year before this. He was put to much torture, he lay
three hours on the Rack; besides, two other Inventions of Torture were made use
of to make him discover all those in London who met with them in their private
Assemblies: but he would tell nothing, and showed such patience, that the
Bishops did publicly commend him for it. On the ninth of April a Man was burnt
at Hereford: On the 19th of May three Men were burnt at Colchester. At this
time, Complaints being made to the Queen, that Books of Heresy, Treason, and
Sedition, were either brought in from Foreign Parts, or secretly printed in
England, and dispersed among her Subjects; she set out, on the sixth of June, a
Proclamation of a strange nature: That whosoever had any of these, and did not
presently burn them, without reading, or showing them to any other Person, they
should be esteemed Rebels; and without any further delay, be executed by the
Martial Law. On the 27th of that Month, when seven were to be led out to be
burnt in Smithfield, it was proclaimed in the Queens Name, that no Man should
pray for them, or speak to them, or say, God help them: which was thought a
strain of barbarity beyond all the Examples of former times, to deprive dying
Men of the good wishes and prayers of their Friends. But however this might
restrain Men from giving outward Signs of their praying for them, it could not
bind up their inward and secret Devotions. Those seven had been taken at a
Meeting in Islington, with many others; of whom some died in Prison, and six
others were burnt at Brainford the 14th of July. The rest of them were kept by
Bonner, who now seemed to have been glutted with the Blood of so many
Innocents, and therefore to have put a stop to the effusion of more: yet those
that were kept Prisoners by him, did not so entirely escape his fury, but that
he disciplined them himself with Rods, till he was weary; and so gave over that
odd way of Pastoral Correction, rather to ease himself, than in pity to them
whom he whipped. On the tenth of July a Minister was burnt at Norwich: On the
second or third of August, a Gentleman was burnt near Winchester: In August
four were burnt at Bury; and in November three more were burnt there. On the
fourth of November a Man, and a Woman, were burnt at Ipswich: At that time a
Woman was burnt at Exeter: and to close up all, on the tenth of November three
Men, and two Women, were burnt at Canterbury, which made in all thirty nine
this Year. There had been seventy nine burnt the former Year, ninety four the
Year before that, and seventy two the first Year of the Persecution: which in
all come to 284. But he that writ the Preface to Bishop Ridley's Book De Coena
Domini, who is supposed to be Grindal, afterward Archbishop of Canterbury,
says, That in the two first Years of the Queens Persecution there were above
eight hundred put to most cruel kinds of death for Religion: by which it seeems
Fox, on whom I depend in the Numbers I have assigned, has come far short in his
account. Besides those that were burnt, many others died in Bonds, of whom
there are sixty reckoned. There were also great Numbers of those who were vexed
with long and grievous Imprisonment: and though they redeemed their Lives by
the renouncing, or rather the dissembling of their Consciences; yet this being
but forced from them, they carried with them their old Opinions; and the Wound
they gave their Consciences to save their Lives, as it begot in many of them
great horror for what they had done, so it raised in them the most mortal
hatred to those who had driven them to such straits: so that if that Religion
was hateful before to the Nation, for the Impostures and Scandals that were
discovered in the Clergy, and some few Instances of their Cruelty, the repeated
Burnings, and other Cruelties, of which now they saw no end, did increase their
aversion to it beyond all expression.

The Method of the Persecutions of this Reign.
At first the Bishops dealt earnestly with those who were brought before them,
to recant; and were ready at any time to receive them: the Queens Pardon was
also sent to them as they were ready to be tied to the Stake, if they would
then turn. But now it was far otherwise. For in the Council-Books there is an
Entry made of a Letter, written on the first of August this Year, to Sir
Richard Pexall Sheriff of Hampshire, signifying, That the Queen thought it very
strange, that he had delayed the Execution of the Sentence against one
Bembridge, condemned of Heresy, because he had recanted: requiring him to
execute it out of hand, and if he still continued in the Catholic Faith, which
he outwardly pretended, he was then to suffer such Divines as the Bishop of
Winchester should appoint, to have access to him for confirming him in the
Faith, and to attend on him at his death, that he might die Gods Servant: and
as soon as the Sheriff had thus burnt him, he was to come to the Council, and
answer for his presumption in delaying it so long. The Matter of Fact was thus:
Bembridge being tied to the Stake, and the Fire taking hold on him, he, through
the violence of it, yielded, and cried out, I recant. Upon which, the Sheriff
made the Fire be put out; and Bembridge Signed such a Recantation as Doctor
Seton, who was near him, writ for him: but for all that, upon this Order of
Council, he was burnt; and the Sheriff was put in the Fleet: so that now it
appeared that it was not so much the conversion of those they called Heretics,
as their destruction, that the Bishops desired: and so much were their
Instruments set on these severities, that though they saw the Queen declining
so fast, that there was no appearance of her living many days; yet the Week
before she died, they burnt, as has been said, five together in one Fire at
Canterbury.

There was nothing done in the War with France this Year, An unhappy Expedition
against France.
but the sending out a Fleet of 120 Ships, with 7000 Land-men in it, under the
Command of the Lord Clinton; who landed at Port Conquet, in the Point of
Britain, where after a small resistance made by the French, he burnt the Town;
but the Country being gathered together, the English were forced to return to
their Ships, having lost above 600 of their Men. The design was, to have seized
on Breast, and fortified it; which was proposed by King Philip, who had sent
thirty of his Ships to their assistance. This the French knowing by some of the
Prisoners whom they took, went and fortified Breast, and kept a great Body of
Men together, to resist in case the English should make a second impression.
But the Lord Clinton, seeing he could do nothing, returned, having made a very
expensive and unprosperous attempt. The English had lost their Hearts; the
Government at home was so little acceptable to them, that they were not much
concerned to support it; they began to think, Heaven was against them.

There were many strange accidents at home, Strange and unusual accidents.
that struck terror in them. In July, Thunder broke near Nottingham, with such
violence, that it beat down two little Towns, with all the Houses and Churches
in them: the Bells were carried a good way from the Steeples, and the Lead that
covered the Churches, was cast 400 Foot from them, strangely wreathed. The
River of Trent, as it is apt upon Deluges of Rain to swell and overrun the
Country; so it broke out this Year with extraordinary violence; many Trees were
plucked up by the Roots, and with it there was such a Wind, that carried
several Men and Children a great way, and dashed them against Trees or Houses,
so that they died. Hailstones fell that were fifteen Inches about in other
Places: and which was much more terrible, a contagious intermitting Fever, not
unlike the Plague, raged every where: so that three parts of four of the whole
Nation were infected with it. So many Priests died of it, that in many Places
there were none to be had for the performing of the Offices. Many Bishops died
also of it, so that there were many vacancies made by the Hand of Heaven,
against Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown: and it spreading most violently in
August, there were not Men enough, in many Counties, to reap the Harvest: so
that much Corn was lost. All these Symptoms concurred to increase the aversion
the People had to the Government; which made the Queen very willing to consent
to a Treaty of Peace, that was opened at Cambray in October; to which she sent
the Earl of Arundel, the Bishop of Ely, and Dr. Wotton, as her
Plenipotentiaries.

A Treaty of Peace between England, France, and Spain.
The occasion of the Peace was from a meeting that the Bishop of Arras had with
the Cardinal of Lorrain at Peronne; in which he proposed to him, how much
Philip was troubled at the continuance of the War; their Forces being so much
engaged in it, that they could make no resistance to the Turk, and the mean
while Heresy increasing and spreading in their own Dominions, while they were
so taken up that they could not look carefully to their Affairs at home, but
must connive at many things: therefore he pressed the Cardinal to persuade the
King of France to an Accommodation. The Cardinal was easily induced to this,
since besides his own zeal for Religion, he saw that he might thereby bear down
the Constables greatness; whose Friends, chiefly his two Nephews, the Admiral,
and Dandelot, who went then among the best Captains in France, were both
suspect of being Protestants; upon which, the latter was shortly after put in
Prison: so he used all his endeavors to draw the King to consent to it; in
which he had the less opposition, since the Court was now filled with his
Dependants, and his four Brothers, who had got all the great Officers of France
into their Hands: and the Constable, and Admiral being Prisoners, there was
none to oppose their Councils. The King thinking, that by the recovery of
Calais, and the Places about it, he had gained enough to balance the loss of
St. Quintin, was very willing to hearken to a Treaty: and he was in an ill
state to continue the War, being much weakened both by the loss he suffered last
Year, and the blow that he received in July last: The Battle of Graveling.
the Marshal de Thermes being enclosed by the Count of Egmont near Graveling,
where the French Army being set on by the Count, and galled with the English
Ordnance from their Ships that lay near the Land, was defeated, 5000 killed,
the Marshal and the other chief Officers being taken Prisoners. These losses
made him sensible, that his Affairs were in so ill a condition, that he could
not gain much by the War.

The Number of the Protestants growing in France.
The Cardinal was the more earnest to bring on a Peace, because the Protestants
did not only increase in their Numbers, but they came so openly to avow their
Religion, that in the public Walks without the Suburbs of St. Germain, they
began to sing David's Psalms in French Verse. The newness of the thing amused
many, the devotion of it wrought on others, the Music drew in the rest; so
that the Multitudes that used to divert themselves in those Fields, in stead of
their ordinary sports, did now nothing for many nights, but go about singing
Psalms: and that which made it more remarkable was, that the King and Queen of
Navarre came and joined with them. That King, besides the Honor of a Crowned
Head, with the small part of that Kingdom that was yet left in their Hands, was
the first Prince of the Blood. He was a soft and weak Man; but his Queen, in
whose right he had that Title, was one of the most extraordinary Women that any
Age has produced, both for knowledge far above her Sex, for a great judgment
in Affairs, an Heroical Greatness of Mind, and all other Virtues; joined to a
high measure of Devotion, and true Piety: all which, except the last, she
derived to her Son Henry the Great. When the King of France heard of this
Psalmody, he made an Edict against it; and ordered the doers of it to be
punished: but the Numbers of them, and the respect to those Crowned Heads, made
the business to go no further.

On the 24th of April was the Dolphin married to the Queen of Scotland. The
Dolphin marries the Queen of Scotland.
Four Cardinals, Bourbon, Lorrain, Chastilion, and Bertrand, with many of the
Princes of the Blood, and the other great Men of France, and the Commissioners
sent from Scotland, were present. But scarce any thing adorned it more than the
Epithalamium written upon it by Buchanan; which was accounted one of the
perfectest Pieces of Latin Poetry. After the Marriage was over, the Scotch
Commissioners were desired to offer the Dolphin the Ensigns of the Regality of
Scotland, and to acknowledge him their King; but they excused themselves, since
that was beyond their Commission, which only empow'red them to treat concerning
the Articles of the Marriage, and to carry an account back to those that sent
them. Then it was desired that they would promote the business at their return
to their Country; but some of them had expressed their aversion to those
Propositions so plainly, that it was believed they were poisoned by the
Brethren of the House of Guise. Four of them died in France; the Bishop of
Orkney, and the Earls of Rothes, and Cassils, and the Lord Fleeming. The Prior
of St. Andrews was also very sick; and though he recovered at that time, yet he
had never any perfect health after it. When the other four returned into
Scotland, a Convention of the Estates was called, to consult about the
Propositions they brought.

This Assembly consists of all those Members that make up a Parliament, who
were then, the Bishops, and Abbots, and Priors, A Convention of Estates in
Scotland.
who made the first Estate; the Noblemen, that were the second Estate; and the
Deputies from the Towns; one from every Town, only Edinburgh sends two, were
the third Estate. Anciently all that held Lands of the Crown, were summoned to
Parliaments, as well the greater as the lesser Barons. But in King James the
first's time, the lesser Barons, finding it a great charge to attend ou such
Assemblies, desired to be excused from it; and procured an Act of Parliament
exempting them, and giving them power to send from every County, two, three,
four, or more, to represent them: but they afterward thought this rather a
Charge than a Privilege, and did not use it; so that now the second Estate
consisted only of the Nobility. But the Gentry finding the prejudice they
suffered by this, and that the Nobility grew too absolute, procured, by King
James the sixth's favor, an Act of Parliament restoring them to that Right of
sending Deputies, two from every County, except some small Counties that send
only one. But according to the Ancient Law, none has a Vote in the Elections,
but those who hold Lands immediately of the Crown, of such a value. The
difference between a Parliament, and a Convention of Estates, is, that the
former must be summoned forty days before it sits; and then it meets in State,
and makes Laws, which are to be prepared by a Committee of all the Estates,
called the Lords of the Articles: but a Convention may be called within as few
days as are necessary for giving notice to all parts of the Nation to make
their Elections: They have no Power of making Laws, being only called for one
particular Emergent; which, during the division of the Island, was chiefly upon
the breaking out of War betwixt the two Nations, and so their Power was
confined to the giving of Money for the occasion which then brought them
together.

In the Convention now held, after much debate and opposition, whether they
should consent to the demand made by the Ambassador sent from France, it was
carried, that the Dolphin should be acknowledged their King: great assurances
being given, that this should be only a bare Title, and that he should pretend
to no Power over them. So the Earl of Argile, and the Prior of St. Andrews, who
had been the main sticklers for the French Interest, upon the promises that the
Queen Regent made them, that they should enjoy the free exercise of their
Religion, were appointed to carry the Matrimonial Crown into France. But as
they were preparing for their Journey, a great revolution of Affairs fell out
in England.

A Session of Parliament in England.
The Parliament met on the fifth of November. On the seventh the Queen sent for
the Speaker of the House of Commons, and ordered him to open to them the ill
condition the Nation was in: for though there was a Treaty begun at Cambray,
yet it was necessary to put the Kingdom in a posture of defense, in case it
should miscarry. But the Commons were now so dissatisfied, that they could come
to no resolution. So on the 14th day of November the Lord Chancellor, the Lord
Treasurer, the Duke of Norfolk, the Earls of Shrewsbury, and Pembroke, the
Bishops of London, Winchester, Lincoln, and Carlisle, the Viscount Mountacute,
the Lords Clinton, and Howard, came down to the House of Commons, and sat in
that place of the House, where the Privy-Counsellors used to sit. The Speaker
left his Chair, and he, with the Privy-Counsellors that were of the House, came
and sat on low Benches before them. The Lord Chancellor showed the necessity
of granting a Subsidy, to defend the Nation, both from the French, and the
Scots. When he had done, the Lords withdrew; but though the Commons entered,
both that, and the two following days, into the debate, they came to no issue
in their Consultations.

The Queen had never enjoyed her health perfectly, since the false conception
that was formerly spoken of; The Queens sickness.
upon which followed the neglect from her Husband, and the despair of Issue,
that increased her Melancholy: and this receiving a great addition from the
loss of Calais, and the other misfortunes of this Year; she, by a long
declination of Health, and decay of her Spirits, was now brought so low, that
it was visible she had not many days to live: and a Dropsy coming on her, put
a conclusion to her unhappy Reign, And death.
and unfortunate Life, on the 17th of November, in the 43d Year of her Age,
after she had reigned five Years, four Months, and eleven Days.

At the same time Cardinal Pool, Cardinal Pool dies.
as if one Star had governed both their Nativities, was also dying; and his end
being hastened by the Queens death, he followed her within sixteen hours, in
the 59th Year of his Age. He left his whole estate to Aloisi Prioli a Noble
Venetian, with whom he had lived six and twenty years in so entire a
friendship, that as nothing could break it off, so neither was any thing able
to separate them from one another company. Prioli, being invited by Pope
Julius to come and receive a Cardinals Hat, preferred Pools company before it;
and as he had supplied him in his necessities in Italy, so he left his Country
now, to live with him in England. Pool made him his Executor: But Prioli was of
a more Noble temper, than to enrich himself by his Friends Wealth; for as he
took care to pay all the Legacies he left, so he gave away all that remained,
reserving nothing to himself but Pools Breviary and Diary. And indeed the
Cardinal was not a Man made to raise a Fortune, being, by the greatness of his
Birth, and his excellent Virtues, carried far above such mean designs. He was a
Learned, His Character.
Modest, Humble, and good natured Man; and had indeed such Qualities, and such
a Temper, that if he could have brought the other Bishops to follow his
Measures, or the Pope and Queen to approve of them, he might have probably done
much to have reduced this Nation to Popery again. But God designed better
things for it: so he gave up the Queen to the Bloody Councils of Gardener, and
the rest of the Clergy. It was the only thing in which she was not led by the
Cardinal. But she imputed his Opinion in that Particular, rather to the
sweetness of his Temper, than to his Wisdom and Experience: and he, seeing he
could do nothing of what he projected in England, fell into a languishing,
first of his mind, that brought after it a decay of his Health, of which he
died. I have dwelt the more copiously on his Character, being willing to deny
to none, of whom I write, the Praises that are due to them: and he being the
only Man of that whole Party, of whom I found any reason to say much good, I
was the more willing to enlarge about him, to let the World see, how little I
am biassed in the account I give, by Interest or Opinion. So that if I have
written sharply of any others that have been mentioned in this Reign, it was
the force of Truth, and my abhorrence of their barbarous Cruelties, that led me
to it, more than my being of a contrary Persuasion to them. It is certain, that
Pool's method, of correcting the manners of the Clergy, and being gentle to the
Reformed, would in all appearance have been much more fatal to the progress of
the Reformation; that was set forward by nothing more, than by the severities
showed to those that differed from them, and the indulgence of the Bishops to
the vices of their own Party. Yet Pool had a vast superstition to the Sea of
Rome; and though his being at the Council of Trent, had opened his Eyes to many
things, which he had not observed before; yet he still retained his great
submission to that See, and thought it impossible to maintain the Order and
Unity of the Church, but by holding Communion with it; which carried him, in
opposition to many apprehensions himself had of some Theological Points, still
to support the Interests of the Papacy. His neglect of the offer of it, when it
was made to him, showed this flowed from no aspirings of his own, but purely
from his judgment: so that what mistakes soever, his Education, and Heats with
King Henry, and the disasters of his Family, might have involved him in, it
cannot be denied, that he was a Man of as great Probity and Virtue as most of
the Age, if not all of that Church, in which he lived.

The Queens Character.
For the Queen her self, her Character has appeared so manifestly in her Reign,
that I need make no further description of her. She was a Woman of a strict and
innocent Life; that allowed her self few of the diversions, with which Courts
abound. She was bred to Learning, and understood the Latin Tongue well; but
what further knowledge she had, does not appear to me. She was constant at her
Devotions, and was as much addicted to the Interests and Humors of the Clergy,
as they could have wished her. She had great resentments of her own ill usage
in her Fathers and Brothers times; which made her be easily induced to take her
revenge, though she colored it with her zeal against Heresy. She did not much
mind any other Affairs, but those of the Church: so that if she could have
extirpated Heresy, she seemed to regard all other things very little: and
being given up to follow the Dictates of Rome, with a nice scrupulosity of
Conscience, it was no wonder she went on in these designs very vigorously. For
as the Pope was ever calling on all Princes that were under his obedience, to
set up the Courts of Inquisition; so the fourth General Council of Lateran, to
which, with the other General Councils, she paid no less reverence than to the
Scriptures, charged Catholic Princes to extirpate all Heretics out of their
Dominions; such as were slack must be required to do it by their Bishops; and
if that prevailed not, they were to be excommunicated by them; and if they
continued negligent, and under that Censure a year, they were to be deprived by
the Pope, and their Dominions to be given to others, who should take more care
to extirpate Heresy. The Pope had also in February this Year published a
Constitution, to which he had made all the Cardinals set their Hands,
confirming all former Decrees and Canons against Heretics; declaring, that all
Prelates, Princes, Kings, and Emperors, that had fallen into Heresy, should be
understood to be deprived of their Dominions, without any further Sentence: and
that any Catholics who would take the Forfeiture, should have a good Title to
all that they invaded and seized. The Bishops, besides the other Canons binding
them to proceed against Heretics, were, by the Words of the Oath of Obedience
which they swore to the Pope at their Consecration, engaged to oppose and
persecute the Heretics with all their might: so that their giving severe
Counsels, and the Queens following them, flowed mainly from the Principles of
their Religion: in which the sowrness of her temper made it the more easy to
persuade her to a Compliance to those courses, to which her inclination led her
without any such Motives. To conclude, her death was as little lamented, as any
of all our Princes ever was, the Popish Clergy being almost the only Mourners
that were among her own People.

Thus lived and died Mary Queen of England by Inheritance, and of Spain by
Marriage.

The END of the Second BOOK.
engraved portrait of Queen Elizabeth I Vol: 2d. Page: 373.

EFFIGIES ELIZABETHAE REGINAE ANGLIAE ETC.

R. White sculp.
engraved Royal blazon HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE Nata Grenvici 1533 Sept. 7.
Sorori Successit in Regno 1558. Nov: 17.

Obijt 1602/3 Mar: 24 Anno Aetatis 70.

Printed for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church yard.



BOOK III. OF THE SETTLEMENT OF THE REFORMATION OF RELIGION, In the beginning
of Queen Elizabeth's Reign.
QUEEN Mary's Death was concealed for some hours. What the secret Consultations
were upon it is not known; 1558. Queen Elizabeth succeeds.
but the Issue of them appeared about nine a Clock. Then the Lord Chancellor
went to the House of Lords, and first imparted to them the News of the Queens
Death; which, as it struck the Bishops with no small fear, so those Counselors
who had been severe in their advices about her Sister, did apprehend she might
remember it against them. Yet they all agreed to proclaim her Queen: and by the
Zeal they expressed for her coming to the Crown, intended to balance the
Errors they had formerly been led to, rather in compliance to the late Queens
resentments, than out of any ill will they bore her self. They sent for the
House of Commons, and the Lord Chancellor signified to them the Queens Death;
which, he said, would have been a much more sorrowful loss to them, if they had
not such a Successor, that was the next and indisputed Heir to the Crown,
Elizabeth, of whose Right and Title none could make any question; therefore
they intended to proclaim her Queen, and desired their Concurrence. This was
Ecchoed with many and long repeated Cries, God save Queen Elizabeth. Long and
happily may She Reign.

The Parliament being declared to be dissolved by the late Queens death, And
proclaimed Queen.
the Lords proclaimed Elizabeth Queen; and went into London, where it was again
done by the Lord Major, and received every where with such excessive Joy, that
there was no sign of sorrow expressed for the death of Queen Mary, but what the
Priests showed; who, in so public and universal a Joy, were forced to betake
themselves to secret Groans, since they durst not vent them in public. Never
did any before her come to the Throne with so many good Wishes and
Acclamations, which the horror of the Cruelties, and the reflection of the
Disasters of the former Reign, drew from the People, who now hoped to see
better Times.

And comes to London.
The Queen was then at Hatfield, where having received the news of her Sisters
death, and of her being proclaimed Queen, she came from thence to London. On
the 19th at Highgate all the Bishops met her, whom she received civilly, except
Bonner, on whom she looked as defiled with so much Blood that she could not
think it fit to bestow any mark of her favor on him. She was received into the
City, with Throngs much greater than even such Occasions used to draw together,
and followed with the loudest shouts of Joy that they could raise. She lay that
night at the Duke of Norfolk's House in the Charter House, and next day went to
the Tower. There at her Entry she kneeled down, and offered up thanks to God
for that great change in her Condition; that whereas she had been formerly a
Prisoner in that Place, every hour in fear of her Life, she was now raised to
so high a Dignity. She soon cleared all Peoples apprehensions as to the
hardships she had formerly met with, and showed she had absolutely forgot from
whom she had received them: even Benefield himself not excepted; who had been
the chief Instrument of her Sufferings: But she called him always her Jailer,
which though she did in a way of Raillery, yet it was so sharp that he avoided
coming any more to the Court.

She presently dispatched Messengers to all the Princes of Christendom, giving
notice of her Sisters death, and her Succession. She writ in particular to King
Philip, a large acknowledgment of his kindness to her, to whom she held her
self much bound for his interposing so effectually with her Sister for her
Preservation. She sends a Dispatch to Rome.
She also sent to Sir Edward Karn, that had been her Sisters Resident at Rome,
to give the Pope the news of her Succession. The haughty Pope received it in
his ordinary Style, declaring, That England was held in Fee of the Apostolic
See, that she could not succeed being Illegitimate, nor could he contradict the
Declarations made in that matter by his Predecessors, Clement the seventh, and
Paul the third: He said, it was great boldness in her to assume the Crown
without his consent; for which in reason she deserved no favor at his hands:
yet, if she would renounce her Pretensions, and refer her self wholly to him,
he would show a fatherly affection to her, and do every thing for her that
could consist with the Dignity of the Apostolic See. But to no effect.
When she heard of this, she was not much concerned at it; for she had written
to Karn as she did to her other Ministers, and had renewed his Powers upon her
first coming to the Crown, being unwilling in the beginning of her Reign to
provoke any Party against her: But hearing how the Pope received this Address,
she recalled Karns Powers, and commanded him to come home. The Pope on the
other hand required him not to go out of Rome, but to stay and take the care of
an Hospital over which he set him: which it was thought that Karn procured to
himself, because he was unwilling to return into England, apprehending the
change of Religion that might follow, for he was himself zealously addicted to
the Sea of Rome.

As soon as Philip heard the news, he ordered the Duke of Feria, King Philip
courts her in Marriage.
whom he had sent over in his Name to comfort the late Queen in her sickness,
to Congratulate the new Queen, and in secret to propose Marriage to her; and to
assure her he should procure a Dispensation from Rome: and at the same time he
sent thither to obtain it. But the Queen, though very sensible of her
Obligation to him, had no mind to the Marriage. It appeared by what has been
said in the former Book, and by the Sequel of her whole Life, that though upon
some occasions, when her Affairs required it, she treated about her Marriage,
yet she was firmly resolved never to marry. Besides this, she saw her People
were generally averse to any Forreigner, and particularly to a Spaniard: and
she made it the steady Maxim of her whole Reign, from which she never
departed, to rule in their affections as well as over their Persons. Nor did
she look on the Popes Dispensation as a thing of any force to warrant what was
otherwise forbidden by God: And the Relation between King Philip and her being
the Reverse of that which was between her Father and Queen Katharine, it
seeming to be equally unlawful for one Man to marry two Sisters, as it was for
one Woman to be married to two Brothers, she could not consent to this Marriage
without approving King Henry's with Queen Katharine: and if that were a good
Marriage, then she must be Illegitimate, as being born of a Marriage which only
the unlawfulness of that could justify. So Inclination, Interest, and
Conscience, all concurred to make her reject King Philip's motion. Yet she did
it in terms so full of Esteem and Kindness for him, that he still insisted in
the Proposition; in which she was not willing to undeceive him, so entirely, as
to put him out of all hopes, while the Treaty of Cambray was in dependence,
that so she might tie him more closely to her Interests.

The French, hearing of Queen Mary's Death, The Queen of Scots pretends to the
Crown of England.
and being allarum'd at Philips design upon the new Queen, sent to Rome, to
engage the Pope to deny the Dispensation, and to make him declare the Queen of
Scotland to be the right Heir to the Crown of England, and the pretended Queen
to be Illegitimate. The Cardinal of Lorrain prevailed also with the French
King, to order his Daughter-in-law to assume that Title, and to put the Arms of
England on all her Furniture.

But now to return to England, The Queens Council.
Queen Elizabeth continued to employ some of the same Counselors that had
served Queen Mary: namely, Heath the Lord Chancellor, the Marquess of
Winchester Lord Treasurer, the Earls of Arundel, Shrewsbury, Derby, and
Pembroke, the Lords Clinton, and Howard, Sir Thomas Cheyney, Sir William Petre,
Sir John Mason, Sir Richard Sackvile, and Dr. Wotton, Dean of Canterbury and
York. Most of these had complied with all the Changes that had been made in
Religion backward and forward since the latter end of King Henry's Reign, and
were so dexterous at it, that they were still employed in every new Revolution.
To them, who were all Papists, the Queen added, the Marquess of Northampton,
the Earl of Bedford, Sir Thomas Parre, Sir Edward Rogers, Sir Ambrose Cave, Sir
Francis Knolles, and Sir William Cecil, whom she made Secretary of State; and
soon after she sent for Sir Nicolas Bacon; who were all of the Reformed
Religion. She renewed all the Commissions to those formerly entrusted, and
ordered, that such as were imprisoned on the account of Religion should be set
at liberty. After this, a Man that used to talk pleasantly, said to her, that
he came to supplicate in behalf of some Prisoners not yet set at liberty: She
asked who they were: he said they were Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, that were
still shut up; for the People longed much to see them abroad. She answered him
as pleasantly, she would first talk with themselves, and see whether they
desired to be set at such liberty as he requested for them.

A Consultation about the change of Religion.
Now the two great things under Consultation were Religion, and Peace. For the
former, some were appointed to consider how it was to be Reformed. Beal, a
Clerk of the Council, gave advice to Cecil, that the Parliaments under Queen
Mary should be declared void; the first being under a force, (as was before
related) and the Title of Supreme Head being left out of the Summons to the
next Parliament before it was taken away by Law: from whence he inferred, that
both these were not lawfully held or duly summoned; and this being made out,
the Laws of King Edward were still in force: but this was laid aside as too
high and violent a way of proceeding, since the annulling of Parliaments, upon
little errors in Writs, or some particular disorders, was a Precedent of such
consequence that to have proceeded in such a manner, would have unhinged all
the Government and security of the Nation. More moderate Courses were thought
on. The Queen had been bred up from her Infancy with a hatred of the Papacy,
and a Love to the Reformation: But yet as her first Impressions in her Fathers
Reign were in favor of such old Rites as he had still retained; so in her own
Nature she loved State, and some Magnificence, in Religion, as well as in every
thing else: She thought that in her Brothers Reign they had stripped it too much
of external Ornaments, and had made their Doctrine too narrow in some Points;
therefore she intended to have some things explained in more general terms,
that so all Parties might be comprehended by them. She inclined to keep up
Images in Churches: and to have the manner of Christ's Presence in the Sacrament
left in some general words; that those who believed the Corporal Presence might
not be driven away from the Church by too nice an Explanation of it. Nor did
she like the Title of Supreme Head; she thought it imported too great a Power,
and came too near that Authority which Christ only had over the Church. These
were her own private thoughts. She considered, nothing could make her Power
great in the World abroad, so much as the uniting all her People together at
home: Her Fathers and her Brothers Reign had been much distracted by the
Rebellions within England, and she had before her Eyes the Instance of the
Coldness that the People had expressed to her Sister on all occasions for the
maintaining or recovering of the Dominions beyond Sea: Therefore she was very
desirous to find such a Temper in which all might agree. She observed, that in
the Changes formerly made, particularly in renouncing the Papacy, and making
some Alterations in Worship, the whole Clergy had concurred, and so she
resolved to follow and imitate these by easy steps.

There was a long Consultation had about the Method of the Changes she should
make: The substance of which shall be found in the Collection, in a Paper,
where, in the way of Question and Answer, A Method of doing it proposed.
Collection Number 1.
the whole design of it is laid down. This Draught of it was given to Sir
William Cecil, and does exactly agree with the account that Cambden gives of
it. That Learned and Judicious Man has written the History of this Queens
Reign, with that Fidelity and Care, in so good a Style, and with so much
Judgment, that it is without question the best part of our English History: but
he himself often says, that he had left many things to those who should
undertake the History of the Church; therefore in the Account of the beginnings
of this Reign, as I shall in all things follow him with the credit that is due
to so extraordinary a Writer, so having met with some things which he did not
know, or thought not necessary in so succinct a History to enlarge on, I shall
not be afraid to write after him, though the Esteem he is justly in may make it
seem superfluous to go over these matters any more.

It seemed necessary for the Queen to do nothing before a Parliament were
called; The Heads of it.
for only from that Assembly could the affections of the People be certainly
gathered. The next thing she had to do, was to balance the dangers that
threatened her both from abroad and at home. The Pope would certainly
excommunicate and depose her, and stir up all Christian Princes against her:
The King of France would lay hold of any opportunity to embroil the Nation; and
by the assistance of Scotland, and of the Irish, might perhaps raise troubles
in her Dominions. Those that were in Power in Queen Mary's time, and remained
firm to the old Superstition, would be discontented at the Reformation of
Religion: the Bishops and Clergy would generally oppose it: and since there was
a necessity of demanding Subsidies, they would take occasion, by the discontent
the People would be in on that account, to inflame them: and those who would be
dissatisfied at the retaining of some of the old Ceremonies, would on the other
hand disparage the Changes that should be made, and call the Religion a
Cloak'd-Papistry, and so alienate many of the most zealous from it. To remedy
all these things, it was proposed to make Peace with France, and to cherish
those in that Kingdom that desired the Reformation. The Curses and Practices of
Rome were not much to be feared. In Scotland those must be encouraged who
desired the like change in Religion; and a little Money among the Heads of the
Families in Ireland, would go a great way. And for those that had borh Rule in
Queen Mary's time, ways were to be taken to lessen their credit throughout
England: they were not to be too soon trusted or employed, upon pretense of
Turning; but those who were known to be well affected to Religion, and the
Queens Person, were to be sought after and encouraged. The Bishops were
generally hated by the Nation: It would be easy to draw them within the
Statute of Praemunire, and upon their falling into it, they must be kept under
it, till they had renounced the Pope, and consented to the Alterations that
should be made. The Commissions of the Peace, and for the Militia, were to be
carefully reviewed, and such Men were to be put in them, as would be firm to
the Queens Interests. When the Changes should be made, some severe punishments
would make the rest more readily submit. Great care was to be had of the
Universities, and other public Schools, as Eaton and Winchester, that the next
Generation might be betimes seasoned with the Love and Knowledge of Religion.
Some learned Men, as Bill, Parker, May, Cox, Whitehead, Grindall, Pilkington,
and Sir Thomas Smith, were to be ordered to meet and consider of the Book of
Service. In the mean while the People were to be restrained from Innovating
without Authority; and the Queen, to give some hope of a Reformation, might
appoint the Communion to be given in both kinds. The Persons that were thought
fit to be trusted with the Secret of these Consultations, were the Marquess of
Northampton, the Earls of Bedford, and Pembroke, and the Lord John Gray. The
Place that was thought most convenient for the Divines to meet in, was Sir
Thomas Smiths House in Channon-Row, where an Allowance was to be given for
their Entertainment.

The forwardness in many to the Reformation.
As soon as the News of the Queens coming to the Crown was known beyond Sea, all
those who had fled thither for shelter did return into England: and those who
had lived in Corners during the late Persecution, now appeared with no small
assurance: and these, having notice of the Queens Intentions, could not contain
themselves, but in many Places begun to make Changes, to set up King Edwards
Service, to pull down Images, and to affront the Priests. Upon this, the Queen,
to make some discovery of her own Inclinations, gave order, that the Gospels
and Epistles, and the Lords Prayer, the Apostles Creed, and the Ten
Commandments, should be read in English, and that the Letany should be also
used in English: and she forbade the Priests to Elevate the Host at Mass.
Having done this, on the 27th of December she set out a Proclamation against
all Innovations, requiring her Subjects to use no other Forms of Worship than
those she had in her Chapel, till it should be otherwise appointed by the
Parliament, which she had summoned to meet on the 23d of January. The Writs
were issued out by Bacon, into whose Hands she had delivered the Great Seal. On
the fifth of December, she performed her Sisters Funeral Rites with great
Magnificence at Westminster. The Bishop of Winchester being appointed to preach
the Sermon, did so mightily extol her and her Government, and so severely
taxed the disorders which he thought the Innovators were guilty of, not without
reflections on the Queen, that he was thereupon confined to his House till the
Parliament met.

Parker designed to be Archbishop of Canterbury.
One of the chief things under consultation, was, to provide Men fit to be put
into the Sees that were now vacant, or that might fall to be so afterward, if
the Bishops should continue intractable. Those now vacant, were the Sees of
Canterbury, Hereford, Bristol, and Bangor: and in the beginning of the next
Year the Bishops of Norwich, and Gloucester died: so that, as Cambden has it,
there were but fourteen Bishops living when the Parliament met. It was of great
importance to find Men able to serve in these Employments, chiefly in the Sea
of Canterbury. For this, Dr. Parker was soon thought on. Whether others had the
offer of it before him or not, I cannot tell: but he was writ to by Sir
Nicholas Bacon on the ninth of December, to come up to London; and afterward
on the 30th of December, by Sir William Cecil; and again by Sir Nicholas Bacon,
on the fourth of January. He understood, that it was for some high preferment;
and being a Man of an humble Temper, distrustful of himself, that loved
privacy, and was much disabled by sickness, he declined coming up all he could:
he begged he might not be thought of for any public Employment, but that some
Prebend might be assigned him, where he might be free both from Care and
Government; since the Infirmities, which he had contracted by his flying about
in the Nights in Queen Mary's time, had disabled him from a more public
station. That to which he pretended, shows how moderate his desires were: for
he professed, an Employment of twenty Nobles a year would be more acceptable to
him than one of two hundred Pound. He had been Chaplain to Queen Anne Bullen,
and had received a special charge from her, a little before she died, to look
well to the Instruction of her Daughter in the Principles of the Christian
Religion; and now the Queen had a grateful Remembrance of those Services. This,
joined with the high Esteem that Sir Nicholas Bacon had of him, soon made her
resolve to raise him to that great Dignity. And since such high Preferments are
generally, if not greedily sought after, yet very willingly undertaken by most
Men; it will be no unfit thing to lay open a modern Precedent, which indeed
savours more of the Ancient than the latter Times; for then in stead of that
Ambitus, which has given such offense to the World in the latter Ages, it was
ordinary for Men to fly from the offer of great Preferments. Some run away when
they understood they were to be Ordained, or had been Elected to great Sees,
and fled to a Wilderness. This showed they had a great sense of the Care of
Souls, and were more apprehensive of that weighty Charge, than desirous to
raise or enrich themselves or their Families. It has been showed before, that
Cranmer was very unwillingly engaged in the Sea of Canterbury; and now, he that
succeeded him in that See with the same designs, was drawn into it with such
unwillingness, that it was almost a whole year before he could be prevailed
upon to accept of it: The account of this will appear in the Series of Letters
both written to him, and by him, on that Head; which were communicated to me by
the present most Worthy and most Reverend Primate of this Church. I cannot
mention him in this place without taking notice, that as in his other great
Virtues and Learning he has gone in the steps of those most eminent
Archbishops that went before him; so the whole Nation is witness how far he
was from aspiring to high Preferment, how he withdrew from all those
opportunities that might be steps to it, how much he was surprised with his
unlooked-for advancement, how unwillingly he was raised, and how humble and
affable he continues in that high Station he is now in: but this is a Subject
that I must leave for them to enlarge on that shall write the History of this
present Age.

1559. Bacon made Lord Keeper.
In the beginning of the next Year, the Queen having found that Heath
Archbishop of York, then Lord Chancellor, would not go along with her, as he
had done in the Reigns of her Father and Brother; and having therefore taken
the Seals from him, and put them into Sir Nicholas Bacon's Hand, did now by
Patent create him Lord Keeper. Formerly those that were Keepers of the Seal,
had no Dignity nor Authority annexed to their Office; they did not hear Causes,
nor preside in the House of Lords, but were only to put the Seals to such Writs
or Patents as went in course; and so it was only put in the Hands of a Keeper
but for some short Interval. But now, Bacon was the first Lord Keeper, that had
all the Dignity and Authority of the Lord Chancellor conferred on him; and his
not being raised to that high Title, perhaps flowed from his own modesty; for
as he was one of the most Learned, most Pious, and Wisest Men of the Nation; so
he retained in all his greatness a Modesty equal to what the Ancient Greeks and
Romans had carried with them to their highest advancement. He was Father to the
great Sir Francis Bacon, Viscount St. Albans, and Lord Chancellor of England,
that will be always esteemed one of the greatest Glories of the English Nation.

The Queens Coronation.
The Queen was now to be Crowned; and having gone on the twelfth of January to
the Tower, she returned from thence in State on the thirteenth. As she went
into her Chariot, she lifted up her Eyes to Heaven, and blessed God that had
preserved her to see that Joyful Day, and that had saved her as he did his
Prophet Daniel out of the Mouth of the Lions. She acknowledged her Deliverance
was only from him, to whom she offered up the Praise of it. She passed through
London in great Triumph: and having observed that her Sister, by the sullenness
of her behavior to the People, had much lost their affections; therefore she
always used, as she passed through Crowds, but more especially this day, to
look out of her Coach cheerfully on them, and to return the respects they paid
her with great sweetness in her Looks; commonly saying, God bless You, my
People; which affected them much. But nothing pleased the City more than her
behavior as she went under one of the Triumphal Arches: There was a rich Bible
let down to her, as from Heaven, by a Child, representing Truth; She with great
Reverence kissed both her Hands, and receiving it, kissed it, and laid it next
her Heart; and professed she was better pleased with that Present, than with
all the other Magnificent ones that had been that day made her by the City:
This drew Tears of Joy from the Spectators Eyes. And indeed this Queen had a
strange Art of insinuating her self by such ways into the affections of her
People. Some said she was too Theatrical in it; but it wrought her end; since
by these little things in her deportment she gained more on their affections,
than other Princes have been able to do by more real and significant Arts of
Grace and Favor. The day following she was Crowned at Westminster by Oglethorp
Bishop of Carlisle, all the other Bishops refusing to assist at that Solemnity.
He, and the rest of that Order, perceived that she would change the Religion
then established, and looked on the Alterations she had already made, as
Pledges of more to follow; and observed by the favor that Cecil and Bacon had
with her, that she would return to what had been set up by her Brother. They
had already turned so often, that they were ashamed to be turning at every time.
Heath, Tonstall, and Thirleby, had complied in King Edwards time, as well as in
King Henry's; and though Thirleby had continued in credit and favor with them
to the last; yet he had been one of those who had gone to Rome, where he made
such public Professions of his respect to the Apostolic See; and he had also
assisted at the degradation and condemnation of Cranmer; so that he thought it
indecent for him to return to that Way any more: Therefore he with all the rest
resolved to adhere to what they had set up in Queen Mary's time. There were two
of King Edwards Bishops yet alive, who were come into England, yet the Queen
chose rather to be consecrated by a Bishop actually in Office, and according to
the old Rites, which none but Oglethorp could be persuaded to do. After that,
she gave a general Pardon according to the Common Form.

On the 23d of January, The Parliament meets.
being the day to which the Parliament was summoned, it was Prorogued till the
25th, and then it was opened with a long Speech of the Lord Bacons, in which he
laid before them the distracted estate of the Nation, both in matters of
Religion, and the other Miseries that the Wars and late Calamities had brought
upon them: all which he recommended to their care. For Religion, the Queen
desired they would consider of it without heat or partial affection, or using
any reproachful term of Papist or Heretic; and that they would avoid the
Extremes, of Idolatry and Superstition on the one hand, and contempt and
irreligion on the other; and that they would examine matters without
Sophistical Niceties, or too subtle Speculations, and endeavor to settle
things so as might bring the People to an Uniformity and Cordial Agreement in
them. As for the state of the Nation, he showed the Queens great unwillingness
to lay new Impositions on them, upon which he run out largely in her
commendation, giving them all assurance that there was nothing she would
endeavor more effectually than the advancing of their Prosperity, and the
preserving their affections. He laid open the loss of Calais, with great
reflections on those who had been formerly in the Government; yet spoke of it
as a thing which they could not at that time hope to recover; and laid before
them the charge the Government must be at, and the necessities the Queen was
in; adding in her Name, that she would desire no Supply, but what they did
freely and cheerfully offer.

One of the first things that the Commons considered, was, whether the want of
the Title of Supreme Head, which the Queen had not yet assumed, was a Nullity
in the Summons for this and other Parliaments in which it had been omitted; but
after this had been considered some days, it was judged to be no nullity; for
the annulling of a Parliament, except it had under a force, or for some other
error in the Constitution, was a thing of Dangerous Consequence.

But leaving the Consultations at Westminster, I shall now give an account of
the Treaty of Peace at Cambray. The Treaty at Cambray.
That at which things stuck most, was the rendering of Calais again to the
English, which the French did positively refuse to do. For a great while Philip
demanded it with so much earnestness, that he declared he would make Peace on
no other terms; since as he was bound in Point of Honor to see the English,
who engaged in the War only on his account, restored to the condition that they
were in at the beginning of it; so his Interest made him desire that they might
be Masters of that Place, by which, it being so near them, they could have the
Convenience of sending over Forces to give a diversion to the French at any
time thereafter, as their Alliances with him should require. But when Philip
saw there was no hope of a Marriage with the Queen, and perceived that she was
making alterations in Religion, he grew less careful of her Interests, and
secretly agreed a Peace with the French. But that he might have some color to
excuse himself for abandoning her, he told her Ambassador, that the French had
offered him full satisfaction in all his own concerns, so that the Peace was
hindered only by the Consideration of Calais; and therefore, unless the English
would enter into a League with him for keeping up the War six years longer, he
must submit to the necessity of his Affairs. The Queen perceiving that she was
to expect no more assistance from the Spaniard, who was so much engaged to the
old Superstition, that he would enter into no strict League with any whom he
accounted an Heretic, was willing to listen to the Messages that were sent her
from France, by the Constable and others, inducing her to agree to a Peace. She
on the other hand complained that the Queen of Scotland, and her Husband in her
Right, had assumed the Title and Arms of England: It was answered, That was
done as the younger Brothers in Germany carried the Title of the great Families
from whence they were descended; and for Titles, the Queen of England had
little reason to quarrel about that, since she carried the Title, and gave the
Arms of France.

A Peace with France agreed to.
The Queen and her Council saw it was impossible for her to carry on the War
with France alone. The laying heavy Impositions on her Subjects in the
beginning of her Reign, might render her very ungrateful to the Nation, who
loved not to be charged with many Subsidies: and when the War should produce
nothing but some Wastes on the French Coasts, which was all that could be
expected, since it was unreasonable to look for the Recovery of Calais, it
might turn all the Joy they were now in at her coming to the Crown into as
general a discontent. It was the ruin of the Duke of Somerset, that he had
engaged in a War in the beginning of King Edwards Reign, when he was making
Changes in Religion at home: therefore it was necessary to yield to the
necessity of the time, especially since the loss of Calais was no reproach on
the Queen, but on her Sister: so it was resolved on, to make a general Peace,
that being at quiet with their Neighbors, they might with the less danger
apply themselves to the correcting what was amiss in England, both in Religion,
and the Civil Government. At length a Peace was made on these terms, That there
should be free Commerce between the Kingdoms of England, France, and Scotland:
the French should keep Calais for eight years; and at the end of that time
should deliver it to the English: and if it were not then delivered, they
should pay to the English 500000 Crowns, for which they should give good
security by Merchants that lived in other Parts, and give Hostages till the
Security were given: but if during these years the Queen made War on France, or
Scotland, she was to lose her Right to that Town; or if the French or Scots
made War on her, Calais should be presently restored; to which she was still to
reserve her Right: Aymouth in Scotland was to be razed, and a Commission was to
be sent down to some of both Kingdoms, to agree all lesser differences. On
these terms a Peace was made, and proclaimed between those Crowns; to which
many of the English, that did not apprehend what the charge of a War for the
regaining of Calais would have amounted to, were very averse; thinking it
highly dishonorable, that they, whose Ancestors had made such Conquests in
France, should be now beaten out of the only remainder that they had on the
Continent; and thus make a Peace by which it was in effect parted with for
ever. For all these Conditions about restoring it were understood to be only
for palliating so Inglorious a business. But the Reformed cast the blame of
this on the Papists; and some moved, that all the late Queens Council should be
questioned for their Misgovernment in that Particular: for it was thought,
nothing would make them so odious to the Nation, as the charging that on them.
They on the other hand did cast the blame of it on the Lord Wentworth, that had
been Governor of Calais, and was now professedly one of the Reformed, and had
been very gentle to these of that Persuasion during his Government. But he put
himself on a Trial by his Peers, which he underwent on the 22d of April, and
there did so clear himself, that he was by the Judgment of the Peers acquitted.

The Queens Government being thus quieted abroad, The Proceedings of the
Parliament.
she was thereby at more leisure to do things at home. The first Bill that was
put into the House of Lords to try their affections and disposition to a Change
in the matters of Religion, was that for the Restitution of the Tenths and
First Fruits to the Crown. It was agreed to by the Lords on the fourth of
February, having been put in the 30th of January, and was the first Bill that
was read: the Archbishop of York, the Bishops of London, Worcester, Landaffe,
Litchfield, Exeter, Chester, and Carlisle, protested against it, these were all
of that Order that were at the Session, except the Bishops of Winchester,
Lincoln, Ely, and the Abbot of Westminster, who it seems were occasionally
absent. On the sixth of February it was sent down to the Commons, to which they
readily agreed; and so it had the Royal Assent. By it, not only the Tenths and
First Fruits were again restored to the Crown, but also all Impropriated
Benefices which had been surrendered up by Queen Mary.

They address to the Queen for her marrying.
But the Commons, reflecting on the Miseries in which they had been lately
involved by Queen Mary's Marriage, had much debate about an Address to the
Queen to induce her to marry. On the fourth of February it was argued in the
House of Commons; and on the sixth, the Speaker, with the Privy-Counsellors of
the House, and thirty Members more, were sent with their desires to the Queen.
They expressed the affections of the Nation to her, and said, That if they
could hope she might be Immortal they would rest satisfied; but that being a
vain Imagination, they earnestly besought her to choose such a Husband as might
make the Nation and her self happy; and by the blessing of God, bring such
Issue as might Reign after her death, which they prayed God might be very late.
The Queens Answer.
She said, She looked on that as an expression both of their affection and
respect, since they had neither limited Time nor Place. She declared that she
had hitherto lived in a single state with great satisfaction; and had neither
entertained some Honorable Propositions which, the Lord Treasurer knew, had
been made to her in her Brothers time, nor had been moved by the fears of death
that she was in, while she was under her Sisters displeasure, (of which she
would say little; for though she knew, or might justly suspect, by whose means
it was, yet she would not utter it, nor would she charge it on the Dead, or
cast the burden of it wholly upon her Sister:) But she assured them, if ever
she married, she would make such a Choice as should be to the satisfaction and
good of her People: She did not know what credit she might yet have with them;
but she knew well, she deserved to have it, for she was resolved never to
deceive them: Her People were to her in stead of Children, and she reckoned her
self married to them, by her Coronation: They would not want a Successor when
she died; and for her part, she should be well contented that the Marble should
tell Posterity, HERE LIES A QUEEN THAT REIGNED SO LONG, AND LIVED AND DIED A
VIRGIN: She took their Address in good part, and desired them to carry back her
hearty thanks for the care the Commons had of her.

The Journals of the House of Lords are imperfect, so that we find nothing in
them of this matter: yet it appears that they likewise had it before them: for
the Journals of the House of Commons have it marked, that on the fifteenth of
February, there was a Message sent from the Lords, desiring that a Committee of
thirty Commoners might meet with twelve Lords to consider what should be the
Authority of the Person whom the Queen should marry. The Committee was
appointed to treat concerning it; but it seems, the Queen desired them to turn
to other things that were more pressing: for I find nothing, after this, entered
in the Journals of this Parliament concerning it.

On the ninth of February the Lords past a Bill for the Recognizing of the
Queens Title to the Crown. They recognize her Title to the Crown.
It had been considered whether as Queen Mary had procured a former Repeal of
her Mothers Divorce, and of the Acts that passed upon it declaring her
Illegitimate, the like should be done now. The Lord Keeper said, The Crown
purged all defects, and it was needless to look back to a thing which would at
least cast a reproach on her Father: the enquiring into such things too
anxiously would rather prejudice than advance her Title. So he advised that
there should be an Act passed in general words asserting the lawfulness of her
descent, and her Right to the Crown, rather than any special Repeal. Queen Mary
and her Council were careless of King Henry's Honor; but it became her rather
to conceal than expose his Weakness. This being thought both Wise and Pious
Council, the Act was conceived in general Words, That they did assuredly
believe and declare, that by the Laws of God and of the Realm she was their
lawful Queen, and that she was rightly, lineally, and lawfully descended from
the Royal Blood, and that the Crown did without all doubt or ambiguity belong
to her, and the Heirs to be lawfully begotten of her Body after her; and that
they, as representing the Three Estates of the Realm, did declare and assert
her Title, which they would defend with their Lives and Fortunes. This was
thought to be very wise Council: for if they had gone to repeal the Sentence of
Divorce which passed upon her Mothers acknowledging a Precontract, they must
have set forth the force that was on her when she made that Confession: and
that, as it was a great dishonor to her Father, so it would have raised
discourses likewise to her Mothers prejudice; which must have rather weakened
than strengthened her Title: And, as has been formerly observed, this seems to
be the true reason why in all her Reign there was no Apology printed for her
Mother. There was another Act passed for the restoring of her in Blood to her
Mother, by which she was qualified, as a private Subject, to succeed, either to
her Grandfathers Estate, or to any others by that Blood.

But for the matters of Religion, the Commons began; The Acts that were passed
concerning Religion.
and on the fifteenth of February, brought in a Bill for the English Service,
and concerning the Ministers of the Church. On the 21st a Bill was read for
annexing the Supremacy to the Crown again; and on the 17th of March another
Bill was brought in, confirming the Laws made about Religion in King Edwards
time: and on the 21st another was brought in, That the Queen should have the
Nomination of the Bishops, as it had been in King Edwards time. The Bill for
the Supremacy was past by the Lords on the 18th of March; the Archbishop of
York, the Earl of Shrewsbury, the Viscount Mountacute, and the Bishops of
London, Winchester, Worcester, Landaffe, Coventry and Litchfield, Exeter,
Chester, and Carlisle, and the Abbot of Westminster, dissenting. But afterward
the Commons annexed many other Bills to it, as that about the Queens making
Bishops, not according to the Act made in King Edwards time, but by the old way
of Elections, as it was Enacted in the 25th Year of her Fathers Reign, with
several Provisoes; which passed in the House of Lords with the same dissent. By
it, all the Acts past in the Reign of King Henry, for the abolishing of the
Popes Power, are again revived; and the Acts in Queen Mary's time, to the
contrary, are repealed. There was also a Repeal of the Act made by her for
proceeding against Heretics. They revived the Act made in the first Parliament
of King Edward, against those that spoke irreverently of the Sacrament, and
against private Masses, and for Communion in both kinds: And declared the
Authority of Visiting, Correcting, and Reforming all things in the Church, to
be for ever annexed to the Crown, which the Queen and her Successors might by
her Letters Patents depute to any Persons to exercise in her Name. All Bishops,
and other Ecclesiastieal Persons, and all in any Civil Employment, were
required to swear that they acknowledged the Queen to be the Supreme Governor
in all Causes as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal within her Dominions; that
they renounced all Foreign Power and Jurisdiction; and should bear the Queen
Faith and true Allegiance: Whosoever should refuse to swear it, was to forfeit
any Office he had either in Church or State; and to be from thenceforth
disabled to hold any Employment during Life. And if within a Month after the
end of that Session of Parliament, any should, either by discourse or in
writing, set forth the Authority of any Foreign Power, or do any thing for the
advancement of it, they were to forfeit all their Goods and Chattels: and if
they had not Goods to the value of twenty Pounds, they were to be Imprisoned a
whole year; and for the second offense they were to incur the Pains of a
Praemunire: and the third offense in that kind was made Treason. To this a
Proviso was added, That such Persons as should be Commissioned by the Queen to
Reform and Order Ecclesiastical Matters, should judge nothing to be Heresy but
what had been already so Judged, by the Authority of the Canonical Scriptures,
or by the first four General Councils, or by any other General Council in which
such Doctrines were declared to be Heresies by the express and plain Words of
Scripture: All other Points, not so decided, were to be judged by the
Parliament with the assent of the Clergy in their Convocation.

This Act was in many things short of the Authority that King Henry had
claimed, and the severity of the Laws he had made. The Title of Supreme Head
was left out of the Oath: This was done to mitigate the Opposition of the
Popish Party; but besides, the Queen her self had a scruple about it, which was
put in her Head by one Lever, a famous Preacher among those of the Reformation,
of which Sands, afterward Bishop of Worcester, complained to Parker in a
Letter that is in the Collection. Collection Number 2.
There was no other punishment inflicted on those that denied the Queens
Supremacy, but the loss of their Goods; and such as refused to take the Oath,
did only lose their Employments; whereas to refuse the Oath in King Henry's
time, brought them into a Praemunire, and to deny the Supremacy was Treason.
The Bishops oppose the Queens Supremacy.
But against this Bill the Bishops made Speeches in the House of Lords. I have
seen a Speech of this kind was said to have been made by Archbishop Heath; but
it must be forgery put out in his Name: for he is made to speak of the
Supremacy as a new and unheard of thing, which he, who had sworn it so often in
King Henry's and King Edwards times, could not have the face to say. The rest
of the Bishops opposed it, the rather, because they had lately declared so high
for the Pope that it had been very indecent for them to have revolted so soon.
The Bishop of Duresme came not to this Parliament. There were some hopes of
gaining him to concur in the Reformation: for in the Warrant the Queen
afterward gave to some for Consecrating the new Bishops, he is first named;
and I have seen a Letter of Secretary Cecils to Parker, that gives him some
hope that Tonstal would join with them. He had been offended with the Cruelties
of the late Reign; and though the resentments he had of his ill usage in the
end of King Edwards time, had made him at first concur more heartily to the
restoring of Popery, yet he soon fell off, and declared his dislike of those
violent Courses; and neither did he, nor Heath, bring any in trouble within
their Diocesses upon the account of Religion; though it is hardly credible that
there was no occasion for their being severe, if they had been otherwise
inclined to it. The Bishop of Ely was also absent at the passing of this Act;
for though he would not consent to it, yet he had done all that was prescribed
by it so often before, that it seems he thought it more decent to be absent,
than either to consent to it, or to oppose it.

The Power that was added for the Queens Commissionating some to Execute her
Supremacy, gave the Rise to that Court, which was commonly called the High
Commission Court; The beginning of the High Commission.
and was to be in the room of a single Person, to whom, with the Title of Lord
Vicegerent, King Henry did delegate his Authority. It seems, the Clergymen
with whom the Queen consulted at this time, thought this too much to be put in
one Man's Hand, and therefore resolved to have it shared to more Persons, of
whom a great many would certainly be Churchmen: so that they should not be
altogether kept under by the hard Hands of the Laity, who having groaned long
under the Tyranny of an Ecclesiastical Yoke, seemed now disposed to revenge
themselves by bringing the Clergy as much under them; for so Extremes do
commonly rise from one another.

The Popish Clergy were now every where beginning to declaim against Innovation
and Heresy. Harpsfield had, in a Sermon at Canterbury in February, stirred the
People much to Sedition: and the Members belonging to that Cathedral had openly
said, that Religion should not nor could not be altered. The Council also heard
that the Prebendaries there had bought up many Arms: so a Letter was written to
Sir Thomas Smith, to examine that matter. Harpsfield was not put in Prison, but
received only a Rebuke. There came also complaints from many other Places of
many Seditious Sermons: So the Queen, following the Precedent her Sister had
set her, did, in the beginning of March, forbid all Preaching, except by such
as had a License under the Great Seal. But lest the Clergy might now in the
Convocation set out Orders in opposition to what the Queen was about to do; she
sent, and required them, under the Pains of a Praemunire, to make no Canons.
Yet Harpsfield, that was Prolocutor, with the rest of the lower House, made an
Address to the upper House, to be by them presented to the Queen, for the
discharge of their Consciences. They reduced the Particulars into five
Articles. 1. That Christ was corporally present in the Sacrament. 2. That there
was no other Substance there but his Body and Blood. 3. That in the Mass there
was a Propitiatory Sacrifice for the Dead and the Living. 4. That St. Peter and
his lawful Successors had the Power of feeding and governing the Church. 5.
That the Power of treating about Doctrine, the Sacraments, and the Order of
Divine Worship, belonged only to the Pastors of the Church. These they had sent
to the two Universities, from whence they were returned, with the Hands of the
greatest part in them to the first four; but it seems they thought it not fit
to sign the last: For now the Queen had resolved to have a public Conference
about Religion in the Abby-Church of Westminster.

The Archbishop of York was continued still to be of the Council; so the
Conference being proposed to him, he, after he had Communicated it to his
Brethren, accepted of it, though with some unwillingness. It was appointed that
there should be nine of a side, who should confer about these three Points. 1.
Whether it was not against the Word of God, and the Custom of the Ancient
Church, to use a Tongue unknown to the People, in the Common Prayers and the
Administration of the Sacraments? 2. Whether every Church had not Authority to
appoint, change, and take away, Ceremonies, and Ecclesiastical Rites, so the
same were done to edification. 3. Whether it could be proved by the Word of
God, that in the Mass there was a Propitiatory Sacrifice for the Dead, and the
Living? All was ordered to be done in Writing. The Bishops, as being actually
in Office, were to read their Papers first upon the first Point, and the
Reformed were to read theirs next; and then they were to exchange their Papers,
without any discourse concerning them, for the avoiding of jangling. The next
day they were to read their Papers upon the second, and after that, upon the
third Head: and then they were to answer one another Papers. The Nine on both
sides were, the Bishops of Winchester, Litchfield, Chester, Carlisle, and
Lincoln, and Doctors Cole, Harpsfield, Langdale, and Chedsey, on the Popish
side: and Scory late Bishop of Chichester, Cox, Whitehead, Grindal, Horn,
Sands, Guest, Almer, and Jewel, for the Protestants. The last of March was
appointed to be the first day of Conference, where the Privy Council was to be
present, and the Lord Keeper was to see that they should not depart from the
Rules to which they had agreed.

The noise of this drew vast numbers of People to so unusual a sight: it being
expected that there should be much fairer dealings now, than had been in the
Disputes in Queen Mary's time. The whole House of Commons came to hear it, as
no doubt the Lords did also, though it is not marked in their Journal. At their
meeting, the Bishop of Winchester said their Paper was not quite ready, and
pretended they had mistaken the Order: But Dr. Cole should deliver what they
had prepared, though it was not yet in that order that they could copy it out.
The Secret of this was, the Bishops had in their private Consultations agreed
to read their Paper, but not to give those they called Heretics a Copy of it:
They could not decently refuse to give a public account of their Doctrine, but
they were resolved not to enter into Disputes with any about it: This seemed to
be the giving up of the Faith, if they should suffer it again to be brought
into question: Besides, they looked on it as the Highest Act of Supremacy, for
the Queen to appoint such Conferences: for she and her Council would pretend to
judge in these Points, when they had done disputing. For these Reasons they
would not engage to make any Exchange of Papers. The Lord Keeper took notice
that this was contrary to the Order laid down at the Council Board, to which
the Archbishop of York had in their Names consented. But they pretending they
had mistaken the Order, Cole was appointed to deliver their Minds, which he did
in a long Discourse, the greatest part of which he read out of a Book, that
will be found in the Collection. Collection Number 4.
For though they refused to deliver a Copy of it, yet Parker some way procured
it, among whose Papers I found it. The Substance of it was, Arguments for the
Latin Service.
That although it might seem that the Scriptures had appointed the Worship of
God to be in a known Tongue; yet that might be changed by the Authority of the
Church, which had changed the Sabbath, appointed in the Scripture, without any
Authority from thence. Christ washed his Disciples Feet, and bid them do the
like, yet this was not kept up: Christ Instituted the Sacrament of his Body and
Blood after Supper; and yet the Church appointed it to be received fasting: so
had the Church also given it only in one kind, though Christ himself gave it in
both: And whereas the Apostles, by Authority from the Holy Ghost, commanded all
Believers to abstain from Blood, yet that was not thought to oblige any now:
and though there was a Community of Goods in the Apostles times, it was no
obligation to Christians to set up that now: so that this matter was in the
Power of the Church. And since the Church of Rome had appointed the Latin
Service to be every where used, it was Schismatical to separate from it: for
according to Ireneus, all Churches ought to agree with her, by reason of her
great Preeminence. Upon which they run out largely to show the mischiefs of
Schism, both in France, Spain, Germany, and in other Countries. And for the
Britains and Saxons of England, their first Apostles, that converted them to
Christianity, were Men of other Nations, and did never use any Service but that
of their Native Language. All the Vulgar Tongues did change much, but the Latin
was ever the same: and it was not fit for the Church to be changing her
Service. The Queen of Ethiopia's Eunuch read Isaiah's Book, though he
understood it not; upon which, God sent Philip to him to expound it: So the
People are to come to their Teachers, to have those things explained to them
which they cannot understand of themselves. There were many Rites in the Jewish
Religion, the signification whereof the People understood as little then, as
the Vulgar do the Latin now; and yet they were commanded to use them. The
People were to use their private Prayers in what Tongue they pleased, though
the public Prayers w^^^ put up in Latin; and such Prayers may be for their
profit, though they understand them not, as absent Persons are the better for
the Prayers which they do not hear, much less understand. They said, it was not
to be thought that the Holy Ghost had so long forsaken his Church, and that a
few lately risen up were to teach all the World. They concluded, that they
could bring many more Authorities; but they, being to defend a Negative,
thought it needless, and would refer these to the Answers they were to make.

Arguments against it.
When this was done, the Lord Keeper turned to those of the other side, and
desired them to read their Paper. Horn was appointed by them to do it. He began
with a short Prayer to God to enlighten their minds, and with a Protestation
that they were resolved to follow the Truth according to the Word of God. Then
he read his Paper, which will be also found in the Collection. Collection
Number 3.
They founded their Assertion on St. Paul's words, who, in the 14th Chapter of
his first Epistle to the Corinthians, had treated on that Subject of set
purpose; and spoke in it, not only of Preaching, but of Praying with the
Understanding; and said, that the Unlearned were to say Amen at the giving of
Thanks. From that Chapter they argued, that St. Paul commanded that all things
should be done to Edification, which could not be by an unknown Language: He
also charged them that nothing should be said that had an uncertain sound; and
that, as the sound of a Trumpet must be distinct, so the People must understand
what is said, that so they might say Amen at the giving of Thanks. He also
required those that spoke in a strange Language, and could not get one to
interpret, to hold their peace; since it was an absurd thing for one to be a
Barbarian to others in the Worship of God: and though the speaking with strange
Tongues was then an extraordinary Gift of God, yet he ordered that it should
not be used where there was no Interpreter. They added, that these things were
so strictly commanded by St. Paul, that it is plain they are not indifferent,
or within the Power of the Church. In the Old Testament, the Jews had their
Worship in the Vulgar Tongue; and yet the new Dispensation being more Internal
and Spiritual, it was absurd that the Worship of God should be less understood
by Christians, than it had been by the Jews. The chief end of Worship is,
according to David, that we may show forth Gods Praises, which cannot be done,
if it is in a strange Tongue. Prayer is the offering up of our desires to God,
which we cannot do, if we understand not the Language they are in. Baptism and
the Lords Supper are to contain Declarations of the Death and Resurrection of
Christ, which must be understood, otherwise why are they made? The use of
Speech is to make known what one brings forth to another. The most Barbarous
Nations perform their Worship in a known Tongue, which shows it to be a Law of
Nature. It is plain from Justin Martyrs Apology, that the Worship was then in a
known Tongue; which appears also from all the Ancient Liturgies: and a long
Citation was brought out of St. Basil, for the singing of Psalms, duly weighing
the Words with much attention and devotion; which, he says, was practiced in
all Nations. They concluded, wondering how such an abuse could at first creep
in, and be still so stiffly maintained; and wh^^ those who would be thought the
Guides and Pastors of the Church, were so unwilling to return to the Rule of
St. Paul, and the Practice of the Primitive Times.

There was a great shout of Applause, when they had done. They gave their
Paper, signed with all their Hands, to the Lord Keeper, to be delivered to the
other side, as he should think fit. But he kept it till the other side should
bring him theirs. The Papists, upon this, said; they had more to add on that
Head, which was thought disingenuous by those that had heard them profess they
had nothing to add to what Cole had said. Thus the Meeting broke up for that
day, being Saturday; and they were ordered to go forward on Monday, and to
prepare what they were to deliver on the other two Heads. The Papists, though
they could complain of nothing that was done, except the applause given to the
Paper of the Reformers; yet they saw by that, how much more acceptable the
other Doctrine was to the People; and therefore resolved to go no further in
that matter. At the next meeting, they desired that their Answer to the Paper
read by the Reformed might be first heard: To this the Lord Keeper said, That
they had delivered their mind the former day, and so were not to be heard till
they had gone through the other Points; and then they were to return on both
sides to the answering of Papers. They said that what Cole had delivered the
former day, was Ex tempore, and of himself; but it had not been agreed on by
them. This appeared to all the Assembly to be very foul dealing; so they were
required to go on to the second Point. Then they pressed that the other side
might begin with their Paper, and they would follow: for they saw what an
advantage the others had the former day, by being heard last. The Lord Keeper
said, the Order was that they should be heard first, as being Bishops now in
Office. But both Winchester, and Lincoln, refused to go any further, if the
other side did not begin. Upon which there followed a long debate; Lincoln
saying that the first Order, which was, that all should be in Latin, was
changed; and that they had prepared a Writing in Latin: But in this, not only
the Counselors, among whom sat the Archbishop of York, but the rest of his
own Party contradicted him. In conclusion, all, except Fecknam, refused to read
any more Papers: he said, he was willing to have done it, but he could not
undertake such a thing alone; and so the Meeting broke up.

But the Bishops of Winchester, and of Lincoln, said, The Conference between
the Papists and Protestants breaks up.
the Doctrine of the Catholic Church was already established, and ought not to
be disputed; except it were in a Synod of Divines: that it was too great an
encouragement to Heretics, to hear them thus discourse against the Faith
before the unlearned Multitude: and that the Queen by so doing had incurred the
Sentence of Excommunication; and they talked of excommunicating her and her
Council. Upon this they were both sent to the Tower. The Reformed took great
advantage from the Issue of this Debate, to say, their Adversaries knew that
upon a fair hearing the Truth was so manifestly on their side, that they durst
not put it to such hazard. The whole World saw that this Disputation was
managed with great Impartiality, and without noise or disorder; far different
from what had been in Queen Mary's time: so they were generally much confirmed
in their former belief, by the Papists flying the Field. They on the other hand
said, they saw the rude Multitude were now carried with a Fury against them;
the Lord Keeper was their professed Enemy; the Laity would take on them to
judge, after they had heard them; and they perceived they were already
determined in their minds; and that this Dispute was only to set off the
changes that were to be made with the Pomp of a Victory: and they blamed the
Bishops for undertaking it at first, but excused them for breaking it off in
time. And the Truth is, the strength of their Cause, in most Points of
Controversy, resting on the Authority of the Church of Rome, that was now a
thing of so odious a sound, that all Arguments brought from thence, were not
like to have any great effect. Upon this whole matter, there was an Act of
State made, and Signed by many Privy Counselors, giving an account of all the
steps that were made in it, which will be found in the Collection. Collection
Number 5.


This being over, the Parliament was now in a better disposition to pass the
Bill for the Uniformity of the Service of the Church. Some of the Reformed
Divines were appointed to review King Edwards Liturgy, and to see if in any
Particular it was fit to change it. The only considerable Variation was made
about the Lords Supper, of which somewhat will appear from the Letter of Sandys
to Parker. It was proposed to have the Communion Book so contrived, that it
might not exclude the belief of the Corporal Presence: for the chief design of
the Queens Council was, to unite the Nation in one Faith; and the greatest part
of the Nation continued to believe such a Presence. Therefore it was
recommended to the Divines to see that there should be no express definition
made against it; that so it might lie as a Speculative Opinion, not determined,
in which every Man was left to the Freedom of his own Mind. Hereupon the
Rubric that explained the reason for kneeling at the Sacrament, That thereby
no Adoration is intended to any Corporal Presence of Christ's natural Flesh and
Blood, because, that is only in Heaven, which had been in King Edwards Liturgy,
was now left out. And whereas at the delivery of the Elements in King Edwards
first Liturgy, there was to be said, The Body or Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ
Preserve thy Body and Soul to Everlasting Life; which words had been left out
in his second Liturgy, as favoring the Corporal Presence too much; and in
stead of them, these words were ordered to be used in the distribution of that
Sacrament, Take and eat this, in remembrance that Christ died for thee, and
feed on him in thy Heart by Faith with Thanksgiving; and Drink this in
remembrance that Christ's Blood was shed for thee, and be thankful. They now
joined both these in one. Some of the Collects were also a little altered: and
thus was the Book presented to the House. But for the Book of Ordination, it
was not in express terms named in the Act; which gave an occasion afterward to
question the lawfulness of the Ordinations made by that Book. But by this Act
the Book that was set out by King Edward, and confirmed by Parliament in the
fifth Year of his Reign, was again authorized by Law; and the Repeal of it in
Queen Mary's time was made void. So the Book of Ordinations being in that Act
added to the Book of Common Prayer, it was now legally in force again; as was
afterward declared in Parliament, upon a Question that was raised about it by
Bonner.

The Bill that was put in on the 15th of February, concerning the new Service,
being laid aside, a new one was framed, and sent up by the Commons on the 18th
of April, and debated in the House of Lords: Debates about the Act of
Ueiformity.
Heath made a long Speech against it, rather Elegant than Learned; He enlarged
much on the several Changes which had been made in King Edward's time: he said,
that both Cranmer and Ridley changed their Opinions in the matter of Christ's
presence: he called Ridley the most notably learned Man that was of that way.
These Changes he imputed to their departing from the Standard of the Catholic
Church: he complained much of the robbing of Churches, the breaking of Images,
and the Stage Plays made in mockery of the Catholic Religion. Upon all these
Reasons he was against the Bill. The Bishop of Chester spoke also to it: He
said, the Bill was against both Faith and Charity: that Points once defined
were not to be brought again into question; nor were Acts of Parliament
Foundations for a Churches Belief: he enlarged on the Antiquity of their Forms;
and said, it was an insolent thing to pretend that our Fathers had lived in
Ignorance. The Prophets oftentimes directed the Israelites to ask of their
Fathers. Matters of Religion could not be understood by the Laity. It was of
great consequence to have their Faith well grounded. Jeroboam made Israel to
Sin, when he set up a new way of Worship: and not only the Orthodox, but even
the Arrian Emperors ordered, that points of Faith should be examined in
Councils. Gallio by the light of Nature knew that a Civil Judge ought not to
meddle with matters of Religion: In the Service Book that was then before them,
they had no Sacrifice for their Sins, nor were they to adore Christ in the
Host; and for these reasons he could not agree to it: but if any thought he
spoke this because of his own concern, or pitied him for what he might suffer
by it, he would say in the words of our Savior Weep not for me, Weep for your
selves.

After him spoke Fecknam Abbot of Westminster; He proposed three Rules by which
they should judge of Religion; it is Antiquity, its constancy to it self, and
the influence it had on the Civil Government: he said the old Religion began in
the time of King Lucius, according to Gildas; the Book now proposed, was not
used before the two last years of King Edward: the one was always the same, the
other was changed every second year, as appeared in the point of the Presence
of Christ in the Sacrament: there had been great Order and Obedience in Queen
Mary's Reign; but now every where great Insolences were committed by the
People, with some very indecent Prophanations of the most holy things: he
recommended to them, in St. Austines words, the adhering to the Catholic
Church: the very name Catholic, which Heretics had not the confidence to
assume, showed their Authority. The Consent of the whole Church in all Ages,
with the perpetual Succession of Pastors in St. Peter's Chair, ought to weigh
more with them, than a few new Preachers, who had distracted both Germany and
England of late.

Thus I have given the substance of their Speeches, being all that I have seen
of that side. I have seen none at all on the other side; tho it is not probable
but some were made in defense of the Service, as well as these were against it.
But upon this Occasion I shall set down the substance of the second Paper,
which the Reformed Divines had prepared on the second point, for the Conference
about the Authority of every particular Church to change or take away
Ceremonies. I do not put it in the Collection, because I have not that which
the Papists prepared in Opposition to it. But the heads of this Paper were as
follows.

Arguments for the Changes made in the Service.
It is clear by the Epistles which St. Paul writ to the Corinthians and other
Churches, that every Church has Power in it self to order the Forms of their
Worship, and the administration of the Sacraments, among them, so as might best
tend to Order, Edification, and Peace. The like Power had also the seven Angels
of the Churches to whom St. John writ. And for the first three Ages, there was
no General Meeting of the Church in Synods, but in those times the neighboring
Pastors and Bishops, by mutual advice rather than Authority, ordered their
affairs: and when Heresies sprung up, they condemned them, without staying for
a General Determination of the whole Church. There were also great differences
among them in their Customs, as about observing Lent and Easter. Ceremonies
grew too soon to a great number. When Errors or Abuses appeared, private
Bishops reformed their own Diocesses: So those who came in the room of Arrian
Bishops, even when that Heresy was spread over all the East, and the Sea of
Rome it self was defiled with it, yet reformed their own Churches. Ambrose
finding the custom of Feasting in Churches on the Anniversaries of the Martyrs
gave occasion to great Scandals, took it away. Even in Queen Mary's time, many
of the old Superstitions of Pilgrimages and Relics, which had been abolished
in King Henry's time, were not then taken up again: from which they argued,
that if some things might be altered, why not more? So that if there was good
reason to make any Changes, it could not be doubted but that as Hezekiah and
Josiah had made by their own power, so the Queen might make Reformations: which
were not so much the setting up of new things, as the restoring of the state of
Religion to what it was anciently; which had been brought in by consent of
Parliament and Convocation in King Edward's time. The Rules they offered in
this Paper about Ceremonies, were, that they should not be made necessary parts
of Worship; that they should not be too many, nor dumb and vain, nor should be
kept up for gain and advantage.

These were the Arguments used on both sides: But the Reformed being superior
in number, the Bill passed in the House of Lords; the Archbishop of York, the
Marquess of Winchester, the Earl of Shrewsbury, the Viscount Mountacute, the
Bishops of London, Worcester, Ely, Coventry, Chester, and Carlisle; and the
Lords, Morley, Stafford, Dudley, Wharton, Rich, and North, and the Abbot of
Westminster dissenting. By this Act the new Book was to take place by St. John
Baptist's day.

Another Act passed, That the Queen might reserve to her self the Lands
belonging to Bishoprics, as they fall void, giving the full value of them in
Impropriated Tithes in lieu of them. To this the Bishops dissented on the 7th
of April, when it passed in the House of Lords. But when this came to the
Commons, there was great opposition made to it. Many had observed, that in
Edward the 6th's time, under a pretense of giving some Endowments to the Crown,
the Courtiers got all the Church Lands divided amongst themselves; so it was
believed the use to be made of this, would be the robbing of the Church,
without enriching the Crown. After many days Debate, on the 17th of April, the
House divided, and 90 were against it, but 133 were for it, and so it passed.

On the 5th of May, another Bill passed with the like opposition. It was for
annexing of all Religious Houses to the Crown. After that there followed some
private Acts for declaring the deprivation of the Popish Bishops in K. Edward's
Time to have been good. When they were restored by Q. Mary, the Sentences
passed against them, were declared to have been void from the beginning; and so
all Leafes that were made by Ridley, Poinet, and Hooper, and the Patents
granted by the King, of some of their Lands, were annulled. It was particularly
remembered in the House of Commons, that Ridley had made the confirming of these
Leases his last desire, when he was going to be tied to the Stake. The ground
on which the Sentences were declared void, was, because the Parties had
appealed, though in the Commission, by virtue of which the Delegates deprived
them, they were empowered to proceed notwithstanding any Appeal. To this, not
only the Bishops, but the Marquess of Winchester, and the Lords, Stafford,
Dudley, and North, dissented.

It shows the great Moderation of this Government, that this Marquess,
notwithstanding his adhering to the Popish Interest in the House of Lords, was
still continued Lord Treasurer; which employment he held fourteen Years after
this, and died in the 97th Year of his Age, leaving 103 issued from his own
Body, behind him. He was the greatest instance of good Fortune and Dexterity,
that we find in the English History; who continued Lord Treasurer in three such
different Reigns, as King Edward's, Queen Mary's, and Queen Elizabeth's were.

There was a Subsidy, and two Tenths, and two Fifteenths given by the
Parliament, with the Tonnage and Poundage, for the Queen's Life; and so on the
8th of May it was dissolved.

There were three Bills that did not pass in the House of Commons, Bills that
were proposed, but not passed.
but upon what account they were laid aside, it does not appear. The one was
for the Restoring of the Bishops that had been deprived by Q. Mary. There were
but three of these alive, Barlow, Scory, and Coverdale; the first of these had
resigned, and the last, being old, had no mind to return to his Bishopric: So
perhaps it was not thought worth the while to make an Act for one Man's sake,
especially since there were so many vacant Bishoprics in the Queen's hands,
and more were like to fall. The other Bill was, for the restoring of all
Persons that were deprived from their Benefices because they were married. This
the Queen odered to be laid aside; of which Sands complained much in his Letter
to Parker: But yet the Queen took no notice of the Laws formerly made against
their Marriage; and promoted many married Priests, particularly Parker himself.
There was no Law now in force against Clergy-mens marrying; for Queen Mary had
only repealed the Laws of Edward the 6th, which allowed it, but had made none
concerning that Matter: So there was nothing but the Canon Law against it; and
that was resolved to be condemned, by continuing that Article of Religion
concerning the Lawfulness of their Marriage, among those that should be set
out. The next Bill, that came to nothing, was a new Act for giving Authority to
32 Persons, to revise the Ecclesiastical Laws, and digest them into a Body; it
was laid aside at the second Reading in the House of Commons, and has slept
ever since.

The Bishops refuse the Oath of Supremacy.
When the Parliament was over, the Oath of Supremacy was soon after put to the
Bishops and Clergy. They thought, if they could stick close to one another in
refusing it, the Queen would be forced to dispense with them, Vita Parkeri.
and would not at one stroke turn out all the Bishops in England. It does not
appear how soon after the Dissolution of the Parliament, the Oath was put to
them; but it was not long after, for the last Collation Bonner gave of any
Benefice, was on the 6th of May this Year. The Oath being offered to Heath,
Archbishop of York, to Bonner of London, Thirleby of Ely, Bourn of Bath and
Wells, Christopherson of Chichester, Bain of Litchfield, White of Winchester,
and Watson of Lincoln, Oglethorpe of Carlisle, Turbervile of Exeter, Pool of
Peterburgh, Scot of Chester, Pates of Worcester, and Goldwell of St. Asaph,
they did all refuse to take it: So that only Kitchen Bishop of Landaff took it.
There was some hope of Tonstall; so it was not put to him till September, but
he being very old, chose to go out with so much Company, more for the decency
of the thing, than out of any scruple he could have about the Supremacy for
which he had formerly writ so much. They were, upon their refusal, put in
Prison for a little while; but they had all their Liberty soon after, except
Bonner, White, and Watson. There were great Complaints made against Bonner,
that he had, in many things, in the prosecution of those that were presented
for Heresy, exceeded what the Law allowed; so that it was much desired to have
him made an Example. But as the Queen was of her own nature Merciful, so the
Reformed Divines had learned in the Gospel, not to render Evil for Evil, nor to
seek Revenge; and as Nazianzen had of old exhorted the Orthodox, when they had
got an Emperor that favored them, not to retaliate on the Arrians for their
former Cruelties: So they thought it was for the honor of their Religion, to
give this real demonstration of the Conformity of their Doctrine, to the Rules
of the Gospel, and of the Primitive Church, by avoiding all Cruelty and
Severity, when it looked like Revenge.

The Queen's gentleness to them.
All this might have been expected from such a Queen, and such Bishops. But it
showed a great temper in the whole Nation, that such a Man as Bonner had been,
was suffered to go about in safety, and was not made a Sacrifice to the Revenge
of those who had lost their near Friends by his means. Many things were brought
against him, and White, and some other Bishops; upon which the Queen promised
to give a Charge to the Visitors, whom she was to send over England, to enquire
into these things; and after she had heard their Report, she said, she would
proceed as she saw cause: by this means she did not deny justice, but gained a
little time to take off the Edg that was on Men's Spirits, who had been much
provoked by the ill usage they had met with from them.

Heath was a Man of a generous temper, and was so well used by the Queen, for
as he was suffered to live securely at his own House in Surrey, so she went
thither sometimes to visit him. Tonstall and Thirleby lived in Lambeth with
Parker, with great freedom and ease; the one was Learned and good natured, the
other was a Man of Business: but too easy and flexible. White and Watson were
morose sullen Men; to which their Studies, as well as their Tempers, had
disposed them; for they were much given to Scholastical Divinity, which
inclined Men to be Cinical, to overvalue themselves, and despise others.
Christopherson was a good Grecian, and had translated Eusebius and the other
Church Historians into Latin, but with as little fidelity, as may be expected
from a Man violently addicted to a Party. Bain was learned in the Hebrew, which
he had professed at Paris, in the Reign of Francis the First. All these chose
to live still in England; only Pates, Scot, and Goldwell, went beyond Sea.
After them went the Lord Morley, Sir Francis Englefield, Sir Robert Peckham,
Sir Thomas Shelley, and Sir John Gage; who it seems, desired to live where they
might have the free exercise of their Religion: And such was the Queen's
gentleness, that this was not denied them, tho such favor had not been showed
in Q. Mary's Reign. Feeknam Abbot of Westminster, was a charitable and generous
Man, and lived in great esteem in England. Most of the Monks returned to a
Secular course of Life, but the Nunns went beyond Sea.

Now the Queen intended to send Injunctions over England, A Visitation and
Injunctions ordered by the Queen.
and in the end of June they were prepared. There was great difficulty made
about one of them; the Queen seemed to think the use of Images in Churches,
might be a means to stir up Devotion, and that at least it would draw all
People to frequent them the more: for the great measure of her Councils was, to
unite the whole Nation into one way of Religion. The Reformed Bishops and
Divines opposed this vehemently; they put all their Reasons in a long Writing
which they gave her concerning it; the Preface and Conclusion of which will be
found in the Collection. Coll. Numb. 6.
They protested they could not comply with that, which, as it was against their
own Consciences, so it would prove a Snare to the Ignorant: they had often
pressed the Queen in that Matter; The Queen inclined to retain Images in
Churches.
which, it seems, stuck long with her: They prayed her not to be offended with
that Liberty they took, thus to lay their Reasons before her, it being a thing
which Christian Princes had at all times taken well from their Bishops. They
desired her to commit that Matter to the Decision of a Synod of Bishops and
Divines, and not to do such a thing merely upon some Political Considerations;
which as it would offend many, so it would reflect much on the Reign of her
most Godly Brother, and on those who had then removed all Images, and had given
their Lives afterward for a Testimony to the Truth.

The substance of their Reasons, Reasons brought against it.
(which for their length I have not put in the Collection) is, That the second
Commandment forbids the making of any Images, as a resemblance of God. And
Deuteronomy. 27. there was a Curse pronounced on those who made an Image, an
abomination to the Lord, and put it in a secret place; which they expounded of
some Sacraria in private Houses: and Deuteronomy. 4. among the Cautions Moses gives to
the People of Israel to beware of Idolatry; this is one, that they do not make
an Image, for the use of these does naturally degenerate into Idolatry: The
Jews were so sensible of this after the Captivity, that they would die, rather
than suffer an Image to be put in their Temple. The Book of Wisdom, calls an
Image, A Snare for the feet of the Ignorant. St. John charged those he writ to,
to beware of Idols. So Tertullian said, It was not enough to beware of Idolatry
toward them, but of the very Images themselves. And as Moses had charged the
People not to lay a stumbling block in the way of the Blind; so it was a much
greater Sin to leave such a Trap for the weak Multitude. This was not for
Edification, since it fed the Superstition of the Weak and Ignorant, who would
continue in their former dotage upon them, and would alienate others from the
Public Worship; So that between those that would separate from them if they
were continued, and the Multitude that would abuse them, the number of those
that would use them aright, would be very inconsiderable: The outward splendour
of them would be apt to draw the minds of the Worshippers, if not to direct
Idolatry, yet to staring and distraction of Thoughts. Both Origin and Arnobius
tell us, That the Primitive Christians had no Images at all. Ireneus accused
the Gnostics for carrying about the Image of Christ. St. Austin commends
Varro, for saying, that the old Romans worshipped God more chastely, without the
use of any Images. Epiphanius tore a Veil with an Image on it; and Serenus
broke Images in Gregory the Great's Time. Valens and Theodosius, made a Law
against the Painting or Graving of the Image of Christ: And the use of Images
in the Eastern Churches, brought those distractions on that Empire, that laid
it open to the Invasions of the Mahometans.

These Reasons prevailed with the Queen, to put it into her Injunctions, to
have all Images removed out of the Church.

The Injunctions given by King Edward, at his first coming to the Crown, were
all renewed, with very little variation. To these some things were added, of
which I shall give account.

The Heads of the Injunctions.
It was no where declared, neither in the Scriptures, nor by the Primitive
Church, that Priests might not have Wives; upon which, many in King Edward's
Time had married. Yet great offense was given by the indecent Marriages that
some of them then made. To prevent the like Scandals for the future, it was
ordered, That no Priest or Deacon should marry without allowance from the
Bishop of the Diocese, and two Justices of the Peace, and the Consent of the
Woman's Parents or Friends. All the Clergy were to use Habits, according to
their Degrees in the Universities; the Queen declaring, that this was not done
for any Holiness in them, but for Order and Decency. No Man might use any
Charm, or consult with such as did. All were to resort to their own Parish
Churches, except for an extraordinary Occasion. Innkeepers were to sell
nothing in the Times of Divine Service. None were to keep Images, or other
Monuments of Superstition, in their Houses. None might Preach, but such as were
licensed by their Ordinary. In all Places, they were to examine the Causes, why
any had been in the late Reign Imprisoned, Famished, or put to Death, upon the
pretense of Religion; and all Registers were to be searched for it. In every
Parish the Ordinary was to name three or four discreet Men, who were to see
that all the Parishioners did duly resort on Sundays and Holy Days to Church;
and those who did it not, and upon admonition did not amend, were to be
denounced to the Ordinary. On Wednesdays and Fridays, the Common Prayer and
Litany was to be used in all Churches. All slanderous words, as Papist,
Heretic, Schismatic, or Sacramentary, were to be forborne, under severe pains.
No Books might be printed without a License, from the Queen, the Archbishop,
the Bishop of London, the Chancellor of the Universities, or the Bishop, or
Archdeacon of the Place where it was printed. All were to kneel at the
Prayers, and to show a Reverence when the Name of Jesus was pronounced. Then
followed an Explanation of the Oath of Supremacy, in which the Queen declared
that she did not pretend to any Authority for the ministering of Divine Service
in the Church, and that all that she challenged was that which had at all times
belonged to the Imperial Crown of England; that she had the Sovereignty and
Rule over all manner of Persons under God, so that no Foreign Power had any
Rule over them; and if those who had formerly appeared to have Scruples about
it, took it in that sense, she was well-pleased to accept of it, and did acquit
them of all Penalties in the Act. The next was about Altars and
Communion-Tables; she ordered, that for preventing of Riots, no Altar should be
taken down, but by the consent of the Curat and Churchwardens; that a
Communion Table should be made for every Church, and that on Sacrament days it
should be set in some convenient Place in the Chancel; and at other Times
should be placed where the Altar had stood. The Sacramental Bread was ordered
to be round and plain, without any Figure on it, but somewhat broader and
thicker than the Cakes formerly prepared for the Mass. Then the form of bidding
Prayer was prescribed, with some variation from that in King Edward's Time; for
whereas to the Thanksgiving for God's Blessings to the Church in the Saints
departed this Life, a Prayer was added, That they with us, and we with them,
may have a glorious Resurrection; now those words, they with us, as seeming to
import a Prayer for the Dead, were left out.

For the Rule about Churchmen Marrying, Reflections made on the Injunctions.
those who reflected on it, said, They complained not of the Law, but as St.
Jerome did in the making a Law in his Time, they complained of those that had
given occasion for it. Ministers wearing such Apparel as might distinguish them
from the Laity, was certainly a means to keep them under great restraint, upon
every indecency in their Behavior, laying them open to the Censures of the
People; which could not be, if they were habited so, as that they could not be
distinguished from other Men: and humane nature being considered, it seems to
be a kind of Temptation to many, when they do but think their Disorders will
pass unobserved. Bowing at the Name of Jesus, was thought a fit expression of
their grateful acknowledging of our Savior, and an owning of his Divinity: And
as standing up at the Creed, or at the Gloria Patri, were solemn expressions of
the Faith of Christians; So since Jesus is the Name by which Christ is
expressed to be our Savior, it seemed a decent piece of acknowledging our
Faith in him, to show a Reverence when that was pronounced; not as if there
were a peculiar sanctity or virtue in it, but because it was his proper Name,
Christ being but an Appellation added to it. By the Queen's care, to take away
all words of Reproach, and to explain the Oath of Supremacy; not only clearing
any ambiguity that might be in the words, but allowing Men leave to declare in
what sense they swore it, the moderation of her Government did much appear; in
which, instead of inventing new Traps to catch the Weak, which had been
practiced in other Reigns, all possible care was taken to explain things so,
that they might be as comprehensive to all Interests as was possible. They
reckoned, if that Age could have been on any terms separated from the Papacy,
though with allowance for many other superstitious Conceits, it would once
unite them all; and in the next Age they would be so educated, that none of
those should any more remain. And indeed this Moderation had all the effect
that was designed by it for many Years, in which the Papists came to Church,
and to the Sacraments. But afterward, it being proposed to the King of Spain,
then ready to engage in a War with the Queen, upon the account of her
supporting of the United Provinces, that he must first divide England at home,
and procure from the Pope a Sentence against the Queen, and a condemnation of
such Papists as went to the English Service; and that for the maintaining and
educating of such Priests as should be his Tools to distract the Kingdom, he
was to found Seminaries at Doway, Lovain, and St. Omers, from whence they might
come over hither, and disorder the Affairs of England: The prosecution of those
Counsels, raised the Popish Party among us, which has ever since distracted
this Nation, and has oftener than once put it into most threatening convulsive
Motions, such as we feel at this day.

The first high Commission.
After the Injunctions were thus prepared, the Queen gave out Commissions for
those who should visit all the Churches of England: in which they lost no time,
for the New Book of Service was by Law to take place on St. John Baptist's day;
and these Commissions were signed that same day. Coll. Number. 7.
One of those Commissions, which was for the Archbishopric and Province of
York, is put into the Collection. It was granted to the Earls of Shrewsbury and
Derby, and some others, among whom Dr. Sands is one.

The Preamble sets forth, That God having set the Queen over the Nation, she
could not render an account of that Trust, without endeavoring to propagate
the True Religion with the right way of worshipping God in all her Dominions;
therefore she intending to have a General Visitation of her whole Kingdom,
empowered them, or any two of them, to examine the true State of all the
Churches in the Northern Parts; to suspend or deprive such Clergymen as were
unworthy, and to put others into their Places, to proceed against such as were
obstinate, by Imprisonment, Church-Censure, or any other legal way. They were
to reserve Pensions for such as would not continue in their Benefices, but
quitted them by Resignation; and to examine the condition of all that were
Imprisoned on the account of Religion, and to discharge them; and to restore
all such to their Benefices, as had been unlawfully turned out in the late
Times.

This was the first High Commission that was given out; that for the Province
of Canterbury was, without doubt, of the same nature. The prudence of reserving
Pensions for such Priests as were turned out, was much applauded; since thereby
they were kept from extreme want, which might have set them on to do mischief;
and by the Pension which was granted them upon their good Behavior, they were
kept under some awe, which would not have been otherwise. That which was
chiefly condemned in these Commissions, was, the Queen's giving the Visitors
Authority to proceed by Ecclesiastical Censures, which seemed a great stretch
of her Supremacy: but it was thought, that the Queen might do that, as well as
the Lay-Chancellors did it in the Ecclesiastical Courts; So that one Abuse was
the excuse for another.

These Visiters having made Report to the Queen of the Obedience given to the
Laws and her Injunctions, it was found, that of 9400 Benificed Men in England,
there were no more but fourteen Bishops, six Abbots, twelve Deans, twelve
Archdeacons, fifteen Heads of Colleges, fifty Prebendaries, and eighty
Rectors of Parishes, that had left their Benefices upon the account of
Religion. So compliant were the Papists generally. And indeed the Bishops after
this time had the same apprehension of the danger into which Religion was
brought by the juglings of the greatest part of the Clergy, who retained their
affections to the old Superstition, that those in King Edward's time had: So
that if Queen Elizabeth had not lived so long as she did, till all that
Generation ^as dead, and a new Set of Men better educated and principled, were
gro n up and put in their rooms; and if a Prince of another Religion ^ d
succeeded before that time, they had probably turned about again ^o the old
Superstitions as nimbly as they had done before in Queen Mary's days. That
which supported the superstitious Party in King Edward's time most, was, that
many great Bishops did secretly favor and encourage them: Therefore it was now
resolved to look well to the filling of the vacant Sees.

It has been said before, that Parker Parker's unwillingness to accept of the
Canterbury.
was sent for to London by the Queen's Order, and the Archbishopric of
Canterbury was offered him: he was, upon that, cast into such a perplexity of
mind, that he was out of measure grieved at it. As soon as he was returned
home, he writ a Letter to the Lord Keeper; which, with all the other Letters
that passed in this matter, I have put into the Collection: Coll. Numb. 8.
He professed he never had less joy of a Journey to London, and was never more
glad to get from it, than upon his last being there. He said, It was necessary
to fill that See with a Man that was neither Arrogant, Faint-hearted, nor
Covetous; an Arrogant Man would perhaps divide from his Brethren in Doctrine,
whereas the whole strength of the Church depended on their Unity; but if their
should be Heart-burnings among them, and the private quarrels, that had been
beyond Sea, should be brought home, the Peace of the Church would be lost, and
the Success of all their Design would be blasted: and if a fainthearted Man
were put in, it would raise the Spirits of all their Adversaries; A Covetous
Man was good for nothing. He knew his own unfitness both of Body and Mind, so
well, that though he should be sorry to offend him, and Secretary Cecil, whom
he honored above all Men in the World, and more sorry to displease the Queen;
yet he must above all things avoid God's Indignation, and not enter into a
station into which he knew he could not carry himself so as to answer it either
to God, or the World for his Administration. And if he must go to Prison for
his obstinate untowardness, (with which it seems they had threatened him) he
would suffer it rather with a quiet conscience, than accept of an Employment
which he could not discharge. He said, he intended by God's Grace never to be
of that Order, neither higher nor lower. He knew what he was capable of: he was
poor, and not able to enter on such a station; he had a Rupture which made him
that he could not stir much; therefore he desired some place in the University,
where he might wear out his Life tolerably. He knew he could not answer their
Expectation, which made him so importunate not to be raised so high: He said,
he had great apprehensions of Differences like to fall out among themselves;
which would be a pleasant diversion to those of the Church of Rome: He saw some
Men were Men still, even after all their teaching in the School of Affliction.
He protested he did not seek his own private gain or ease; he had but two or
three years more of life before him, and did not intend to heap up for his
Children. This he writ the first of March.

The business of the Parliament made this Motion to be laid aside, till that
was dissolved; and then on the 17th of May the L. Keeper wrote to him
concerning it: He told him, that he saw by a Resolution taken that day in the
Queen's Presence, that it would be very hard for his Friends to get him
delivered from that Charge. For his own part, if he knew a Man to whom the
Characters in his Letter did agree better than to himself, he should be for
preferring of such a one; but knowing no such, he must be still for him. On the
19th after that, the Lord Keeper, and Secretary Cecil, signed a Letter in the
Queen's Name, requiring him to come up; and after that, they sent a second
Command to him to come to Court, on the 28th of the Month. He came up, but
again excused himself. Yet at last, being so often pressed, he writ to the
Queen her self, protesting that extreme Necessity forced him to trouble her,
both out of Conscience to God, and regard to her Service: he knew his great
unworthiness for so high a Function; therefore as on his Knees he humbly
besought her to discharge him of that Office, which did require a Man of more
Learning, Virtue, and Experience, then he perfectly knew was in himself. He
lamented his being so meanly qualified, that he could not serve her in that
high station; but in any other inferior Office, he should be ready to
discharge his Duty to her, in such a Place as was suitable to his infirmity.
But in the conclusion he submitted himself to Her pleasure. In the end he was
with great difficulty brought to accept of it. So on the 8th day of July the
Conge d' Elire was sent to Canterbury; and upon that, on the 22d of July a
Chapter was summoned to meet the first of August; where the Dean and
Prebendaries meeting, they, according to a method often used in their
Elections, did by a Compromise refer it to the Dean to name whom he pleased:
and he naming Doctor Parker, according to the Queen's Letter, they all
confirmed it, and published their Election, singing Te Deum upon it. On the 9th
of September the Great Seal was put to a Warrant for his Consecration, directed
to the Bishops of Duresm, Bath and Wells, Peterborough, Landaff, and to Barlow,
and Scory (styled only Bishops, not being then elected to any Sees) requiring
them to Consecrate him. From this it appears, that neither Tonstal, Bourn, nor
Pool were at that time turned out: It seems there was some hope of gaining them
to obey the Laws, and so to continue in their Sees.

He is Consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury.
This m^^ter was delayed to the 6th of December. Whether this flowed from
Parker's unwillingness to engage in so high a Station, or from any other secret
Reason, I do not know. But then, the three Bishops last named refusing to do
it, a new Warrant passed under the Great Seal, to the Bishop of Landaff, Barlow
Bishop Elect of Chichester, Scory Bishop engraved portrait of Archibishop of
Canterbury Matthew Parker EFFIGIES MATTHAEI PARKERI ARCHIEPISCOPI CANTUARIENSIS
R. White sculp
engraved coat of arms

Natus Nordorici 1504 August: 6. Decanus Lincoln. sub Edrardo VI.

Consecr. Archiep. Cantuariensis 1559: Dec. 17. Obijt 1575. Maij 17.

Printed for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church yard.

Elect of Hereford, Coverdale late Bishop of Exeter, Hodgkins Bishop Suffragan
of Bedford, John Suffragan of Thetford, and Bale Bishop of Ossory; that they,
or any four of them, should Consecrate him. So by virtue of this, on the 9th of
December, Barlow, Scory, Coverdale, and Hodgkins met at the Church of St. Mary
le Bow; where, according to the Custom, the Conge d' Elire, with the Election,
and the Royal Assent to it, were to be brought before them: and these being
read, Witnesses were to be cited to prove the Election lawfully made; and all
who would object to it were also cited. All these things being performed
according to Law, and none coming to object against the Election, they
Confirmed it according to the usual manner. On the 17th of December Parker was
Consecrated in the Chapel at Lambeth, by Barlow, Scory, Coverdale, and
Hodgkins, according to the Book of Ordinations made in King Edward's time: Only
the Ceremony of putting the Staff in his hands was left out of the Office, in
this Reign. He being thus Consecrated himself, did afterward Consecrate
Bishops for the other Sees: namely, Grindal Bishop of London, Cox, that had
been King Edward's Almoner, Bishop of Ely, Horn Bishop of Winchester, Sandys
Bishop of Worcester, Merick Bishop of Bangor, Young Bishop of S. David's,
Bullingham Bishop of Lincoln, Jewel Bishop of Salisbury, (the great Ornament of
that Age for Learning and Piety;) Davis Bishop of St. Asaph, Guest Bishop of
Rochester, Berkley Bishop of Bath and Wells, Bentham Bishop of Coventry and
Litchfield, Alley Bishop of Exeter, and Par Bishop of Peterborough. Barlow and
Scory were put into the Sees of Chichester and Hereford. And sometime after
this, in February 1561, Young was translated from S. David's to York; there
being now no hopes of gaining Heath to continue in it; which it seems had been
long endeavored, for it was now two years that that See had been in vacancy.
In like manner, after so long waiting to see if Tonstal would conform, there
being now no more hope of it, in March 1561, Pilkington was made Bishop of
Duresme. Best was afterward made Bishop of Carlisle, and Downham Bishop of
Chester.

I have given the more distinct Account of these Promotions, The Fable of the
Nags-head confuted.
because of a most malicious Slander with which they were asperst in
aftertimes. It was not thought on for forty years after this. But then it was
forged, and published, and spread over the World, with great confidence, That
Parker himself was not legally nor truly Consecrated. The Author of it was said
to be one Neale, that had been sometime one of Bonner's Chaplains. The
Contrivance was, that the Bishop of Landaff being required by Bonner not to
Consecrate Parker, or to give Orders in his Diocese, did thereupon refuse it:
Upon that the Bishops Elect being met in Cheapside at the Nags-head-Tavern,
Neale, that had watched them thither, peeped in through an hole of the Door,
and saw them in great disorder, finding the Bishop of Landaff was intractable.
But (as the Tale goes on) Scory bids them all kneel, and he laid the Bible upon
every one of their Heads or Shoulders, and said, Take thou Authority to Preach
the Word of God sincerely, and so they rose up all Bishops. This Tale came so
late into the World, that Sanders, and all the other Writers in Queen
Elizabeth's time, had never heard of it: otherwise we may be sure they would
not have concealed it. And if the thing had been true, or if Neale had but
pretended that he had seen any such thing, there is no reason to think he would
have suppressed it. But when it might be presumed that all those persons were
dead that had been present at Parker's Consecration, then was the time to
invent such a Story; for then it might be hoped that none could contradict it.
And who could tell but that some who had seen Bishops go from Bow-Church to
dine at that Tavern with their Civilians, as some have done after their
Confirmation, might imagine that then was the time of this
Nags-head-Consecration. If it were boldly said, one or other might think he
remembered it. But as it pleased God, there was one then living that remembered
the contrary. The old Earl of Nottingham, who had been at the Consecration,
declared it was at Lambeth, and described all the Circumstances of it, and
satisfied all reasonable men that it was according to the Form of the Church of
England. The Registers both of the Sea of Canterbury, and of the Records of the
Crown, do all fully agree with his Relation. For as Parker's Conge d' Elire,
with the Queen's Assent to his Election, and the Warrant for his Consecration,
are all under the Great Seal: So upon the Certificate made by those who
Consecrated him, the Temporalties were restored by another Warrant also
enrolled; which was to be showed in the House of Lords when he took his Place
there. Besides that the Consecrations of all the other Bishops made by him,
show that he alone was first Consecrated without any other. And above all other
Testimonies, the Original Instrument of Archbishop Parker's Consecration lies
still among his other Papers in the Library of Corpus Christi College at
Cambridge, which I saw and read. It is as manifestly an Original Writing, Coll.
Numb. 9.
as any that I ever had in my hands: I have put it in the Collection, for the
more full discovery of the Impudence of that Fiction. But it served those ends
for which it was designed. Weak people hearing it so positively told by their
Priests, came to believe it; and I have my self met with many that seemed still
to give some credit to it, after all that clear Confutation of it, made by the
most Ingenious and Learned Bishop Bramhall, the late Primat of Ireland.
Therefore I thought it necessary to be the larger in the Account of this
Consecration; and the rather, because of the influence it has into all the
Ordinations that have been since that time derived down in this Church.

Some excepted against the Canonicalness of it, because it was not done by all
the Bishops of the Province, and three of the Bishops had no Sees when they did
it, and the fourth was only a Suffragan-Bishop. But to all this it was said,
That after a Church had been overrun with Heresy, those Rules, which were to
be observed in its more settled state, were always superseded; as appears
particularly when the Arrian Bishops were turned out of some great Sees, for
the Orthodox Bishops did then ordain others to succeed them, without judging
themselves bound by the Canons in such Cases. And Bishops that had been rightly
Consecrated, could certainly derive their own Character to others, whether they
were actually in Sees or not. And a Suffragan-Bishop, being Consecrated in the
same manner that other Bishops were, tho he had a limited Jurisdiction, yet was
of the same Order with them. All these things were made out with a great deal
of Learning by Mason, who upon the publishing of that Fiction, wrote in
Vindication of the English Ministry.

Thus were the Sees filled, the Worship Reformed, and the Queen's Injunctions
sent over England. Three things remained yet to be done. The first was, To set
out the Doctrine of the Church, as it had been done in King Edward's Time. The
second was, To Translate the Bible, and publish it with short Notes. And the
third was, To regulate the Ecclesiastical Courts. The Bishops therefore set
about these. And for the first, Though they could not, by public Authority,
set out the Articles of the Church till they met in a Convocation; yet they
soon after prepared them. And for the present, they agreed on a short
Profession of their Doctrine, which all Incumbents were obliged to read and
publish to their People. This will be found in the Collection, Coll. Number. 11.
copied from it, as it was then printed.

In the Articles made in King Edward's Reign, which I have put in the
Collection, the Reader will find on the Margent the differences between those
and these marked. In the third Article, the explanation of Christ's descent to
Hell, was left out. In that about the Scriptures, they now added an enumeration
of the Canonical and Apocryphal Books; declaring, that some Lessons were read
out of the latter, for the Instruction of the People, but not for the
confirmation of the Doctrine. About the Authority of the Church, they now
added, That the Church had power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and had
Authority in Controversies of Faith; but still subordinate to the Scripture.

In the Article about the Lord's Supper, there is a great deal left out, for
instead of that large refutation of the Corporal Presence, from the
impossibility of a Bodies being in more places at once; from whence it follows,
that since Christ's Body is in Heaven, the Faithful ought not to believe or
profess a Real or Corporal Presence of it in the Sacrament. In the new
Articles, it is said, That the Body of Christ is given and received after a
Spiritual manner; and the means by which it is received, is Faith. But in the
Original Copy of these Articles, M.SS. C. Cor. Christ. Cant.
which I have seen subscribed by the hands of all that sat in either House of
Convocation, there is a further addition made. The Articles were subscribed
with that Precaution which was requisite in a matter of such consequence; for
before the Subscriptions, there is set down the number of the Pages, and of the
Lines in every Page of the Book, to which they set their hands.

In that Article of the Eucharist, these words are added, Christus in Coelum
ascendens, corpori suo immortalitatem dedit, naturam non abstulit: Humanae enim
naturae veritatem, juxta scripturas perpetuo retinet, quam in uno and definito
loco esse, and non in multa vel omnia simul loca diffundi, oportet: Quum igitur
Chistus in Coelum sublatus, ibi usque ad finem Soeculi sit permansurus, atque
inde, non aliunde, (ut loquitur Augustinus) venturus sit ad judicandum vivos
and mortuos, non debet quisquam fidelium, Carnis ejus and Sanguinis realem and
corporalem (ut loquuntur) praesentiam in Eucharistia, vel credere vel
profiteri. In English thus; Christ, An Explanation of Christ's Presence in the
Sacrament.
when he ascended into Heaven, made his Body Immortal, but took not from it the
nature of a Body: For still it retains, according to the Scriptures, the verity
of a humane Body; which must be always in one definite place, and cannot be
spread into many, or all places at once. Since then Christ being carried up to
Heaven, is to remain there to the end of the World, and is to come from thence,
and from no place else, (as says St. Austin) to judge the Quick and the Dead;
None of the Faithful ought to believe or profess the real, or (as they call
it), the corporal Presence of his Flesh and Blood in the Eucharist.

But this in the Original is dashed over with minium; yet so, that it is still
legible. ^u^ it is suppresse^.
The Secret of it was this; The Queen and her Council studied, (as has been
already shown) to unite all into the Communion of the Church: and it was
alleged, that such an express definition against a Real Presence, might drive
from the Church many who were still of that Persuasion; and therefore it was
thought to be enough to condemn Transubstantiation, and to say, that Christ was
present after a Spiritual manner, and received by Faith; to say more, as it was
judged superfluous, so it might occasion Division. Upon this, these words were,
by common consent, left out: And in the next Convocation, the Articles were
subscribed without them, of which I have also seen the Original.

This shows that the Doctrine of the Church, subscribed by the whole
Convocation, was at that time contrary to the belief of a Real or Corporal
Presence in the Sacrament; only it was not thought necessary or expedient to
publish it. Though from this silence, which flowed not from their Opinion, but
the Wisdom of that Time, in leaving a Liberty for different Speculations, as to
the manner of the Presence; some have since inferred, that the chief Pastors of
this Church, did then disapprove of the Definition made in King Edward's Time,
and that they were for a Real Presence.

For the Translating of the Bible, it was divided into many Parcels. The
Pentateuch was committed to William Alley Bishop of Exeter. The Books from
that, to the second of Samuel, were given to Richard Davis, who was made Bishop
of St. David's, when Young was removed to York. All from Samuel, to the second
Book of Chronicles, was assigned to Edwin Sandys, then Bishop of Worcester.
From thence to the end of Job, to one whose Name is marked A. P. C. The Book of
the Psalms was given to Thomas Bentham, Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield. The
Proverbs to one who is marked A. P. The Song of Solomon to one Marked A. P. E.
All from thence to the Lamentations of Jeremy, was given to Robert Horn Bishop
of Winchester. Ezekiel and Daniel, to Bentham. From thence to Malachi, to
Grindal Bishop of London. The Apocripha to the Book of Wisdom, was given to
Barlow Bishop of Chichester, and the rest of it, to Parkhurst Bishop of
Norwich. The Gospels, Acts, and Epistle to the Romans, were given to Richard
Cox Bishop of Ely. The Epistles to the Corinthians, to one marked G. G. I know
not to whom the rest of the New Testament was assigned. All these Allotments I
gather from the Bible it self, as it was afterward set out by Parker. What
Method they followed in this Work, I cannot discover; unless the Rules
afterward given in King James his Time, when the Translation was revived,
Coll. Number. 10.
were copied from what was now done: which Rules, for the curiosity of the
thing, I shall put in the Collection, as I copied it from B. Ravis's Paper.
They were given with that care that such a matter required. There were many
Companies appointed for every parcel of the Scripture, and every one of a
Company was to translate the whole Parcel: then they were to compare these
together; and when any Company had finished their Part, they were to
communicate it to the other Companies. So it is like, that at this Time those
several Bishops that had undertaken the Translation, did associate to
themselves Companies, with whose assistance they perfected it afterward; and
when it was set out, at the end of every Section, the initial Letters of his
Name, that had translated it, were printed, as W. E. E. W. for Will. Exon, and
Edwin Wigorn; and so in the rest. In what Year this was first printed, I am not
so well assured. For I have not seen the first Impression of it, but I believe
it was in the Year 1561, or soon after it; for the Almanac prefixed for the
Moveable Feasts, begins with that Year.

As for the Canons and Rules of the Church Government, they were not so soon
prepared. There came out some in the Year 1571, and more in the Year 1597, and
a far larger Collection of them in the first Year of King James's Reign. But
this Matter has yet wanted its chief force; for Penitentiary Canons have not
been set up, and the Government of the Church is not yet brought into the Hands
of Churchmen. So that in this Point the Reformation of the Church wants some
part of its finishing, in the Government and Discipline of it.

Thus did Queen Elizabeth again recover the Reformation of Religion: and it
might have been expected, The Beginnings of the Divisions of this Church.
that under such moderate and wise Councils, things should have been carried
with that Temper, that this Church should have united in its endeavors to
support it self, and become the Bulwark of the Reformation, and the Terror of
Rome. But that Blessing was, by the Sins of the Nation, the Passions of some,
the Interests of others, and the Weakness of the greatest part, in a great
measure denied us. The Heats that had been raised beyond Sea, were not quite
forgotten; and as some Sparks had been kindled about Clergy-mens Habits in K.
Edward's Reign; so, though Hooper and Ridley had buried that Difference in
their Ashes, it broke out again concerning the Vestments of the Inferior
Clergy. Other things were also much contested. Some were for setting up
Ecclesiastical Courts in every Parish, for the exercising of Discipline against
scandalous Persons; others thought this might degenerate into Faction. These
lesser Differences were craftily managed by some who intended to improve them
so far, that they might have the Church Lands divided among them, and they
carried these Heats further in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, then one would imagine,
that considers the temper of that Government. But since that, still by many
Degrees, and many Accidents in the Civil Government, they are now grown to that
height; that, though considering the Grounds on which they have been, and still
are maintained, they appear to be of no great force or moment: Yet if the
Animosities and Heats that are raised by them, are well examined, there is
scarce any probable hopes left of composing those Differences, unless our
Lawgivers do vigorously apply themselves to it.

The Reformation in Scotland.
Having giving this Account of the Establishment of the Reformation here in
England under Queen Elizabeth: I have, in some sort, discharged my self of the
Design of my Engagement in this Work: but since the Settlement of Religion in
Scotland was made the same Year, I shall next give some account of that; which
I do with the more assurance, having met with several important things relating
to it in Melvill's Memoires, that are in none of the printed Books. When the
Treaty began for a Peace between the two Crowns of France and Spain, the secret
Reason of making it, was, to root out Heresy, so much was expressed in the
Preamble to it, that to extirpate Heresy, to have a General Council called, and
the Church fully Reformed, both from Errors and Abuses, those Princes had
entered into a firm Peace.

The Cardinal of Lorrain writ to his Sister the Queen, Regent of Scotland; that
now, since they were making Peace, they were resolved to purge the World of
Heresy. He also writ to the Archbishop of St. Andrews to the same Effect. The
Queen Regent was much confounded at this. She was now forced to break her Faith
with those who had served her Interests hitherto; and to whom she had often
promised, that they should not be troubled for their Consciences. The danger
was also very great from their Combination, since the Queen of England would
certainly assist them; both because the Religion was the same in both
Countries; and because, by dividing that Kingdom, she would secure the North of
England from the mischief Scotland could do it, if moved and set on to it by
France. But the Bishops in Scotland, shutting their Eyes upon all Dangers,
resolved by some signal Instance, to strike a Terror into the People.

The Archbishop of St. Andrews, having gathered a meeting of many Bishops,
Abbots, and Divines, brought before them one Walter Mill, an old decrepit
Priest, who had long given over saying Mass, and had preached in several places
of the Country. They had in vain dealt with him to recant; Mils M^rtyrdom.
so now he was brought to his Trial. They objected Articles to him, about his
asserting the lawfulness of Priests Marriages; denying the Seven Sacraments;
saying the Mass was Idolatry; denying the Presence of Christ's Flesh and Blood
in the Sacrament; and condemning the Office of Bishops; speaking against
Pilgrimages; and teaching privately in Houses.

To these he answered beyond all their Expectation; for he was so old and
infirm, that they thought he could say nothing. He said, He esteemed Marriage a
blessed Bond, and free for all Men to enter into it; and that it was much
better for Priests to marry, than to vow Chastity and not keep it, as they
generally did. He said, He knew no Sacraments, but Baptism and the Lord's
Supper; the rest he left to them. He said, The Priests sole communicating was,
as if a Lord should invite many to Dinner, and ring a Bell for them to come;
but when they came, should turn his back on them, and eat all himself. He said,
That Christ was only spiritually in the Sacrament; and that there was no other
Sacrifice, but that which he offered on the Cross. He held, That they were
Bishops indeed, who did the Work of a Bishop; and not they who sought only
their sensual Pleasures, and neither regarded the Word of God, nor their
Flocks. He knew Pilgrimages had been much abused, and great Uncleanness was
committed, under the color of going to them; but there was no ground for them
in Scripture.

Upon these Answers he was required to Recant; but he said, he knew he was to
die once, and what they intended to do with him, he wished they would do it
soon. Upon this, he was declared an obstinate Heretic. But the Country was so
alienated from them, that they could not find a Man to burn him; and he that
had the Jurisdiction in that Regality, refused to execute the Sentence. Yet at
last, one of the Archbishops Servants was gotten to undertake it; but in the
whole Town, they could find none that would sell them a Cord to tie him to the
Stake; so they were forced to put it off till the next day; and then, since
none other could be had, the Archbishop sent the Cords of his own Pavilion for
that use. When Mill was brought to the Stake, he said, he would not go up of
his own accord, because he would not be accessory to his own Death; but if they
would put their hand to him, they should see how cheerfully he should do it.
That being done, he went up, and said, I will go in to the Altar of God. He
exhorted the People to be no more seduced by the Lies of their Priests, but to
depend upon Christ and his Mercy; for whose Doctrine, as many Martyrs had
offered up their Lives, so he blessed God that had so honored him to call him
to give this Testimony, for whose Glory he most willingly offered up his Life.
When the Fire was set to him, he called to the People to pray for him, and
continued to cry, Lord have mercy on me, till he could speak no more.

His Suffering was much resented by the Inhabitants of St. Andrews, The Nation
was much provoked by it.
who raised a great heap of Stones in the place where he was burnt, for a
Memorial of it; and though the Priests scattered them often, they renewed them
still, till a Watch was set about it.

In all parts of Scotland, and especially in the Towns, and in the Families of
the Nobility and Gentry, the Reformation had been received, and secretly
professed. So they began now to consult what to do. They had many meetings in
several places; and finding their Interest was great over the Kingdom, they
entered into Confederacies to maintain the true Religion.

Before the Parliament met last Year, they had sent a Petition to the Queen
Regent, That the Worship of God might be in the Vulgar Tongue, and the
Communion might be given in both Kinds: That there should be great care taken
in the Election of Ministers, that it might be according to the Custom of the
Primitive Church; and that scandalous Ministers might be removed, and more
worthy Men put in their Places.

But the Queen Regent, to keep them in hopes till the Dolphin should be
acknowledged King of Scotland, promised they should not be hindered to have
Prayers in their own Tongue, so they would keep no public Assemblies in
Edinburgh and Leith.

In the Parliament, they proposed the abrogating of the Laws for Church-mens
proceedings against Heretics; and that none should be condemned of Heresy, but
according to the Word of God; with some other Limitations of the Severities
against them. But the Queen still gave them good hopes; only she said, she
could not agree to those things, by reason of the opposition that would be made
by the Spiritual Estate: But she suffered them to read a Protestation in
Parliament, declaring their desires of a Reformation; and that if, upon the
denial of it, Abuses were removed violently, they were not to be blamed, who
had begun thus in a modest way to Petition for it.

This Year it was become visible that she resolved to proceed to extremities.
She ordered all the reformed Preachers to appear at Sterling the 10th of May.
When this was done, the Earl of Glencarn went to her in the Name of the rest,
and asked her the reason of that way of proceeding. She answered him in
passion, 'That maugre them and all that would take part with them, the
Ministers should be banished Scotland, though they preached as soundly as St.
Paul did. Upon this, he remembered her of the Promises she had often made them:
to which she answered, 'That the Promises of Princes should be no further
strained then seemed convenient to them to perform. Glencarn replied, 'if she
would keep no Promises, they would acknowledge her no more, but renounce their
Obedience to her.

A Revolt began at St. Johnstoun. ^
That very night she heard that in the Town of St. Johnstoun, the People had
Sermons openly in their Churches. Upon that she ordered the Lord Ruthven to go
and reduce that Town: He answered, he could not govern their Consciences: Upon
which, she vowed she would make him and them both repent it. The Ministers were
coming from all parts, accompanied with many Gentlemen, to appear on the Day to
which they were cited. The Queen hearing that, sent word to them to go home,
for she would not proceed in the Citation. Many of them upon that returned to
their homes, but others went to St. Johnstoun: Yet upon their not appearing,
she made them all be declared Rebels, contrary to her Promise: This made many
leave her, and go over to them at St. Johnstoun. The People began there first
to break Images; and then they fell into the Houses of the Franciscans and
Dominicans, where they found much more Wealth than agreed with their pretended
Poverty. They also pulled down a great House of the Carthusians, with so much
Have, that within two days there was not one Stone left to show where it had
stood: but yet the Prior was suffered to carry away the Plate. All that was
found in these Houses, besides what the Monks carried away, was given to the
Poor. The Queen, hearing this, resolved to make that Town an Example; and sent
over all the Kingdom to gather the French Soldiers together, with such others
as would join with her in this Quarrel. But the Earl of Glencarn with
incredible have came to their assistance, with 2500 Men: And there were
gathered in all, in and about the Town, 7000 Men. The Queen, seeing it now
turned to an open Rebellion, employed the Earl of Argile and the Prior of St.
Andrews to treat with them. An Oblivion for what was past was agreed on: The
Queen was to come to St. Johnstoun, without her Frenchmen: and the matters of
Religion were to be referred to a Parliament. Upon this, she went thither; but
carried Frenchmen with her, and put a Garrison in the Town; and proceeded to
the Fining of many, and the Banishing of others. Being pressed with her
Promise, she said, The Promises of Princes ought not to be strictly urged, and
those were not to be kept that were made to Heretics; she declared that she
would take it on her Conscience, to kill and undo all that Sect, and make the
best excuse she could when it was done. Upon this, all the Nation forsook her:
and in many other places they went on to cleanse the Churches, and pull down
Monasteries.

When the News of this came to the Court of France, it was at first not rightly
understood. The Queen Regent represented it, as if it had been a Design to
shake off the French Power; and desired a great Force to reduce them. The King
then saw too late, that the Constable had given him good Advice, in diswading
the Match with Scotland: The French Kind intends to grant Liberty of Religion.
and fearing to be entangled in a long chargeable War, he resolved to send one
thither to know the true occasion of these Stirrs. So the Constable proposed to
him the sending of Melvil, by whom he had understood, that the Reason of all
their disorders was the Queen's breaking her Word to them in the matters of
Religion. He carried Melvil to the King, and in his presence gave him
Instructions, to go to Scotland, and see what was the true cause of all these
disorders; and particularly, how far the Prior of St. Andrews, (afterward
the Earl of Murray,) was engaged in them; and if he, by secret Ways, could
certainly find there was nothing in it but Religion, that then he should give
them Assurances of the free Exercise of it, and press them not to engage any
further till he was returned to the French Court, where he was promised to find
a great Reward for so important a Service: but he was not to let the Queen
Regent understand his business. He found upon his going into Scotland, that it
was even as he had formerly heard; that the Queen Regent was now much hated and
distasted by them: but that upon an Oblivion of what was passed, and the free
Exercise of their Religion for the future, all might be brought to peace and
quiet. But before he came back, the King of France was dead, the Constable in
disgrace, and the Cardinal of Lorrain governed all: But is killed.
So he lost his Labor, and Reward, which he valued much less, being a generous
and virtuous Man, than the Ruin that he saw coming on his Country.

The Lords that were now united against the, Queen Mother came and took St.
Johnstoun. From thence they went to Stirling, and Edinburgh: and every where
they pulled down Monasteries; all the Country declared on their side; so that
the Queen Regent was forced to fly to Dumbar-Castle. The Lords sent to England
for Assistance, which the Queen readily granted them. They gave out, that they
desired nothing but to have the French driven out, and Religion settled by a
Parliament. The Queen Regent, seeing all the Country against her, and
apprehending that the Q. of England would take advantage from these Stirrs to
drive her out of Scotland, was content to agree to a Truce; A Truce agreed to
in Sc^^l^^d.
and to summon a Parliament to meet on the 10th of January. But the new King of
France sent over Mr. de Croque, with a high threatening Message, that he would
spend the whole Revenue of France rather then not be revenged on them that
raised these Tumults in Scotland. The Lords answered, that they desired nothing
but the Liberty of their Religion: and that being obtained, they should be in
all other things his most obedient Subjects. The Queen Regent, having gotten
about 2000 Men from France, fortified Leith; and in many other things broke the
Truce. There came over also some Doctors of the Sorbonne to dispute with the
Ministers, because they heard the Scottish Clergy were scarce able to defend
their own Cause. The Lords gathered again, and seeing the Queen Regent had so
often broke her Word to them, they entered into Consultation to deprive her of
her Regency. Their Queen was not yet of Age; and in her Minority, they
pretended that the Government of the Kingdom belonged to the States: and
therefore they gathered together many of her Maleadministrations, for which
they might the more colorably put her out of the Government. The Queen Regent
is deposed.
The things they charged on her were chiefly these: That she had without Law
begun a War in the Kingdom, and brought in Strangers to subdue it; had governed
without the consent of the Nobility, embased the Coin to maintain her
Soldiers; had put Garrisons in five Towns; and had broke all Promises and
Terms with them. Thereupon they declared her to have fallen from her Regency,
and did suspend her Power, till the next Parliament. So now it was an
irreconciliable Breach. The Lords lay first at Edinburgh, and from thence
retired afterward to Sterling: Upon which, the French came and possessed
themselves of the Town, and set up the Mass again in the Churches. Greater
Supplies came over from France under the Command of the Marquess of Elbeuf, one
of the Queen Regent's Brothers; who, though most of his Fleet were dispersed,
yet brought to Leith 1000 Foot, so that there were now above 4000 French
Soldiers in that Town. But what Accession of strength soever the Queen Regent
received from these, she lost as much in Scotland; for now almost the whole
Country was united against her; and the French were equally heavy to their
Friends and Enemies. They marched about by Sterling to waste Fife, where there
were some small Engagements between them and the Lords of the Congregation.

But the Scots, The Scots implore the Q. of Englands Aid.
seeing they could not stand before that force that was expected from France
the next Spring, sent to Queen Elizabeth to desire her Aid openly; for the
secret Supplies of Money and Ammunition, with which she hitherto furnished them,
would not now serve the Turn. The Counsel of England apprehended that it would
draw on a War with France: yet they did not fear that much; for that Kingdom
was falling into such Factions, that they did not apprehend any great Danger
from thence till their King was of Age. So the Duke of Norfolk was sent to
Berwick, to treat with the Lords of the Congregation; who were now headed by
the Duke of Chattelherhault. On the 27th of February they agreed on these
Conditions: They were to be sure Allies to the Queen of England; and to assist
her, both in England and Ireland, as she should need their help. She was now on
the other hand, to assist them to drive the French out of Scotland: after
which, they were still to continue in their obedience to their Natural Queen.
This League was to last, during their Queen's Marriage to the French King, and
for a Year after: and they were to give the Queen of England Hostages, who were
to be changed every six Months.

This being concluded, and the Hostages given, the Lord Gray marched into
Scotland with 2000 Horse, and 6000 Foot. Upon that, the Lords sent and offered
to the Queen Regent, that if she would send away the French Forces, the English
should likewise be sent back, and they would return to their Obedience.

This not being accepted, they drew about Leith Leith is besieged by the
English.
to besiege it. In one Sally which the French made, they were beaten back with
the loss of 300 Men. This made the English more secure, thinking the French
would no more come out: but they understanding the ill order that was kept,
sallied out again, and killed near 500 of the English. This made them more
watchful for the future. So the Seige being formed, a Fire broke out in Leith,
which burnt down the greatest part of the Town: the English playing all the
while on them, distracted them so, that the Soldiers being obliged to be on
the Walls, the Fire was not easily quenched. Hereupon the English gave the
Assault, and were beaten off with some loss: but the Duke of Norfolk sent a
supply of 2000 Men more, with the assurance of a great Army, if it was
necessary; and charged the Lord Gray, not to quit the Seige till the French
were gone. Ships were also sent to lie in the Frith, to block them up by Sea.
The French apprehending the total loss of Scotland, sent over Monluc Bishop of
Valence to London, to offer to restore Calais to the Queen of England, if she
would draw her Forces out of Scotland. She gave him a quick Answer on the
sudden her self, that she did not value that Fish-Town, so much as she did the
quiet of Britain. But the French desiring that she could mediate a Peace
between them and the Scots, she undertook that, and sent Secretary Cecil and D.
Wotton into Scotland to conclude it. As they were on the Way, the Queen Regent
died The Queen Regent of Scotland dies.
in the Castle of Edinburgh, on the 10th of June. She sent for some of the
chief Lords before her Death, and desired to be reconciled to them; and asked
them pardon for the Injuries she had done them. She advised them to send both
the French and English Soldiers out of Scotland; and prayed them to continue
in their Obedience to their Queen. She also sent for one of their Preachers,
Willock, and discoursed with him about her Soul, and many other things, and
said unto him, that she trusted to be saved only by the Death and Merits of
Jesus Christ: and so ended her Days; which if she had done a Year sooner,
before these last Passages of her Life, she had been the most universally
lamented Queen that had been in any time in Scotland. For she had governed them
with great Prudence, Justice, and Gentleness; and in her own Deportment, and in
the order of her Court, she was an Example to the whole Nation: but the
Directions sent to her from France, made her change her Measures, break her
Word, and engage the Kingdom in War; which rendered her very hateful to the
Nation. Yet she was often heard to say, that if her Counsels might take place,
she doubted not to bring all things again to perfect Tranquillity and Peace.

The Treaty between England, France, and Scotland, A Peace is concluded.
was soon after concluded. The French were to be sent away within Twenty Days;
an Act of Oblivion was to be confirmed in Parliament; the Injuries done to the
Bishops and Abbots were referred to the Parliament; Strangers and Churchmen
were no more to be trusted with the chief Offices; and a Parliament was to meet
in August for the confirming of this. During the Queen's absence the Nation was
to be governed by a Council of Twelve: of these the Queen was to name seven,
and the States five: the Queen was neither to make Peace nor War, but by the
Advice of the Estates, according to the Ancient Custom of the Kingdom. The
English were to return, as soon as the French were gone: and for the matter of
Religion, that was referred to the Parliament: and some were to be sent from
thence to the King and Queen, to set forth their desires to them: and the Queen
of Scotland was no more to use the Arms and Title of England. All these
Conditions were agreed to on the 8th of July; and soon after, both the French
and English left the Kingdom.

In August thereafter the Parliament Reformation is settled in Scotland by
Parliament.
met, where four Acts passed; one for the abolishing of the Pope's Power. A
second, For the repealing of all Laws made in favor of the former
Superstition. A third, For the punishing of those that said or heard Mass. And
the fourth was, A Confirmation of the Confession of Faith; which was afterward
ratified, and inserted in the Acts of Parliament, held Anno 1567. It was penned
by Knox, and agrees, in almost all things, with the Geneva Confession.

Of the whole Temporalty, none but the Earl of Athol, and the Lords, Somervile
and Borthick, dissented to it: They said, they would believe as their Fathers
had done before them. The Spiritual Estate said nothing against it. The Abbots
struck in with the Tide, upon assurance, that their Abbeys should be converted
to Temporal Lordships, and be given to them. Most of the Bishops, seeing the
Stream so strong against them, complied likewise; and to secure themselves, and
enrich their Friends or Bastards, did dilapidate all the Revenues of the
Church, in the strangest manner that has ever been known; and yet, for most of
all these Leases and Alienations, they procured from Rome Bulls to confirm
them; pretending at that Court, that they were necessary for making Friends to
their Interest in Scotland.

Great numbers of these Bulls I my self have seen and read: So that after all
the noise that the Church of Rome had made of the Sacrilege in England, they
themselves confirmed a more entire waste of the Churches Patrimony in Scotland;
of which there was scarce any thing reserved for the Clergy. But our Kings have
since that time, used such effectual endeavors there, for the recovery of so
much as might give a just encouragement to the Labors of the Clergy; that
universally the inferior Clergy is better provided for in no Nation than in
Scotland; for in Glebe and Tithes, every Incumbent is by the Law provided with
at least 50 l. Sterling a Year; which, in proportion to the cheapness of the
Country, is equal to twice so much in most parts of England. But there are not
among them such Provisions for encouraging the more Learned and deserving Men,
as were necessary. When these Acts of the Scottish Parliament were brought into
France to be confirmed, they were rejected with much scorn; so that the Scots
were in fear of a new War. Francis the 2d died.
But the King of France dying in the beginning of December, all that Cloud
vanished; their Queen being now only Dowager of France, and in very ill terms
with her Mother-in-Law Queen Katherine de Medici, who hated her, because she
had endeavored to take her Husband out of her Hands, and to give him up wholly
to the Counsels of her Uncles. So she being ill used in France, was forced to
return to Scotland, and govern there in such manner, as the Nation was pleased
to submit to.

Thus had the Queen of England separated Scotland entirely from the Interests
of France, and united it to her own: And being engaged in the same Cause of
Religion, she ever after this, had that influence on all Affairs there, that
she never received any disturbance from thence, during all the rest of her
glorious Reign. In which, other Accidents concurred to raise her to the
greatest Advantages in deciding Foreign Contests, that ever this Crown had.

In July after she came to the Crown, Henry the Second of France, The Civil
Wars of France.
was unfortunately wounded in his Eye at a Tilting, the Beaver of his Helmet
not being let down; so that he died of it soon after. His Son Francis the
Second succeeding, was then in the 16th Year of his Age, and assumed the
Government in his own Name; but put it into the hands of his Mother, the
Cardinal of Lorrain, and the Duke of Guise. The Constable was put from the
Court, the Princes of the Blood were not regarded, but all things were carried
by the Cardinal and his Brother; between whom, and the Queen Mother, there
arose great misunderstandings, which proved fatal to the Queen of Scotland; for
she, being much engaged with her Uncles, and having an Ascendant over her
Husband, did so divide him from his Mother, that before he died, she had only
the shadow of the Government. This she remembered ever after against her
Daughter-in-Law, and took no care of her afterward in all her Miseries.

But the Prince of Conde, with the Admiral, and many others, resolving to have
the Government in their Hands, engaged some Lawyers to examine the point of the
King's Majority: These writ several Books on that Subject, to prove that two
and twenty was the soonest that any King had been ever held to be of Age to
assume the Government: and that no Strangers, nor Women, might be admitted to
it by the Law of France, but that it belonged to the Princes of the Blood,
during the King's Minority; who were to manage it by the Advice of the Courts
of Parliament, and the three Estates. So that the Design now concerted between
these great Lords, to take the King out of their hands who disposed of him, was
grounded on their Laws: Yet as this Design was laying all over France, Papists
and Protestants concurring in it, it was discovered by a Protestant, who
thought himself bound in Conscience to reveal it. Upon this, the Prince of
Conde and many others were seized on; and had not the King's Death, in the
beginning of December 1560, saved him, the Prince himself, and all the Heads of
that Party, had suffered for it.

But upon his Death, Charles the Ninth that succeeded him, being but eleven
Years Old, the King of Navarre was declared Regent; and the Queen Mother, who
then hated the Cardinal of Lorrain, united her self to him and the Constable,
and drew the weak Regent into her Interests. Upon this, some Lawyers examining
the Power of the Regents, found that the other Princes of the Blood were to
have their share of the Government with him; and that he might be checked by the
Courts of Parliament, and was subject to an Assembly of the three Estates.

In July, the next Year, there was a severe Edict passed against the
Protestants, to put down all their Meetings, and banish all their Preachers.
The Execution of it was put into the hands of the Bishops; but the greater part
of the Nation would not bear it.

So in January thereafter, another Edict passed, in a great Assembly of the
Princes of the Blood, the Privy Counselors, and eight Courts of Parliament,
for the free exercise of that Religion; requiring the Magistrates to punish
those who should hinder or disturb their Meetings. Soon after this the Duke of
Guise, and his Brother, reconciled themselves to the Queen Mother, and resolved
to break that Edict. This was begun by the Duke of Vassy, where a Meeting of
the Protestants being gathered, his Servants disturbed them; they began with
reproachful Words, from these it went to Blows, and throwing of Stones; and by
one of them the Duke was wounded: for which his Men took a severe Revenge, for
they killed sixty of them, and wounded two hundred, sparing neither Age now
Sex* After this, the Edict was everywhere broken. Many Lawyers were of Opinion,
that the Regent could not do it, and that the People might lawfully follow the
next Prince of the Blood in defense of the Edict.

Upon this, his Brother, the Prince of Conde gathered an Army. In the beginning
of the War, the King of Navarre was killed at the Siege of Roan; so that, by
the Law, the Prince of Conde ought to have succeeded him in the Regency; and
thus the Wars that followed after this could not be called Rebellion; since the
Protestants had the Law and the first Prince of the Blood of their side, to
whom the Government did of right belong.

Thus began the Civil Wars of France, which lasted above thirty Years; in all
which time, the Queen of England, by the Assistance she sent them, sometimes of
Men, but for the most part, of Money and Ammunition, did support the Protestant
Interest with no great Charge to her self. And by that, she was not only
secured from all the Mischief which so powerful a Neighbor could do her, but
had almost the half of that Kingdom depending on her.

The Wars of the Netherlands.
The State of the Netherlands afforded the like Advantages in those Provinces;
where the King of Spain, finding the Proceedings of the Bishops were not
effectual for the Extirpation of Heresy, their Sees being so large, intended to
have founded more Bishoprics, and to have set up the Courts of Inquisition in
those Parts; and apprehending some opposition from the Natives, he kept
Garrisons of Spaniards among them, with many other things, contrary to the
Laetus Intro^^us, that had been agreed to, when he was received to be their
Prince.

The People finding all Terms broken with them, and that by that Agreement they
were disengaged from their Obedience, if he broke those Conditions, did shake
off his Yoke. Upon which followed the Civil Wars of the Netherlands, that
lasted likewise above thirty Years. To them the Queen gave assistance; at first
more secretly, but afterward more openly: and as both they and the French
Protestants were assisted with Men out of Germany, which were generally led by
the brave, but seldom fortunate, Casimir, Brother to the Elector Palatine, so
the money that paid them, was for most part furnished from England.

And thus was Queen Elizabeth the Arbiter of all the Neighboring parts of
Christendom. She at Home brought the Coin to a true Standard: Navigation
prospered; Trade spread, both in the Northern Seas to Archangel, and to the
East and West Indies; and in her long Wars with Spain, she was always
Victorious. That great Armada, set out with such assurance of Conquest, was,
what by the Hand of Heaven in a Storm, what by the unweildiness of their Ships,
and the nimbleness of Ours, so shattered and sunk, that the few remainders of
it returned with irrecoverable shame and loss to Spain again. She reigned in
the Affections of her People, and was admired for her Knowledge, Virtues, and
Wisdom, by all the World. She always ordered her Councils so, that all her
Parliaments, were ever ready to comply with them; for in every thing she
followed the true Interest of the Nation. She never asked Subsidies, but when
the necessity was visible; and when the Occasions, that made her demand any,
vanished, she discharged them.

She was admired even in Rome it self, where Sixtus the Fifth used to speak of
her, and the King of Navarre, Vita de Sisto 5.
as the only Princess that understood what it was to Govern; and profanely
wished, he might enjoy her but one night, hoping they would beget a New
Alexander the Great between them. But if that had been, and the Child had taken
after the Father, it would have been more like Alexander the Sixth.

Notwithstanding all the Attempts of Rome against her Person and Government,
she still lived and triumphed. In the first ten Years of her Reign, all things
were carried with such moderation, that there was no stir about Religion. Pope
Pius the Fourth, reflecting on the capricious and high Answer his mad
Predecessor had made to her Address, sent one Parpalia to her, in the second
Year of her Reign, to invite her to join her self to that See, and he would
disanul the Sentence against her Mothers Marriage; confirm the English Service,
and the use of the Sacrament in both Kinds. But she sent the Agent word to stay
at Brussels, and not to come over. The same Treatment met Abbot Martinengo, who
was sent the Year after with the like Message. From that Time, all Treaty with
Rome was entirely broken off. Pius the Fourth proceeded no further; but his
Successor, Pius the Fifth, resolved to contrive her Death, as he that writ his
Life relates. Catena.


The unfortunate Queen of Scotland, upon the Wars in her Country, was driven to
seek shelter in England, where it was at first resolved to use her well, and to
restore her to her Crown and Country; as will appear by two Papers, which for
their Curiosity, being Originals, I have put into the Collection. Coll. Numb.
12.
The one is the Advice that Sir Henry Mildmay gave about it: the other is a
long Letter written concerning it by the Earl of Leicester to the Earl of
Sussex. They were given me by that most ingenious and virtuous Gentleman, Mr.
Evelyn, who is not satisfied to have advanced the knowledge of this Age, by his
own most useful and successful Labors, about Planting, and diverse other ways,
but is ready to contribute every thing in his Power to perfect other Men's
Endeavors.

But while the English Council intended to have used the Queen of Scotland
well, her own officious Friends, by the frequent Plots that were in a
Succession of many Years carried on, sometimes by open Rebellion, as in the
North of England, and in Ireland, but more frequently by secret Attempts,
brought on her the Calamities of a long Imprisonment, and Death in the
Conclusion.

Her Death was the greatest blemish of this Reign, being generally censured by
all the Age, except by Pope Sixtus the Fifth, Vita de Sisto 5.
who was a Man that delighted in cruel Executions, and so concluded her to be a
happy Woman that had the pleasure to cut off a Crowned Head. But Queen
Elizabeth's own preservation from the many Designs that were against her Life,
made it in some sort, if not necessary, yet more excusable in her: especially
that unfortunate Queen having her self cherished the Plot of Babington and
Ballard, and having set her hand to the Letters that were written to them about
it, though she still denied that, and cast the blame of it on her Secretaries;
who (as she said) had gotten her hand to them without her Knowledge. The Pope
had deposed the Queen (as will appear by his Sentence, which I have put in the
Collection; Coll. Number. 13.
) and the Queen of Scotland being the next Heir to the Crown, and a zealous
Papist, those of that Religion hoped, by destroying the Queen* to set her in
her room; which put England in no small disorder, by Associations, and other
means that were used for preserving the Queen, and destroying the Popish
Interest. The Rebellions and Plots in England and Ireland, were not a little
supported by the Assistance of King Philip of Spain, who did all he could to
embroil the Queen's Affairs at home, though still without Success. But the
steps of the Queen's Proceedings, both against Papists and Puritans, are so set
out by her great and wise Secretary, Sir Francis Walsingham in so clear a
manner, that I shall set it down here as a most important piece of History;
being written by one of the wisest and most virtuous Ministers that these
latter Ages have produced. He wrote it in French to one Monsieur Critoy a
Frenchman, of which I have seen an English Copy, taken (as is said) from the
Original.

SIR,
Walsingham's Letter concerning the Q^een's proceedings against both Papists
and Puritans.
WHereas you desire to be advertized, touching the proceedings here in
Ecclesiastical Causes, because you seem to note in them some Inconstancy and
Variation, as if we inclined sometimes to one side, and sometimes to another;
and as if that Clemency and Lenity were not used of late, that was used in the
beginning: all which you imputed to your own superficial understanding of the
Affairs of this State, having, notwithstanding her Majesty's doings in singular
Reverence, as the real Pledges which she has given unto the World of her
Sincerity in Religion, and of her Wisdom in Government well meriteth. I am glad
of this Occasion, to impart that little I know in that matter unto you, both
for your own Satisfaction, and to the end you may make use thereof, toward any
that shall not be so modestly and so reasonably minded, as you are. I find
therefore her Majesty's Proceedings to have been grounded upon two Principles.

The one, that Consciences are not to be forced, but to be won and reduced by
force of Truth, with the aid of Time, and use of all good means of Instruction
and Persuasion.

The other, that Causes of Consciences when they exceed their bounds, and grow
to be matter of Faction, loose their Nature, and that Sovereign Princes ought
distinctly to punish their Practices and Contempt, though colored with the
pretense of Conscience and Religion.

According to these Principles, her Majesty at her coming to the Crown, utterly
disliking the Tyranny of Rome, which had used by Terror and Rigor to settle
Commandments of Men's Faiths and Consciences. Though as a Princess of great
Wisdom and Magnanimity, she suffered but the exercise of one Religion; yet her
proceedings toward the Papists, was with great Lenity: expecting the good
Effects which time might work in them; and therefore her Majesty revived not
the Laws made in the 28th and 35th of her Fathers Reign, whereby the Oath of
Supremacy might have been offered at the King's Pleasure to any Subject, so he
kept his Conscience never so modestly to himself, and the refusal to take the
same Oath, without further Circumstances was made Treason. But contrariwise,
her Majesty not liking to make Windows into Men's Hearts and secret Thoughts,
except the abundance of them did overflow into overt and express Acts, or
Affirmations, tempered her Law so, as it restrains every manifest
disobedience, in impugning and impeaching, advisedly and maliciously, her
Majesty's supreme Power, maintaining and extolling a Foreign Jurisdiction: And
as for the Oath, it was altered by her Majesty into a more grateful Form; the
hardness of the Name and Appellation of Supreme Head, was removed; and the
Penalty of the refusal thereof, turned only to disablement to take any
Promotion, or to exercise any Charge, and yet of liberty to be reinvested
therein, if any Man should accept thereof, during his Life. But after, when
Pius Quintus excommunicated her Majesty, and the Bulls of Excommunication were
published in London, whereby her Majesty was in a sort proscribed, and that
thereupon, as upon a principal Motive or Preparative, followed the Rebellion in
the North; yet because the ill Humors of the Realm were by that Rebellion
partly purged, and that she feared at that time no Foreign Invasion, and much
less the Attempt of any within the Realm, not backed by some potent Power and
Succor from without, she contented her self to make a Law against that special
case of bringing in and publishing of any Bulls, or the like Instruments;
Whereunto was added a Prohibition upon pain, not of Treason, but of an inferior
degree of Punishment, against the bringing of the Agnus Dei's, and such other
Merchandice of Rome, as are well known not to be any essential part of the
Romanish Religion, but only to be used in practice, as Love Tokens, to inchant
and bewitch the peoples Affections, from their Allegiance to their Natural
Sovereign. In all other Points, her Majesty continued her former Lenity: but
when about the 20th Year of her Reign, she had discovered in the King of Spain,
an intention to Invade her Dominions; and that a principal part of the Plot,
was to prepare a Party within the Realm, that might adhere to the Forreigner;
and that the Seminaries began to blossom, and to send forth daily, Priests, and
professed Men, who should by Vow taken at Shrift, reconcile her Subjects from
their Obedience; yea, and bind many of them to attempt against her Majesty's
Sacred Person; and that, by the Poison which they spread, the Humors of most
Papists were altered, and that they were no more Papists in Conscience, and of
Softness, but Papists in Faction: Then were there new Laws made, for the
punishment of such as should submit themselves to such Reconcilements, or
Renunciation of Obedience: And because it was a Treason carried in the Clouds,
and in wonderful secrecy, and come seldom to light; and that there was no
presuspicion thereof so great, as the Recusancy to come to Divine Service,
because it was set down by their Decrees, that to come to Church before
Reconciliation, was to live in Schism; but to come to Church after
Reconcilement, was absolutely heretical and damnable. Therefore there were
added Laws containing Punishment pecuniary, videlicet, such as might not
enforce Consciences, but to enfeeble and impoverish the means of those about
whom it rests indifferent and ambiguous, whether they were reconciled or not:
and when, notwithstanding all this Provision, the Poison was dispersed so
secretly, as that there was no means to stay it, but by restraining the
Merchants that brought it in. Then lastly, There was added a Law, whereby such
seditious Priests, of new Erection, were exiled; and those that were at that
time within the Land, shipped over, and so commanded to keep hence upon pain of
Treason. This has been the proceeding, though intermingled, not only with
sundry Examples of her Majesty's Grace toward such as in her Wisdom she knew
to be Papists in Conscience, and not Faction and Singularity, but also with
extraordinary mitigation toward the Offenders in the highest Degree, committed
by Law, if they would but protest, that if in case this Realm should be invaded
with a Foreign Army, by the Pope's Authority, for the Catholic Cause, as they
term it, they would take part with her Majesty, and not adhere to her Enemies.

For the other Party, which have been offensive to the State, though in another
Degree, which named themselves Reformers, and we commonly call Puritans, this
has been the proceeding toward them: A great while, when they enveighed
against such Abuses in the Church, as Pluralities, Non-residence, and the like,
their Zeal was not condemned, only their Violence was sometime censured. When
they refused the use of some Ceremonies and Rites, as Superstitious, they were
tolerated with much connivancy and gentleness; yea, when they called in
question the superiority of Bishops, and pretended to a Democracy into the
Church; yet their Propositions were here considered, and by contrary Writings
debated and discussed. Yet all this while, it was perceived that their Course
was dangerous, and very popular: as because Papistry was odious, theretofore it
was ever in their Mouths, that they sought to purge the Church from the
Relics of Papistry; a thing acceptable to the people, who love ever to run
from one extreme to another.

Because multitude of Rogues, and Poverty was an Eyesore, and a dislike to
every Man; therefore they put into the peoples head, that if Discipline were
planted, there should be no Vagabonds nor Beggars, a thing very plausible: and
in like manner they promised the people many of the impossible Wonders of their
Discipline; besides, they opened to the people a way to Government, by their
Consistory and Presbytery; a thing, though in consequence no less prejudicial
to the Liberties of private Men, than to the Sovereignty of Princes; yet in
first show very popular. Nevertheless this, except it were in some few that
entered into extreme contempt, was born with, because they pretended in dutiful
manner to make Propositions, and to leave it to the Providence of God, and the
Authority of the Magistrate.

But now of late Years, when there issued from them that affirmed, the consent
of the Magistrate was not to be attended; when under pretense of a Confession,
to avoid Slander and Imputations, they combined themselves by Classes and
Subscriptions, when they descended into that vile and base means of defacing
the Government of the Church, by ridiculous Pasquills, when they begun to make
many Subjects in doubt to take Oaths which is one of the Fundamental parts of
Justice in this Land, and in all Places; when they began both to vaunt of their
strength, and number of their Partisans and Followers, and to use Cominations
that their Cause would prevail, though Uproar and Violence, then it appeared
to be no more Zeal, no more Conscience, but mere Faction and Division: And
therefore though the State were compelled to hold somewhat a harder hand to
restrain them than before, yet was it with as great moderation, as the Peace of
the State or Church could permit. And therefore, Sir, to conclude, consider
uprightly of these Matters, and you shall see, her Majesty is no more a
Temporizer in Religion: It is not the Success Abroad, nor the Change of
Servants here at Home, can alter her; only as the things themselves alter, she
applied her Religious Wisdom to Methods correspondent unto them; still
retaining the two Rules before mentioned, in dealing tenderly with Consciences,
and yet in discovering Faction from Conscience, and Softness from Singularity.
Farewell.

Your loving Friend, F. Walsingham.


THUS I have prosecuted what I at first undertook, the Progress of the
Reformation, from its first and small beginnings in England, till it came to a
complete settlement in the time of this Queen. Of whose Reign, if I have
adventured to give any Account, it was not intended so much for a full
Character of Her and her Councils, as to set out the great and vissible
Blessings of God that attended on her; the many Preservations she had, and that
by such signal Discoveries, as both saved her Life, and secured her Government;
and the unusual happiness of her whole Reign, which raised her to the Esteem
and Envy of that Age, and the Wonder of all Posterity. It was wonderful indeed,
that a Virgin Queen could rule such a Kingdom, for above 44 Years, with such
constant success, in so great tranquillity at Home, with a vast increase of
Wealth, and with such Glory abroad. All which may justly be esteem-to have been
the Rewards of Heaven, crowning that Reign with so much Honor and Triumph,
that was begun with the Reformation of Religion.

The end of the third Book; and of the History of the Reformation of the Church
of England.
THE TABLE OF THE CONTENTS Of the Second Part of the History of the Reformation
of the CHURCH of England.
BOOK I. Of the Life and Reign of King Edward the Sixth.
1547.
K. Edward's Birth and Baptism. page 1 His Education and Temper, page 2
Cardan's Character of him, ibid. A design to create him Prince of Wales, page 3
King Henry dies, and he succeeds, ibid. King Henry's Will, ibid. Debate about
choosing a Protector, page 4 The Earl of Hartford is chosen, page 5 It is
declared in Council, ibid. The Bishops take out Commissions, page 6 Reasons for
a Creation of Peers, ibid. Affairs of Scotland, page 8 Lay men in
Ecclesiastical Dignities, ibid. Images taken away in a Church in London, page 9
The progress of Image Worship, ibid. Many pull down Images, page 11 Gardener is
offended at it, ibid. The Protector writes about it, ibid. Gardener writes to
Ridley about them, page 12 Commissions to the Justices of Peace, page 13 The
form of Coronation changed, ibid. King Henry's Burial, ibid. Soul-Masses
examined, page 14 A Creation of Peers, page 15 The King is crowned, ibid. The
Lord Chancellor is turned out, ibid. The Protector made by Patent, page 17 The
Affairs of Germany, page 19 Ferdinand made K. of the Romans, ibid. The Diet at
Spire, ibid, Emperor makes Peace with France, and with the Turk, page 20 And
sets about the ruin of the Protest. ibid. Protestant Princes meet at Frankfort,
page 21 D. of Sax, and Land. of Hesse Arm, page 22 Peace between England and
France, page 23 Francis the first dies, ibid. A Reformation set about in
England, page 24 A Visitation resolved on, page 26 Some Homilies compiled, page
27 Injunctions for the Visitation, page 28 Injunctions for the Bishops, page 29
Censures passed upon them, ibid. Protector goes into Scotland, page 31 Scotland
said to be Subject to England, ib. Protector enters Scotland, page 33 Makes
Offers to the Scots, ibid. The Scots Defeat at Musselburgh, page 34 Protector
returns to England, page 35 The Visitors execute the Injunctions, page 36
Bonner Protests and Recants, ibid. Gardener would not obey, ibid. His Reasons
against them, ibid. He complains to the Protector, page 38 The Lady Mary
complains also, page 39 The Protector writes to her, ibid. The Parliament
meets, ibid. An Act repealing severe Laws, page 40 An Act about the Communion,
page 41 Communion in both kinds, ibid. Private Masses put down, page 42 An Act
about the admission of Bishops, page 43 Ancient ways of electing Bishops, ibid.
An Act against Vagabonds, page 45 Chauntries given to the King, ibid. Acts
proposed, but not passed, page 46 The Convocation meets, page 47 And makes some
Petitions, ibid. The Clergy desire to have Representatives in the House of
Commons, ibid. The Grounds of that, page 48 The Affairs of Germany, page 50
Duke of Saxe taken, ibid. The Archbishop of Colen resigns, page 51 A Decree
made in the Diet, page 52 Proceedings at Trent, ibid. The Council removed to
Boloign, page 53 The French quarrel about Buloign, ibid. The Protector and the
Admiral fall out, page 54
1548.
Gardener is set at liberty, page 55 M^rq. of Northampton sues a Divorce, page
56 The Arguments for it, page 57 A Progress in the Reformation, page 58
Proclamation against Innovation, page 59 All Images taken away page 60
Restraints put on Preachers, page 61 Some Bishops and Doctors examine the
Public Offices and Prayers, ibid. Corruptions in the Office of the Commun.
page 62 A new Office for the Communion, page 64 It is variously censured, page
65 Auricular Confession left indifferent, ibid. Chauntry Lands sold, page 67
Gardener falls into new Troubles, page 68 He is ordered to preach, page 69 But
gives offense, and is imprisoned, page 70 A Catechism set out by Cranmer, page
71 A further reformation of public Offices, ibid. A new Liturgy resolved upon,
page 72 The Changes made in it, page 73 Preface to it, page 79 Reflections made
on it, ibid. All preaching forbid for a time, page 81 Affairs of Scotland,
ibid. The Queen of Scots sent to France, page 82 The Siege of Hadingtoun, ibid.
A Fleet sent against Scotland, page 83 But without success, ibid. The Siege of
Hadingtoun raised, page 84 Discontents in Scotland, page 85 The Affairs of
Germany, ibid. The Book of the Interim, page 86 Both sides offended at it,
ibid. Calvin writes to the Protector, page 88 Bucer writes against Gardener,
ibid. A Session of Parliament, ibid. Act for the Marriage of the Clergy, page
89 Which was much debated, ibid. Arguments for it from Scripture, ibid. And
from the Fathers, page 90 The Reasons against it examined, page 91 An Act
confirming the Liturgy, page 93 Censures passed upon it, page 94 The singing
of Psalms set up, ibid.
1549.
An Act about Fasts, page 95 Some Bills that did not pass, page 96 A design of
digesting the Common Law into a Body, ibid. The Admiral's Attainder, page 97 He
was sent to the Tower, ibid. The Matter referred to the Parliament, page 99 The
Bill against him passed, ibid. The Warrant for his Execution, page 100 It is
signed by Cranmer, ibid. Censures upon that, ibid. Subsidies granted, page 101
A New Visitation, ibid. All obey the Laws except Lady Mary, page 103 A Treaty
of Marriage for her, ibid. The Council required her to obey, page 104 Christ's
Presence in the Sacrament examined, ibid. Public Disputations about it, page
105 The manner of the Presence explained, page 107 Proceedings against
Anabaptists, page 110 Of these there were two sorts, ibid. Two of them burnt,
page 112 Which was much censured, ibid. Disputes concerning Infant Baptism,
ibid. Predestination much abused, page 113 Tumults in England, ibid. Some are
soon quieted, page 114 The Devonshire Rebellion, page 115 Their Demands, ibid.
An Answer sent to them, page 116 They make new Demands, page 117 Which are
rejected, ibid. The Norfolk Rebellion. ibid. The Yorkshire Rebellion, page 118
Exeter besieged, ibid. It is relieved, and the Rebels defeated, page 119 The
Norfolk Rebels are dispersed, ibid. A general Pardon, page 120 A Visitation of
Cambridg, ibid. Dispute about the Greek pronunciation, ibid. Bonner in new
Troubles, ibid. Injunctions are given him, page 121 He did not obey them, page
122 He is proceeded against, ibid, He defends himself, page 123 He Appeals,
page 125 But is deprived, page 126 Censures past upon it, page 127 The French
fall into Bulloign, page 128 Ill Success in Scotland, page 129 The Affairs of
Germany, ibid. A Faction against the Protector, page 130 Advices about Foreign
Affairs. page 131. Paget sent to the Emperor. ibid. But can obtain nothing.
page 133. Debates in Council. ibid. Complaints of the Protector. page 134. The
Counselors leave him. page 135. The City of London joins with them. page 136.
The Protector offers to submit. ibid. He is accused and sent to the Tower. page
138. Censures passed upon him. ibid. The Papists much lifted up. page 139. But
their hopes vanish. ibid. A Treaty with the Emperor. page 140. A Session of
Parliament. ibid. An Act against Tumults. ibid. And against Vagabonds. ibid.
Bishops move for a Power of Censuring. page 141. An Act about Ordinations.
ibid. An Act about the Duke of Somerset. ibid. The Reformation carried on. page
142. A Book of Ordinations made. page 143. Heath disagrees to it, and put in
Prison. ibid. Interrogations added in the new Book. page 144. Bulloigne was
resolved to be given to the French. page 146. Pope Paul the third dies. ibid.
Cardinal Pool was elected Pope. ibid. Julius the third chosen. page 147.
1550.
A Treaty between the English and French. ibid. Instructions given the English
Ambassador. ibid. Articles of the Treaty. page 148. The Earl of Warwick governs
all. page 149. Ridley made Bishop of London. ibid. Proceedings against
Gardener. page 150. Articles sent to him. ibid. He signed them with Exceptions.
page 151. New Articles sent him. ibid. He refuses them, and is hardly used.
ibid. Latimer advises the King about his Marriage. page 152. Hooper made Bishop
of Gloucester. ibid. But refuses the Episcopal Garments. ibid. Upon that great
H^^t^ arose. ibid. Bucers Opinion about it. page 153. And Peter Martyrs. page
154. A German Congregation (...) London. ibid. Polidore Virgil lea^^^ England.
ibid. A Review made of the Common Prayer Book. page 155. Bucers advice
concerning it. ibid. He writ a Book for the King. page 156. The (...) studies
to reform^ abuses. page 157. He keeps a Journal of his Reign. ibid. Ridley
visits his Diocese. page 158. Altars turned to Communion-Tables. ibid. The
Reasons given for it. page 159. Sermons on Working-days forbidden. ibid. The
Affairs of Scotland. page 161. And of Germany. ibid.
1551.
The Compliance of the Popish Clergy. page 162. Bucers Death and Funeral. page
163. His Character. page 164. Gardener is deprived. page 165. Which is much
censured. ibid. Hooper is Consecrated. page 166. Articles of Religion prepared.
ibid. An Abstract of them. page 167. Corrections in the Common Prayer Book.
page 169. Reasons of kneeling at the Communion. page 170. Orders for the Kings
Chaplains. page 171. The Lady Mary has Mass still. ibid. The King is earnest
against it. page 172. The Council write to her about it. ibid. But she was
intractable. page 174. And would not hear Ridley preach. page 175. The Designs
of the Earl of Warwick. page 176. The Sweating Sickness. ibid. A Treaty for a
Marriage with the Daughter of France. page 177. Conspiracy against the Duke of
Somerset. page 178. The King is alienated from him. page 179. He is brought to
his Trial. ibid. Acquitted of Treason, but not of Felony. page 180. Some others
condemned with him. page 181. The Seal is taken from the Lord Rich. page 182.
And given to the Bishop of Ely. ibid. Church-mens being in Secular Employments
much censured. page 183. Duke of Somersets Execution. page 184. His Character.
page 185. Affairs of Germany. page 186. Proceedings at Trent. page 187.
1552.
A Session of Parliament. page 189. The Common Prayer Book confirmed, ibid.
Censures past upon it. page 190. An Act concerning Treasons. ibid. An Act about
Fasts and Holy Days. page 191. An Act for the married Clergy. page 192. An Act
against Usury. ibid. A Bill against Simony not passed page 193. The Entail of
the Duke of Somersets Estate cut off. page 194. The Commons refuse to attaint
the Bishop of Duresme by Bill. ibid. The Parliament is dissolved. page 195. A
Reformation of the Ecclesiastical Courts is considered. ibid. The chief heads
of it. page 197. Rules about Excommunication. page 201. Projects for relieving
the poor Clergy. page 202. Heath and Day deprived. page 203. The Affairs of
Ireland. ibid. A change in the order of the Garter. page 205. Paget degraded
from the Order. page 206. The increase of Trade. page 207. Cardan passes
through England. page 208. The Affairs of Scotland. ibid. The Affairs of
Germany. page 210. Proceedings at Trent. page 211. An Account of the Council
there. page 212. A Judgment of the Histories of it. ibid. The freedom of
Religion established in Germany. page 213. The Emperor is much cast down. page
214.
1553.
A Regulation of the Privy Council. ibid. A New Parliament. ibid. The
Bishopric of Duresm suppressed and two new ones were to be raised. page 215. A
Visitation for the Plate in Churches. page 216. Instructions for the President
in the North. page 217. The form of the Bishops Letters Patents. page 218. A
Treaty with the Emperor. page 219. The Kings sickness. page 221. His care of
the poor. ibid. Several Marriages. page 222. He intends to leave the Crown to
Lady Jane Gray. ibid. Which the Judges opposed at first. ibid. Yet they
consented to it except Hales. page 222. Cranmer is hardly prevailed with. page
224. The Kings sickness becomes desperate. ibid. His last Prayer. ibid. His
Death and Character. ibid.
BOOK II. The Life and Reign of Queen Mary.
QVeen Mary succeeds but is in great danger. page 233. And retires to Suffolk.
ibid. She writes to the Council. page 234. But they declare for the Lady Jane.
ibid. The Lady Janes Character. ibid. She unwillingly accepts the Crown. page
235. The Council writes to Queen Mary. ibid. They proclaim the Lady Jane Queen.
ibid. Censures passed upon it. page 236. The Duke of Northumberland much hated.
page 237. The Council send an Army against Queen Mary. ibid. Ridley Preaches
against her. page 238. But her Party grows strong. ibid. The Council turn and
proclaim her Queen. page 239. The Duke of Northumberland is taken. ibid. Many
Prisoners are sent to the Tower. ibid. The Queen comes to London. page 240. She
was in danger in her Fathers time. ibid. And was preserved by Cranmer. page
241. She submitted to her Father. ibid. Designs for changing Religion. page
242. Gardiners policy. ibid. He is made Chancellor. ibid. Duke of
Northumberland and others Attainted. ibid. He at his Death professes he had
been always a Papist. page 243. His Character. page 244. King Edwards Funeral.
ibid. The Queen declares she will force no Conscience. page 245. A Tumult at
Paul's. ibid. A Proclamation against Preaching. ibid. Censures passed upon it.
page 246. She uses those of Suffolk ill. ibid. Consultations among the
Reformed. page 247. Judge Hales barbarously used. ibid. Cranmer declares
against the Mass. page 248. Bonners insolence. ibid. Cranmer and Latimer sent
to the Tower. page 250. Foreigners sent out of England. ibid. Many English fly
beyond Sea. ibid. The Queen rewards those who had served her. page 251. She is
Crowned and discharges a Tax. ibid. A Parliament summoned. page 252. The
Reformed Bishops thrust out of the House of Lords. ibid. Great disorders in
Elections. ibid. An Act moderating severe Laws. page 253. The Marriage of the
Queens Mother Confirmed. ibid. Censures passed upon it. page 254. The Queen is
severe to the Lady Elis. ibid. King Edwards Laws about Religion repealed. page
255. An Act against injuries to Priests. ibid. An Act against unlawful
assemblies. ibid. Marquess of Northamptons 2d Marriage broken. page 256. The
Duke of Norfolks Attaindor annulled. ibid. Cranmer and others attainted. page
257. But his See is not declared void. ibid. The Queen resolves to reconcile
with Rome. ibid. Cardinal Pool sent Legate. page 258. But is stopped by the
Emperor. page 259. The Queen sends to him. ibid. His advice to the Queen. page
260. Gardiners methods are preferred. page 261. The House of Commons offended
with the Queens Marriage then treated about. ibid. The Parliament is dissolved.
ibid. 1200000 Crowns sent to corrupt the next Parliament. page 262. Proceedings
in the Convocation. ibid. Disputes concerning the Sacrament. ibid. Censures
passed upon them. page 283.
1554.
Ambassadors treat with the Queen for her Marriage. ibid. Articles agreed on.
ibid. The Match generally disliked. p. 284. Plots to oppose it are discovered.
ibid. Wiat breaks out in Kent. ibid. His Demands. p. 286. He is defeated and
taken. ibid. The Lady Jane and her Husband Executed. p. 271. Her preparations
for Death. ibid. The Duke of Suffolk is Executed. p. 272. The Lady Elis is
unjustly suspected. p. 273. Many severe proceedings. ibid. The Imposture in the
Wall. ibid. Instructions for the Bishops. p. 274. Bishops that adhere to the
Reform* deprived. ibid. The Mass every where set up. page 276. Books against
the married Clergy. page 277. A New Parliament. ibid. The Queens Regal Power
asserted. ibid. The secret Reasons for that Act. ibid. Great jealousies of the
Spaniards. page 279. The Bishopric of Duresm restored. ibid. Disputes at
Oxford. page 280. With Cranmer. page 281. And Ridley. page 282. And Latimer.
page 283. Censures passed upon them. ibid. They are all Condemned. ibid. The
Prisoners in London give reasons why they would not dispute. page 284. King
Philip Lands. page 286. And is Married to the Queen. ibid. He brings a great
Treasure with him. ibid. Acts of favor done by him. page 287. He preserves the
Lady Elizabeth, ibid. He was little beloved. page 288. But much Magnifyed by
Gardener. ibid. Bonners carriage in his Visitation. ibid. No reordination of
those Ordained in King Edward's time. page 289. Bonners rage. page 290. The
Sacrament stolen. page 291. A New Parliament. ibid. Cardinal Pools Attaindor
repealed. ibid. He comes to London. page 292. And makes a speech to the
Parliament. ibid. The Queen is believed with Child. ibid. The Parliament
petition to be reconciled. page 293. The Cardinal absolves them. ibid. Laws
against the Sea of Rome repealed page 294. A Proviso for Church Lands. ibid. A
Petition from the Convocation. ibid. An Address from the inferior Clergy. page
295. Laws against Heretics revived. page 296. An Act declaring Treasons. ibid.
Another against seditious words. ibid. Gardener in great esteem. page 297. The
fear of losing the Church Lands. ibid. Consultations how to deal with
Heretics. page 298. Cardinal Pool for moderate courses. page 299. But Gardener
is for violent ones. ibid. To which the Queen is inclined. page 300.
1555.
They begin with Rogers and others. ibid. Who refusing to comply are judged.
page 301. Rogers and Hooper burnt. page 302. Sanders and Tailor burnt. page
303. These cruelties are much censured, page 304. Reflections made on Hoopers
Death. ibid. The Burnings much disliked. page 305. The King Purges himself.
ibid. A Petition against persecution. ibid. Arguments to defend it. page 306.
More are Burnt. page 307. Ferrar and others Burnt. page 308. The Queen gives up
the Church Lands. ibid. Pope Julius dies, and Marcellus succeeds. page 309.
Paul the 4th succeeds him. page 310. English Ambassadors at Rome. ibid.
Instructions sent for persecution. page 311. Bonner required to Burn more. page
312. The Queens delivery in vain expected. ibid. Bradford and others Burnt.
page 313. Sir Thomas Mores works Published. page 316. His Letter of the Nun of
Kent. ibid. Ridley and Latimer Burnt. page 318. Gardiners Death and Character.
page 320. The temper of the Parliament is much changed. page 322. The Queen
discharges tenths and first fruits. ibid. An Act against those that fled beyond
Sea rejected. page 323. An Act debarring a Murderer from the benefit of Clergy
opposed. ibid. Sir Anthony Kingston put in the Tower. page 324. Pool holds a
Convocation. ibid. The heads of his Decrees. ibid. Pools design for Reforming
of abuses. page 326. Pool will not admit the Jesuits to England. page 327.
Philpots Martyrdom. page 328. Foreign affairs. ibid. Charles the 5ths
Resignation. page 329. Cranmers Trial. page 332. He is degraded. page 333. He
recants. ibid. He repents of it. page 334. His Martyrdom. page 335. His
Character. ibid. Others suffer on the like account. page 337. A Child born in
the Fire and burnt. ibid. The Reformation grows. page 338. Troubles at
Frankfort among the English there. page 339. Pool is made Archbishop of
Canterbury. page 340. Some Religious Houses are endowed. ibid. Records are
razed. page 341. Endeavors for the Abbey of Glassenburg. ibid. Foreign
Affairs. page 342. The Pope is extravagantly proud. ibid. He dispenses with the
French Kings Oath. page 343. And makes War with Spain. page 344.
1557.
A Visitation of the Universities. page 345. The Persecution set forward. page
346. A Design for setting up the Inquisition. page 347. Burnings for Religion.
page 348. Lord Stourton hanged for Murder. page 350. The Queen is jealous of
the French. page 351. The Battle at St. Quintin. page 352. The Pope offended
with Cardinal Pool. ibid. He recalls him. page 353. The Queen refuses to
receive Cardinal Peito. ibid. A Peace between the Pope and Spain. page 354. A
War between England and Scotland. ibid. The Affairs of Germany. page 355. A
Persecution in France. page 356.
1558.
Calais is besieged. ibid. And it and Guisnes are taken. page 357. Sark taken
by the French. page 358. And retaken strangely. page 359. Great discontents in
England. ibid. A Parliament is called. page 360. King of Sweden courts the Lady
Elizabeth. page 361. But is rejected by her. ibid. She was ill used in this
Reign. page 362. The Progress of the Persecution. page 363. The Methods of it.
page 364. An Expedition against France. page 365. Many strange Accidents. ibid.
A Treaty of Peace. page 366. The Battle of Graveling, ibid. Many Protestants in
France. ibid. Dolphin marries the Queen of Scots. page 367. A Convention of
Estates in Scotland. ibid. A Parliament in England. page 368. The Queens
Sickness and Death. page 369. Cardinal Pool dies. ibid. His Character. ibid.
The Queens Character. page 370.
BOOK III. Of the Settlement of the Reformation of Religion in the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign.
QVeen Elizabeth succeeds. page 373. And comes to London. page 374. She sends a
Dispatch to Rome, ibid. But to no effect. ibid. King Philip Courts her. page
375. The Queens Council. ibid. A Consultation about the Change of Religion.
page 376. A Method proposed for it. page 377. Many forward to Reform. page 378.
Parker named to be Archbishop of Canterbury. ibid.
1559.
Bacon made Lord Keeper. page 380. The Queens Coronation. ibid. The Parliament
meets. page 381. The Treaty at Cambray. page 382. A Peace agreed on with
France. ibid. The Proceedings of the Parliament. page 383. An Address to the
Queen to marry. page 384. Her Answer to it. ibid. They Recognize her Title.
page 385. Acts concerning Religion. ibid. The Bishops against the Supremacy.
page 386. The beginning of the High Commission. page 387. A Conference at
Westminster. page 388. Arguments for the Latin Service. page 389. Arguments
against it. page 390. The Conference breaks up. page 391. The Liturgy corrected
and explained. page 392. Debates about the Act of Uniformity. page 393.
Arguments for the Changes then made. page 394. Bills proposed, but rejected.
page 395. The Bishops refuse the Oath of Supremacy. page 396. The Queens
gentleness to them. ibid. Injunctions for a Visitation. page 397. The Queen
desires to have Images retained. ibid. Reasons brought against it. ibid. The
Heads of the Injunctions. page 398. Reflections made on them. page 399. The
first High Commission. page 400. Parkers unwillingness to accept of the
Archbishopric of Canterbury. page 401. His Consecration. page 402. The Fable
of the Nags-head confuted. page 403. The Articles of Religion prepared. page
405. An Explanation of the Presence in the Sacrament. ibid. The Translation of
the Bible. page 406. The beginnings of the Divisions. page 407. The Reformation
in Scotland. ibid. Mills Martyrdom. page 408. It occasions great discontents.
page 409. A Revolt at St. Johnstoun. page 410. The French King intends to grant
them liberty of Religion. page 411. But is killed. ibid. A Truce agreed to.
ibid. The Queen Regent is deposed. page 412. The Scots implore the Queen of
England's Aid. ibid. Leith besieged by the English. ibid. The Queen Regent
dies. page 413. A Peace is concluded. ibid. The Reformation settled by
Parliament. ibid. Francis the second dies. ibid. The Civil Wars of France. page
415. The Wars of the Netherlands. page 416. The misfortunes of the Queen of
Scotland. page 417. Queen Elizabeth deposed by the Pope. page 418. Sir Fr.
Walsinghams Letter concerning the Queens proceeding with Papists, and Puritans.
ibid. The Conclusion. page 421.
FINIS.
A COLLECTION OF RECORDS AND Original Papers; WITH OTHER INSTRUMENTS Referred
to in the SECOND PART OF THE History of the Reformation OF THE Church of
England.

LONDON, Printed by J.D. for Richard Chiswell. 1680.

The Journal of King EDWARD'S Reign, written with his own Hand.
The Original is in the Cotton Library. Nero C. 10.
THe Year of our Lord 1537, was a Prince born to King Henry the 8th, by Jane
Seimour then Queen; who within few days after the Birth of her Son, died, and
was buried at the Castle of Windsor. This Child was Christened by the Duke of
Norfolk, the Duke of Suffolk, and the Archbishop of Canterbury. Afterward was
brought up till he came to six Years old among the Women. At the sixth Year of
his Age he was brought up in Learning by Master Doctor Cox, who was after his
Almoner, and John Cheek Master of Arts, two well-learned Men, who sought to
bring him up in learning of Tongues, of the Scripture, of Philosophy, and all
Liberal Sciences. Also John Bellmaine Frenchman, did teach him the French
Language. The tenth Year not yet ended, it was appointed he should be created
Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Count Palatine of Chester: At which time,
being the Year of our Lord 1547, the said King died of a Dropsy as it was
thought. After whose Death incontinent came Edward Earl of Hartford, and Sir
Anthony Brown Master of the Horse, to convoy this Prince to Enfield, where the
Earl of Hartford declared to him, and his younger Sister Elizabeth, the Death
of their Father.

Here he begins anew again.
AFter the Death of King Henry the 8th, his Son Edward, Prince of Wales, was
come to at Hartford, by the Earl of Hartford, and Sir Anthony Brown Master of
the Horse; for whom before was made great preparation that he might be created
Prince of Wales, and afterward was brought to Enfield, where the Death of his
Father was first showed him; and the same day the Death of his Father was
showed in London, where was great lamentation and weeping: and suddenly he
proclaimed King. The next day, being the (...) of (...) He was brought to the
Tower of London, where he tarried the space of three weeks; and in the mean
season the Council sat every day for the performance of the Will, and at length
thought best that the Earl of Hartford should be made Duke of Somerset, Sir
Thomas Seimour Lord Sudley, the Earl of Essex Marquess of Northampton, and
diverse Knights should be made Barons, as the Lord Sheffield, with diverse
others. Also they thought best to choose the Duke of Somerset to be Protector of
the Realm, and Governor of the King's Person during his Minority; to which all
the Gentlemen and Lords did agree, because he was the King's Uncle on his
Mothers side. Also in this time the late King was buried at Windsor with much
solemnity, and the Officers broke their Staves, hurling them into the Grave;
but they were restored to them again when they came to the Tower. The Lord
Lisle was made Earl of Warwick, and the Lord Great Chamberlainship was given to
him; and the Lord Sudley made Admiral of England: all these things were done,
the King being in the Tower. Afterward all things being prepared for the
Coronation, the King being then but nine Years old, passed through the City of
London, as heretofore has been used, and came to the Palace of Westminster;
and the next day came into Westminster Hall. And it was asked the People,
Whether they would have him to be their King? Who answered; Yea, yea: Then he
was crowned King of England, France, and Ireland, by the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and all the rest of the Clergy and Nobles; and Anointed, with all
such Ceremonies as were accustomed, and took his Oath, and gave a General
Pardon, and so was brought to the Hall to Dinner on Shrove-sunday, where he sat
with the Crown on his Head, with the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Lord
Protector; and all the Lords sat at Boards in the Hall beneath, and the Lord
Marshal's Deputy, (for my Lord of Somerset was Lord Marshal) rode about the
Hall to make room; then came in Sir John Dimock Champion, and made his
Challenge, and so the King drank to him, and he had the Cup. At night the King
returned to his Palace at Westminster, where there was Justs and Barriers; and
afterward Order was taken for all his Servants being with his Father, and being
with the Prince, and the Ordinary and Unordinary were appointed. In the mean
season Sir Andrew Dudley, Brother to my Lord of Warwick, being in the Paunsie,
met with the Lion, a principal Ship of Scotland, which thought to take the
Paunsie without resistance; but the Paunsie approached her, and she shot, but
at length they came very near, and then the Paunsie shooting off all one side,
burst all the overlop of the Lion, and all her Tackling, and at length boarded
her and took her; but in the return, by negligence, she was lost at
Harwich-Haven, with almost all her Men.

In the month of Should be March.
May died the French King called Francis, and his Son called Henry, was
proclaimed King. There came also out of Scotland an Ambassador, but brought
nothing to pass, and an Army was prepared to go into Scotland. Certain
Injunctions were set forth, which took away diverse Ceremonies, and Commissions
sent to take down Images, and certain Homilies were set forth to be read in the
Church. Dr. Smith of Oxford recanted at Paul's certain Opinions of the Mess, and
that Christ was not according to the Order of Melchisedeck. The Lord Seimour of
Sudley married the Queen, whose name was Katherine, with which Marriage the
Lord Protector was much offended.

There was great preparation made to go into Scotland, and the Lord Protector,
the Earl of Warwick, the Lord Dacres, the Lord Gray, and Mr. Brian, went with a
great number of Nobles and Gentlemen to Barwick; where the first day after his
coming, he mustered all his Company, which were to the number of 13000 Footmen,
and 5000 Horsemen. The next day he marched on into Scotland, and so passed the
Pease; then he burnt two Castles in Scotland, and so passed a straight of a
Bridge, where 300 Scots Light-Horsemen set upon him behind him, who were
discomfited. So he passed to Musselburgh, where the first day after he came, he
went up to the Hill, and saw the Scots, thinking them, as they were indeed at
least, 36000 Men; and my Lord of Warwick was almost taken, chasing the Earl of
Huntley, by an Ambush, but he was rescued by one Bertivell, with twelve
Hagbuttiers on Horseback, and the Ambush ran away.

The 10th day of September, the Lord Protector thought to get the Hill, which
the Scots seeing, passed the Bridge over the River of Musselburgh, and strove
for the higher Ground, and almost got it; but our Horsemen set upon them, who
although they stayed them, yet were put to flight, and gathered together again
by the Duke of Somerset, Lord Protector, and the Earl of Warwick, and were
ready to give a new Onset. The Scots being amazed with this, fled theirwayes,
some to Edinburgh, some to the Sea, and some to Dalkeith; and there were slain
10000 of them, but of Englishmen 51 Horsemen, which were almost all Gentlemen,
and but one Footman. Prisoners were taken, the Lord Huntley Chancellor of
Scotland, and diverse other Gentlemen; and slain of Lairds 1000. And Mr. Brian,
Sadler, and Vane, were made Bannerets.

After this Battle Broughtie-craig was given to the Englishmen, and Hume, and
Roxburgh, and Heymouth, which were Fortified, and Captains were put in them,
and the Lord of Somerset rewarded with 500 l. Lands. In the mean season,
Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, was, for not receiving the Injunctions,
committed to Ward. There was also a Parliament called, wherein all Chaunteries
were granted to the King, and an extreme Law made for Vagabonds, and diverse
other things. Also the Scots besieged Broughty-craig, which was defended
against them all by Sir Andrew Dudley Knight, and oftentimes their Ordnance was
taken and marred.

YEAR II.
A Triumph was, where six Gentlemen did challenge all Comers, at Barriers,
Justs, and Tournay; and also that they would keep a Fortress with thirty, with
them against an hundred, or under, which was done at Greenwich.

Sir Edward Bellingam being sent into Ireland Deputy, and Sir Anthony St.
Leiger revoked, he took O-Canor, and O-Mor, bringing the Lords that rebelled
into subjection; and O-Canor and O-Mor leaving their Lordships, had apiece an
100 l. Pension.

The Scots besieged the Town of Haddington, where the Captain, Mr. Willford,
every day made issues upon them, and slew diverse of them. The thing was very
weak, but for the Men, who did very manfully. Oftentimes Mr. Holcroft and Mr.
Palmer did Victual it by force, passing through the Enemies; and at last the
Rhinegrave unawares set upon Mr. Palmer, which was there with near a thousand
and five hundred Horsemen, and discomfited him, taking him, Mr. Bows Warden of
the West-Marches, and diverse other, to the number of 400, and slew a few. (Upon
St. Peter's day the Bishop of Winchester was committed to the Tower.) Then they
made diverse brags, and they had the like made to them. Then went the Earl of
Shrewsbury General of the Army, with 22000 Men, and burnt diverse Towns and
Fortresses, which the Frenchmen and Scots hearing, levied their Siege in the
month of September; in the levying of which, there came one to Tiberio, who as
then was in Haddington, and setting forth the weakness of the Town, told him,
That all Honor was due to the Defenders, and none to the Assailers; so the
Siege being levied, the Earl of Shrewsbury entered it, and victualled, and
reinforced it. After his departing by night, there came into the Outer Court,
at Haddington, 2000 Men armed, taking the Townsmen in their Shirts; who yet
defended them, with the help of the Watch, and at length, with Ordnance, issued
out upon them, and slew a mavelous number, bearing diverse Assaults, and at
length drove them home, and kept the Town safe.

A Parliament was called, where an Uniform Order of Prayer was institute,
before made by a number of Bishops and learned Men gathered together in
Windsor. There was granted a Subsidy, and there was a notable Disputation of
the Sacrament in the Parliament House. Also the Lord Sudley, Admiral of
England, was condemned to Death, and died in March ensuing. Sir Thomas
Sharington was also condemned for making false Coin, which he himself
confessed. Diverse also were put in the Tower.

YEAR III.
Hume-Castle was taken by Night, and Treason, by the Scots. Mr. Willford, in a
Skirmish, was left of his Men, sore hurt and taken. There was a Skirmish at
Broughty-craig, wherein Mr. Lutterell, Captain after Mr. Dudley, did burn
certain Villages, and took Monsieur de Toge Prisoner. The Frenchmen by night
assaulted Boulingberg, and were manfully repulsed, after they had made Faggots
with Pitch, Tar, Tallow, Rosin, Powder, and Wildfire, to burn the Ships in the
Haven of Bollein, but they were driven away by the Bollonors, and their Faggots
taken.

In Mr. Bows Place, who was Warden of the West-Marches, was put the Lord
Dacres; and in the Lord Gray's Place, the Earl of Rutland; who after his coming
entered Scotland, and burnt diverse Villages, and took much Prey. The People
began to rise in Wiltshire, where Sir William Herbert did put them down,
overrun, and slew them. Then they rose in Sussex, Hampshire, Kent,
Glocestershire, Suffolk, Warwickshire, Essex, Hartfordshire, a piece of
Leicestershire, Worcestershire, and Rutlandshire, where by fair Persuasions,
partly of honest Men among themselves, partly by Gentlemen, they were often
appeased; and because certain Commissions were sent down to pluck down
Enclosures, they did rise again. The French King perceiving this, caused War to
be proclaimed; and hearing that our Ships lay at Jersey, sent a great number of
his Galleys, and certain Ships, to surprise our Ships; but they being at
anchor, beat the French, that they were fain to retire with the loss of 1000 of
their Men.

At the same time the French King passed by Bullein to New Haven, with his
Army, and took Blackness, by Treason, and the Almain Camp; which done,
New Haven surrendered. There were also in a Skirmish, between 300 English
Footmen, and 300 French Horsemen, six Noblemen slain. Then the French King came
with his Army to Bollein, which they seeing, razed Boulingberg; but because of
the Plague, he was compelled to retire, and Chastilion was left behind, as
Governor of the Army. In the mean season, because there was a rumor that I
was dead, I passed through London.

After that they rose in Oxfordshire, Devonshire, Norfolk, and Yorkshire. To
Oxford, the Lord Gray of Wilton was sent with 1500 Horsemen and Footmen, whose
coming, with the assembling of the Gentlemen of the Country, did so abash the
Rebels, that more than half of them ran theirways, and other that tarried, were
some slain, some taken, and some hanged. To Devonshire, the Lord Privy Seal was
sent, who with his Band, being but small, lay at Honington, whiles the Rebels
besieged Exeter, who did use diverse pretty Feats of War, for after diverse
Skirmishes, when the Gates were burnt, they in the City did continue the Fire
till they had made a Rampire within; also after, when they were undermined, and
Powder was laid in the Mine, they within drowned the Powder and the Mine, with
Water they cast in; which the Lord Privy Seal having thought to have gone to
enforce them a by-way, of which the Rebels having spial, cut all the Trees
betwixt St. Mary Outrie and Exeter; for which cause the Lord Privy Seal burnt
that Town, and thought to return home: The Rebels kept a Bridge behind his Back,
and so compelled him, with his small Band, to set upon them, which he did, and
overcame them, killing 600 of them, and returning home without any loss of Men.
Then the Lord Gray, and Spinola, with their Bands, came to him, and afterward
Gray, with 200 of Redding, with which Bands he being reinforced, came to raise
the Siege at Exeter, for because they had scarcity of Victual; and as he passed
from Honington, he came to a little Town of his own, whither came but only two
ways, which they had reinforced with two Bullwarks made of Earth, and had put
to the defense of the same about 2000 Men; and the rest they had laid, some at
a Bridge called Honington-Bridg, partly at a certain Hedge in a Highway, and the
most part at the Siege of Exeter. The Rereward of the Horsemen, of which
Travers was Captain, set upon the one Bullwark, the Waward and Battle on the
other; Spinola's Band kept them occupied at their Wall: At length Travers drove
them into the Town, which the Lord Privy Seal burnt. Then they ran to a Bridge
thereby, from whence being driven, there were in a Plain about 900 of them
slain.

The next day they were met about other 2000 of them, at the entry of a
Highway, who first desired to talk, and in the mean season fortified
themselves; which being perceived, they ran theirways, and that same Night the
City of Exeter was delivered of the Siege. After that they gathered at
Launston, to whom the Lord Privy Seal, and Sir Will. Herbert went, and
overthrew them, taking their chief Heads and executing them. Nevertheless some
sailed to Bridgwater, and went about Sedition, but were quickly repressed.
Hitherto of Devonshire. At this time the Black Gally was taken. Now to Norfolk;
The People suddenly gathered together in Norfolk, and increased to a great
number, against whom the Lord Marquess of Northampton was sent, with the number
of 1060 Horsemen, who winning the Town of Norwich, kept it one day and one
night; and the next day in the morning, with the loss of 100 Men, departed out
of the Town, among whom the Lord Sheffield was slain. There were taken diverse
Gentlemen, and Servingmen, to the number of thirty; with which Victory, the
Rebels were very glad; but afterward hearing that the Earl of Warwick came
against them, they began to stay upon a strong plot of Ground upon a Hill near
to the Town of Norwich, having the Town confederate with them. The Earl of
Warwick came with the number of 6000 Foot, and 1500 Horsemen, and entered into
the Town of Norwich, which having won, it was so weak that he could scarcely
defend it; and oftentimes the Rebels came into the Streets, killing diverse of
his Men, and were repulsed again; yea, and the Townsmen were given to Mischief
themselves: So having endured their Assaults three days, and stopped their
Victuals, the Rebels were constrained, for lack of Meat, to remove; whom the
Earl of Warwick followed with 1000 Almains, and his Horsemen, leaving the
English Footmen in the Town, and overcame them in plain Battle, killing 2000 of
them, and taking Ket their Captain, who in January following was hanged at
Norwich, and his Head hanged out; Ket's Brother was taken also, and punished
alike. In the mean season Chastilion besieged the Peer of Bolloin made in the
Haven, and after long Battery, 20000 shot or more, gave assault to it, and were
manfully repulsed; nevertheless they continued the Siege still, and made often
Skirmishes, and false Assaults, in which they won not much. Therefore seeing
they profited little that way, they planted Ordnance against the Mouth of the
Haven that no Victual might come to it; which our Men seeing, set upon them by
night and slew diverse Frenchmen, and dismounted many of their Pieces;
nevertheless the French came another time and planted their Ordnance toward the
Sand-side of the Sand-Hills, and beat diverse Ships of Victualers at the Entry
of the Haven, but yet the Englishmen, at the King's Adventure, came into the
Haven and refreshed diverse times the Town. The Frenchmen seeing they could not
that way prevail, continued their Battery but smally, on which before they had
spent 1500 Shot in a day, but loaded a Galley with Stones and Gravel, which
they let go in the Stream to sink it; but or ere it sunk, it came near to one
Bank, where the Bulloners took it out, and brought the Stones to reinforce the
Peer. Also at Guines was a certain Skirmish, in which there was about an 100
Frenchmen slain, of which some were Gentlemen and Noblemen. In the mean season
in England rose great Stirs, like to increase much if it had not been well
foreseen. The Council, about nineteen of them, were gathered in London,
thinking to meet with the Lord Protector, and to make him amend some of his
Disorders. He fearing his state, caused the Secretary, in My Name, to be sent
to the Lords, to know for what Cause they gathered their Powers together; and
if they meant to talk with him, that they should come in a peaceable manner.
The next morning, being the 6th of October and Saturday, he commanded the
Armor to be brought down out of the Armoury of Hampton Court, about 500
Harnesses, to Arm both his and My Men, with all the Gates of the House to be
Rampeir'd, People to be raised: People came abundantly to the House. That
night, with all the People, at nine or ten of the Clock of the night, I went to
Windsor, and there was Watch and Ward kept every night. The Lords sat in open
Places of London, calling for Gentlemen before them, and declaring the Causes
of Accusation of the Lord Protector, and caused the same to be proclaimed.
After which time few came to Windsor, but only Mine own Men of the Guard, whom
the Lords willed, fearing the Rage of the People so lately quieted. Then began
the Protector to treat by Letters, sending Sir Philip Hobbey, lately come from
his Embassage in Flanders, to see to his Family, who brought in his return a
Letter to the Protector, very gentle, which he delivered to him, another to Me,
another to my House, to declare his Faults, Ambition, Vainglory, entering into
rash Wars in my Youth, negligent looking on New Haven, enriching of himself of
my Treasure, following of his own Opinion, and doing all by his own Authority,
etc. Which Letters were openly read, and immediately the Lords came to Windsor,
took him, and brought him through Holborn to the Tower. Afterward I came to
Hampton Court, where they appointed, by My consent, six Lords of the Council to
be Attendant on Me, at least two and four Knights; Lords, the Marquess of
Northampton, the Earls of Warwick and Arundel, the Lords, Russel St. John, and
Wentworth; Knights, Sir Andr. Dudley, Sir Edw. Rogers, Sir Tho. Darcy, and Sir
Tho. Wroth. After I came through London to Westminster. The Lord of Warwick
made Admiral of England. Sir Thomas Cheiney sent to the Emperor for Relief,
which he could not obtain. Master Wotton made Secretary. The Lord Protector, by
his own Agreement and Submission, lost his Protectorship, Treasureship,
Marshalship, all his Movables, and more, 2000 l. Land, by Act of Parliament.
The Earl of Arundel committed to his House, for certain Crimes of suspicion
against him, as plucking down of Bolts and Locks at Westminster, giving of My
Stuff away, etc. and put to fine of 12000 l. to be paid 1000 l. Yearly; of
which he was after relieved.

Also Mr. Southwell committed to the Tower for certain Bills of Sedition,
written with his Hand, and put to fine of 500 l. Likewise Sir Tho. Arundel, and
six, then committed to the Tower for Conspiracies in the West Places. A
Parliament, where was made a manner to Consecrate, Priests, Bishops, and
Deacons. Mr. Paget surrendering his Comptrolership, was made Lord Paget of
Beaudesert, and cited into the Higher House by a Writ of Parliament. Sir
Anthony Wingfield; before Vicechamberlain, made Comptroller. Sir Thomas Darcy
made Vicechamberlaine. Guidotty made diverse Errands from the Constable of
France to make Peace with us; upon which were appointed four Commissioners to
Treat, and they after long Debatement made a Treaty as follows.

Anno 1549. Mart. 24.
Peace concluded between England, France, and Scotland; By our English side,
John Earl of Bedford, Lord Privy Seal, Lord Paget de Beaudesert, Sir William
Petre Secretary, and Sir John Mason. On the French side, Monsieur de Rochepot,
Monsieur Chastilion, Guilluart de Mortier, and Boucherel de Sany, upon these
Conditions, That all Titles, Tribute, and Defenses, should remain; That the
Faults of one Man, except he be punished, should not break the League. That the
Ships of Merchandise shall pass to and fro: That Pirates shall be called back,
and Ships of War. That Prisoners shall be delivered of both sides. That we
shall not War with Scotland. That Bollein, with the pieces of New Conquest, and
two Basilisks, two Demy-Cannons, three Culverines, two Demy-Culverins, three
Sacres, six Faulcons, 94 Hagbutts, a Crook, with Wooden Tails, and 21 Iron
Pieces; and Lauder, and Dunglass, with all the Ordnance save that that came
from Haddington, shall, within six months after this Peace proclaimed, be
delivered; and for that the French to pay 200000 Scutes within three days after
the delivery of Bollein, and 200000 Scutes on our Lady Day in Harvest next
ensuing; and that if the Scots raizd Lauder, and we should raze Roxburg and
Heymouth. For the performance of which, on the 7th of April, should be
delivered at Guisnes and Ardres, these Hostages.

Marquess de Means. Monsieur Trimoville. Monsieur D'anguien. Monsieur
Montmorency. Monsieur Henandiere. Vicedam de Chartres. My Lord of Suffolk. My
Lord of Hartford. My Lord Talbot. My Lord Fitzwarren. My Lord Martavers. My
Lord Strange.
Also that at the delivery of the Town, Ours should come home, and at the first
Payment three of theirs; and that if the Scots raze Lauder and Dunglass, We
must raze Roxburgh and Heymouth, and none after fortify them, with
comprehension of the Emperor.

25. This Peace, Anno 1550, proclaimed at Calais and Bollein.

29. In London, Bonefires.

30. A Sermon in Thanksgiving for Peace, and Te Deum sung.

31. My Lord Somerset was delivered of his Bonds, and came to Court.

April.
2. The Parliament prorogued to the second day of the Term in October ensuing.

3. Nicholas Ridley, before of Rochester, made Bishop of London, and received
his Oath.

Thomas Thirlby, before of Westminster, made Bishop of Norwich, and received
his Oath.

4. The Bishop of Chichester, before a vehement affirmer of Transubstantiation,
did preach against it at Westminster in the preaching place.

Removing to Greenwich from Westminster.

6. Our Hostages passed the Narrow Seas between Dover and Calais.

7. Monsieur de Fermin, Gentleman of the King's Privy Chamber, passed from the
French King by England to the Scotch Queen, to tell her of the Peace.

An Ambassador came from Gustave the Swedish King, called Andrew, for a surer
Amity touching Merchandise.

9. The Hostages delivered on both the sides, for the Ratification of the
League with France and Scotland; for because some said to Monsieur Rochfort
Lieutenant, that Monsieur de Guise, Father to the Marquess of Means, was dead,
and therefore the delivery was put over a day.

8. My Lord Warwick made General Warden of the North, and Mr. Herbert President
of Wales; and the one had granted to him 1000 Marks Land, the other 500; and
Lord Warwick 100 Horsemen at the King's Charge.

9. Licenses signed for the whole Council, and certain of the Privy Chamber to
keep among them 2340 Retainers.

10. My Lord Somerset taken into the Council. Guidotti the beginner of the talk
for Peace, recompensed with Knightdom, 1000 Crowns Reward, 1000 Crowns Pension,
and his Son with 250 Crowns Pension.

Certain Prisoners for light Matters dismissed; agreed for delivery of French
Prisoners taken in the Wars. Peter Vane sent Ambassador to Venice. Letters
directed to certain Irish Nobles, to take a blind Legate coming from the Pope,
calling himself Bishop of Armagh. Commissions for the delivery of Bulloin,
Lauder, and Dunglass.

6. The Flemings Men of War would have passed our Ships without vailing Bonet;
which they seeing, shot at them, and drove them at length to vail Bonet, and so
depart.

11. Monsieur Trimaul, Monsieur Vicedam de Char, and Monsieur Henaudie, came to
Dover, the rest tarried at Calais till they had leave.

13. Order taken, that whosoever had Benefices given them, should preach before
the King in or out of Lent, and every Sunday there should be a Sermon.

16. The three Hostages aforesaid came to London, being met at Debtford by the
Lord Gray of Wilton, Lord Bray, with diverse other Gentlemen, to the number of
20, and Servingmen an 100, and so brought into the City, and lodged there, and
kept Houses every Man by himself.

18. Mr. Sidney and Mr. Nevel made Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber. Commission
given to the Lord Cobham Deputy of Calais, William Petre chief Secretary, and
Sir John Mason French Secretary, to see the French King take his Oath, with
certain Instruction; and that Sir John Mason should be Ambassador Leigier.

Commission to Sir John Davies, and Sir William Sharington, to receive the
first Payment, and deliver the Quittance.

19. Sir John Mason taken into the Privy Council, and William Thomas made
Clerk of the same.

Whereas the Emperors Ambassador desired leave, by Letters Patents, that my
Lady Mary might have Mass; it was denied him. And where he said we broke the
League with him, by making Peace with Scotland, it was answered, That the
French King, and not I, did comprehend them, saving that I might not invade
them without occasion.

10. Lauther being besieged of the Scots, the Captain hearing that the Peace
was Proclaimed in England, delivered it, as the Peace did will him, taking
Sureties, that all the Bargains of the Peace should be kept.

18. Monsieur de Guise died.

20. Order taken for the Chamber, that three of the Outer Privy-Chamber
Gentlemen should always be here, and two lie in the Palace, and fill the Room
of one of the four Knights; that the Squires should be diligent in their
Office; and five Grooms should be always present, of which one to watch in the
Bedchamber.

21. The Marquess de Means, the Duke de Anguien, and the Constable's Son,
arrived at Dover.

23. Monsieur Trimoville, and the Vicedam of Chartres, and Monsieur Henaudy,
came to the Court, and saw the Order of the Garter, and the Knights, with their
Sovereign, receive the Communion.

24. Certain Articles touching a streighter Amity in Merchandise sent to the
King of Sweeden, being these.

First; If the King of Sweden sent Bullion, he should have our Commodities and
pay no Toll.

Secondly; He should bring Bullion to none other Prince.

Thirdly; If he brought Ozymus, and Steel, and Copper, etc. he should have our
Commodities, and pay Custom as an Englishman.

Fourthly; If he brought any other, he should have free intercourse, paying
Custom as a Stranger, etc.

It was answered, to the Duke of Brunswick, that whereas he offered Service
with 10000 Men of his Land, that the War was ended; and for the Marriage of my
Lady Mary to him, there was talk for her Marriage with the Infant of Portugal,
which being determined, he should have answer.

25. Lord Clinton Captain of Bulloin, having sent away before all his Men
saving 1800, and all his Ordnance, saving that the Treaty did reserve, issued
out of the Town with these 1800, delivering it to Monsieur Chastilion,
receiving of him the six Hostages English, an Acquittance for delivery of the
Town, and safe Conduct to come to Calais; whither when he came, he placed 1800
in the Emperors Frontiers.

27. The Marquess du Means Count d' Anguien, and the Constable's Son, were
received at Black Heath by my Lord of Rutland, my Lord Gray of Wilton, my Lord
Bray, my Lord Lisle, and diverse Gentlemen, with all the Pensionaries, to the
number of an hundred, beside a great number of Servingmen.

It was granted, that my Lord of Somerset should have all his moveable Goods
and Leases, except those that be already given.

The King of Sweden's Ambassador departed home to his Master.

29. The Count d' Anguien, Brother to the Duke of Vendosme, and next Heir to
the Crown after the King's Children; the Marquess de Means, Brother to the
Scotch Queen; and Monsieur Montmorency, the Constable's Son came to the Court,
where they were received with much Music at Dinner.

26. Certain were taken that went about to have an Insurrection in Kent, upon
May day following; and the Priest, who was the chief Worker, ran away into
Essex, where he was laid for.

30. Dunglass was delivered as the Treaty did require.

May.
2. Joan Bocher, otherways called Joan of Kent, was burnt for holding, That
Christ was not Incarnate of the Virgin Mary; being condemned the Year before,
but kept in hope of Conversion; and the 30th of April, the Bishop of London,
and the Bishop of Ely, were to persuade her, but she withstood them, and
reviled the Preacher that preached at her Death.

The first payment was paid at Calais, and received by Sir Thomas Dennis, and
Mr. Sharington.

4. The Lord Clinton, before Captain of Bollein, came to Court, where after
Thanks, he was made Admiral of England, upon the Surrender of the Earl of
Warwick's Patent; He was also taken into the Privy Council, and promised
further Reward. The Captain also, and Officers of the Town, were promised
Rewards. Monsieur de Brisay passed also by the Court to Scotland, where at
Greenwich he came to the King, telling him, That the French King would see that
if he lacked any Commodity that he had, he would give it him; and likewise
would the Constable of France, who then bore all the Swing.

5. The Marquess de Means departed to Scotland with Monsieur de Brisay, to
acquaint the Queen of the death of the Duke of Guise.

6. The Master of Ayrskin, and Monsieur Morret's Brother came out of Scotland
for the Acceptance of the Peace, who after had Passport to go into France.

7. The Council drew a Book for ever Shire, who should be Lieutenants in them,
and who should tarry with Me; but the Lieutenants were appointed to tarry till
Chastilions, Sarcy, and Boucherels coming, and then to depart.

9. Proclamation was made, That the Soldiers should return to their Mansions;
and the Mayor of London had charge to look through all the Wards, to take them
and send them to their Countries.

The Debt of 30000 l. and odd Money, was put over an Year, and there was bought
2500 Cinquetales of Powder.

11. Proclamation was made, That all Wooll-winders should take an Oath that
they would make good Cloth there, as the Lord Chancellor would appoint them,
according to an Act of Parliament made by Edward the Third.

7. The Lord Cobham, the Secretary Petre, and Sir John Mason came to the French
King to Amiens, going on his Journey, where they were received of all the
Nobles, and so brought to their Lodgings, which were well dressed.

10. The French King took the Oath for the Acceptance of the Treaty.

12. Our Ambassadors departed from the French Court, leaving Sir John Mason as
Legier.

14. The Duke of Somerset was taken into the Privy-Chamber, and likewise was
the Lord Admiral.

15. It was appointed that all the Light-Horsemen of Bollein, and the Men of
Arms, should be paid their Wages, and be led by the Lord Marquess of
Northampton, Captain of the Pensioners; and all the Guard of Bollein under the
Lord Admiral. Also that the chiefest Captains should be sent, with 600 with
them, to the strengthening of the Frontiers of Scotland.

The comprehension of Peace with Scotland was accepted so far as the League
went, and Sealed.

16. The Master of Ayrskin departed into France.

17. Removing from Westminster to Greenwich.

18. The French King came to Bollein to visit the Pieces lately delivered to
him, and to appoint an Order, and staying things there; which done he departed.

19. Peter Vane went as Ambassador to Venice, and departed from the Court with
his Instructions.

20. The Lord Cobham and Sir William Petre, came home from their Journey,
delivering both the Oath, and the Testimonial of the Oath, witnessed by diverse
Noblemen of France; and also the Treaty sealed with the Great Seal of France:
and in the Oath was confessed, That I was Supreme Head of the Church of England
and Ireland, and also King of Ireland.

23. Monsieur Chastilion, and Mortier, and Boucherel, accompanied with the
Rhinegrave, Dandelot the Constable's second Son, and Chenault the Legier, came
to Duresm Place, where in their Journey they were met by Mr. Treasurer, and
sixty Gentlemen, at Woollwich, and also saluted with great Peals, at Woollwich,
Debtford, and the Tower.

24. The Ambassador came to me presenting the Legier; and also delivering
Letters of Credence from the French King.

25. The Ambassador came to the Court, where they saw Me take the Oath for the
Acceptance of the Treaty; and afterward dined with Me: and after Dinner saw a
Pastime of ten against ten at the Ring, whereof on the one side were the Duke
of Suffolk, the Vicedam, the Lord Lisle, and seven other Gentlemen apparallel'd
in Yellow. On the other, the Lord Strange, Monsieur Hennadoy, and the eight
other in blew.

26. The Ambassador saw the baiting of the Bears and Bulls.

27. The Ambassadors, after they had hunted, sat with me at Supper.

28. The same went to see Hampton Court, where they did Hunt, and the same
night returned to Duresm-place.

25. One that by way of Marriage had thought to assemble the People, and so to
make an Insurrection in Kent, was taken by the Gentlemen of the Shire, and
afterward punished.

29. The Ambassadors had a fair Supper made them by the Duke of Somerset; and
afterward went into the Thames, and saw both the Bear hunted in the River, and
also Wildfire cast out of Boats, and many pretty Conceits.

30. The Ambassadors took their leave, and the next day departed.

June.
3. The King came to Shein, where was a Marriage made between the Lord Lisle
the Earl of Warwick's Son, and the Lady Ann Daughter to the Duke of Somerset;
which done, and a fair Dinner made, and Dancing finished, the King and the
Ladies went into two Anti-Chambers made of Boughs, where first he saw six
Gentlemen of one side, and six of another, run the course of the Field twice
over. Their names here do follow.

The Lord Edward. Sir John Apleby, etc.
And afterward came three Masters of one side, and two of another, which ran
four Courses apiece. Their Names be;

Last of all came the Count of Regunete, with three Italians, who ran with all
the Gentlemen four Courses, and afterward fought at Tournay; and so after
Supper he returned to Westminster.

4. Sir Robert Dudley third Son to the Earl of Warwick, married Sir John
Robsarts Daughter; after which Marriage, there were certain Gentlemen that did
strive who should first take away a Gooses Head which was hanged alive on two
cross Posts.

5. There was Tilt and Tournay on foot, with as great Staves as they run withal
on Horseback.

6. Removing to Greenwich.

8. The Gests of My Progress were set forth, which were these; From Greenwich
to Westminster, from Westminster to Hampton Court, from Hampton Court to
Windsor, from Windsor to Guilford, from Guilford to Oatland, from Oatland to
Richmond, etc.

Also the Vicedam made a great Supper for the Duke of Somerset and the Marquess
of Northampton, with diverse Masks and other Conceits.

9. The Duke of Somerset, Marquess of Northampton, Lord Treasurer, Bedford, and
the Secretary Petre, went to the Bishop of Winchester to know to what he would
stick. He made answer, That he would obey and set forth all things set forth by
Me and my Parliament; and if he were troubled in Conscience, he would reveal it
to the Council, and not reason openly against it.

The first Payment of the Frenchmen, was laid up in the Tower for all Chances.

10. The Books of my Proceedings were sent to the Bishop of Winchester, to see
whether he would set his Hand to it, or promise to set it forth to the People.

11. Order was given for Fortifying and Victualling Cales for four months; and
also Sir Henry Palmer and Sir -- Alce, were sent to the Frontiers of Scotland,
to take a view of all the Forts there, and to report to the Council where they
thought best to fortify.

12. The Marquess de Means came from Scotland in Post, and went his way into
France.

13. Commissions were signed to Sir William Herbert, and thirty other, to
Entreat of certain Matters in Wales, and also Instructions to the same, how to
behave himself in the Presidentship.

14. The Surveyor of Calais was sent to Calais, first to raze the Walls of
Risbank toward the Sand-hills, and after to make the Wall massy again, and the
round Bullwark to change to a pointed one, which should run twenty foot into
the Sea, to beat the Sand-hills, and to raze the Mount. Secondly, To view
Maubeug, to make an high Bullwark in the midst, with Flankers, to beat through
all the straight; and also four Sluices to make Calais Haven better. Afterward
he was bid to go to Guisnes, where first he should take away the three-corn'd
Bullwark to make the outward Wall of the Keep, and to fill the space between
the Keep and the said outward Wall with the foresaid Bullwark, and to raise the
Old Keep that it might defend the Town. Also he was bid to make Parson's
Bullwark, where it is now, round, without Flankers, both pointed, and also with
six Flankers to bear hard to the Keep.

Atwood and Lambert were sent to take view of Allderny, Silly, Jernsey,
Gernsey, and the Isle of Gitto.

The Duke of Somerset, with five others of the Council, went to the Bishop of
Winchester; to whom he made this Answer; I having deliberately seen the Book of
Common Prayer, although I would not have made it so my self, yet I find such
things in it as satisfies my Conscience, and therefore I will both execute it
my self, and also see other my Parishioners to do it.

This was subscribed by the foresaid Counselors, that they heard him say these
words.

16. The Lord Marquess, Mr. Herbert, the Vicedam Henandie, and diverse other
Gentlemen, went to the Earl of Warwick's, where they were honorably received;
and the next day they ran at the Ring a great number of Gentlemen.

19. I went to Debtford, being bidden to Supper by the Lord Clinton; where
before Supper I saw certain Men stand upon the end of a Boat, without holding
of any thing, and ran one at another, till one was cast into the Water. At
Supper Monsieur Vicedam and Henandie supped with me. After Supper was there a
Fort made upon a great Lighter on the Thames which had three Walls, and a
Watchtower; in the midst of which Mr. Winter was Captain, with forty or fifty
other Soldiers in Yellow and Black. To the Fort also appertained a Gallery of
Yellow Color, with Men and Ammunition in it for defense of the Castle:
Wherefore there came four Pinaces with their Men in White, handsomely dressed;
which intending to give assault to the Castle, first drove away the Pinace, and
after with Clods, Squibs, Canes of Fire-Darts made for the nonce, and Bombards,
assaulted the Castle; and at length came with their Pieces, and burst the outer
Walls of the Castle, beating them off the Castle into the second Ward, who
after issued out and drove away the Pinaces, sinking one of them, out of which,
all the Men in it, being more than twenty, leaped out and swam in the Thames;
Then came the Admiral of the Navy, with three other Pinaces, and won the Castle
by Assault, and burst the top of it down, and took the Captain and under
Captain. Then the Admiral went forth to take the Yellow Ship, and at length
clasped with her, took her, and assaulted also her top, and won it also by
compulsion, and so returned home.

20. The Mayor of London caused the Watches to be increased every night,
because of the great Frays, and also one Alderman to see good Rule kept every
night.

22. There was a privy search made through all Sussex for all Vagabonds,
Gypsies, Conspirators, Prophesiers, all Players, and such like.

24. There were certain in Essex about Rumford, went about a Conspiracy, which
were taken, and the Matter stayed.

25. Removing to Greenwich.

23. Sir John Yates, Sheriff of Essex, went down with Letters to see the Bishop
of London's Injunctions performed, which touched plucking down of
Superaltaries, Altars, and such like Ceremonies and Abuses.

29. It was appointed that the Germans should have the Austin-Friars for their
Church to have their Service in, for avoiding of all Sects of Anabaptists, and
suchlike.

17. The French Queen was delivered of a third Son, called Monsieur d'
Angoulesme.

13. The Emperor departed from Argentin to Augusta.

30. John Poynet made Bishop of Rochester, and received his Oath.

July.
5. There was Money provided to be sent into Ireland, for payment of the
Soldiers there; and also Orders taken for the dispatch of the Strangers in
London.

7. The Master of Arskin passed into Scotland coming from France. Also the
French Ambassador did come before Me, first after showing the Birth of Monsieur
d' Angoulesme; afterward declaring, That whereas the French King had for my
sake let go the Prisoners at St. Andrews, who before they were taken, had
shamefully murdered the Cardinal, he desidered that all Scots that were
Prisoners might be delivered. It was answered, That all were delivered. Then he
moved for one called the Archbishop of Glasgow; who since the Peace, came
disguised without Pasport, and so was taken. It was answered, That we had no
Peace with Scotland, such, that they might pass our Country, and the Master of
Erskin affirmed the same.

8. It was agreed that the 200 that were with Me, and 200 that were with Mr.
Herbert, should be sent into Ireland; Also that the Mint should be set a set a
work that it might coin 24000 l. a Year, and so bear all my Charges in Ireland
for this Year, and 10000 l. for my Coffers.

9. The Earl of Warwick, the Lord Treasurer, Sir William Herbert, and the
Secretary Petre, went to the Bishop of Winchester with certain Articles signed
by Me and the Council, containing the confessing of his Fault, the Supremacy,
the establishing of Holy Days, the abolishing of six Articles, and diverse
other, whereof the Copy is in the Council-Chest; whereunto he put his Hand,
saving to the Confession.

10. Sir William Herbert and Secretary Petre were sent unto him, to tell him, I
marvelled that he would not put his Hand to the Confession. To which he made
answer, That he would not put his Hand to the Confession, for because he was
Innocent, and also the Confession was but the Preface of Articles.

11. The Bishop of London, the Secretary Petre, Mr. Cecil, and Goderick, were
commanded to make certain Articles according to the Laws, and to put in the
Submission.

12. It was appointed, That under the Shadow of preparing for the Sea-Matters,
there should be sent 5000 l. to the Protestants to get their good Will.

14. The Bishop of Winchester did deny the Articles that the Bishop of London
and the other had made.

13. Sir John Yates was sent into Essex to stop the going away of the Lady
Mary, because it was credibly informed that Scipperus should steal her away to
Antwerp; diverse of her Gentlemen were there, and Scipperus a little before came
to see the Landing-places.

16. It was appointed that the two hundred with the Duke of Somerset, and two
hundred with the Lord Privy Seal, and four hundred with Master St. Legier,
should be sent to the Seacoast.

17. It was agreed, that on Wednesday next, We should go in one day to Windsor
and dine at Sion.

18. It was thought best that the Lord Bows should tarry in his Wardenship
still, and the Earl of Warwick should tarry here and be recompensed.

19. The Bishop of Winchester was sequestered from his Fruits for three months.

20. Hooper was made Bishop of Gloucester. The Merchants were commanded to stay
as much as they could their Vent into Flanders, because the Emperor had made
many straight Laws against them that professed the Gospel.

21. A Muster was made of the Boullonois, who were fully paid for all past,
and a month to come. Sir John Wallop, Francis Hall, and Doctor Coke, were
appointed Commissioners to appoint the Limits between Me and the French King.

23. Removing to Windsor.

22. The Secretary Petre, and the Lord Chancellor, were appointed to go to the
Lady Mary, to cause her to come to Oking, or to the Court.

25. It was appointed, that half the French King's Payment should be bestowed
on paying 10000 l. at Calais, 9000 l. in Ireland, 10000 l. in the North, 2000
l. in the Admiralty, so that every Crown might go for one of our Nobles.

27. Because the Rumor came so much of Scipperus coming, it was appointed that
they of the Admiralty should set my Ships in readiness.

26. The Duke of Somerset went to set Order in Oxfordshire, Sussex, Wiltshire,
and Hampshire.

28. The Lady Mary, after long communication, was content to come to Leez to my
Lord Chancellor, and then to Hunsden; but she utterly denied to come to the
Court or Oking at that time.

31. The Earl of Southampton died.

14. Andrew Dory took the City of -- in Africa, from the Pirat Dragutte, who in
the mean season burnt the Country of Genoa.

8. The Emperor came to Ausburg.

August.
4. Mr. St. Legier was appointed, by Letters Patents, to be Deputy there; and
had his Commission, Instructions, and Letters to the Nobles of Ireland for the
same purpose.

5. The same Deputy departed from the Castle of Windsor.

6. The Duke of Somerset departed to Redding to take an Order there.

7. It was appointed, that of the Money delivered to Me by the French King,
there should be taken 100000 Crowns to pay 10000 l. at Calais, 10000 in the
North, and 2000 in the Admiralty, and 8000 in Ireland.

8. Monsieur Henaudy took his leave to depart to Calais, and so upon the
Payment, to be delivered Home; and Tremoville being sick, went in a
Horse-Litter to Dover.

9. The French Ambassador came to Windsor, to sue for a Passport for the
Dowager of Scotland; which being granted, so she came like a Friend; he
required 300 Horse to pass, with 200 Keepers, which was not wholly granted, but
only that 200 Horse, with an 100 Keepers in one Company, coming into this
Realm, as should be appointed, should, without let, pass into France, and not
return this way.

11. The Vicedam of Chartres showed his License to tarry here, with a Letter
written to the same purpose.

10. The Ambassador of France departed not a little contented with his gentle
Answers.

12. Removing to Guilford.

13. The Parliament was Prorogued to the 20th of February next following.

Mr. Cook Master of Requests, and certain other Lawyers, were appointed to make
a short Table of the Laws and Acts that were not wholly unprofitable, and
present it to the Board.

The Lord Chancellor fell sore sick, with forty more of his House, so that the
Lady Mary came not thither at that time.

14. There came diverse Advertisements from Chamberlain, Ambassador with the
Queen of Hungary, that their very Intent was to take away the Lady Mary, and so
to begin an Outward War, and an Inward Conspiracy; insomuch that the Queen said
Scipperus was but a Coward, and for fear of one Gentleman that came down, durst
not go forth with his Enterprise to my Lady Mary.

16. The Earl of Maxwell came down to the North-Border with a good Power to
overthrow the Gremes, who were a certain Family that were yielded to Me; but
the Lord Dacre stood before his Face with a good Band of Men, and so put him
from his Purpose, and the Gentlemen, called Gremes, skirmished with the said
Earl, slaying certain of his Men.

17. The Council appointed, among themselves, That none of them should speak in
any Man's behalf for Land to be given, Reversion of Offices, Leases of Manours,
or extraordinary Annuities, except for certain Captains who served at Bollein,
their Answer being deferred till Michaelmass next.

18. A Proclamation that till Michaelmass all Strangers that sued for Pensions
should go their way.

20. Removing to Oking.

15. The second Payment of the French was paid, and Henaudie and Tremoville
delivered.

21. 8000 l. of the last Payment was appointed to be paid to the Dispatch of
Calais, and 5000 at the North.

24. 10000 l. was appointed to be occupied to win Money to pay the next Year,
pay the outward Pays; and it was promised that the Money should double every
month.

26. Removing to Oatlands.

27. Andrea Doria gave a hot Assault to the Town of -- in Africa kept by the
Pirat called Drogute, but was repulsed by the Townsmen.

29. The Pirat gave a hot Assault to Andrea Dorea by Night, and slew the
Captain of Thames, with diverse other notable Men.

31. The Duke Maurice made answer to the Emperor, That if the Council were not
free, he would not come at it.

September.
2. Maclamore in Ireland before a Rebel, by the means of Mr. Baberson,
surrendered himself and gave Pledges.

6. Mr. Wotton gave up his Secretaryship, and Mr. Cecil got it of him.

8. Removing from Nonsuch.

13. Removing to Oatlands.

22. A Proclamation was set forth, by the which it was commanded; 1. That no
kind of Victual, no Wax, Tallow, Candles, nor no such thing should be carried
over, except to Calais, putting in Sureties to go thither. 2. That no Man
should buy or sell the self-same things again except Broakers, who should not
have more than ten quarters of Grain at once. 3. That all Justices should
divide themselves into Hundreds, Rapes, and Wapentakes, to look in their
Quarters what superfluous Corn were in every Barn, and appoint it to be sold at
a reasonable price. Also that one of them must be in every Market to see the
Corn brought. Furthermore, whoever shipped over any Thing aforesaid to the
Parts beyond Sea, or Scotland, after eight days following the publication of
the Proclamation, should forfeit his Ship, and the Ware therein, half to the
Lord of the Franchize, and half to the finder thereof; whosoever bought to sell
again after the day aforesaid, should forfeit all his Goods, Farms, and Leases,
to the use, one half of the Finder, the other of the King; whosoever brought not in
Corn to Market as he was appointed, should forfeit 10 l. except the Purveyours
took it up, or it were sold to his Neighbors.

25. Letters sent out to the Justices of the Peace for the due execution
thereof.

18. Andrea Doria had a repulse from the Town of Afrodisium
in Africa, and lost many of his Men, and the Captain of Thames, and
nevertheless left not yet the Siege.

24. Order was given for the Victualing of Calais.

26. The Lord Willoughby, Deputy of Calais, departed and took his journey
thitherward.

28. The Lord Treasurer sent to London to give Order for the preservation of
the City, with help of the Mayor.

Whereas the Emperor required a Council, they were content to receive it, so it
were free and ordinary, requiring also that every Man might be restored to his
Right, and a general Peace proclaimed. They desired also, that in the mean
season no Man might be restrained to use his fashion of Religion.

18. The Emperor made Answer, That the Council should be to the Glory of God,
and Maintenance of the Empire at Trent; He knew no Title to any of his
Territories, Peace he desired, and in the mean season would have them observe
the Interim and last Council of Trent; he would also that they of Breme and
Hamburgh, with their Associates, should leave their Seditions, and obey his
Decrees.

21. George Duke of Mecklenburgh came with 8000 Men of War to the City of
Magdeburgh, being Protestant; against whom went forth the Count of Mansfield,
and his Brother, with 6000 Men, and eight Guns, to drive him from Pillage; but
the other abiding the Battle, put the Count to flight, took his Brother
Prisoner, and slew 3000 Men, as it is reported.

October.
4. Removing to Richmond.

5. The Parliament Prorogued to the 20th of January.

6. The French King made his entry into Roan.

10. It was agreed that York, Master of one of the Mints at the Tower, should
make his Bargain with Me; viz. To take the Profit of Silver rising of Bullion
that he himself brought, should pay all my Debts, to the Sum of 1200000 l. or
above, and remain accountable for the Overplus, paying no more but 6 s. and 6
d. the ounce, till the Exchange were equal in Flanders, and after 6 s. and 2 d.
Also that he should declare all his Bargains to any should be appointed to
oversee him, and leave off when I would: For which I should give him 15000 l.
in Pressed, and leave to carry 8000 l. over-Sea to abase the Exchange.

16. Removing to Westminster.

19. Prices were set of all kind of Grains, Butter, Cheese, and Poultry-Ware,
by a Proclamation.

20. The Frenchmen came to Sandefield and Fins-wood, to the number of 800, and
there on my Ground did spoil my Subjects that were relieved by the Wood.

26. The French Ambassador came to excuse the foresaid Men, saying, They
thought it not meet that that Wood should be spoiled of us, being thought and
claimed as theirs, and therefore they lay there.

24. There were 1000 Men embarked to go to Calais, and so to Guisnes, and
Hammes, Rishumbee, Newmanbridge, the Causie and the Bullwarks, with Victual for
the same.

November.
19. There were Letters sent to every Bishop to pluck down the Altars.

20. There were Letters sent down to the Gentlemen of every Shire, for the
observation of the last Proclamation touching Corn, bccause there came none to
the Markets, commanding them to punish the Offenders.

29. Upon the Letters written back by the same, the second Proclamation was
abolished.

December.
15. There was Letters sent for the taking of certain Chaplains of the Lady
Mary for saying Mass, which she denied.

19. Borthwick was sent to the King of Denmark, with privy Instructions for the
Marriage of the Lady Elizabeth to his Son.

20. There was appointed a Band of Horsemen divided amongst the Nobles.

An 100 to the Duke of Somerset. 50 to my Lord Marq. Northampton. Lord Marquess
of Dorset. Earl of Wiltshire. Lord Wentworth. Lord Admiral. Lord Paget. Mr.
Sadler. Mr. Darcy. To the Earl of Warwick. Lord Privy Seal. Mr. Herbert. Mr.
Treasurer.
24. Removing to Greenwich.

26. Peace concluded between the Emperor and the Scots.

January.
6. The Earl of Arundel remitted of 8000 l. which he ought to have paid for
certain Faults he had committed within 12 Years.

7. There was appointed, for because the Frenchmen did go about practice in
Ireland, that there should be prepared four Ships, four Barques, four Pinaces,
and twelve Victualers, to take three Havens; of which two were on the
South Side toward France, and one in James Cannes the Scottish Country, and
also send and break the foresaid Conspiracies.

10. Three Ships being sent forth into the Narrow Seas, took certain Pirates,
and brought them into England, where the most part was hanged.

27. Monsieur de Lansac came from the French King by way of request, to ask
that Coumilis, the fishing of the Tweed, Edrington, the Ground debatable, and
the Scotch Hostages that were put here in the King my Father's days, should be
delivered to the Scots, that they might be suffered to Traffic, as though
they were in Peace, and that all Interest of the foresaid Houses should be
delivered to the Scots. Also that those Prisoners which were bound to pay their
Ransoms before the Peace last concluded, should not enjoy the benefit of the
Peace.

18. The Lord Cobham was appointed to be General Lieutenant in Ireland.

30. Letters written to Mr. St. Lieger to repair to the South parts of Ireland
with his Force.

February.
3. Mr. Croftis appointed to go into Ireland, and there with Rogers and certain
Artificers, to take the Havens aforesaid, and begin some Fortification.

5. Diverse Merchants of London were spoken withal for provision of Corn out of
Dansick, about 40000 Quarters.

10. Mountford was commanded to go to provide for certain proportions of
Victual for the Ships that should go into Ireland.

11. Also for Provision to be sent to Barwick and the North parts.

16. Whaley was examined, for persuading diverse Nobles of the Realm to make the
Duke of Somerset Protector at the next Parliament, and stood to the denial, the
Earl of Rutland affirming it manifestly.

13. The Bishop of Winchester, after a long Trial, was deposed of his
Bishopric.

20. Sir William Pickering Knight. was dispatched to the French King for Answer to
Monsieur de Lansac, to declare, That although I had right in the foresaid
Places, yet I was content to surrender them, under Conditions to be agreed on
by Commissioners on both sides; and for the last Articles I agreed without
condition.

25. The Lord Marquess Dorset appointed to be Warden of the North-Borders,
having three Sub-Wardens, the Lord Ogle, etc. in the East, and the Lord Coniers
in the West. Also Mr. Auger had the charge for victualling Calais.

28. The Learned Man Bucerus died at Cambridg; who was two days after buried in
St. Mary's Church at Cambridg; all the whole University, with the whole Town,
bringing him to the Grave, to the number of 3000 Persons. Also there was an
Oration of Mr. Haddon made very eloquently at his Death, and a Sermon of Dr.
Parker.
after that Master Redman made a third Sermon; which three Sermons made the
People wonderfully to lament his Death. Last of all, all the Learned Men of the
University made their Epitaphs in his praise, laying them on his Grave.

March.
3. The Lord Wentworth Lord Chamberlain, died about ten of the Clock at Night,
leaving behind him sixteen Children.

1. Sir John York made great loss about 2000 l. weight of Silver, by Treason of
English Men which he brought for Provision of the Mints. Also Judd 1500, and
also Tresham 500; so the whole came to 4000 l.

February.
20. The Frenchmen came with a Navy of 160 Sail into Scotland, laden with
provision of Grain, Powder, and Ordnance; of which sixteen great Ships perished
on Ireland Coast, two laden with Artillery, and fourteen with Corn.

Also in this month the Deputy there set at one, certain of the West Lords that
were at variance.

March.
10. Certain new Fortifications were devised to be made at Calais; That at
Graveling the Water should be let in in my Ground, and so should fetch a
compass by the six Bulwarks to Guisnes, Hammes, and Newnambridg; and that there
should be a Wall of eight foot high, and six broad of Earth, to keep out the
Water, and to make a great Marsh about the Territories of Calais 37 miles long.
Also for Flankers at the Keep of Guisnes, willed to be made a three-cornered
Bullwark at the Keep to keep it. Furthermore, at Newnambridg, a massy Wall to
the French-side there, as was a Green. Besides, at the West Gittie there should
be another Gittie, which should defend the Victuallers of the Town always from
Shot from the Sand-hills.

5. Mr. Archer had 2000 l. in Money, wherewith he provided out of Flanders for
Calais 2000 Quarters of Barley, 500 of Wheat.

18. The Lady Mary, my Sister, came to me to Westminster, where after
Salutations, she was called, with my Council, into a Chamber; where was
declared how long I had suffered her Mass, in hope of her reconciliation, and
how now being no hope, which I perceived by her Letters, except I saw some
short amendment I could not bear it. She answered, That her Soul was God's, and
her Faith she would not change, nor dissemble her Opinion with contrary doings.
It was said, I constrained not her Faith, but willed her not as a King to Rule,
but as a Subject to obey; and that her Example might breed too much
inconvenience.

19. The Emperor's Ambassador came with a short Message from his Master of War,
if I would not suffer his Cousin, the Princess, to use her Mass. To this was no
answer given at this time.

20. The Bishops of Canterbury, London, Rochester, did consider to give license
to sin, was sin; to suffer and wink at it for a time might be born, so all
haste possible might be used.

23. The Council having the Bishops Answers, seeing my Subjects taking their
vent in Flanders, might put the whole Realm in danger. The Flemings had Cloth
enough for a Year in their hand, and were kept far under the danger of the
Papists; the 1500 Cinquetales of Powder I had in Flanders, the Harness they had
for preparation of the Gendarmory, the Goods my Merchants had there at the
Woolfleet, decreed to send an Ambassador to the Emperor, Mr. Wotton, to deny
the matter wholly, and persuade the Emperor in it, thinking, by his going, to
win some time for a preparation of a Mart, convenience of Powder, Harness, etc.
and for the Surety of the Realm. In the mean season to punish the Offenders,
first of my Servants that heard Mass, next of hers.

24. Sir Anthony Brown sent to the Fleet for hearing Mass, with Sergeant
Morgan, Sir Clement Smith, which a Year before heard Mass, chidden.

25. The Ambassador of the Emperor came to have his Answer, but had none,
saving that one should go to the Emperor within a month or two to declare the
Matter.

22. Sir William Pickering came with great thanks from the French King.

27. Removing to Greenwich.

31. A Challenge made by Me, that I, with sixteen of my Chamber, should run at
Base, Shoot, and run at the Ring with any seventeen of my Servants Gentlemen in
the Court.

Mr. Crosted arrived in Ireland, and came to Waterford to the Deputy,
consulting for Fortification of the Town.

April.
1. The first day of the Challenge at Base, or Running, the King won.

3. Monsieur de Lansac came again from the French King to go to Scotland, for
appointing his Commissioners on the Scotch side, who were the French Ambassador
in Scotland, the Bishop of -- the Master of Erskin, etc.

Thomas Darcy made Lord Darcy of Chich. and Lord Chamberlain; for maintenance
whereof he had given 100 Merks to his Heirs generally, and 300 to his Heirs
Males.

6. I lost the Challenge of Shooting at Rounds, and won at Rovers.

7. There were appointed Commissioners on my side, either the Bishop of
Litchfield if he had no Impediment, or Norwich, Mr. Bows, Mr. Bekwith, and Sir
Thomas Chaloner.

8. Sir John Yates made Vicechamberlain, and Captain of the Guard, and 120 l.
Land.

5. Poinet Bishop of Rochester received his Oath for the Bishopric of
Winchester, having 2000 Merk Land appointed to him for his Maintenance.

7. A certain Arrian of the Strangers, a Dutch Man, being excommunicated by the
Congregation of his Countrymen, was after long disputation condemned to the
Fire.

9. The Earl of Wiltshire had 50 more in my Lord Marquess Dorset's Place,
Warden in the North, and my Lord of Rutland in my Lord Wentworth's Place other
fifty.

10. Mr. Wotton had his Instructions made to go withal to the Emperor, to be as
Ambassador Legier in Mr. Morison's place, and to declare this Resolution, That
if the Emperor would suffer my Ambassador with him, to use his Service, then I
would his; if he would not suffer Mine, I would not suffer his. Likewise, that
my Sister was my Subject, and should use my Service appointed by Act of
Parliament.

Also it was appointed to make 20000 pound weight for necessity somewhat baser,
to get gains 16000 l. clear, by which the Debt of the Realm might be paid, the
Country defended from any sudden Attempt, and the Coin amended.

11. Mr. Pickering had his Instructions and Dispatch to go into France as
Ambassador Legier there, in Mr. Mason's Place, who desired very much to come
home; and Mr. Pickering had Instructions to tell the French King of the
appointing of my Commissioners in Scotland aforesaid.

2. They of Magdeburg having in January last past taken in a conflict the Duke
of Mecklenburg, and three other Earls, did give an Onset on Duke Maurice by
Boats on the River, when it overflowed the Country, and slew diverse of his Men,
and came home safe, receiving a great portion of Victual into the Town.

15. A Conspiracy opened of the Essex-men, who within three days after minded
to declare the coming of Strangers, and so to bring People together to
Chelmsford, and then to spoil the Rich Men's Houses if they could.

16. Also of Londoners, who thought Here the sense is not perfect.
Woodcock to rise on May Day against the Strangers of the City, and both the
Parties committed to Ward.

23. The French King, and the Lord Clinton, chosen into the Order of the
Garter; and appointed that the Duke of Somerset, the Marquess of Northampton,
the Earl of Wiltshire, and the Earl of Warwick should peruse and amend the
Order.

24. The Lords sat at London, and banqueted one another this day, and three
days after, for to show agreement amongst them, whereas Discord was bruited,
and somewhat to look to the punishment of Tale-bearers, and apprehending of
evil Persons.

25. A Bargain made with the Foulcare for about 60000 l. that in May and August
should be paid for the defraying of it. 1. That the Foulcare should put it off
for 10 in the 100. 2. That I should buy 12000 Marks weight, at 6 s. the ounce,
to be delivered at Antwerp, and so conveyed over. 3. I should pay 100000 Crowns
for a very fair Jewel of his, four Rubies marvelous big, one Orient and great
Diamond, and one great Pearl.

27. Mallet, the Lady Mary's Chaplain, apprehended and sent to the Tower of
London.

30. The Lord Marquess of Northampton appointed to go with the Order, and
further Commission of Treaty, and that in Post; having joined with him in
Commission, the Bishop of Ely, Sir Philip Hobbey, Sir William Pickering, and
Sir John Mason Knights, and two other Lawyers, Smith that was Secretary, etc.

May.
2. There was appointed to go with my Lord Marquess, the Earls of Rutland,
Worcester, and Ormond; the Lords Lisle, Fitzwater, and Bray, Barguenny, and
diverse other Gentlemen, to the number of thirty in all.

3. The Challenge at running at the Ring performed; at the which first came the
King, sixteen Footmen, and ten Horsemen, in black Silk Coats, pulled out with
white Taffety; then all the Lords, having three Men likewise apparelled; and
all Gentlemen their Footmen in white Fustian, pulled out with black Taffety.
The other side came all in yellow Taffety; at length the yellow Band took it
thrice in 120 courses, and my Band touched often, which was counted as nothing,
and took never, which seemed very strange, and so the Prize was of my Side
lost. After that Tournay followed, between six of my Band, and six of theirs.

4. It was appointed that there should be but four Men to wait on every Earl
that went with my Lord Marquess of Northampton, three on every Lord, two on
every Knight or Gentleman: Also that my Lord Marquess should in his Diet be
allowed for the loss in his Exchange.

5. The Muster of the Gendarmoury appointed to be the first of June if it were
possible, if not the 8th.

6. The Testourn cried down from 12 d. to 9 d. and the Groat from 4 d. to 3 d.

9. One Stewart a Scotchman meaning to poison the young Queen of Scotland,
thinking thereby to get Favor here, was, after he had been a while in the
Tower and Newgate, delivered on my Frontiers at Calais to the French, for to
have him punished there according to his deserts.

10. Diverse Lords and Knights sent for to furnish the Court at the coming of
the French Ambassador, that brought hither the Order of St. Michael.

12. A Proclamation proclaimed, to give warning to all those that keep any
Farms, multitudes of Sheep, above the number limited in the Law, viz. 2000;
decayed Tenements and Towns, Regratters, Forestalling Men that sell dear,
having plenty enough, and put Plough Ground to Pasture, and Carriers over-Sea
of Victual, That if they leave not these Enormities, they shall be straightly
punished very shortly, so that they should feel the smart of it; and to command
execution of Laws made for this purpose before.

14. There mustered before Me an hundred Archers, two Arrows apiece, all of the
Guard; afterward shot together, and they shot at an inch Board, which some
pierced quite, and stuck in the other Board; diverse pierced it quite through
with the Heads of their Arrows, the Boards being very well-seasoned Timber. So
it was appointed there should be ordinarily 100 Archers, and 100 Halbertiers,
either good Wrestlers, or casters of the Bar, or Leapers, or Runners, or tall
Men of Personage.

15. Sir Philip Hobbey departed toward France, with ten Gentlemen of his own,
in Velvet Coats and Chains of Gold.

16. Likewise did the Bishop of Ely depart with a Band of Men well furnished.

20. A Proclamation made, That whosoever found a Seditious Bill, and did not
tear and deface it, should be a partaker of the Bill, and punished as the Maker.

21. My Lord Marquess of Northampton had Commission to deliver the Order, and
to treat of all things, and chiefly of Marriage for Me to the Lady Elizabeth
his Daughter. First, To have the Dote 12000 Marks a Year, and the Dowry at
least 800000 Crowns. The Forfeiture 100000 Crowns at the most if I performed
not, and paying that to be delivered; and that this should not impeach the
former Covenants with Scotland, with many other Branches.

22. He departed himself in Post.

24. An Earthquake was at Croidon and Blechinglee, and in the most part of
Surrey, but no harm was done.

30. Whereas before Commandment was given that 160000 l. should be Coined of
three ounces in the Pound fine, for discharge of Debts, and to get some
Treasure, to be able to alter all, now was it stopped, saving only 80000 l. to
discharge my Debts, and 10000 Mark weight that the Foulcare delivered in the
last Exchange, at four ounces in the pound.

31. The Musters defered till after Midsummer.

June.
2. It was appointed that I should receive the Frenchmen that came hither at
Westminster, where was made preparation for the purpose, and four garnish of
new Vessels taken out of Church Stuff, as Miters, and Golden Missals, and
Primers, and Crosses, and Relics of Plessay.

4. Provision made in Flanders for Silver and Gold Plate, and Chains to be
given to these Strangers.

7. A Proclamation set forth, that Exchange, or Re-exchange, should be made
under the Punishment set forth in King Henry the Seventh's Time, duly to be
executed.

10. Monsieur Marshall departed from the Court to Bulloigne in Post, and so
hither by Water in his Galleys and Foists.

In this Month, and the Month before, was great Business for the City of Parma,
which Duke It should be Octavio.
Horatio had delivered to the French King, for the Pope ascited him, as holding
it in capite of him, whereby he could not alienate it without the Pope's Will;
but he came not at his Day, for which cause the Pope and Imperialists raised
8000 Men, and took a Castle on the same River side. Also the French King sent
Monsieur de Thermes, who had been his General in Scotland, with a great piece
of his Gendarmory into Italy, to help Duke Horatio. Furthermore the Turks made
great preparation for War, which some feared would at length burst out.

21. I was elected of the Company of St. Michael in France by the French King
and his Order.

13. Agreement made with the Scots for the Borders, between the Commissioners
aforesaid, for both the Parties.

In this month Dragute, a Pirat, escaped ( Andrea Doria, who had closed him in
a Creek) by force of his Galley-Slaves, that dug another way into the Sea,
and took two of Andrea's Galleys that lay far into the Sea.

14. Pardon given to those Irish Lords that would come in before a certain day
limited by the Deputy; with Advertisement to the Deputy to make sharp War with
those that would resist; and also should administer my Laws everywhere.

18. Because of my Charges in Fortifications at Calais and Barwick should be
paid, it was agreed, that beside the Debt of the Realm 80000 l. there should
be 40000 l. coined, three ounces Fine, nine of Allay; and 5000 pound weight
should be coined in a Standard of seven ounces Fine at the least.

17. Soperantio came as Ambassador from Venice, in Daniel Barbaro's Place.

16. I accepted the Order of Monsegnieur Michael by promise to the French
Ambassador.

17. My Lord Marquess of Northampton came to Nants with the Commissioners, and
all those Noblemen and Gentlemen that came over-Sea with him.

20. Upon Advertisement of Scipperus coming, and rigging of certain Ships in
Holland; also for to show the Frenchmen pleasure at their coming, all the Navy
that lay in Gillingham-water was appointed to be rigged, and furnished with
Ordnance, and lay in the River of Thames, to the intent, that if Scipperus came
afterward, he might be met with, and at least the Frenchmen should see the
force of my Navy.

22. The Lady Mary sent Letters to the Council, marvelling at the Imprisonment
of Dr. Mallet, her Chaplain, for saying of Mass before her Household, seeing it
was promised the Emperor's Ambassador she should not be molested in Religion,
but that she and her Household should have the Mass said before them continually.

24. They answered, That because of their Duties to King, Country, and
Friends, they were compelled to give her answer, That they would see, not only
him, but also all other Mass-Sayers, and breakers of Order, straightly punished.
And that as for promise they had, nor would give none to make her free from the
punishment of the Law in that behalf.

18. Chastilion came to my Lord Marquess, and there banqueted him by the way at
two times between Nantes and Chasteau Brian, where the King lay.

15. Mendoza, a Gentleman of the King's Chamber, was sent to him to conduct him
to the Court.

19. My Lord Marquess came to Chasteau-Brian, where half a mile from the Castle
there met him -- with an hundred Gentlemen, and brought him to the Court booted
and spurred to the French King.

20. The French King was invested with the Order of the Garter in his
Bedchamber, where he gave a Chain to the Garter worth 200 l. and his Gown
dressed with Auglets worth, 25 l. The Bishop of Ely making an Oration, and the
Cardinal of Lorrain making him Answer. At Afternoon the Lord Marquess moved the
French King to the Marriage of the Scots Queen to be consummate, for whose
hearing he appointed two Commissioners.

21. The Cardinal of Lorrain, and of Chastilion, the Constable, the Duke of
Guise, etc. were appointed Commissioners on the part of France, who absolutely
denied the first Motion for the Scotch Queen, saying, Both they had taken too
much Pains, and spent too many Lives for her. Also a conclusion was made for
her Marriage to the Dolphin. Then was proponed the Marriage of the Lady
Elizabeth, the French King's eldest Daughter; to which they did most cheerfully
assent. So after they agreed neither Party to be bound in Conscience nor
Honor, till she were twelve Years of Age and upwards. Then they came to the
Dote, which was first asked 1500000 Scutes of France, at which they made a
mock; after for donatio propter nuptias, they agreed that it should be as great
as has been given by the King my Father to any Wife he had.

22. Our Commissioners came to 1400000 of Crowns, which they refused, then to a
Million, which they denied; then to 800000 Crowns, which they said they would
not agree to.

23. Then our Commissioners asked what they would offer? First they offered
100000 Crowns, then 200000, which they said was the most, and more than ever
was given. Then followed great Reasonings, and showing of Presidents, but no
nearer they would come.

24. They went forward unto the Penalties if the Parties misliked, after that
the King's Daughter were twelve and upwards, which the French offered 100000,
50000 Crowns, or promise, that she should be brought, at her Father's Charge,
three months before she were twelve, sufficiently Jewelled and stuffed. Then
Bonds to be delivered alternatively at London, and at Paris, and so forth.

26. The Frenchmen delivered the foresaid Answers written to my Commissioners.

July.
1. Whereas certain Flemish Ships, twelve Sail in all, six tall Men of War,
looking for eighteen more Men of War, went to Diep, as it was thought, to take
Monsieur le Marshall by the way; order was given, that six Ships being before
prepared, with four Pinnaces and a Brigantine, should go both to conduct him,
and also to defend, if any thing should be attempted against England, by
carrying over the Lady Mary.

2. A Brigandine sent to Diep, to give knowledge to Monsieur le Marshall of the
Flemings coming; to whom all the Flemings veiled their Bonnet. Also the French
Ambassador was advertised; who answered, That he thought him sure enough when
he came into our Streams, terming it so.

2. There was a Proclamation signed for shortning of the fall of the Money to
that day; in which it should be proclaimed, and devised, that it should be in
all places of the Realm within one day proclaimed.

3. The Lord Clinton and Cobham was appointed to meet the French at Gravesend,
and so to convoy him to Duresme-place, where he should lie.

4. I was banqueted by the Lord Clinton at Debtford, where I saw the Primrose
and the Mary Willoughby launched.

The Frenchmen landed at Rye, as some thought, for fear of the Flemings lying
at the Lands-end, chiefly because they saw our Ships were let by the Wind that
they could not come out.

6. Sir Peter Meutas, at Dover, was commanded to come to Rye to meet Monsieur
le Marshall, who so did; and after he had delivered his Letters, written with
Mine own Hand, and made my Recommendations, he took order for Horses and Carts
for Monsieur le Marshall, in which he made such Provision as was possible to
be for the sudden.

7. Monsieur le Marshall set forth from Rye, and in his Journey Mr. Culpepper,
and diverse other Gentlemen, and their Men, to the number of 1000 Horse, well
furnished, met him, and so brought him to Maidston that Night.

Removing to Westminster.

8. Monsieur le Marshall came to Mr. Bakers, where he was very well feasted
and banqueted.

9. The same came to my Lord Cobhams to Dinner, and at night to Gravesend.

Proclamation made that a Testourn should go at 9 d. and a Groat at 3 d. in all
Places of the Realm at once.

At this time came the Sweat into London, which was more vehement than the Old
Sweat; for if one took cold, he died within three hours; and if he escaped, it
held him but nine hours or ten at the most: also if he slept the first six
hours, as he should be very desirous to do, then he roved, and should die
roving.

11. It grew so much, for in London the 10th day there died 100 in the
Liberties, and this day 120; and also one of my Gentlemen, another of my Grooms
fell sick and died, that I removed to Hampton Court with very few with Me.

The same night came the Marshall, who was saluted with all my Ships being in
the Thames, fifty and odd, all with shot well furnished, and so with the
Ordnance of the Tower. He was met by the Lord Clinton Lord Admiral, with forty
Gentlemen, at Gravesend, and so brought to Duresme-place.

13. Because of the Infection at London, he came this day to Richmond, where he
lay with a great Band of Gentlemen, at least 400, as it was by diverse esteemed,
where that night he hunted.

14. He came to Me at Hampton Court at nine of the Clock, being met by the Duke
of Somerset at the Wall-end, and so coveied first to Me; where after his
Masters Recommendations and Letters, he went to his Chamber on the Queens-side,
all hanged with Cloth of Arras, and so was the Hall, and all my Lodging. He
dined with Me also. After Dinner, being brought into an Inner-Chamber, he told
Me, he was come, not only for delivery of the Order, but also for to declare
the great Friendship the King his Master bore Me; which he desired I would
think to be such to Me as a Father bears to his Son, or Brother to Brother.
And although there were diverse Persuasions, as he thought, to dissuade Me from
the King his Master's Friendship, and Witless Men made diverse Rumors, yet he
trusted I would not believe them. Furthermore, that as good Ministers on the
Frontiers do great good, so ill much harm. For which cause he desired no
Innovation should be made on things had been so long in controversy by
Hand-strokes, but rather by Commissioners talk. I answered him, That I thanked
him for his Order, and also his Love, etc. and I would show like Love in all
Points. For Rumors, they were not always to be believed, and that I did
sometime provide for the worst, but never did any harm upon their hearing. For
Ministers, I said, I would rather appease these Controversies with words, than
do any thing by force. So after, he was conveyed to Richmond again.

17. He came to present the Order of Monsiegneur Michael; whereafter with
Ceremonies accustomed, he had put on the Garments, he, and Monsieur Gye
likewise of the Order, came one at my right Hand, the other at my left to the
Chapel, where-after the Communion celebrated, each of them kissed my Cheek.
After that they dined with Me, and talked after Dinner, and saw some Pastime,
and so went home again.

18. A Proclamation made against Regratters, and Forestallers, and the words of
the Statute recited, with the Punishment of the Offenders. Also Letters were
sent to all Officers and Sheriffs for the executing thereof.

19. Another Proclamation made for punishment of them that would blow Rumors
of abasing and enhaunsing of the Coin to make things dear withal.

The same night Monsieur le Marshall St. Andre supped with Me; after Supper
saw a dozen Courses, and after I came and made Me ready.

20. The next Morning he came to Me to mine Arraying, and saw my Bedchamber,
and went a hunting with Hounds; and saw Me shoot, and saw all my Guards shoot
together. He dined with Me, heard Me play on the Lute, Ride; came to Me to my
Study, supped with Me, and so departed to Richmond.

19. The Scots sent an Ambassador hither for receiving the Treaty, sealed with
the Great Seal of England, which was delivered him. Also I sent Sir Thomas
Chaloner, Clerk of my Council, to have the Seal of them, for Confirmation of
the last Treaty at Northampton.

17. This day my Lord Marquess and the Commissioners coming to treat of the
Marriage, offered by later Instructions 600000 Crowns, after 400000 l. and so
departed for an hour. Then seeing they could get no better, came to the French
Offer of 200000 Crowns, half to be paid at the Marriage, half six months after
that.

Then the French agreed that her Dote should be but 10000 Marks of Lawful Money
of England.

Thirdly, It was agreed, that if I died, she should not have the Dote, saying,
They did that for Friendships-sake without president.

19. The Lord Marquess having received and delivered again the Treaty sealed,
took his leave, and so did all the rest.

At this time was there a bickering at Parma between the French and the
Papists, for Monsieur de Thermes, Petro Strozi, and Fontivello, with diverse
other Gentlemen to the number of thirty, with 1500 Soldiers, entered Parma,
Gonzaga with the Emperors and Popes Band lay near the Town. The French made
Sallies, and overcame, slaying the Prince of Macedonia, and the Seigniour
Baptista the Pope's Nephew.

22. Mr. Sidney made one of the four chief Gentlemen.

23. Monsieur de Marshall came to Me, declaring the King his Masters
well-taking my readiness to this Treaty; and also how much his Master was bent
that way. He presented Monsieur Bois Dolphine to be Ambassador here, as my Lord
Marquess the 19th day did present Mr. Pickering.

26. Monsieur le Marshall dined with Me. After Dinner saw the strength of the
English Archers. After he had so done, at his departure I gave him a Diamond
from my finger, worth, by estimation, 150 l. both for Pains, and also for my
Memory. Then he took his leave.

27. He came to a hunting to tell me the News, and show the Letter his Master
had sent him, and doubtless of Monsieur Terms and Marignans Letters, being
Ambassador with the Emperor.

28. Monsieur le Marshall came to Dinner to Hide-Park, where there was a fair
House made for him, and he saw the Coursing there.

30. He came to the Earl of Warwick's, lay there one night, and was well
received.

29. He had his Reward, being worth 3000 l. in Gold, of current Money. Monsieur
de Gye 1000 l. Monsieur Chenault 1000 l. Monsieur Movillier 500 l. the
Secretary 500 l. and the Bishop Peregrueux 500 l.

August.
3. Monsieur le Marshall departed to Bolleign, and had certain of my Ships to
conduct him thither.

9. Four and twenty Lords of the Council met at Richmond, to commune of my
Sister Mary's matter; who at length agreed, That it was not meet to be suffered
any longer, making thereof an Instrument signed with their Hands, and sealed,
to be on Record.

11. The Lord Marquess, with the most part of his Band, came home, and
delivered the Treaty Sealed.

12. Letters sent for Rochester, Inglefield, and Walgrave to come the 13th day,
but they came not till another Letter was sent to them the 13th day.

14. My Lord Marquess's Reward was delivered at Paris, worth 500 l. my Lord of
Ely's 200. Mr. Hobbey's 150; the rest all about one scantling.

14. Rochester, etc. had commandment neither to hear nor to suffer any kind of
Service, but the Common and Orders set forth at large by Parliament, and had a
Letter to my Lady's House from my Council for their Credit, another to her self
from me. Also appointed that I should come and sit at Council when great
Matters were debating, or when I would.

This last month Monsieur de Terms, with 500 Frenchmen, came to Parma, and
entered safely; afterward certain issued out of the Town, and were overthrown,
as Scipiaro, Dandelot, Petro, and others, were taken, and some slain; after
they gave a Skirmish, entered the Camp of Gonzaga, and spoiled a few Tents, and
returned.

15. Sir Robert Dudley and Barnabe sworn two of the six ordinary Gentlemen. The
last month the Turks Navy won a little Castle in Sicily.

17. Instructions sent to Sir James Croftes for diverse purposes, whose Copy is
in the Secretary's hands. The Testourn cried down from 9 d. to 6 d. the Groat
from 3 d. to 2 d. the 2 d. to 1 d. the Penny to an Halfpenny, the Halfpenny
to a Farthing, etc.

1. Monsieur Terms and Scipiero overthrew three Ensigns of Horsemen at three
times; took one dispatch sent from Don Fernando to the Pope concerning this
War, and another from the Pope to Don Fernando; Discomfited four Ensigns of
Footmen; took the Count Camillo of Castilion, and slew a Captain of the
Spaniards.

22. Removing to Windsor.

23. Rochester, etc. returned, denying to do openly the charge of the Lady
Mary's House for displeasing her.

26. The Lord Chancellor, Mr. Comptroller, the Secretary Petre, sent to do the
same Commission.

27. Mr. Coverdale made Bishop of Exeter.

28. Rochester, etc. sent to the Fleet.

The Lord Chancellor, etc. did that they were commanded to do to my Sister and
her House.

31. Rochester, etc. committed to the Tower.

The Duke of Somerset taking certain that began a new Conspiracy for the
destruction of the Gentlemen at Okingam two days past, executed them with Death
for their Offense.

29. Certain Pinaces were prepared to see that there should be no conveyance
over-Sea of the Lady Mary secretly done. Also appointed that the Lord
Chancellor, Lord Chamberlain, the Vice-chamberlain, and the Secretary Petre
should see by all means they could, whether she used the Mass; and if she did
that, the Laws should be executed on her Chaplains. Also that when I came from
this Progress to Hampton Court, or Westminster, both my Sisters should be with
Me, till further Order were taken for this purpose.

September.
3. The French Ambassador came to declare, first how the Emperor wronged diverse
of his Masters Subjects and Vassals; arrested also his Merchants, and did
cloakedly begin War, for he besieged Mirandula round about with Forces he had
made in the French King's Country. Also he stayed certain French Ships going a
fishing to the New Foundland. Furthermore he set out a dozen of Ships, which
bragged they would take the Dowager of Scotland, which thing stayed her so long
at Diep. Whereupon his Master had taken the whole Fleet of Antwerp, conveying
it to his Country into his Ports, by 20 Ships he had set forth under Baron de
la Guard. Also minded to send more help to Piedmont and Mirandula. For this
cause he desired that on my Coasts the Dowager might have safe passage, and
might be secured by my Servants at the Seacoast if any chance should happen.

He was willed to put it in writing; he showed how the Turks Navy, having
spoiled a piece of Sicily, went to Malta, and there took an Isle adjacent
called Gozo; from thence they went to Tripoly. In Transylvania Rosto-Bassa was
leader of the Army, and had spoiled it wholly.

In Hungary the Turks had made a Fort by the Mines to get them. Magdeburg was
freshly victualled, and Duke Maurice came his way, being suspected that he had
conspired with them there.

4. It was answered, to the French Ambassador, That the Dowager should in all
my Ports be defended from Enemies, Tempest, and likewise also Thanks were given
for the News.

5. The Emperor's Ambassador came to require, That my Sister Mary's Officers
should be restored to their Liberty, and she should have her Mass till the
Emperor was certified thereof.

It was answered, That I need not to answer except I list, because he spoke
without Commission, which was seen by the shortness of the time since the
committing of her Officers, of which the Emperor could not be advertised. He
was willed no more to move these Piques, in which he had been often answered,
without Commission. He was answered, That the Emperor was by this time
advertised, although the Matter pertained not to him. Also that I had done
nothing but according to a King's Office herein, in observing the Laws that
were so Godly, and in punishing the Offenders. The Promise to the Emperor was
not so made as he pretended, affirmed by Sir Philip Hobbey being at that time
their Ambassador.

6. Deliberation touching the Coin. Memorandum, That there were diverse
Standards nine ounces fine, a few eight ounces fine, as ill as four, because
although that was fine, yet a Shilling was reckoned for two Shillings, six
ounces, very many four ounces, many also three ounces, 130000 l. now of late.
Whereupon agreed that the Testourn being called to six Pence, four with help of
six should make ten fine, eight fine with help of nine, being fewer than those
of eight, should make ten ounces fine, the two ounces of Allay should quit the
charges of Minting; and those of threepence, being but few, should be turned
to a Standard of four of Farthings, and Halfpence, and Pence, for to serve for
the poor People, because the Merchants made no Exchange of it, and the Sum was
not great. Also to bear the Charges, for because it was thought that few or
none were left of nine ounces fine, eight ounces were naught, and six ounces
were two ways devised, one without any craft, the other was not fully six, of
which kind was not a few.

9. A Proclamation set forth touching the Prices of Cattle, of Hogs, Pigs,
Beeves, Oxen, Muttons, Butter, and Cheese, after a reasonable price, not fully
so good cheap as it was when the Coin was at the perfectest, but within a fifth
part of it, or thereabouts.

10. I removed to Farnham.

12. A Proclamation set forth touching the Coin, That whereas it was so that
Men for Gain melted down the Nine-pence Testourn continually, and the
Sixpence; also there should no Person in any wise melt it down, upon pain to
incur the Penalty of the Laws.

13. A Letter directed to the Lord Treasurer, the Lord Great Master, and the
Master of the Horse, to meet at London, for the ordering of my Coin, and the
payment of my Debts; which done, to return, and make report of their
Proceedings.

11. War proclaimed in Britain between the Emperor and the French, by these
Terms, Charles Roy d' Espaigne, et Duc de Milan, leaving out Emperor.

10. Four Towns taken by the French Soldiers that were the Emperor's in
Piedmont Guerra: from Amiens also the Emperor's Country there was spoiled, and
120 Castles or Fortresses taken.

Proclamation made in Paris touching the Bulls, that no Man should go for them
to Rome.

Other Ships also taken by Prior de Capua Merchants, to the number of a dozen;
Prior de Capua had 32 Galleys.

19. The French Ambassador sent this News also, That the Turks had taken
Tripoly.

20. The Secretary Cecil, and Sir Philip Hobbey, sent to London to help the
Lord Treasurer, etc. in the Matters of the Bishops of Chichester, Worcester,
and Duresme, and examination of my Sisters Men.

18. Removing to Windsor.

20. The Lords at London having tried all kinds of Stamping, both of the
Fineness of 9, 8, 6, 4, and 3, proved that without any loss, but sufferable,
the Coin might be brought to eleven ounces fine: For whereas it was thought
before, that the Testourn was, through ill Officers and Ministers corrupted, it
was tried, that it had the valuation just by eight sundry kinds of melting, and
400 l. of Sterling Money, a Testourn being but Sixpence, made 400 l. 11 ounces
fine of Money Sterling.

22. Whereupon they reported the same, and then it was concluded that the
Testourn should be eleven ounces fine, the proportion of the Pences according
to the Gold; so that five Shillings of Silver should be worth five of Gold.

23. Removing to Oatlands.

24. Agreed that the Stamp of the Shilling and Sixpence should be on one side,
a King painted to the Shoulders in Parliament-Robes, with a Chain of the Order.
Five Shillings of Silver, and half five Shillings, should be a King on
Horseback, armed with a naked Sword hard to his Breast. Also that York's Mint,
and Throgmorton's in the Tower, should go and work the fine Standard. In the
City of York and Canterbury should the small Money be wrought of a baser State.
Officers for the same were appointed.

A piece of Barwick Wall fell, because the Foundation was shaken by working of
a Bullwark.

28. The Lord Marquess of Dorset grieved much with the disorder of the Marches
toward Scotland, surrendered the Wardenship thereof to bestow where I would.

27. The Wardenship of the North given to the Earl of Warwick.

Removing to Hampton Court.

28. Commissioners appointed for sitting on the Bishop of Chichester and
Worcester; three Lawyers, and three Civilians.

10. The Imperialists took the Suburbs of Heading, and burnt them.

26. The Passport of the Dowager of Scotland was made for a longer time, till
Christmas; and also if she were driven, to pass quietly by Land into Scotland.

20. Monsieur d' Angoulesme was born; and the Duke of Vendosme had a Son by the
Princes of Navarr his Wife.

30. The Feast of Michaelmass was kept by Me in the Robes of the Order.

October.
1. The Commission for the making of five Shillings, half five Shillings,
Groats, and Six-pences, eleven ounces fine, and Pence, with Halfpence, and
Farthings, four ounces fine, was followed and signed.

5. Jarnac came in Post for declaration of two things; the one, that the Queen
had a third Son of which she was delivered, called Le Duc d' Angoulesme, of
which the King prayed Me to be Godfather. I answered, I was glad of the News,
and that I thanked him for that I should be Godfather, which was a token of
good Will he bare me. Also that I would dispatch for the accomplishment
thereof, the Lord Clinton, the Lord Admiral of England. He said, he came also
to tell a second Point of the good success of his Masters Wars; He told how the
last month in Shampaign, beside Sedan, 1000 Horse Imperialists, with diverse
Hungarians, Martin Vanrossy being their Captain and Leader, entered the Country;
and the Alarm came, the Skirmish began so hot, that the French Horse, about two
or three hundred Men of Arms, came out and took Vanrossy's Brother, and slew
diverse. Also how in Piedmont, since the taking of the last four Towns, three
other were taken, Monrechia, Saluges, and the Town of Burges. The Turks had
come to Naples, and spoiled the Country, and taken Ostium in the Mouth of
Tyberis. Also in Sicily he had taken a good Haven and a Town.

6. Jarnac departed, having lying in the Court under my Lodging. The Night
before the Bishops of Worcester and Chichester were deposed for Contempts.

7. There were appointed to go with the Lord Admiral, Mr. Nevil, Mr. Barnabie,
Gentlemen of the Chamber; Sir William Stafford, Sir Adrian Poinings, Sir John
Norton, Sir John Teri, Knights; and Mr. Brook.

8. Letters directed to the Captains of Gandarms, that they should muster the
8th of November, being the Sunday after Hallow-Eve day.

11. Henry Marquess of Dorset, created Duke of Suffolk; John Earl of Warwick,
created Duke of Northumberland; William Earl of Wiltshire, created Marquess of
Winchester; Sir William Herbert, created Earl of Pembrook, and Lord of Cardiff;
Mr. Sidney, Mr. Nevil, Mr. Cheek, all three of the Privy-Chamber, made Knights;
also Mr. Cecil one of the two Secretaries.

13. Proclamation signed touching the calling in of Testourns and Groats, that
they that list might come to the Mint and have fine Silver of Twelve-pence for
two Testourns.

3. Prior de Capna departed the French King's Service, and went to his Order of
Knights in Malta, partly for displeasure to the Count Villars the Constable's
Brother-in-Law, partly for that Malta was assailed often by the Turks.

7. Sir Thomas Palmer came to the Earl of Warwick, since that time Duke of
Northumberland, to deliver him his Chain, being a very fair one (for every Link
weighed an ounce) to be delivered to Jarnac, and so to receive as much;
whereupon in my Lords Garden he declared a Conspiracy, How at St. George's day
last, my Lord of Somerset, who then was going to the North, if the Master of
the Horse, Sir William Herbert, had not assured him on his Honor that he
should have no hurt, went to raise the People, and the Lord Gray went before to
know who were his Friends. Afterward a Device was made to call the Earl of
Warwick to a Banquet, with the Marquess of Northampton, and diverse others, and
to cut off their Heads. Also he found a bare Company about them by the way to
set upon them.

11. He declared also, that Mr. Vane had 2000 Men in readiness; Sir Thomas
Arundel had assured my Lord, that the Tower was safe; Mr. Partridge should
raise London, and take the Great Seal with the Apprentices of London; Seymour
and Hammond should wait upon him, and all the Horse of the Gandarms should be
slain.

13. Removing to Westminster, because it was thought this Matter might easilier
and surelier be dispatched there, and likewise all other.

14. The Duke sent for the Secretary Cecil to tell him he suspected some ill.
Mr. Cecil answered, That if he were not guilty, he might be of good courage; if
he were, he had nothing to say, but to lament him. Whereupon the Duke sent him
a Letter of Defiance, and called Palmer, who after denial made of his
Declaration, was let go.

16. This morning none was at Westminster of the Conspirators. The first was
the Duke, who came later than he was wont of himself. After Dinner he was
apprehended. Sir Thomas Palmer on the Tarras walking there, Hammond passing by
Mr. Vice-chamberlain's Door, was called in by John Piers to make a match at
Shooting, and so taken. Nudegates was called for as from my Lord his Master,
and taken; likewise were John Seimour and David Seimour. Arundel also was
taken, and the Lord Gray coming out of the Country. Vane upon two sendings of
my Lord in the morning, fled at the first sending; he said, My Lord was not
stout, and if he could get home, he cared for none of them all he was so
strong. But after he was found by John Piers in a Stable of his Man's at Lambeth
under the Straw. These went with the Duke to the Tower this Night, saving
Palmer, Arundel, and Vane, who were kept in Chambers here apart.

17. The Duchess, Crane and his Wife, with the Chamber-keeper, were sent to the
Tower for devising these Treasons. James Wingfield also for casting of Bills
seditiously; also Mr. Partridge was attaqued, and Sir James Holcroft.

18. Mr. Banister and Mr. Vaughan were attaqued and sent to the Tower, and so
was Mr. Stanhope.

19. Sir Thomas Palmer confessed that the Gandarms, on the Musterday, should be
assaulted by 2000 Footmen of Mr. Vane's, and my Lord's hundred Horse; besides
his Friends which stood by, and the idle People which took his part. If he were
overthrown, he would run through London, and cry, Liberty, Liberty, to raise
the Apprentices, and R; if he could, he would go to the Isle of Wight, or to
Pool.

22. The Dowager of Scotland was by Tempest driven to Land at Portsmouth, and
so she sent word she would take the benefit of the safe Conduct to go by Land
and to see Me.

23. She came from Portsmouth to Mr. Whites House.

24. The Lords sat in the Star Chamber, and there declared the Matters and
Accusations laid against the Duke, meaning to stay the minds of the People.

25. Certain German Princes, in the beginning of this month, desired Aid in
Cause of Religion 400000 Dollars, if they should be driven to make shift by
necessity, and offered the like also, if I entered into any War for them;
whereupon I called the Lords, and considered, as appears by a Scroll in the
Board at Westminster, and thereupon appointed that the Secretary Petre, and Sir
William Cecil another Secretary, should talk with the Messenger to know the
matter precisely, and the Names of those would enter the Confederacy.

28. The Dowager came to Sir Richard Cotton's House.

29. She came from Sir Richard Cotton's to the Earl of Arundel to Dinner, and
brought to Mr. Brown's House, where met her the Gentlemen of Sussex.

30. She came and was conveied by the same Gentlemen to Guilford, where the
Lord William Howard, and the Gentlemen of Surrey met her.

All this month the Frenchmen continued spoiling of the Emperor's Frontiers,
and in a Skirmish at Ast they slew 100 Spaniards.

31. A Letter directed to Sir Arthur Darcy to take the charge of the Tower, and
to discharge Sir John Markham upon this, that without making any of the Council
privy, he suffered the Duke to walk abroad, and certain Letters to be sent and
answered between David Seimour and Mrs. Poinings, with other diverse Suspicions.

17. There were Letters sent to all Emperors, Kings, Ambassadors, Noblemen,
Men, and Chief Men, into Countries, of the late Conspiracy.

31. She came to Hampton Court, conveied by the same Lords and Gentlemen
aforesaid; and two miles and an half from thence, in a Valley, there met her
the Lord Marquess of Northampton, accompanied with the Earl of Wiltshire, Son
and Heir to the Lord High Treasurer; Marquess of Winchester; the Lord
Fitzwater, Son to the Earl of Sussex; The Lord Evers, the Lord Bray, the Lord
Robert Dudley, the Lord Garet, Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, Sir Edward Rogers, and
diverse other Gentlemen, besides all the Gentlemen Pensioners, Men of Arms and
Ushers, Sewers and Carvers, to the number of 120 Gentlemen, and so she was
brought to Hampton Court. At the Gate thereof met her the Lady Marquess of
Northampton, the Countess of Pembrook, and diverse other Ladies and Gentlewomen,
to the number of sixty; and so she was brought to her Lodging on the
Queen-side, which was all hanged with Arras, and so was the Hall, and all the
other Lodgings of Mine in the House very finely dressed; and for this night,
and the next day, all was spent in Dancing and Pastime, as though it were a
Court, and great presence of Gentlemen resorted thither.

26. Letters were written, for because of this Business, to defer the Musters
of Gendarmory till the -- day of December.

November.
1. The Dowager perused the House of Hampton Court, and saw some coursing of
Deer.

2. She came to the Bishop's Palace at London, and there she lay, and all her
Train lodged about her.

3. The Duke of Suffolk, the Earl of Warwick, Wiltshire, and many other Lords
and Gentlemen were sent to her to welcome her, and to say, on My behalf, That
if she lacked any thing she should have it for her better Furniture; and also I
would willingly see her the day following.

The 26th of October.
Crane confessed the most part, even as Palmer did before, and more also, how
that the place where the Nobles should have been banqueted, and their Heads
stricken off, was the Lord Paget's House, and how the Earl of Arundel knew of
the Matter as well as he, by Stanhop who was a Messenger between them; also
some part, how he went to London to get Friends once in August last, feigning
himself sick. Hammond also confessed the Watch he kept in his Chamber at Night.
Bren also confessed much of this matter. The Lord Strange confessed how the
Duke willed him to stir me to marry his third Daughter, the Lady Jane, and
willed him to be his Spy in all Matters of my Doings and Sayings, and to know
when some of my Council spoke secretly with Me; this he confessed of himself.

November.
4. The Duke of Suffolk, the Lord Fitzwater, the Lord Bray, and diverse other
Lords and Gentlemen, accompanied with his Wife the Lady Francis, the Lady
Margaret, the Dutchesses of Richmond and of Northumberland, the Lady Jane
Daughter to the Duke of Suffolk; the Marquess of Northampton and Winchester;
the Countesses of Arundel, Bedford, Huntington, and Rutland; with 100 other
Ladies and Gentlewomen went to her, and brought her through London to
Westminster. At the Gate there received her the Duke of Northumberland, Great
Master, and the Treasurer, and Comptroller, and the Earl of Pembrook, with all
the Sewers, and Carvers, and Cup-bearers, to the number of thirty. In the Hall
I met her, with all the rest of the Lords of my Council, as the Lord Treasurer,
the Marquess of Northampton, etc. and from the outer-Gate up to the
Presence Chamber, on both sides, stood the Guard. The Court, the Hall, and the
Stairs, were full of Servingmen; the Presence Chamber, Great-Chamber, and her
Presence Chamber, of Gentlemen. And so having brought her to her Chamber, I
retired to Mine. I went to her to Dinner; she dined under the same Cloth of
State, at my left Hand; at her rereward dined my Cousin Francis, and my Cousin
Margaret; at Mine sat the French Ambassador. We were served by two Services,
two Sewers, Cup-bearers, Carvers, and Gentlemen. Her Master Hostell came before
her Service, and my Officers before Mine. There were two Cup-boards, one of
Gold four Stages high, another of massy Silver six Stages: In her great Chamber
dined at three Boards the Ladies only. After Dinner, when she had heard some
Music, I brought her to the Hall, and so she went away.

5. The Duke of Northumberland, the Lord Treasurer, the Lord Marquess of
Northampton, the Lord Privy Seal, and diverse others, went to see her, and to
deliver a Ring with a Diamond, and two Nags, as a Token from Me.

6. The Duke of Northumberland, with his Band of a hundred, of which forty were
in Black-Velvet, white and black Sleeves, sixty in Cloth, The Earl of Pembrook
with his Band, and fifty more, The Earl of Wiltshire, with 58 of his Father's
Band, all the Pensioners, Men of Arms, and the Country, with diverse Ladies, as
my Cousin Margaret, the Dutchesses of Richmond and Northumberland, brought the
Queen to Shoreditch, through Cheap Side and Cornhill; and there met her
Gentlemen of Middlesex an 100 Horse, and so she was conveied out of the Realm,
met in every Shire with Gentlemen.

8. The Earl of Arundel committed to the Tower, with Master Stroadly, and St.
Alban his Men, because Crane did more and more confess of him.

7. A Frenchman was sent again into France, to be delivered again to the eight
Frenchmen at the Borders, because of a Murder he did at Diep, and thereupon he
fled hither.

14. Answer was given to the Germans, which did require 400000 Dollars, if need
so required, for maintenance of Religion.

First, That I was very well inclined to make Peace, Amity, or Bargain with
them I knew to be of mine Religion; for because this Messenger was sent only to
know my Inclination and Will to enter, and not with full Resolution of any
Matters.

Secondly, I would know whether they could get unto them any such strength of
other Princes as were able to maintain the War, and to do the Reciprogue to Me
if need should require; and therefore willed those three Princes, Duke Maurice
of Saxon, the Duke of Mecklenburgh, and the Marquess John of Brandenburgh, from
which he was sent, to open the Matter to the Duke of Prussia, and to all
Princes about them, and somewhat to get the good Will of Hamburgh, Lubeck,
Bremen, etc. showing them an inkling of the matter.

Thirdly, I would have the matter of Religion made more plain, lest when War
should be made for other Quarrels, they should say it were Religion.

Fourthly, He should come with more ample Commission from the same States to
talk of the sum of Money, and other Appurtenances. This Answer was given, lest
if I assented wholly at the first, they would declare mine Intent to the Stadts
and whole Senates, and so to come abroad, whereby I should run into danger of
breaking the League with the Emperor.

16. The Lord Admiral took his leave to go into France for christening of the
French King's Son.

18. Fossey, Secretary to the Duke Maurice, who was here for matter
above-specified.

20. A Proclamation appointed to go forth, for that there went one before this
time, that set prices of Beef, Oxen, and Muttons, which was meant to continue
but to November; when as the Parliament should have been to abbrogate that, and
to appoint certain Commissioners to cause the Grasiers to bring to the Market,
and to sell at prices reasonable. And that certain Overseers should be besides
to certify of the Justices doings.

23. The Lord Treasurer appointed High-Steward for the Arraignment of the Duke
of Somerset.

At this time Duke Maurice began to show himself a Friend to the Protestants,
who before that time had appeared their Enemy.

21. The foresaid Proclamation proclaimed.

17. The Earl of Warwick, Sir Henry Sidney, Sir Henry Nevil, and Sir Henry
Yates, did challenge all Comers at Tilt the third of January, and at Tornay
the sixth of January; and this Challenge was proclaimed.

28. News came that Maximilian was coming out of Spain, nine of his Galleys
with his Stuff, and 120 Gennets, and his Treasure, was taken by the French.

24. The Lord Admiral entered France, and came to Bulloign.

26. The Captain of Portsmouth had word and commandment to bring the Model of
the Castle and Place, to the intent it might be fortified, because Baron de la
Guard had seen it, having an Engineer with him, and as it was thought had the
Plott of it.

30. 22 Peers and Nobles, besides the Council, heard Sir Thomas Palmer, Mr.
Hammond, Mr. Crane, and Nudigate, swear that their Confessions were true; and
they did say, that that was said without any kind of Compulsion, Force, Envy,
or Displeasure, but as favorably to the Duke as they could swear to with safe
Consciences.

24. The Lord Admiral came to Paris.

December.
1. The Duke of Somerset came to his Trial at Westminster Hall; The
Lord-Treasurer sat as High-Steward of England, under the Cloth of State, on a
Bench between two Posts, three degrees high. All the Lords to the number of 26,
viz.

Dukes.
Suffolk. Northumberland.
Marquess.
Northampton.
Earls.
Derby. Bedford. Huntingdon. Rutland. Bath. Sussex. Worcester. Pembrook. Vis.
Hereford.
Barons.
Burgaveny. Audley. Wharton. Evers. Latimer. Bourough. Souch. Stafford.
Wentworth. Darcy. Sturton. Windsor. Cromwell. Cobham. Bray.
These sat a degree under, and heard the Matter debated.

First, After the Indictments were read, five in number, the Learned Counsel
laid to my Lord of Somerset, Palmer's Confession. To which he answered, That he
never minded to raise the North, and declared all the ill he could devise of
Palmer, but he was afraid for Bruites, and that moved him to send to Sir
William Herbert. Replied it was again, that the worse Palmer was, the more he
served his purpose. For the Banquet, he swore it was untrue, and required more
Witnesses. Whence Crane's Confession was read, He would have had him come Face
to Face. For London, he meant nothing for hurt of any Lord but for his own
Defense. For the Gendarmoury, it were but a mad matter for him to enterprise
with his 100 against 900. For having Men in his Chamber at Greenwich, confessed
by Partridg, it seemed he meant no harm, because when he could have done harm
he did it not. My Lord Strange's Confession, he swore it was untrue, and the
Lord Strange took his Oath it was true. Nudigate's, Hammond's, and Alexander
Seimour's Confessions he denied, because they were his Men.

The Lawyers rehearsed, how to raise Men at his House for an ill Intent, as to
kill the Duke of Northumberland, was Treason, by an Act, Anno tertio of my
Reign, against Unlawful Assemblies, for to devise the Death of the Lords was
Felony. To mind resisting his Attachment was Felony; To Raise London was
Treason, and to Assault the Lords was Felony. He answered, He did not intend to
raise London, and swore, that the Witnesses were not there. His assembling of
Men was but for his own defense. He did not determine to kill the Duke of
Northumberland, the Marquess, etc. but spoke of it, and determined after the
contrary, and yet seemed to confess he went about their Death.

The Lords went together. The Duke of Northumberland would not agree that any
searching of his Death should be Treason. So the Lords acquitted him of
High Treason, and condemned him of Treason Fellonious, and so he was adjudged
to be hanged.

He gave thanks to the Lords for their open Trial, and cried Mercy of the Duke
of Northumberland, the Marquess of Northampton, and the Earl of Pembrook, for
his ill-meaning against them, and made suit for his Life, Wife, Children,
Servants, and Debts, and so departed without the Ax of the Tower. The People
knowing not the Matter, shouted half a dozen of times so loud, that from the
Hall-Door it was heard at Charing Cross plainly, and rumors went that he was
quit of all.

2. The Peace concluded by the Lord Marquess, was ratified by Me before the
Ambassador, and delivered to him Signed and Sealed.

3. The Duke told certain Lords that were in the Tower, that he had hired
Bertivill to kill them; which thing Bertivill examined on, confessed, and so
did Hammond that he knew of it.

4. I saw the Musters of the new Band-men of Arms; 100 of my Lord Treasurers;
100 of Northumberland, 100 Northampton, 50 Huntingtoun, 50 Rutland, 120 of
Pembrook, 50 Darcy, 50 Cobham, 100 Sir Thomas Cheyney, and 180 of the
Pensioners and their Bands, with the old Men of Arms, all well-armed Men; some
with Feathers, Staves, and Pensils of their Colors; some with Sleeves and
half-Coats; some with Bards and Staves, etc. The Horses all fair and great, the
worst would not have been given for less than 20 l. there was none under
fourteen handful and an half the most part, and almost all Horses with their
Guider going before them. They passed twice about St. James's Field, and
compassed it round, and so departed.

15. Then were certain Devices for Laws delivered to my Learned Council to Pen,
as by a Schedule appears.

18. It was appointed I should have six Chaplains ordinary, of which two ever
to be present, and four always absent in preaching: one Year two in Wales, two
in Lancashire and Darby; next Year two in the Marches of Scotland, two in
Yorkshire; the third Year, two in Devonshire, two in Hampshire; fourth Year,
two in Norfolk and Essex, and two in Kent and Sussex, etc. These six to be
Bill, Harle, Perne, Grindall, Bradford The other name dashed.
.

20. The Bishop of Duresme was for concealment of Treason written to him, and
not disclosed at all till the Party did open him, committed to the Tower.

21. Richard Lord Rich Chancellor of England, considering his sickness, did
deliver his Seal to the Lord-Treasurer, the Lord great Master, and the Lord
Chamberlain, sent to him for that purpose during the time of his sickness, and
chiefly of the Parliament.

5. The Lord Admiral came to the French King, and after was sent to the Queen,
and so conveied to his Chamber.

6. The Lord Admiral christened the French King's Child, and called him, by the
King's commandment, Edward Alexander. All that day there was Music, Dancing,
and Playing with Triumph in the Court; but the Lord Admiral was sick of a
double Quartane, yet he presented Barnabe to the French King, who took him to
his Chamber.

7. The Treaty was delivered to the Lord Admiral, and the French King read it
in open Audience at Mass, with Ratification of it. The Lord Admiral took his
leave of the French King, and returned to Paris very sick.

The same day the French King showed the Lord Admiral Letters that came from
Parma, how the French Men had gotten two Castles of the Imperialists; and in
the defense of the one, the Prince of Macedonia was slain on the Walls, and was
buried with triumph at Parma.

22. The Great Seal of England delivered to the Bishop of Ely, to be Keeper
thereof during the Lord Rich's sickness.

The Band of 100 Men of Arms, which my Lord of Somerset of late had, appointed
to the Duke of Suffolk.

23. Removing to Greenwich.

24. I began to keep Holy this Christmas, and continued till Twelve-tide.

26. Sir Anthony St. Legier, for Matters laid against him by the Bishop of
Dublin, was banished my Chamber till he had made answer, and had the Articles
delivered him.

28. The Lord Admiral came to Greenwich.

30. Commission was made out to the Bishop of Ely, the Lord Privy Seal, Sir
John Gates, Sir William Petre, Sir Robert Bows, and Sir Walter Mildmay, for
calling in my Debts.

January.
1. Orders were taken with the Chandlers of London, for selling their
Tallow-Candles, which before some denied to do; and some were punished with
Imprisonment.

3. The Challenge that was made in the last Month, was fulfilled.

The Challengers were.
Sir Henry Sidney. Sir Henry Nevel. Sir Henry Gates.
Defendants.
The Lord Williams. The Lord Fitzwater. The Lord Ambrose. The Lord Roberts. The
Lord Fitzwarren. Sir George Howard. Sir William Stafford. Sir John Parrat. Mr.
Norice. Mr. Digby. Mr. Warcop. Mr. Courtney. Mr. Knolls. The Lord Bray. Mr.
Paston. Mr. Carry. Sir. Anthony Brown. Mr. Drury.
These in all ran six Courses a-piece at Tilt against the Challengers, and
accomplished their Courses right-well, and so departed again.

5. There were sent to Guisnes Sir Richard Cotton, and Mr. Bray, to take view
of Calais, Guisnes, and the Marches; and with the advice of the Captain and
Engineers, to devise some amendment, and thereupon to make me Certificate, and
upon mine Answer to go further to the Matter.

4. It was appointed, that if Mr. Stanhop left Hull, then that I should no more
be charged therewith, but that the Town should take it, and should have 40 l. a
Year for the repairing of the Castle.

2. I received Letters out of Ireland, which appear in the Secretary's Hand,
and thereupon the Earldom of Thowmount was by Me given from O-Brians Heirs,
whose Father was dead, and had it for term of Life, to Donnas Baron of Ebrecan,
and his Heirs Males.

3. Also Letters were written of Thanks to the Earls of Desmond and Clanrikard,
and to the Baron of Dunganan.

3. The Emperor's Ambassador moved me several times that my Sister Mary might
have Mass, which with no little reasoning with him was denied him.

6. The foresaid Challengers came into the Tournay, and the foresaid Defendants
entered in after, with two more with them, Mr. Terill, and Mr. Robert Hopton,
and fought right-well, and so the Challenge was accomplished.

The same Night was first of a Play, after a Talk between one that was called
Riches, and the other Youth, whether of them was better. After some pretty
Reasoning, there came in six Champions of either side.

On Youth's side came.
My Lord Fitzwater. My Lord Ambrose. Sir Anthony Brown. Sir William Cobham. Mr.
Carry. Mr. Warcop.
On Riches side.
My Lord Fitzwarren. Sir Robert Stafford. Mr. Courtney. Digby. Hopton.
Hungerford.
All these fought two to two at Barriers in the Hall. Then came in two
apparalled like Almains, the Earl of Ormond and Jaques Granado, and two came in
like Friars, but the Almains would not suffer them to pass till they had
fought; the Friars were Mr. Drury and Thomas Cobham. After this followed two
Masks, one of Men, another of Women. Then a Banquet of 120 Dishes. This day
was the end of Christmas.

7. I went to Debtford to dine there, and broke up the Hall.

8. Upon a certain Contention between the Lord Willowby, and Sir Andrew Dudley
Captain of Guisnes, for their Jurisdiction, the Lord Willowby was sent for to
come over, to the intent the Controversy might cease, and Order might be taken.

12. There was a Commission granted to the Earl of Bedford, to Mr.
Vicechamberlain, and certain others, to call in my Debts that were owing Me,
and the days past; and also to call in these that be past when the days be come.

17. There was a Match run between six Gentlemen of a side at Tilt.

Of one Side.
The Earl of Warwick. The Lord Roberts. Mr. Sidney. Mr. Novel. Henry Gates.
Anthony Digby.
Of the other Side.
The Lord Ambrose. The Lord Fitzwater. Sir Francis Knollis. Sir Anthony Brown.
Sir John Parrat. Mr. Courtney.
These wan by four Taintes.

18. The French Ambassador moved, That We should destroy the Scotch part of the
Debatable Ground as they had done Ours. It was answered: 1. The Lord Coniers
that made the Agreement, made it none otherwise but as it should stand with his
Superiour's Pleasure: whereupon the same Agreement being misliked, because the
Scotch part was much harder to overcome, word was sent to stay the Matter.
Nevertheless the Lord Maxwell did, upon malice to the English Debatablers,
overrun them; whereupon was concluded, That if the Scots will agree it, the
Ground should be divided; if not, then shall the Scots waste their Debatablers,
and we Ours, commanding them by Proclamation to depart.

This day the Stiliard put in their Answer to a certain Complaint that the
Merchant-Adventurers laid against them.

19. The Bishop of Ely, Custos Sigilli, was made Chancellor, because as Custos
Sigilli, he could execute nothing in the Parliament that should be done, but
only to Seal ordinary things.

21. Removing to Westminster.

22. The Duke of Somerset had his Head cut off upon Tower Hill, between eight
and nine a Clock in the morning.

16. Sir William Pickering delivered a Token to the Lady Elizabeth, a fair
Diamond.

18. The Duke of Northumberland having under him 100 Men of Arms, and 100
Light Horse, gave up the keeping of 50 Men at Arms to his Son the Earl of
Warwick.

23. The Sessions of Parliament began.

24. John Gresham was sent over into Flanders, to show to the Foulcare, to whom
I owed Money, that I would defer it; or if I paid it, pay it in English, to
make them keep up their French Crowns, with which I minded to pay them.

25. The Answer of the Stiliard was delivered to certain of my Learned Council
to look on and oversee.

27. Sir Ralph Vane was condemned of Felony in Treason, answering like a
Ruffian.

Paris arrived with Horses, and showed how the French King had sent Me six
Cortalls, two Turks, a Barbary, two Gennets, a stirring Horse, and two littles
Mules, and showed them to Me.

29. Sir Thomas Arundel was likewise cast of Felony in Treason, after long
controversy, for the Matter was brought in Trial by seven of the Clock in the
morning.

28. At noon the Inquest went together; they sat shut up in a House together,
without Meat or Drink, because they could not agree all that Day, and all that
Night.

29. This day in the morning they did cast him.

February.
2. There was a King of Arms made for Ireland, whose Name was Vlster, and his
Province was all Ireland; and he was the fourth King of Arms, and the first
Herald of Ireland.

The Emperor took, the last month and this, a Million of pounds in Flanders.

6. It was appointed that Sir Philip Hobbey should go to the Regent, upon
pretense of ordering of Quarrels of Merchants, bringing with him 63000 l. in
French Crowns to be paid in Flanders at Antwerp, to the Schortz and their
Family, of Debts I owed them, to the intent he might dispatch them both under
one.

5. Sir Miles Partridge was condemned of Felony for the Duke of Somerset's
Matter, for he was one of the Conspirators.

8. Fifty Men at Arms appointed to Mr. Sadler.

9. John Beaumont, Master of the Rolls, was put in Prison for forging a false
Deed from Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, to the Lady Ann Powis, of certain
Lands and Leases.

10. Commission was granted out to 32 Persons, to examine, correct, and set
forth the Ecclesiastical Laws.

The Persons Names were these.
The Bishops. The Divines. Civilians. Canterbury. Tailor of Lincoln. Mr.
Secretary Petre. Ely. Tylor of Hadlee. Mr. Secretary Cicil. London. Mr. Cox,
Almoner. Mr. Traherne. Winchester. Sir John Cheek. Mr. Red. Exeter. Sir Anthony
Cook. Mr. Coke. Bath. Petrus Martyr. May, Dean of Paul's. Gloucester. Joannes
Alasco. Skinner. Rochester. Parker of Cambridge.

Lawyers.
Justice Broomley. Goodrick. Lucas. Justice Hales. Stamford. Gaudy. Gosnald.
Carel.

10. Sir Philip Hobbey departed with somewhat more Crowns than came to 53500
and odd Livers, and had authority to borrow, in my Name, of Lazarus Tuker 10000
l. Flemish, at 7 per Cent. for six months, to make up the Pay, and to employ
that that was in Bullion, to bring over with him; also to carry 3000 Merks
weight upon a License the Emperor granted the Scheitz which they did give me.
After that to depart to Bruges, where the Regent lay, and there to declare to
her the Griefs of my Subjects.

11. There was delivered of Armor, by John Gresham Merchant, 1100 pair of
Corslets and Horsemen-harnesses, very fair.

14. It was appointed that the Jesus of Lubeck, a Ship of 800 Tun, and the Mary
Gouston of 600 Tun, should be let out for a Voyage to Merchantmen for a 1000 l.
they at the Voyage to Levants-end to answer the Tackling, the Ship, the
Ordnance, Munition, and to leave it in that case they took it. Certain others
of the worst of my Ships were appointed to be sold.

9. Proclamation was made at Paris, that the Bands of the Dolphine, the Duke of
Vendosme, the Count d' Anguien, the Constable of France, the Duke de Guise, and
d' Aumale, the Count de Sancerres, the Marshall S. Andrew, Monsieur de Jarnac
and Tavennes, should, the 15th day of March, assemble at Troyes in Champaign to
resist the Emperor. Also that the French King would go thither in Person, with
200 Gentlemen of his Household, and 400 Archers of his Guard.

16. The French King sent his Secretary de Lausbespine to declare this Voyage
to him, This is imperfect.
and to desire him to take pains to have Mr. Pickering with him, and to be a
Witness of his Doings.

19. Whereupon it was appointed, that he should have 2000 Crowns for his
Furnishment, besides his Diet, and Barnabe 800.

20. The Countess of Pembrook died.

18. The Merchant-Adventurers put in their Replication to the Stiliards Answer.

23. A Decree was made by the Board, that upon knowledge and information of
their Charters, they had found: First, That they were no sufficient
Corporation. 2. That their Number, Names, and Nation, was unknown. 3. That when
they had forfeited their Liberties, King Edward the 4th did restore them on
this condition, That they should color no Strangers Goods, which they had
done. Also that whereas in the beginning they shipped not past 8 Clothes, after
100, after 1000, after that 6000; now in their Name was shipped 44000 Clothes
in one Year, and but 1100 of all other Strangers. For these Considerations
sentence was given, That they had forfeited their Liberties, and were in like
case with other Strangers.

28. There came Ambassadors from Hamburgh, and Lubeck, to speak on the behalf
of the Stiliard Merchants.

29. A Flemming would have searched the Falcon for Frenchmen, the Falcon
turned, shot off, boarded the Fleming, and took him.

Payment was made of 63500 l. Flemish to the Foulcare, all saving 6000 l. which
he borrowed in French Crowns by Sir Philip Hobbey.

March.
2. The Lord of Burgaveny was committed to Ward for striking the Earl of Oxford
in the Chamber of presence.

The Answer for the Ambassadors of the Stiliard was committed to the Lord
Chancellor, the two Secretaries, Sir Robert Bows, Sir John Baker, Judge
Montague, Griffith Solicitor, Gosnald, Goodrick, and Brooks.

3. It was agreed, for better dispatch of things, certain of the Council, with
others joined with them, should overlook the Penal Laws, and put certain of
them in execution. Others should answer Suitors; Others should oversee my
Revenues, and the Order of them; also the superfluous Paiments heretofore made.
Others should have Commission for taking away superfluous Bullwarks.

First, Order was given for defense of the Merchants, to send four Barques and
two Pinaces to the Sea.

4. The Earl of Westmoreland, the Lord Wharton, the Lord Coniers, Sir Tho.
Palmer, and Sir Tho. Chaloner, were appointed in Commission to meet with the
Scotch Ambassadors, for equal division of the Ground that was called the
Debatable.

6. The French Ambassador declared to the Duke of Northumberland, how the
French King had sent him a Letter of Credit for his Ambassadry. After delivery
made of the Letter, he declared how Duke Maurice of Saxony, the Duke of
Mecklenburgh, the Marquess of Brandenburgh, the Count of Mansfield, and diverse
other Princes of Germany, made a League with his Master Offensive and
Defensive; the French to go to Strasburg, with 30000 Footmen, and 8000
Horsemen; the Almains to meet with them there the 25th of this month, with
15000 Footmen, and 5000 Horsemen. Also the City of Strasburg had promised them
Victual, and declared how the French would send me Ambassadors to have Me into
the same League. Also that the Marquess of Brandenburg, and Count of Mansfield,
had been privately conveied to the French King's Presence, and were again
departed to leavy Men; and he thought by this time they were in the Field.

10. He declared the same thing to Me in the same manner.

9. It was consulted touching the Marts, and it was agreed that it was most
necessary to have a Mart in England for the enriching of the same to make it
the more famous, and to be less in other Men's danger, and to make all things
better cheap, and more plentiful. The time was thought good to have it now,
because of the Wars between the French King and the Emperor. The Places were
the meetest, Hull for the East parts. Southampton for the South Parts of
England, as appears by two Bills in my Study. London also was thought no ill
place, but it was appointed to begin with the other two.

11. The Bills put up to the Parliament were over-seen, and certain of them
were for this time thought meet to pass and to be read, other of them for
avoiding tediousness to be omitted, and no more Bills to be taken.

15. Those that were appointed Commissioners for the Requests, or for the
execution of Penal Laws, or for overseeing of the Courts, received their
Commissions at my Hand.

18. It was appointed, that for the payment of 14000 l. in the end of April,
there should be made an Anticipation of the Subsidy of London, and of the Lords
of my Council, which should go near to pay the same with good Provision.

20. The French Ambassador brought me a Letter of Credit from his Master, and
thereupon delivered me the Articles of the League betwixt the Germans and him,
desiring Me to take part of the same League; which Articles I have also in my
Study.

23. The Merchants of England having been long stayed, departed, in all about
60 Sail, the Woolfleet, and all to Antwerp. They were countermanded because of
the Mart, but it was too late.

24. For So Much as the Exchange was stayed by the Emperor to Lions, the
Merchants of Antwerp were sore afraid; and that the Mart could not be without
Exchange, liberty was given to the Merchants to exchange and rechange Money for
Money.

26. Henry Dudley was sent to the Sea with four Ships, and two Barks, for
defense of the Merchants, which were daily before robbed; who, as soon as he
came to the Sea, took two Pirates Ships and brought them to Dover.

28. I did deny, after a sort, the Request to enter into War, as appears by
the Copy of my Answer in the Study.

29. To the intent the Ambassador might more plainly understand My meaning, I
sent Mr. Hobbey and Mr. Mason to him, to declare him mine intent more amply.

31. The Commissioners for the Debatable of the Scotch side, did deny to meet,
except a certain Castle, or Pile, might be first razed; whereupon Letters were
sent to stay our Commissioners from the Meeting till they had further word.

10. Duke Maurice mustered at Artnstat in Saxony all his own Men, and left Duke
August, the Duke of Anhault, and the Count of Mansfield, for defense of his
Country, chiefly for fear of the Bohemians. The Young Lansgrave, Reiffenberg,
and others, mustered in Hassen.

14. The Marquess Albert of Brandenburg mustered his Men two leagues from
Erdfort, and after entered the same, receiving of the Citizens, a Gift of 20000
Florins; and he borrowed of them 60000 Florins, and so came to Steinfurt, where
Duke Maurice and all the German Princes were assembled.

April.
2. I fell sick of the Measels and Small Pox.

4. Duke Maurice, with his Army, came to Augusta; which Town was at the first
yielded to him, and delivered into his Hands, where he did change certain
Officers, restored their Preachers, and made the Town more free.

5. The Constable, with the French Army, came to Metz, which was within two
days yielded to him, where he found great provision of Victuals, and that he
determined to make the Staple of Victual for his Journey.

8. He came to a Fort wherein was an Abbey called Gocoza, and that Fort abide
80 Cannon-shot; at length came to a Parley, where the Frenchmen got in and won
it by Assault, slew all, saving 115, with the Captain, whom he hanged.

9. He took a Fort called Maranges, and razed it.

12. The French King came to Nancy to go to the Army, and there found the
Duchess and the young Duke of Lorrain.

13. The Marshall St. Andrew, with 200 Men of Arms, and 2000 Footmen, carried
away the young Duke, accompanied with few of his old Men, toward France, to the
Dolphin, which lay at Rhemes, to the no little discontentation of his Mother
the Duchess. He fortified also diverse Towns in Lorrain, and put in French
Garrisons.

14. He departed from Nancy to the Army which, lay at Metz.

7. Monsieur Senarpon gave an overthrow to the Captain of St. Omers, having
with him 600 Footmen, and 200 Horsemen.

15. The Parliament broke up, and because I was sick, and not able to go well
abroad as then, I signed a Bill containing the Names of the Acts which I would
have pass; which Bill was read in the House. Also I gave Commission to the Lord
Chancellor, two Archbishops, two Bishops, two Dukes, two Marquesses, two
Earls, and two Barons, to dissolve wholly this Parliament.

18. The Earl of Pembrook surrendered his Mastership of the Horse, which I
bestowed on the Earl of Warwick.

19. Also he left 50 of his Men of Arms, of which 25 were given to Sir Philip
Hobbey, and 25 to Sir John Gates.

21. It was agreed that Commissions should go out for to take certificate of
the superfluous Church Plate to Mine use, and to see how it has been embezeled.

The French Ambassador desired, That forasmuch as it was dangerous carrying of
Victual from Bolleign to Ard by Land, that I would give license to carry by Sea
to Calais, and from Calais to Ard, in my Ground.

22. The Lord Paget was degraded from the Order of the Garter for diverse his
Offenses, and chiefly because he was no Gentleman of Blood, neither of
Father-side nor Mother-side.

Sir Anthony St. Leiger, which was accused by the Bishop of Dublin for diverse
brawling Matters, was taken again into the Privy-Chamber, and sat among the
Knights of the Order.

23. Answer was given to the French Ambassador, that I could not accomplish his
Desire, because it was against my League with the Emperor.

24. The Order of the Garter was wholly altered, as appears by the new
Statutes. There were elected Sir Andrew Dudley, and the Earl of Westmoreland.

26. Monsieur de Couriers came from the Regent, to desire that her Fleet might
safely, upon occasion, take harbor in my Havens. Also he said, he was come to
give order for redressing all Complaints of our Merchants.

25. Whereas it was appointed that the 14000 l. that I owed in the last of
April, should be paid by the anticipation of the Subsidy of London, and of the
Lords, because to change the same over-Sea, was loss of the sixth part of the
Money I did so send over. Stay was made thereof, and the payment appointed to be
made over of 20000 l. Flemish, which I took up there 14 per Cent. and so
remained 6000 l. to be paid there the last of May.

30. Removing to Greenwich.

28. The Charges of the Mints were diminished 1400 l. and there was left 600 l.

18. King Ferdinando, Maximilian his Son, and the Duke of Bavaria, came to
Linx, to treat with Duke Maurice for a Peace; where Maurice declared his Griefs.

16. Duke Maurice's Men received an overthrow at Vlms; Marquess Albert spoiled
the Country, and gave them a day to answer.

31. A Debt of 14000 l. was paid to the Foulcare.

May.
1. The Stilyard-men received their Answer; which was, to confirm the former
Judgment of my Council.

2. A Letter was sent to the Foulcare from my Council to this effect; That I
have paid 63000 l. Flemish in February, and 14000 in April, which came to
77000 l. Flemish, which was a fair Sum of Money to be paid in one Year, chiefly
in this busy World, whereas it is most necessary to be had for Princes. Besides
this, That it was thought Money should not now do him so much pleasure as at
another time peradventure. Upon these Considerations they had advised Me to pay
but 5000 l. of the 45000 I now owe, and so put over the rest according to the
old Interest, 14 per Cent. with which they desired him to take patience.

4. Monsieur de Couriers received his Answer, which was, That I had long ago
given order that the Flemish Ships should not be molested in my Havens, as it
appears, because Frenchmen chasing Flemings into my Havens, could not get
them because of the rescue they had, but that I thought it not convenient to
have more Ships to come into my Havens than I could well rule and govern. Also
a note of diverse Complaints of my Subjects was delivered to him.

10. Letters were sent to my Ambassadors, That they should move to the Princes
of Germany, to the Emperor, and to the French King, That if this Treaty came to
any effect or end, I might be comprehended in the same.

Commission was given to Sir John Gates, Sir Robert Bows, the Chancellor of
the Augmentation, Sir Walter Mildmay, Sir Richard Cotton, to sell some part of
the Chauntry Lands, and of the Houses, for the payment of my Debts, which was
251000 l. Sterling at the least.

Tailor, Dean of Lincoln, was made Bishop of Lincoln.

Hooper, Bishop of Gloucester, was made Bishop of Worcester and Gloucester.

Story, Bishop of Rochester, was made Bishop of Chichester.

Sir Robert Bows was appointed to be made Master of the Rolls.

Commandment was given to the Treasurers, that nothing of the Subsidy should be
disbursed but by Warrant from the Board; and likewise for our Lady Day Revenues.

14. The Baron of the Exchequer, upon the surrender made by Justice Lecister,
was made Chief Justice, the Attorney Chief-Baron, the Sollicitor-General
Attorney, and the Solicitor of the Augmentation, Gosnold, General-Sollicitor,
and no more Solicitor to be in the Augmentation Court. Also there were
appointed eight Sergeants of the Law against Michaelmass next coming.

Gaudy. Stamford. Carell, etc.
16. The Muster was made of all the Men at Arms saving 50 of Mr. Sadlers, 25 of
Mr. Vicechamberlains, and 25 of Sir Philip Hobbey's, and also of all the
Pensioners.

17. The Progress was appointed to be by Dorchester to Pool in Dorsetshire, and
so through Salisbury homeward to Windsor.

18. It was appointed Money should be cried down in Ireland after a Pay, which
was of Money at Midsummer next; in the mean season the thing to be kept secret
and close. Also the Pirry, the Mint-masters, taking with him Mr. Brabamon,
chief Treasurer of the Realm, should go to the Mines and see what profit may be
taken of the Oar the Almains had dug in a Mine of Silver; and if it would
quit cost, or more, to go forward withal, if not, to leave off and discharge
all the Almains.

Also that of 500 of the 2000 Soldiers there being, should be cut off, and as
many more as would go and serve the French King, or the Emperor, leaving
sufficient at Home, no Fortifications to be made also yet for a time, in no
place unfortified; and many other Articles were concluded for Ireland.

20. Sir Richard Wingfield, Rogers, and -- were appointed to view the State of
Portsmouth, and to bring again their Opinions concerning the fortifying thereof.

4. The French King having passed the Straits of Lorrain, came to Savern, four
miles from Strasburg, and was victualled by the Country, but denied passage
through their Town.

21. Answer came from the Foulcare, That for the deferring of 30000 l. parcel
of 45 Troas, he was content; and likewise August Pyso, he might have paid him
20000 l. as soon as might be.

22. It was appointed, that forasmuch as there was much disorder on the Marches
on Scotland-side, both in my Fortifications of some Places, and negligent
looking to other Forts, the Duke of Northumberland, general Warden thereof,
should go down and view it, and take order for it, and return home with speed.
Also a pay of 10000 l. to go before him.

23. It was appointed that these Bands of Men of Arms should go with me this
Progress.

Lord Treasurer 30 Lord Great Master 25 Lord Privy Seal 30 Duke of Suffolk 25
Earl of Warwick 25 Earl of Rutland 15 Earl of Huntington 25 Earl of Pembrook 50
Lord Admiral 15 Lord Darcy 30 Lord Cobham 20 Lord Warden 20 Mr. Vicechamberlain
15 Mr. Sadler 10 Mr. Sidney 10
26. It was appointed that Thomas Gresham should have paid him out of the Money
that came of my Debts 7000 l. for to pay 6800 l. the last of the month, which
he received the same Night.

28. The same Thomas Gresham had 9000 l. paid him toward the payment of 20000
l. which the Foulcare required to be paid at the Passmart, for he had taken by
Exchange from hence 5000 l. and odds, and 10000 l. he borrowed of the Scheits,
and ten of Lazarus Tukkar. So there was in the whole 25, of which was paid the
last of April 14, so there remained 11000, and 9000 l. which I now made over by
Exchange, which made 20000 l. to pay the Foulcare with.

30. I received Advertisement from Mr. Pickering, that the French King went
from Savern to Aroumasshes, which was yielded to him; from this to Leimsberg,
and so toward Spires, his Army to be about 20000 Footmen, and 8000 Horsemen,
well appointed, besides Rascals. He had with him 50 pieces of Artillery, of
which were 26 Cannons, and six Organs, and great number of Boots. From
Leimsberg, partly doubting Duke Maurice's meaning, partly for lack of Victual;
and also because he had word that the Regent's Army, of which were Guides the
Count de Egmont, Monsieur de Rye, Martin Vanrouse, and the Duke of Holest, to
the number of 16000 Footmen, and 6000 Horsemen, had invaded Champaign, and
fortified Aschenay; he retired homeward till he came to Striolph, and there
commanded all unprofitable Carriage and Men should depart to Chalons, and sent
to the Admiral to come to him with 6000 Swissers, 4000 Frenchmen, 1500
Horsemen, and 30 pieces of Ordnance, meaning, as it was thought, to do some
Enterprise about Luxemburg, or to recover Aschenay which the Regent had
fortified. There died in this Journey 2000 Men for lack of good Victual; for
eight days they had but Bread and Water, and they had marched 60 Dutch miles at
the least, and past many a Straight, very painfully and laboursomly.

19. Duke Maurice coming from Auspurg in great have, came this day to the first
Passage called the Clowse, which the Emperor had caused to be strongly
fortified and victualled, a passage thorough an Hill, cut out artificially in
the way to Inspurg, and there was a strong Bulwark made hard by it, which he
wan, after a long fight within an hour and an half by Assault, and took and
slew all that were within. And that Night he marched through that Hill into a
Plain, where he looked for to see twelve Ensigns of Lansknights of his Enemies,
but they retired to the second Straight, and yet diverse of them were both slain
and taken; and so that Night he lodged in the Plain, at the entry of the second
Passage, where there were five Forts and one Castle, which with Ordnance slew
some of Duke Maurice's Men.

20. This morning the Duke of Mecklenburg, with 3000 Footmen, cast a Bridge over
a River five miles beneath the Sluice, and came and gave assault behind the
Sluice, and Duke Maurice gave assault in the Face, and the Countrymen of Tirol,
for hate of the Spaniards, helped Duke Maurice, so that five Forts were won by
Assault, and the Castle yielded upon condition to depart, not to serve in three
months after the Emperor. In this Enterprise he slew and took 3000 and 500
Persons, and 23 pieces of Artillery, and 240000 S.

The Emperor hearing of this, departed by Night from Inshpruk, forty miles that
Night in Post; he killed two of his Gennets, and rode continually every Night,
first to Brixinium; and after for doubt of the Cardinal of Ferrara's Army,
turned to Villucho in Carinthia. The 30th of May, tarrying for the Duke d'
Alva, who should come to him with 2000 Spaniards, and 3000 Italians that came
from Parma. Also the Emperor delivered Duke Frederic from Captivity, and sent
him through Bohemia into Saxony, to raise a Power against Duke Maurice's Nephew.

22. Duke Maurice, after that Hala and diverse other Towns about Inshpruk in
Tirol had yielded, came to Inshpruk, and there caused all the Stuff to be
brought to the Marketplace, and took all that pertained to Imperialists as
confiscate, the rest he suffered the Townsmen to enjoy. He took there fifty
pieces of Ordnance, which he conveied to Ausburg, for that Town he fortified,
and made it his Staple of Provision.

Certain Things which the Commissioners for the Requests shall not meddle
withal.

First, Suits for Lands.

Secondly, Suits for Forfeits, amounting to more than 40 l. value.

Thirdly, Suits for Pensions.

Fourthly, Reversions of Farms, which have more than one Year to come.

Fifthly, Leases of Manours.

Sixthly, Leases for more than 21 Years.

Seventhly, No Offices of special Trust in Reckonings of Money, as Customers,
Comptrollers, Surveyors, Receivers, Auditors, Treasurers, and Chancellors, etc.
to be given otherwise than durante beneplacito. Also all Mint-masters, and
others that have a doing in the Mint, and suchlike. The Bishops, Judges, and
other Officers of Judgment, quam diu se been gesserit. Balliwicks,
Stewardships, keeping of Parks and Houses, etc. to be granted during Life.

Eighthly, Suits for forgivement of Debts.

Ninthly, Releasing of Debts to be paid.

Tenthly, Suits for Money, to the intent to pay Debts they owe elsewhere.

Eleven, Suits to buy Land.

Twelve, Suits for Licenses, to carry over Gold, Silver, Lead, Leather, Corn,
Wood, etc. that be things unlawful.

Thirteen, Unresidence upon Benefices.

They shall meddle with Baliewicks and Stewardships, during Leases for 21
Years; Forfeits under 40 l. Receiverships, Woodwardships, Surveyorships, etc.
during pleasure. Instalments of days for Debts. To those Gentlemen that have
well-served, Fee-Farms to them and their Heirs Males of their Body, paying
their Rent, and discharging the Annuities due to all Officers touching the
same. Keeping of Houses and Parks, ordinary Offices, as Yeomen of the Crown,
the Household Offices, etc.

June.
2. Sir John Williams, who was committed to the Fleet for disobeying a
Commandment given to him for not paying any Pensions, without not making my
Council privy, upon his submission was delivered out of Prison.

4. Beamont Master of the Rolls, did confess his Offenses, who in his Office of
Wards had bought Land with my Money, had lent it, and kept it from Me, to the
value of 9000 l. and above, more than this twelve month, and 11000 in
Obligations, how he being Judge in the Chancery between the Duke of Suffolk and
the Lady Powis, took her Tittle, and went about to get it into his Hands,
paying a Sum of Money, and letting her have a Farm of a Manor of his, and
caused an Indenture to be made falsely, with the old Duke's counterfeit Hand to
it; by which he gave these Lands to the Lady Powis, and went about to make
twelve Men perjured. Also how he had concealed the Felony of his Man to the Sum
of 200 l. which he stole from him, taking the Money into his own hand again. For
these Considerations he surrendered into my Hands all his Offices, Lands, and
Goods, moveable and unmovable, toward the payment of this Debt, and of the
Fines due to these particular Faults by him done.

6. The Lord Paget, Chancellor of the Duchy, confessed how he, without
Commission, did sell away my Lands and great Timber-Woods; how he had taken
great Fines of my Lands, to his said particular Profit and Advantage, never
turning any to my Use or Commodity; how he made Leases in Reversion for more
than 21 Years. For these Crimes, and other-like recited before, he surrendered
his Office, and submitted himself to those Fines that I or my Council would
appoint to be levied of his Goods and Lands.

7. Whaley, Receiver of Yorkshire, confessed how he lent my Money upon Gain and
Lucre; how he paid one Years Revenue over, with the Arrearages of the last;
how he bought mine own Land with my own Money; how in his Accounts he had made
many false Suggestions; how at the time of the fall of Money, he borrowed diverse
Sums of Money, and had allowance for it, after by which he gained 500 l. at one
crying down, the whole Sum being 2000 l. and above. For these and suchlike
Considerations he surrendered his Office, and submitted to Fines which I or my
Council should assign him, to be levied of his Goods and Lands.

8. The Lords of the Council sat at Guild Hall in London, where in the presence
of a thousand People, they declared to the Mayor and Brethren their
sloathfulness in suffering unreasonable prices of Things, and to Craftsmen
their willfulness, etc. telling them, That if upon this Admonition they did not
amend, I was wholly determined to call in their Liberties as confiscate, and to
appoint Officers that should look to them.

10. It was appointed that the Lord Gray of Wilton should be pardoned of his
Offenses, and delivered out of the Tower.

Whereas Sir Philip Hobbey should have gone to Calais with Sir Richard Cotton,
and William Barnes Auditor, it was appointed Sir Anthony St. Legier, Sir
Richard Cotton, and Sir Thomas Mildmay, should go thither, carrying with them
10000 l. to be received out of the Exchequer.

Whereas it was agreed that there should be a Pay now made to Ireland of 5000
l. and then the Money to be cried down, it was appointed that 3000 weight which
I had in the Tower, should be carried thither, and coined at 3 Denar. fine; and
that incontinent the Coin should be cried down.

12. Because Pirry tarried here for the Bullion, William Williams Essay-Master
was put in his place, to view the Mines with Mr. Brabazon, or him whom the
Deputy should appoint.

13. Banester and Crane, the one for his large Confession, the other because
little Matter appeared against him, were delivered out of the Tower.

16. The Lord Paget was brought into Star Chamber, and there declared
effectuously his submission by word of Mouth, and delivered it in writing.

Beaumont who had before made his Confession in writing, began to deny it
again; but after being called before my Council, he did confess it again, and
there acknowledged a Fine of his Land, and signed an Obligation in surrender of
all his Goods.

17. Monsieur de Couriers took his leave.

2. The French King won the Castle of Robdemac. Certain Horsemen of the Regents
came and set upon the French King's Baggage, and slew diverse of the Carriers,
but at length, with some loss of the Frenchmen, they were compelled to retire.
The French King won Mount St. Ann.

4. The French King came to Deuvillars, which was a strong Town, and besieged
it, making three Breaches.

12. The Town was yielded to him, with the Captain. He found in it 2500
Footmen, 200 Horsemen, 63 great Brass-pieces, 300 Hagbuts of Croke, much
Victual, and much Ammunition, as he did write to his Ambassador.

19. It was appointed that the Bishop of Durham's Matter should stay till the
end of the Progress.

20. Beaumont in the Star Chamber confessed, after a little sticking upon the
Matter, his Faults, to which he had put to his Hand.

22. It was agreed that the Bands of Men of Arms, appointed to Mr. Sidney, Mr.
Vicechamberlain, Mr. Hobbey, and Mr. Sadler, should not be furnished, but left
off.

25. It was agreed, that none of my Council should move Me in any Suit of Land
for Forfeits above 20 l. for Reversion of Leases, or other extraordinary Suits,
till the State of my Revenues were further known.

15. The French King came to a Town standing upon the River of Mosa, called
Yvoire, which gave him many hot Skirmishes.

18. The French King began his Battery to the Walls.

14. The Townsmen of Mountmedy gave a hot Skirmish to the French, and slew
Monsieur de Toge's Brother, and many other Gentlemen of the Camp.

12. The Prince of Salerno, who had been with the French King to treat with him
touching the Matter of Naples, was dispatched in Post with this Answer, That
the French King would aid him with 13000 Footmen, and 1500 Horsemen in the
French Wages, to recover and conquer the Kingdom of Naples; and he should
marry, as some said, the French King's Sister, Madam Margaret. The Cause why
this Prince rebelled against the Emperor, was, partly the uncourteous handling
of the Viceroy of Naples, partly Ambition.

The Flemings made an Invasion into Champaign, in so much that the Dolphin had
almost been taken; and the Queen lying at Chalons, sent some of her Stuff
toward Paris.

Also another Company took the Town of Guise, and spoiled the Country.

22. Monsieur de Tallie was sent to raise the Arrierbands and Legionars of
Picardy and Champaign, to recover Guise, and invade Flanders.

27. Removing to Hampton Court.

30. It was appointed that the Statds should have this Answer, That those
Clothes which they had bought to carry over to the Sum of 2000 Clothes and odd,
should be carried at their old Custom, so they were carried within six weeks;
and likewise all Commodities they brought in till our Lady Day in Term next, in
all other Points, the old Decree to stand, till by a further communication the
Matter should be ended and concluded.

The Lord Paget was licensed to tarry at London, and there-abouts, till
Michaelmass, because he had no Provision in his Country.

26. Certain of the Heralds, Lancaster and Portcullis, were committed to Ward,
for counterfeiting Clarencieux Seal to get Money by giving of Arms.

23. The French King having received diverse Skirmishes of the Townsmen, and
chiefly two; in the one, they slew the French Light Horse, lying in a Village
by the Town; in the other, they entered into the Camp, and pulled down Tents;
which two Skirmishes were given by the Count of Mansfield Governor of the
Town. And the Duke of Luxemburg and his 300 Light Horse, understanding by the
Treason of four Priests, the weakest part of the Town, so affrighted the
Townsmen and the Flemish Soldiers, that they by threatenings, compelled their
Captain the Count, that he yielded himself and the Gentlemen Prisoners, the
Common-Souldiers to depart with white Wands in their Hands. The Town was well
Fortified, Victualled, and Furnished.

24. The Town of Mountmedy yielded to the French King, which before had given a
hot Skirmish.

July.
4. Sir John Gates Vicechamberlain was made Chancellor of the Duchy.

7. Removing to Oatlands.

5. The Emperor's Ambassador delivered the Regent's Letter, being of this
effect; That whereas I was bound by a Treaty with the Emperor, made Anno Dom.
1542, at Dotrecht, That if any Man did Invade the two Counties, I should help
him with 5000 Footmen, or 700 Crowns a day during four months, and make War
with him within a month after the Request made; and now the French King had
invaded Luxemburg, desiring my Men to follow the Effect of the Treaty.

7. The Names of the Commissioners was added, and made more, both in the Debts,
the surveying of the Courts, the Penal Laws, etc. and because my Lord
Chamberlain, my Lord Privy Seal, Mr. Vicechamberlain, and Mr. Secretary Petre,
went with me this Progress.

8. It was appointed that 50 pound weight of Gold should be coined after the
new Standard, to carry about this Progress, which makes 150 l. Sterling.

9. The Chancellor of the Augmentation was willed to surcease his Commission,
given him the third Year of our Reign.

3. Monsieur de Bossy, Grand Escuyer to the Emperor, was made General of the
Army in the Low Countries, and Monsieur de Prat over the Horsemen.

10. It was appointed here, that if the Emperor's Ambassador did move any more
for Help or Aid, this Answer should be sent him by two of my Council, That this
Progress-time my Council was dispersed, I would move by their Advise, and he
must tarry till the Matter were concluded, and their Opinions heard. Also I had
committed the Treaty to be considered by diverse learned Men, etc. And if
another time he would press Me, then answer to be made, That I trusted the
Emperor would not wish Me, in these young Years, having felt them so long, to
enter into them. How I had Amity sworn with the French King, which I could not
well break; and therefore if the Emperor thought it so meet, I would be a Mean
for a Peace between them, but not otherwise. And if he did press the Treaty,
lastly to conclude, That the Treaty did not bind Me which my Father had made,
being against the profit of my Realm and Country; and to desire a new Treaty to
be made between Me and the Emperor in the last Wars. He answered, That he
marvelled what We meant, for we are bound, quoth the Emperor, and not You. Also
the Emperor had refused to fulfill it diverse times, both in not letting pass
Horses, Armor, Ammunition, etc. which were provided by Me for the Wars. As
also in not sending Aid upon the Forraging of the Low Country of Calais.

12. A Letter was written to Sir Peter Meutas, Captain of the Isle of Jersey,
both to command him that Divine Service may there be used as in England; and
also that he take heed to the Church-Plate that it be not stolen away, but
kept safe till further Order be taken.

9. The French King came to the Town Aveins in Hainault, where after he had
viewed the Town, he left it, and besieged a Pile called Tirlokbut; the Bailiff
of the Town perceiving his departure, gave the Onset on his Rereward with 2000
Footmen, and 500 Horsemen, and slew 500 Frenchmen. After this, and the winning
of certain Holds of little force, the French King returned into France, and
divided his Army into diverse good Towns to rest them, because diverse were sick
of the Flux, and such other Diseases, meaning shortly to increase his Power,
and so to go forward with his Enterprise.

12. Frederick Duke of Saxony was released from his Imprisonment, and sent by
the Emperor into his own Country, to the great rejoicing of all the Protestants.

5. The Emperor declared, That he would none of these Articles to which Duke
Maurice agreed, and the King of the Romans also. The Copy of them remains
with the Secretary Cecil.

Marquess Albert of Brandenburg did great harm in the Country of Franconia,
burnt all Towns and Villages about Norimberg, and compelled them to pay to the
Princes of his League 200000 Dollars, ten of the fairest pieces of Ordnance,
and 150 Kintalls of Powder. After that he went to Frankfort, to distress
certain Soldiers gathered there for the Emperor.

15. Removing to Guilford.

20. Removing to Petworth.

23. The Answer was made to the Emperor's Ambassador, touching the Aid he
required, by Mr. Wotton, and Mr. Hobbey, according to the first Article supra.

24. Because the number of Bands that went with Me this Progress made the Train
great, it was thought good they should be sent home, save only 150 which were
picked out of all the Bands. This was, because the Train was thought to be near
4000 Horse, which were enough to eat up the Country, for there was little
Meadow nor Hay all the way as I went.

25. Removing to Londre, Sir Anthony Brown's House.

27. Removing to Halvenaker.

30. Whereas it had been before devised, that the New Fort of Barwick should be
made with four Bulwarks; and for making of two of them, the Wall of the Town
should be left open on the Enemies side a great way together, (which thing had
been both dangerous and chargeable) it was agreed the Wall should stand, and
two Slaughter-houses to be made upon it to scour the outer Courtins; a great
Rampire to be made within the Wall, a great Ditch within that, another Wall
within that, with two other Slaughter-Houses, and a Rampire within that again.

26. The Flemings entered in great numbers into the Country of Terovenne;
whereupon 500 Men of Arms arose of Frenchmen, and gave the Onset on the
Flemings, overthrew them, and slew of them 1435, whereof were 150 Horsemen.

31. It was appointed, on my Lord of Northumberland's Request, that he should
give half his Fee to the Lord Wharton, and make him his Deputy-Warden there.

August.
2. Removing to Warblington.

3. The Duke of Guise was sent into Lorrain, to be the French King's Lieutenant
there.

4. Removing to Waltham.

8. Removing to Portsmouth.

9. In the morning I went to Chaterton's Bullwark, and viewed also the Town; at
afternoon went to see the Storehouse, and there took a Boat and went to the
wooden Tower, and so to Haselford. Upon viewing of which things, it there was
devised two Forts to be made upon the entry of the Haven; one where Ridley's
Tower stands, upon the Neck that makes the Camber; the other upon a like
Neck standing on the other side the Haven, where stood an old Bullwark of Wood.
This was devised for the strength of the Haven. It was meant, that that to the
Town-side should be both stronger and larger.

10. Henry Dudley who lay at Portsmouth, with a warlike Company of 140 good
Soldiers, was sent to Guisnes with his Men, because the Frenchmen assembled in
these Frontiers in great numbers.

Removing to Tichfield, the Earl of Southampton's House.

14. Removing to Southampton.

16. The French Ambassador came to declare how the French King meant to send
one that was his Lieutenant in the Civil Law, to declare which of our Merchants
Matters have been adjudged on their side, and which against them, and for what
Consideration.

16. Removing to Beuleu.

The French Ambassador brought news how the City of Siena had been taken by the
French-side on St. James's day, by one that was called the Count Perigliano,
and other Italian Soldiers, by Treason of some within the Town; and all the
Garrison of the Town, being Spaniards, were either taken or slain. Also how the
Marshall Brisac had recovered Saluzzo, and taken Verucca. Also how Villebone
had taken Turnaham and Mountreville in the Low Country.

18. Removing to Christ-Church.

21. Removing to Woodlands.

In this month, after long Business, Duke Maurice and the Emperor agreed on a
Peace, but Marquess Albert of Brandenburg would not consent thereto, but went
away with his Army to Spires and Worms, Colen and Treves, taking large sums of
Money of all Cities which he passed, but chiefly of the Clergy. Duke Maurice's
Soldiers perceiving Marquess Albert would enter into no Peace, went almost all
to the Marquess's Service; among which were Principal the Count of Mansfelt,
Baron Haydeke, and a Colonel of 3000 Footmen, and 1000 Horsemen, called
Reiffenberg; So that of 7000 which should been sent into Hungary against the
Turks, there remained not 3000. Also the Duke of Wittenberg did secretly let go
2800 of the best Soldiers in Germany, to the Service of Marquess Albert, so
that his Power was now very great.

Also in this month the Emperor departing from Villachia, came to Insbruk, and
so to Monaco, and to Augusta, accompanied with 8000 Spaniards, and Italians,
and a little Band of a few ragged Almains. Also in this month did the Turks win
the City of Tamesino in Transylvania, and gave a Battle to the Christians, in
which was slain Count Pallavicino, and 7000 Italians and Spaniards. Also in
this month did the Turks Navy take the Cardinal of Trent's two Brethren, and
seven Galleys, and had in chase 39 other. Also in this month did the Turks Navy
Land at Terracina in the Kingdom of Naples; and the Prince of Salerno set
forward with 4000 Gascoins, and 6000 Italians; and the Count Perigliano brought
to his Aid 5000 Men of those that were at the Enterprise of Siena. Also the
Marshall Brisac won a Town in Piedmont called Bussac.

24. Removing to Salisbury.

26. Upon my Lord of Northumberland's return out of the North, it was
appointed, for the better strengthening of the Marches, that no one Man should
have two Offices; and that Mr. Sturley, Captain of Barwick, should leave the
Wardenship of the East-Marches to the Lord Evers; and upon the Lord Coniers
resignation, the Captainship of the Castle of Carlisle was appointed to Sir --
Gray, and the Wardenship of the West-Marches to Sir Richard Musgrave.

27. Sir Richard Cotton made Comptroller of the Household.

28. Removing to Wilton.

30. Sir Anthony Archer was appointed to be Marshal of Calais, and Sir Edward
Grimston Comptroller of Calais.

22. The Emperor being at Augusta, did banish two Preachers Protestants out of
Augusta, under pretense that they preached seditiously, and left Mecardus the
chief Preacher, and six other Protestant Preachers in the Town, giving the
Magistrates leave to choose others in their place that were banished.

29. The Emperor caused eight Protestant Citizens of the Town to be banished,
of them that went to the Fair at Lintz, under pretense, that they taking
Marquess Albert's part, would not abide his Presence.

September.
2. Removing to Wotisfunt, my Lord Sands House.

5. Removing to Winchester.

7. From thence to Basing, my Lord Treasurer's House.

10. And so to Donnington-Castle besides the Town of Newbery.

12. And so to Reading.

15. To Windsor.

16. Stuckley being lately arrived out of France, declared, how that the French
King being wholly persuaded that he would never return again into England,
because he came away without leave, upon the apprehension of the Duke of
Somerset his old Master, declared to him his Intent, That upon a Peace* made
with the Emperor, he meant to besiege Calais, and thought surely to win it by
the way of Sandhills, for having Ricebank both to famish the Town, and also to
beat the Marketplace; and asked Stuckley's Opinion: When Stuckley had
answered, he thought it impossible. Then he told him that he meant to Land in
England, in an Angle thereof about Falmouth, and said, the Bullwarks might
easily be won, and the People were papistical; also that Monsieur de Guise at
the same time should enter into England by Scotland-side, with the Aid of the
Scots.

19. After long reasoning it was determined, and a Letter was sent in all haste
to Mr. Morison, willing him to declare to the Emperor, That I having pity, as
all other Christian Princes should have, on the Invasion of Christendom by the
Turk, would willingly join with the Emperor, and other States of the Empire, if
the Emperor could bring it to pass in some League against the Turk and his
Confederates, but not to be aknown of the French King, only to say, That he
has no more Commission, but if the Emperor would send a Man into England, he
should know more. This was done on intent to get some Friends. The Reasonings
be in my Desk.

21. A Letter was sent only to try Stuckley's Truth to Mr. Pickering, to know
whether Stuckley did declare any piece of this Matter to him.

Barnabe was sent for home.

23. The Lord Gray was chosen Deputy of Calais in the Lord Willowby's place,
who was thought unmeet for it.

24. Sir Nicholas Wentworth was discharged of the Portership of Calais, and one
-- Cotton was put into it. In consideration of his Age, the said Sir Nicholas
Wentworth had 100 l. Pension.

26. Letters were sent for the discharge of the Men of Arms at Michaelmass next
following.

27. The young Lords Table was taken away, and the Masters of Requests, and the
Sergeants of Arms, and diverse other extraordinary Allowances.

26. The Duke of Northumberland, the Marquess of Northampton, the Lord
Chancellor, Mr. Secretary Petre, and Mr. Secretary Cecil, ended a Matter at
Eaton-College, between the Master and the Fellows; and also took order for the
amendment of certain superfluous Statutes.

28. Removing to Hampton Court.

29. Two Lawyers came from the French King to declare what things had passed
with the Englishmen in the King's Privy Council; what and why against them, and
what was now in doing, and with what diligence. Which when they had eloquently
declared, they were referred to London, where there should speak with them Mr.
Secretary Petre, Mr. Wotton, and Sir Thomas Smith; whereby then was declared
the Griefs of our Merchants, which came to the Sum of 50000 l. and upwards; to
which they gave little answer, but that they would make Report when they came
home, because they had yet no Commission, but only to declare us the Causes of
things done.

The first day of this month the Emperor departed from Augusta toward Vlmes;
and thanking the Citizens for their steadfast sticking to him in these perrilous
Times, he passed by them to Strasburg, accompanied only with 4000 Spaniards,
5000 Italians, 12000 Almains, and 2000 Horsemen, and thanking also them of
Strasburg for their goodwill they bore him, that they would not let the French
King come into their Town, he went to Weysenberg, and so to Spires, and came
thither the 23 d of this month. Of which the French King being advertised,
summoned an Army to Metz, and went thitherward himself; sent a Pay of three
months to Marquess Albert, and the Rhinegrave and his Band; also willing him to
stop the Emperor's Passage into these Low Countries, and to fight with him.

27. The Matter of the Debatable was agreed upon, according to the last
Instructions.

26. Duke Maurice, with 4000 Footmen and 1000 Horsemen, arrived at Vienna
against the Turks.

21. Marquess Hans of Brandenburg, came with an Army of 13000 Footmen, and 1500
Horsemen, to the Emperor's Army; and many Almain Soldiers increased his Army
wonderfully, for he refused none.

October.
3. Because I had a pay of 48000 l. to be paid in December, and had as yet but
14000 beyond Seas to pay it withal, the Merchants did give me a Loan of 40000
l. to be paid by them the last of December, and to be repaied again by Me the
last of March. The manner of levying this Loan was of the Clothes, after the
rate of 20 s. a Cloth, for they carried out at this Shipping 40000
Broad-Clothes. This Grant was confirmed the 4th day of this month, by a company
assembled of 300 Merchant-Adventurers.

2. The Bullwarks of Earth and Boards in Essex, which had a continual allowance
of Soldiers in them, were discharged, by which was saved presently 500 l. and
hereafter 700 or more.

4. The Duke D'alva, and the Marquess of Marigna, set forth with a great part
of the Emperor's Army, having all the Italians and Spaniards with them, toward
Treves, where the Marquess Albert had set ten Ensigns of Launce-Knights to
defend it, and tarried himself with the rest of his Army at Landaw besides
Spires.

6. Because Sir Andrew Dudley, Captain of Guisnes, had indebted himself very
much by his Service at Guisnes, also because it should seem injurious to the
Lord Willowby, that for the Contention between him and Sir Andrew Dudley, he
should be put out of his Office, therefore it was agreed, That the Lord William
Howard should be Deputy of Calais, and the Lord Gray Captain of Guisnes.

Also it was determined that Sir Nicholas Sturley should be Captain of the new
Fort at Barwick, and that Alex. Brett should be Porter, and one Roksby should
be Marshal.

7. Upon report of Letters written by Mr. Pickering, how that Stuckley had not
declared to him, all the while of his being in France, no one word touching the
Communication before specified; and declared also how Mr. Pickering thought, and
certainly advertised, that Stuckley never heard the French King speak no such
word, nor never was in credit with him, or the Constable, save once, when he
became an Interpreter between the Constable and certain English Pioneers, He
was committed to the Tower of London.

Also the French Ambassador was advertised how we had committed him to Prison,
for that he untruly slandered the King our good Brother, as other such
Runnagates do daily the same. This was told him, to make him suspect the
English Runnagates that be there. A like Letter was sent again to Mr. Pickering.

8. Le Seigneur de Villandry came in Post from the French King with this
Message. First, That although Mr. Sidney's and Mr. Winter's Matters, were
justly condemned; yet the French King, because they both were my Servants, and
one of them about me, was content gratuito to give Mr. Sidney his Ship, and all
the Goods in her; and Mr. Winter his Ship, and all his own Goods. Which Offer
was refused, saying, We required nothing gratuito, but only Justice and
Expedition. Also Villandry declared, That the King his Master, wished that an
Agreement were made between the Ordinances and Customs of England and France in
Marine Affairs. To which was answered, that our Ordinances were nothing but the
Civil Law, and certain very old Additions of the Realm; That we thought it
reason not to be bound to any other Law than their old Laws, which had been of
long time continued, and no fault found with them. Also Villandry brought forth
two new Proclamations, which for things to come were very profitable for
England, for which he had a Letter of Thanks to the King his Master. He
required also Pardon and Releasement of Imprisonment for certain Frenchmen
taken on the Seacoast. It was showed him they were Pirates: Now some of them
should by Justice be punished, some by Clemency pardoned; and with this
Dispatch he departed.

11. Horn Dean of Durham, declared a secret Conspiracy of the Earl of
Westmoreland, the Year of the apprehension of the Duke of Somerset, How he
would have taken out Treasure at Midleham, and would have robbed his Mother,
and sold 200 l. Land; and to please the People, would have made a Proclamation
for the bringing up of the Coin, because he saw them grudg at the fall. He was
commanded to keep this Matter close.

6. Mr. Morison, Ambassador with the Emperor, declared to the Emperor the
Matter of the Turks before specified; whose Answer was, He thanked us for our
gentle Offer, and would cause the Regent to send a Man for the same purpose, to
know our further meaning in that behalf.

11. Mr. Pickering declared to the French King, being then at Rhemes,
Stuckley's Matter of Confession, and the Cause of his Imprisonment: Who after
protestation made of his own good Meaning in the Amity, and of Stuckley's
Ingratitude toward him, his lewdness and ill-demeanour, thanked Us much for
this so gentil an uttering of the Matter, that we would not be led with false
Bruites and Tales.

The Bishop Tunstal of Durham was deprived of his Bishopric.

In this month Monsieur de Rue, Martin Rossen, and an Army of Flemings, while
the French had assembled his Men of War in Lorrain, had sent the Constable to
the Army, which lay four leagues from Verdun, the Duke de Guise with 7000 Men
to Metz, and the Marshall St. Andrew at Verdeun, razed and spoiled, between
the River of Some and Osse, many Towns, as Noyon, Roy, Chamy; and Villages,
Nelle, Follambray, a new built House of the King's, etc. insomuch that the
French King sent the Admiral of France to help the Duke of Vendosme against
that Army.

There was at this time a great Plague that reigned in sundry parts of France,
of which many Men died.

20. A Man of the Earl of Tyrones was committed to the Tower, because he had
made an untrue Suggestion and Complaint against the Deputy and the whole
Council of Ireland. Also he had bruited certain ill Bruites in Ireland, how the
Duke of Northumberland, and the Earl of Pembrook were fallen out, and one
against another in the Field.

17. The Flemings, and the Englishmen that took their parts, assaulted by Night
Hamletue; the Englishmen were on the Walls, and some some of the Flemings also;
but by the cowardice of a great part of the Flemings, the Enterprise was lost,
and many Men slain. The number of the Flemings were 4000, the number of the Men
within Hambletue 400. The Captain of this Enterprise was Monsieur de Vandeville
Captain of Gravelin.

6. Monsieur de Boissey entered Treves with a Flemish Army, to the number of
12000 Footmen, and 2500 Horsemen, Burgunions, without any resistance, because
the Ensigns there left by Marquess Albert were departed; and thereupon the Duke
d' Alva, and the Marquess of Marion, marched toward Metz; the Emperor himself,
and the Marquess Hans of Brandenburg, having with him the rest of his Army, the
ninth day of this month departed from Landaw toward Metz. Monsieur de
Boissey's Army also joined with him at a place called Swayburg, or Deuxpont.

23. It was agreed, that because the State of Ireland could not be known
without the Deputy's presence, that he should, in this dead time of the Year,
leave the governance of the Realm to the Council there for the time, and bring
with him the whole State of the Realm, whereby such order might be taken, as
the superfluous Charge might be avoided, and also the Realm kept in quietness,
and the Revenue of the Realm better and more profitably gathered.

25. Whereas one George Paris an Irishman, who had been a practiser between the
Earl of Desmond and other Irish Lords, and the French King, did now, being
weary of that Matter, practice means to come home, and to have his old Lands in
Ireland again. His Pardon was granted him, and a Letter written to him from my
Council, in which he was promised to be considered and helped.

There fell in this month a great Contention among the Scots, for the Kers slew
the Lord of Balcleugh, in a Fray in Edinburgh; and as soon as they had done,
they associated to them the Lord Home and all his Kin: But the Governor
thereupon summoned an Army to go against them; but at length, because the
Dowager of Scotland favored the Kers and Homes, and so did all the French
Faction, the French King having also sent for 5000 Scotch Footmen, and 500
Horsemen, for his Aid in these Wars, the Governor agreed the 5000 Footmen
under the leading of the Earl of Cassils; and 500 Light-Horsemen, of which the
Kers and the Homes should be Captains, and go with such haste into France, that
they might be in such place as the French King would appoint them to serve in,
by Christmas, or Candlemass at the furthest. And thus he trusted to be well
rid of his most mortal Enemies.

27. The Scots hearing that George Paris practiced for Pardon, committed him to
Ward in Striveling-Castle.

25. Monsieur de Rue having burnt in France eighteen leagues in length, and
three leagues in breadth; having pillaged, and sacked, and razed the fair Towns
of Noyon, Roy, Nelle, and Chamy, the King's new House of Follambray, and
infinite other Villages, Bullwarks, and Gentlemen's Houses in Champaign and
Picardy, returned into Flanders.

23. The Emperor in his Person came to the Town of Metz with his Army, which
was reckoned 45000 Footmen, as the Bruit went, and 7000 Horsemen. The Duke d'
Alva with a good Band went to view the Town; upon whom issued out the Soldiers
of the Town, and slew of his Men about 2000, and kept him play till the main
force of the Camp came down, which caused them to retire with loss. On the
French Party was the Duke of Nemours hurt on the Thigh. There was in the Town
as Captain, the Duke of Guise; and there were many other great Lords with him,
as the Prince of Rochsurion, the Duke de Namours, the Vicedam of Chartres,
Pierro Stozzy, Monsieur Chastilion, and many other Gentlemen.

November.
5. Monsieur de Villandry returned to declare, how the King his Master did
again offer to deliver four Ships against which Judgment had passed. He said,
The King would appoint Men to hear our Merchants at Paris, which should be Men
of the best sort. He said likewise, how the King his Master meant to mend the
Ordinance, of which Amendment he brought Articles.

7. These Articles were delivered to be considered by the Secretaries.

9. Certain were thought to be sought out by several Commissions; viz. Whether
I were justly answered of the Plate, Lead, Iron, etc. that belonged to Abbeys?
Whether I were justly answered the Profit of Alome, Copper, Fustians, etc.
which were appointed to be sold? and of such Land as the King my Father sold,
and suchlike Articles.

12. Monsieur Villandry received answer for the first Article, as he did
before, How I meant not by taking freely so few, to prejudice the rest. For
hearing of our Merchants Matters at Paris, by an inferior Council, We thought
both too dilatory after these long Suits, and also unreasonable, because the
inferior Council would undo nothing (though cause appeared) which had been
before judged by the higher Council. And as for the New Ordinances, we liked
them in effect as ill as their Old, and desired none other but the Old
accustomed ones which have been used in France of late Time, and to be yet
continued between England and the Low Country. Finally, We desire no more
Words, but Deeds.

4. The Duke d'Aumail being left in Lorrain, both to stop the Emperor's
Provision, annoy his Camp, and to take up the Straglers of the Army, with a
Band of 400 Men of Arms, which is 1200 Horse, and 800 Light Horse, hearing how
Marquess Albert began to take the Emperor's part, sent first certain
Light Horse to view what they intended. Those Avan-Couriers lighted on a Troop
of 500 Horsemen, who drove them back till they came to the Duke's Person;
Whereupon the Skirmish grew so great, that the Marquess with 12000 Footmen, and
1000 Horsemen, came to his Men's succors, so the Duke's Party was discomfited,
the Duke himself taken and hurt in many places; Monsieur de Roan was also
slain, and many other Gentlemen slain and taken. This Fight was before Toul,
into which Fort escaped a great part of the Light Horse.

6. Heading Town and Castle was taken by the Monsieur de Reux; The Castle was
reckoned too well stored of all things, and rendered either by Cowardice or
Treason. The Battery was very small, and not suitable. The most was, that the
Captain, Monsieur Jeulis, was, with one of the first shots of the Cannon,
slain, and his Lieutenant with him.

In this month Ferdinando Gonzaga besieged St. Martins in Piedmont.

18. There was a Commission granted out to Sir Richard Cotton, Sir John Gates,
Sir Robert Bows, and Sir Walter Mildmay, to examine the account of the fall of
Money, by the two Proclamations.

20. The Lord Ogle leaving the Wardenship of the Middle Marches, because my
Lord Evers Land lay there, he was made Deputy-Warden there, with the Fee of 600
Merks; and Sir Thomas Dacres of the East Marches, with the Fee of 500 Merks.

24. Thomas Gresham came from Antwerp hither, to declare how Monsieur de
Langie, Treasurer to the Emperor, of Flanders, was sent to him from the Regent
with a certain Packet of Letters which the Burgonions had taken in Bullonois,
coming from the Dowager of Scotland: The Effect whereof was, How she had
committed George Paris the Irishman to Prison, because she had heard of his
meaning to return into England; how she had found the Pardon he had, and diverse
other Writings; and how she had sent O-Coners's Son into Ireland, to comfort
the Lords of Ireland. Also he showed certain Instructions, Anno 1548, upon the
Admiral's fall, given to a Gentleman that came hither, That if there were any
here of the Admiral's Faction, he should do his uttermost to raise an Uproar.

29. Henry Knowls was sent in Post into Ireland with a Letter, to stay the
Deputy, if he met him, in Ireland, because of the Business; and that he should
seem to stay for his own Affairs, and prolong his going from Week to Week, lest
it be perceived. Also he had with him certain Articles concerning the whole
state of the Realm, which the Deputy was willed to answer.

30. There was a Letter of Thanks written to the Regent, and sent to Mr.
Chamberlain, to deliver her for the gentle Overture made to Thomas Gresham by
the Treasurer Langie. He was also willed to use gentle words in the delivery of
the Letters, wishing a further Amity: And for recompense of her Overture, to
tell her of the French King's practice, for 5000 Scotch Footmen, and 500
Horsemen. And also how he takes up by Exchange at Lubeck 100000 l. whereby
appears some meaning that way the next Spring.

28. The Lord Paget was put to his Fine of 6000 l. and 2000 l. diminished to
pay it within the space of -- Years, at days limited.

Here the Journal ends, or if more was written by the King, it is lost.
Some other Papers written with King Edward the Sixth's own Hand.
Number 2. A Collection of Passages of Scripture against Idolatry, in French,
dedicated to the Protector.
In Trinity Coll. Libr. Cambridg.
LE fervent zele que Je vous apercoy avoir en la Reformation de Idolatry,
Tres-cher et bien aim Oncle, ma incite comme par maniere de pass temps, en
lisant la saint Escriture, de noter plusieurs lieux en icelle qui defendent de
n^adorer ny fair aucuns Images. Non seulement de Dieux Estranges, mais ausi de
ne former chose pensant la fair semblable a la Majeste de Dieu le Creature si
tresbahy. Veu qui lui mesme and son St. Esprit, par la bouche de ses Prophets,
L'a si souvent defendu, que tant de gens ont ose et osent commetre Idolatry en
faisant et adorant les Images. Mais Je croy que cestoit pourtant quils
n'avoient ou n'entendoit pas ses paroles. Car comme il dit il ne peut estre veu
en chooses qui soient materielles. Mais veut estre veu par ses ouvres, ni plus
ne moins que quand on voit quelque excellent piece d'ouvrage sans voir ouvrier
qui L'a fait, on peut Imaginer son excellence: Ainsi regardant et considerant
l'excellence du Firmament et les chooses tant parfaites et mervelleuses, que y
sont comprises, nous pouvons Imaginer quelle e le Createur qui les a formees
seulement par sa parole, et en tell maniere nostre Oeil Spirituel pouroit
beaucoup mieux voir quelle chose c'est que de Dieu, que nostre Oeil corporell
ne le pourroit voir en chose que Creature humane ait fait et formee. Pourtant,
cher Oncle, apres avoir note en ma Bible en Anglois plusieurs sentences qui
contradisent a tout Idolatry a celle fin de m'apprendre et exercer en
l'Escriture Francoise, je me suis amuse a le Translater en la dite Langue
Francoise: Puis les ay fait rescire en se petit livret, lequell de tresbon
cueur Je vous offer: Priant Dieu le Createur de vous donner grace de continuer
en vostre labeur spirituel au salut de vostre ame et a l' honneur et gloire d'
iceluy.

Then follow 72 Passages out of the Old Testament, against worshipping strange
Gods or Images, with little Paraphrases of his own, he concludes.

Il y a autres places en la saint Escriture, tant Apocryphes que autres,
desquelles je ne fais nulle mention pour le present, qui toutesfois sont
correspondentes a celles don't est fait mention par cy devant. Mais pour tant
que quasi tous les Prophets et autres Saints, desquels la Saint Escriture
parle deffendent de ne commetre Idolatry Je desire et exhort toute la
Congregation des Chrestiens qu'un chascun d'eux vueille delaisser cest
abominable vice.

A Discourse about the Reformation of many Abuses. Number 2. The Government of
this Realm is divided into two parts, one Ecclesiastical, and the other
Temporal.
THe Ecclesiastical consists in setting forth the Word of God, Cotton Libr.
Nero C. 10.
continuing the People in Prayer, and the Discipline. The setting forth of the
Word of God, consists in the good discreet Doctrine and Example of the
Teachers, and Spiritual Officers; for as the good Husbandman makes his Ground
good and plentiful, so does the true Preacher with Doctrine and Example, print
and graft in the Peoples Mind the Word of God, that they at length become
plentiful. Prayers also to God must be made continually, of the People, and
Officers of the Church, to assist them with his Grace. And those Prayers must
first, with good consideration, be set forth, and Faults therein be amended.
Next, being set forth, the People must continually be allured to hear them. For
Discipline, it were very good that it went forth, and that those that did
notably offend in Swearing, Rioting, neglecting of God's Word, or such the like
Vices, were duly punished, so that those that should be the Executors of this
Discipline, were Men of tried Honesty, Wisdom, and Judgment. But because those
Bishops who should execute it, some for Papistry, some for Ignorance, some for
Age, some for their ill Name, some for all these, are Men unable to execute
Discipline; it is therefore a thing unmeet for these Men: Wherefore it were
necessary, that those that were appointed to be Bishops, or Preachers, were
honest in Life, and learned in their Doctrine; that by rewarding of such Men,
others might be allured to follow their good Life.

As for the Prayers, and Divine Service, it were meet the Faults were drawn out
(as it was appointed) by-learned Men, and so the Book to be established, and
all Men willed to come thereunto to hear the Service, as I have put in
Remembrances in Articles touching the Statutes of this Parliament. But as for
Discipline, I would wish no Authority given generally to all Bishops, but that
Commission be given to those that be of the best sort of them to exercise it in
their Diocesses.

Thus much generally for Religion.

Temporal Regiment.
The Temporal Regiment consists, in well-ordering, enriching, and defending
the whole Body Politic of the Commonwealth, and every part of the whole, to
one Part, not the other. The Example whereof may be best taken of a Man's Body;
for even as the Arm defends, helps, and aideth the whole Body, chiefly the
Head, so ought Servingmen, and Gentlemen chiefly, and suchlike kind of People,
be always ready to the defense of their Country, and chiefly of their Superior
and Governor; and ought in all things to be vigilant and painful for the
increasing and aiding of their Country. And forasmuch as they, in serving their
King and Country, have diverse great and manifold Charges, even as the Arm does
many times bear great stresses for defense of the Head and Body, having no kind
of way to enrich themselves, neither by Merchandise, neither by Handicraft,
neither by Husbandry; as the Arm does decoct no Meat it self, nor engendereth
no Blood, therefore even as the Stomach, Liver, and Lights, which parts
engender the Blood, does send nourishment to the Arms and Legs sufficient to
strengthen the part, even so must the Artificers so use their Gain in working,
and so truly and justly make that that they work; The Merchants must so sell
their Ware, and so labor to bring in strange Commodities; The Husbandmen must
pay such Rent, and so sell Things that come of the increase of the Ground, that
the Hands, and the Legs, that is to say, the States of Gentlemen and of
Servingmen may well do the Commonwealth that Service they ought to do. And as
the Gentlemen and Servingmen ought to be provided for, so ought not they
neither to have so much as they have in France, where the Peasantry is of no
value, neither yet meddle in other Occupations, for the Arms and Legs does
never draw the whole Blood from the Liver, but leaves it sufficient to work
on; neither does meddle in any kind of engendring of Blood. No nor no one part
of the Body does serve for two Occupations; even so neither the Gentleman ought
to be a Farmer, nor the Merchant an Artificer, but to have his Art
particularly. Furthermore, no Member in a well-fashioned and whole Body, is too
big for the proportion of the Body: So must there be in a well-ordered
Commonwealth, no Person that shall have more than the proportion of the
Country will bear; so it is hurtful immoderately to enrich any one Part. I
think this Country can bear no Merchant to have more Land than 100 l. no
Husbandman nor Farmer worth above 100 or 200 l. no Artifice above 100 Merks; no
Labourer much more than he spends. I speak now generally, and in such Cases
may fail in one Particular; but this is sure, This Commonwealth may not bear
one Man to have more than two Farms, than one Benefice, than 2000 Sheep, and
one kind of Art to live by. Wherefore as in the Body no part has too much, nor
too little, so in a Commonwealth ought every part to have ad victum and non ad
saturitatem. And there is no Part admitted in the Body that does not work and
take pains, so ought there no part of the Commonwealth to be but laboursome in
his Vocation. The Gentleman ought to labor in Service in his Country; the
Servingman ought to wait diligently on his Master; the Artificer ought to
labor in his Work; the Husbandman in Tilling the Ground; the Merchant in
passing the Tempests; but the Vagabonds ought clearly to be banished, as is the
superfluous Humor of the Body, that is to say, the Spittle and Filth, which
because it is for no use, it is put out by the strength of Nature. This is the
true ordering of the state of a well-fashioned Commonwealth, That every Part
do obey one Head, one Governor, one Law, as all Parts of the Body obey the
Head, agree among themselves, and one not to eat another up through greediness,
but that we see that Order, Moderation, and Reason, bridle the Affections. But
this is most of all to be had in a Commonwealth well-ordered, That the Laws
and Ordinances be well executed, duly obeyed, and ministered without corruption.
Now having seen how things ought to be, let us first see how now they be
ordered, and in what state they stand now, and then go forward to seek a Remedy.

The first Point in ordering the Commonwealth we touched, was, That the
Gentlemen, Noblemen, and Servingmen, should stand stoutly to the defense of
their Superior and Governor, and should be painful in ordering their Country;
which thing, although in some part, and the most part, be well (thanks be to
God) yet in some parts is not absolutely, which I shall show hereafter
particularly.

But the second Point, for maintenance of the State of Landed Men, is
ill-looked to; for that State of Gentlemen and Noblemen, which is truly to be
termed the State of Nobles, has alonely not exercised the Gain of living: for
Merchants, have enhaunced their Ware; Farmers have enhaunced their Corn and
Cattle; Laborers their Wages; Artificers the price of their Wormanship; and
Mariners and Boatsmen their Hire for Service, whereby they recompense the loss
of things they buy; but the most part of true Gentlemen (I mean not these
Farming Gentlemen, nor Clarking Knights) have little or nothing increased their
Rents; yet their Housekeeping is dearer, their Meat is dearer, their Liveries
dearer, their Wages greater; which thing at length, if speedy Remedy be not
had, will bring that State into utter Ruin, Quod absit.

The Artificers work falsely; the Clothiers use deceit in Cloth; the Masons in
Building; the Clockmakers in their Clocks; the Joiner in his working of Timber,
and so forth all other almost, to the intent they would have Men oftener come to
them for amending their Things, and so have more Gain, although at the
beginning they take out of measure. The Merchants adventure not to bring in
strange Commodities, but loiter at home, send forth small Hoyes with two or
three Mariners, occupy exchange of Money, buy and sell Victual, steal out
Bullion, Corn, Victual, Wood, and suchlike things, out of the Realm, and sell
their Ware unreasonably. The Husbandmen and Farmers take their Ground at a
small Rent, and dwell not on it, but let it to poor Men for triple the Rent
they take it for, and sell their Flesh, Corn, Milk, Butter, etc. at
unreasonable prices. The Gentleman, constrained, by Necessity and Poverty,
becomes a Farmer, a Grasier, or a Sheep-master. The Grasier, the Farmer, the
Merchants become Landed-men, and call themselves Gentlemen, though they be
Churls; yea, the Farmer will have ten Farms, some twenty, and will be a
Pedlar-Merchant. The Artificer will leave the Town, and for his more Pastimes,
will live in the Country; yea, and more than that, will be a Justice of Peace,
and will think scorn to have it denied him; so Lordly be they nowadays: for
now they are not content with 2000 Sheep, but they must have 20000, or else
they think themselves not well; they must have twenty mile square their own
Land, or full of their Farms, and four or five Crafts to live by is too little,
such Hellhounds be they. For Idle Persons, there were never I think more than
be now; the Wars, Men think is the cause thereof, such Persons can do nothing
but Rob and Steal; but slack execution of the Laws has been the chiefest sore
of all; the Laws have been manifestly broken, the Offenders banished, and
either by Bribery, or foolish Pity, escaped punishment. The Dissension, and
Disagreement, both for private Matters, and also in Matters of Religion, has
been no little cause, but the principal has been the disobedient and
contentious talking and doing of the foolish and fond People, which for lack of
teaching, have wandered, and broken wilfully and disobediently the Laws of this
Realm. The Lawyers also, and Judges, have much offended in Corruption and
Bribery.

Furthermore, they do nowadays much use to forestall, not only private
Markets of Corn and Victual, whereby they enhaunce the price thereof, but also
send to the Sea too, aboard Ships, and take the Wine, Sugar, Dates, or any
other Ware, and bring it to London, where they sell at double the price. What
shall I say of those that buy and sell Offices of Trust, that impropriate
Benefices, that destroy Timber; that not considering the sustaining of Men of
their Corn, turn Till Ground to Pasture; that use excess in Apparel, in Diet,
and in building of Enclosures of Wastes and Commons; of those that cast false
and seditious Bills; but that the thing is so tedious, long, and lamentable to
entreat of the Particulars, that I am weary to go any further in the
Particulars; wherefore I will cease, having told the worst, because the best
will save it self.

Now I will begin to entreat of a Remedy. The Ill in this Commonwealth, as I
have before said, stands in deceitful working of Artificers, using of
Exchange and Usury, making vent with Hoyes only into Flanders; conveying of
Bullion, Lead, Bell-mettle, Copper, Wood, Iron, Fish, Corn, and Cattle, beyond
Sea; inhauncing of Rents; using no Arts to live by; keeping of many Sheep, and
many Farms; idleness of People; disobedience of the lower sort; buying and
selling of Offices, Impropriations, Benefices; turning Till Ground to Pasture;
exceeding in Apparel, Diet, and Building; enclosing of Commons; casting of ill
and seditious Bills.

These Sores must be cured with these Medicines or Plasters. 1. Good
Education. 2. Devising of good Laws. 3. Executing the Laws justly, without
respect of Persons. 4. Example of Rulers. 5. Punishing of Vagabonds and idle
Persons. 6. Encouraging the Good. 7. Ordering well the Customers. 8. Engendring
Friendship in all parts of the Commonwealth. These be the chief Points that
tend to order well the whole Commonwealth.

And for the first, as it is in order first, so it seems to be in dignity and
degree; for Horace says very wisely, Quo est muta recens servabit odorem
Testa diu --
With whatsoever thing the New Vessel is imbued, it will long keep the savor,
says Horace; meaning, That for the most part Men be as they be brought up, and
Men keep longest the favor of their first bringing up. Wherefore seeing that
it seems so necessary a thing, We will show our device herein. Youth must be
brought up, some in Husbandry, some in Working, Graving, Gilding, Joining,
Printing, making of Clothes, even from their tenderest Age, to the intent they
may not, when they come to Man's Estate, loiter as they do now adays, and
neglect, but think their Travail sweet and honest. And for this purpose would I
wish that Artificers and others were either commanded to bring up their Sons in
like Trade, or else had some Places appointed them in every good Town, where
they should be Apprentices, and bound to certain kind of Conditions. Also that
those Vagabonds that take Children and teach them to beg, should, according to
their demerits, be worthily punished. This shall well ease and remedy the
deceitful working of Things, disobedience of the lower Sort, casting of
Seditious Bills, and will clearly take away the Idleness of People.

2. Devising of good Laws, I have showed my Opinion heretofore, what Statutes I
think most necessary to be enacted this Sessions; nevertheless I would wish,
that beside them hereafter, when time shall serve, the superfluous and tedious
Statutes were brought into one Sum together, and made more plain and short, to
the intent that Men might the better understand them; which thing shall much
help to advance the profit of the Commonwealth.

3. Nevertheless when all these Laws be made, established, and enacted, they
serve to no purpose, except they be fully and duly executed. By whom? By those
that have authority to execute; that is to say, the Noblemen, and the Justices
of Peace. Wherefore I would wish, that after this Parliament were ended, those
Noblemen, except a few that should be with Me, went to their Countries, and
there should see the Statutes fully and duly executed; and that those Men
should be put from being Justices of Peace, that be touched or blotted with
those Vices that be against these new Laws to be established; for no Man that
is in fault himself, can punish another for the same offense. Turpe est Doctori
cum culpa redarguit ipsum. And these Justices being put out, there is no doubt
for execution of the Laws.

Desunt caetera. Number 3. A Reformation of the Order of the Garter; Translated
out of English into Latin by King Edward.
EEwardus sextus Dei Gratia Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Rex, etc. Cotton
Libr. Nero C. 10.
Omnibus qui praesentes videbunt Literas Salutem. Serenissimi Majores nostri
Reges Angliae deliberantes and secumipsis cogitantes, de eo officio quo uti
debeant erga Deum, Patriam, and eos qui suae ditioni erant subjecti, satis
facile invenerunt nihil tam ad suum officium pertinere quam ut bonos, fortes,
magnanimos, prudentes and claros viros (pro singularibus eorum meritis) honor
gloriaque afficerent, and amicitiam, societatem, consensionem quandam in bonis
rebus inter omnes, praecipue vero inter pares foverent. Honorem enim (ut certe
est) praemium virtutis judicabant; concordiam vero fundamentum and auctricem
rerumpublicarum existimabant. Haec igitur illis perpendentibus, optimum visum
est constituere societatem coetum aut conventum aliquem eorum, qui in
domesticis pacis negotiis optime se gesserant, and in militaribus pugnis
fortiter and prudenter se exercuerant. Hosque voluerunt in signum concordiae
and unitatis Tibias fascia quadam circumligare, quasi eo facto divulgantes sese
non dubitare Patriae Religionis and Domini causa vitam and bona profundere,
eamque ob causam Ordinem Garterii nominaverunt. Quem quidem Ordinem omnium voce
celebratum, serpens ille humano generi infestus Satanas conspiciens, tantopere
ad virtutem homines incitare, conatus est poenitus delere. In quo tantum
elaboravit, tam diligenter praedam quaesivit, tam ingeniose and callide homines
decepit, ut tandem repliverit decreta hujus Societatis multis ambiguis,
superstitiosis, Papisticis and inter se contrariis sententiis. Putandum enim
erit, quod si Evangelii lux non apparuisset, de isto Ordine penitus actum
fuisset, saltem de his rebus in Ordine in quo bonorum nomen meruissent. Indies
enim crevit malum; Nos autem summopere commoti, antiquitate, magnificentia and
pulchritudine hujus Ordinis omnibus viribus elaboravimus, ad eum reducendum ad
statum pristinum. Quapropter in caetu quodam celebrato die Anno Dom. 1551 Regni
vero nostri.

Ubi permulti Milites ejusdem Ordinis aderant, constitutum erat a nobis,
Autoritate eorundem Militum, quod hi articuli infrascripti firmissime
observabuntur, ut hujus Ordinis Decreta.

1. Primum Conclusum Statutumque existit, quod hic ordo posthac appellabitur
Ordo Garterii; non Ordo Sancti Georgii: nec idem Georgius amplius posthac
appellabitur; nec nominabitur Patronus Ordinis, ne ille honor qui soli Deo
debeatur, cuidam creaturae attribuatur.

2. Item Milites circumligabunt Tibias Garteriis (ut vulgo dicunt) quibus
inscribunt haec verba. Honi soit qui mal y pense; in collis autem cathenarum
more gerent equitem sculptum, altera manu tenentis gladium penetrantem librum,
in quem gladium scribetur Protectio, in Librum vero Verbum Dei, altera autem
Clipeum in quem inscribetur Fides, hac re significantes se concordes
protectores Verbi Divini and Fideles existere. Cum enim ab Georgio eodem
auferetur honor ille, quod Patronus amplius Ordinis non erit, Milites non
amplius gestabunt eundem divum, post Festum Michaelis proxime sequentis.

3. Arma tamen Ordinis maneant in eodem Statu quo antea manner sunt solita,
viz. Crux rubea in Campo Argenteo.

4. Numerus Militum erunt 24 praeter praefectum, si enim plures existant tum
minori in honor habebitur Collegam esse Ordinis, hi autem Milites jam existunt.

5. Quod Rex Angliae, Haeredes and Successores ejus, erunt hujus Ordinis
Praefecti quemadmodum and solitum est antehac. Et quia saepe oriuntur
ambiguitates contentiones and mutationes temporum; propter quas aut tolli, aut
definiri, aut adjungi debent aliqua decreta hujus Ordinis, saepe etiam in
mortuorum Militum locum alii substituantur necesse est: Idcirco conclusum est,
quod licet eidem Regi Angliae, aliqua tali re mota, Advocatis sex ex Sociis
Ordinis, cum eorum consensu, celebrato in loco aliquo, mutare, definire,
addere, aut detrahere ab hoc Ordine; ut illis bonum videbitur, and etiam
eligere, in numerum Militum, alios omnes, qui sunt generosi, insignia
gestantes, a part Patrum and Matrum per tres progenies sive generationes
quoscunque arbitrabuntur maxim idoneos.

6. Omnes hi qui rei sunt inventi Capitalium Criminum, aut ignave a praelio
aufugerunt, aut Notabili Crimine sunt contaminati, quanquam mors illis non
infligatur, tamen Milites Ordinis esse desinent. Aequum enim qui esse potest,
enim qui insigni and foedo aliquo vitio sit contaminatus, in bonorum Societate
aut caetu manner. Capitalia vero sint Crimina, pro quibus leges judicant debere
mortis paenam subire.

7. Si autem idem Ordinis praefectus intelligat locum aliquem vacuum existere,
tum mittet ad Milites vicinos and propinquos ut certo quodam die adsint, hasque
literas mittet triduum ante diem celebrandi caetus; nisi forte adsint plus quam
sex Milites.

8. Qui Milites Congregati in caetu quodam vestibus Ordinis induti, si locus
aliquis sit vacuus, scribent unusquisque nomina trium Principium: viz.
Imperatorum, Regum, Archiducum, Ducum, Marchionum, Comitum, aut Vicecomitum,
nomina tria Baronum, sive Dominorum, and nomina trium Militum Aureatorum quos
Baccalaureos Milites vulgo dicunt.

9. Cum nomina sunt scripta, tum Rex Angliae Ordinis praefectus ex eorum numero
eliget quem maxim idoneum arbitrabitur ex antiqua illustrique familia natum,
aut qui suis gestis praeclaris nomen famam and honorem summum acquisiverit, nam
in electione Militum divitias respicere nullo modo oportet, sed virtutem and
generis Nobilitatem, primo autem in loco virtutem.

10. Miles electus, cum proxime adsit; adducetur in Domum ubi caetus celebratur
per duos Collegas Ordinis, Praefectus induet eum cathena sive Collario Rosarum
circumligatorum fasciis cum sculpta equitis imagine, ut praedixi, appendente;
duo vero Collegae fascia, sive ut vulgo dicunt, Garterio tibiam circumligabunt:
Tradetur etiam electo Militi liber horum decretorum.

11. Miles vero electus ibit Windesoram, and Praefectus Ordinis mittet ad illum
substitutum suum and duos coadjutores, qui collocabunt eum, si fieri possit,
sine aliorum Militum detrimento in sede, ejus gradui Nobilitatis apta and
accomoda, and secundum veterem modum vestes recipiet (quas vulgo dicunt
Anglice, The Mantel, the Cirtel, and the Hood) and his vestibus indutus audiet
preces divinas in sede illi constituta, simul cum substituto and coadjutoribus
Communionem recipiens.

12. Post preces absolutas recipiet hoc jusjurandum; se pro viribus velle
sustinere and defendere omnes honores, titulos, querelas and Dominia Regis
Angliae Ordinis Praefecti; velle etiam (quantum in se est) protegere amare and
colere Divini Verbi studiosos; velle deponere humanas Traditiones and augere
Gloriam and Honorem Dei.

13. Ille ordo qui institutus fuit olim de insignibus, gladiis, galaeis and
armis reponendis in cellis aut sedibus, maneat in priori forma.

14. Adhaec cum Dedicatio Ordinis auferatur a divo Georgio, and si tempus anni
non sit idoneum ad multos homines cogendos, and ex patria accersendos,
praesertim vero ne ipsam dedicationem Verbis auferentes re videremur retinere,
idcirco statutum est caetum caelebratum fore, ut olim in Anglia die Divi
Georgii; sic nunc primo Die Sabbati, and primo Die Dominico in mense Decembris,
nisi forte primus dies mensis Decembris sit dies Dominicus; tunc autem
celebrabitur primo Die Sabbati, and secundo die Dominico.

15. Primo vero Die Sabbati Milites qui adsunt (omnes autem adesse debent nisi
forte habeant licitam excusationem) audient preces Vespertinas institutas
Autoritate Parliamenti vestibus Ordinis induti, sedentes quisque in sede
constituta. Miles autem electus non collocatus in sede stabit direct versus
eum locum ubi collocabitur.

16. Die Dominico sequenti in aurora audient supradicti Milites preces, and qui
se paratos facere possint, Communionem recipient, vesperi etiam audient preces
vespertinas.

17. Milites autem absentes tenebuntur eadem facere in suis aedibus toto hoc
tempore vestibus Ordinis induti.

18. Praeterea Milites qui adsunt vestibus Ordinis induti prandebunt omnes, ab
uno latere sedentes in eodem gradu quo collocantur Windesorae, in cellis in
caetum etiam intrabunt hoc die, ut si, quid faciendum sit, perficiant.

19. Cantatores and Praebendarii fruentur suis possessionibus durante Vita,
post mortem autem eorum conferentur in Concionatores in castro Windesorae.

20. Pauperes autem qui in eodem Collegio manent, habebunt omnia sua pristino
more, loci autem conferentur in Milites vulneratos aut admodum senes viros,
solum privabuntur superstitiosis and vanis Caeremoniis quibus uti sunt soliti
ut Oratione pro defunctis, etc. Quemadmodum vero soliti sunt missae adesse sic
jam adsint in precibus constitutis.

21. Sunt autem certae summae Argenti quae solent impendi cum moriantur Milites
Ordinis.

l. s. d. A Rege Angliae 08 06 8 A Rege peregrino 06 13 4 A Principe 05 16 8 A
Duce 05 00 0 A Marchione 03 13 0 A Comite 02 10 0 A Vice Count 02 01 8 A
Barone 01 13 4 A Milite 00 16 8 Baccalaureo

Adhaec cum Milites eligantur solvendae sunt hae summae Peccuniae.

l. s. d. A Rege Angliae 30 00 0 A Rege peregrino 20 00 0 A Principe 13 06 8 A
Duce 10 00 0 A Marchione 08 06 8 A Comite 06 13 8 A Vice Comite 05 16 8 A
Barone 05 00 0 A Milite 03 06 8

Hae praedictae summae Argenti colligantur and quotannis pauperibus
destribuantur ut interdum solitum est fieri.

22. Rex Angliae exsolvat Pecuniam quam peregrini Principes debebunt propter
articulum supradictum.

23. Sed quia difficile est omnia haec sine Ministris idoneis fieri, igitur
constitutum est fore quatuor Ordinis hujus Ministros. Cancellarius, Annotator
sive Register, Praecessor qui nigram virgam gestabit, and praecipuus Rex
armorum qui ab Ordine nomen obtinebit Garter.

24. Sigillum Ordinis habebit ex uno latere Arma Angliae and Franciae simul cum
Armis Ordinis circumligata hac circumscriptione, Verbum Domini manet in
aeternum, ex altera part equitem sculptum, ut Milites gestabunt circumligatum
fascia sive Garterio.

25. Hoc sigillo Cancellarius sigillabit omnia decreta, licentias,
constitutiones, literas and reliqua omnia quae ad ordinem praedictum pertinent
aut ullo modo debent pertinere.

26. Annotator in magno Libro Annotabit Latin quibus temporibus quisque miles
fuerit electus, quibus mortuus, quaenam sancita erant decreta, quaenam
dissoluta, and si quae erunt alia pertinentia ad Ordinem supradictum, hunc
autem librum relinquet in Castro Windesorae suo successori in eodem officio.

27. Rex Heraoldorum and insignium Garter servabit nomina and cognomina arma
and insignia cujusque Militis electi, eundem librum relinquens suo successori,
and si quae sit ambiguitas de armis, ipse dijudicabit.

28. Praecessor Ordinis gestans virgam nigram praeibit ordinem and ostium
custodiet, and eandem autoritatem habebit, qua antehac usus est. Quod siquis
Militum contumeliose and graviter offenderit, and ejus criminis in cetu fuerit
convictus, Praecessor Ordinis cum Rege Heroaldorum eum exuent catena and
Garterio.

29. Adhaec cum aliquis peregrinus Rex in Militum numerum substituatur and
eligatur, Caeremoniis hujus Ordinis non detinebitur, sed prout placuerit.

30. Post electionem vero praefectus Ordinis mittet duos Milites ejusdem
Ordinis, qui post preces in ejus patria vulgares induent eum vestibus illis
quae solent gestari, viz. Anglice, The Mantel, the Cirtel, and the Hood. In
collum etiam imponent catenam rosarium cum equite sculpto appendente and fascia
vulgo dicto Garterio.

31. Postea per procuratorem in sede collocabitur, nullum omnino juramentum
recipiens, nec preces unquam alias quam solitas audiens.

32. Quod Rex Angliae possit dispensare and veniam dare omittendi ullas
Caeremonias, si causa postulet.

33. Quod hi articuli ut monumenta decreta and Leges Ordinis reponentur in
Collegio Windesorae, omnes autem his contrariae penitus abrogabuntur.

FINIS.
A Paper concerning a Free Mart in England.
Number 4. The Reasons and Causes why it is now most necessary to have a Mart
in England.
1. BEcause our vent of Clothes might be open in all Wars.

2. Because our Merchants Goods might be out of danger of Strangers, without
fear of arresting for every light Cause.

3. Because it would much enrich the Realm; for as a Market enricheth a Town,
so does a Mart enrich a Realm.

4. Because for at a need, round Sums of Money might be of them borrowed that
haunt the Mart.

5. Because we should have a great multitude of Ships strangers to serve in the
Wars.

6. Because all strangers Goods, when War is made, should be in our danger.

7. Because we should buy all things at the first hand of Strangers, whereas
now the Spaniards sell to the Flemings their Wares, and the Flemings to us.

8. Because the Towns toward the Seaside should be much more populous.

9. Because whereas now they bring Tapestry, Points, Glasses, and Laces, they
would then bring in Bullion, and other substantial Merchandice, to the intent
to have our Cloth and our Tin.

10. Because we should take from our Enemies their Power, and make that they
should borrow no Money of Merchants but when we list, at least no great Sum of
Money.

The Causes why this Time is most Commodious to erect a Mart in.
1. The Wars between the French King and the Emperor, and the Ships of either
side, makes the Italians, Genoa's, Portugals, and Spaniards, to forbear their
Trade to Antwerp. 2. The Frenchmen, the Stadts, the Sprusses, and Ships of
Eastland, being against the Emperor, will not come neither. 3. The French King
invading Lorrain, and fearing Flanders. 4. And the Almains lying on the River
of Rhene, stopeth the Course of Merchants out of Italy to Antwerp, and also
Frankfort. 5. The putting of Men of War in the Town, makes the Merchants to
forbear their Traffic, and to look to their Lives. 6. The breach of the last
Tempest is like, they say, to make the Channel uncertain, and the Haven naught.
7. The stop of the Exchange to Lions, will make many Flemings Bankrupts. These
things will decay the Marts of Antwerp and Frankfort. But these Nations cannot
live without a Vent, therefore they will now most willingly come hither if they
had a Free Mart.

2. It were an easier matter to come to Southampton for the Spaniards,
Britanes, Vascoins, Lombards, Geneoese, Normands, and Italians, than to go to
Antwerp.

3. It were easier for the Merchants of the Eastland, the Sprusses, the Danes,
Swedens, and Norvegians, to come to Hull than to Antwerp.

4. Southampton is a better Port than Antwerp.

5. The Flemings have allured Men to make a Mart there with their Privileges,
having but very little Commodities; much easier shall we do it, having Cloth,
Tin, Seacoal, Lead, Bellmettal, and such other Commodities, as few Realms
Christian have the like; nor they when they began had no such opportunity.

How the Mart will be brought to pass.
1. Our Merchants are to be stayed from a Mart or two, under pretense that they
abstain because of the Imposition.

2. Then Proclamation must be made in diverse places of the Realm where
Merchants resort, That there shall be a free Mart kept at Southampton, with
these Liberties and Customs.

1. The time of the Mart to begin after Whitsontide, and to hold on five weeks;
by which means it shall not let St. James's Fair at Bristol, nor Bartholomew
Fair at London.

2. All Men coming to the Mart shall have free going and free coming, without
Arresting, except in cases of Treason, Murder, or Felony.

3. For the time of the Mart, all sorts of Men shall pay but half the Custom
they do in other places of the Realm.

4. No Shipping shall be from any other place from South Wales to Essex during
that time.

5. In the Shires of Hampshire, Wiltshire, Sussex, Surrey, Kent, Dorsetshire,
That no Bargain shall be made of Wares during that time but in the Mart Town.

6. A Court to correct Offenders, with Liberties thereto.

7. Some one Commodity must be assigned to the Mart, or some one kind of Cloth.

8. The Merchants of the Staple must be bargained withal, and contented with
some honest Offer, to the intent by their Liberties they may not let the Mart.

9. Some more Liberties must be given to the Inhabitants of Southampton; and if
Money may be spared, some must be lent them to begin their Trade withal.

10. Our Ships on the Sea must look as well as they may, observing the
Treaties, to the safeguard of the Merchants when they come.

11. If this prove well, then may another be made at Hull, to begin after
Stowrbridg-Fair, to the intent they may return before the great Ices come to
their Seas.

The Discommodities and Letts to the Mart to be kept in England.
1. BEcause Strangers lack access hither by Land, which they have at Antwerp.

2. The ill-working of our Cloths, which makes them less esteemed.

3. The abundance of our Cloths in Flanders will make them less sought for here.

4. The Merchants have established their dwelling-places at Antwerp.

5. That other Nations will stay their coming hither for a while by the
Emperor's Commandment.

6. The denial of the Request of the Merchants of the Stiliard, will somewhat
let the Mart, if it be not looked to.

7. The poverty and littleness of the Town of Southampton.

8. The goodliness of the Rhine.

The Remedies and Answers thereunto.
To the first Point.
1. At this time when the Mart should begin at Southampton, the French King and
the Almains shall stop the intercourse by Land, so that nothing shall come that
way but in great danger.

2. When War shall be made against us, then our Navy may defend them.

3. As the Town of Southampton lacks the Commodity of the Access of
Merchandise by Land, so it has this Commodity, that there can be no access of
Enemies by Land, which may be at Antwerp, and Men think will be this Year,
which is a great safety to the Merchants.

4. The Traffic that comes by Land will not much diminish the Mart, for it
is only almost the Venetians Traffic, who shall much easilier come hither by
Sea, than to Antwerp, and with less danger of the Seas.

To the second Point.
1. The ill-making of our Clothes will be meet to be looked on this Parliament,
and order thereupon to be given. The Matter is come to some ripeness already,
the Upper House has one Bill, and the Nether House has another in good
forwardness.

2. As ill as they be made, the Flemings do at this time desire them
wonderfully, offering rather to pay the Imposition of the Emperor than to lack
them.

To the third Point.
1. It were very necessary that the Ships that shall be hereafter going were
stayed till the Mart were come to some ripeness.

2. The Clothes hereafter might be bought up with our Money here, and conveied
to Southampton, to be there uttered at the Mart time, and so it should help the
Mart very well.

To the fourth Point.
1. The danger of their Lives, which they now fear very much, will make them
seek another Harbor to rest in more safely.

2. They came from Bruges to Antwerp only for the English Commodities, although
they were settled at Bruges.

3. They have a great Commodity to come to Southampton, and a great fear of
spoiling to drive them from Antwerp.

4. The Merchants never assign to themselves such a Mansion, but for more gain
they will leave that, and take another.

To the fifth Point.
1. The Emperor is at this time so driven to his Shifts, that neither he shall
be able to attend the stay of Money from coming to the Mart, neither if he were
able to attend, could, I think, do it, now the Flemings being put in such fear
as they be of the loss of all they have.

2. The Flemings and the Spaniards which be under him, can hardlier be without
us than we without them, and therefore they would hardly be brought to forbear
our Traffic.

To the sixth Point.
1. It were good the Stiliard-men were for this time gently answered, and that
it were seen, whether by any gentle offer of some part of their Liberties,
again they might be brought to ship their Wares to the Mart. The Frenchmen also
I think would easily be brought to come hither, having now none other Traffic
but hither, these two Nations would suffice to begin a Mart for the first part.

To the seventh Point.
1. It is not the ability of the English Merchants only that makes the Mart,
but it is the resort of other Nations to some one place when they do exchange
their Commodities one with another, for the bargaining will be as well amongst
the Strangers themselves; the Spaniards with the Almains, the Italians with
Flemings, the Venetians with the Danes, etc. as other Nations will bargain with
Us.

2. The Merchants of London, of Bristol, and other places, will come thither
for the Mart time, and traffic.

3. The Merchants will make shift enough for their Lodging.

4. There may be some of these Clothes that shall go hereafter, be bought with
my Money, and so carried to Southampton to be there uttered.

To the eighth Point.
1. Bruges, where the Mart was before, stood not on the River of Rhine, nor
Antwerp does not neither stand on that River.

2. Frankfort Mart may well stand for a Fair in Almain, although Southampton
serve for all Nations that lie on the Seaside; for few of those come to
Frankfort Mart.

Windsor, Sept. 23. Sexto Edwardo Sexti. 1552.
Number 5. The Method in which the Council represented Matters of State to the
King. An Original. Written by Sir William Cecil Secretary of State.
Questions.
1. Whether the King's Majesty shall enter into the Aid of the Emperor?

Answ. He shall.
A Pacto.
1. THe King is bound by the Treaty; and if he will be helped by that Treaty, he
must do the Reciproque.

A periculo vitando.
2. If he do not Aid, the Emperor is like to Ruin, and consequently the House of
Burgundy come to the French Possession, which is perilous to England; and
herein the greatness of the French King is dreadful.

Religio Christiana.
3. The French King brings the Turk into Christendom, and therefore that
exploit to be stayed.

Periculum violati pacti.
4. If the Emperor, for Extremity, should agree now with the French, then our
Peril were double greater. 1. The Emperor's Offense for lack of Aid. 2. The
French King's Enterprises toward us; and in this Peace, the Bishop of Rome's
devotion toward us.

Pro Repub. and Patria.
5. Merchants be so evil used, that both for the loss of Goods and Honor, some
Remedy must be sought.

Pericula consequentia.
6. The French King's Proceedings be suspicious to the Realm, by breaking and
burning of our Ships, which be the old strength of this Isle.

Declaration of Stuckley's Tale.

Answer, He shall not.
Difficile quasi impossible.
1. The Aid is to be chargeable for the Cost, and almost to be executed is
impossible.

Solitudo in periculis.
2. If the Emperor should die in this Confederacy, we should be left alone in
the War.

Amicorum suspitio vitanda.
3. It may be the German Protestants might be more offended with this
Conjunction with the Emperor, doubting their own Causes.

Sperandum been ab amicis.
4. The Amity with France is to be hoped will amend and continue; and the
Commissioners coming may perchance restore.

Corrolarium of a mean way. Judicium.
1. So to help the Emperor as we may also join with other Christian Princes,
and conspire against the French King, as a common Enemy to Christendom.

Reasons for the Common Conjunction.
1. The cause is common, Auxilia communia.
and therefore there will be more Parties to it.

2. It shall avoid the chargeable entry into Aid with the Emperor, Sumptus
vitandi.
according to the Treaties.

3. If the Emperor should die or break off, Amicorum copia.
yet it is most likely some of the other Princes and Parties will remain, so as
the King's Majesty shall not be alone.

4. The Friendship shall much advance the King's other Causes in Christendom.
Dignitas causae.


5. It shall be most honorable to break with the French King for this common
Quarrel of Christendom. Pro fide and Religione.


Reasons against this Conjunction.
1. The Treaty must be with so many Parties, Inter multos nihil secretum.
that it can neither be speedily or secretly concluded.

2. If the Matter be revealed, and nothing concluded, Amicitiae irritatae.
then consider the French King's Offense, and so may he at his leisure be
provoked to practice the like Conjunction against England with all the Papists.

Conclusion.
1. The Treaty to be made with the Emperor, The King's Hand.
and by the Emperor's means with other Princes.

2. The Emperor's Acceptance to be understanded, before we treat any thing
against the French King.

Number 6. A Method for the Proceedings in the Council, written with King
Edward's Hand.
The Names of the whole Council.
The Bishop of Canterbury The Bp of Ely Lord Chancellor. The Lord Treasurer The
Duke of Northumberland. The Lord Privy Seal. The Duke of Suffolk. The Marquess
of Northampton. The Earl o^ Shrewsbury. The Earl of Westmore^^nd. The Earl of
Huntington. The Earl of Pembr^^k. The Viscount Hereford. The Lord Admiral. The
Lord Chamberlain. The Lord Cobham. The Lord Rich. Mr. Comptroller. Mr.
Treasurer. Mr. Vicechamberlain. Mr. Secretary Petre. Mr. Secretary Cecil. Sir
Philip Hobbey. Sir Robert Bows. Sir John Gage. Sir John Mason. Mr. Ralph
Sadler. Sir John Baker. Judge Broomley. Judge Montague. Mr. Wotton. Mr. North.
Those that be now called in Commission.
The Bishop of London. The Bishop of Norwich. Sir Thomas Wroth. Sir Richard
Cotton. Sir Walter Mildmay. Mr. Solicitor. Mr. Gosnold. Mr. Cook. Mr. Lucas.
The Counselors abovenamed to be thus divided into several Commissions and
Charges. First, For hearing of those Suits which were wont to be brought to the
whole Board.
The Lord Privy Seal. The Lord Chamberlain. The Bishop of London. The Lord
Cobham. Mr. Hobbey. Sir John Mason. Sir Ralph Sadler. Mr. Wotton. Mr. Cook,
Masters of Requests. Mr. Lucas, Masters of Requests.
Those Persons to hear the Suits, to answer the Parties, to make Certificate
what Suits they think meet to be granted; and upon answer received of their
Certificate received, to dispatch the Parties: Also to give full answer of
denial to those Suits that be not reasonable nor convenient: Also to dispatch
all Matters of Justice, and to send to the common Courts those Suits that be
for them.

The Calling of Forfeits done against the Laws, for punishing the Offenders and
breakers of Proclamations that now stand in force.

The Lord Privy Seal. The Earl of Pembrook. The Lord Chamberlain. Sir Thomas
Wroth. Sir Robert Bows. Mr. Secretary Petre. Mr. Hobbey. Mr. Wotton. Sir John
Baker. Mr. Solicitor. Mr. Gosnald.
These shall first see what Laws Penal, and what Proclamations, standing now in
force, are most meet to be executed, and shall bring a Certificate thereof.
Then they shall enquire in the Countries how they are disobeyed, and first,
shall begin with the greatest Offenders, and so afterward punish the rest,
according to the pains set forth. They shall receive also the Letters out of
the Shires, of Disorders there done, and punish the Offenders.

For the State.
The Bishop of Canterbury. The Lord Chancellor. The Lord Treasurer. The Duke of
Northumberland. The Duke of Suffolk. The Lord Privy Seal. The Marquess of
Northampton. The Earl of Shrewsbury. The Earl of Pembrook. The Earl of
Westmoreland. The Lord Admiral. The Viscount Hereford. The Lord Chamberlain.
Mr. Vicechamberlain. Mr. Treasurer and Comptroller. Mr. Cecil. Mr. Petre. Mr.
Wotton. Sir Philip Hobbey. Sir Robert Bows.
These to attend the Matters of the State, I will sit with them once a week to
hear the debating of things of most importance.

These Persons underwritten shall look to the state of all the Courts,
especially of the new erected Courts, as the Augmentation, the First Fruits and
Tithes, the Wards; and shall see the Revenues answered at the half Years end,
and shall consider with what superfluous Charges they be burdened, and thereof
shall make a Certificate which they shall deliver.

The Lord Chamberlain. The Bishop of Norwich. Sir Thomas Wroth. Sir Robert
Bows. Sir Richard Cotton. Sir Walter Mildmay. Mr. Gosnald.
I understand it is a Member of the Commission that follows, but yet those
shall do well to do it for the present, because the other shall have no leisure
till they have called in the Debts; after which done, they may sit with them.

Those that now be in Commission for the Debts, to take Accounts of all
Paiments since the 35th of the King that dead is, after that they have done
this Commission they are now in hand with.

Likewise for the Bullwarks, the Lord Chamberlain, Mr. Treasurer, and Mr.
Comptroller, to be in Commission in their several Jurisdictions.

The rest of the Council, some go home to their Countries straight after the
Parliament, some be sore sick that they shall not be able to attend any thing,
which when they come, they shall be admitted of the Council. Also that these
Councils that sit apart. Also that those of the Council that have these several
Commissions.

Desunt quedam.
15. Jan. 1552.
This seems not to be the King's Hand, but is interlined in many places by him.

Certain Articles devised and delivered by the King's Majesty, for the quicker,
better, and more orderly dispatch of Causes, by his Majesty's Privy Council.
Cotton Libr. Nero. C. 10.
1. HIs Majesty wills, that all Suits, Petitions, and common Warrants
delivered to his Privy Council, be considered by them on the Mundays in the
Morning, and answered also on the Saturdays at Afternoon; and that that day,
and none others, be assigned to that purpose.

2. That in answering of these Suits and Bills of Petition, heed be taken that
so many of them as pertain to any Court of his Majesty's Laws be as much as may
be referred to those Courts where by order they are triable; such as cannot be
ended without them, be with expedition determined.

3. That in making of those Warrants for Money that pass by them, it be foreseen
that those Warrants be not such as may already be dispatched by Warrant dormant,
lest by means of such Warrants, the Accounts should be uncertain.

4. His Majesty's pleasure is, That on the Provided that on Sundays they be
present at Common Prayer.
Sundays, they intend the Public Affairs of this Realm; they dispatch Answers
to Letters for the good order of the Realm, and make full Dispatches of all
Things concluded the Week before.

5. That on the Sunday Night, the Secretaries, or one of them, shall deliver to
his Majesty a Memorial of such Things as are debated to be by his
Privy Council, and then his Majesty to appoint certain of them to be debated on
several days, viz. Monday Afternoon, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday,
Morning.

6. That on Friday at Afternoon, they shall make a Collection of such things as
have been done the four days past; how many of those Articles they have
concluded; how many they debated but not ended; how many the time suffered not
to peruse; and also the principal Reasons that moved them to conclude on such
Matters as seems doubtful.

7. That on Saturday Morning they shall present this Collection to his Majesty,
and know his Pleasure upon such things as they have concluded, and also upon
all the private Suits.

8. That on Sunday Night again, his Majesty having received of the Secretaries
such new Matters as has arisen upon new occasion, with such Matters as his
Council have left, some not determined, and some not debated, shall appoint
what Matters, and on which days shall be determined, the next Week following.

9. That none of them depart his Court for longer than two days, without there
be left here at the least eight of the Council, and that not without giving
notice thereof to the King's Majesty.

10. That they shall make no manner of Assembly or Meeting in Council, without
there be to the number of four at the least.

11. Furthermore, if they be assembled to the number of four, and under the
number of six, then they shall reason and debate things, examine all
Inconveniences and Dangers, and also Commodities on each side; make those
things plain which seem diffuse at the first opening; and if they agree amongst
themselves, then at the next full Assembly of six, they shall make a perfect
conclusion and end with them.

12. Also if there rise such matter of weight, as it shall please the King's
Majesty himself to be at the debating of, then warning shall be given, whereby
the more may be at the debating of it.

13. If such Matter shall happen to rise as shall require long debating and
reasoning, or e're it come to a full conclusion or end, then his Majesty's
Council shall not intermeddle other Causes; nor fall to other Matters for that
day, until they have brought it to some end.

14. When Matters for lack of time be only debated, and yet brought to no end,
then it shall be noted how far, and to what point the Matter is brought, and
which have been the principal Reasons on each side, to the intent when the
Matter is treated or spoken of again, it may the sooner and easilier come to
conclusion.

15. In Matters that be long, tedious, and busy, there may be pointed or
chosen two or three, more or less, as the case shall seem to require, to
prepare, set forth, and make plain the Matters, and to bring report thereof,
whereby the things being less cumbrous and diffuse, may the easilier be
dispatched.

Finally; If upon Advertisements, Letters, or other occasion whatsoever there
arise, Matters of great Importance, that require haste, his Majesty's meaning
is not, but that such Matters be waved, considered, and determined,
notwithstanding the Articles pointed to several days, so that nevertheless this
Order be not generally or commonly broken.

17. That all Warrants for Reward above 40 l. and for his Business or Affairs
above 100 l. pass not but under his Signature.

18. That no private Suit be intermedled with the great Affairs, but heard on
the Mundays before.

19. If there be under four, and a Matter of Expedition arise, they shall
declare it to the King's Majesty, and before him debate it, but not send answer
without it require wonderful haste.

A COLLECTION OF RECORDS, etc.
Number 1. The Character of EDWARD the Sixth, as it is given by Cardanus, lib.
12. de Genituris, de Genitura Edwardi Sexti.
A Derant enim illi gratiae; Linguas enim multas adhuc Puer callebat: Latinam,
Anglicam patriam, Gallicam; non expers, ut audio, Graecae, Italicae and
Hispanicae, and forsan aliarum: Non illi Dialectica deerat, non Naturalis
Philosophiae principia, non Musica: Mortalitatis nostrae imago, gravitas Regiae
Majestatis, indoles tanto Principe digna; In universum magno miraculo humanarum
rerum, tanti ingenii and tantae expectationis, Puer educabatur. Non haec
Rhetorice exornata veritatem excedunt, sed sunt minora.

And afterward.
Fuit in hoc monstrificus puellus: hic linguas jam septem, ut audio,
perdidicerat; propriam, Gallicam and Latinam exact tenebat. Dialecticae non
expers, and ad omnia docilis. Cum illo congressus, decimum quintum adhuc agebat
annum, interrogavit, (Latin non minus quam ego polite and prompte loquebatur)
quid contineant libri tui de rerum varietate rari? Hos enim nomini M. S.
dedicaveram. Tum ego, Cometarum primum causam, diu frustra quaesitam, in primo
capite ostendo. Quaenam, inquit ille? Concursus ego aio, luminis, erraticorum
syderum. At Rex, Quomodo cum diversis motibus astra moveantur, non statim
dissipatur aut movetur illorum motu? At ego, Movetur equidem, sed long
celerius illis, ob diversitatem aspectus, velut in Cristallo and sole cum iris
in pariete relucet. Parva enim mutatio magnam facit loci differentiam. At Rex,
Et quonam pacto absque subjecto illud fieri potest, irridi enim paries
subjectum? Tum ego, velut in lactea via, and luminum reflectione, cum plures
candelae prope accensae medium quoddam lucidum and candidum efficient. Itaque
ex ungue leonem, ut dici solet. Fuit hic in maxima omnium aut bonorum aut
eruditorum expectatione ob ingenuitatem atque suavitatem morum. Prius ceperat
favere artibus quam nosceret, and noscere antequam uti posset. Conatus quidam
humanae conditionis quem non solum Anglia, sed orbis, ereptum immature deflere
debet. Plurimum educationi debueramus, plus ereptum est hominum dolo, fraudeve.
O quam been dixerat ille, Immodicis brevis est aetas and rara senectus.

Specimen vertutis exhibere potuit, non exemplum.

Flete nefas magnum, sed toto flebitis orb
Mortales, vester corruit omnis honor;
Nam regum decus, and juvenum flos, spesque bonorum,
Delitiae saecli, and gloria gentis erat.
Dignus Apollineis Lachrymis, doctaeque Minervae
Flosculus, heu misere concidis ante diem!
Te tumulo dabimus Musae, supremaque flentes
Munera, Melpomene tristia fata cavet.
Ubi gravitas Regia requirebatur, senem vidisses, ut blandus erat and comis
aetatem referebat. Cheli pulsabat, publicis negotiis admovebatur, liberalis
animo, atque in his patrem aemulabatur. Qui dum nimium bonus esse studuit,
malus videri poterat: sed a filio aberat suspicio criminis, indoles
Philosophiae studiis exculta fuit.

Number 2. The Commission which the Archbishop of Canterbury took out for his
Archbishopric.
Regist. Cran. Fol. 28.
EDwardus sextus, Dei Gratiae, Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Rex, Fidei
Defensor, ac in terra Ecclesiae Anglicanae and Hiberniae supremum Caput,
Reverendissimo in Christo Partri, ac praedicto Consiliario nostro, Thomae Cant.
Archiep. salutem. Quandoquidem omnis juris dicendi Autoritas, atque etiam
Jurisdictio omnimodo; tum illa quae Ecclesiastica dicitur, quam secularis, a
regia Potestate velut a supremo Capite, ac omnium Magistratuum infra Regnum
nostrum, font and scaturigine primitus emanaverit; sane illos qui
jurisdictionem hujusmodi antehac non nisi praecario fungebantur beneficium
hujusmodi sic eis ex liberalitate Regia indultum gratis animis agnoscere, idque
Regiae munificentiae solummodo acceptum refer, eique, quoties ejus Majestati
videbitur, cedere convenit. Nos tuis in hac part supplicationibus humilibus
inclinati, and nostrorum subditorum commodis consulere cupientes. Tibi vices
nostras sub modo and forma inferius descriptis committend. fore; teque
licentiand. esse decernimus ad Ordinand. igitur quoscunque infra Dioces. tuam
Cant. ubicunque Oriundos, quos, moribus and literatura praevio diligenti and
rigoroso examine idoneos fore compereris, ac ad omnes etiam sacros and
Presbyteratus Ordines promovend. ordinand. praesentatosque ad beneficia
Ecclesiastica quaecunque infra Dioc. tuam Cant. constituta, si ad curam
Beneficiis hujusmodi iminentem sustinend. habiles reperti fuerint and idonei,
ac non aliter admittend. ac in and de eisdem instituend. and investiend. ac
etiam si res ita exigat, destituend. Beneficiaque Ecclesiastica quaecunque ad
tuam collationem sive dispositionem spectantia and pertinentia Personis idoneis
conferend. atque approband. testamenta and ultimas voluntates. Necnon
administrationes committend. bonorum quorumcunque subditorum nostrorum ab
intestat decedend. quorum bona jura sive credita in diversis Dioc. sive
jurisdictionibus, aut alibi juxta consuetudinem Curiae Praerogativae Cant.
vitae and mortis suarum tempore habentium calculumque and ratiocinium, and alia
in ea part expediend. testamentaque and administrationes, quorumcunque tuae
Dioc. ut prius approband. and committend. causasque lites and negotia coram te
aut tuis deputatis pendend. Indecisas, necnon alias sive alia quascunque sive
quaecunque ad forum Ecclesiasticum pertinend. ad te aut tuos deputatos sive
deputandos per vestram querelae, aut appellationis devolvend. sive deducend.
quae citra legum nostrarum and Statutorum Regni nostri offensionem coram te aut
tuis deputatis agitari, aut ad tuam sive alicujus Comissariorum per te vigore
hujus Commissionis jure deputandorum cognitione devolvi aut deduci valiant, and
possunt examinand. and decidend. Caeteraque omnia and singula in Praemissis,
seu circa ea necessaria, seu quomodolibet opportuna, per and ultra ea quae tibi
ex sacris Literis divinitus Commissa esse dignoscuntur, vice, nomine and
Autoritate nostris exequend. Tibi de cujus sana Doctrina, Conscientiae
puritate, vitaeque and morum integritate, ac in rebus gerundis fide and
industria plurimum confidimus, vices nostras cum potestate alium vel alios,
Commissarium vel Commissarios, ad praemissa vel eorum aliqua surrogand. and
substituend. eosdemque ad placitum revocand. tenore praesentium Committimus, ac
liberam facultatem concedimus, teque licentiamus per praesentes ac nostrum
beneplacitum duntaxat duraturatum cum cujuslibet congrue and Ecclesiast.
coercionis potestate, quacunque inhibitione ante dat. praesentium emanata in
aliquo non obstante, tuam Conscientiam coram Deo strictissime onerantes, and ut
summo omnium judici aliquando rationem reddere, and coram nobis tuo sub
periculo corporali, respondere intendis te admonentes, ut interim tuum officium
juxta Evangelii normam pie and sancte exercere studeas, and ne quem ullo
tempore unquam ad sacros Ordines promoveas; vel ad curam animarum gerendam
quovismodo admittas; nisi eos duntaxat quos and tanti and tam venerabilis
officii functionem, vitae and morum Integritas notissimis testimoniis
approbata, literarum scientia and aliae qualitates requisitae ad hoc habiles
and idoneos clare and luculenter ostenderint and declaraverint. Nam ut maxim
compertum cognitumque habemus morum omnium and maxim Christianae Religionis
corruptelam, a malis pastoribus in populum emanasse, sic and veram Christi
Religionem vitaeque and morum emendationem a bonis pastoribus iterum delectis
and assumptis in integrum restitutum iri haud dubie speramus. In cujus rei
testimonium praesentes Literas nostras inde fieri, and sigilli nostri quo ad
causas Ecclesiasticas utimur appensione jussimus communiri. Datum septimo die
mensis Februarii, Anno Dom. millesimo quingentesimo quadragesimo sexto and
Regni nostri Anno primo.

Number 3. The Councils Letter to the Justices of Peace. An Original.
Cotton Libr. Titus B. 2.
AFter our right hearty Commendations, where the most Noble King, of famous
memory, our late Sovereign Lord and Master King Henry the 8th, (whom God
pardon) upon the great Trust which his Majesty had in your virtous Wisdoms and
good Dispositions to the Commonwealth of this Realm, did specially name and
appoint you, among others, by his Commissions under his Great Seal of England,
to be Conservatours and Justices of his Peace, within that his County of
Norfolk. Forasmuch as the same Commissions were dissolved by his decease, it
has pleased the King's Majesty, our Sovereign Lord that now is, by the Advice
and Consent of us, the Lord Protector and others Executors to our said late
Sovereign Lord, whose Names be underwritten; to whom with others, the
Government of his most Royal Person, and the Order of his Affairs, is by his
last Will and Testament committed, till he shall be of full Age of eighteen
Years, to cause new Commissions again to be made for the conservation of his
Peace throughout this Realm, whereof you shall by this Bearer receive one for
that County. And for that the good and diligent execution of the Charge
committed to you and others by the same, shall be a notable Surety to the King,
our Sovereign Lord's Person that now is, to whom God give increase of Virtue,
Honor, and many Years, a most certain Stay to the Commonwealth, which must
needs prosper where Justice has place and reigns. We shall desire you, and
in his Majesty's Name charge and command you, upon the receipt hereof, with all
diligence, to assemble your selves together; and calling unto you all such
others as be named in the said Commission. You shall first cry and call to God
to give you Grace to execute this Charge committed unto you with all truth and
uprightness, according to your Oaths, which you shall endeavor your selves to
do in all things appertaining to your Office accordingly: in such sort as all
private Malice, Sloth, Negligence, Displeasure, Disdain, Corruption, and
sinister Affections set apart, it may appear you have God, and the preservation
of your Sovereign Lord, and natural Country before your Eyes; and that you
forget not that by the same, your Selves, your Wives, and your Children, shall
surely prosper and be also preserved. For the better doing whereof, you shall
at this your first Assembly, make a division of your selves into Hundreds or
Wapentakes; that is to say, Two at the least to have especial eye and regard to
the good Rule and Order of that, or those Hundreds, to see the Peace duly kept,
to see Vagabonds and Perturbers of the Peace punished, and that every Man apply
himself to do as his Calling does require; and in all things to keep good
Order, without alteration, innovation, or contempt of any thing that by the
Laws of our late Sovereign Lord is prescribed and set forth unto us, for the
better direction and framing of our selves toward God and honest Policy. And
if any Person, or Persons, whom ye shall think you cannot Rule and Order,
without trouble to this Country, shall presume to do the contrary, upon your
Information to us thereof, we shall so aid and assist you in the execution of
Justice, and the punishment of all such contemptuous Offenders, as the same
shall be example to others. And further, his Majesty's Pleasure, by the Advice
and Consent aforesaid is, That you shall take such Orders amongst you, as you
fail not once every six weeks, till you shall be otherwise commanded, to write
unto the said Lord Protector, and others of the Privy Council, in what state
that Shire stands; and whether any notable things have happened, or were like
to happen, in those Parts that you cannot redress, which would be speedily met
withal and looked unto; or whether you shall need any advice or counsel, to the
intent we may put our hands to the stay and reformation of it in the beginning,
as appertains: Praying you also to take order, That every Commissioner in the
Shire may have a Double, or a Copy of this Letter, both for his own better
Instruction, and to show to the Gentlemen, and such others as inhabit in the
Hundreds, specially appointed to them, that every Man may the better conform
himself to do Truth, and help to the advancement of Justice according to their
most bounden Duties, and as they will answer for the contrary. Thus fare you
well.

From the Tower of London, the 12th of February. Your loving Friends, E.
Hertford. T. Cantuarien. Thomas Wriothelsey Cancel. W. St. John. J. Russell.
Anthony Brown. Anthony Denny. Cuth. Duresme. William Paget. W. Herbert. Edward
North.


Number 4. The Order for the Coronation of King Edward. Sunday, the 13th of
Febr. at the Tower, etc.
THis day the Lord Protector, and others his Executors, Ex Libro Concilii.
whose Names be hereunto subscribed, upon mature and deep deliberation had
among them, did finally resolve, That forasmuch as diverse of the old
Observances and Ceremonies afore-times used at the Coronations of the Kings of
this Realm, were by them thought meet, for sundry respects, to be corrected;
and namely, for the tedious length of the same, which should weary and be
hurtsome peradventure to the King's Majesty, being yet of tender Age, fully to
endure and bide out. And also for that many Points of the same were such as by
the Laws of the Realm at this present were not allowable. The King's Majesty's
Coronation should be done and celebrated upon Shrove-Sunday next ensuing, in
the Cathedral Church of Westminster, after the Form and Order ensuing.

First; The Archbishop of Canterbury shall show the King to the People at four
parts of the great Pulpit or Stage to be made for the King, and shall say on
this wise; Sirs, Here I present King Edward rightful and undoubted Inheritor,
by the Laws of God and Man, to the Royal Dignity and Crown Imperial of this
Realm, whose Consecration, Inunction, and Coronation, is appointed by all the
Nobles and Peers of this Land to be this day. Will ye serve at this time, and
give your good-wills and assents to the same Consecration, Inunction, and
Corronation, as by your Duty of Allegiance ye be bound to do?

The People to Answer, Yea, Yea, Yea; King Edward, King Edward, King Edward.

This done, the Archbishop of Canterbury, being revested as he should go to
Mass, with the Bishops of London and Winchester on both sides, with other
Bishops, and the Dean of Westminster in the Bishop's absence, to go in order
before the King; the King shall be brought from his Seat by them that assisted
him to the Church to the high Altar, where after his Prayer made to God for his
Grace, he shall offer a Pall and a pound of Gold, 24 pound in Coin, which shall
be to him delivered by the Lord Great Chamberlain. Then shall the King fall
grovelling before the Altar, and over him the Archbishop shall say this
Collect, Deus humilium, etc. Then the King shall rise and go to his Chair, to
be prepared before the Altar, his Face to the Altar, and standing, one shall
hold him a Book; and the Archbishop standing before the King, shall ask him,
with a loud and distinct Voice, in Manner and Form following.

Will ye grant to keep to the People of England, and others your Realms and
Dominions, the Laws and Liberties of this Realm, and others your Realms and
Dominions?

I grant and promit.
You shall keep, to your strength and power, to the Church of God, and to all
the People, holy Peace and Concord.

I shall keep.
You shall make to be done, after your Strength and Power, equal and rightful
Justice in all your Dooms and Judgments, with Mercy and Truth.

I shall do.
Do you grant to make no Laws, but such as shall be to the Honor and Glory of
God, and to the Good of the Commonwealth; and that the same shall be made by
the consent of your People, as has been accustomed.

I grant and promit.
Then shall the King rise out of his Chair, and by them that before assisted
him, be led to the High Altar, where he shall make a solemn Oath upon the
Sacrament, laid upon the said Altar, in the sight of all the People, to observe
the Premises; and laying his Hand again on the Book, shall say;

The things which I have before promised, I shall observe and keep. So God help
me, and those Holy Evangelists by Me bodily touched upon this Holy Altar.

That done, the King shall fall again grovelling before the High Altar, and the
said Archbishop kneeling before him, shall, with a loud Voice, begin Veni
Creator Spiritus, etc.

Which done, the said Archbishop standing, shall say over the King, Te
invocamus; and at the end shall kneel again, and then shall the King rise and
be set in the Chair again; and after a little pause he shall rise, and assisted
with those that did before that Office, go again to the High Altar, where he
shall be uncloathed by his Great Chamberlain unto his Coat of Crimson Satin;
which, and also his Shirt, shall be opened before and behind on the Shoulders,
and the bowght of the Arms, by the said Great Chamberlain, to the intent that
on those Places he be anointed; and whiles he is in the anointing, Sir Anthony
Denny, and Sir William Herbert, must hold a Pall over him. And first, The said
Archbishop shall anoint the King, kneeling, in the Palms of his Hands, saying
these words, Vngas Manus; with this Collect, Respice Omnipotens Deus. After he
shall anoint him in the Breast, in the midst of his Back, on his two Boughts of
his Arms, and on his Head making a Cross; and after making another Cross on his
Head, with Holy Chrism, saying as he anointeth the places aforesaid, Vngatur
Caput, ungantur scapulae, etc. During which time of Unction, the Quire shall
continually sing, Vngebant Regem, and the Psalm, Domine in virtute tua
laetabitur Rex. And it is to be remembered, that the Bishop or Dean of
Westminster, after the King's Inunction, shall dry all the Places of his Body,
where he was anointed, with Cotton, or some Linen Cloth, which is to be burnt.
And furthermore the places opened for the same, is to be clothed by the Lord
Great Chamberlain; and on the King's Hands shall be put, by the said
Archbishop of Canterbury, a pair of Linen Gloves, which the Lord Great
Chamberlain shall before see prepared.

This done, the King shall rise, and the Archbishop of Canterbury shall put on
the King a Tabert of Tanteron-white, shaped in manner of a Dalmatick; and he
shall put up on the King's Head a Quoif, the same to be brought by the Great
Chamberlain. Then the King shall take the Sword he was girt withal, and offer
it himself to God, laying it on the Altar, in token that his Strength and Power
should first come from God. And the same Sword he shall take again from the
Altar, and deliver to some great Earl, to be redeemed of the Bishop or Dean of
Westminster for 100 s. which Sword shall be born naked afterward before the
King.

Then the King being set in his Chair before the Altar, shall be crowned with
St. Edward's Crown; and there shall be brought, by the Bishop or Dean of
Westminster, Royal Sandals and Spurs to be presently put on by the Lord Great
Chamberlain; and the Spurs again immediately taken off, that they do not
encumber him.

Then the Archbishop, with all the Peers and Nobles, shall convey the King,
sustained as before, again into the Pulpit, setting him in his Siege Royal; and
then shall the Archbishop begin, Te Deum Laudamus; which done, the Archbishop
shall say unto the King, Sta and retine a modo locum. And the King being thus
set, all the Peers of the Realm, and Bishops, holding up their Hands, shall
make unto him Homage as follows; first, the Lord Protector alone, then the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Lord Chancellor, so two and two as they be
placed.

J. N. become your Liege Man, of Life and Limb, and of earthly Worship, and
Faith, and Truth, I shall bear unto you, against all manner of Folks, as I am
bound by my Allegiance, and by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm. So help us
God and Allhallowes. And then every one shall kiss the King's left Cheek; which
done, all they holding up their hands together, in token of their Fidelity,
shall with one Voice on their knees say. We offer to sustain and defend you and
your Crown, with our Lives, and Lands, and Goods, against all the World. And
then with one Voice to cry, God save King Edward; which the People shall cry
accordingly. Then shall the King be led to his Travers to hear the High Mass,
and so depart home crowned in Order, as he set forth accordingly.

E. Hertford.
T. Cantuarien. Tho. Wriothesley, Cancel. W. St. John. J. Russel. John Lisle.
Cuth. Duresme. Anthony Brown. W. Paget. Anthony Denny. W. Herbert.

Number 5. The Commission for which the Lord Chancellor was deprived of his
Office; with the Opinion of the Judges concerning it.
Ex Libro Concilii. Fol. 49.
EDwardus sextus Dei Gratia Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Rex, Fidei
Defensor; and in terra Ecclesiae Anglicanae and Hiberniae supremum Caput,
dilectis and fidelibus Consiliariis suis, Roberto Southwell Militi, custodi ac
Magistro Rotulorum Cancellariae nostrae, and Johanni Tregonwell Armigero uni
Magistrorum Cancellariae nostrae praedictae, and dilectis sibi Johanni Olyver
Clerico, and Antonio Bellasis Clerico, Magistris ejusdem Cancellariae nostrae
salutem. Quia praedilectus and fidelis consanguineus noster Thomas Comes
Southampton Cancellarius noster Angliae, nostris arduis negotiis ex mandato
nostro continuo intendens, in eisdem adeo versatur, quod ad ea quae in Curia
Cancellariae nostrae, in causis and materiis inter diversos ligeos and subditos
nostros ibidem pendentibus, tractand. audiend. discutiend. and terminand. Sicut
ut fieri debeant, ad presens non sufficiat: volentes proinde in ejusdem
Cancellarii nostri absentia omnibus ligeis and subditis nostris quibuscunque,
quascunque materias suas in Curia Cancellariae nostrae praedictae
prosequentibus, plenam and celerem justitiam exhiberi, ac de fidelitatibus, and
providis circumspectionibus vestris before confidentes, assignavimus, vos
tres, and duos vestrum, ac tenore praesentium damus vobis tribus and duobus,
plenam potestatem and autoritatem audiendi and examinandi quascunque materias,
causas, and Petitiones coram nobis in Cancellaria nostra, inter quoscunque
ligeos and subditos nostros nunc pendentes, and in posterum ibidem exhibend.
and pendend. and easdem materias, causas and Petitiones, juxta sanas vestras
discretiones, finaliter terminand. and debitae executioni demandand. partesque
in materiis sive causis vel Petitionibus illis nominatis and specificatis ad
testes and alios quoscunque, quos vobis fore videbitur, evocandos, quoties
expedire videbitis coram vobis tribus vel duobus vestrum evocandos; and ipsos
and eorum quemlibet debite examinari compellend. diesque productorios imponend.
and assignand. processusque quoscunque in ea part necessarios concedend. and
fieri faciend. contemptus etiam quoscunque ibidem commissos sive perpetratos,
debite castigand. and puniend. caeteraque omnia and singula faciend. and
exequend. quae circa praemissa necessaria fuerint; seu quomodolibet opportuna:
Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod circa promissa diligenter attendatis, ac ea
faciatis, and exequamini cum effectu. Mandamus etiam tenore praesentium omnibus
and singulis Officiariis and Ministris nostris curiae nostrae praedictae, quod
vobis tribus, and duobus vostrum in executione praemissorum diligenter
intendant, prout decet: Volumus enim and per praesentes concedimus, quod omnia
and singula judicia sive finalia decreta per vos tres vel duos vestru^ super
hujusmodi causis, sive materiis reddend. seu fiend. sicut and esse debeant,
tanti and consimilis valoris, effectus, efficaciae, roboris, and virtutis, ac
si per Dominum Cancellarium Angliae and Curiae Cancellariae praedictae, reddita
seu reddenda forent, proviso semper, quod omnia and singula hujusmodi judicia
seu finalia decreta, per vos tres vel duos vestrum, virtute praesentium
reddend. seu fiend. manibus vestris trium vel duorum vestrum, subscribantur and
consignentur, and superinde eadem judicia sive decreta praefato Cancellario
nostro praesententur and liberentur, ut idem Cancellarius noster antequam
irrotulentur, eadem similiter manu sua consignet. In cujus rei testimonium has
literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes, Test meipso apud Westmonast. 18 die
Feb. Anno Regni nostri primo.

THE said Students referring to the consideration of the said Protector and
Council, what the granting out of the said Commission without warrant did
weigh; Forasmuch as the said Protector and Council minding the surety of the
King's Majesty, and a direct and upright proceeding in his Affairs, and the
observation of their Duties in all things, as near as they can, to his Majesty,
with a desire to avoid all things which might offend his Majesty, or his Laws;
and considering, that the said Commission was none of the things which they in
their Assemblies in Council, at any time since the Death of the King's Majesty
late deceased, did accord to be passed under the Great Seal, have for their own
Discharges required us, whose Names be underwritten, for the Opinion they have
of our knowledge and experience in the Laws of this Realm, to consider the said
Case of making of the said Commission without warrant; and after due
consideration thereof, to declare in writing to what the said Case does weigh
in Law. We therefore, whose Names be underwritten, after mature and advised
consultation and deliberation thereupon; do affirm and say, for our Knowledges
and Determinations, That the said Chancellor of England having made forth,
under the Great Seal of England, without any Warrant, the Commission aforesaid
has done, and does by his so doing offend the King's Majesty, has and does by
the Common Law, forfeit his Office of Chancellor, and incurreth the Danger,
Penalty, and Payment, of such Fine as it shall please the King's Majesty, with
the advice of the said Lord Protector and Council to set upon him for the same;
with also Imprisonment of his Body at the King's Will: In Witness whereof we
have set our Names to this Present, the last day of February, in the first Year
of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Edward the 6th, by the Grace of God,
King of England, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, and in Earth of
the Church of England; and also of Ireland the Supreme Head; And have likewise,
for more ample testimony of this our Opinion of, and upon the Premises, put
and subscribed our Names to this present Duplicate of the same here asserted,
in this present Act of this 6th day of the month of March accordingly.

Number 6. The Duke of Somerset's Commission to be Protector.
Ex Libro Concilii. Fol. 62.
EDward the 6th, by the Grace of God, King of England, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, and of the Church of England, and also of Ireland, in
Earth the Supreme Head. Whereas our Council, and diverse of the Nobles and
Prelates of this our Realm of England, considering Our young and tender Age,
have thought meet and expedient, as well for Our Education, and bringing up in
Knowledge, Learning, and Exercises of Good and Godly Manners, Virtues, and
Qualities, meet and necessary for a Prince of Our Estate, and whereby We
should, and may at Our full Age be the more able to minister and execute the
Charge of our Kingly Estate and Office, committed unto Us by the Goodness of
Almighty God, and left, and come unto Us, by right Inheritance, after and by
the decease of Our late Sovereign Lord and Father, of most famous Memory, King
Henry the 8th, whose Soul God pardon. As also to the intent, that during the
time of our Minority, the great and weighty Causes of our Realms and Dominions
may be set forth, conducted, passed, applied, and ordered, in such sort, as
shall be most to the Glory of God, our Surety and Honor; and for the Weal,
Benefit, and Commodity of Us, Our said Realms and Dominions, and of all Our
loving Subjects of the same, have advised Us to nominate, appoint, and
authorize some one meet and trusty Personage, above all others, to take the
special Care and Charge of the same for Us, and in our Name and Behalf; without
the which the things before remembered could not, nor can be done so well as
appertains. We therefore using their Advices and Counsels in this behalf, did
heretofore assign and appoint our dear and well-beloved Uncle Edward, now Duke
of Somerset, Governor of our Person, and Protector of Our said Realms and
Dominions, and of our Subjects and People of the same. Which thing, albeit We
have already declared heretofore, and our Pleasure therein published by Word of
our Mouth, in the presence of Our said Council, Nobles, and Prelates of Our said
Realm of England, and not by any Writing set forth under Our Seal for that only
purpose. Yet for a more perfect and manifest knowledge, and further
corroboration and understanding of Our determination in that behalf; and
considering that no manner of Person is so meet to have and occupy the said
Charge and Administration, and to do Us service in the same, as is Our said
Uncle Edward, Duke of Somerset, eldest Brother to our Natural most gracious
late Mother Queen Jane, as well for the proximity of Blood, whereby he is the
more stirred to have special eye and regard to our Surety and good Education,
in this Our said Minority; as also for the long and great experience which Our
said Uncle has had in the Lifetime of Our said dear Father, in the Affairs of
our said Realm and Dominions, both in time of Peace and War; whereby he is more
able to Order and Rule Our said Realms, Dominions, and Subjects of the same:
and for the special confidence and trust that We have in Our said Uncle, as
well with the Advice and Consent of our Council, and other our Nobles and
Prelates, as also of diverse discreet and sage Men that served Our said late
Father in his Council and weighty Affairs; We therefore, by these Presents, do
not only ratify, approve, confirm, and allow, all and every thing and things
whatsoever devised or set forth, committed or done by Our said Uncle, as
Governor of our Person, and Protector of our said Realms and Dominions, and of
the Subjects of the same, since the time he was by Us named, appointed, and
ordained by Word Governor of our Person, and Protector of Our said Realms and
Dominions, and of the Subjects of the same, as is aforesaid, or otherwise any
time before, sithence the death of Our said late Father. But also by these
Presents, We for a full and perfect Declaration of the Authority of Our said
Uncle, given and appointed as aforesaid, do nominate, appoint, and ordain Our
said Uncle, Governor of Our said Person, and Protector of Our said Realms and
Dominions, and of the Subjects of the same, until such time as We shall have,
by the sufferance of God, accomplished the Age of eighteen Years.

And We also do grant to Our said Uncle, by these Presents, full Power and
Authority, from time to time, until such time as We shall have accomplished the
said Age of eighteen Years, to do, procure, and execute, and cause to be done,
procured, and executed, all and every such Thing and Things, Act and Acts,
which a Governor of the King's Person of this Realm, during his Minority, and a
Protector of his Realms, Dominions, and Subjects, ought to do, procure, and
execute, or cause to be done, procured, and executed; and also all and every
other thing and things, which to the Office of a Governor of a King of the
Realm, during his Minority, and of a Protector of his Realms, Dominions, and
Subjects, in any wise appertains or belongs. Willing, Authorizing, and
Commanding, Our said Uncle, by these Presents, to take upon him the Name,
Title, and Authority of Governor of our Person, and Protector of our Realms,
Dominions, and Subjects; and to do, procure, and execute, and cause to be done,
procured and executed, from time to time, until We shall have accomplished the
said Age of eighteen Years, all and every Thing and Things, Act and Acts, of
what Nature, Quality, or Effect soever they be or shall be, concerning our
Affairs, Doings, and Proceedings, both Private and Public, as well in Outward
and Foreign Causes and Matters, as also concerning our Affairs, Doings, and
Proceedings within Our said Realms and Dominions, or in any of them, or
concerning any Manner, Causes, or Matters, of any of our Subjects of the same,
in such like manner and form as shall be thought, by his Wisdom and Discretion,
to be for the Honor, Surety, Prosperity, good Order, Wealth, or Commodity of
Us, or of any of Our said Realms and Dominions, or of the Subjects of any of
the same.

And to the intent Our said Uncle should be furnished with Men qualified in
Wit, Knowledge, and Experience for his Aid and Assistance, in the managing and
accomplishment of Our said Affairs, We have, by the Advice and Consent of Our
said Uncle, and others, the Nobles, Prelates, and wise Men of Our said Realm of
England, chosen, taken, and accepted, and by these Presents do choose, take,
accept, and ordain to be our Counselors, and of our Council, the most Reverend
Father in God, Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, and our right Trusty and
well-beloved William, Lord St. John, Great Master of our Household, and
President of our Council; John Lord Russel Keeper of our Privy Seal; and Our
trusty and right well-beloved Cousins, William Marquess of Northampton; John
Earl of Warwick, Great Chamberlain of England; Henry Earl of Arundel, our Lord
Chamberlain; Thomas Lord Seymour of Sudley, High Admiral of England; the
Reverend Father in God, Cuthbert Bishop of Duresm, and Our right trusty and
well-beloved Richard Lord Rich; Sir Thomas Cheyney Knight of our Order, and
Treasurer of our Household; Sir John Gage Knight of our Order, and Comptroller
of our Household; Sir Anthony Brown Knight of our Order, Master of our Horses;
Sir Anthony Wingfield Knight of our Order, our Vicechamberlain; Sir William
Paget Knight of our Order, Our chief Secretary; Sir William Petre Knight, one
of Our two principal Secretaries; Sir Ralph Sadler Knight, Master of our Great
Wardrobe; Sir John Baker Knight. Dr. Wotton Dean of Canterbury and York; Sir
Anthony Denny and Sir William Herbert Kts. Gentlemen of our Privy-Chamber; Sir
Edward North Knight. Chancellor of our Court of Augmentations and Revenues of our
Crown; Sir Edward Montague Knight. Chief Justice of our Common Pleas; Sir Edward
Wotton Knight. Sir Edmund Pekham Knight. Cofferer of our Household; Sir Thomas Bromley
Knight. one of the Justices for Pleas before us to be holden, and Sir Richard
Southwell Knight.

And furthermore We are contented and pleased, and by these Presents do give
full Power and Authority to our said Uncle, from time to time, until We shall
have accomplished, and be of the full Age of eighteen Years, to call, ordain,
name, appoint, and swear such, and as many other Persons of our Subjects, as to
him our said Uncle shall seem meet and requisite to be of our Council; and that
all and every such Person or Persons, so by our said Uncle, for and during the
time aforesaid to be called, named, ordained, appointed, and sworn of our
Council, and to be our Counselor or Counselors, We do by these Presents name,
ordain, accept, and take our Counselor and Counselors, and of our Council in
like manner and form, as if he, they, and every of them, were in these Presents
by Us appointed, named, and taken to be of our Council, and our Counselor or
Counselors, by express Name or Names. And that also of our forenamed
Counselors, or of any others which our said Uncle shall hereafter at any time
take and choose to be our Counselor or Counselors, or of our said Council, he
our said Uncle shall, may, and have Authority by these Presents, to choose,
name, appoint, use, and swear of Privy Council, and to be our Privy-Counsellor
or Counselors, such and so many as he from time to time shall think convenient.

And it is Our further pleasure, and also We will and grant by these Presents,
for Us, our Heirs and Successors, That whatsoever Cause, Matter, Deed, Thing,
or Things, of what Nature, Quality, or Condition soever the same be; yea,
though the same require, or ought by any Manner, Law, Statute, Proclamation, or
other Ordinance whatsoever, to be specially, or by Name, expressed or set forth
in this Our present Grant or Letters Patents, and be not herein expressed or
mentioned, specially which Our said Uncle, or any of our Privy-Counsellor, or
Counselors, with the Advice, Consent, or Agreement of Our said Uncle, have
thought necessary, meet, expedient, decent, or in any manner-wise convenient to
be devised, done, or executed, during our Minority, and until We come to the
full Age of eighteen Years, for the Surety, Honor, Profit, Health, or
Education of our Person; or for the Surety, Honor, Profit, Weal, Benefit, or
Commodity of any of our Realms, Dominions, or Subjects; and the same have
devised, done, or executed, or caused to be devised, executed, or done at any
time since the Death of Our most Noble Father of most famous memory. We are
contented, and pleased, and will and grant, for Us, our Heirs and Successors,
by these Presents, that the same Cause, Matter, Deed, Thing and Things, and
every of them, shall stand, remain, and be (until such time our said Uncle,
with such and so many of Our foresaid Counselors as he shall think meet to
call unto his assistance, shall revoke and annihilate the same) good, sure,
stable, vailable, and effectual, to all Intents and Purposes, without offense
of Us, or against Us, or of or against any of our Laws, Statutes,
Proclamations, or other Ordinances whatsoever; and without incurring therefore
into any Danger, Penalty, Forfeit, Loss; or any other Encumbrance, Penalty, or
Vexation of his or their Bodies, Lands, Rents, Goods, or Chattels; or of their,
or of any of their Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, or of any other Person
or Persons whatsoever, which have done or executed any Cause, Matter, Deed,
Thing or Things, now, or any time since the Death of Our said Father, by the
Commandment or Ordinance of Our said Uncle, or any of our Counselors, with the
Advice, Consent, or Agreement of Our said Uncle.

And further We are contented and pleased, and will and grant, for Us, our
Heirs and Successors, by these Presents, that whatsoever Cause, Matter, Deed,
Thing or Things, of what Nature, Quality, or Condition soever the same be, or
shall be; yea, though the same require, or ought by any Manner, Law, Statute,
Proclamation, or other whatsoever Ordinance to be specially and by name
expressed and set forth in this our present Grant and Letters Patents, and be
not herein specially named or expressed, which our said Uncle shall at any
time, during our Minority, and until We shall come to the full Age of eighteen
Years, think necessary, meet, expedient, decent, or in any wise convenient to
be devised, had, made, executed or done in our Name, for the Surety, Honor,
Profit, Health, or Education of our Person, or which our said Uncle, with the
Advice and Consent of such, and so many of our Privy Council, or of our
Counselors, as he shall think meet to call unto him from time to time, shall
at any time, until We come unto the full Age of eighteen Years, think
necessary, meet, decent, expedient, or in any-wise convenient to be devised,
had, made, executed, or done in our Name, for the Surety, Honor, Profit, Weal,
Benefit, or Commodity of any of our Realms, Dominions, or Subjects, or any of
them, he Our said Uncle and Counselors, and every of them, and all and every
other Person or Persons, by his Our said Uncle's Commandment, Direction,
Appointment, or Order, or by the Commandment, Appointment, Direction, or Order
of any of Our said Counselors, so as Our said Uncle agree, and be contented,
to and with the same, shall and may do, or execute the same without displeasure
to Us, or any manner of Crime or Offense to be by Us, our Heirs or Successors,
laid or imputed to him Our said Uncle, or any Our said Counselors, or any
other Person or Persons therefore, or in that behalf, and without any offense
of or against our Laws, Statutes, Proclamations, or other whatsoever
Ordinances; and without incurring therefore into any Damages, Penalty,
Forfeit, Loss, or any other Encumbrance, Trouble, or Vexation of his, or any of
their Bodies, Lands, Tenements, Goods or Chattels; or of his or their, or any
their Heirs, Successors, Assigns, Executors or Administrators. And therefore we
Will and Command, not only all and every our Judges, Justices, Sergeants,
Attorneys, Sollicitors, Sheriffs, Escheators, Bailiffs, and all other our
Officers, Ministers, and Subjects, that now be, or hereafter shall be, in no
wise to Impeach, Appeal, Arrest, Trouble, Vex, Injure, or Molest in our Name or
otherwise, Our said Uncle, or our said Counselors, or any of them, or any
other Person, for any Cause, Matter, Deed, Thing or Things, which he or they,
or any of them have done, or shall do, execute, or cause to be executed or done
as aforesaid; But also We require, and nevertheless straightly Charge and
Command, by these Presents, all and every our Officers, Ministers, and
Subjects, of what Estate, Degree, or Condition soever he or they be, or shall
be, to be obedient, aiding, attendant and assisting to Our said Uncle and
Counselors, and to every of them as behooves, for the execution of this Charge
and Commission given and committed unto Our said Uncle and Council as
aforesaid, as they tender our Favor, and their own Weals, and as they will
answer unto Us at their uttermost Perils for the contrary. In Witness whereof,
We have caused these our Letters to be made Patents; Witness our Self at
Westminster, the 13th day of March, in the first Year of our Reign.

E. Somerset. T. Cantuarien. W. St. John. J. Russell. W. Northamp. T. Cheynie.
William Paget. Anthony Brown.


Number 7. The King's Letter to the Archbishop of York, concerning the
Visitation then intended.
EDwardus sextus, Dei Gratia, Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Rex, Cotton
Libr. Titus B. 2.
Fidei Defensor, ac in terra Ecclesiae Anglicanae and Hiberniae supremum Caput,
Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, ac praedilecto Consiliario nostro Roberto
permissione divina Eboracen. Archiepisc. Angliae Primati and Metropolitano
salutem.
Quum nos, suprema Authoritate nostra Regia, omnia and singula loca
Ecclesiastica, clerumque and populum infra and per totum nostrum Angliae Regnum
constituta, propediem visitare statuerimus, Vobis tenore praesentium stricte
inhibemus atque mandamus and per vos Suffraganeis vestris confratribus
Episcopis, ac per illos suis Archidiaconis ac aliis quibuscunque jurisdictionem
Ecclesiasticam exercentibus, tam exemptis quam non exemptis, infra vestram
Provinciam Eboracens. ubilibet constitutis sic inhibere volumus atque
praecipimus, quatenus nec vos nec quisquam eorum Ecclesias, aut alia loca
praedicta Clerumve aut populum visitare, aut ea quae sunt jurisdictionis
exercere seu quicquam aliud in praejudicium dictae nostrae Visitationis
generalis quovismodo attemptare presumat sive presumant sub poena contemptus,
donec and quousque licentiam and facultatem vobis and eis in ea part largiend.
and impertiend. fore duxerimus. Et quia non solum internam animorum subditorum
nostrorum pacem; verum etiam externam eorum concordiam multiplicibus opinionum
procellis ex contentione, dissentione and contraversiis concionatorum exortis,
multum corruptam, violatam ac misere divulsam esse cernimus; Idcirco nobis
admodum necessarium visum est ad sedandas and componendas hujusmodi opinionum
varietates, quatenus inhibeatis, seu inhiberi faciatis omnibus and singulis
Episcopis, nec alibi quam in Ecclesiis suis Cathedralibus, and aliis Personis
Ecclesiasticis quibuscunque, ne in alio loco quam in suis Ecclesiis,
Collegiatis, sive Parochialibus, in quibus intitulati sunt, predicent, aut
subditis nostris quovismodo concionandi munus exerceant, nisi ex gratia nostra
speciali ad id postea licentiati fuerint, sub nostrae indignationis paena. In
cujus rei testimonium, Sigillum nostrum, quo ad causas Ecclesiasticas utimur,
praesentibus apponi mandavimus. E. Somerset. T. Seimour. T. Cantuarien. W. St.
John. Will. Petre Secretary. J. Russell. John Barker. John Gage.


Dat. quarto die mensis Maii, Anno Dom. 1547. and Regni nostri Anno primo.
Number 8. The Form of bidding Prayer before the Reformation. The Bedes on the
Sunday.
Out of the Festival, printed An. 1509.
YE shall kneel down on your Knees, and lift up your Hearts, making your Prayers
to Almighty God, for the good State and Peace of all-holy Church, that God
maintain, save, and keep it. For our Holy Father the Pope, with all his true
College of Cardinals, that God for his Mercy them maintain and keep in the
right Belief, and it hold and increase, and all Misbelief and Heresy be less
and destroyed. Also ye shall pray for the Holy Land, and for the Holy Cross
that Jesus Christ died on for the redemption of Man's Souls, that it may come
into the power of Christian Men the more to be honored for our Prayers. Also
ye shall pray for all Archbishops and Bishops; and especially for the
Archbishop of Canterbury our Metropolitan, and for the Bishop of N. our
Diocesan, that God of his Mercy give to them Grace so to govern and rule Holy
Church, that it may be to the Honor and Worship of him, and Salvation of our
Souls. Also ye shall pray for Abbots, Priors, Monks, Canons, Friars, and for
all Men and Women of Religion, in what Order, Estate, or Degree that they stand
in, from the highest Estate unto the lowest Degree. Also ye shall pray for all
them that have Charge and Cure of Christian Men's Souls, as Curats and Parsons,
Vicars, Priests and Clarks; and in especial for the Parson and Curat of this
Church, and for all the Priests and Minsters that serve therein, or have served
therein; and for all them that have taken any Order, that Almighty God give
them Grace of continuance well for to keep and observe it to the honor and
health of their Souls. Also ye shall pray for the Unity and Peace of all
Christian Realms, and in especial for the good Estate, Peace and Tranquillity,
of this Realm of England, for our Liege Lord the King, that God for his great
Mercy send him Grace so to Govern and Rule this Realm, that God be pleased and
worshipped, and to the Profit and Salvation of this Land. Also ye shall pray
for our Liege Lady the Queen, my Lord Prince, and all the noble Progeny of
them; for all Dukes, Earls, Barons, Knights, and Esquires, and other Lords of
the King's Council, which have any Rule and Governance in this Land, that God
give them Grace so to Council, Rule, and Govern, that God be pleased, the Land
defended, and to the profit and Salvation of all the Realm. Also ye shall pray
for the Peace both on Land, and on the Water; that God grant Love and Charity
among all Christian People. Also ye shall pray for all our Parishes, where that
they be, on Land or on Water, that God save them from all manner of Perils; and
for all the good Men of this Parish, for their Wives, Children, and Men, that
God them maintain, save and keep. Also ye shall pray for all true Tithers, that
God multiply their Goods and Increase; for all true Tillers that labor for our
Sustenance, that Till the Earth; and also for all the Grains and Fruits that be
sown, set, or done on the Earth, or shall be done, that God send such Weather
that they may grow, increase, and multiply, to the help and profit of all
Mankind. Also ye shall pray for all true Shipmen and Merchants, wheresoever
that they be, on Land or on Water, that God keep them from all Perils, and
bring them home in safety, with their Goods, Ships, and Merchandises, to the
Help, Comfort, and Profit of this Realm. Also ye shall pray for them that find
any Light in this Church, or give any Behests, Book* Bell, Chalice, or
Vestment, Surplice, Water-cloath, or Towel, Lands, Rents, Lamp or Light, or any
other Adornments, whereby God's Service is the better served, sustained and
maintained in Reading and Singing, and for all them that thereto have
counseled, that God reward and yield it them at their most need. Also ye shall
pray for all true Pilgrims and Palmers, that have taken their way to Rome, to
Jerusalem, to St. Katherines, or St. James, or to any other Place, that God of
his Grace give them time and space, well for to go and to come, to the profit
of their Lives and Souls. Also ye shall pray for all them that be sick or
diseased of this Parish, that God send to them Health, the rather for our
Prayers; for all the Women which be in our Ladys Bands, and with Child, in this
Parish, or in any other, that God send to them fair Deliverance, to their
Children right Shape, Name, and Christendom, and to the Mother's purification;
and for all them that would be here, and may not, for Sickness or Travail, or
any other lawful Occupation, that they may have part of all the good Deeds that
shall be done here in this Place, or in any other. And ye shall pray for all
them that be in good Life, that good them hold long therein; and for them that
be in Debt, or deadly Sin, that Jesus Christ bring them out thereof, the rather
for our Prayer. Also ye shall pray for him or her that this day gave the Holy
Bread, and for him that first began and longest holds on, that God reward it
him at the day of Doom; and for all them that do well, or say you good, that
God yield it them at their need, and for them that otherwise would that Jesus
Christ amend them; For all those, and for all Christian Men and Women, ye shall
say a Pater Noster; Ave Maria; Deus misereatur nostri; Gloria Patri; Kyrie
Eleison; Christ Eleison; Kyrie Eleison; Pater Noster; Et ne nos; Sed libera;
Versus; Ostende nobis; Sacerdotes; Domine salvum fac Regem; Salvum fac Populum;
Domine fiat Pax; Domine exaudi; Dominus vobiscum; Oremus; Ecclesiae tuae
quaesumus; Deus in cujus manu; Deus a quo sancta, etc. Furthermore, ye shall
pray for all Christian Souls, for Archbishops and Bishops Souls; and in
especial, for all that have been Bishops of this Diocese; and for all Curats,
Parsons and Vicar's Souls, and in especial, for them that have been Curats of
this Church, and for the Souls that have served in this Church. Also ye shall
pray for the Souls of all Christian Kings and Queens, and in especial for the
Souls of them that have been Kings of this Realm of England; and for all those
Souls that to this Church have given Book, Bell, Chalice, or Vestment, or any
other thing, by the which the Service of God is better done, and Holy Church
worshipped. Ye shall also pray for your Father's Soul, for your Mother's Soul;
for your Godfathers Souls, for your Godmothers Souls; for your Brethren and
Sisters Souls, and for your Kindreds Souls, and for your Friends Souls, and for
all the Souls we be bound to pray for; and for all the Souls that be in the
Pains of Purgatory, there abiding the Mercy of Almighty God; and in especial
for them that have most need and least help, that God of his endless Mercy
lessen and minish their Pains by the means of our Prayers, and bring them to
his Everlasting Bliss in Heaven. And also of the Soul N. or of them that upon
such a day this Week we shall have the Anniversary; and for all Christian Souls
ye shall devoutly say a Pater Noster and Ave Maria; Psalmus de profundis, etc.
with this Collect, Oremus; Absolve quaesumus Domine animas famulorum tuorum
Pontificum, Regum, Sacerdotum, Parentum, Parochianorum, Amicorum, Benefactorum
Nostrorum, and omnium fidelum defunctorum, ab omni vinculo delictorum; ut in
Resurrectionis Gloria inter sanitos and electos tuos resuscitati respirent, per
Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Number 9. Bishop Tonstall's Letter, proving the Subjection of Scotland to
England. An Original.
Cotton Libr. Caligula B. 7
PLease it your Grace, my Lord Protector, and you right hounourable Lords of the
King's Majestys Council, to understand, that I have received your Letter of the
4th of this month, by which ye will me to search all mine old Registers, and
ancient Places to be sought, where any thing may be found for the more clear
declaration to the World of the King's Majestys Title to the Realm of Scotland,
and to advertise you with speed accordingly: And also to signify unto you what
ancient Charters and Monuments for that purpose I have seen, and where the same
are to be sought for. According unto which your Letters, I have sought with all
diligence all mine old Registers, making mention of the Superiorities of the
Kings of England to the Realm of Scotland, and have found in the same of many
Homages made by the Kings of Scots to the Kings of England, as shall appear by
the Copies which I do send to your Grace and to your Lordships herewith. Ye
shall also find in the said Copies the Gift of the Barony of Coldingham, made
to the Church of Duresm by Edgar the King of Scots; which Original Gift is
under Seal, which I showed once to my Lord Maxwell at Duresm, in the presence
of you my Lord Protector. I find also a confirmation of the same Gift by King
William Rufus in an old Register, but not under Seal, the Copy whereof is sent
herewith. The Homages of Kings of Scotland which I have found in the Registers,
I have sent in this Copy. I send also herewith the Copy of a Grant made by King
Richard the First unto William King of Scots and his Heirs, How as often as he is
summoned to come to the Parliament, he shall be received in the Confines of the
Realm of Scotland, and conducted from Shire to Shire unto his coming to the
Parliament; and what the King does allow him for his Diet every day unto the
Court; and also what Diet and Allowance he has, being at the Parliament, both
in Bread and Wine, Wax and Candle, for his time of his abode there; and of his
Conduct in his return home.

And where King William, King of Scots, made Homage to King Henry the Second,
and granted, That all the Nobles of his Realm should be his Subjects, and make
Homage to him; and all the Bishops of his Realm should be under the
Archbishops of York: And the said King William delivered to the said King
Henry, the Castles of Roxburgh, Edinburgh, and the Castle of Barwick, as is
found in my Register; and that the King of England should give all Abbeys and
Honors in Scotland, or at least they should not be given without his Counsel.
I do find, in the confirmation of the same, out of the old Registers of the
Priors of Duresm, Hommage made by the Abbots, Priors, and Prioresses of
Scotland, to King Edward the First, in French, which I do send herewith. Also I
do send herewith in French, how King Edward the First was received and taken to
be Supreme Lord in Scotland, by all those that pretended Title to the Crown of
Scotland, as next Heirs to the King, that was then dead without Issue, and the
compromise of them all made unto the said King Edward the First to stand to his
Judgment, which of all them that did claim should have the Crown of Scotland:
The Transcript of which Compromise in French, was then sent by the said King
Edward, under the Seal of the King's Exchequer in green Wax, to the Prior of
Duresm, to be registered for a perpetual Memory, that the Supremity of Scotland
belonged to the Kings of England, which yet the Chapiters of Duresm have to
show, which thing he commands them to put in their Chronicles.

And touching the second part of your Letter, where you will me to advertise
you what I have seen in the Premises; so it is, that I was commanded by mine
old Master, of famous memory, King Henry the 8th, to make search among the
Records of his Treasury, in the Receipt for Solemnities to be done at his
Coronation in most solemn manner; according to which commandment, I made search
in the said Treasury, where I fortuned to find many Writings for the Supremacy
of the King to the Realm of Scotland; and among others also, a Writing with
very many Seals of Arms of Scots, confessing the right of the Supremacy to the
King of England; which Writings I doubt not may be found there.

I have also sent a Copy of a Book my self have of Homages made to the Kings of
England by the Kings of Scotland, which the Chancellor of England in King Henry
the Sevenths days had gathered out of the King's Records, which I doubt not,
but out of the King's Records and Ancient Books, the same may be found again by
my Lord Chancellor and the Judges.

Furthermore your Grace, and you the Right Honorable Lords of the Council,
shall understand, That in making much search for the Premises, at the last we
found, out of the Registers of the Chapters of Duresm, when it was a Priory,
the Copy of a Writing, by which King Edward the Second does renounce such
Superiority as he had in the Realm of Scotland, for him and his Heirs, to
Robert King of Scots then being, as will appear by a Copy of the same, which I
do send you herewith, making mention, in the end of the said Writings, of a
Commission that he gave to Henry the Lord Percy, and to William the Lord Souch,
under his Letters Patents, to give his Oath upon the same. And after the said
Writing, we found also in the said Book, a Renunciation of the said King
Edward, of a Process that he had commenced before the Bishop of Rome, against
Robert King of Scots and his Subjects, for breaking their Oath to him, as will
appear by the Copy thereof, which I do send also herewith. And touching the
said Renunciation of King Edward the Second, to the Superiority of the Realm of
Scotland, I have often heard it spoken of by Scots, but I did never see the
form of it in writing, until I see it now; which thing it is not unlikely but
the Scots have under the Seal of the said King Edward. Whereunto answer is to
be made, That a King renouncing the right of his Crown, cannot prejudice his
Successors, who have at the time of their entry, the same whole right that
their Predecessors had at their first entry, as Men learned in the Civil Law
can by their learning show.

And furthermore, search is to be made in the King's Records in the Treasury,
whether Homages have been made sithence King Edward the Second's Time; that is
to say, in the Times of King Edward the Third, King Richard the Second, King
Henry the Fourth, King Henry the Fifth, and King Henry the Sixth. In which
Times, if any Homage can be found to be made, it shall appear the same
Renunciation to have taken none effect in the Successors, and Ancient Right to
be continued again. For after King Edward the Fourth and King Henry the Sixth
strove for the Crown, I think none Homage of Scotland will be found, for then
was also lost Gascoigne and Guienne in France. It is also to be remembered, that
when the Body of King Henry the Fifth was brought out of France to be buried at
Westminster, the King of Scots then being, came with him, and was the chief
Mourner at his Burial; which King of Scots, whether he made any Homage to King
Henry the Fifth in his Lifetime, or to King Henry the Sixth at his Coronation,
it is to be searched by the Records of that time.

This is all that can be found hitherto, by all most diligent search that I
could make in my Records here; and if any more can be found, it shall be sent
with all speed.

And thus Almighty preserve your Grace, and your Honorable Lordships, to his
Pleasure and yours.

From Ackland the 15th of October, 1547. Your Graces most humble Orator at
Commandment. Cuth. Duresme.

Number 10. A Letter from the Scottish Nobility to the Pope, concerning their
being an Independent Kingdom. An Original. Literae directae ad Dominum Summum
Pontificem per Communitatem Scotiae. 1320.
SAnctissimo Patri in Christo, Ex Autogr. apud Ill. Com. de H.
ac Domino D. Johanni Divina Providentia Sacrosanctae Romanae and Universalis
Ecclesiae Summo Pontifici, filii sui humiles and devoti, Duncanus Comes de
Fife, Thomas Ranulph Comes Moraviae, D. Manniae and Vallis Annandiae, Patricius
de Dumbar, Comes Marchiae, Malisius Comes de Straherne, Malcolmus Comes de
Levenex, Willielmus Comes de Ross, Magnus Comes Cathaneae and Orcadiae, and
Willielmus Comes Sutherlandiae, Walterus Senescallus Scotiae, Willielmus de
Souls Buttelarius Scotiae, Jacobus D. Douglas, Rogerus de Moubray, David D. de
Brechen, David de Grahame, Ingelramus de Umphavill, Johannes de Meneteth custos
Comitatis de Meneteth, Alex. Fraser, Gilbertus de Haia Constabularius Scotiae,
Robertus de Keith Mariscallus Scotiae, Henricus de Sancto Claro, Johannes de
Grahame, David de Lindsey, Willielmus Oliphant, Patricius de Grahame, Johannes
de Tenton, Willielmus de Abernethie, David de Weemes, Willielmus de Monte fixo,
Fergusus de Ardrossane, Eustachius de Maxwell, Willielmus de Ramsay, Willielmus
de Monte alto, Alanus de Moravia, Donenaldus Campbell, Johannes Cambrime,
Regenaldus de Chein, Alex. de Seaton, Andreas de Lescelyne, and Alex. de
Straton, caeterique Barons and libere-tenentes; ac tota Communitas Regni
Scotiae, omnimodam reverentiam filialem, cum devotis pedum osculis Beatorum;
Scimus; Sanctissime Pater, and Domine, and ex antiquorum gestis and libris
colligimus, quod inter caeteras nationes egregias, nostra [scilicet Scotorum
Natio] multis praeconiis fuerit insignita; quae de majori Scythia per Mare
Tyrrhenum and Columnas Herculis transiens, and in Hispania inter faerocissimos
per multa temporum curricula residens, a nullis quantumcunque Barbaricis
poterat alicubi subjugari; Indeque veniens post mill and ducentos annos a
transitu Populi Israelitici sibi seeds in occidente, quas nunc obtinet,
expulsis Brittonibus, and Pictis omnia deletis: licet per Norwagienses, Dacos
and Anglicos saepius impugnata fuerit, multis sibi victoriis and laboribus
quamplurimis adquisivit; ipsasque ab omni servitute liberas (ut priscorum
testantur Historiae) semper tenuit: In quorum Regno centum and tres december Reges
de ipsorum regali praesapia, nullo alienigena interveniente, Regnaverunt;
Quorum Nobilitas and merita (licet ex aliis non clarerent) satis patenter
effulgent ex eo; quod Rex regum D. Jesus Christus post Passionem and
Resurrectionem suam ipsos in ultimis terrae finibus constitutos, quasi primos
ad suam fidem sanctissimam convocavit, nec eos per quemlibet in dicta fide
confirmari voluit, sed per suum primum Apostolum, quamvis ordine secundum vel
tertium, Sanctum Andream meritissimum beati Petri Germanum, quem semper ipsis
praecesse voluit ut Patronum. Haec autem Sanctissimi Patres and Predecessores
vestri sollicita mente pensantes, ipsum Regnum and Populum, ut beati Petri
germano peculium multis favoribus and privilegiis quam plurimis muniverunt.
Itaque gens nostra sub ipsorum protectione libera hactenus degit and quieta;
donec ille princeps Magnificus Rex Anglorum Edwardus, Pater istius, (qui hunc
est) Regnum nostrum Acephalum, populumque nullius mali aut doli conscium, nec
bellis aut insultibus tunc assuetum sub amica and confederata specie
innumerabiliter infestavit. Cujus injurias, caedes, and violentias,
praedationes, incendia, Praelatorum incarcerationes, Monasteriorum
combustiones, Religiosorum spoliationes and occisiones, alia quoque enormia,
quae in dicto populo exercuit, nulli parcens aetati aut sexui, Religioni aut
ordini; nullus scriberet nec ad plenum intelligeret nisi quem experientia
informaret: a quibus malis innumeris (ipso juvante qui post vulnera medetur and
sanat) liberati sumus per serenissimum Principem Regem and Dominum nostrum, D.
Robertum, qui pro populo and haereditate suis de manibus inimicorum liberandis,
quasi alter Maccabeus aut Josua, labores, and taedia, inedias and pericula,
leto sustinuit animo; quem etiam divina dispositio, and juxta leges and
consuetudines nostras, quas usque ad mortem sustinere volumus, juris Successio,
and debitus nostrorum omnium consensus and assensus, nostrum fecerunt Principem
ac Regem: Cui, tanquam illi, per quem salus in populo facta est, pro nostra
liberate tuenda tam jure quam meritis tenemur and volumus in omnibus
adhaerere; Quem, (si ab inceptis desistet, Regi Anglorum aut Anglicis nos, aut
Regnum nostrum, volens subjicere) tanquam inimicum nostrum, and sui nostrique
juris subversorem, statim expellere intemur; and alium Regem nostrum, qui ad
defensionem nostram sufficient, faciemus: Quia, quamdiu centum vivi remanserint
nunquam Anglicorum dominio aliquatenus volumus subjugari. Non enim propter
gloriam, divitias, aut honores, pugnamus; sed propter libertatem solummodo,
quam nemo bonus nisi simul cum vita amittet. Hinc est, Reverende Pater and
Domine, quod sanctitatem vestram cum omni praecum instantia genuflexis cordibus
exoramus, quatenus sincero cord menteque pia recensentes, quod apud eum, cujus
vices in terris geritis, non sit pondus and pondus, nec distinctio Judaei and
Graeci, Scoti aut Anglici, tribulationes and Augustias nobis and Ecclesiae Dei
illatas ab Anglicis, paternis oculis intuentes Regem Anglorum, cui sufficere
debet quod possidet (cum olim Anglia septem aut pluribus solebat sufficere
Regibus) monere and exhortari dignemini, ut nos Scotos in exili degentes,
Scotia (ultra quam habitatio non est) nihilque nisi nostrum cupientes in pace
dimittat: Cui pro nostra procuranda quiet, quicquid possumus (ad statum
nostrum respectu habito) facere volumus cum effectu. Vestra enim interest,
Sancte Pater, hoc facere, qui paganorum feritatem Christianorum culpis
exigentibus in Christianos saevientem aspicitis, and Christianorum terminos
arctari indies. Quaedam sunt deleta.
-- Sanctitatis memoriae derogat, si (quod absit) Ecclesia in aliqua sui part
vestris temporibus patiatur Ecclipsin aut Scandalum, vos videritis: Exhortet
igitur Christianos Principes, qui non causam ut causam ponentes se fingunt in
subsidium terrae sanctae propter guerras, quas habent cum proximus ire non
posse; Cujus impedimenti causa est verior, quod in minoribus proximis
debellandis utilitas proprior, and resistentia de bilior estimantur. Sic quam
leto cord dictus D. Rex Noster and nos; Si Rex Anglorum nos in pace dimittit,
illuc iremus; qui nihil ignorant satis novit: quod Christi Vicario totique
Christianitati ostendimus and testamur. Quibus, si Sanctitas vestra Anglorum
relatibus nimis credula, fidem sinceram non adhibet, aut ipsis in nostram
confusionem favere non desinat, Corporum excidia, animarum exitia, and caetera
quae sequenturin commoda, quae ipsi in nobis and nos in ipsis fecerimus, vobis
ab altissimo credimus imputanda; ex quo sumus and erimus in his quae tenemur,
tanquam obedientiae filii, vobis tanquam ipsius vicario, in omnibus complacere;
ipsique tanquam summo Regi and judici causam nostram ruendam committimus,
cogitatum nostrum jactitantes in ipso, sperantesque finem; quod in nobis
virtutem faciet, and ad nihilum rediget Hosts nostros Serenitatem ac
Sanctitatem vestram conservet Altissimus, Ecclesiae suae Sanctae per tempora
diuturna. Datum apud Monasterium de Aberbroth in Scotia, 6 die Aprilis, Anno
gratiae Millesimo trecentesimo vicesimo. Anno vero Regni Regis nostri
supradicti quintodecimo.

Number 11. The Oath given to the Scots, who submitted to the Protector.
YOu shall bear your Faith to the King's Majesty, Ex Libro Concilii. Fol. 139.
our Sovereign Lord Edward the Sixth, etc. till such time as you shall be
discharged of your Oath by special License. And you shall, to the uttermost of
your power, serve his Majesty truly and faithfully, against all other Realms,
Dominions, and Potentates, as well Scots as others. You shall hear nothing that
may be prejudicial to his Majesty, or any of his Realms or Dominions, but with
as much diligence as you may, shall cause the same to be opened, so as the same
come to his Majesty's Knowledge, or to the knowledge of the Lord Protector, or
some of his Majesty's Privy Council. You shall, to the uttermost of your
possible Power, set forwards and advance the King's Majesty's Affairs in
Scotland, for the Marriage and Peace.

Number 12. The Protestation of the Bishop of London made to the Visitors, when
he received the King's Majesty's Injunctions and Homilies.
Ex Libro Concilii. Fol. 110.
I Do receive these Injunctions and Homilies, with this Protestation, That I
will observe them, if they be not contrary and repugnant to God's Law, and the
Statutes and Ordinances of this Church.

The Submission and Revocation of the same Bishop, made before the Lords of the
Kings Majesty's Council, presently attending upon his Majesty's Person; with
the subscription of his Name thereunto.
Where I Edmund Bishop of Lodon, have at such time as I received the King's
Majesty's, my most dread Sovereign Lord's Injunctions and Homilies at the Hands
of his Highness Visitors, did unadvisedly make such Protestation, as now upon
better consideration of my duty of Obedience, and of the ill Example that may
ensue to others thereof, appears to me neither reasonable, nor such as might
well stand with the Duty of an humble Subject; forasmuch as the same
Protestation, at my request, was then by the Register of that Visitation
enacted and put in Record; I have thought it my bounden Duty, not only to
declare before your Lordships, That I do now, upon better consideration of my
Duty, renounce and revoke my said Protestation, but also most humbly beseech
your Lordships, that this my Revocation of the same may likewise be put in the
same Records for a perpetual Memory of the Truth: Most humbly beseeching your
good Lordships, both to take order that it may take effect, and also that my
former unadvised doings may, by your good Mediations, be pardoned of the King's
Majesty.

Edmund London.


Number 13. Gardiner's Letter to Sir John Godsalve concerning the Injunctions.
Ex MS. Col. C. C. Cantab.
Mr. Godsalve, after my right hearty Commendations, with like thanks for the
declaration of your good mind toward me (as you mean it) although it agrees
not with mine Account, such as I have had leisure to make in this time of
Liberty, since the Death of my late Sovereign Lord, (whose Soul Jesu pardon).
For this have I reckoned, that I was called to this Bishopric without the
offense of God's Law, or the King's, in the attaining of it. I have kept my
Bishopric these sixteen Years, accomplished this very day, that I write these
my Letters unto you, without offending God's Law, or the King's, in the
retaining of it, howsoever I have of frailty otherwise sinned. Now if I may
play the third part well, to depart from the Bishopric without the offense of
God's Law, or the King's, I shall think the Tragedy of my Life well passed
over: and in this part to be well handled is all my care and study now, how to
finish this third Act well; for so I offend not God's Law, nor the King's, I
will no more care to see my Bishopric taken from me, than my self to be taken
from the Bishopric. I am by Nature already condemned to die, which Sentence no
Man can pardon, nor assure me of delay in the execution of it; and so see that
of necessity I shall leave my Bishopric to the disposition of the Crown from
whence I had it, my Household also to break up, and my bringing up of Youth to
cease, the remembrance whereof troubles me nothing. I made in my House at
London a pleasant Study that delighted me much, and yet I was glad to come into
the Country and leave it; and as I have left the use of somewhat, so can I
leave the use of all to obtain a more quiet; it is not loss to change for the
better. Honesty and Truth are more leef to me than all the Possessions of the
Realm, and in these two to say and do frankly, as I must, I never forbear yet:
and in these two, Honesty and Truth, I take such pleasure and comfort, as I
will never leave them for no respect, for they will abide by a Man, and so will
nothing else. No Man can take them away from me but my self; and if my self do
them away from me, then my self do undo my self; and make my self worthy to
lose my Bishopric, whereat, such as gape, might take more sport than they are
like to have at my hands. What other Men have said or done in the Homilies I
cannot tell, and what Homilies or Injunctions shall be brought hither, I know
not; such as the Printers have sold abroad, I have read and considered, and am
therefore the better instructed how to use my self to the Visitors at their
repair hither, to whom I will use no manner of Protestation but a plain
Allegation, as the Matter serves, and as Honesty and Truth shall bind me to
speak; for I will never yield to do that should not beseem a Christian. Bishops
ought never to lose the Inheritance of the King's Laws due to every English Man
for want of Petition. I will show my self a true Subject, humble and obedient,
which repugneth not with the preservation of my Duty to God, and my Right in
the Realm, not to be enjoined against an Act of Parliament: which mine intent I
have signified to the Council, with request of redress in the Matter, and not
to compel me to such an Allegation, which, without I were a Beast, I cannot
pretermit: and I were more than a Beast, if after I had signified to the
Council Truth and Reason in words, I should then seem in my Deeds not to care
for it. My Lord Protector, in one of such Letters as he wrote to me, willed me
not to fear too much; and indeed I know him so well, and diverse others of my
Lords of the Council, that I cannot fear any hurt at their hands, in the
allegation of God's Law and the King's, and I will never defame them so much to
be seen to fear it. And of what strength an Act of Parliament is, the Realm was
taught in the case of her that we called Queen Ann, where all such as spoke
against her in the Parliament House, although they did it by special
Commandment of the King, and spoke that was truth, yet they were fain to have a
Pardon, because that speaking was against an Act of Parliament. Did you never
know, or here tell of any Man, that for doing that the King our late Sovereign
Lord willed, devised, and required to be done, He that took pains, and was
commanded to do it, was fain to sue for his Pardon, and such other also as were
doers in it: and I could tell who it were. Sure there has been such a Case,
and I have been present when it has been reasoned, That the doing against an
Act of Parliament, excuses not a Man, even from the Case of Treason, although
a Man did it by the King's Commandment. You can tell this to your remembrance,
when you think further of it, and when it comes to your remembrance, you will
not be best content with your self, I believe, to have advised me to enter the
breach of an Act of Parliament, without surety of Pardon, although the King
command it, and were such indeed as it were no matter to do it at all. And thus
I answer the Letters with worldly civil Reasons, and take your Mind and Zeal
toward me to be as tender as may be; and yet you see that the following of
your Advice might make me lose my Bishopric by mine own Act, which I am sure
you would I should keep, and so would I, as might stand with my Truth and
Honesty, and none otherwise, as knows God, who send you heartily well to fare.

Number 14. The Conclusion of Gardiner's Letter to the Protector, against the
lawfulness of the Injunctions.
Cotton Libr. Vesp. D. 18.
Whether the King may command against the Common Law, or an Act of Parliament,
there is never a Judge, or other Man in the Realm, ought to know more by
experience, of that the Lawyers have said, than I.

First, My Lord Cardinal had obtained his Legacy by our late Sovereign Lord's
Request at Rome; yet being it was against the Laws of the Realm, the Judges
censured the Offense of Praemunire; which Matter I bore away, and take it for a
Law of the Realm, because the Lawyers said so, but my Reason digested it not.

The Lawyers, for the confirmation of their Doings, brought in a Case of my
Lord Typtest, an Earl he was, and learned in Civil Laws; who being Chancellor,
because in execution of the King's Commission he offended the Laws of the
Realm, he suffered on Tower Hill: they brought in the Examples of many Judges
that had Fines set on their Heads in like case, for transgression of the Laws
by the King's Commandment; and this I learned in this Case.

Since that time being of the Council, when many Proclamations were devised
against the Carriers out of Corn; when it came to punishing the Offenders, the
Judges would answer, it might not be by the Laws, because the Act of Parliament
gave liberty, Wheat being under a price: Whereupon at the last followed the Act
of Proclamations, in the passing whereof were many large words.

When the Bishop of Exeter and his Chancellor were by one Body brought into a
Praemunire, I reasoned with the Lord Audley then Chancellor so far, as he bad me
hold my peace, for fear of entering a Praemunire my self: But I concluded, that
although I must take it as of their Authority that it is Common Law, yet I
could not see how a Man authorized by the King, as since the King's Majesty
has taken upon him the Supremacy, every Bishop is, that Man could fall in a
Praemunire.

I reasoned once in the Parliament House, where was free Speech without danger;
and there the Lord Audley Chancellor, then to satisfy me, because I was in
some secret estimation as he knew. Thou art a good Fellow, Bishop, (quoth he)
look the Act of the Supremacy, and there the King's doings be restrained to
Spiritual Jurisdiction: And in an other Act, No Spiritual Law shall have place
contrary to a Common Law, or an Act of Parliament. And if this were not (quoth
he) the Bishops would enter in with the King, and by means of his Supremacy
order the Law as you listed; but we will provide (quoth he) that the Praemunire
shall never go off your Heads. This I bare away there, and held my peace.

Since that time, in a Case of Jewels, I was fain, with the Emperor's
Ambassador Chapinius when he was here, and in the Emperor's Court also, to
defend and maintain by Commandment, that the King's Majesty was not above his
Laws, and therefore the Jeweller, although he had the King's Bill signed, yet
it would not serve, because it was not obtained after the Order of the Law, in
which Matter I was very much troubled. Even this time twelvemonth, when I was
in Commission with my Lord great Master, and the Earl of Southampton, for the
altering of the Court of Augmentations, there was my Lord Montague, and other
of the King's Learned Council, of whom I learned what the King might do against
an Act of Parliament, and what danger it was to them that meddled. It is fresh
in my Memory, and they can tell whether I say true or no; and therefore being
learned in so notable Causes, I wrote in your absence therein, as I had learned
by hearing the Common Lawyers speak (whose Judgments rule these Matters)
howsoever my reason can digest them. When I wrote thereof, the Matter was so
reasonable, as I have been learned by the Lawyers of the Realm, that I trusted
my Lords would have stayed till your Graces return.

Number 15. A Letter from the Duke of Somerset to the Lady Mary in the
beginning of King Edward's Reign.
Madam, my humble Commendations to your Grace premised;
THese may be to signify unto the same, Cotton Libr. Faustin. C. 2.
that I have received your Letters of the second of this present, by Jane your
Servant, reknowledging my self thereby much bound unto your Grace; nevertheless
I am very sorry to perceive that your Grace should have or conceive any
sinister or wrong Opinion in me and others, which were by the King, your late
Father, and our most gracious Master, put in trust as Executors of his Will,
albeit the truth of our doings being known to your Grace, as it seems by your
said Letter not to be. I trust there shall be no such fault found in us, as in
the same your Grace has alleged; and for my part, I know none of us that
will willingly neglect the full execution of every Jot of his said Will, as far
as shall and may stand with the King our Master's Honor and Surety that now
is: otherwise I am sure that your Grace, nor none other his Faithful Subjects,
would have it take place; not doubting but our Doings and Proceedings therein,
and in all things committed to our Charge, shall be such as shall be able to
answer the whole World, both in honor and discharge of our Consciences. And
where your Grace writes, that the most part of the Realm, through a naughty
Liberty and Presumption, are now brought into such a Division, as if we
Executors go not about to bring them to that stay that our late Master left
them; they will forsake all Obedience, unless they have their own Will and
Fantasies, and then it must follow that the King shall not be well served, and
that all other Realms shall have us in an Obloquy and Derision, and not without
just cause. Madam, as these words written or spoken by you sounds not well,
so can I not persuade my self, that they have proceeded from the sincere mind
of so virtuous and so wise a Lady, but rather by the setting on and procurement
of some uncharitable and malicious Persons, of which sort there are too many in
these days, the more pity: but yet we must not be so simple so to weigh and
regard the Sayings of ill-disposed People, and the Doings of other Realms and
Countries, as for that Report we should neglect our Duty to God, and to our
Sovereign Lord and Native Country, for then we might be justly called evil
Servants and Masters; and thanks be given unto the Lord, such has been the
King's Majesty's Proceedings, our young Noble Master that now is, that all his
faithful Subjects have more cause to render their hearty thanks for the
manifold Benefits showed unto his Grace, and to his People and Realm, sithence
the first day of his Reign until this hour, than to be offended with it; and
thereby rather to judge and think, that God who knows the Hearts of all Men,
is contented and pleased with his Ministers, who seek nothing but the true
Glory of God, and the Surety of the King's Person, with the Quietness and
Wealth of his Subjects. And where your Grace writes also, That there was a
Godly Order and Quietness left by the King our late Master, your Graces Father,
in this Realm at the time of his Death; and that the Spiritualty and Temporalty
of the whole Realm, did not only, without compulsion, fully assent to his
Doings and Proceedings, specially in Matters of Religion, but also in all kind
of Talk, whereof, as your Grace wrote, ye can partly be witness your self; at
which your Graces Sayings I do something marvel. For if it may please you to
call to your remembrance what great Labors, Travels, and Pains, his Grace had,
before he could reform some of those stiff-necked Romanists or Papists: yea,
and did not they cause his Subjects Rise and Rebel against him, and constrained
him to take the Sword in his hand, not without danger to his Person and Realm?
Alas, why should your Grace so shortly forget that great Outrage done by those
Generations of Vipers unto his Noble Person only for God's Cause? Did not some
of the same ill kind also, I mean that Romanist Sect, as well with his own
Realm as without, conspire oftentimes his Death, which was manifestly and
oftentimes proved, to the confusion of some of their privy Assisters. Then was
it not that all the Spiritualty, nor yet the Temporalty, did so fully assent to
his Godly Orders, as your Grace writes of? Did not his Grace also depart from
this Life before he had fully finished such Orders as he minded to have
established to all his People, if death had not prevented him? Is it not most
true, that no kind of Religion was perfected at his Death, but left all
uncertain, most like to have brought us in Parties and Divisions, if God had
not only helped us? And does your Grace think it convenient it should so remain?
God forbid. What regret and sorrow our late Master had, the time he saw he must
depart, for that he knew the Religion was not established as he purposed to
have done, I and others can be witness and testify; and what he would have done
further in it, if he had lived, a great many know, and also I can testify: And
does your Grace, who is learned, and should know God's Word, esteem true
Religion, and the knowledge of the Scriptures, to be new-fangledness and
fantasy? For the Lord's sake turn the Leaf, and look the other while upon the
other side, I mean, with another Judgment, which must pass by an humble Spirit
through the Peace of the Living God, who of his infinite Goodness and Mercy
grant unto your Grace plenty thereof, to the satisfying of your Sovereign, and
your most noble Hearts continual desire.

Number 16. Certain Petitions and Requests made by the Clergy of the Lower
House of the Convocation, to the most Reverend Father in God the Archbishop of
Canterbury his Grace, and the residue of the Prelates of the Higher House, for
the furtherance of certain Articles following.
FIrst; Ex M. S. Dr. Stillingfleet.
That Ecclesiastical Laws may be made and established in this Realm by thirty
two Persons, or so many as shall please the King's Majesty to name and appoint,
according to the effect of a late Statute made in 35th Year of the most noble
King, and of most famous Memory, King Henry the 8th. So that all Judges
Ecclesiastical, proceeding after those Laws, may be without danger and peril.

Also that according to the Ancient Custom of this Realm, and the Tenor of the
King's Writ for the summoning of the Parliament, which be now, and ever have
been, directed to the Bishops of every Diocese, the Clergy of the Lower House
of the Convocation may be adjoined, and associate with the Lower House of the
Parliament; or else, That all such Statutes and Ordinances as shall be made
concerning all Matters of Religion and Causes Ecclesiastical, may not pass
without the sight and assent of the said Clergy.

Also that whereas by the Commandment of King Henry the 8th, certain Prelates
and learned Men were appointed to alter the Service in the Church, and to
devise other convenient and uniform Order therein; Who according to the same
Appointment, did make certain Books, as they be informed; Their Request is,
That the said Books may be seen and perused by them, for a better expedition of
Divine Service to be set forth accordingly.

Also that Men being called to Spiritual Promotions, or Benefices, may have
some Allowance for their necessary Living, and other Charges to be sustained
and born, concerning the same Benefices, in the first Year wherein they pay the
first Fruits.

Whether the Clergy of the Convocation may liberally speak their Minds without
danger of Statute or Law?

Number 17. A second Petition to the same purpose.
Ex M. S. Dr. Stillingfleet.
WHere the Clergy, in this present Convocation assembled, have made humble suit
unto the most Reverend Father in God, my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and
all the other Bishops, That it may please them to be a Mean to the King's
Majesty, and Lord Protector's Grace, that the said Clergy, according to the
Tenor of the King's Writ, and the Ancient Laws and Customs of this Noble
Realm, might have their Room and Place, and be associated with the Commons in
the Nether House of this present Parliament, as Members of the Commonwealth,
and the King's most humble Subjects. And if this may not be permitted and
granted unto them, that then no Statutes nor Laws concerning the Christian
Religion, or which shall concern especially the Persons, Possessions, Rooms,
Livings, Jurisdictions, Goods or Chattels of the said Clergy, may pass nor be
enacted, the said Clergy not being made privy thereunto, and their Answers and
Reasons not heard. The said Clergy do most humbly beseech an Answer and
Declaration to be made unto them, what the said most Reverend Father in God,
and all other the Bishops, have done in this their humble Suit and Request, to
the end that the said Clergy, if need be, may choose of themselves such able and
discreet Persons, which shall effectually follow the same Suit in the Name of
them all.

And whereas in a Statute ordained and established by Authority of Parliament
at Westminster, in the 25th Year of the Reign of the most excellent Prince King
Henry the 8th; The Clergy of this Realm submitting themselves to the King's
Highness, did knowledge and confess, according to the Truth, That the
Convocations of the same Clergy have been, and ought to be assembled by the
King's Writ, and did promise farther, in Verbo Sacerdotii, that they never from
thenceforth would presume to attempt, alledg, claim, or put in use, or enact,
promulge, or execute any new Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances, Provincials, or
other, or by whatsoever other Name they shall be called in the Convocation,
unless the King's most Royal Assent and License may to them be had to make,
promulge, and execute the same. And his Majesty to give his most Royal Assent
and Authority in that behalf, upon pain of every one of the Clergy doing the
contrary, and being thereof Convict, to suffer Imprisonment, and make Fine at
the King's Will. And that no Canons, Constitutions, or Ordinances shall be made
or put in execution within this Realm, by Authority of the Convocation of the
Clergy, which shall be repugnant to the King's Prerogative Royal, or the
Customs, Laws, or Statutes of this Realm; which Statute is eft-soons renewed
and established in the 27th Year of the Reign of the most noble King, as by the
Tenor of both Statutes more at large will appear. The said Clergy being
presently assembled in Convocation, by Authority of the King's Writ, do desire
that the King's Majesty's License in writing, may be for them obtained and
granted, according to the effect of the said Statutes authorizing them to
attempt, entreat, and commune of such Matters, and therein freely to give their
Consents, which otherwise they may not do upon pain and peril premised.

Also the said Clergy desires, that such Matters as concerns Religion, which
be disputable, may be quietly and in good order reasoned and disputed among
them in this House, whereby the Verities of such Matters shall the better
appear, and the Doubts being opened, and resolutely discussed, Men may be fully
persuaded with the quietness of their Consciences, and the time well spent.

Number 18. A Paper offered to Q. Elizabeth, and afterward to K. James,
concerning the Inferior Clergies being brought to the House of Commons. Reasons
to induce her Majesty, that Deans, Archdeacons, and some other of her grave
and wise Clergy, may be admitted into the Lower House of Parliament.
1. IN former Times, when Causes Ecclesiastical were either not at all, Ex M.S.
Dr. Borlace.
or else very rarely treated of in that Assembly, the Clergy were thought Men
most meet to consult and determine of the Civil Affairs of this Realm.

2. The Supreme Authority in Church Causes, is not newly granted, but reunited
and restored to the Crown; and an Order is by Law already established, how all
Abuses in the Church are to be reformed: so as no cause concerning Religion may
be handled in that House, without her Majesty's special leave, but with the
manifest impeaching of her Prerogative Royal, and contempt of the said Order.

3. If it shall please her Highness to give way to this Course, that
Church Matters be there debated, and in part concluded: How much more necessary
is it now, than it was in former Times, that some of the Clergy should be there
present at the same?

In the same Paper written over to be presented to K. James, this Article is
thus varied. It is thought the Clergy falling into a Praemunire, and so not in
the King's Protection, it did afterward please the King to pardon them, but
not to restore them. So began this Separation, as far forth as can be
collected; then the Wisdom of a great Politician, meeting with the Ambition of
as great a Prelat, wrought the continuance of the said Separation; under this
pretense, That it should be most for the Honor of him and his Clergy, to be
still by themselves in two Assemblies of Convocation, answerable in proportion
to the two Houses of Parliament. There are many other inconsiderable Amendments
made by Bishop Ravis 's own hand.
It does not appear why they were excluded, but as it is thought either the
King offended with some of them, did so grievously punish the whole Body, or
else the Ambition of one of them meeting with the subtilty of an undermining
Politic, did occasion this causeless Separation.

5. They are yet to this day called by several Writs, directed into their
several Diocesses under the Great Seal, to assist the Prince in that High Court
of Parliament.

6. Though the Clergy and the Universities be not the worst Members of this
Commonwealth, yet in that respect they are of all other in worst condition;
for in that Assembly every Shire has their Knights, and every incorporate Town
their Burgesses, only the Clergy and the Universities are excluded.

7. The Wisdom and Justice of this Realm does intend, That no Subject should be
bound to that Law, whereunto he himself (after a sort) has not yielded his
Consent; but the Clergy and the Universities may now be concluded by Law,
without their Consent, without their just Defense, without their Privity.

8. The many Motions made so prejudicial to the State and being of the Clergy
and Universities, followed now with so great eagerness in that House, would
then be utterly silenced, or soon repressed, with the sober and sufficient
Answers of the Clergy present.

9. It would much repair the Reputation and Credit of the Clergy, which now is
exposed to great contumely and contempt, as generally abroad in this Land, so
particularly in that House. And whosoever is religious and wise may observe, That
the Contempt of the Clergy is the high way to Atheism and all Profaneness. Men
are Flesh and not Spirit, led by ordinary outward Means, and not usually
overwrought by extraordinary Inspirations; and therefore do easily despise
their Doctrine, whose Persons they have in contempt.

10. Look into the whole World, Christian or Unchristian, and see if the Civil
State in every Place be not supported and maintained by the Dignity and
Authority of their Clergies, subordinate and subjected unto them: As on the
contrary, where the Clergy is base and contemptible, there grows an Anarchy and
Confusion. It is Conscience that works Obedience to the temporal Magistrate,
not Constitutions, nor Constraint; the one may command it, the other may
correct the breach of it, only Religion effects a peaceable Subjection.

11. It concerns the Clergy most of all Men in England, that the present
State be continued, as now it is happily established without any alteration.
Whereas some others in that House may think it would be good for them to fish
in troubled Waters, or that any change would be better to them, than their
present Estate wherein they live so Malecontent, through their own
unthriftiness or malignity of Nature, or perverseness of Opinion.

12. If hereafter God in justice should plague us for our Sins, by taking away
the joy of our Hearts, yet how greatly would it tend to his Glory, the Good of
this Land, and the Honor of her blessed Memory; if it shall please her
Majesty, to leave a Portion of the Clergy interessed in that House, where they
may stand for the Godly Government established in her days, against all
Innovation of Popery or Puritanism?

13. In the mean time (which God in Mercy grant may be for many Generations)
her Majesty shall be sure of a number more in that Assembly, that ever will be
most ready to maintain her Prerogative, and to enact whatsoever may make most
for her Highness safety and contentment, as the Men that next under God's
Goodness do most depend upon her Princely Clemency and Protection.

14. It would much recover the ancient Estimation and Authority of that
Assembly, if it might be increased with Men of Religion, Learning, and
Discretion; which now is somewhat imbased by Youths, Serving-men, and Outlaws,
that injuriously are crept into the Honorable House.

15. And it is the more necessary that there were some more Men of Sobriety and
Judgment in that Meeting, that might counterpoise the haste and headiness of
others that have intruded themselves, especially considering that a Cipher is
as sufficient to promote a single Figure of One into the place of Ten, as the
best Man that gives Voice in that House, when they come to calculating.

Number 19. A Letter of Martin Bucers to Gropper.
Gratiam and Pacem Doctissime and Amicissime and Vir.
QUod tam sero respondeo ad tuas Literas, Ex M S. Col. C. C. Cantab.
quanquam etiam occupationes Ministerii mei, tamen id magis in causa fuit, quod
non satis liqueret, quomodo respondere conveniret, simul meae in te Charitati,
meoque Ministerio, and praesenti temporis conditioni. Sed tamen quia Charitati
Deus facile omnia secundat, and frugifera facit, hac incitatus nunc respondeo,
and respondeo ex ejus dictatione.

Et primum de eo, quod te de meo adventu and Ministerio non praemonuerim. Quod
per totam Germaniam increbuerat, etiam anteaquam Ego certus de vocatione ista
essem, non putavi te latere posse. Mox etiam ut adveni and priusquam aliquid
Ministerii inivissem, tuum colloquiuum expetii. Certe nihil maluissem quam a te
ante omnia doceri and institui. Novit Christus quid tibi Tribuam.

Quod scribis te cupere meam conditionem sic esse ut Clero and Populo Vestrae
Coloniae Agrippinae gratus esse and placere possem, nunc cum secus se res
habeant, non esse quod tibi quid imputem. Tibi optime Groppere nihil hujus
imputo, confido enim te, me, quo ipse loco habes, eo etiam studere apud alios
collocare.

Sed cogitemus juxta, cui, Ego Clero istic, cui populo and cur gratus minus
sim, and non placeam, Clerus and Populus Christi cum Domino suo, Personam
nullam in invocantibus Christum, in iis praesertim, quos aliqua Religionis
Nostrae opinio commendat, aversatur: quamvis deprehensi in contumelia Christi,
in desertione verbi ejus, in Scandalo objecto Ecclesiae ejus; Lex nostra non
Judicat quenquam nisi audierit prius ab eo, and cognoverit quid fecerit.
Audiant, cognoscant, tum Judicent: si audire and cognoscere nolunt nec Judicare
jure possunt. Vulgata est haec Responsio, sed nosti etiam Jure Divino, Naturae,
and scripto ab hominibus niti.

Sed O Clerum, O sortem Domini, and habentes Christum sortem suam. Gratias ago
Christo Domino nostro quod in me nihil deprehendet vester Clerus and Populus,
cur me ullo Jure abjicere, nedum persequi queant. Assumpsit me Dominus,
Servorum non est rejicere: posuit me in Ministerium suum Christus, depelli me
eo nemo de Clero Christi postulabit. Agnoscunt se invicem and amant, atque in
opere eodem promovent, quicunque Christi Spiritu vivunt and aguntur, qui hunc
non habent, Christi non sunt, quicquid ipsi se, vel alii eos vocent.

Displicet in me quod videor aliquid Canonum, sed humanitus tantum Conditorum,
transgressus. Hoc si propter Ecclesiam Christi, vel ejus aedificationem vel
ornatum displiceret, non tolerata fuissent tam diu, and hodie tolerarentur, tam
horrendae and Manifestae Simoniae, Sacrilegia, and vitae totius tanta, adeoque
and Canonibus, and Divinis Legibus graviter damnata foeditas. Christi igitur
veritas, and libertas in me istis displicet, non transgressio Canonum, quam in
summa necessariis Sanctionibus penitus and tot jam saeculis pro ridiculo habent.

Consolabor itaque me in Domino, Beati estis, cum vos odio habuerint homines,
and a se excluserint, atque convitiis prosciderint and rejecerint nomen vestrum
tanquam nefandum, Causa filii hominis. Qui in Coelis sedet Pater ridet profecto
hosce conatus contra Regnum Filii sui, and brevi loquetur illis in ira sua.
Avertat misericordia ejus, quae sequuntur.

Deploranda profecto Caecitas, non videre hanc Dei clarissimam Lucem, infanda
stupiditas, ista Dei Judicia non sentire. Quotidie enim vident and audiunt ut
collidantur, qui impingunt in hanc poenam Scandali, and ut commolat illa, in
quos ipsa ceciderit, and tamen conantur adhuc rejicere hunc lapidem, quem Pater
in Zion pro fundamento and angulo posuit. Sed dolent haec and tibi, ac mecum ea
deploras, provides enim quid ista malorum invehant, and adhuc invectura sint.

Audio plerosque multo quam antea solitum fuit concionari purius, audivi etiam
quosdam ipse, in quorum concionibus nihil reprehendendum audiebatur, at quam
multa desiderabantur. Nam pro Amplitudine Majestatis Christi, praedicanda
Christi omnia sunt: hoc est summa perspicuitate, liberate and virtute, non
enim ut multa praeclara cogitemus, aut loquamur, sed ut Domino magis magisque
fidamus, nomen ejus celebremus: idque verbis and factis omnibus, sacrae
Conciones habendae sunt. Quare etiam opposita juxta se ponenda sunt ut magis
illucescant, sed ad singularia Sermo dimittendus est ut plus moneat.

In Templo D. Columbae, aiunt Idolo ejus Imaginis parari vestem majoris precii
quam Centum Florenorum. Si jam Pastor hujus Parochiae Christum pure and (...)
cum effectu praedicat, qui fert tam pudendam Idololatriam? Et si ornari statuam
posse aliquo color dicere conetur, quare non eum cultum prescribit, quem
gratum Martyribus and S. Patres testantur, cultum qui Cruci Christi sit
consentaneus: Sed sicut ipsi verbis Christo omnia tribuunt, facto autem
quaerunt and prosequuntur tam multa contra Christum, ita faciunt etiam populum
delectari nonnihil Saniore Doctrina. Omni autem Vita and Religione permanere in
omnibus Superstitionibus and Vitae impuritate in qua antea haerebat.

Jactatur magna populi devotio istis and erga Pastores suos reverentia, hoc
autem gravius peccatur, cum illis Christus non quam simplicissime in omnibus
etiam Ceremoniis praedicatur. Sed O spinas existimationis and commoditas
mundialis, O fundum tenuem, and humorem malignum, in quo aestus Crucis enatum
semen tam cito arefacit. Haec de iis scribo ad quos pertinent.

De te non dubito Gloriam Christi and propugnationem Regni ejus tibi quoque ut
scribis, cordi esse: tamen te rogo per Christum id quod subjicis diligenter and
coram Christo Domino excutias.

Sed nolui tamen sic urgere Causam Christi, ut dum promotam eam velim, magis
remorer. Zelum oportet esse secundum scientiam, Recte haec, si rite
intelligantur. Sed scientia Spiritus, non Carnis, hic opus est. Causa Christi
nec debet nec potest per se quidem urgeri nisi assiduis praecibus, and modesta,
leni, Religiosa, sed libera, sed clara, sed integra confessione and
praedicatione Christi, eaque quae non verbis tantum sed etiam factis constet.
Hoc si scimus and agimus, Zelum habemus secundum scientiam, and Causam Christi
tantum promovere, and remorari non possumus. Nam Christo tradita est omnis
potestas in Coelo and in Terra, igitur nihil est Potestatis per se Pontifici,
cucullatis and personatis, ac quibusvis titulis titulatis hominibus, qui
scilicet aegreferant liberam and puram Christi Praedicationem. Est quidem
aliquando tacendum Evangelium Christi, sed apud canes and porcos, imo nec apud
hos tacendum est, cum Gloria Christi agitur: sed animose confitendum est,
quanquam non sit illis late explicandum, id est, Sanctum hoc projiciendum and
Margaritae istae spargendae.

Sunt qui far nos Lutheranos non possunt, and tamen a Regno Christi non
abhorrent? Ubi quaeso sunt and qui? Qui enim aliquid Christi habent, ii neminem
odisse and condemnare sustinent, non auditum, non cognita causa; nam Filii Dei
agnoscunt loquelam Christi, oves ejus sequuntur vocem ejus, per quemcunque eam
insonari fecerit.

Si Reformatio Ecclesiae per istos ulla quaeritur, indubie id quaerent, ut
Membra Christi omnia sub capite Christo recolligantur and reconcinnentur and
cooptentur. Quare nemo horum, qui vero Reformationis verae studio tenetur,
ullum hominem sub ullo titulo, quamvis odiosum invidia Crucis Christi, cuiquam
imposuerit, ab hoc sancto opere instaurandi Ecclesias rejiciat, praesertim cum
luce meridiana constet clarius, Pontificios nihil prorsus passuros mutari. Quid
ergo? non quaeremus ut Patria nostra tam pernitiosis desidiis aliquando
liberaretur, ut uno tandem ore Christum glorificemus.

Ne resecemus vites, and uvas queramus a Spinis. Valeat apud nos praejudicium
Christi: quosque ille assumpsit; eos conservi ne repudiemus. Quid cuique datum
sit facile videre est: arbor quaelibet ut plantata est, ut ingenium habet, ita
fert fructum. Ne fugiamus Scandalum Crucis cum quo Christus est. Et si Christi
nos non pudet, nec servorum ejus nos pudeat. Paulus scribit Timotheo, ne pudet
te Testimonii Domini Nostri, neque mei vincti ejus: ita dum nos negotia Domini
agimus sinceriter, nec nostri quisquam, quantumlibet nos Mundus inter damnatos
numeret, qui Christi sit, pudebit. Non est res ulla, ad quam quisquis eam
sincere agit, magis expetat adjuvari se, etiamsi fieri possit ab omnibus
Creaturis, atque est negotium Reformationis Christianae.

Irascentur quidam, tumultuabuntur graviter credo, and impedient negotium
Domini; hoc non credo, neque enim poterunt. Et ut Dominus eis gravissima contra
Regnum suum facere concedat, tamen nobis Filiis Dei propterea nihil tacendum,
nihil dissimulandum, nihil remittendum est in hac Causa Christi.

Jubes me non suspicari te sic mundo inescatum, ut refugias Crucem Domini
far, si ita res postulet, and fructum facturus videare: de te profecto hoc
bonis apud quos convenit semper Testor, te mihi multo plura in Causa Christi
hactenus semper reipsa praestitisse, quam promisisses aut etiam verbis prae te
tulisses: apud me quidem, cum contrarium nunc accidat a quodam, nisi te Christi
membrum and praeclaris dotibus ornatum suspicerem, creed, ita dedit mihi
Dominus sublimia Mundi non mirari, tuam amicitiam and familiaritatem tantopere
non quaesivissem, nec tali studio colerem: sed valde oro Dominum det tibi
videre ubi, quando and qua ratione fructum pro Regno facere possis; and animet
te ac corroboret forti contemplatione Potestatis and Majestatis suae, ut vere
dicas, absit mihi gloriari nisi in Cruce Domini Nostri Jesu Christi per quem
mihi Mundus Crucifixus est and ego mundo. Tantae opes, honores, Curae rerum
saecularium, tamen spinae sunt, tamen onera sunt. Presbyter es Domini Nostri
Jesu Christi, cujus praecipuum munus est praedicare Christum. Clericum veteres
Sancti non patiebantur, vel tutelam pupillorum, vel curam viduarum suscipere,
tam liberum volebant esse curis hujus Saeculi omnem Clericum: at quantis tu ac
etiam privatis causis, nec tamen semper Pupillorum and Viduarum praegravaris,
id dolet indubie and tibi ipsi. Acceptabile Tempus nunc est and Dies Salutis,
sed tempus breve, visitationem Nostram tempore agnoscamus and sequamur.

Haec dum non datur commentari tecum coram, quia te vere diligo, quia colo
sinceriter, cum hunc certum haberem nuncium, ad te scribere volui.

Quod magnificum D. Cancellarium meis Verbis diligenter Salutasti, gratias ago,
utinam autem and resalutare ille, vel hic cum fuit, quod usque ad eam Diem quo
iterum abiit clam me fuit, admittere me ad pium colloquium dignatus esset.
Tamen rogo salutes illum officiose meis verbis.

Dominus Jesus qui solus and efficit and largitur omne bonum, donet ut omnia in
ipso quaeramus, and ab ipso expectemus: Sic facile nos in ipso agnoscemus and
complectemur, quicquid odiosorum Titulorum Diabolus and Membra ejus injiciant.
In Christo enim nec Mas quidem and Foemina, Judaeus and Ethnicus, nedum
Lutherani and Romani; sed omnes unum sunt. In hoc been vale, and fac pro Chrsti
Charitate ut tandem nos aliquando videamus, and Sancto Colloquio nos mutuo
recreemus. Optime mi and colende atque vere dilecte Cordi meo Groppere. Bonn
pridie Calendas Februarii 1543.

Deditus Tibi in Domino, M. Bucerus.
Praecipuum oblitus eram, te per Christum rogo and obtestor, moan ad huc me,
versantem in Negotio Christi. Debes hoc Christo; and apud me tuto depones omnia
nec unquam frustra monebis.




Number 20. Questions and Answers concerning the Divorce of the Marquess of
Northampton.
1. QUid dirimit Matrimonii Vinculum? Ex M. S. Dr. Stillingfleet.


2. Quas ob causas dirimi poterit?

3. An dirimi poterit Conjugium a thoro, non a vinculo?

4. Quibus casibus possit sic dirimi?

5. An exceptio illa (excepta Fornicationis causa) etiam in Lucae, Marci and
Pauli locis, qui de his rebus tractant, est subaudienda?

6. An etiam Uxor, repudiata propter Adulterium, alteri poterit nubere?

7. An redire ad priorem maritum, repudiatae Adulterae liceat?

8. An Maritus, propter Adulterium, ab Uxore casta possit repudiari?

Ad primam Respondemus; Ipso Adulterii facto Matrimonii vinculum dirimi. Nam
alioquin, ob solum Adulterium non liceret viro Uxorem repudiare: voluntas viri
solicitat judices, Judices palam faciunt Ecclesiae, virum licite talem
repudiare Uxorem.

Ad secundam Resp. Quod ob solam causam stupri dirimitur Matrimonii vinculum:
cujus ipso quidem facto, Conjugii dissolvitur nodus, and loquimur his, qui
Sacrosancti Matrimonii jus agnoscunt.

Ad tertiam Resp. Quod non; quia Mulier quamdiu vixerit, alligata and viro,
Romans 7. item ne fraudetis vos invicem, 1 Cor. 7. item in eodem loco Uxori Vir
debitam benevolentiam reddat simpliciter, and Uxor viro, item Vir non habeat
potestatem sui corporis, sed Uxor similiter; nec Vxor habeat potestatem sui
corporis, sed Vir.

Ad quartam patet in responsione ad tertiam.

Ad quintam Respondemus; quod exceptio ista, viz. Nisi causa stupri; est
subaudienda in Luca, Marco and Paulo: alioquin manifesta erit repugnantia inter
Matthaeum and eos.

Ad sextam respond. Quod repudiata propter Adulterium, quia Uxor repudiantis
desiit esse, ob idque libera est sicut aliae omnes post obitum virorum possunt
aliis nubere; aequo jure juxta illud Pauli, si non contineant, contrahant
Matrimonium, 1 Cor. 7.

Ad septimam respond. Quod non licet repudiatae Adulterae redire ad
repudiantem, tanquam alligatae ei Jugi vinculo Matrimonii.

Ultima Question Nihil ad Nos.

Number 21. Injunctions given by the King's Majesty's Visitors, to all and
every the Clergy and Laity, now resident within the Deanery of Duncastre.
Ex MS. Dr. Item. Johnson.
YOu shall not hereafter, in the Pulpit or elsewhere, on the Sunday, or any
other day, give knowledge to your Parishioners, when or what day in the Week any
of the Abrogate Holy Days were solemnized or kept in the Church, but omit the
same with silence as other Working-days, for the utter abolishing of the
remembrance thereof.

Item. You shall teach your Parishioners, That Fasting in the Lent, and other
days, is a mere Positive, that is to say, Man's Law; and by the Magistrates,
upon considerations, may be altered, changed, and dispensed with: and that
therefore all Persons having just cause of Sickness, or other Necessity, or
being licensed thereto, may temperately eat all kinds of Meat, without scruple
or grudge of Conscience.

Item. You shall every day, that an High Mass is said or sung at the High
Altar, before the same Mass, read openly in your Churches the English
Suffrages, for the preservation and safeguard of the King's Majesty's People,
and prosperous success of his Affairs.

Item. You shall every Sunday, at the time of your going about the Church with
Holy Water, into three or four places, where most audience and assembly of
People is, for the declaration of the Ceremonies, say, distinctly and plainly,
that your Parishioners may well hear and perceive the same, these words,
Remember Christ's Bloodshedding, by the which most holy sprinkling, of all
your Sins you have free pardon. And in like manner, before the dealing of the
Holy Bread, these words, Of Christ's Body this is a Token; which on the Cross
for our Sins was broken; wherefore of his Death if you will be partakers, of
Vice and Sin you must be forsakers. And the Clarke in the like manner shall
bring down the Paxe, and standing without the Church Door, shall say loudly to
the People these words; This is a Token of joyful Peace, which is betwixt God
and Men's Conscience: Christ alone is the Peacemaker, which straightly commands
Peace between Brother and Brother. And so long as ye use these Ceremonies, so
long shall ye use these Significations.

Item. The Churchwardens of every Parish Church shall, some one Sunday, or
other Festival day, every Month, go about the Church, and make request to every
of the Parish for their charitable Contribution to the Poor; and the Sum so
collected, shall be put in the Chest of Alms for that purpose provided. And
forasmuch as the Parish-Clark shall not hereafter go about the Parish with his
Holy Water as has been accustomed, he shall, instead of that labor, accompany
the said Churchwardens, and in a Book Register the Name and Sum of every Man
that gives any thing to the Poor, and the same shall intable; and against the
next day of Collection, shall hang up some-where in the Church in open place,
to the intent the Poor having knowledge thereby, by whose Charity and Alms they
be relieved, may pray for the increase and prosperity of the same.

Item. The Churchwardens, for the better relief of honest Poverty, shall, upon
sufficient Surety found for the repayment of the same, lend to some young
married Couple, or some poor Inhabitants of their Parish, some part of the said
Alms, whereby they may buy some kind of Stuff: by the working, sale, and gains
whereof, they may repay the Sum borrowed, and also well relieve themselves; or
else the said Churchwardens to buy the Stuff themselves, and pay the Poor for
their working thereof; and after sale of the same, to return the Sum, with the
Gain, to the said Chest, there to remain to suchlike use.

Item. Forasmuch as heretofore you have not, by any means, diligence, or study,
advanced your selves unto knowledge in God's Word, and his Scriptures,
condignly, as appertains to Priests, and Dispensators of God's Testament; to
the intent you may hereafter be of better ability to discharge your selves
toward God, and your Offices to the World, you shall daily, for your own study
and knowledge, read over diligently, and weigh with judgment, two Chapters of
the New Testament, and one of the Old, in English, and the same shall put in
ure and practice, as well in living as preaching, at times convenient, when
occasion is given.

Item. Forasmuch as Drunkenness, Idleness, Brawls, Dissension, and many other
Inconveniences do chance between Neighbor and Neighbor, by the assembly of
People together at Wakes, and on the Plough- Mundays; it is therefore ordered
and enjoined, That hereafter the People shall use, make, or observe no more
such Wakes, Plough- Mundays, or drawing of the same, with any such Assembly or
Rout of People, or otherwise, as has been accustomed, upon pain of forfeiting
to the King's Highness 40 s. for every Default, to be paid by the Owner of the
Plough and Householder, whereunto the said Plough is drawn, or Wakes are kept.

The Names of the Visitors.
Sir John Markham. John Hearn. Thomas Gragrave. Roger Tongue. William Moreton.
Edmund Farley.
Number 22. A Proclamation against those that do innovate, alter, or leave down
any Rite or Ceremony in the Church of their private Authority; and against them
which Preach without License. Set forth the 6th day of February, in the Second
Year of the King's Majesty's most gracious Reign.
Ex Reg. Cranmer. Fol. 111.
THe King's Majesty, by the advice of his most entirely beloved Uncle, the Duke
of Somerset, Governor of his most Royal Person, and Protector of all his
Realms, Dominions, and Subjects, and others of his Counsel; Considering nothing
so much to tend to the disquieting of this Realm, as diversity of Opinions, and
variety of Rites and Ceremonies concerning Religion, and worshipping of
Almighty God; and therefore studying all the ways and means which can be to
direct this Church, and the Cure committed to his Highness, in one and most
true Doctrine, Rite, and Usage, yet is advertised, That certain private Curats,
Preachers, and other Laymen, contrary to their bounden Duties of Obedience, do
rashly attempt, of their own and singular Wit and Mind, in some
Parish-Churches, and otherwise, not only to persuade the People from the old
and accustomed Rites and Ceremonies, but also themselves brings in new Orders
every one in their Church, according to their Fantasies; the which, as it is
an evident token of Pride and Arrogance, so it tends both to Confusion and
Disorder, and also to the high displeasure of Almighty God, who loves nothing
so much as Order and Obedience. Wherefore his Majesty straightly charge and
commands, That no manner of Person, of what Estate, Order, or Degree soever
he be, of his private Mind, Will, or Fantasy, do omit, leave done, change,
alter, or innovate any Order, Rite, or Ceremony, commonly used and frequented
in the Church of England, and not commanded to be left undone at any time in
the Reign of Our late Sovereign Lord, his Highness Father, other than such as
his Highness, by the Advice aforesaid by his Majesty's Visitors, Injunctions,
Statutes, or Proclamations, has already, or hereafter shall command to be
omitted, left, innovated, or changed, but that they be observed after that sort
as before they were accustomed, or else now since prescribed by the Authority of
his Majesty, or by the means aforesaid: upon pain, That whosoever shall offend
contrary to this Proclamation, shall injure his Highness Indignation, and
suffer Imprisonment, and other gxievous Punishments, at his Majesty's Will and
Pleasure. Provided always, that for not bearing a Candle upon Candlemass-day;
not taking Ashes upon Ash Wednesday; not bearing Palm upon Palm Sunday; not
creeping to the Cross; not taking Holy Bread, or Holy Water; or for omitting
other such Rites and Ceremonies concerning Religion, and the Use of the Church,
which the most Reverend Father in God, the Archbishop of Canterbury, by his
Majesty's Will and Commandment, with the Advice aforesaid, has declared, or
hereafter shall declare to the other Bishops, by his Writing under Seal, as
heretofore has been accustomed to be omitted or changed, no Man hereafter be
imprisoned, nor otherwise punished, but all such things to be reputed for the
observation and following of the same, as though they were commanded by his
Majesty's Injunctions. And to the intent that rash and seditious Preachers
should not abuse his Highness People, it is his Majesty's Pleasure, That
whosoever shall take upon him to Preach openly in any Parish Church, Chapel,
or any other open place, other than those which he licensed by the King's
Majesty, or his Highness Visitors; the Archbishop of Canterbury, or the
Bishops of the Diocese where he does preach, except it be Bishop, Parson,
Vicar, Dean, Warden, or Provost, in his or their own Cure, shall be forthwith,
upon such attempt and preaching, contrary to this Proclamation, be committed to
Prison, and there remain, until such time as his Majesty, by the advice
aforesaid, has taken order for the further punishment of the same; and that
the Premises should be more speedily and diligently done and performed, his
Highness gives straightly in Commandment, to all Justices of Peace, Mayors,
Sheriffs, Constables, Headborroughs, Churchwardens, and all other his Majesty's
Officers and Ministers, and Rulers of Towns, Parishes, and Hamlets, that they
be diligent and attendent to the true and faithful execution of this
Proclamation, and every part thereof, according to the intent, purport, and
effect of the same. And that they of their proceedings herein, or if any
Offender be, after they have committed the same to Prison, do certify his
Highness, the Lord Protector, or his Majesty's Council, with all speed thereof
accordingly, as they tender his Majesty's Pleasure, the Wealth of the Realm;
and will answer to the contrary at their uttermost perils.

God save the King.
Number 23. An Order of Council for the Removing of Images.
AFter our right hearty Commendations to your good Lordship, Regist. Cranmer.
Fol. 32.
where now of late, in the King's Majesty's Visitation, among other Godly
Injunctions commanded to be generally observed throughout all Parts of this his
Highness Realm, one was set forth for the taking down all such Images as had at
any time been abused with Pilgrimages, Offerings, or Censings. Albeit that this
said Injunction has in many parts of the Realm been well and quietly obeyed
and executed, yet in many other places much strife and contention has arisen,
and daily arises, and more and more increases, about the execution of the
same: some Men being so superstitious, or rather willful, as they would by
their good-wills, retain all such Images still, although they have been most
manifestly abused; and in some places also the Images, which by the said
Injunctions were taken down, be now restored and set up again; and almost in
every place is contention for Images, whether they have been abused or not. And
whiles these Men go about on both sides contentiously to obtain their Minds,
contending whether this or that Image has been offered unto, kissed, censed,
or otherwise abused, Parties have in some places been taken, in such sort, as
further inconvenience is very like to ensue, if Remedy be not provided in time.
Considering therefore that almost in no places of the Realm is any sure
quietness, but where all Images be wholly taken away and pulled down already;
to the intent that all Contention in every part of the Realm for this Matter
may be clearly taken away, and that the lively Images of Christ should not
contend for the dead Images, which be things not necessary, and without which
the Churches of Christ continued most Godly many Years, We have thought good to
signify unto you, That his Highness Pleasure, with advice and consent of us the
Lord Protector, and the rest of the Council, is, That immediately upon the
sight hereof, with as convenient diligence as you may, you shall not only give
order, that all the Images remaining in any Church or Chapel within your
Diocese be removed and taken away, but also by your Letters signify unto the
rest of the Bishops within your Province, this his Highness Pleasure, for the
like Order to be given by them, and every of them within their several Diocese;
and in the execution hereof We require, both you and the rest of the said
Bishops, to use such foresight, as the same may be quietly done, with as good
satisfaction of the People as may be. Thus fare your good Lordship well.

From Somerset House, the 21 of February, 1547. Your Lordships assured Friends,
E. Somerset. Jo. Russel. Henricus Arundel. T. Seymor. Anthony Wingfield.
William Paget.


Number 24. The Copy of a Letter sent to all those Preachers which the King's
Majesty has licensed to Preach, from the Lord Protector's Grace, and other of
the King's Majesty's most honorable Council; the 13th day of May, in the
Second Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord, King Edward the Sixth.
AFter our right hearty Commendations, as well for the Conservation of the
quietness and good order of the King's Majesty's Subjects, as that they should
not, by evil and unlearned Preachers, be brought unto Superstition, Error, or
evil Doctrine, or otherwise, be made stubborn and disobedient to the King's
Majesty's Godly Proceedings, his Highness, by our Advice, has thought good to
inhibit all manner of Preachers, who have not such License, as in the same
Proclamation is allowed, to preach, or stir the People, in open and common
preachings of Sermons, by any means, that the devout and godly Homilies, might
the better, in the mean while, sink into his Subjects Hearts, and be learned
the sooner, the People not being tossed to and fro with seditious and
contentious Preaching, while every Man, according to his Zeal, some better,
some worse, goes about to set out his own Fantasy, and to draw the People to
his Opinion. Nevertheless it is not his Majesty's Mind hereby clearly to
extinct the lively Teaching of the Word of God, by Sermons made after such
sort, as for the time the Holy Ghost shall put into the Preacher's Mind, but
that rash, contentious, hot, and undiscreet Preachers, should be stopped; and
that they only which be chosen and elect, be discreet and sober Men, should
occupy that place, which was made for Edification, and not for Destruction; for
the Honor of God, and Peace and Quietness of Conscience to be set forward, not
for private Glory to be advanced; to appease, to teach; to instruct the People
with Humility and Patience, not to make them contentious and proud; to instill
into them their Duty to their Heads and Rulers, Obedience to Laws and Orders,
appointed by the Superiors who have Rule of God; not that every Man should run
before their Heads has appointed them what to do, and that every Man should
choose his own way in Religion: The which thing yet being done of some Men, and
they being rather provoked thereto by certain Preachers, than dehorted from it,
it was necessary to set a stay therein: And yet forasmuch as we have a great
confidence and trust in you, that you will not only Preach truly and sincerely
the Word of God, but also will use circumspection and moderation in your
Preaching, and such Godly Wisdom as shall be necessary and most convenient for
the Time and Place. We have sent unto you the King's Majesty's License to
Preach, but yet with this Exhortation and Admonishment, That in no wise you do
stir and provoke the People to any Alteration or Innovation, other than is
already set forth by the King's Majesty's Injunctions, Homilies, and
Proclamations; but contrariwise, That you do in all your Sermons exhort Men to
that which is at this time more necessary; that is, to the emendation of their
own Lives, to the observance of the Commandments of God, to Humility, Patience,
and Obedience to their Heads and Rulers; comforting the Weak, and teaching them
the right way, and to flee all old Erroneous Superstitions, as the Confidence
in Pardons, Pilgrimages, Beads, Religious Images, and other such of the Bishop
of Rome's Traditions and Superstitions, with his usurped Power; the which
things be here in this Realm most justly abolished; and straightly rebuking
those, who of an arrogance and proud hastiness, will take upon them to run
before they be sent, to go before the Rulers, to alter and change things in
Religion, without Authority, teaching them to expect and tarry the time which
God has ordained, to the revealing of all Truth, and not to seek so long
blindly and hidlings after it, till they bring all Orders into contempt. It is
not a private Man's Duty to alter Ceremonies, to innovate Orders in the Church;
nor yet it is not a Preachers part to bring that into contempt and hatred,
which the Prince does either allow, or is content to suffer. The King's
Highness, by our Advice, as a Prince most earnestly given to the true knowledge
of God, and to bring up his People therein, does not cease to labor and travel
by all godly means, that his Realm might be brought and kept in a most Godly
and Christian Order, who only may and ought to do it. Why should a private Man,
or a Preacher, take this Royal and Kingly Office upon him; and not rather, as
his Duty is, obediently follow himself, and teach likewise others to follow and
observe that which is commanded. What is abolished, taken away, reformed, and
commanded, it is easy to see by the Acts of Parliament, the Injunctions,
Proclamations, and Homilies: the which things most earnestly it behooves all
Preachers in their Sermons to confirm and approve accordingly, in other things
which be not yet touched, it behooves him to think, that either the Prince does
allow them, or else suffer them; and in those it is the part of a Godly Man,
not to think himself wiser than the King's Majesty, and his Council: but
patiently to expect and to conform himself thereto, and not to intermeddle
further, to the disturbance of a Realm, the disquieting of the King's People,
the troubling of Men's Consciences, and disorder of the King's Subjects.

These things we have thought good to admonish you of at this time, because we
think you will set the same so forward in your preaching, and so instruct the
King's Majesty's People accordingly, to the most advancement of the Glory of
God, and the King's Majesty's most Godly Proceedings, that we do not doubt but
much profit shall ensue thereby, and great conformity in the People the which
you do instruct; and so we pray you not to fail to do: and having a special
regard to the weakness of the People what they may bear, and what is most
convenient for the time; in no case to intermeddle in your Sermons, or
otherwise, with Matters in contention or controversion, except it be to reduce
the People in them also to Obedience, and following of such Orders as the
King's Majesty has already set forth, and no others, as the King's Majesty and
our Trust is in you, and as you tender his Highness Will and Pleasure, and will
answer to the contrary at your Peril.

Fare you well.

Printed at London, June 1. 1548.
Number 25. Queries put concerning some Abuses of the Mass; with the Answers
that were made by many Bishops and Divines to them.
Quest. 1. Whether the Sacrament of the Altar was instituted to be received of
one Man for another, Ex M. S. Dr. Stillingfleet.
or to be received of every Man for himself?
Answers.
THe Sacrament of the Altar was not instituted to be received of one Man for
another, Cantuarien.
but to be received by every Man for himself.

The Sacrament of the Altar was not instituted to be received of one Man for
one other, but of every Man for himself. Eboracen.


I think that the Sacrament of Thanks was not instituted to be received of one
Man for another, London. Hereford. Cicestren. Worcester. Norvicen. Assaven.

but of every Man for himself.

The Sacrament of the Altar was instituted, Dunelm.
to be received of every Man by himself, to make him a Member of Christ's
Mystical Body, and to knit and unite him to Christ our Head; as St. Paul says,
1 Cor. 10. Vnus Panis, and unum Corpus, multi sumus omnes qui de uno pane
participamus.

The Sacrament of the Altar was not instituted to be received of one Man for
another Sacramentally, Sarisburien.
no more than one Man to be Christened for another: notwithstanding the Grace
received by him that is Housled, or Christened, is profitable and available to
the whole Mystical Body of Christ, and therefore to every lively Member thereof.

The Sacrament (as they call it) of the Altar, Lincoln.
was not instituted to be received of one for another, but of every Man for
himself: For Christ, the Institutor of this Sacrament, says, with manifest
words, Take, eat, etc. Mat. 26. And also, John 6. Except ye eat the Flesh of
the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no Life in you. Whosoever eats my
Flesh, and drinks my Blood, has eternal Life. Nor the receiving of one Man
does avail or profit any other; otherwise than by the way of Example, whereby
the People present are provoked to the imitation of the thing that is good.

Elien.
The Sacrament of the Altar was not instituted to be received of one Man for
another, but of every Man for himself.

Covent. and Litchfield.
I think and suppose, that the Sacrament of the Altar was instituted to be
received of every Man for himself; for so are the words of Christ, Comedite and
bibite, speaking to them present, and to every one of them.

Carliolen.
The Sacrament of the Altar was not ordained or instituted to be received of one
Man alone, but of all, and for all, because it is the General and continual
Remedy, help, and succor of all, which makes no let or stop of themselves,
and their own unfaithful or sinful Life.

Roffen.
Of every Man for himself.

Bristollen.
The Sacrament of the Altar was not instituted to be received of one Man for
another Sacramentally, no more than one Man to be Christened for another, but
every Man to receive it in Faith and cleanliness of Life for himself.

Meneven.
The Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ was not instituted, that one Man
should receive it for another, but every Man for himself. Probet autem seipsum
homo, and sic de pane illo edat, and de poculo illo bibat. Cor. 11.

Dr. Cox.
The Sacrament of Thanks was instituted to be received of every Man for himself,
and not of one for another.

Dr. Tyler.
Of every Man for himself.

Quest. 2. Whether the Receiving of the said Sacrament of one Man does avail
and profit any other?
Answers.
Cantuarien.
THe Receiving of the said Sacrament by one Man, does avail and profit only him
that receives the same.

Eboracen.
The Receiving of the Sacrament only avails the Receivers thereof, except it
be by reason of such Communion as is among the Members of the Mystical Body of
Christ.

London. Worcester. Hereford. Norvicen. Cicestren. Assaven.

I think that the Receiving of the said Sacrament does not avail or profit any
other, but only as all other good Works done of any Member of Christ's Church,
be available to the whole Mystical Body of Christ, and to every lively Member
of the same, by reason of mutual Participation, and spiritual Communion between
them. And also it may be profitable to others, as an Example whereby others may
be stirred to Devotion, and to like Receiving of the same.

The Receiving of the Sacrament of one Man does profit another, Dunelmen.
as the health and good-liking of one Member, does in part strengthen the Body,
and other Members of the same: for St. Paul says, Multi unum corpus sumus in
Christo, singuli autem alter alterius membra, Romans 12. and 1 Cor. 12. Si gaudet
unum membrum, cangaudent omnia membra. And in a Mystical Body, the good living
of one Man, stirs another to the same.

The Oblation made after the Consecration in the Mass, Sarisburien.
is the offering unto the Father of the Body and Blood of Christ, by the
Minister, with the Commemoration of the Passion, and with Thanksgiving for the
same, and with the Prayers of the Minister and People, that it may be available
to all Christian People.

The Receiving thereof of one Man, Elien.
does not avail or profit any other, but as all good Deeds profit the
Congregation; and as one Member healed or taking nourishment, profits another
Member.

And I suppose also, Covent. and Litchfield.
that the Receiving of one Man does not avail or profit another, but as every
good Act or Deed of one Member does profit to the whole Body.

The Receiving of the Sacrament, Carliolen.
as it notes the Act of him who receives, it may be, that it neither avails
or profits him who receives, nor any other, but also hurts the Receiver, if
he presume to take it rashly or unworthily. But as touching the thing which is
Sacred, offered, and distributed by the Common Minister in the Mass,
representing the Holy Church, or Mystical Body of Christ, and is received both
of him and other that will, whatsoever the Receiving or Receiver be, it
avails and profits all present, absent, Living and Dead.

No, but as the receipt of wholesome Doctrine, Roffen.
the receipt of the Fear of God, the receipt of any Godly Gift that is
profitable to any one Member of Christ's mystical Body, may be said generally
to profit the whole Body, because there is a mystical Communion, and a
spiritual Participation amongst all the Members of Christ in all Godliness; as
there is in the natural Body a natural participation of all natural Affections
both good and evil.

It appears, by the words of St. Cyprian, Bristollen.
Epist. 6. Lib. 3. that it should be profitable and available to others,
forasmuch as he wrote these words of the faithful Christians which departed
this World in Prison,. and said; Quanquam fidelissimus and devotissimus frater
noster, inter caetera solicitudinem and curam suam cum fratribus in omni
obsequio operationis impertitur, qui nec illic curam corporum -- scripserit ac
scribat ac significat mihi dies quibus in carcere beati fratres nostri ad
immortalitatem gloriosae mortis exitu transeant and celebrentur, hic a nobis
Oblationes and Sacrificia ob commemorationes eorum, quae cito vobiscum, domine
prosperante, celebrabimus. Ita enim docuit Apostolus Christi unus Panis and
unum Corpus multi sumus omnes, 1 Cor. 1.
qul de uno Pane, and de uno Calice participamus. Nec loquitur de his solis qui
eo tempore Corinthi conveniebant, and Sacramentum ab unius Sacerdotis manu
recipiebant; Verum potius de seipso tunc procul a Corintho agente, and
Corinthiis ipsis omnibusque in Christum credentibus ubi tandem constituti
essent quos omnes significat unum esse Corpus qui toto orb de uno Pane
communicantes participarent.

Meneven.
The Sacrament profits him only, that receives it worthily; like-as it
damnifieth him only that receives it unworthily. Nam qui edit aut bibit
indigne, judicium sibi ipsi edit ac bibit, 1 Cor. 11.

Dr. Cox.
The Receiving of the said Sacrament, does avail and profit the Receiver only,
and none other, but by occasion to do the like.

Dr. Tyler.
So much as the Christening of Man profits another, which after my Opinion
profits nothing.

Quest. 3. What is the Oblation and Sacrifice of Christ in the Mass?
Answers.
Cantuarien.
THe Oblation and Sacrifice of Christ in the Mass is not so called, because
Christ indeed is there offered and sacrificed by the Priest and the People,
(for that was done but once by himself upon the Cross) but it is so called,
because it is a Memory and Representation of that very true Sacrifice and
Immolation which before was made upon the Cross.

Eboracen.
The Oblation and Sacrifice of Christ in the Mass, is the presenting of the very
Body and Blood of Christ to the Heavenly Father, under the Forms of Bread and
Wine, consecrated in the Remembrance of his Passion, with Prayer and
Thanksgiving for the Universal Church.

London. Worcester. Hereford. Norvicen. Cicestren. Assaven.

I think it is the Presentation of the very Body and Blood of Christ being
really present in the Sacrament; which Presentation the Priest makes at the
Mass, in the Name of the Church, unto God the Father, in memory of Christ's
Passion and Death upon the Cross; with thanksgiving therefore, and devout
Prayer, that all Christian People, and namely they which spiritually join with
the Priest in the said Oblation, and of whom he makes special remembrance, may
attain the benefit of the said Passion.

Dunelm.
The Oblation and Sacrifice of Christ in the Mass, is the presenting of Christ
by the Priest, in commemoration of his Passion, being our eternal and permanent
Sacrifice, present in the Sacrament by his Omnipotent Word left to us, to have
his Death and Passion in remembrance, with giving thanks for the same, and
Prayer of the Minister, and them which be present, that the same may be
available to the whole Church of Christ, both Quick and Dead in the Faith of
Christ.

Which Oblation, commemoration of Christ's Passion, Sarisburie
giving of Thanks and Prayer, takes effect only in them which by their own
proper Faith shall receive the same effect.

There is properly no Oblation nor Sacrifice, Lincoln.
but a remembrance of the One Oblation of Christ upon the Cross, made once for
all; a giving of Thanks for the same, and the Prayer of the public Minister
for the whole Congregation; which Prayer only takes effect in them, who by
their own proper Faith receive the benefit of Christ: And where many of those
Authors do say there is an Oblation and Sacrifice, they spoke so, because in
this Sacrament we be admonished of the Oblation and Sacrifice of Christ upon
the Cross.

If Oblation be taken pro re Oblata, then, Elien.
as old Ancient Doctors write, it Is, Corpus and Sanguis, scil. Verum, and
Corpus, scil. Mysticum. If ye take it pro actu offerendi, it is a Commemoration
and Representation of Christ's Death once suffered upon the Cross, with
Thanksgiving for the same.

I suppose the very Oblation and Sacrifice of Christ in the Mass, Covent. and
Litchfield.
is this; That after the Benediction, that is to say, the words of Consecration
spoken by the Priest, and the divine working of Christ presently, by the which
there is the very precious Body, and the precious Blood of Christ present to be
so received; then the Priest offers up the holy Memory of our Redemption to
God the Father, most humbly praying, That as it was once offered up by Christ
upon the Cross, for the Redemption of Mankind, so it may take effect now, and
at all times, especially in those that with a true Faith, with a full Trust and
hope shall so worthily receive it.

The Oblation and Sacrifice of Christ in the Mass, is, Carliolen.
even the same which was offered by Christ on the Cross, ever and everywhere
abiding and enduring of like strength, virtue and power. The difference is,
That on the Cross Christ being there both Priest and Sacrifice, offered himself
visibly; and in the Mass, being likewise both Priest and Sacrifice, offers
himself invisibly, by the common Minister of the Church, who in the name and
stead of the whole faithful Congregation offers and presents, as he bid and
commanded by Christ.

The Representation and Commemoration of Christ's Death and Passion, said and
done in the Mass, is called the Sacrifice, Oblation, Roffen.
or Immolation of Christ; Non rei veritate, (as learned Men do write) sed
significandi Mysterio.

It is in giving Thanks unto the Father, Bristollen.
as Christ did himself at his Supper, taking the Bread and Wine into his hands,
and with the words of Consecration, consecrating the same, and then making
presentation of the very Body and Blood of Christ unto God the Father, in the
Name of the Church, in the memory of Christ's most painful Passion and Death,
suffered upon the Cross; and so worthily receiving the same, and with giving
thanks again for the same at the latter end; as the Gospel says, Hymno dicto;
but what this Hymn or Prayer was, I find no mention.

Meneven.
The Oblation and Sacrifice of Christ mentioned in the Mass, is a memorial of
Christ's only Sacrifice upon the Cross, once offered for ever; Vnica enim
Oblatione, perfectos effecit in perpetuum eos qui sanctificantur, Heb. 10.

Dr. Cox.
The Oblation of the Sacrifice of Christ in the Mass, is the Prayer, the Praise,
the Thanksgiving, and the remembrance of Christ's Passion and Death.

Dr. Tyler.
There is no Oblation, speaking properly; but some Ancient Doctors, and the use
of the Church, calls the receiving of it, with the Circumstances then done,
an Oblation; that is to say, a Memorial and Remembrance of Christ's most
precious Oblation upon the Cross.

Quest. 4. Wherein consists the Mass by Christ's Institution?
Answers.
Cantuarien.
THe Mass, by Christ's Institution, consists in those things which be set
forth in the Evangelists; Matthew. 26. Mark 14. Luke 22. 1 Cor. 10, and 11.

Eboracen.
The Mass, by Christ's Institution, consists in the Consecration and Oblation
of the very Body and Blood of Christ, with Prayer, Thanksgiving, and Receiving
of the same, as appears in the Evangelists, Matthew. 26.27. Mark 14. and 15.
Luke 22. and 23. John 6. 1 Cor. 10, and 11. Acts 2.

London. Worcester. Hereford. Norvicen. Cicestren. Assaven.
I think it consists principally, in the Consecration, Oblation, and Receiving
of the Body and Blood of Christ; with Prayers and Thanksgiving; but what the
Prayers were, and what Rites Christ used or commanded at the first institution
of the Mass, the Scripture declares not.

Dunelm.
The Mass, by Christ's Institution, consists in those things which be set
forth by the Evangelists, Mat. 26. Mark 19. Luke 22. and Paul, 1 Cor. 10, 11,
and 12. and Acts 2. with humble and contrite Confession, the Oblation of
Christ, as before: the Receiving of the Sacrament, giving of Thanks therefore,
and Common Prayer for the Mystical Body of Christ.

The Mass, by Christ's Institution, Sarisburien.
consists in those things which be set forth in the Evangelists, Matthew. 26.
Mark 14. Luke 22. 1 Cor. 10, and 11. Acts 2, and 13.

It consists in these things which be set forth Matthew. 26. Mark 19. Luke 22.
1 Cor. 10.11. Acts 2. Lincoln.


The Mass, by Christ's Institution, Elien.
consists in those things which be set forth in the Evangelists, Matthew. 26.
Luke 22. and 1 Cor. 10.11. and Acts 2.

The Mass, by Christ's Institution, Covent. and Litchfield.
only expressing the Form of Christ by the Scripture, consists in the taking
of the Bread, and giving thanks to God the Father, in the Benediction and
Consecration, in the receiving or distribution, and receiving of them, to whom
the distribution is made by the hands of the Priest: as the Eldest Authors
affirm, in the renewing of the memory of our Redemption by an undoubted Faith,
and for that to give most humble thanks; so calling to remembrance, as often as
it is thus done, the inestimable benefit of our Redemption. What Thanks that
Christ gave before this most holy Action, or what Thanks that he gave after it,
by the general words of Matthew, Hymno dicto, are not expressed: Chap. 24.
So that there appears, both before this most Holy Action, and also after, to
be a certain Ceremony appointed by Christ more than is expressed: Moreover, 1
Cor. 11.
by the Doctrine of the Apostle, it behooves every Man to be wise and
circumspect, that he receive not this most blessed Sacrament unworthily and
unreverently, not making difference betwixt the receiving of the most blessed
Body of Christ, and other Meats.

The Mass, by Christ's Institution, consists in Consecrating, Carliolen.
Offering, Receiving, and Distributing of the blessed Body and Blood of our
Savior Jesus Christ, according to that he himself did, willed, and commanded
to be done. This we have manifested by the Evangelists, St. Paul, and St. Luke,
in the Acts. But because Christ was, after his Resurrection long with his
Disciples, communicating and treating of the Kingdom of God, what should be
done here to come thither, it may be well thought, that whatsoever he or his
Holy Spirit left with the Apostles, and they with others, after which also the
whole Universal Congregation of Christian People uses and observes, most
ancient and holy Doctors in like form notes, may likewise be said and taken as
of Christ's Institution.

I am not able to say, Roffen.
that the Mass consists by Christ's Institution in other things, than in
those which be set forth in the Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, and Luke, in the
Acts, and 1 Cor. 10. and 11.

As I take it, the Mass by Christ's Institution, Bristollen.
consists in those Things and Rites, which be set forth unto us, in the 26th
of St. Matthew, the 14th of St. Mark, and the 22 of St. Luke; and also as
mention is made in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap. 10. and 11. and
Acts 11. any other Institution I read not of by Scripture.

Meneven.
Christ's Institution compriseth no more in the Mass, than the Communion of the
Body and Blood to be ministered and received under both kinds, of Bread and
Wine, according as is declared by the Evangelists, Mat. 26. Mark 14. Luke, in
the Acts 2.

Dr. Cox.
The Mass, by Christ's Institution, consists in Thanksgiving to the Father, in
distributing of the Body and Blood of Christ to the Congregation, to have the
Death and Passion of Christ in remembrance, and in the end to laud and praise
God.

Dr. Tyler.
In giving of Thanks to God the Father, and blessing and breaking it, and
reverently receiving the Holy Sacraments, with all such Rites and Circumstances
as Christ did in both the kinds.

Quest. 5. What time the accustomed Order began first in the Church, that the
Priest alone should receive the Sacrament?
Answers.
Cantuarien.
I Think the use, that the Priest alone did receive the Sacrament without the
People, began not within six or seven hundred Years after Christ.

Eboracen.
The accustomed Order that the Priest alone should receive the Sacrament, began
about the time of Zepherinus; who when the common People had left their daily
and frequent Communion, ordained that they should communicate, at the least
once in the Year, that was at Easter; which Ordinance Innocentius the third
confirmed.

London. Worcester. Her^ford. Norwich. Chichester. St. Asaph.

I know no further Order or Commandment of the Church, but what time the
devotion of the People was so greatly decayed, that they would not come to
receive the Sacrament, then the Priests were compelled to receive it alone.

The custom began, that the Priest alone should receive the Sacrament of
necessity, Dunelm.
when the People falling from Devotion would not come to the Communion, but
cared more for their worldly Business, than for godly receiving the Sacrament:
for in the beginning they received it daily by fervent Devotion; after, thrice
a Week; after, on the Sundays only; after, thrice in the Year, at Christmas,
Easter, and Whitsunday; after, only once in the Year, at Easter, by coldness of
Devotion.

The time certain is not known, most Men ascribe it unto Gregory, Lincoln.
who was more than 600 Years after Christ; for that every Bishop of Rome
bringing in his Portion, (some Introitus, some Kyrie Eleison, some Graduale);
the Mass in the said Gregory's time, was grown to the full quantity it is now
of, and Men's Inventions began to step before, and get ground of Christ's
Institution; but from the beginning it was not so, for Christ did not eat and
drink alone at his last Supper, but gave the Bread and Cup to all present. In
the Primitive Church one did not eat alone, and the rest look on, but they did
eat together, and drink together, as it is to be seen Acts 2. 1 Cor. 11. And
Anacletus writes thus, Peracta Consecratione omnes communicent, qui noluerint
Ecclesiasticis caveant liminibus. De Conso. Did. 1. Cum Episcopus, etc.

The very time I know not, but is to be supposed, Eli.
that that custom crept into the Church by negligence and slackness of the
Lay People, who would not so often receive it as the Priest would; for in the
beginning, the Communion with the Laity was Quotidiane, which the Priest
observes still unto this day, and not the Laity; and there be Canons that
binds the Priest to the receiving of it as often as he does Consecrate; and the
cause why the Priests did not receive it, after they had consecrated, should
seem to be, that there was none to receive it with them, which was the occasion
of these making of those Canons, as I suppose.

Because Scripture says, Panis quem frangimus, Roffen.
nonne communicatio corporis est, etc. Likewise de Chalice, cui benedicimus;
and also, bibite ex eo omnes. And the Canons said to be of the Apostles, Can.
10. and 10. and of the Antiochian Council, Can. 2. Anacletus in an Epistle,
commands the Sacrament to be received of more than of the Priest alone.
Dyonise also declares the same, and also long after, Chrysostom. St. Ambrose, and
St. Austin, both complain of the slackness of some, and earnestly exhorts the
People to the receipt thereof. Therefore I suppose that custom, that the Priest
should receive it alone, where it was celebrated openly, was not received in
the Church of Christ by the space of four or five hundred Years at least after
Christ.

I know no such Order or Commandment of the Church, Bristol.
but what time the Devotion of the People began greatly to decay, and would not
come to receive the Sacrament, then I think the Priests were compelled to
receive it alone.

I suppose not long after the Apostles time, Dr. Cox.
the godly Devotions of the People decaying, who at the beginning used to come
daily, and after that weekly, after that thrice in the Year, and at last but
once in the Year, the Priest was forced to receive the Sacrament alone.

Quest. 6. Whether it be convenient that the same Custom continue still within
this Realm?
Answers.
Cantuarien.
I Think it more agreeable to the Scripture and Primitive Church, that the first
usage should be restored again, that the People should receive the Sacrament
with the Priest.

London. Worcester. Hereford. Norvicen. Cicestren. Assaven.

I would wish, that at every Mass, there would be some to receive the Sacrament
with the Priest: Nevertheless if none will come to receive it, I think it
lawful and convenient, that the Priests of this Realm of England may say Mass,
and receive the Sacrament alone.

Dunelm.
It were much convenient that People were exhorted to come to it oftener, if they
could be brought thereto. Nevertheless if none will communicate, it is not meet
that the Priests stirred to communicate, or should forbear for coldness or lack
of other Men's Devotion.

Lincoln.
Nothing can be better, or more wisely devised than Christ did ordain, and the
Apostles, according to his Ordinance, did use; we ought therefore to captivate
our Senses and Understandings to the Wisdom of Christ; and think that most
convenient, that to his Ordinance is most correspondent: And as St. Paul notes,
By eating all of one Bread, and drinking all of one Cup, we be put in
remembrance, that we be all one Body in Christ, and have received all one
Spirit. Nevertheless the slackness of some ought not to be prejudicial to the
rest, nor the refusing of one to be impediment to another.

Elien.
If the Laymen could be brought to it, it were better not to continue; but if
they cannot, it is not convenient that Priests, who would communicate for their
own comfort, should be defrauded by other Men's slackness.

Roffen.
I suppose it were best, that that Custom should be reformed unto the Rule of
Scripture, and unto the Pattern of the Primitive Church.

Bristollen.
I think it were good, that at every Mass there were some to receive the
Sacrament with the Priest; nevertheless, if none will come to receive it, I
think it lawful and convenient, that the Priest say Mass, and receive the
Sacrament alone, when he is disposed, or by the Christian Congregation desired.

Dr. Cox.
I think it not convenient that the said Custom should continue, if by any godly
Mean the People might be brought to receive the Sacrament with the Priest.

Quest. 7. Whether it be convenient that Masses Satisfactory should continue,
(that is to say) Priests hired to sing for Souls departed?
Answers.
I Think it not convenient that Satisfactory Masses should continue. Cantab.


I think that such of the Schoolmen as do write of Masses Satisfactory, do
define them otherwise than is declared in this Question: London. Worcester.
Hereford. Norwich. Chichester. St. Asaph.

Nevertheless I think, that it is not against the Word of God, but that Priests
praying in the Mass, both for the Quick and Dead, and doing other things in the
Church about the Ministration of the Sacraments, may take a Living for the same.

All Priests saying Mass be bound in the same, Dunelmen.
to pray for the whole mystical Body of Christ, Quick and Dead, though they be
not hired thereto; and those that be deputed thereto, if they say Mass, must do
the same though they were not hired: And yet, as St. Paul says, Those that be
partakers of Spiritual Things with others, ought to minister unto them temporal
Things in recompense, Romans 15.

St. Paul says, Heb. 10. Lincoln.
That we are made Holy by the Offering of the Body of Jesus once for all; and
Heb. 9. That Christ by his own Blood, entered in once to the holy place and
found eternal Redemption; which Redemption and Satisfaction, unless we think
insufficient, it were meet Masses Satisfactory to be taken away, and not to
count Christ and his Apostles, either unlearned, or unloving Teachers; and who
could not or would not teach a thing so necessary. Nauclerus does write, that
Gregory the third gave commandment to Priests to pray and offer for the Dead.
And though ancient Writers make often mention of Prayer for the Dead, yet they
never allow any Hireling to that purpose. Lege August. ad Aurel. de coercenda
temulentia.

It is one thing to sing Satisfactory, Eli.
and another to be hired to sing Mass for the Souls departed: for the first
imports, that the Mass should be a Satisfaction for the sins of the Soul
departed; which is not so, but the second, that is, to sing or pray for the
Souls departed, is a laudable custom, and seems to have some ground in
Scripture; which custom has been always continued from the Apostles time, and
has been used in the Mass, as appears by Ancient Doctors, Aust. Amb. Chrysostom.
and others; and therefore this to continue I think it meet. But to say Mass for
Money, thinking it a Commutation or just Compensation betwixt the Prayer and the
Money that he is hired for, I think it sounds to Avarice and Simonie; and yet,
dignus est operarius mercede sua. Like-as, Praedicans Evangelium sine sumptu
debet ponere Evangelium, and tamen Dominus ordinavit his qui Evangelium
annunciant de Evangelio vivere.

Carlisle.
If by this be meant, that any Thing, or Action either of the Priest, should be
a full and perfect Satisfaction of Sins Venial and Mortal; I know we read not
of any such Satisfactory, neither would I say that Priests be hired after that
common fashion and contracts of the World, to sing for Souls departed, but
rather that they, as they be ordered to do, do say and sing their Mass, having
in their remembrance, both generally and specially, as shall most appertain
both to the Living and the Dead; and then, as they be worthy, must have their
Livings by the Altar which they serve, as St. Paul at large declares. But as
for the full and perfect Satisfaction of all manner of Sins, that is to be
attributed only to Christ, his Passion and Justification; yet after the mind of
St. Austin, St. Jerome, with others, Pro non valde malis propitiatones fiant and
de levioribus peccatis, cum quibus obligati defuncti sunt, possunt post mortem
absolvi, etc.

Roffen.
That Masses Satisfactory should continue to be sung for Souls departed, by
Priests hired thereunto, I think it not convenient.

Bristol.
I think that the Word of God, and St. Paul meant, that all Priests may offer
Gifts and Sacrifices unto God for the Offenses of the People, (as it is written
in the 5th of the Hebrews) Omnis Pontifex, etc. and may receive and take
(ministering the Sacrament and Sacramentals in the Church to the Congregation) a
Living for the same.

Dr. Cox.
Masses to be said for satisfaction of Sin, (since Christ is the only
Satisfaction for all Sin) is an Abuse not to be continued: and Priests to be
hired only to sing for Souls departed, seems to be a superfluous Function in
Christ's Church.

Quest. 8. Whether the Gospel ought to be taught, at the time of the Mass, to
the understanding of the People being present?
Answers.
Cantab.
I Think it very convenient, that the Gospel, concerning the Death of Christ,
and our Redemption, should be taught to the People in the Mass.

York.
It is expedient that the Gospel be taught at the time of the Mass, to the
Understanding of the People being present.

London, etc.
I think it not necessary to have a Sermon at every Mass, but the oftener the
same is done to the edifying of the People (so that the service of their
Vocation be not thereby defrauded) the more it is to be commended.

It is much convenient that the Gospel be taught to the understanding of the
People being present, when it may be. Howbeit, Dunelm.
it is not so of the Substance of the Mass, but the Mass may be done without
it, and it done at other times as well as at the Mass.

Christ distributing the Sacrament to his Disciples, does say, Lincoln.
(as it is Luke 22.) Hoc facite in meam commemorationem: And if St. Paul does
thus write to the Corinthians, Quotiescunque manducabitis panem hunc ac calicem
bibitis, mortem domini annunciabitis donec veniet. The glad Tidings therefore,
the great Benefit that we receive by Christ's Death and Sufferings, (which we
see as in a Glass, in this Holy Sacrament) ought to be set forth and preached
to the People, so often as they come to the Holy Communion.

That the Gospel be read or taught at the time of the Mass, Elien.
that the People there present may understand; it is good and godly, and
convenient it should be so.

I think it convenient and necessary, Carliolen.
that as the King's most Excellent Majesty, his most dear Uncle my Lord
Protector's Grace, with the most honorable Council beside, has already
appointed and enjoined to be done, that at all such times as the People (as
they ought) be most gathered together, in the Principal and High Mass, the
Gospel be taught and declared to the best understanding of the People.

The Annunciation of Christ's Death and Passion, Roffen.
and the Benefit of the same, that the forgiveness of Sins, to all the true and
faithful Believers therein, ought evermore to be set forth in the Mass to the
edification of the People; which thing cannot be done, according to St. Paul's
mind and meaning, 1 Cor. 14. as I suppose, except it be set forth to the
Peoples understanding.

I think it is not against God's Word, Bristollen.
but the oftener the same is done to the edifying of the People, received with
Devotion, and intending redress of Life thereby, the more it is to be affected
and used.

In the Mass-time, it were convenient to have some Doctrines, Dr. Cox.
after the Example of the Primitive Church, that at the Blessed Communion the
people might be edified.

Quest. 9. Whether in the Mass it were convenient to use such Speech as the
People may understand?
Answers.
Cantuarien.
I Think it convenient to use the Vulgar Tongue in the Mass, except in certain
secret Mysteries, whereof I doubt.

Eboracen.
It were convenient to use such Speech in the Mass, as the People might
understand.

London. Hereford. Cicestren. Worcester. Norvicen. Assaven.

To have the whole Mass in English, I think it neither expedient, neither
convenient.

Dunelm.
It is convenient that the common Latin Tongue to these West parts of
Christendom, be used in the Mass, being the Common Prayer of the whole Church,
namely, in the Mysteries thereof, lest rude People should vilely profane the
Holy Mysteries thereof by contempt. Nevertheless certain Prayers might be in
the Mother Tongue, for the instruction and stirring of the Devotion of the
People, as shall be thought convenient.

Lincoln.
St. Paul would all things in the Congregation, and Public Assembly, so to be
spoken that they might edify; and in such a Language, that the People present
might say Amen to our Thanksgiving. And long after the Apostles times, all the
People present did answer the Priest, (he speaking in a Language that they did
understand) like-as the Clark or Boy does now answer (as he is taught) in a
Language that he understands not. Cypri. habet de Cons. distinct. 1. Ca. Quando.

Elien.
It was so used in Dalmatia in St. Hierom's time, and in Sclavonia in Cyril's
time, who making suit to the Court of Rome for the same; and the Matter being
debated in the Consistory, and having many Adversaries, suddenly there was
heard a Voice, as it were, from Heaven; Omnis Spiritus laudet Dominum, and
omnis Lingua confiteatur ei. Whereupon Cyrillus had his Petition granted him.

Elien. Haec jam mea est Opinio, sed, sic ut, auditis melioribus cedam.

Carliolen.
This Question was deeply searched and tried for, in the most excellent and of
highest memory, King Henry the Eighth his time, by the best Clarks of his
Realm, in his presence; and then and there concluded, and upon that same by
Proclamation commanded, That Holy Scripture should not be evulgate in English.
Yet after it was otherwise seen and provided for: Therefore therein I would
wish, that were most to the quiet edification of Christian People, and shall
submit my self to my Superiors and Betters, submitting mine Understanding to
their Judgments.

I think it not only convenient that such Speech should be used in the Mass, as
the People might understand, Roffen.
but also to speak it with such an audible Voice, that the People might hear
it, that they be not defrauded of their Own, which Saint Paul teaches to
belong to them; and also that they may answer, as Cyprian says, the People did
in his days, Habemus ad Dominum. Nevertheless, as concerning that part that
pertains to the Consecration, Dionise and Basil moves me to think it no
inconvenience, that part should be spoken in silence.

If the Mass should be wholly in English, Bristollen.
I think we should differ from the Custom and Manner of all other Regions:
therefore if it may stand with the King's Majesty's Pleasure, I think it not
good to be said all in English.

Per me Paulum Episcopum Bristollensem. Quest. 10. When the Reservation of the
Sacrament, and the hanging up of the same first began?
Answers.
THe Reservation of the Sacrament began, I think, Cantuarien.
six or seven hundred Years after Christ: The hanging up, I think, began of
late time.

Polidore Virgil does write, Lincoln.
that Innocentius the Third decreed the Sacrament to be kept, to be in a
readiness for the Sick. And Honorius the third confirmed the same; adding, that
it ought to be reserved in loco singulari, mundo, and signato. Commanding also
the Priests that they should often instruct the People reverently to bow down
at the Elevation-Time, and when it is born to the sick. As for the hanging up
of the Sacrament over, or setting it upon the Altar, is of a later time, not
yet received in diverse places of Christendom.

Some Questions, with Answers made to them by the Bishops of Worcester,
Chichester, and Hereford. The Question. What or wherein John's Fasting, giving
Alms, being Baptized, or Receiving the Sacrament of Thanks in England, does
profit and avail Thomas dwelling in Italy, and not knowing what John in England
does?
The Answer.
Worcester. Chichester. Hereford.

THe distance of place does not let nor hinder the Spiritual Communion which is
between one and another, so that John and Thomas, wheresoever they be, far and
sundry, or near together, being both lively Members of Christ, receive either
of others Goodness some Commodity; although to limit what or wherein, is
unsearchable, and only pertains to the Knowledge of God.

The Question. Whether the said Acts in John do profit them that be in Heaven,
and wherein?
The Answer.
Luc. 15.
Gaudium est in Coelo super uno peccatore poenitentiam agente, etc.

The Question. Whether it lies in the said John, to defraud any Member of
Christ's Body of the benefit of his Fasting, Alms-Deeds, Baptism, or Receiving
of the Sacrament, and to apply the same benefit to one Person more than to
another?
The Answer.
Charity defraudeth no Man of any such benefit that might come to him; and it
lies in God only to apply the same, and not in any Man, otherwise than by
desire and prayer; but the better the Man is, the more available his Prayer is
to them, for whom he especially prays.

The Question. What thing is the Presentation of the Body and Blood of Christ
in the Mass, which you call the Oblation and Sacrifice of Christ? and wherein
stands it, in Act, Gesture, or Words; and in what Act, Gesture, or Words?
The Answer.
The Presentation, etc. stands in such Words, Prayers, Supplications, and
Actions, as the Priest uses at the Mass, having the Body and Blood of Christ
there present in the Sacrament.

The Question. Is there any Rite or Prayer not expressed in the Scripture,
which Christ used or commanded at the first Institution of the Mass, which we
be now bound to use; and what the same be?
The Answer.
That Christ used Rites and Prayers at the Institution and Distribution of the
Sacrament, the Scripture declares: But what Rites and Prayers they were we
know not; but I think we ought to use such Rites and Prayers as the Catholic
Church has, and does uniformly observe.

The Question. Whether in the Primitive Church there were any Priests that
lived by saying of Mass, Mattins, and Even-song, and praying for Souls only?
And whether any such state of Priesthood be allowed in the Scripture, or be
meet to be allowed now?
The Answer.
There were Priests in the Primitive Church which preached not, but exercised
themselves in Prayer for the Quick and the Dead, and other Spiritual
Ministrations in the Church; and accustomably used common Prayers both Morning
and Evening; and such state of Priesthood is not against the Scripture.

The Question. For what Cause it were not expedient nor convenient to have the
whole Mass in English?
The Answer.
This Question is answered by Dyonise and Basil, De Spiritu Sancto; and also an
uniformity of all Churches in that thing is to be kept.

Number 26. A Collection of some of the Chief Indulgences then in the English
Offices.
Horae B. Mariae Virg. ad usum Sarum; Printed at Paris, 1526.

Folio 38.
TO all them that be in the State of Grace, that daily say devoutly this Prayer
before our Blessed Lady of Pity, she will show them her blessed Visage, and
warn them the Day and the Hour of Death; and in their last End, the Angels of
God shall yield their Souls to Heaven; and he shall obtain 500 Years, and so
many Lents of Pardon, granted by five Holy Fathers, Popes of Rome.

Folio 42.
Our Holy Father Sixtus the 4th, Pope, has granted to all them that devoutly
say this Prayer before the Image of our Lady, the sum of 11000 Years of Pardon.

Folio 44.
Our Holy Father the Pope, Sixtus, has granted, at the instance of the
high-most and excellent Princess Elizabeth, late Queen of England, and Wife to
our Sovereign Liege Lord King Henry the 7th, (God have mercy on her sweet Soul,
and all Christian Souls) that every day in the Morning, after three tollings of
the Ave-Bell, say three times the whole Salutation of our Lady, Ave Maria
Gratia; that is to say, at six of the Clock in the Morning three Ave Mary's; at
twelve of the Clock at Noon three Ave Mary's; and at six of the Clock at Even;
for every time so doing, is granted of the Spiritual Treasure of Holy Church,
300 days of Pardon, toties quoties. And also our Holy Father, the Archbishop
of Canterbury and York, with other nine Bishops of this Realm, have granted,
three times in the day, forty days of Pardon to all them that be in the state
of Grace, able to receive Pardon; the which began the 26th day of March, Anno
1492. Anno Henrici 7. and the sum of the Indulgence and Pardon for every Ave
Maria, 860 days, toties quoties. This Prayer shall be said at the tolling of
the Ave-Bell.

Folio 47.
Our Holy Father the Pope, Bonifacius, has granted to all them that devoutly
say this lamentable contemplation of our Blessed Lady standing under the Cross
weeping, and having compassion with her sweet Son Jesus, seven Years of Pardon,
and forty Lents. And also Pope John the 22d has granted 300 days of Pardon.

Folio 50.
These be the fifteen Does, the which the Holy Virgin S. Bridget was wont to
say daily before the Holy Rood in S. Paul's Church at Rome; whosoever says this a
whole Year, shall deliver fifteen Souls out of Purgatory of his next Kindred,
and convert other fifteen Sinners to good Life; and other fifteen Righteous Men
of his kind shall persevere in good Life; and what ye desire of God ye shall
have it, if it be to the Salvation of your Souls.

Folio 54.
To all them that before this Image of Pity devoutly say five Pater Nosters,
and five Ave Mary's, and a Credo, piteously beholding those Arms of Christ's
Passion, are granted 32755 Years of Pardon; and Sixtus the 4th Pope of Rome,
has made the fourth and the fifth Prayer, and has doubled his foresaid Pardon.

Folio 56.
This Epistle of our Savior, sends our Holy Father, Pope Leo, to the Emperor
Carolo Magno; of the which we find written, Who that bears this Blessing upon
him, and says it once a day, shall obtain forty Years of Pardon, and eighty
Lentings, and he shall not perish with sudden Death.

Folio 57.
This Prayer made by S. Austin, affirming who that says it daily kneeling,
shall not die in Sin; and after this Life shall go to the everlasting Joy and
Bliss.

Folio 58.
Our Holy Father the Pope, John 22d, has granted to all them that devoutly say
this Prayer, after the Elevation of our Lord Jesus Christ, 3000 days of Pardon
for deadly sins.

Ibid.
Our Holy Father the Pope, Bonifacius the Sixth, has granted to all them that
say devoutly this Prayer following, between the Elevation of our Lord, and the
three Agnus Dei, 10000 Years of Pardon.

Folio 61.
Our Holy Father, Sixtus the 4th, has granted to all them that be in the state
of Grace, saying this Prayer following immediately after the Elevation of the
Body of our Lord, clean remission of all their Sins perpetually enduring. And
also John the Third, Pope of Rome, at the request of the Queen of England, has
granted to all them that devoutly say this Prayer before the Image of our Lord
Crucified, as many days of Pardon, as there were wounds in the Body of our Lord
in the time of his bitter Passion, the which were 5465.

Folio 65.
These five Petitions and Prayers made S. Gregory, and has granted unto all
them that devoutly say these five Prayers, with five Pater Nosters, five Ave
Mary's, and a Credo, 500 Years of Pardon.

Folio 66.
These three Prayers be written in the Chapel of the Holy Cross in Rome,
otherwise called, Sacellum Sanctae Crucis septem Romanorum, who that devoutly
say them, they shall obtain ten hundred thousand Years of Pardon for deadly
Sins, granted of our Holy Father John, 22d Pope of Rome.

Folio 68.
Who that devoutly beholds these Arms of our Lord Jesus Christ, shall obtain
6000 Years of Pardon of our Holy Father S. Peter, the first Pope of Rome, and
of thirty other Popes of the Church of Rome, Successors after him. And our Holy
Father, Pope John the 22d, has granted unto all them, very contrite and truly
confessed, that say these devout Prayers following, in the commemoration of the
bitter Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, 3000 Years of Pardon for deadly Sins,
and other 3000 for venial Sins, and say first a Pater Noster and Ave Maria.

Folio 71.
Our Holy Father, Pope Innocentius the Second, has granted to all them that
say this Prayer devoutly, in the worship of the Wound that our Lord had in his
blessed Side, when he was dead, hanging in the Cross, 4000 days of Pardon.

Folio 72.
This most devout Prayer, said the Holy Father S. Bernard, daily kneeling in
the worship of the most Holy Name Jesus. And it is well to believe, that
through the Invocation of the most excellent Name of Jesu, S. Bernard obtained
a singular Ward of perpetual Consolation of our Lord Jesu Christ. And these
Prayers written in a Table that hanged at Rome in S. Peter's Church, nigh to
the High Altar there, as our Holy Father the Pope evely is wont to say the
Office of the Mass; and who that devoutly, with a contrite Heart, daily say
this Orison, if he be that day in the state of eternal Damnation, then his
eternal Pain shall be changed him in temporal pain of Purgatory; then if he
has deserved the pain of Purgatory, it shall be forgotten and forgiven,
through the infinite Mercy of God.

Number 27. Injunctions for a Visitation of Chauntries. To the Parson, Vicar,
Curat, Chaunter, Priests, Churchwardens, and two of the most honest Persons of
the Parish of (...) being no Founders, Patrons, Donors, Lessees, nor Farmers of
the Promotions or Corporations hereafter recited, nor of any part thereof, and
to four of them at the least.
Ex MS. Dr. Johnson.
FIrst, Ye shall make diligent search and inquiry, immediately upon the receipt
hereof, of the number; and how many Chauntries, Hospitals, Colleges, free
Chapels, Fraternities, Brotherhoods, Guilds and Salaries, or Wages of
Stipendiary Priests, being Perpetuities now charged, or that ought to be
charged, or chargeable, to the payment of the first Fruits and Tenths, and of
all Colleges chargeable, and not chargeable to the said payment of Tenths and
first Fruits, which be within your Church and Parish.

Also you shall enquire of the Orders, Ordinances, Kinds, Qualities, Degrees,
Uses and Abuses, or Misuses, Conditions, Estates, and Necessities, of and
concerning all and every the said Chantries, Fraternities, Guilds, Stipends, or
Wages, and other the Premises; and by what Names, Sir-names, Corporations, or
Titles, they and every of them be taken or known; and to what intents,
purposes, and deeds of Charity they and every of them were founded, ordained,
and made; and ye shall take into your hands, and also bring with you, at the
day of your Certificate, the Foundations, and all other Writings which you have
or can attain, for the true declaration and proof of the same.

Also you shall enquire, how and what manner or sort the Revenues and Profits
of the Lands and Possessions of all the aforesaid Promotions, and every of
them, be used, expended, employed, or bestowed.

Also how many of the said Promotions be Parish-Churches.

Also how far space or distance the said Chantries and Chapels be, and stand
from the Parish-Churches, of the Parishes wherein they do stand.

Also ye shall enquire of all the Houses, Lands, Tenths, Rents, Possessions and
Revenues, united, annexed, or appertaining to the aforesaid Chantries,
Hospitals, Guilds, and other Promotions abovesaid, and to every of them, and of
the yearly value thereof, and shall make a true and perfect Rental or other
Book thereof.

And ye shall enquire of all the Resolutes, Deductions, and yearly paiments or
charges going forth of the Premises, and of every part thereof, and shall
certify the same in writing; that is to say, for every Chantry, or other the
aforesaid Promotions severally by it self; and over this, to bring with you all
such Rentals of the same, and every of them, as ye have or may attain or come
by.

Also ye shall enquire of all the Lands, Rents, Possessions, and Hereditaments,
which were or be united, annexed, or pertaining to the aforesaid Promotions or
Corporations, or to any of them, which at any time since the fourth day of
February, in the 27th Year of the King's Majesty's Reign, did appertain or
belong to them, or any of them, and of the Goods, Jewels, and Ornaments, lately
pertaining or belonging to the same.

Also ye shall enquire how many of the aforesaid Chantries, Hospitals, Guilds,
and other the aforesaid Promotions and Corporations, and what Lands, Rents, or
parcels thereof, sithence the 4th day of February, in the 27th Year of the
Reign of our aforesaid Sovereign Lord, been or have been dissolved, purchased,
or by any other means or ways taken, entered unto, or obtained by any of the
King's Majesty's Subjects, by their own Authorities, without the King's License.

And ye shall enquire of the Lands, Tenths, Rents, and Hereditaments thereof,
and of the yearly Value of the same, and of all the Goods and Ornaments of the
same; and of the yearly Resolutes, Deductions, and Paiments going forth of the
same; and shall make a true Rental or Book thereof, and shall certify the same
particularly.

Also ye shall enquire of all the Plate, Jewels, Ornaments, Goods, and
Chattels, merely and truly pertaining or belonging to all the aforesaid
Promotions or Corporations, and to every of them severally, and shall make one
true Inventory thereof, with the Value of the same, and of every parcel
thereof, that is to say, in true weight of all parcels of Plate, Chalices, and
other; and the price or value of all other Ornaments, Goods, or Chattels, and
in whose hands or possession the same be or remain.

Also, finally, ye shall make ready and finish your Certificate in writing,
before the (...) of all and singular the Premises, and of every Article
abovesaid severally, and not in gross, or in one whole Article, as ye will
answer and be sworn to the same: And that you, and every of you, being resident
or remaining within the said Parish, shall Sign and Seal the same; and ye shall
send the same your Certificate sealed unto us, at such day and place as
hereafter shall be assigned unto you, by one of the most honest of the
aforesaid Churchwardens, and by all the Incumbents of the Chantries, Chapels,
Hospitals, Guilds and Promotions aforesaid, if there be but one Incumbent in
the said Promotions, or any of them; And if there be more Incumbents than one
in the said Promotions, or any of them being of one Foundation, that then one
of the said Incumbents, together with the said honest Churchwarden, and other
Incumbents, being but one of one Foundation, as is aforesaid. Foreseeing
always, that your Proceedings and Certificate of the Premises, and every part
thereof, be executed, ordered, and done, with all diligence, substantially and
truly, that the same may so appear unto us at our repair to view and survey the
Premises, as ye will then have condign thanks for the same, and avoiding your
extreme damage, which may ensue of the contrary.

Robert Archbishop. Sir Michael Stanhope. Sir Leonard Bekworth. Mr. Robert
Henneage. Mr. -- Babthorpe. Mr. Wallay. Mr. Norton. Mr. Chaloner. Mr. Gargrave.
Mr. -- Auditor.


Number 28. The Protector's Letter to Gardener, concerning the Points he was to
handle in his Sermon.
Ex MS. Col. Cor. C. Cant.
WE commend us unto you; We sent to you yesterday our Servant William Cecil, to
signify unto you our Pleasure and Advice, That you should, in this your next
Sermon, forbear to entreat upon those Principal Questions, which remain amongst
the number of learned Men in this Realm, as yet in controversy, concerning the
Sacrament of the Altar, and the Mass; as well for that your private Argument or
Determination therein might offend the People, naturally expecting decisions of
litigious Causes, and thereby Discord and Tumult arise; the occasions whereof
we must necessarily prevent and take away; as also for that the Questions and
Controversies rest at this present in consultation, and with the pleasure of
God, shall be, in small time, by public Doctrine and Authority, quietly and
truly determined. This Message we send to you, not thinking but your own Wisdom
had considered so much in an apparent Matter; or at the least, upon our
remembrance, ye would understand it and follow it with good will, consulting
thereby your own Quiet in avoiding Offense, as observing our Pleasure in
avoiding Contention. Your Answer thereunto, our said Servant has declared unto
us in this manner. Ye can no wise forbear to speak of the Sacrament, neither of
the Mass; this last being the chief Foundation, as ye say, of our Religion, and
that without it we cannot know that Christ is our Sacrifice; the other being so
spoken of by many, that if you should not speak your mind thereof what ye
think, you know what other Men would think of you; in the end, concluding
generally, that you will speak the Truth, and that ye doubt not but that we
shall be therewith content; adding also, as our said Servant reports unto us,
That you would not wish that we our selves should meddle or have to do in these
Matters of Religion, but that the care thereof were committed to you the
Bishops, unto whom the blame, if any should be deserved, might well be imputed.

To this your Answer, if so it be, we reply very shortly, signifying unto you
our express Pleasure and Commandment, on our Sovereign Lord the King's
Majesty's behalf, charging you, by the Authority of the same, to abstain in
your said Sermon from treating of any Matter in controversy concerning the said
Sacrament and the Mass, and only to bestow your Speech in the expert
explication of the Articles prescribed unto you, and in other wholesome Matter,
of Obedience of the People, and good Conversation and Living; the same Matters
being both large enough for a long Sermon, and not unnecessary for the time.
And the treaty of other, which we forbid you not meet in your private Sermon
to be had, but necessarily reserved for a public Consultation, and at this
present utterly to be forborne for the common Quiet.

This our express Pleasure, wherein we know how reasonably we may command you,
and you (we think) know how willingly ye ought to obey us. For our intermedling
with these Causes of Religion, understand you, that we account it no small part
of our Charge, under the King's Majesty, to bring his People from Ignorance to
Knowledge, and from Superstition to true Religion, esteeming that the chief
Foundation to build Obedience upon: and where there is a full consent of
others, the Bishops and learned Men, in a Truth, not to suffer you, or a few
other, with wilful headiness, to dissuade all the rest. And although we presume
not to determine Articles of Religion by our Self, yet from God we knowledge it,
we be desirous to defend and advance the Truth, determined or revealed, and so
consequently we will not fail, but withstand the Disturbers thereof. So fare
you well.

From Sion, June 28. Anno 1548. Your Loving Friend, E. Somerset.

Number 29. Some of the Collects and Hymns to the Saints in the Hours ad usum
Sarum, printed at Paris, Anno 1520. In which, immediate Adoration is offered to
them, and those things are asked of them, which God only gives.
Folio 4.
SAncta Dei Genetrix, quae digne meruisti concipere, quem totus orbis nequivit
comprehendere; tuo pio interventu, culpas nostras ablue, ut perennis sedem
gloriae, per te redempti, valeamus scandere, ubi manes cum Filio tuo sine
tempore.

Fol. 11. S. Pauthaleon.
Sancte Panthaleon Martyr Christi, militari ordine fuisti, quo promeruisti; --
Demum heremiticam vitam acquisisti, -- Tu vero hydropicum sanum reddidisti --
Missus in equleo ungues perdidisti -- Costas cum lampadibus adustus fuisti --
Collum subdens gladio pronus pertulisti -- Fundens lac pro sanguine vitam sic
finisti -- Cunctas febres dilue a plebe tam tristi -- Qui Coelestis Gloriae
Regna meruisti.

Fol. 12. S. Tho. Cant.
Tu per Thomae sanguinem, quem pro te impendit, fac nos Christ scandere, quo
Thomas ascendit -- Versicle gloria and honor coronasti, eum Domino: Resp. and
constituisti, eum supra opera manuum tuarum.

Fol. 12. of Pope Nicolaus. And so in many other places.
Ut ejus meritis and precibus a gehennae incendiis liberemur.

Sancta Maria succurre miseris, Juva pusillanimes, refove flebiles, ora pro
populo: Fol. 30.
interveni pro clero, intercede pro devoto femineo sexu.

Fol. 33.
Virgo singularis, inter omnes mitis, nos culpis solutos, mites fac and castos:
Vitam presta puram, iter para tutum, ut videntes Jesum, semper collaetemur.

Fol. 44.
A Prayer to the Virgin, to the sayers of which, Pope Calestine granted 300 days
of Pardon; a part of which is. Consolare peccatorem, and ne tuum des honorem,
alieno vel crudeli; precor te Regina Coeli. Me habeto excusatum, apud Christum
tuum natum, cujus iram expavesco, and furorem pertimesco, nam peccavi tibi
soli. O Maria Virgo, noli esse mihi aliena, gratia Coelesti plena; esto custos
cordis mei, signa me timore Dei, confer vitae sanitatem, and da morum
honestatem: Et da peccata me vitare, and quod justum est amare, O dulcedo
Virginalis, nunquam fuit nec est talis, etc.

Fol. 77. S. George.
Georgi Martyr inclite, te decet laus and gloria: praedotatum militia, per quem
puella Regia, existens in tristitia, coram Dracone pessimo, salvata est, and
animo; te rogamus cord intimo, ut cum cunctis fidelibus, Coeli jungamur
civibus, nostris abluti sordibus, ut simul cum laetitia, tecum simus in gloria,
nostraque reddant labia lauds Christo cum gloria.

Martyr Christophore, pro salvatoris honor, fac nos mente fore, Ibid. St.
Christopher.
dignos deitatis amore, Promisso Christi, quia quod petis obtinuisti, da populo
tristi, bona quae moriendo petisti: confer solamen, and mentis toll gravamen;
judicis examen, fac mite sit omnibus Amen.

O Willielme Pastor bone, Cleri pater and patron, Fol. 78.
munda nobis in agone, confer opem and depone, vitae sordes and Coronae
Coelestis da gaudia.

O vos undena millia, puellae gloriosae, virginitatis lilia, Fol. 80. 11000
Virgins.
Martyrii Rosae, in vita me defendite, prebendo mihi juvamen, in morte vos
ostendite supremum ferendo solamen.

To St. Alban.

Te nunc petimus patron, praeco sedule, qui es nostra vera gloria, solve
precum votis, servorum scelera.

To St. Peter and St. Paul.

Beat Petre qui Maxima reseras, claudis verbo Coeli limina, sum pius vota
fidelia, peccati cuncta dissolvendo vincula: Sacra Paul ingere dogmata,
illustrans plebis pectora.

In die omnium Sanctorum.

Mariam primam vox sonet nostra, per quam nobis vitae sunt data praemia: Regina
quae es matter, and casta, solve nostra per filium peccamina: Angelorum concio
sacra, and Arch-Angelorum turma inclita, nostra diluant jam peccata praestando
supernam Coeli gloriam.

Number 30. Dr. Redmayn's Opinion concerning the Marriage of the Clergy. An
Original.
I Think that although the Word of God does exhort and counsel Priests to live
in Chastity, Ex MS. Col. C. C. Cant.
out of the cumber of the Flesh and of the World, that thereby they may wholly
attend to their Calling; yet the Bond of continuing from Marriage, does only
lie upon Priests in this Realm, by reason of Canons and Constitutions of the
Church, and not by any Precept of God's Word, as in that they should be bound
by any Vow: Which (in as far as my Conscience is) Priests in this Church of
England do not make.

I think that it stands well with God's Word, that a Man which has been, or
is but once married, being otherwise accordingly qualified, may be made a
Priest.

And I do think, that for as much as Canons and Rules made in this behalf are
neither Universal nor Everlasting, but upon Considerations may be altered and
changed; Therefore the King's Majesty, and the higher Powers of the Church,
may, upon such Reasons as shall move them, take away the Clog of perpetual
Continence from Priests, and grant that it may be lawful for such as cannot, or
will not contain, to marry a Wife; and if she die, then the said Priest to
marry no more, remaining still in the Ministration.

John Redmayn.

Number 31. Articles of High Treason, and other Misdemeanors against the
King's Majesty, and his Crown, objected to Sir Thomas Seymour Knight. Lord Seymour
of Sudley, and High Admimiral of England.
Ex Libro Concilii. Fol. 236.
1. Whereas the Duke of Somerset was made Governor of the King's Majesty's
Person, and Protector of all his Realms and Dominions, and Subjects; to the
which you your self did agree, and gave your consent in writing; it is objected
and laid unto your Charge, That this notwithstanding you have attempted and
gone about, by indirect means, to undo this Order, and to get into your hands
the Government of the King's Majesty, to the great danger of his Highness
Person, and the subversion of the State of the Realm.

2. It is objected, and laid to your Charge, that by corrupting with Gifts, and
fair Promises, diverse of the Privy Chamber, you went about to allure his
Highness to condescend and agree to the same your most heinous and perilous
purposes, to the great danger of his Highness Person, and of the subversion of
the State of the Realm.

3. It is objected, and laid unto your Charge, that you wrote a Letter with
your own hand; which Letter the King's Majesty should have subscribed, or
written again after that Copy, to the Parliament House; and that you delivered
the same to his Highness for that intent: With the which so written by his
Highness, or subscribed, you had determined to have come into the Commons-House
your self; and there, with your Fautors and Adherents before prepared, to have
made a Broil, or Tumult, or Uproar, to the great danger of the King's Majesty's
Person, and subversion of the State of this Realm.

4. It is objected, and laid unto your Charge, That you your self spoke to
diverse of the Council, and labored with diverse of the Nobility of the Realm,
to stick and adhere unto you for the Alteration of the State, and Order of the
Realm, and to attain your other Purposes, to the danger of the King's Majesty's
Person, now in his tender Years, and subversion of the State of the Realm.

5. It is objected, and laid unto your Charge, that you did say openly and
plainly, You would make the Blackest Parliament that ever was in England.

6. It is objected, and laid to your Charge, That being sent for by the
Authority, to answer to such things as were thought meet to be reformed in you,
you refused to come; to a very evil Example of Disobedience, and danger thereby
of the subversion of the State of the Realm.

7. It is Objected, and laid to your Charge, That since the last Sessions of
this Parliament, notwithstanding much clemency showed unto you, you have still
continued in your former mischievous Purposes; and continually, by your self
and other, studied and labored to put into the King's Majesty's Head and Mind,
a misliking of the Government of the Realm, and of the Lord Protector's doings,
to the danger of his Person, and the great peril of the Realm.

8. It is Objected, and laid to your Charge, That the King's Majesty being of
those tender Years, and as yet by Age unable to direct his own things, you have
gone about to instill into his Grace's Head, and as much as lies in you,
persuaded him to take upon himself the Government and managing of his own
Affairs, to the danger of his Highness Person, and great peril of the whole
Realm.

9. It is Objected, and laid to your Charge, That you had fully intended and
appointed, to have taken the King's Majesty's Person into your own hands and
custody, to the danger of his Subjects, and peril of the Realm.

10. It is Objected, and laid to your Charge, That you have corrupted, with
Money, certain of the Privy-Chamber, to persuade the King's Majesty to have a
credit toward you; and so to insinuate you to his Grace, that when he lacked
any thing, he should have it of you and none other Body, to the intent he
should mislike his ordering, and that you might the better, when you saw time,
use his King's Highness for an Instrument to this purpose, to the danger of his
Royal Person, and subversion of the State of the Realm.

11. It is Objected, and laid unto your Charge, That you promised the Marriage
of the King's Majesty at your Will and Pleasure.

12. It is Objected, and laid unto your Charge, That you have labored, and
gone about to combine and confederate your self with some Persons: and
specially moved those Noblemen, whom you thought not to be contented, to
depart into their Countries, and make themselves strong; and otherwise to
allure them to serve your purpose by gentle Promises and Offers, to have a
Party and Faction in readiness to all your Purposes, to the danger of the
King's Majesty's Person, and peril of the State of the Realm.

13. It is Objected, and laid unto your Charge, That you have parted, as it
were, in your imagination and intent the Realm, to set Noblemen to countervail
such other Noblemen as you thought would let your devilish Purposes, and so
labored to be strong to all your Devices; to the great danger of the King's
Majesty's Person, and great peril of the State of the Realm.

14. It is Objected, and laid unto your Charge, That you had advised certain
Men to entertain and win the favor and good-wills of the head Yeomen and
Ringleaders of certain Countries, to the intent that they might bring the
Multitude and Commons, when you should think meet, to the furtherance of your
Purposes.

15. It is Objected, and laid to your Charge, That you have not only studied
and imagined how to have the Rule of a number of Men in your hands, but that
you have attempted to get, and also gotten, diverse Stewardships of Noblemens
Lands, and their Mannoreds, to make your Party stronger, for your Purposes
aforesaid; to the danger of the King's Majesty's Person, and great peril of the
State of the Realm.

16. It is Objected, and laid to your Charge, That you have retained young
Gentlemen, and hired Yeomen, to a great multitude, and far above such number as
is permitted by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, or were otherwise necessary
or convenient for your Service, Place, or Estate, to the fortifying of your
self toward all your evil Intents and Purposes; to the great danger of the
King's Majesty, and peril of the State of the Realm.

17. It is Objected, and laid to your Charge, That you had so travailed in that
Matter, that you had made your self able to make, of your own Men, out of your
Lands, and Rules, and other your Adherents, 10000 Men, besides your Friends, to
the advancement of all your Intents and Purposes; to the danger of the King's
Majesty's Person, and the great peril of the State of the Realm.

18. It is Objected, and laid unto your Charge, That you had conferred, cast,
and weighed so much Money as would find the said 10000 Men for a Month; and that
you knew how and where to have the same Sum; and that you had given warning to
have and prepare the said Mass of Money in a readiness; to the danger of the
King's Majesty's Person, and great peril to the State of the Realm.

19. It is Objected, and laid unto your Charge, That you have not only, before
you married the Queen, attempted and gone about to marry the King's Majesty's
Sister, the Lady Elizabeth, second Inheritor, in remainder to the Crown, but
also being then let by the Lord Protector, and others of the Council, sithence
that time, both in the life of the Queen, continued your old labor and love;
and after her death, by secret and crafty means, practiced to atchieve the said
purpose of marrying the said Lady Elizabeth; to the danger of the King's
Majesty's Person, and peril of the state of the same.

20. It is Objected, and laid to your Charge, That you married the late Queen
so soon after the late King's Death, that if she had conceived straight after,
it should have been a great doubt whether the Child born, should have been
accounted the late King's or yours; whereupon a mavelous danger and peril
might, and was like to have ensued to the King's Majesty's Succession, and
Quiet of the Realm.

21. It is Objected, and laid unto your Charge, That you first married the
Queen privately, and did dissemble and keep close the same, insomuch that a
good space after you had married her, you made labor to the King's Majesty,
and obtained a Letter of his Majesty's Hand, to move and require the said Queen
to marry with you; and likewise procured the Lord Protector to speak to the
Queen to bear you her favor toward Marriage; by the which coloring, not only
your evil and dissembling Nature may be known, but also it is to be feared,
that at this present you did intend to use the same practice in the marriage of
the Lady Elizabeth's Grace.

22. It is Objected, and laid unto your Charge, That you not only, so much as
lay in you, did stop and let all such things as, either by Parliament or
otherwise, should tend to the advancement of the King's Majesty's Affairs, but
did withdraw your self from the King's Majesty's Service; and being moved and
spoken unto, for your own Honor, and for the Ability that was in you, to serve
and aid the King's Majesty's Affairs, and the Lord Protectors, you would always
draw back, and feign Excuses, and declare plainly that you would not do it.

Wherefore upon the discourse of all these foresaid things, and of diverse
others, it must needs be intended, that all these Preparations of Men and Money,
the attempts and secret practices of the said Marriage; the abusing and
persuading of the King's Majesty, to mislike the Government, State, and Order
of the Realm that now is, and to take the Government into his own hands; and to
credit you, was to none other end and purpose, but after a Title gotten to the
Crown, and your Party made strong both by Sea and Land, with Furniture of Men
and Money sufficient, to have aspired to the Dignity Royal, by some heinous
Enterprise against the King's Majesty's Person; to the subversion of the whole
State of the Realm.

23. It is Objected, and laid unto your Charge, That you not only had gotten
into your hands the strong and dangerous Isles of Silly, bought of diverse Men;
but that so much as lay in your power, you travailed also to have Londay; and
under pretense to have victualled the Ships therewith, not only went about, but
also moved the Lord Protector, and whole Council, that you might, by public
Authority, have that, which by private fraud and falsehood, and confederating
with Sharington, you had gotten, that is, the Mint at Bristol, to be yours
wholly, and only to serve your Purposes, casting, as may appear, that if these
Traitorous Purposes had no good success, yet you might thither conveigh a good
Mass of Money; where being aided with Ships, and conspiring at all evil Events
with Pirates, you might at all times have a sure and safe Refuge, if any thing
for your demerits should have been attempted against you.

24. It is also Objected, and laid unto your Charge, That having knowledge that
Sir William Sharington Knight. had committed Treason, and otherwise wonderfully
defrauded and deceived the King's Majesty, nevertheless you both by your self,
and by seeking Council for him, and by all means you could, did aid, assist,
and bear him, contrary to your Allegiance and Duty to the King's Majesty, and
the good Laws and Orders of the Realm.

25. It is Objected, and laid unto your Charge, That where you owed to Sir
William Sharington Knight. a great sum of Money, yet to abet, bear, and cloak the
great falsehood of the said Sharington, and to defraud the King's Majesty, you
were not afraid to say and affirm, before the Lord Protector and the Council,
that the same Sharington did owe unto you a great Sum of Money, viz. 2800 l. and
to conspire with him in that falsehood, and take a Bill of that feigned Debt
into your custody.

26. It is Objected, and laid unto your Charge, That you by your self and
Ministers have not only extorted and bribed great Sums of Money of all such
Ships as should go into Island, but also as should go any other where in
Merchandise, contrary to the Liberty of this Realm, and to the great
discouragement and destruction of the Navy of the same; to the great danger of
the King's Majesty, and the State of the Realm.

27. It is Objected, and laid unto your Charge, That where diverse Merchants, as
well Strangers as Englishmen, have had their goods piratously robbed and taken,
you have had their Goods in your hands and custody, daily seen in your House,
and distributed among your Servants and Friends, without any restitution to the
Parties so injured and spoiled; so that thereby Foreign Princes have in a
manner been weary of the King's Majesty's Amity, and by their Ambassadors
diverse times complained; to the great slander of the King's Majesty, and danger
of the State of the Realm.

28. It is Objected, and laid unto your Charge, That where certain Men have
taken certain Pirates, you have not only taken from the Takers of the said
Pirates all the Goods and Ships so taken, without any reward, but have cast the
said Takers, for their good Service done to the King's Majesty, into Prison;
and there detained them a great time, some eight Weeks, some more, some less,
to the discouraging of such as truly should serve the King's Majesty against
his Pirates and Enemies.

29. It is Objected, and laid unto your Charge, That diverse of the Head Pirates
being brought unto you, you have let the same Pirates go again free unto the
Seas; and taking away from the Takers of them, not only all their Commodity and
Profit, but from the true Owners of the Ships and Goods, all such as ever came
into the Pirates hands, as though you were authorized to be the chief Pirat, and
to have had all the Advantage they could bring unto you.

30. It is Objected, and laid unto your Charge, That where Order has been
taken, by the Lord Protector and the whole Council, that certain Goods,
piratically taken upon the Seas, and otherwise known not to be Wreck nor
Forfeited, should be restored to the true Owners, and Letters thereupon written
by the Lord Protector and the Council; to the which Letters, you your self,
among the other, did set to your Hand; Yet you, this notwithstanding, have
given commandment to your Officers, That no such Letters should be obeyed; and
written your private Letters to the contrary, commanding the said Goods not to
be restored, but kept to your own use and profit, contrary to your own Hand
before in the Council Chamger written, and contrary to your Duty and
Allegiance, and to the perilous Example of others, and great slander and danger
of the Realm.

31. It is Objected, and laid unto your Charge, That where certain Strangers,
which were Friends and Allies to the King's Majesty, had their Ships, with Wind
and Weather broken, and yet came unwrecked to the Shore; when the Lord
Protector and the Council had written for the restitution of the said Goods,
and to the Country to aid and save so much of the Goods as might, you your self
subscribing and consenting thereto; yet this notwithstanding, you have not only
given contrary commandment to your Officers, but as a Pirat have written
Letters to some of your Friends to help, that as much of these Goods as they
could, should be conveyed away secretly by Night further off, upon hope that if
the same Goods were assured, the Owners would make no further labor for them,
and then you might have enjoyed them; contrary to Justice and your Honor, and
to the great slander of this Realm.

32. It is Objected, and laid unto your Charge, That you have not only
disclosed the Kings Majesty's Secret Council, but also where you your self,
amongst the rest, have consented and agreed to certain things for the
advancement of the King's Affairs, you have spoken and labored against the
same.

33. It is further Objected, and laid unto your Charge, That your Deputy
Steward, and other your Ministers of the Holt, in the County of Denbigh, have
now, against Christmas last past, at the said Holt, made such provision of
Wheat, Malt, Beefs, and other such things as be necessary for the sustenance of
a great number of Men; making also, by all the means possible, a great Mass of
Money; insomuch that all the Country does greatly marvel at it, and the more,
because your Servants have spread Rumors abroad, that the King's Majesty was
dead; whereupon the Country is in a great maze, doubt, and expectation, looking
for some Broil, and would have been more, if at this present, by your
apprehension, it had not been stayed.

The Lord Admiral's Answer to three of the former Articles.
TO the first, he says, That about Easter-Tyde was twelve-months, he said to
Fowler, as he supposes it was, that if he might have the King in his custody
as Mr. Page had, he would be glad; and that he thought a Man might bring him
through the Gallery to his Chamber, and so to his House: But this he said he
spoke merrily, meaning no hurt. And that in the mean time after he heard, and
upon that sought out certain Precedents, that there was in England at one time,
one Protector, and another Regent of France, and the Duke of Exeter, and the
Bishop of Winchester, Governors of the King's Person; Upon that he had thought
to have made suit to the Parliament House for that purpose, and he had the
names of all the Lords, and totted them whom he thought he might have to his
purpose to labor them. But afterward communing with Mr. Comptroller at
Ely-place, being put in remembrance by him of his assenting and agreeing with
own his Hand, that the Lord Protector should be governor of the King's Person,
he was ashamed of his doings, and left off that suit and labor.

To the second he says, He gave Money to two or three of them which were about
the King. To Mr. Cheek he says, he gave at Christmass-tide was twelve-months,
when the Queen was at Enfield 40 l. whereof to himself 20 l. the other for the
King, to bestow where it pleased his Grace amongst his Servants. Mr. Cheek was
very loath to take it, howbeit he would needs press that upon him; and to him
he gave no more, at no time as he remembers, since the King's Majesty was
crowned.

To the Grooms of the Chamber he has at Newyears-tydes given Money, he does not
well remember what.

To Fowler, he says, he gave Money for the King, since the beginning of this
Parliament now last at London, 20 l.

And diverse times, he says, the King has sent to him for money, and he has
sent it. And what time Mr. Latimer preached before the King, the King sent to
him to know what he should give Mr. Latimer, and he sent to him by Fowler 40 l.
with this word, that 20 l. was a good reward for Mr. Latimer, and the other he
might bestow amongst his Servants; whether he has given Fowler any money for
himself he does not remember.

To the third, he says, It is true, he drew such a Bill indeed himself, and
proffered it to the King, or else to Mr. Cheek, he cannot well tell; and before
that, he says, he caused the King to be moved by Mr. Fowler, whether he could
be contented that he should have the Governance of him as Mr. Stanhope had. He
knows not what answer he had; but upon that he drew the said Bill to that
effect, that his Majesty was content, but what answer he had to the Bill he
cannot tell, Mr. Cheek can tell.

Number 32. The Warrant for the Admiral's Execution. March 17.
Ex Libro Concilii. Fol. 247.
THis day, the 17th of March, the Lord Chancellor, and the rest of the King's
Council, meeting in his Highness Palace of Westminster, heard the Report of the
Bishop of Ely, who by the said Lords, and others of the Council, was sent to
instruct and comfort the Lord Admiral; after the hearing whereof, consulting
and deliberating with themselves of the time most convenient for the execution
of the said Lord Admiral, now attainted and condemned by the Parliament, They
did condescend and agree, that the said Lord Admiral should be executed the
Wednesday next following, betwixt the hours of nine and twelve in the forenoon
the same day, upon Tower Hill. His Body and Head to be buried within the Tower.
The King's Writ (as in such Cases as heretofore has been accustomed) being
first directed and sent forth for that purpose and effect. Whereupon calling to
the Council Chamger the Bishop of Ely, they willed him to declare this their
Determination to the said Lord Admiral; and to instruct and teach him, the best
he could, to the quiet and patient suffering of Justice, and to prepare himself
to Almighty God.

E. Somerset. T. Cantuarien. R. Rich Cancel. W. St. John. J. Russel. J.
Warwick. F. Shrewsbury. Thomas Southampton. William Paget. Anthony Wingfield.
William Petre. A. Denny. Edward North. R. Sadler.


Number 33. Articles to be followed and observed, according to the King's
Majesty's Injunctions and Proceedings.
1. THat all Parsons, Vicars, and Curats, Ex MS. Dr. Johnson.
omit in the reading of the Injunctions, all such as make mention of the Popish
Mass, of Chantries, of Candles upon the Altar, or any other suchlike thing.

2. Item. For an Uniformity, that no Minister do counterfeit the Popish Mass,
as to kiss the Lord's Table; washing his Fingers at every time in the
Communion; blessing his Eyes with the Paten or Sudary, or crossing his Head
with the Paten, shifting of the Book from one place to another, laying down and
licking the Chalice of the Communion; holding up his Fingers, Hands, or Thumbs,
joined toward his Temples, breathing upon the Bread or Chalice, showing the
Sacrament openly before the distribution of the Communion; ringing or sacrying
Bells, or setting any Light upon the Lord's Board at any time: And finally, to
use no other Ceremonies than are appointed in the King's Book of Common
Prayers, or kneeling otherwise than is in the said Book.

3. Item. That none buy or sell the Holy Communion, as in Trentals and such
other.

4. Item. That none be suffered to pray upon Beads, and so the People to be
diligently admonished; and such as will not be admonished, to put from the Holy
Communion.

5. Item. That after the Homily, every Sunday, the Minister exhort the People,
especially the Communicants, to remember the poor Men's Box with their Charity.

6. Item. To receive no Corpse but at the Churchyard, without Bell or Cross.

7. Item. That the Common Prayer, upon Wednesdays and Fridays, be diligently
kept, according to the King's Ordinances, exhorting such as may conveniently
come, to be there.

8. Item. That the Curats, every sixth Week at the least, teach and declare
diligently the Catechism, according to the Book of the same.

9. Item. That no Man maintain Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, the six
Articles, Bedrolls, Images, Relics, Lights, Holy Bells, Holy Beads, Holy
Water, Palms, Ashes, Candles, Sepulchers Paschal, creeping to the Cross,
hallowing of the Font of the Popish manner, Oil, Chresme, Altars, Beads, or any
other such Abuses and Superstitions, contrary to the King's Majesty's
Proceedings.

10. Item. That within any Church or Chapel, be not used any more than one
Communion upon any day, except Christmass-day and Easter Day.

11. Item. That none keep the Abrogate Holy Days, other than those that have
their proper and peculiar Service.

12. Item. That the Churchwardens suffer no buying nor selling, gaming, or
unfitting Demeanor, in Church, or Churchyards, especially during the
Common Prayer, the Sermon, and reading of the Homily.

13. Item. That going to the Sick with the Sacrament, the Minister have not
with him either Light or Bells.

Number 34. A Paper written by Luther to Bucer, concerning a Reconciliation
with the Zuinglians. An Original.
Ex M S. Col. C. Chapter Cant.
PRimo, Ut nullo modo concedamus de nobis dici, quod neutri neutros ante
Intellexerunt: Nam isto Pharmaco non medebimur tanto vulneri: cum nec ipsi
credamus utrimque hoc verum esse, and alii putabunt a nobis hoc fingi; ut ita
magis suspectam reddemus causam, vel potius per totum dubiam faciemus; cum sit
communis omnium, ut in tantis animorum turbis and scrupulis non expedit hoc
nomine addere offendiculum.

Secundo, Cum hactenus dissenserimus, quod illi signum, nos Corpus Christi
asseruerimus plane contrarii: Nihilominus mihi videtur utile, ut mediam, ut
novam statuamus sententiam, qua and illi concedant Christum adesse vere and nos
concedamus panem solum manducari. Considerandum certe est, quantam hic
fenestram aperiemus in re omnibus communi cogitandi and Orientium hinc fontes
questionum and opinionum Here a word is wanting, it is like it should be
Occludendi.
(...) Ut tutius multo sit illos simpliciter manner in suo signo, cum nec ipsi
suam, nec nos nostram partem, multo minus utrique totum orbem pertrahemus in
eam sententiam; Sed potius irritabimus ad varias Cogitationes, ideo vellem
potius ut sopitum maneret dissidium in duabus istis sententiis, quam ut occasio
daretur infinitis questionibus ad Epicurismum profuturis.

Istis salvis, nihil est quod a me peti possit: nam ut ego hoc dissidium vellem
(testis est mihi Christus meus) redemptum Corpore and Sanguine meo. Sed quid
faciam? Ipsi forte Conscientia bona sunt in altera sententia. Feramus igitur
eos: si sinceri sunt, liberabit eos Christus Dominus. Ego contra captus sum
bona mea Conscientia, nisi ipsi mihi sum ignotus, in meam sententiam: ferant
and me, si non possunt mihi accedere.

Number 35. The Sentence against Joan of Kent, with the Certificate made upon
it.
IN Dei Nomine, Amen. Nos Thomas, Regist. Cran. Fol. 175.
permissione divina Cantuarien. Archiepiscopus, totius Angliae primas and
Metrapolitanus, Thomas Smith Miles, Willielmus Cook Decanus de Arcubus, Hugo
Latimer Sacrae Theologiae Professor, and Richardus Lyell Legum Doctor,
illustrissimi, invictissimi in Christo Principis and Domini nostri Domini
Edwardi sexti, Dei Gratia Angliae, etc. per Literas suas Regias Patentes, dat.
duodecimo die mensis Aprilis, Anno Regni sui tertio, contra te Joannam Bocher,
alias nuncupatam Joannam de Kente, coram nobis super haeretica pravitate, juxta
and secundum Commissionem dicti Domini nostri Regis detectam and declaratam, ac
in ea part apud bonos and graves Notorie and Public, diffamatam, rite and
legitime procedentes, auditis, visis, intellectis, cognitis, rimatis, and
matura deliberatione discussis and ponderatis dicti negotii meritis and
circumstantiis, servatisque in omnibus and per omnia in eodem negotio de jure
servandis in quomodolibet requisitis: judicialiter and pro tribunali sendentes,
Christi nomine invocato ac ipsum solum Deum praeoculis nostris habentes; Quia
per acta inactitata, deducta, probata, confessata, ac per te saepius coram
nobis in eodem negotio recognita, comperimus and clare invenimus te, tum per
confessiones, tum per recognitiones tuas coram nobis judicialiter factas,
nefandum and intollerabilem errorem, haeresin damnatam and scandalosam
opinionem subscriptam, juri Divino and Fidei Catholicae obviantem, contrariam
and repugnantem: viz. That you believe, that the Word was made Flesh in the
Virgins Belly; but that Christ took Flesh of the Virgin, you believe not;
because the Flesh of the Virgin, being the outward Man, was sinfully gotten and
born in Sin; but the Word, by the consent of the inward Man of the Virgin, was
made Flesh. Quem quidem e^rorem, haeresin damnatam and scandalosam opinionem,
juri divino and Fidei Catholicae obviantem, contrariam and repugnantem, etc. Id
circo nos Thomas Archiep. etc. te Joannam Bocher, alias Joannam de Kente
praedictam, de meritis, culpis, obstinaciis and contumaciis, etc. de and super
horrendo haereticae pravitatis reatu confessam, ad Ecclesiae unitatem redire
nolentem, haereticam opinionem credentem, praemissorum praetextu fuisse and
esse, cum animi dolor and cordis amaritudine Judicamus, teque ex nunc tanquam
pertinacem and obstinatam haereticam, judicio sive curiae seculari ad omnem
juris effectum, qui exinde sequi debeat, aut poterit, relinquendam fore
decernimus and declaramus, and sic per praesentes de facto relinquimus; Teque
Joannam Bocher, alias Joannam de Kent, memoratam haereticam, pertinacem, in
majoris Excommunicationis sententiam occasion praemissorum incidisse and
incurrisse, necnon excommunicatam fuisse and esse, etiam sententialiter and
definitive pronunciamus and declaramus, per hanc nostram sententiam
definitivam, quam ferimus and promulgamus in his scriptis. Lecta fuit haec
sententia per praenominatos, Reverendum, etc.

Sermo factus Domino Regi contra Joannam Bocher, alias dictam, J^annam de Kent
pro Brachio Seculari.
ILlustrissimo and Invictissimo in Christo Principi, Domino nostro Edwardo
sexto, Dei Gratia Angliae, etc. Thomas Permissione Divina Cantuarien, etc.
Thomas Smith and Commissarii praedicti and Inquisitores vestrae Celsitudinis,
per Literas vestras Regias Patentes, dat. 12 Aprilis, Anno Regni vestri tertio,
sufficienter and legitime deputati honorem and perpetuam foelicitatem in eo,
per quam Reges regnant and Principes dominantur. Vestrae Regiae Celsitudini,
Tenore praesentum significamus, quod nos adversus quandam, Joannam Bocher alias
Joannam de Kent dictam, subditam vestram de and super nefando Crimine Haereseos
ac detestanda Anabaptistarum Secta apud bonos and graves enormiter defamatam,
and super reatu earundem nobis detectam, delatam and denuntiatam, rite and
legitime juxta literarum vestrarum Regiarum Commissionalium exigentiam, and
tenorem procedentes, eandem Joannam, per nos examinatam, comperimus and
invenimus Errores, Haereses and damnatas Opiniones pertinaciter animo indurato
saepenumero manutenuisse, defendisse and in eisdem permansisse, and ab eisdem
nullo modo resipiscisse, nec resipiscere curasse; sed ad Sanctae Matris
Ecclesiae gremium redire penitus neglexisse: Ideo, cum animi amaritudine and
cordis dolor, eandem Joannam, saepius monitam and per nos ad Ecclesiae
unitatem redire hortatam, salutaribus nostris monitis parere omnino spernentem,
de and cum consensu Collegarum nostrorum, tanquam ovem morbidam a grege domini
(ne alios viros subditos sua contagione inficiat) ejiciendam and eliminandam
fore decrevimus, ipsamque Joannam occasion iniquitatis suae inveteratae,
haereticam ac haereticis Opinionibus credentem, mediante nostra sententia
definitiva, pronunciavimus and decrevimus. Cum igitur Sancta Matter Ecclesia non
habeat, quod ulterius facere and exequi debeat, in hac part vestrae Regiae
sublimitati and brachio vestro seculari dictam Haereticam and relapsam
relinquimus, condigna animadversione plectendam. In cujus rei testimonium; Nos
Thomas Archiep. etc. Commissarius vester humillimus supradictus, de consensu
Collegarum nostrorum, hic se subscribentium, Sigillum nostrum Archiepiscopale
praesentibus apponi fecimus. Datum ultimo die mensis Aprilis, Anno Dom. 1549.
and Regni vestri foelicissimi Anno tertio.

Folio 178. After this follows the Process, and Sentence of Condemnation of
one George van Parre a Dutchman, for obstinately maintaining the like
Opinions; together with a Petition imploring the execution thereof, and the
assistance of the Secular Power, conform to the Tenor of that above-written,
bearing date the 6th of April, Anno Dom. 1551.

The Judges and Commissioners of this Process, were Thomas Archbishop of
Canterbury, Nicholas Bishop of London, William May, Griffin Leyson, John
Oliver, Miles Coverdale, Richard Lyell, John Gosnold, and Christopher Nevison.

His Heresy that he believes, is, That God the Father is only God: and that
Christ is not very God, is non-Heresie. And being asked, by an Interpreter,
Whether he would abjure the said Opinion? He answered; No.

Number 36. A Letter from the Protector to Sir Philip Hobby, concerning the
Rebellions at Home.
KNowing that all such as be Ambassadors abroad, Cotton Libr. Galba. B. 12.
are not only desirous of News, for the love they bear to their own Country
naturally, desiring often to hear of the estate of it, but also to confirm and
confute such Rumors as be spread in the Parts where they lie, we have thought
good to impart what since our last Letters has chanced. The Devonshire Men are
well chastised and appeased; three other of their Captains have voluntarily
come in, and simply submitted themselves to Sir Thomas Pomery Knight. Wise and
Harrice, who before were fled, and could not be found; and the Country comes
in daily to my Lord Privy Seal, by 100 and 1000, to crave their Pardon, and be
put in some sure hope of Grace. Burry, and some one or two more of their blind
Guids, that escaped from the Sword, have attempted, in the mean Season, to stir
up Somersetshire, and have gotten them a Band or Camp; but they are sent after,
and we trust by this, they have as they deserve. The Earl of Warwick lies near
to the Rebels in Norfolk, which faint now, and would have Grace gladly, so that
all might be pardoned, Ket, and the other Arch-Traitors. The number upon that
is at a stay, and they daily shrink so fast away, that there is great hope that
they will leave their Captains destitute and alone, to receive their worthy
Reward; the which is the thing we most desire, to spare, as much as may be, the
effusion of Blood, and that namely of our own Nation. In Yorkshire a Commotion
was attempted the Week last past; but the Gentlemen were so soon upon them, and
so forwardly, that it was straight suppressed; and with weeping Eyes, the rest
upon their Knees, they wholly together desired the Gentlemen to obtain their
Pardons; the which the King's Majesty has so granted unto them, as may stand
with his Highness Honor: So that for the Inner Parts (thanks be to the
Almighty God) the Case stands in good Points. The Causes and Pretenses of
these Uproars and Risings, are diverse and uncertain, and so full of variety
almost in every Camp, (as they call them) that it is hard to write what it is;
as ye know, is like to be of People without Head and Rule, and that would have
that they wot not what: Some cries, pluck down Enclosures and Parks, some for
their Commons; others pretend the Religion; a number would Rule another while,
and direct things as Gentlemen have done; and indeed all have conceived a
wonderful hate against Gentlemen, and takes them all as their Enemies. The
Ruffians among them, and the Soldiers, which be the chief Doers, look for
spoil. So that it seems no other thing but a Plague and a Fury amongst the
vilest and worst sort of Men: for except only Devonshire and Cornwall, and they
not past two or three, in all other Places not one Gentleman, or Man of
Reputation was ever amongst them, but against their Wills, and as Prisoners. In
Norfolk, Gentlemen, and all Servingmen, for their sakes, are as ill handled as
may be; but this Broil is well assuaged, and in a manner at a point shortly to
be fully ended, with the Grace of God.

On the other part of the Seas, we have not so good News; for the French King
taking now his time, and occasions of this Rebellion within the Realm, is come
unto Bullingnois, with a great number of Horsemen and Footmen, himself in
Person: And as we are advertised, of the Letters of the 24th of this present,
from Ambletue or Newhaven, the Almain Camp, or Almain Hill, a piece
appertaining to the said Ambletue, was that day delivered to the French, by
traitorous consent of the Camp; their variance falling out, or feigned, between
the Captain and the Soldiers, so that they are now besieged very near, and in
a manner round. Howbeit they write, that they trust the piece it self of
Newhaven will be well enough defended, God assisting them, who be in as good
and stout a courage as any Men may be, and as desirous to win Honor, and give
a good account of their Charge. Thus we bid you heartily farewell. August 24.
1549.

Number 37. A Letter of Bonner 's after he was deprived. An Original. The first
part of this Letter, is the recommending the Bearer, that they might find a
good Marriage for him.
-- The Pears were so well accepted in every place, where I had so many Thanks
for my Distribution, that I intend, by God's Grace, to send down to you your
Frail again, to have an eching, either of more Pears, or else of Puddings, etc.
ye do know what, etc. does mean, by that Italian Proverb, Dio me guarda da
furia di villani, da Conscientia di preti, da chi odi due mess nel giorno, da
quasibuglie di medici da etc. di notarii, da chi jura per la Conscientia mia. I
do not write to Sir John Burn, nor to my Lady, for any thing, their Conscience
is not over-large; and the like is in Mr. Hornvale, and also my old
Acquaintance John Badger. But if amongst you I have no Puddings, then must I
say, as Messer, our Priest of the Hospital, said to his mad Horse, in our last
journey to Hostia, Al diavolo, al diavolo, aitutti diavolli. Our Lord preserve
you, and all yours, with desire to be recommended to all. Festo omnium
Sanctorum, in the Marshalsea.

To my dear beloved Friend, the Worshipful Richard Lechmore. Your loving and
assured old Acquaintance, Edmond Bonner.

Number 38. Letters and Instructions touching Proceedings with the Emperor, to
Sir William Paget, Knight of the Order, sent to the Emperor. 1549.
FIrst, He shall communicate his Instructions, Cotton Libr. Galba. B. 12.
and the cause of his coming with Sir Philip Hobbey Ambassador, Resident with
the Emperor, and accompanied with him at his access to the said Emperor, shall
deliver his Letters of Credit; and for his Credit shall utter his Charge as
follows.

First, He shall declare what good Will we have to the continuance of the
Amity, and the increase of the same, by such means as may be devised on either
Party; and how the Reciproque has been promised on their behalf.

Item. To the intent they may as well perceive our forwardness therein, as also
the World see the same take effect indeed, he is sent to show what We have
thought upon for this purpose; and also if they be of a like forwardness, to
hear again what they think meet in that behalf; and upon this Conference,
either to conclude upon both Our Devices, or such one of them as shall be
thought best for both Parties.

Item. We think good, that the Treaty already made between the Emperor and the
King's Majesty of famous memory, deceased, be made perpetual, that is to say,
confirmed by the Prince, and the Countries on both sides, whose Commodity
depend upon the same Treaty.

Item. Before the Confirmation, the Treaty to be revised by him; and the
Ambassador, and certain other to be appointed by the Emperor, to the intent it
may appear whether we have both one understanding of the words of the Treatise.

Item. Where the debating to and from of the Amity with his Ambassador here,
occasion has risen to talk of Marriage, between the Infant of Portugal and the
Lady Mary; to which thing we perceive the Emperor has sithence been made
privy; and that in case the Emperor mind to treat further of that Matter, he
shall say he has commission to hear and conclude thereof.

Item. To declare the State of our Affairs in Scotland at this time; and
forasmuch as the Scots have been very much aided with Victuals, Ammunitions,
and other Necessaries from his Dominions, by reason whereof they are more stiff
and unwilling to come to Reason; the said Comptroller declaring this
Consideration, shall do wh^t he may to ^^ocure, that not only all safe Conducts
granted by the Emperor, or the Regent may be cassed; but also his consent, that
if any his Subjects traffic into Scotland, being common Enemies, if they be
taken beyond Barwick thitherward, it may be lawful for our Men to take their
Goods as forfeit.

Item. To declare our proceedings with France at this time, and of our sending
Commissioners upon the French Motion, who shall not conclude any thing
prejudicial to the Amity or Treaties already passed, or now to be passed,
between Us and the Emperor, but shall depend wholly upon his proceeding there;
so as if the Emperor shall, upon consultation of his Affairs, determine with us
to do any thing to France, we will frame our Communications with the French
thereafter: if otherwise, than the said Commissioners now sent to the French
shall do accordingly.

Item. For making the Treaty perpetual, We think convenient, that the Prince of
Spain do confirm and sign the same, and the Low Countries comprised therein, do
also in their General Parliaments or Assemblies make like Confirmation, and in
their Courts to make Decrees thereof; and this, or such form as has been used
in those Parts heretofore in like Cases, to be done for their part: And for our
part, the King to Ratify it, the Parliament to Confirm it, and the Courts of
Chancery, King's Bench, and Common Pleas, to make Decrees thereof.

Item. In the revising of the Treaty, if any Doubt rise for the understanding
of it, which shall seem by his and the Ambassadors discretion to be for the
King's Profit, to conclude upon it, if they will agree to the same; and if
there arise doubt, which shall seem to their discretions against the King, then
to advertise hither.

Item. For the case of the Marriage, to declare at the first what was left by
the King's Majesty deceased; and yet nevertheless afterward to offer 100000
Crowns, or the Revenue yearly which she has now upon convenable Dower. The
said 100000 Crowns, or Revenue, to be paid at Calais, if the Marriage take
place; she to be conveyed to Calais at the King's Charges; the Marriage to be
made in the Emperor's Court, or elsewhere in the Low Country, by his
appointment; and for her Dowry to ask (...) by the Year to be paid in case of
the Infant's Death, at Calais yearly, at the Feasts of (...) and the Feast of
(...) and She to return into England with Jewels, Plate, Household Stuff, such
as should be agreed upon. And thus far to enter for the first Degree; and in
case of further Communication, to advertise and reecive answer from hence.

Item. Touching our Proceeding with France, to declare how we have continued in
War with them, and Scotland these four Years alone, without help; and that we
think it expedient for us, upon this occasion now ministered by France, to give
ear; in the which hearing, we mind to attribute much to the Emperor's
Friendship; for loath we are to let slip from the King any one jot of his
Right, if the Emperor will assist; but otherwise we must make such a Bargain
for the King, as we may with regard to his Honor and Surety. And in this Point
the Comptroller shall press the said Emperor to enter with us, and to put him
in a remembrance of his Quarrels, and all such other things as he can devise
for this purpose; and to put him in hope generally, that we will enter
gallantly with him. And if he descend to Particulars for the form of the Entry,
to hear his Opinion, and to advertise, and then proceed as answer comes from
hence; but specially to remember to set forth the comprehension of Bulloign for
defense, upon a like Reciproque, for so shall he be brought to think we mind
not to conclude with France, and thereby stay such practices, as upon occasion
of the said Comptroller's going, either he with France, or France with him,
might enter together. And so the Commissioners sent to France, may make the
better Bargain for the King. Marry, this Point is not to be opened thoroughly,
till he hear some likelihood that our Commissioners in France break off without
conclusion.

Item. The said Comptroller shall essay, as of himself, whether they will
accept Bulloign at the King's Majesty's Hands, for some other reasonable
recompense.

Item. The said Comptroller shall use his discretion, to open the Points
aforesaid to the Emperor, Granvela, or D'arras, either at one time, or several
times, as to his discretion shall seem convenient; and shall address his
Pacquets to the Commissioners for France lying at Calais, to the end they may
see his Proceedings, and send them over with speed, directing their Charge the
better hereafter.

Number 39. An Account of a Conference the English Ambassadors had with the
Emperor's Ministers, in a Letter to the Protector.
IT may like your Grace to be advertised, Cotton Libr. Galba. B. 12.
that upon the 20th of this Present, came to the Lodging of me the Comptroller,
Monsieur d' Arras, and in his company the two Presidents of the Council, St.
Maurice and Viglius; who after a few words of Office passed between them and
us, entered the cause of their coming, saying, That the Emperor having been
informed of such Conference as was passed this other day between me and
Granvela, has to declare his readiness to any thing that might satisfy his
good Will and Affection to the intent of the King, sent us here to revisite the
Treaties, and see how we do agree upon the understanding of the same. I the
Comptroller answered, That it was not amiss, howbeit I had not so opened the
Matters, nor looked to have it passed in such order. But first to know the
Emperor's Resolution, how he can be contented with the Confirmation of the
Treaty, in the form that I had moved, and then that agreed upon, to proceed to
the revisitation of the same. In good Faith, quoth d' Arras, we did so
understand it, and have so reported to the Emperor, and this Commission has he
now given us. Well, quoth I, seeing you are now here, and have brought the
Treaty with you for that purpose, we may do somewhat in it, and afterward be
advised further, requiring, that in case any thing should be found in the
passages of the Treaty meet to be considered, that we might, before further
wading in the Matter, know the Emperor's Resolution, touching as well the
Confirmation of the Treaty, as in such things as now might be moved: which they
thought reasonable. And so we began to read the Treaty; and when we came to the
sixth Article, wherein it is provided for the common Enmity in case of
Invasion, and by the Establishment set forth, with what number the Invasion
must be made; and that both for the Invasion, and the Number the Prince
required to join, shall credit the Letters of the Prince requiring. I put this
Case, quoth I, for the understanding of this Matter, that the King my Master
will signify by his Letters to the Emperor, that such a day the Scots, our
common Enemies, to the number of 7000 Men, with the aid of the French King,
affronted the Borders of England, comprehended in the Treaty, and set above
2000 Men into the Realm to invade: who did indeed invade, and spoil, and burn,
and take Prisoners; and therefore would require the Emperor, according to the
Treaty, to take the French King, who had aided his Enemies, for his Enemies;
for so does he, and so will use him for his Enemies. Is not the Emperor bound
to do it? What say you, quoth I, how do you understand this Article? It should
seem yes, quoth d' Arras, but we will speak with the Emperor in it, and bring
you an answer. The words be plain, quoth I, and cannot be avoided.

Then in the seventh Article, where it is said, That the Prince requiring for
his Aid Money instead of Men, must, if the Invasion made by the Enemy cease,
restore the Money again which remains. And afterward says, That though the
Invasion cease, yet if he will follow the Enemy, he may use the Aid for the
time appointed in the Treaty; saying in generality, (eo casu subsidiis
auxiliaribus, etc.) I asked, Whether in those general words, they mean not the
Money as well as the Men? Whereupon they seemed to doubt, and took a Note
thereof, to know the Emperor's Pleasure in the same.

In the ninth Article, where it is treated for redress of Injuries done by one
Subject to the other, there we fell into a brawl of half an hour, upon a
Question that I moved, viz. When they took Justice to be denied? And their
Answer was, That we used none at all. And here at length, I fell into their
manner of Arresting of one whole Nation upon a Knave Mariner's Complaint. And
he, What Thieves our Nation was upon the Sea, and Lawless People, and that they
never proceed to such Extremities, but when their Subjects had been in England
and Justice was denied. That has never been seen, quoth I; but if any of your
Subjects think himself grieved, straight he runs to Monsieur le Protecteur;
and he, by and by, setting all the King's Affairs apart, must attend to the
Affairs of Monsieur le Mariniure, or else home runs he with open cry, That
he cannot have Justice in England, and you straight believe; and thereupon
comes these often Blusters. And do you think it reason, that Monsieur G. or
you should attend to every private Man's Complaint; you should then have a
goodly Office. No, you send them to the ordinary Justices, and so let that take
place and way as it will; but you will never impeach your self more with the
Matter. And reason, quoth he, but the Cause is not alike with you in England,
for there, quoth he, all things come to the Lord Protector's Hand, there is
none other Judge or Justice used or cared for in the Realm; no, and his Letters
sometimes not esteemed, and that our Subjects fear full often, and therefore of
force they must resort to Monsieur Protecteur. And this is not true, quoth I,
and that Monsieur Hobbey knows, my Lord Protector, nor none of the
Privy Council, meddle with no private Matters whosoever it be, but only meddle
with Matters of State, leaving all other things to the ordinary course of
Justice, except only many times to gratify your Ambassador, and to show himself
glad to nourish the Amity, he troubles himself with the Complaints of your
Subjects, which, by St. Mary, by my advice, he shall do no more, seeing it is
so little considered, but shall refer them to the common Justice. Whither is
that? (quoth he). To the Admiralty, quoth I. Marry, a goodly Justice, quoth he,
for so shall the poor Man's Cause be tried before his Adversary. And why not
tried in our Admiralty (quoth I) as well as in yours. Nay, quoth he, both be
naught indeed; they were very ordinary Courts at the beginning of the redress
of Matters upon the Sea, but now they feel the sweet of the Gain such, as they
care little for Justice. And here, as well for relief of poor Men spoiled and
robbed upon the Seas, as to avoid Arrests, and such other troublesome
Proceedings on either side, we fell to devising, and came to this Point; If the
Princes for their parts, upon their advertisement to the Emperor, and we to
your Grace, shall like it, that Commission sufficient be given by the Emperor
to two of his Privy Council, to hear and determine by their discretion,
summary; and de pleno, all Complaints by the King's Subjects here for criminal
Causes upon the Sea; and the King's Majesty to do the like to two of his
Privy Council, for the Complaints in like case of the Emperor's Subjects.

And this was all was passed in open Conference, saying, That in the Discourse
for the Confirmation in the Treaty by the Prince and their Countries, as they
seemed to show the Emperor's readiness, (but yet not so resolved) that the
Prince should confirm the Treaty, and that further any other thing should be
done that he might reasonably do, to declare his good Will to the entertainment
and augmentation of his Amity and Affection to the King's Majesty. So he
alleged diverse Reasons why the Emperor should not seek to his Subjects to
confirm his Treaties with Foreign Princes. We alleged the Example of the
King, and the French King in times past; and what was said in that Case at C.
(...) in the presence of himself de C. (...) and Chap. (...) Whereunto he
answered, That the State of France was more restrained than the Emperor's; and
that the French King could give no piece of his Patrimony, nor bind his
Country, without the consent of his Parliament at Paris, and the three Estates;
but he thought the King of England to have a greater Prerogative, and the
Emperor he was sure had a greater Prerogative; and so had all his Ancestors,
and therefore would be loath now to put himself so far in their danger: They
were, he said, fifteen or sixteen Parliaments, and if a thing should be
proposed unto them, whereof they had never heard the like before, they would
not only muse much at the Matter, but they would have also the scanning of it;
and what would come of it, the Emperor could not tell, peradventure dash the
Matter, and so prejudice his Prerogative with them. Yet now where he and his
Ancestors do, and have always passed Treaties with other Princes, and bind
their Subjects thereby without making them privy thereto, it would by this
means come to pass, that from henceforth their Subjects would look to be privy
to every Treaty, which were not convenient; marry, for the Prince which shall
succeed to confirm the Treaty, he thought the Emperor could not take it but
reasonable, and doubted not to bring a good Answer in the same. So as we see
for this Point, it will come to the confirmation of the King and the Prince,
and upon any condition or interpretation of the Treaty to them also, wherein we
intend to go forwards, for so our Instruction bears us, unless that before
the conclusion and shutting up of the Matter, we hear from your Grace to the
contrary.

The things being thus far passed, and our open Talk at a Point, and they ready
to depart, Monsieur d' Arras taking occasion (as it seemed) to stay because of
the Rain, took me aside, and asked me if I would command him any other Service.
I answered, No Service, but Friendship, and the continuance of his good Will to
the King's Majesty's Affairs; whereunto he making large Offers, I began to
enter with him, how much your Grace, and all the rest, reposed themselves in
the friendship of the Emperor, and the good Ministry of his Father and him, to
the furtherance of the King's Majesty's Affairs; to whom, as in that behalf,
they showed themselves great Friends, so did they, like good Servants to their
Master, for the prosperous success of the Affairs of the one, served the turn
of the other, and the contrary. Whereupon I discoursed largely, as far as my
poor Capacity would extend, how necessary it was for the Emperor to aid and
assist us in all things, so as we are not oppressed by force, or driven, for
want of Friendship, to take such ways to keep us in quiet, as both we our
selves would be loath, and our Friends should afterward have peradventure
cause to forethink.

I repeated first how we entered the Wars for your sake; for the King might have
made his Bargain honorable with France, which no Man knew better than I: how
long we have endured the War, and how long alone; how favorable they are to
our common Enemies the Scots; how ungentle the French be to us, and by indirect
means think to consume us, to make the Emperor the weaker.

I recited the practices of the French with the Turk, with the Pope, with the
Germans, with Denmark; his Aid of the Scots, and all upon intent to impeach the
Emperor when he sees time, or at the least attending a good hour, upon hope of
the Emperor's Death; the weaker that we be, the easilier shall he do it; if we
forgo any our Pieces on this side, we must needs be the weaker; and that so we
had rather do, than alone to keep War against Scotland and France. Wherefore if
they will both provide for their own Strength, and give us courage to keep
still that which we have, the Emperor must be content to take This is a Cipher,
and stands, I suppose, for Bulloign.
13 into defense, as well as other places comprehended in the Treaty; which, I
said, we meant not, but upon a reasonable Reciproque. What Reciproqe (quoth he)
roundly? Thereupon advise you reasonably, quoth I. O, quoth he, I cannot see
how the Emperor can honorably make a true Treaty for that Point, without
offense of his Treaty with France; and we mean to proceed directly and plain
with all Men, quoth he. Why, quoth I, we may bring you justly, by and by with
us, if we will advertise you, as I did even now put my Case. Yea, if your Case
be true, quoth he; but herein we will charge your Honors and Consciences,
whether the Fact be so or no? for your Grace shall understand, that I talked in
the Matter so suspiciously, as though such an Invasion had been made, and that
you would require common Enmity.

In fine, Sir, after many Motions and Persuasions, and long Discourses used on
my behalf, to induce them to take 13 into defense. His refuge was only, That
they would fain learn how they might honestly answer the French; albeit I
showed him some forms of Answers, which he seemed not to l^ke; yet in the end I
said, He was a great Doctor, and as he had put the Doubt, so he was learned
sufficiently, if he listed to assoil the same. He said, he would open these
Matters to the Emperor, and trusted to bring me such an Answer as I should have
reason to be satisfied, and so departed; whereof, as soon as we have knowledge,
your Grace shall be advertised accordingly. And thus we beseech God, to send
your Grace well to do all your Proceedings.

Number 40. A Letter from Sir William Paget, and Sir Philip Hobbey, concerning
their Negotiation with the Emperor's Ministers. An Original.
IT may like your Grace be advertised, That yesterday at Afternoon, Cotton
Libr. Galba. B. 12.
Monsieur d' Arras, accompanied with two Presidents of the Council, St. Maurice
and Viglius, came unto the Lodging of me the Comptroller; and after some words
of Office passed on either part, d' Arras began to set forth the cause of their
coming, saying, That the Emperor having at good length considered and debated
the things proponed and communed of between us since my coming hither, had sent
them to report unto me his final Answer and Resolution to the same.

And first (quoth he) to your Case, That at our being together for the
revisitation of the Treaty, ye put forth upon the sixth Article for the common
Enmity in case of Invasion, his Majesty museth much, what ye should mean
thereby, for seeing the Case is not in ure, he thinks, that doubting of his
Friendship, ye go about, by these means, to grope and feel his Mind; which ye
need not do, he having hitherto showed himself ready in all things to show the
King, his good Brother, pleasure, and to observe the Treaty in all Points to
the uttermost; and if this Case should happen to come in ure, then will he not
fail to do whatsoever the Treaty binds him unto, till when he can make no
other answer therein.

As to your Question, moved upon the sixth Article of the Treaty, viz. Whether
Money be not meant as well as Men by these words, Subsidiis Auxiliaribus? His
Majesty takes the words to be plain enough, and thinks they cannot be
otherwise interpreted, than to be meant, as well for Money as Men, for so does
he understand them.

Unto the Order that was communed upon for the Administration of Justice on
both sides, for matter of Spoil or Piracy upon the Sea, his Majesty having
weighed what is best to be done therein further, he has good cause first to
complain of the over many Spoils that your Men have made on his poor Subjects,
and the small Justice that has been hitherto ministered unto them herein,
whereof he has continual Complaints, and therefore he thinks it were meeter,
e're ever any further Order shall be concluded upon, that his Subjects were
first recompensed of these wrongs they have sustained, and the Matter brought
to some equality, and his People put in as much good case as yours are; for I
assure you (quoth he) the Wrongs our Men have sustained are many; among the
rest a poor Jeweler, having gotten a safe conduct of the King that dead is, to
bring into England certain Jewels, because after he had the King's Hand and
Seal to the License, he had not the same sealed also with the Great Seal of
England, his Jewels were taken from him; and he, being not present (although it
were so named in the Sentence) condemned to lose them by the order of your Law,
contrary to all Equity and Justice: Which seems strange, that the King's Hand
and Seal should appear to be sufficient for a greater Matter than this. The
Treaties also provide, That the Subjects of the one Prince may frankly, without
impediment, traffic and occupy into the other Princes Country; but to shadow
the Matter with all, one, I cannot tell who, has been agreed withal, and so
the poor Man and his Heirs put from their Right, which his Majesty wishes to
be considered. And albeit he thinks that the King your Master, being under
Age, cannot himself, by the order of the Law, conclude upon any thing now in
his Minority, that shall be of due force and strength, able to bind him and his
Country when he shall come to his perfect Age. Yet taking that his Tutors being
authorized thereto, by the common Assent of your Parliament, may go through and
conclude upon these, or like things in his Name, his Majesty thinks it will
do well, when his Subjects shall be recompensed of the Wrongs they have
hitherto sustained, that some order be devised for the administration of
Justice hereafter in like Cases.

As touching the Confirmation of the Treaty, considering that the same was
first made between the Emperor and King Henry the Eighth, and not ratified by
the King your Master since his Father's Death, his Majesty thinks that he
has most cause to require the same: Wherefore because (as I told you even now)
he thinks that these things, the King himself should conclude upon during his
Minority, cannot be of sufficient force, if his Tutors shall be, by the
Authority of your Parliament enabled thereto, his Majesty is content the Treaty
be confirmed by them in the King's Name, and by the Prince of Spain, in such
form as shall be thought best for both Parties.

As to the comprehension of Bulloign, ye must know, that we have a Treaty with
France as well as with you, which the Emperor cannot, without some touch of his
Honor, break, without just Grounds: And albeit his Majesty would be loath to
see the King, his good Brother, forgo either that Piece, or any other Jot of
his Right, yet can he not enter this Defense, unless he would break with France
out of hand; which in respect of his other Affairs he cannot yet do, howbeit he
will gladly assist his good Brother in any other thing the best he may, and
will not fail to show him all the Pleasure he can with regard to his Honor;
but with Bulloign he cannot meddle at this time. And here he staying; Is this
the Emperor's resolute and full Answer, Monsieur d' Arras? quoth I. Yea, (quoth
he); wherewith he prays the King, his good Brother, to rest satisfied, and
take it in good part. Albeit (quoth I) I have no Commission to make any Reply
thereto, because it was not known to your Grace what the Emperor's Resolution
should be, yet in the way of talk I will be bold to say my mind herein; We
have, Monsieur d' Arras (quoth I) always esteemed the Emperor's Friendship, and
desired the observation of the Treaties, and the entertainment of the Amity, as
a thing necessary and common to both the Parties; for the better establishment
whereof, and that now and in this time some good Fruit, to the benefit of both,
might appear to the World to follow of the same, I was sent hither, which was
the chiefest cause of my coming: And because that the Amity between both
Princes might be the firmer, and that all Doubts being taken away, no cause of
Quarrel shall be left, we thought best to put you in mind of the Confirmation
and Revisitation of the Treaty, to the intent, that by the one, the World might
see an establishment of our Friendship by our deed; and that by the other, one
of us might understand another, and consider whether any thing were to be added
for the Commodity of both Parties, which I suppose stands you as much upon to
desire, as it does us. And whereas ye say that the King's Majesty, because he
is under Age, cannot conclude or go through with any thing that shall be of
sufficient force, I must needs tell you plainly, That ye touch his Majesty's
Honor over-near herein, for we think that the Majesty of a King is of such
efficacy, that he has even the same Authority, and full Power, at the first
hour of his Birth, that he has thirty Years after. And what your Laws are, I
know not, but sure I am, that by our Laws, whatsoever is done by the King in
his Minority, or by his Ministers in his Name, is of no less force and
strength, than if it had been done in time of his full Age and Years, if once
the Great Seal of his Realm have passed, there is no Remedy but needs must he
stand thereto. Marry, let the Ministers take heed what they do, and look that
they may be able to discharge themselves toward him of their Doings, if he
shall require account of them when he comes to Age, for it is they must answer
him; but he must needs stand to whatsoever they have counseled him to agree
unto during his Minority. And to prove that our Laws gives him the same
Authority now, that he shall have when he comes to his perfect Age; if any
Man, either for instruction of Learning, or any other Cause, should presume to
lay hands on, or touch his Majesty in way of correction, he should by Law be
taken for a Traitor. And if the Matter were as ye take it, we should then be in
a strange and evil case, for neither might we conclude Peace, League, or
Treaty, nor make Laws or Statutes, during the King's Minority, that should be
of sufficient force to bind him and his to the observation of the same. But ye
mistake the Matter much; and therefore if the Emperor mind to proceed to this
Confirmation he may, or otherwise do as it shall please him.

And as touching my Case (quoth I) ye must understand, I did not move it
without some just ground, for remembering that all your Commissioners, and all
ours being together at Vtrecht for the Esclarcisement of the Treaty, although
the words of the Treaty were plain enough, and could receive none other
interpretation than was there plainly written, yet would ye needs understand
the Article for common Enmity, in case of Invasion, after your own minds. And
whereas, by the words of the Treaty, no mention is made of any number, and
therefore with howsoever few in number the Invasion be made, ought the Invaders
to be taken for common Enemies? Your Commissioners did nevertheless interpret
the Matter at their pleasure, and would needs prescribe a number of 8000 Men;
under which number of Invasion were made, the Treaties in this case should not
stand to any force. And like-as ye put a doubt here, where none was to be
found, so thought I, ye might do in other things were they never so plain; and
that moved me to put this case, to see whether ye understood this Point as ye
ought to do, after the literal sense; and partly to know your minds therein,
because perhaps the Matter has been already in ure. This, I say, was the
occasion why I put further this Question, and not for any mistrust of the
Emperor's Friendship, whom I must confess we have always found our Well-willer,
and so we doubt not he will continue; and therefore I need not grope his mind
herein, neither did I mean any such thing hereby.

As to your Answer to the order of Justice, I see not that the Emperor has so
much cause to complain of lack of Justice in his Subjects Cases, as ye seem to
set forth; for hitherto there has not any Man complained in our Country, and
required Justice, unto whom the same has been denied. And although some Man
abiding the order of our Law, or having had some Sentence that pleased him not,
has complained hither of delay or lack of Justice, ye must not therefore, by
and by, judge that he says true, or that there is not uprightness or equity
used in our Country, for we have there, as ye have here, and elsewhere,
Ministers that are wise, and well-learned in our Law, and Men of honesty and
good Conscience, who deal and proceed justly, as the order of the Law leads
them, without respect to favor or friendship to any Man.

And as for the Jewellers Case that ye moved, ye must understand, that as ye
have Laws here in your Country, for the direction of your Commonwealth, so
have we also in ours; whereby amongst the rest we do forbid, for good respect,
the bringing in, or transporting forth of certain Things, without the King's
safe conduct or License. And although, as ye alleged before, the Treaty
gives liberty to the Subjects of either Prince to traffic into the others
Country, it is not for all that meant hereby, that they shall not be bound to
observe the Law and Order of the Country whereunto they Traffic: for this
liberty is only granted for the security of their Persons to go and come
without impeachment, and makes them not for all that Lawless. And whereas
further it is provided by our Law, that in certain things to be granted by the
King, the same Grant must pass under the Great Seal; Then if any of those
things pass under any other Seal, they be not of due force until they have also
passed the Great Seal of England; wherefore if the Jeweller, either by
negligence or covetousness, of himself, or of those he put in trust, did not
observe this Order; but thereto contrary, for sparing a little Cost, did
presume to bring in his Jewels before his License came to the Great Seal, me
thinks neither he, nor any other, can have just cause to say that he was
wronged, if according to our Laws he were sentenced to lose the same: and yet,
after he was thus condemned, more to gratify the Emperor, than for that I took
it to be so reasonable, I my self was a Suitor to my Lord Protector's Grace,
for some Recompense to be made to the Jeweller's Wife, whom we knew, and none
other to be Party: for she followed the Suit, she presented the Petitions, in
her Name were they made; and finally she, and none others, was by the Emperor's
Ambassador commended unto us.

I have seen the Sentence (quoth he) and do mislike nothing so much therein, as
that the Man is condemned, and named to have been present, at the time of his
Condemnation, when indeed he was dead a good while before.

He was present (quoth I) in the Person of his Wife, who was his Procurator,
and represented himself; and I know, that those before whom this Matter passed,
are Men both Learned and of good Conscience, and such as would not have done
herein any thing against Right and Order of Law.

The Sentences that are given in our Country by the Justices and Ministers,
they are just and true, and therefore neither can we, nor will we revoke them
for any Man's pleasure, after they have once passed the Higher Court, from
whence there is no further appellation, no more than you will here call back
such final Order, as has been in any case taken by your High Court of Brabant.
And the cause why we for our part misliked not this order of Justice, was for
the better establishment of the Amity, and to avoid the continual Arrests that
are made on our poor Men; to the end also that this sort of Suitors might be
the sooner dispatched, without troubling either my Lord Protector in England,
or you here, when you are busied in other Affairs of more importance.

And as concerning the Comprehension of Bulloign, in good Faith, because we
thought that if the same should happen to be taken from the King's Majesty by
force, as I trust it shall not, the loss should be common, and touch the
Emperor almost as near as us; We thought good, for the better security thereof,
to move this Comprehension, which we take to be as necessary for the Emperor as
us. And though we are not so wise and well seen in your things as your selves
are, yet do we look toward you, and guess of your Affairs afar off, and
perhaps do somewhat understand the state of the same, whereof I could say more
than I now intend. But ye say this is the Emperor's Resolution herein; We take
it as an Answer, and shall do accordingly. Marry, whereas you stick so much
upon your Honor in breaking your Treaties with the French, I remember Monsieur
Granvela your Father, at my being with him, did not let to say, That he had his
Sleeve full of Quarrels against the French, whenever the Emperor list to
break with them.

Yea, so have we indeed (quoth he) but the time is not yet come: we must
temporize our things in this case as the rest of our Affairs lead us.

Ye say well (quoth I) ye have reason to regard chiefly the well-guiding of
your own things, and yet me thinks some respect ought to be given to Friends.
But seeing this is your Answer, I will reply no more thereto.

Yet one thing, Monsieur d' Arras, (quoth I) I moved to your Father, which ye
make no mention of, and I would gladly know your mind in, which is, the
granting of safe Conducts to the common Enemy: which the Treaty, by plain and
express words, forbideth either Prince to do.

Indeed, Monsieur Ambassadeur, (quoth he) the words of the Treaty are as ye
say, plain enough; and yet the Matter were very strait, if it should be taken
in such extremity; for hereafter, in time of War, ye might happen to have need
of Wood, Canvas, or Wine, and we of the like, and other necessaries; and if in
such Cases the Princes should not have Prerogative to grant safe Conducts, it
shall be a great inconvenience, and a thing not hereafter seen; howbeit the
Emperor for his part will not, I think, stick much hereupon, but observe the
plain meaning of the Treaty. Nevertheless I cannot say any thing expressly on
his behalf herein, because Monsieur Granvela spoke nothing thereof. And yet did
we move him of it (quoth I) and he bad us grant none, and the Emperor for his
part would not grant any. No more has he done, quoth he, sithence his coming
into this Country, nor intends not hereafter. He needs not, quoth I, for
those that have been given out before are sufficient for a great while. Nay,
that they are not, quoth he, for the longest was granted but for a Year, and
now are they expired; and whereas a while sithence, one presuming upon his safe
Conduct, came into this Country to Traffiqe, because the time thereof was
expired, he was taken and imprisoned.

The said d' Arras, after this talk, touched further unto me two Points, which
the Emperor, he said, desires may be reformed; The first was, Our Merchants,
contrary to our Intercourse, do enhaunce the prices of their Woolls, and will
not sell at such prices as they are bound by the Intercourse; wherewith the
Merchants here do find themselves agrieved, and therefore the Emperor desires
some order may be taken herein.

Whereunto I answered, that I understood not the Matters, and yet I supposed
our Men did not this but upon some grounds and just occasion, by reason of
other breach of Order on their parts here. Howbeit I showed him I would inform
your Grace thereof, and doubted not, but if any thing were amiss on our parts,
it shall be reformed; accordingly looking for the semblable on their behalf.

The other, he said, was, That our Men have of late begun to build a Bulwark,
which stands half on the King's Majesty's Ground, and half on the Emperor's
Territory. And although Monsieur de Rue have viewed the same, and perceiving
the Emperor to be wronged thereby, has required our Folks to proceed no
further therein; yet cease they not to build still, which the Emperor
marvelleth much at, and thinks we would not take it well that he should attempt
the like Fortification upon the King's Territory; and therefore requires that
some Redress may be given in time therein.

I answered, That I knew not of this thing; howbeit, as I went homeward, I
would inform my self of the case, and make report thereof to your Grace, who I
doubted not would take such order therein, as should stand with Reason.

And here Monsieur d' Arras setting forth with many good words the Emperor's
Amity toward the King, and his readiness to show his Majesty's Pleasure in all
things that he conveniently may; and that in case we proceed to any further
Treaty with France; he doubted not but we would have regard to them, according
to our Treaties: and that also, if we grew to any Peace with the Scots, seeing
that his Majesty is entered in Enmity chiefly for our sake, whereby his Subjects
have been sundry ways endangered, he trusts he will have consideration to see
that convenient Recompense be made to them by the Scots, e're ever we go
through with any conclusion; the rather, because the Scots have, and cease not
still to offer, besides a large Recompense, very great Conditions, if his
Majesty would fall to any Peace with them, which chiefly for our sakes he has,
and will refuse to do. We answered hereunto generally, That the King's Majesty,
in such case, we doubted not, would have due respect to the Emperor's Amity,
and proceed herein as appertains.

This was the substance of their cold Answer, as your Grace may see, of small
effect, although interlaced with plenty of good words, which we also thought
best to use toward them, and requite them with the like. And thus, after I had
required of d' Arras a time to take my leave of the Emperor, and his promise to
procure the same, as shortly as he might, we departed. And thus we beseech God
to send your Grace as well to do as we do wish.

From Bruges, July 24. William Paget. Philip Hobbey.


Number 41. The Council's Letter to the King against the Protector. An Original.
MOst high and mighty Prince, our most gracious Sovereign Lord. Cotton Libr.
Titus B. 2.
It may please your Majesty to be advertised, That having heard such Message as
it pleased your Majesty to send unto us by your Highness Secretary, Sir William
Petre; like as it was much to our grief and discomfort to understand, that upon
untrue Informations, your Majesty seemed to have some doubt of our Fidelites;
so do we, upon our knees, most humbly beseech your Majesty to think, that as we
have always served the King's Majesty, your most noble Father, and your
Highness likewise, faithfully and truly, so do we mind always to continue your
Majesty's true Servants, to the effusion of our Blood, and loss of our Lives.
And for the security of your most Royal Person's safeguard, and preservation of
your Realms and Dominions, have at this time consulted together, and for none
other cause, we take God to witness. We have heretofore, by all good and gentle
means, attempted to have had your Highness Uncle, the Duke of Somerset, to have
governed your Majesty's Affairs, by the advice of us, and the rest of your
Counselors; but finding him so much given to his own Will, that he always
refused to hear Reason; and therewith doing sundry such things as were, and be
most dangerous, both to your most Royal Person, and to your whole Realm, we
thought yet again to have gently and quietly spoke with him in these things,
had he not gathered Force about him, in such sort, as we might easily perceive
him earnestly bent to the maintenance of his old wilful and troublous doings.
For redress whereof, and none other cause, we do presently remain here ready to
live and die your true Servants. And the Assembly of almost all your Council
being now here, we have, for the better Service of your Majesty, caused your
Secretary to remain here with us, most humbly beseeching your Grace to think in
your Heart, that the only preservation of your Person, and your Estate, for the
discharge of our Duties, enforces us to devise how to deliver your Grace from
the peril your Highness stands in, and no other respect; for whatsoever is,
or shall be said to your Higness, no earthly thing could have moved us to have
seemed to stand as a Party, but your only preservation, which your Majesty
shall hereafter perceive (and we doubt not) repute us for your most faithful
Servants and Counselors, as our doings shall never deserve the contrary; as
God knows, to whom we shall daily pray for your Majesty's preservation; and
with our Bodies, defend your Person and Estate as long as Life shall endure.

R. Rich Canc. W. Saint John. W. Northampton. J. Warwick. Arundel. F.
Shrewsbury. Thomas Southampton. T. Cheyne. William Petre, Secretary. Edward
North. John Gage. R. Sadler. Nicholas Wotton. Edward Montague. Richard
Southwell.


Number 42. Articles offered by me the Lord Protector, to the King's Majesty,
in the presence of his Highness Council, and others his Majesty's Lords and
Gentlemen, at Windsor, to be declared on my behalf, to the Lords, and the rest
of his Highness Council remaining at London.
Cotton Libr. Caligula B. 7
FIrst, That I do not, nor did not mean to apprehend any of them, or otherwise
to disturb or molest them; but hearing tell of their such Meetings and
Assemblies, and gathering of Horsemen, and other Powers, out of several
Countries, not being privy of the Causes thereof, to avoid further
inconveniences and danger which might ensue to your Majesty's Person; which by
many Rumors, certain Intelligences, and sundry Messages, was declared imminent
unto your Highness, and to me the Lord Protector, was forced to seek this
Defense, as I at the first beginning declared unto your Highness.

Secondly, That this Force and Power which here is assembled about your Majesty
at this present, is to do none of them which be there at London, or elsewhere,
either in Person or Goods, any damage or hurt, but to defend only, if any
violence should be attempted against your Highness.

As for any contention and strife betwixt me the Lord Protector, and the
Council there, I do not refuse to come to any reasonable end and conclusion,
that should be for the preservation of your Majesty, and tranquillity of the
Realm, if they will send any two of them with Commission on their behalfs, to
conclude and make a good end betwixt us.

And I most humbly beseech your Majesty to appoint any two of such as be here
about your Majesty, to join with the same; and whatsoever those four, or three
of them shall determine, I do, and shall wholly and fully submit my self
thereunto. And that for more confirmation, if it shall be so thought good to
the said Persons, their Agreement and Conclusion to be established and ratified
by Parliament, or any other Order that shall be devised. And I beseech your
Majesty, that at my humble suit, and by the advice of me, and other of your
Council here, for the better proceedings herein, and to take away all Doubts
and Fears that might arise, to grant to them four, or any such two of them,
which they shall send for the purpose abovesaid, free passage for themselves,
and with each of them twenty of their Servants, to safely come, tarry here, and
return at their pleasure. And I most humbly beseech your Majesty, that this
Bill, signed with your Majesty's Hands, and ours, may be a sufficient Warrant
therefore. Given and exhibited at the Castle of Windsor, October. 8. 1549.

Number 43. Letters sent from the Lords at London, to the King's Majesty.
MOst high and mighty Prince, our most gracious Sovereign Lord, Ex Libro
Concilii.
we have received, by Mr. Hobbey, your Majesty's most gracious Letters, of the
8th of this Instant, and heard such further Matter as it pleased your Majesty
to will to be declared by him. And sorry we be, that your Majesty should have
these occasions to be troubled, especially in this kind of Matter; the
beginning and only occasion whereof, as we be well able to prove to your
Majesty, has proceeded of the Duke of Somerset. It is much discomfort to us
all, to understand that your Royal Person should be touched with any care of
Mind; and most of all it grieveth us, that it should be persuaded your Majesty,
that we have not that care that beseems us of the pacifying of these Uproars,
and conservation of your Majesty's Commonwealth and State from Danger; wherein
whatsoever is informed your Highness, we humbly beseech your Majesty to think,
we be as careful as any Men living may be; and do not, nor (we trust) shall not
forget the Benefits received of your Majesty's most noble Father, nor any of
our bounden Duties of Allegiance; the consideration, and the special care
whereof, forced us to consult seriously, and to join in this sort: which thing,
if we had not presently followed, not only your most Royal Person (whom
Almighty God long preserve) but this your whole Estate being already much
touched, and in great towardness of ruin, was most like to come, in short time,
to most imminent danger and peril; the Causes whereof, as we do all well know,
and can prove to have proceeded from the said Duke. So if we should not
earnestly provide for the same, we should not be able to answer to your Majesty
hereafter for not doing our Duties therein; therefore do we nothing doubt, but
your Majesty, of your great clemency and good nature, will not think that all
and every of us, being the whole state of your Privy Council, one or two
excepted, should be led in these things by private Affections, or would presume
to write to your Majesty, that whereof we were not most assured; and much more,
we trust that your Highness, of your goodness, will, without any jealousy or
suspicion, think that most expedient, both for your own most Royal Person, and
all your Subjects, that by the Body of your Council may be thought expedient;
to whom, and to no one Man, your Highness most grave Father, appointed by his
last Will and Testament, the Care of your Majesty, and all your most weighty
Affairs. We cannot therefore but think our selves much wronged, that your said
most Royal Person is in this sort by the Duke only detained and shut up from
us, to all our great heaviness, and the great fear of all other your Majesty's
true Subjects, and wonder of all the World; sooner may one Man intend ill, than
a multitude of us, who we take God to witness to be a thousand times more
careful of Your Highness surety, than for all our own Lives. We trust also,
that of Your Majesty's good Nature, You will not think that wilfulness, which
Your whole Council does, or shall agree upon, for Your Majesty's Surety and
Benefit; where the more agreeable we be, the better Opinion we trust Your
Majesty will conceive of us and our doings. It comfort us much to see the
great appearance of Your Majesty's natural clemency, even in these Your young
Years; and the assured hope which we have thereof, encourages us to be
persuaded, that You both do, and will conceive good Opinion of us and all our
doings; and that Your Majesty is, and so will continue, our gracious good Lord,
with whom (as we trust) we never deserve willingly to be called in the standing
of any Judgment with Your Majesty.

For the end of this Matter, touching the Duke of Somerset, if he have that
respect to Your Majesty's Surety that he pretends; if he have that
consideration of his Duty to God that his Promise and Oath requires; if he
have that remembrance of the performance of Your Majesty's Father's Will, that
to the effect of a good Executor appertains; if he have the reverence to Your
Law that a good Subject ought to have, Let him first quietly suffer us, Your
Majesty's most humble Servants, and true Counselors, to be restored to Your
Majesty's presence; let him, as becomes a true Subject, submit himself to Your
Majesty's Council, and the order of Your Highness Laws; let the Forces
assembled be sent away, and then may we do our Duties, in giving our attendance
upon Your Majesty; and after consult there with Your Majesty more freely, for
such order as may be thought most meet for Your Grace's Surety: By these means
Your Majesty's Subjects may be at quiet, and all occasions of stir taken away.
And if the said Duke refuse to agree hereunto, we must think him to remain in
his naughty and detestable determination. The Protectorship and Governance of
your most Royal Person, was not granted him by your Father's Will, but only by
agreement, first amongst us the Executors, and after of others. Those Titles
and special Trust was committed to him during Your Majesty's Pleasure; and upon
condition he should do all things by advice of Your Council. Which condition,
because he has so many times broken, and notwithstanding the often speaking
to, without all hope of amendment, we think him most unworthy those Honors or
Trust. Other particular things, too many and too long to be written to Your
Majesty at this time, may at our next access to Your Royal Presence, be more
particularly opened, consulted upon, and moderated, for the conservation of
Your Majesty's Honor, Surety, and good Quiet of Your Realms and Dominions, as
may be thought most expedient.

Number 44. Letters from the Lords at London, to the Archbishop of Canterbury
and Sir William Paget, etc.
MY Lords, after our most hearty Commendations, Ex Libro Concilii.
we have received your Letters by Mr. Hobbey, and heard such Credence as he
declared on the King's Majesty's and your behalfs unto us. The Answers
whereunto, because they may at more length appear to you both, by our Letters
to the King's Majesty, and by report also of the said Mr. Hobbey, we forbear to
repeat here again; most heartily praying, and requiring your Lordships, and
every of you; and nevertheless charging and commanding you, in the King's
Majesty's Name, to have a continual earnest watch, respect and care, to the
surety of the King's Majesty, our natural and most gracious Sovereign Lord's
Person; and that he be not removed from his Majesty's Castle of Windsor, as you
tender your Duties to Almighty God and his Majesty, and as you will answer for
the contrary at your uttermost perils. We are moved to call earnestly upon you
herein, not without great cause, and amongst many others, we cannot but
remember unto you, That it appears very strange unto us, and a great wonder
unto all true Subjects, that you will either assist or suffer his Majesty's
most Royal Person to remain in the Guard of the Duke of Somerset's Men,
sequestered from his own old sworn Servants. It seems strange, that in his
Majesty's own House, Strangers should be armed with his Majesty's own Armor,
and be nearest about his Highness Person; and those to whom the ordinary Charge
is committed, sequestered away, so as they may not attend according to their
sworn Duties. If any ill come hereof, you can consider to whom it must be
imputed once; the Example is very strange and perilous. And now, my Lords, if
you tender the preservation of his Majesty, and the State, join with us to that
end: we have written to the King's Majesty, by which way things may soon be
quietly and moderately compounded. In the doing whereof, we mind to do none
otherwise than we would be done to, and that with as much moderation and favor
as honorably we may. We trust none of you have just cause to note any one of
us, and much less all of such cruelty, as you so many times make mention of.
One thing in your Letters we marvel much at, which is that you write, that you
know more than we know. If the Matters come to your knowledge, and hidden from
us, be of such weight as you seem to pretend; or if they touch, or may touch
his Majesty or the State, we think you do not as you ought, in that you have
not disclosed the same unto us, being the whole State of the Council. And thus
praying God to send you the Grace to do that may tend to the surety of the
King's Majesty's Person, and tranquillity of the Realm, we bid you heartily
farewell, etc.

Number 45. An Answer to the former Letter. An Original.
Ex Libro Concilii.
IT may like your good Lordships, with our most hearty Commendations, to
understand, That this morning Sir Philip Hobbey has, according to the Charge
given him by your Lordships, presented your Letters to the King's Majesty, in
the presence of us, and all the rest of his Majesty's good Servants here, which
was there read openly, and also the others to them of the Chamber, and of the
Household, much to their Comforts, and ours also; and according to the Tenours
of the same, we will not fail to endeavor our selves accordingly.

Now touching the marvel of your Lordships, both of that we would suffer the
Duke of Somerset's Men to guard the King's Majesty's Person; and also of our
often repeating this word Cruelty; although we doubt not but that your
Lordships have been thoroughly informed of our Estates here, and upon what
occasion the one has been suffered, and the other proceeded; yet at our
convening together, (which may be when and where pleases you) we will, and are
able to make your Lordships such an account, as wherewith we doubt not you will
be satisfied, if you think good to require it of us. And for because this
Bearer, Master Hobbey, can particularly inform your Lordships of the whole
discourse of all things here, we remit the report of all other things to him,
saving that we desire to be advertised, with as much speed as you shall think
good, whether the King's Majesty shall come forthwith thither, or remain still
here; and that some of your Lordships would take pains to come hither
forthwith. For the which purpose, I the Comptroller, will cause three of the
best Chambers in the great Court to be hanged and made ready. Thus thanking God
that all things be so well acquieted, we commit your Lordships to his tuition.

From Windsor, the 10th of October. 1549. Your Lordships assured loving Friends,
T. Cant. William Paget. T. Smith.


Number 46. Articles objected to the Duke of Somerset.
1. THat he took upon him the Office of Protector, upon express condition, That
he should do nothing in the King's Affairs, but by assent of the late King's
Executors; or the greatest part of them.

2. That contrary to this condition, he did hinder Justice, and subvert Laws,
of his own Authority, as well by Letters, as by other Command.

3. That he caused diverse Persons Arrested and Imprisoned for Treason, Murder,
Manslaughter, and Felony, to be discharged; against the Laws and Statutes of
the Realm.

4. That he appointed Lieutenants for Armies, and other Officers for the
weighty Affairs of the King, under his own Writing and Seal.

5. That he communed with Ambassadors of other Realms alone, of the weighty
Matters of the Realm.

6. That he would taunt and reprove diverse of the King's most honorable
Counselors, for declaring their Advice in the King's weighty Affairs against
his Opinion; sometimes telling them that they were not worthy to sit in
Council; and sometimes, that he ^eed not to open weighty Matters to them; and
that if they were not agreeable to his Opinion, he would discharge them.

7. That against Law he held a Court of Request in his House; and did enforce
diverse to answer there for their Freehold and Goods, and did determine of the
same.

8. That being no Officer, without the advice of the Council, or most part of
them, he did dispose Offices of the King's Gift for Money; grant Leases, and
Wards, and Presentations of Benefices pertaining to the King, gave Bishoprics,
and made sales of the King's Lands.

9. That he commanded Alchimie, and Multiplication to be practiced, thereby to
abase the King's Coin.

10. That diverse times he openly said, That the Nobility and Gentry were the
only cause of Dearth; whereupon the People rose to reform Matters of themselves.

11. That against the mind of the whole Council, he caused Proclamation to be
made concernig Enclosures; whereupon the People made diverse Insurrections, and
destroyed many of the King's Subjects.

12. That he sent forth a Commission, with Articles annexed, concerning
Enclosures, Commons, Highways, Cottages, and suchlike Matters, giving the
Commissioners authority to hear and determine those causes, whereby the Laws
and Statutes of the Realm were subverted, and much Rebellion raised.

13. That he suffered Rebels to assemble and lie armed in Camp, against the
Nobility and Gentry of the Realm, without speedy repressing of them.

14. That he did comfort and encourage diverse Rebels, by giving them Money, and
by promising them Fees, Rewards, and Services.

15. That he caused a Proclamation to be made against Law, and in favor of the
Rebels, that none of them should be, vexed or sued by any, for their Offenses
in their Rebellion.

16. That in time of Rebellion, he said, That he liked well the Actions of the
Rebels; and that the Avarice of Gentlemen gave occasion for the People to rise;
and that it was better for them to die, than to perish for want.

17. That he said, The Lords of the Parliament were loath to reform Enclosures,
and other things, therefore the People had a good cause to reform them
themselves.

18. That after declaration of the Defaults of Bulloign, and the Pieces there,
by such as did survey them, he would never amend the same.

19. That he would not suffer the King's Pieces of Newhaven, and Blackness, to
be furnished with Men and Provision; albeit he was advertised of the Defaults,
and advised thereto by the King's Council; whereby the French King was
emboldned to attempt upon them.

20. That he would neither give Authority, nor suffer Noblemen and Gentlemen to
suppress Rebels in time convenient; but wrote to them to speak the Rebels fair,
and use them gently.

21. That upon the 5th of October the present Year, at Hampton Court, for
defense of his own private Causes, he procured seditious Bills to be written in
counterfeit Hands, and secretly to be dispersed into diverse parts of the Realm;
beginning thus, Good People; intending thereby to raise the King's Subjects to
Rebellion and open War.

22. That the King's Privy Council did consult at London to come to him, and
move him to reform his Government; but he hearing of their Assembly, declared,
by his Letters in diverse places, that they were high Traitors to the King.

23. That he declared untruly, as well to the King as to other young Lords
attending his Person, That the Lords at London intended to destroy the King;
and desired the King never to forget, but to revenge it; and desired the young
Lords to put the King in remembrance thereof; with intent to make Sedition and
Discord between the King and his Nobles.

24. That at diverse times and places, he said, The Lords of the Council at
London intended to kill me; but if I die, the King shall die; and if they
famish me, they shall famish him.

25. That of his own head he removed the King so suddenly from Hampton Court to
Windsor, without any provision there made, that he was thereby not only in
great fear, but cast thereby into a dangerous Disease.

26. That by his Letters, he caused the King's People to assemble in great
numbers in Armor, after the manner of War, to his Aid and Defense.

27. That he caused his Servants and Friends at Hampton Court and Windsor, to
be apparelled in the King's Armor, when the King's Servants and Guards went
unarmed.

28. That he intended to fly to Gernsey or Wales, and laid Posthorses and Men,
and a Boat to that purpose.

Number 47. A Letter written by the Council to the Bishops, to assure them,
That the King intended to go forward in the Reformation. By the KING.
RIght Reverend Father in God, Right trusty and well-beloved, Regist. Cran.
Fol. 56.
we greet you well. Whereas the Book entitled, the Book of Common Prayers, and
Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church,
after the use of the Church of England; was agreed upon, and set forth by Act
of Parliament; and by the same Act commanded to be used of all Persons within
this our Realm. Yet nevertheless we are informed, that diverse unquiet and
evil-disposed Persons, sithence the apprehension of the Duke of Somerset, have
noised and bruited abroad, That they should have again their old Latin Service,
their Conjured Bread and Water, with suchlike vain and superfluous Ceremonies,
as though the setting forth of the said Book had been the only Act of the said
Duke. We therefore, by the advice of the Body and State of our Privy Council,
not only considering the said Book to be our Act, and the Act of the whole
State of our Realm assembled together in Parliament, but also the same to be
grounded upon the Holy Scripture, agreeable to the Order of the Primitive
Church, and much to the re-edifying of our Subjects, to put away all such vain
expectation, of having the Public Service, the Administration of the
Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies again in the Latin Tongue, which
were but a preferment of Ignorance to Knowledge, and Darkness to Light, and a
preparation to bring in Papistry and Superstition again; have thought good, by
the advice aforesaid, to require, and nevertheless straightly do command and
charge you, That immediately upon the receipt hereof, you do command the Dean
and Prebendaries of your Cathedral Church; the Parsons, Vicar, or Curat, and
Churchwardens of every Parish, within your Diocese, to bring and deliver unto
you, or your Deputy, any of them for their Church or Parish, at such convenient
place as you shall appoint, all Antiphonals, Missals, Graylles, Processionals,
Manuels, Legends, Pies, Portasies, Journals, and Ordinals, after the use of
Sarum, Lincoln, York, or any other private use: And all other Books of Service,
the keeping whereof should be a let to the using of the said Book of Common
Prayers; and that you take the same Books into your hands, or into the hands of
your Deputy, and them so to deface and abolish, that they never after may
serve, either to any such use as they were provided for, or be at any time a
let to that godly and uniform Order, which by a common Consent is now set
forth. And if you shall find any Person stubborn or disobedient in not bringing
in the said Books, according to the tenor of these our Letters, that then ye
commit the said Person to Ward, unto such time as you have certified us of his
misbehaviour. And we will and command you, that you also search, or cause
search to be made, from time to time, whether any Book be withdrawn or hid,
contrary to the tenor of these our Letters, and the same Book to receive into
your Hands, and to use all in these our Letters we have appointed. And further,
whereas it is come unto our knowledge, that diverse froward and obstinate Persons
do refuse to pay toward the finding of Bread and Wine for the Holy Communion,
according to the Order prescribed in the said Book, by reason whereof the Holy
Communion is many times omitted upon the Sunday. These are to will and command
you to convent such obstinate Persons before you, and then to admonish and
command to keep the Order prescribed in the said Book; and if any shall refuse
so to do, to punish them by Suspension, Excommunication, or other Censures of
the Church. Fail you not thus to do, as you will avoid our Displeasure.

Westminst. December. 25. Regni tertio. Thom. Cantuarien. Rich. Chanc. Will. St.
John. J. Russel. H. Dorset. W. Northampton.


Number 48. Cardinal Woolsey's Letters to Rome, for procuring the Popedom to
himself, upon Pope Adrian's death.
Ex MS. Col. Cor. C. Cant.
MY Lord of Bath, Mr. Secretary, and Mr. Hannibal, I commend me unto you in my
right hearty manner; letting you wit, That by Letters lately sent unto me from
you my Lord of Bath, and Mr. Hannibal, dated at Rome the 14th day of September.
Which Letters I incontinently showed unto the King's Grace his Highness. And I
have been advertised, to our great discomfort, That the said 14th day, it
pleased Almighty God to call the Pope's Holiness unto his Infinite Mercy, whose
Soul Jesu pardon. News certainly unto the King's Grace and to me right heavy,
and for the universal weal or quiet of Christendom, (whereunto his Holiness,
like a devout and virtuous Father of Holy Church was very studious) much
displeasant and contrarious; Nevertheless, conforming our selves to the
Pleasure of Almighty God, to whose Calling we all must be obedient; the Mind
and Intention of the King's Highness, and of me both, is to put some helps and
furtherances, as much as conveniently may be, that such a Successor unto him
may now, by the Holy College of Cardinals, be named and elected, as may, with
God's Grace, perform, atchieve, and fulfill the good and virtuous Purposes and
Intents, concerning the Pacification of Christendom; whereunto our said late
Holy Father, as much as the brevity of the time did suffer, was, as it should
seem, minded and inclined; which thing, how necessary it is to the state of
Christ's Religion, now daily more and more declining, it is facil and easy to
be considered; and surely amongst other Christian Princes, there is none which
as ye heretofore have perfectly understood, that to this purpose more dedicated
themselves to give Furtherance, Advice, and Counsel, than the Emperor and the
King's Grace, who as well before the time of the last Vacation, as sithence, by
Mouth and by Letters, with Report of Ambassadors and otherwise, had many sundry
Conferences, Communications, and Devices, in that behalf. In which it has
pleased them, far above my merits or deserts, of their goodness, to think,
judge, and esteem me to be meet and able for to aspire unto that Dignity;
persuading, exhorting, and desiring me, that whenever opportunity should be
given, I should hearken to their Advice, Counsel, and Opinion in that behalf;
and offering unto me, to interpone their Authorities, Helps, and Furtherances
therein to the uttermost. In comprobation whereof, albeit the Emperor, now
being far distant from these Parts, could not, nor might in so brief time, give
unto the King's Grace, new or fresh confirmation of his Purpose, Desire, and
Intent herein: Yet nevertheless my Lady Margaret, knowing the inclination of
his mind in this same, has, by a long discourse made unto me semblable
Exhortation; offering, as well on the Emperor's behalf, as on her own, that as
much shall by them be done, to the furtherance thereof, as may be possible.
Besides this, both by your Letters, and also by particular most loving Letters
of the Cardinal's de Medicis, Sanctorum Quatuor and Campegius, with credence
showed unto me on their behalf, by their Folks here resident, I perceive their
good and fast minds, which they, and diverse other their Friends owe unto me in
that matter. And finally, the King's Highness does not cease, by all the
gracious and comfortable means possible to insist, that I, for manifold,
notable, urgent, and great respects, in any wise shall consent that his Grace
and the Emperor do set forth the thing with their best manner. The
Circumstances of whose most entire, and most firm mind thereunto, with their
bounteous, godly, and beneficial Offers for the Weal of Christendom, which his
Grace makes to me herein, is too long to rehearse. For which Causes, albeit I
know my self far unmeet and unable to so high a Dignity, minding rather to live
and die with his Grace in this his Realm, doing Honor, Service, Good or
Pleasure to the same, than now (mine old days approaching) to enter into new
things; yet nevertheless, for the great zeal and perfect mind which I have to
the exaltation of the Christian Faith; the honor, weal, and surety of the
King's Grace, and the Emperor, and to do my Duty both to Almighty God and to
the World, I referring every thing to God's disposition and pleasure, shall not
pretermit to declare unto you such things, as the King's Highness has
specially willed me to signify unto you, on his Grace's behalf, who most
effectually wills and desires you to set forth the same, omitting nothing
that may be to the furtherance thereof, as his special trust is in you.

First, Ye shall understand, that the mind, and entire desire of his Highness,
above all earthly things, is, That I should attain to the said Dignity, having
his perfect and firm hope, that of the same shall ensue, and that in brief
time, a general and universal Repose, Tranquillity, and Quietness in
Christendom; and as great Renown, Honor, Profit, and Reputation to this Realm
as ever was; besides the singular comfort and rejoice that the King's Grace,
with all his Friends and Subjects should take thereof; who might be well
assured thereby, to compone and order their great Causes and Affairs, to their
high Benefit, Commodity, and most Advantage. For this, and other great and
urgent Causes, the Pleasure of his Highness is, That like-as ye my Lord of
Bath, and Mr. Hannibal, have right prudently and discreetly begun: so ye all,
or as many of you as be present in the Court of Rome, and continue your
Practices, Overtures, Motions and Labors, to bring and conduce this the King's
inward Desire to perfect end and effect.

And because it is not to be doubted, but that before the receipt of these my
Letters, ye having former Instructions, shall have far entered your Devices in
this Matter, wherein the King's Grace trusts ye do lose no time or
opportunity that possibly may be had; I shall therefore, briefly and
compendiously touch such this things, as the King's Highness would ye should
substantially note in this behalf.

One is, That albeit ye both before, and also now, know the King's mind and
desire herein, as is aforesaid, taking that for your Foundation; yet
nevertheless, forasmuch as it appears by your said Letters, and otherwise,
that the Cardinal de Medicis, whose preferment (if this may not be had) both
the King's Grace and I tendereth above all other, minds to experiment what
may be done for himself, great policy and dexterity is in your Labors and
Communications to be used, so that ye may first, by great ensearch and enquiry,
perfectly understand, as nigh as may be, the Disposition, Mind, Affection, and
Inclination, as well of the said Cardinal de Medicis, as of all the residue, if
it be possible; which thing, well known, well pondered and considered, ye shall
thereby have a great light to the residue of your Business, wherein always ye
must so order your selves, that the Matter appearing unto you much doubtful and
uncertain, your particular practices (the desired Intent peradventure failing)
shall not be cause of displeasure or unkindness to be noted by any that may be
elected; and for your introduction herein, the King's Grace sends unto you at
this time two Commissions under his great Seal, the one couched under general
words, without making mention of any particular Person; and in the other, his
Highness has made mention of me by special Name: Besides that, ye shall
receive herewith two Letters from his Grace to the College of Cardinals, with
the Copies of the same; the one in special recommendation of me, and the other
in favor of the Cardinal de Medicis; beside such other particular Letters in
my recommendation to certain Cardinals, and other, as by the Copies of them
herewith enclosed ye shall now perceive. After the receipt thereof, if the
Cardinals before that time shall not be entered into the Conclave, ye taking
your Commodity, as by your Wisdom shall be thought most expedient, shall
deliver unto the Cardinal de Medicis, the King's Letters, and mine to him
addressed, showing unto him, with as good words and manner as ye can, that for
his great Virtue, Wisdom, Experience, and other commendable Merits, with the
entire love and favor which the King's Grace and I bear unto him, thinking and
reputing him most meet and able to aspire unto the Papal Dignity before all
other. Ye have Commandment, Commission, and Instruction, specially and most
tenderly, to recommend him unto the whole College of Cardinals, having also the
King's and my Letters to them in his favor; upon which Declaration ye shall
perceive his Answer to be made unto you in that behalf; whereupon, and by
knowledge of the Disposition of the Residue, ye may perceive how to govern your
selves in the delivery of the rest of your said Letters; for in case it may
evidently appear unto you, that any of the Cardinals, to whom the King's
Letters be directed, have firmly established their minds upon the said Cardinal
de Medices, the more circumspection is to be used with any such in the delivery
to him of the King's Letters, and overture of the secretness of your minds
touching me; considering, that if the King's Intent might in no wise take
effect for me, his Grace would, before all other, advance and further the said
Cardinal de Medicis. Nevertheless, if either by his Answer to be made unto you,
or by other good knowledge, ye shall perceive that he has so many Enemies
herein, that of likelihood he cannot attain the same, ye may be the more bold
to feel his mind how he is inclined toward me; saying, as indeed the King's
Grace has written unto him, That in case he should fail thereof, the King's
Highness would insist, as much as to his Grace were possible, for me; which ye
may say were in manner one thing, considering that both the Cardinal de Medices
and I bear one mind, zeal, and study, to the Weal and Quiet of Christendom, the
Increase and Surety of Italy, the Benefit and Advancement of the Emperor's and
the King's Majesty's Causes; and I being Pope, he in a manner (whom I above all
Men love, trust, and esteem) were Pope, being sure to have every thing
according to his mind and desire, and as much Honor to be put unto him, his
Friends and Family, as might be devised in such wise: That by these and other
good words and demonstrations, ye may make him sure, as I think he be, that
failing for himself, he with all his Friends do their best for me; and seeing
no likelihood for him, ye may then right-well proceed to your particular labor
and practices for me, delivering the King's Letters, both to the College of
Cardinals, and to the other, apart, as ye shall see the case then to require;
and soliciting them, by secret labors, alleging and declaring unto them my
poor Qualities, and how I having so great experience of the Causes of
Christendom, with the entire Favor which the Emperor and the King's Grace bear
unto me; the knowledge also, and deep Acquaintance of other Princes, and of
their great Affairs; the studious mind that I have ever been in, both to the
Surety and Weal of Italy, and also to the Quiet and Tranquillity of Christendom;
not lacking, thanked be God, either Substance or Liberality to look largely
upon my Friends; besides the sundry great Promotions, which by election of me
should be vacant, to be disposed unto such of the said Cardinals, as by their
true and fast Friendship had deserved the same; the loving Familiarity also
which they should find in me; and that of my Nature I am not in great disposed
to rigor or austereness, but can be contented, thanked be God, frankly,
pleasantly, and courteously, to participate, dispose, and bestow, such things
as I have, or shall come to my disposition, not having any such Faction,
Family, or Kinsman, to whom I might show any partiality in bestowing the
Promotions and Goods of the Church; and which is highest to be regarded, that
is likely and in manner sure, that by my means, not only Italy shall be put in
perfect surety for ever, but also a final rest, peace, and quiet, now most
necessary established betwixt all Christian Princes; whereupon the greatest and
most notable Expedition might be made against the Infidels that has been heard
of many Years. For the King's Highness in that case would be contented, and
has fully promised, God willing, to come in Person, when God shall send time,
unto Rome; whither also I should not doubt to bring many more of the Christian
Princes, being determined, if God should send me such Grace, to expone mine own
Person in God's Quarrel; by mean of which my presence many things should be
stated, that for Superiority and otherwise, in times past, has been occasion
of disagreement amongst Princes; Albeit peradventure the greatest respect shall
not now be had hereunto, nor this be the best Elective to win the Cardinals
Favor; wherein you must therefore use your self by your wisdoms, as you shall
see the time, season, and care to require; assuring them, for the removing of
the doubt in changing of the Sea, or not speedy repair thither; that after the
Election once passed and notified to me, I would not fail, by God's Grace,
within three months to be in Rome; there, and in the parts thereabout, to
remain during my Life, whereof ye may make faithful assurance. By these, and
other good means and promises on the King's behalf of large Rewards, which his
Highness refers to your discretion, and is contented to perform that which
ye do therein; It is not to be doubted but that you shall obtain the Favors of
many of them; so as if respect may be had to the Honor of the Sea Apostolic,
and the Surety of Italy, the Tranquillity of Christendom, the Defense of the
same against the Infidels, the Exaltation of the Faith, the Persecution of
Christ's Enemies, the Increase and Weal of the College of Cardinals, with their
Advancement and Promotion; gentle, frank, and liberal entertainment of them,
and generally to the benefit of all Holy Church. The King's Grace supposes his
mind and desire herein, with your good means, diligence, and solicitations, is
not unlike to take good effect; wherein, for the more authority, and better
conducing of your purpose, the pleasure of his Grace is, That you join with the
Emperor's Ambassadors, as far as you may see and perceive them to favor this
the King's Intent, like-as his Grace thinks, that according to the often
Conferences, Communications, Promises, and Exhortations made by the Emperor to
me in this behalf, and according to my said Lady Margaret's desire or offer,
they have commandment to do. In the politic handling of all which Matters, the
King's Highness puts in you his special trust and confidence, so to order
your self in the Premises, as you shall perceive to accord with the inward
desire of his Grace, and the state and disposition of the thing there; for
which purpose his Grace has furnished you at this time, jointly or severally,
with two sundry Commissions, the one general for me, and in my favor, by the
which you have ample Authority to bind and promise, on the King's behalf, as
well gift of Promotions, as also as large sums of Money to as many, and such as
you shall think convenient; and as sure ye may be, whatsoever ye shall promise,
bind his Grace, and do in that behalf, his Highness will inviolably observe,
keep and perform, the other special, as before Letters to the College of two
effects, the one for the Cardinal de Medices, and the other for me, with other
particular Letters in my favor; all which his pleasure is, That you shall use
in manner and form aforesaid; that is to say, If you shall perceive the Affair
of the Cardinal de Medicis to be in such perfect train, that he is like to have
the same Dignity, ye then proceed to that which may be his furtherance, using
nevertheless your particular labor for me, if you think it may do good, after
such sort as ye shall not conceive any ingratitude or unkindness therein. And
if you may see that the said Cardinal de Medicis be not in such great
likelihood thereof; then considering, that as the King's Grace, and I think
verily he will do his best for me, ye shall effectually set forth your
practices for attaining and winning as many Friends for me as possible may be,
delivering your Letters for the Intent, as you shall see cause. Wherein you
being now furnished for both Purposes, and also having one of the Commissions
general and indifferent, without any Person therein specially recommended,
things be to be done or omitted, as you shall know to stand with the state or
commodity of the Affairs there, with the Ground of the King's Mind to you now
declared, shall be your best and perfect Instruction; and as you shall do or
know herein, so the King's Grace desires you often and speedily to advertise
me, by your Letters, having no doubt but that his Highness will see your
travels, diligence, and pains in this behalf, so to be considered, as you shall
have cause to think the same well employed and bestowed.

And my Lord of Bath, as you do know well, because Mr. Pace, at the time of the
last Vacation, was sent purposely from hence with Commission and Instruction
for that Matter; the King, and I, supposing that upon knowledge of this news, he
being at Milan, would incontinently repair unto Rome; has therefore made the
foresaid Commissions, and also this Letter to be directed unto you, jointly and
severally willing you, in such substantial and discreet wise to proceed in that
Matter, not forbearing any thing that may be to the furtherance thereof, as his
Grace, and my special Trust, is in you: And thus most heartily fare you well.
At my Manor of Hampton Court, the 4th day of October.

The rest is the Cardinal's own Hand.
MY Lord of Bath, the King has willed me to write unto you, That his Grace
has a mavelous Opinion of you; and you knowing his mind as you do, his
Highness doubts not but this Matter shall be by your Policy set forth in such
wise, as that the same may come to the desired effect, not sparing any
reasonable Offers, which is a thing, that amongst so many needy Persons is more
regarded, than per-case the Qualities of the Person; ye be wise, and ye wot
what I mean; trust your self best, and be not seduced by fair words, and
specially of those which (say what they will) desire more their own preferment
than mine. Howbeit, great dexterity is to be used; and the King thinks that
all the Imperials shall be clearly with you, if Faith be in the Emperor. The
young Men, which for the most part being needy, will give good ears to fair
Offers, which shall be undoubtedly performed; the King wills you neither to
spare his Authority, or his good Money, or Substance. You may be assured,
whatsoever you promise shall be performed; and our Lord send you good speed.

Your loving Friend, T. Cardinalis Eborac.


Number 49. A Memorial given by the King's Majesty, with the Advice of his
Highness Council, to the Lord Russel Lord Privy Seal, the Lord Paget of
Beaudesert, Sir William Petre Knight. and one of his Highness two Principal
Secretaries, and Sir John Mason Knight. his Majesty's Secretary for the French
Tongue; being sent at this present in Commission, to treat and conclude upon a
Peace, with certain Commissioners sent from the French King at this time for
the same purpose. An Original.
EDWARD R.

Cotton Libr. Caligula E. 1
FIrst, As touching the Place of their Meeting, the same to be at Calais or
Bulloign, if it may be so brought to pass; otherwise to be at such convenient
Place, either within our Dominion, or the French; or sometime in the one, and
sometime the other, as may be best agreed upon. In the appointing whereof, we
would no Ceremony to be so much sticked upon, as the same should be any
occasion of hindrance to the good success looked for at this meeting.

Secondly, If the French Commissioners shall require Bulloign, with the
Members; and all such Grounds and Lands as was of late conquered by our late
Father, of most noble memory, to be restored to the French King, we be pleased
our said Commissioners shall on our Name agree and assent thereunto; so as the
said French Commissioners do, and will likewise covenant and agree, in the Name
of the said French King, to any of our Requests hereafter ensuing.

First, Our said Commissioners shall demand, in recompense for Bulloign, and
the Members and Grounds as aforesaid, that the Treaties last made, between our
said Father of famous Memory, and the Realm of Scotland, may in all things be
performed; and the Person of the Young Scotch Queen delivered to us, to the
intent the Marriage between us and her may be performed. They shall also
demand, that the Fortifications at Newhaven and Blackness may be utterly
ruinated, and no Fortifications made from henceforth at any of those Places.
They shall also require the continuance of payment of our perpetual Pension,
and all the Debts due unto us, by force of any former Treaties, before the
commencement of these last Wars. And this for the first degree, which if it may
not be obtained, then for

The second Degree, we be pleased to accept for a Recompense, if they will
covenant for performance of the said Treaties with Scotland, to deliver the
Scotch Queen, and continue from henceforth the payment of the perpetual Pension.

But if that shall also be refused, then for the third Degree, our said
Commissioners shall require the continuance of payment of our Pension, the
Arrearages due by any former Treaties, between our said Father and the late
French King; and that the Forts of Newhaven, Hambletue, and Blackness, may be
utterly ruinated, and no new Fortifications commenced at any of the said Places
hereafter.

And if this may not be obtained, then for the fourth and last Degree our
Pleasure is, That our said Commissioners shall require the continuance of
payment of our said Pension, and all such Debts as were due unto our said late
Father before the commencement of his last War.

In the debating and discoursing whereof, we will that our said Commissioners
shall employ themselves to their uttermost, to make as good and honorable a
Bargain for us, and to attain all or as much of the Premises as they may;
remembering unto the French Commissioners, our great Charges sustained in these
last Wars commenced by them, contrary to the former Treaties.

Touching the Place, Day, Time, and other Circumstances to be used, as well in
the delivery of Bulloign, the Base Town, the Old Man, the Young Man, with the
Ground, Territories, and Members, to the said Pieces, or any of them belonging;
as also of payment of such Sums of Money as shall be agreed upon for the same;
Our said Commissioners shall, by their good discretions, devise with the said
French Commissioners, all such ways as they can or may think most for our
Honor and Surety: And such overtures or Discourses as shall be made by the
said French Commissioners, touching the Premises, our said Commissioners shall
advertise unto us or our Council.

And if any motion shall be made to have Scotland comprehended in this Peace,
our said Commissioners shall say, That forasmuch as the Scots be common Enemies
to us and the Emperor, we may not assent to the comprehension of them, without
the Emperor's consent; or at the least, without such respect to our Treaties
with the Emperor, and his Subjects, as the Amity between us requires. And
therefore if the Scots will covenant to stand to our Arbitrament and Judgment
for all such Matters as be in difference between the said Emperor and them, we
will be pleased that the Scots shall be comprehended; and one such Article, or
of like effect, made for comprehension of them, as was made at the conclusion
of the least Peace. And if the delivery, or razing of any Pieces, now by us
possessed in Scotland, shall be required, we be pleased that our said
Commissioners traveling first by all ways and means they may, to induce the
other Commissioners to assent, that all the said Pieces, and the Lands by us
now possessed, may remain to us, and our Heirs and Successors for ever, shall
nevertheless, if that may not be received, assent in the end, that
Borthwickeraig, Lauder, and Dunglass, shall be restored upon a convenient
Recompense in Money, so as the Forts of Roxburgh and Haymouth, with their
Grounds adjoining, may be covenanted to remain to us and our Successors for
ever.

If the French Commissioners shall make any motion of Treaty for Marriage,
between us and the Lady Elizabeth, eldest Daughter to the French King; our said
Commissioners excusing the present talk thereof, in respect of our young Years,
and for such other Causes as they may think good, shall do all that they may to
cut off that Talk: But if they shall be much pressed therein, in respect of
such Overtures as have been made already, our Pleasure is, that our said
Commissioners shall, by general words, entertain the talk of that Matter; and
thereof, and of such other Matters as shall be proponed touching the same,
advertise us or our Council.

In all the Treaty it must be remembered, to reserve and have special regard to
the preservation of our Treaties with the Emperor, and other our Friends.

And if it shall seem expedient to our said Commissioners, for the better
expedition of our Affairs committed to their Charge, that a Surceance or
Abstinence of Wars be granted, as well on our behalf, as on the behalf of the
French King, we be pleased that our Right trusty, and right well-beloved
Cousin, the Earl of Huntingdon, our Lieutenant General of that side, shall, by
the advice of our said Commissioners, grant a Surceance or Abstinence for such
time, and in such manner and sort, as by our said Commissioners shall be
thought best, so as the like be also granted on the behalf of the said French
King.

Finally, Our said Commissioners shall advertise us, our Council attendant
about our Person, from time to time, of their Proceedings; and further do as we
or our Council shall appoint them, either by our Letters, or the Letters of our
said Council accordingly.

T. Cant. R. Rich Canc. W. Saint John. H. Dorset. W. Northampton. J. Warwick.
Thomas Southampton. Thom. Ely. Cuth. Duresm. T. Cheyne. T. Wentworth. Anthony
Wingfield. W. Herbert. T. Darcy. N. Wotton. J. Baker. Edward North. Edward
Montague. Richard Southwell.


Number 50. Articles devised by the King's Majesty, with the Advice of his
Highness Council, answering to certain Doubts moved in the Letters, bearing
date the 27th of February last past, sent from his Majesty's Commissioners,
being on the other side the Seas, for the Treaty of Peace. An Original.
EDWARD. R.

FIrst, Cotton Libr. Caligula E. 1
If the French Deputies require to have Roxburgh and Aymouth to be rendered unto
the Scots, we will that our Commissioners shall, by all the best means they can
devise, induce them to agree, that the said two places may and shall remain to
Us: And in case the French will not so be persuaded, but require still to have
them rendered, Our pleasure is, That our Commissioners shall stand most stiffly
in the denial of it, so far forth, that they shall come to the breaking of that
days talk, rather than to condescend unto it. And in case, that move not the
French to relent of their Request, our Commissioners shall afterward send to
the French Deputies to meet, or to talk again, and then they shall say, That
rather than such a good work of Peace should fail, they will grant to the
razing and abandoning of both the said Pieces; with special Capitulation, that
neither the Scots nor the French shall re-fortify, nor cause to be
re-fortified, in neither of those two Places; with the like Covenant for our
part, if the French Deputies do require it.

Item. We are pleased, that the Reservance of our Rights and Titles, mentioned
in our former Articles sent to our said Commissioners, be in general words, so
as severally general reservance be made, as well for our Rights and Titles as
to Scotland, as for our Matters with France.

Item. We are pleased, that for such Sums of Money as shall be agreed upon to be
paid unto Us for the delivery of Bulloign, Our said Commissioners shall take
Hostages of the French, according to Our former Articles sent unto them in that
behalf; the said Hostages to remain there, till the whole and last Sum so
agreed upon be fully answered unto Us. And likewise in case the French Deputies
will ask Hostages for the sure delivery of the Town of Bulloign, with the
Members, Our said Commissioners may agree to the assigning of such Hostages as
shall be thought sufficient for the same; which Hostages nevertheless shall not
be bound to remain or continue there any longer, than till the said Town is
delivered; but shall thereupon be suffered to return home at their Pleasure.

Item. Upon the Conclusion between our Commissioners, and the French Deputies,
for the delivery of Bulloign, our pleasure is, That the term of the delivery of
the same be appointed, as short as may be conveniently, having considerance to
a reasonable respite for the removing and safe conveyance away of the
Artillery, Munition, Armor, and Goods belonging to Us or our Subjects, either
by Sea or by Land, as shall be thought most commodious: and that our Men,
departing out of the Town in the Forenoon, the French shall abstain from entry
into it till at three or four hours after, for avoiding the inconveniences
which may chance upon the coupling of our Men with the French.

Item. Forasmuch as Our said Commissioners being upon the Place, can better
consider any other thing not touched in the Premises, concerning the manner and
fashion of the delivery of Bulloign, or retire of our Men, Artillery, and other
things, other than we can do here, we are pleased to remit that to their
wisdoms and discretions.

Item. As for Alderney and Sark, forasmuch as both those Places are Ours,
reason would that the French should raze their Fortifications at Sark, and the
Fortifications at Alderney, being lawfully done by Us upon our own Ground, to
remain at our Arbitrament. That in case the French Deputies shall make no
mention, neither of the one, nor of the other, We are pleased that our
Commissioners shall also pass it over in silence; but if the French Deputies
shall mention the same, and without the razing the Fortifications at Alderney,
will not condescend to a Peace, We are pleased, our Commissioners shall
conclude with them upon the razing and abandoning of the one and the other of
the aforesaid Fortifications; standing first as much in denial of the French
Deputies Demands herein, as they may.

T. Cant. R. Rich, Chanc. W. Wilts. T. Wentworth. A. Wingfield. T. Darcy. N.
Wotton. R. Sadler. J. Warwick. VV. Northampton. T. Ely. T. Cheyne. W. Herbert.
John Gage. Edward North.


Number 51. The King's Letters Patents to John a Lasco, and the German
Congregation.
Rot. pat. 4 to Reg. part. 5.
EDwardus Sextus Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae, Hiberniae Rex, Fidei Defensor,
and in Terra Ecclesiae Anglicanae and Hibernicae supremum sub Christo Caput,
omnibus ad quos presents literae pervenerint salutem. Cum magnae quaedam and
graves considerationes nos ad presens specialiter impulerunt, tum etiam
cogitantes illud, quanto studio and charitate Christianos Principes in
Sacrosanctum Dei Evangelium and Religionem Apostolicam ab ipso Christo
inchoatam, institutam and traditam, animatos and propensos esse conveniat, sine
qua haud dubie politia and civil Regnum nec consistere diu, neque nomen suum
tueri potest, nisi principes, caeterique praepotentes viri, quos Deus ad
Regnorum gubernacula sedere voluit, id in primis operam dent, ut per totum
Reipub. Corpus, casta sinceraque Religio diffundatur, and Ecclesia. in vere
Christianis and Apostolicis opinionibus and ritibus instituta, atque adulta per
sanctos ac carni and mundo mortuos ministros conservetur: pro eo quod
Christiani Principis officium statuimus, inter alias suas gravissimas de Regno
suo been splendideque administrando cogitationes, etiam Religioni and
Religionis causa calamitate fractis and afflictis exulibus consul^re. Sciatis,
quod non solum praemissa contemplantes and Ecclesiam a Papatus Tyrannide per
nos vindicatam in pristina liberate conservare cupientes: verum etiam exulum
ac peregrinorum conditionem miserantes, qui jam bonis temporibus in Regno
nostro Angliae commorati sunt voluntario exilio, Religionis and Ecclesiae causa
mulctati: quia hospites and exteros homines propter Christi Evangelium ex
Patria sua profligatos and ejectos, and in Regnum nostrum profugos, praesidiis
ad vitam degendam necessariis in Regno nostro egere, non dignum esse neque
Christiano homine, neque principis magnificentia duximus, cujus liberalitas
nullo modo in tali rerum statu restricta, clausave esse debet. Ac quoniam multi
Germanae nationis homines, ac alii peregrini qui confluxerunt, and in dies
singulos confluunt in Regnum nostrum Angliae, ex Germania and aliis
remotioribus partibus, in quibus Papatus dominatur, Evangelii libertas
labefactari and premi caepta est, non habent certam sedem and locum in Regno
nostro ubi conventus suos celebrare valiant, ubi inter suae gentis and moderni
idiomatis homines Religionis negotia and res Ecclesiasticas pro Patriae ritu
and more intelligenter obire and tractare possint: idcirco de gratia nostra
speciali, ac ex certa scientia and mero motu nostris, necnon de avisamento
Concilii nostri volumus, concedimus and ordinamus quod de caetero sit and erit
unum templum, sive sacra aedes in Civitate nostra Londinensi, quod vel quae
vocabitur templum Domini Jesu, ubi Congregatio and conventus Germanorum and
aliorum peregrinorum fieri and celebrari possit, ea intention and proposito,
ut a Ministris Ecclesiae Germanorum aliorumque peregrinorum Sacrosancti
Evangelii incorrupta interpretatio, Sacramentorum juxta Verbum Dei and
Apostolicam observationem administratio fiat. Ac Templum illud, sive Sacram
aedem illam de uno Superintendente and quatuor verbi ministris erigimus,
creamus, ordinamus and fundamus per praesentes. Et quod idem Superintendens and
ministri in re and nomine sint and erunt unum Corpus corporatum and politicum,
de se per nomen Superintendentis and Ministrorum Ecclesiae Germanorum and
aliorum peregrinorum ex fundatione Regis Edwardi Sexti in Civitate Londinensi
per praesentes incorporamus: ac corpus corporatum and politicum per idem nomen
realiter and ad plenum creamus, erigimus, ordinamus, facimus and constituimus
per praesentes: and quod successionem habeant.

Et ulterius de gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia and mero motu
nostris, necnon de avisamento Concilii nostri dedimus and concessimus, ac per
praesentes damus and concedimus praefato Superintendenti and Ministris
Ecclesiae Germanorum and aliorum peregrinorum in Civitate Londinensi, totum
illud templum sive Ecclesiam nuperfratrum Augustinensium in Civitate nostra
Londinensi, ac totam terram, fundum and solum Ecclesiae praedictae, exceptis
toto choro dictae Ecclesiae, terris fundo and solo ejusdem habendum and
gaudendum, dictum Templum sive Ecclesiam ac caetera praemissa, exceptis
praeexceptis, praefatis Superintendenti and Ministris and Successoribus suis,
tenendum de nobis, haeredibus and successoribus nostris in puram and liberam
elyemosinam.

Damus ulterius de avisamento praedicto, ac ex certa scientia and mero motu
nostris praedictis per praesentes concedimus, praefatis Superintendenti and
Ministris and successoribus suis plenam facultatem, potestatem and autoritatem
ampliandi and majorem faciendi numerum ministrorum and nominandi and
appunctuandi de tempore in tempus, tales and hujusmodi subministros, ad
serviendum in Templo praedicto, quales praefatis Superintendenti and Ministris
necessarium visum fuerit. Et quidem haec omnia juxta beneplacitum regium.

Volumus praeterea quod Joannes a Lasco natione Polonus, homo propter
integritatem and innocentiam vitae, ac morum and singularem eruditionem valde
caelebris, sit primus and modernus Superintendens dictae Ecclesiae, and quod
Gualterus Deloenus, Martinus Flandrus, Franciscus Riverius, Richardus Gallus,
sint quatuor primi and moderni Ministri. Damus praeterea and concedimus
praefatis Superintendenti and Ministris and successoribus suis facultatem,
autoritatem and licentiam, post mortem vel vacationem alicujus Ministri
praedictorum, de tempore in tempus eligendi, nominandi and surrogandi alium,
personam habilem and idoneam in locum suum; ita tamen quod persona sic
nominatus and electus praesentetur and sistatur coram nobis, haeredibus vel
successoribus nostris, and per nos, haeredes vel successores nostros
instituatur in Ministerium praedictum.

Damus etiam and concedimus praefatis Superintendenti Ministris and
successoribus suis facultatem, autoritatem and licentiam, post mortem seu
vacationem Superintendentis de tempore in tempus eligendi, nominandi and
surrogandi alium, personam doctam and gravem in locum suum; ita tamen quod
persona sic nominatus and electus praesentetur and sistatur coram nobis,
haeredibus vel successoribus nostris, and per nos, haeredes vel successores
nostros instituatur in officium Superintendentis praedictum.

Mandamus and firmiter injungendum praecipimus, tam Majori, Vicecomitibus and
Aldermanis Civitatis nostrae Londinensis and successoribus suis, cum omnibus
aliis Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Justiciariis, Officiariis and Ministris
nostris quibuscunque, quod permittant praefatis, Superintendenti and Ministris,
and sua, suos libere and quiet frui, gaudere, uti, and exercere ritus and
ceremonias suas proprias, and disciplinam Ecclesiasticam propriam and
peculiarem, non obstante quod non conveniant cum ritibus and caeremoniis in
Regno nostro usitatis, absque impetitione, perturbatione, aut inquietatione
eorum, vel eorum alicujus, aliquo statuto, actu, proclamatione, injunctione,
restrictione, seu usu in contrarium inde antehac habitis, factis, editis, seu
promulgatis in contrarium non obstantibus. Eo quod expressa mentio de vero
valor annuo, aut de certitudine praemissorum, sive eorum alicujus, aut de
aliis donis sive concessionibus per nos praefatis Superintendenti, Ministris
and successoribus suis ante haec tempora factis, in praesentibus minime facta
existit, aut aliquo statuto, actu, ordinatione, provisione, sive restrictione
inde in contrarium factis, editis, ordinatis seu provisis, aut aliqua alia re,
causa vel materia quacunque in aliquo non obstante. In cujus rei testimonium
has literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Test Meipso, apud Leighes,
vicessimo quarto die Julii, Anno Regni nostri quarto, per Breve de privato
Sigillo, and de datis praedicta Autoritate Parliamenti.

R. Southwell. Un. Harrys.


Number 52. Injunctions given in the Visitation of the Reverend Father in God,
Nicholas Bishop of London, for an Uniformity in his Diocese of London, in the
4th Year of our Sovereign Lord King Edward the Sixth, by the Grace of God, King
of England, etc. London, Anno Dom. 1550.
FIrst, Reg. Ridley. Fol. 305.
That there be no reading of such Injunctions as extolleth and sets forth
the Popish Mass, Candles, Images, Chauntries; neither that there be used any
Superaltaries, or Trentals of Communions.

Item. That no Minister do counterfeit the Popish Mass, in kissing the Lord's
Board; washing his Hands or Fingers after the Gospel, or the receipt of the
Holy Communion; shifting the Book from one place to another; laying down and
licking the Chalice after the Communion; blessing his Eyes with the Sudarie
thereof, or Patten, or crossing his Head with the same, holding his
Fore-fingers and Thumbs joined together toward the Temples of his Head, after
the receiving of the Sacrament; breathing on the Bread, or Chalice; saying the
Agnus before the Communion; showing the Sacrament openly before the
distribution, or making any elevation thereof; ringing of the Sacrying Bell, or
setting any Light upon the Lord's Board. And finally, That the Minister, in the
time of the Holy Communion, do use only the Ceremonies and Gestures appointed
by the Book of Common Prayer, and none other, so that there do not appear in
them any counterfeiting of the Popish Mass.

Item. That none be admitted to receive the Holy Communion, but such as will,
upon request of the Curat, be ready, with meekness and reverence, to confess
the Articles of the Creed.

Item. That none make a Mart of the Holy Communion, by buying and selling the
Receipt thereof for Money, as the Popish Mass in times past was wont to be.

Item. Whereas in diverse places, some use the Lord's Board after the form of a
Table, and some of an Altar, whereby Dissension is perceived to arise among the
unlearned; therefore wishing a godly Unity to be observed in all our Diocese;
and for that the form of a Table may more move and turn the simple from the old
superstitious Opinions of the Popish Mass, and to the right use of the Lord's
Supper, We exhort the Curats, Churchwardens, and Questmen here present, to
erect and set up the Lord's Board, after the form of an honest Table, decently
covered, in such place of the Quire or Chancel, as shall be thought most meet
by their discretion and agreement, so that the Ministers, with the
Communicants, may have their place separated from the rest of the People: and
to take down and abolish all other by-Altars or Tables.

Item. That the Minister, in the time of the Communion, immediately after the
Offertory, shall monish the Communicants, saying these words, or suchlike, Now
is the time, if it please you to remember the poor Men's Chest with your
charitable Alms.

Item. That the Homilies be read orderly, without omission of any part thereof.

Item. The Common Prayer be had in every Church upon Wednesdays and Fridays,
according to the King's Grace's Ordinance; and that all such as conveniently
may, shall diligently resort to the same.

Item. That every Curat be diligent to teach the Catechism, whenever just
occasion is offered, upon the Sunday or Holy Day, and at least every six weeks,
once shall call upon his Parishioners, and present himself ready to instruct
and examine the Youth of the same Parish, according to the Book of Service
touching the same.

Item. That none maintain Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, the Six Articles,
Bedrowls, Images, Relics, Rubric Primars, with Invocation of Saints,
Justification of Man by his own Works, Holy Bread, Palms, Ashes, Candles,
Sepulcher Paschal, creeping to the Cross, hallowing of the Fire or Altar, or
any other suchlike abuses, and superstitions, now taken away by the King's
Grace's most Godly Proceedings.

Item. That all Ministers do move the People to often and worthy receiving of
the Holy Communion.

Item. That every Minister do move his Parishioners to come diligently to the
Church; and when they come, not to talk, or walk, in the Sermon, Communion, or
Divine Service-time, but rather at the same to behave themselves reverently,
godly, and devoutly in the Church; and that they also monish the Churchwardens
to be diligent Overseers in that behalf.

Item. That the Churchwardens do not permit any buying, selling, gaming,
outrageous noise or tumult, or any other idle occupying of Youth in the Church,
Church Porch, or Churchyard, during the time of Common Prayer, Sermon, or
reading of the Homily.

Item. That no Persons use to minister the Sacraments, or in open audience of
the Congregation, presume to expound the Holy Scriptures, or to preach, before
they be first lawfully called and authorized in that behalf.

God save the King.
Number 53. Dr. Oglethorp's Submission and Profession of his Faith.
I Did never Preach or Teach openly any thing contrary to the Doctrine and
Religion set forth by the King's Majesty, and authorized by his Grace's Laws,
since the making and publishing of the same.

I suppose, and think his Grace's Proceedings (concerning Religion) to be good
and godly, if they be used accordingly, as his Grace has wil'd they should, by
his Laws and Instructions.

And further, I suppose the Order and Form of Doctrine, and Religion now set
forth by his Grace, and used, in many things to be better and much nearer the
usage of the Apostolic and Primitive Church, than it was before-times: if it
be used godly and reverently, accordingly as I think it to be meant by his
Grace's Highness, and his most Honorable Council.

Namely, in these things, in prohibiting that none should commune alone, in
making the People whole Communers, or in suffering them to Commune under both
kinds, in the Catechisation of young Chaplains in the Rudiments of our Faith,
in having the Common Prayer in English, in setting forth the Homilies, and many
other things; which I think very good and Godly, if they be used as is
aforesaid.

The lately received Doctrine, concerning the Sacrament, and namely the
Attribute of Transubstantiation, I do not like, and I think it not consonant to
the Scriptures, and Ancient Writers; although I suppose that there is a certain
and an ineffable presence of Christ's Body there, which I can neither
comprehend nor express, because it so far passes the compass and reach of my
Wit and Reason; wherefore I think it ought to be both ministered and received
with a godly and reverent fear, and not without great premeditation and
examination aforesaid, as well of the Minister, as of the Receiver. 1550.

Your Grace's poor well-willer, with his Prayer and Service, as he is bound,
Owing Oglethorp.

Number 54. A Letter from Dr. Smith to Archbishop Cranmer. An Original.
Right honorable, and my special good Lord.
Ex MS. Col. Cor. C. Cant.
I Commend me to your Grace most humbly, giving to the same thanks as I am
bound, for your Grace's kindness toward my Sureties; for the which you have
(and shall whiles I live) my good Word and Prayer. Ignatii Epistolae adhuc
extant in Gymnasio Magdalenae. If it might please your Lordship, I would very
gladly see some part of your Collection against my Book, De Caelibatu
Sacerdotum; which I wrote then to try the truth out, not to the intent it
should be printed, as it was, against my Will. Would God I had never made it,
because I took then for my chief Ground, That the Priests of England made a Vow
when they were made, which now I perceive is not true.

My Lord, I received my Cap-case, etc. Sed tribus nummorum meorum partibus
sublatis; Quod damnum aequo animo est ferendum, quod furti revinci non possit,
qui abstulit. My Lord, I am glad that your Grace is reported both gentle and
merciful, of all such which have had to do with you for Religion of this
University. For my part, if ever I may do your Graces basest Servant any
pleasure, I will do it indeed. Si aliter, atqui sentio, loquor, dispeream.
Ignoscat haec Honoranda Dominatio tam diutinum silentium mihi, quippe quod
crebrioribus literis posthac pensabo. Deus optimus maximus tuam amplitudinem
diu servet incolumem Christianae Pietati propagandae ac provehendae. Oxonii 28.

Tibi addictissimus, Richardus Smithaeus.

Number 55.
Articles agreed upon by the Bishops and other Learned Men, in the Convocation
held at London, in the Year 1552. for the avoiding diversities of Opinions, and
stablishing Consent touching true Religion.

Published by the King's Authority.

With Marginal Notes of the differences between these and those set out by
Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1562.

I. Of Faith in the Holy Ghost.
THere is but one living and true God everlasting, without Body, Parts, or
Passions; of infinite Power, Wisdom, and Goodness; the Maker and Preserver of
all things both visible and invisible. And in the unity of this Godhead, there
are three Persons, of one Substance, Power, and Eternity, the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost.

II. The Word of God made very Man.
The Son, which is the Word of the Father, The Son, which is the Word of the
Father, begotten from everlasting of the Father, the very and eternal God, of
one Substance with the Father: took Man's Nature in the Womb of the blessed
Virgin, etc.
took Man's Nature in the Womb of the blessed Virgin, of her Substance: So that
two whole and perfect Natures, that is to say, the Godhead and Manhood were
joined together in one Person, never to be divided, whereof is one Christ, very
God and very Man; who truly suffered, was crucified, dead, and buried, to
reconcile his Father to us, and to be a Sacrifice, not only for Original Guilt,
but also for Actual Sins of Men.

III. Of the going down of Christ into Hell.
As Christ died for us, and was buried; so also is it to be believed that he
went down into Hell: These words were left out.
For his Body lay in the Grave till his Resurrection, but his Soul being
separate from his Body, remained with the Spirits which were detained in
Prison, that is to say, in Hell, and there preached unto them; as witnesses
that place of Peter.

IV. The Resurrection of Christ.
Christ did truly rise again from Death, and took again his Body, with Flesh,
Bones, and all things appertaining to the perfection of Man's Nature, wherewith
he ascended into Heaven, and there sits till he return to judge all Men at
the last day.

Of the Holy Ghost.

The Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son, is of one Substance,
Majesty, and Glory, with the Father and the Son, very and eternal God.


V. The Doctrine of the Holy Scripture is sufficient to Salvation.
Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to Salvation, so that
whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be
required of any Man that it should be believed as an Article of the Faith, or
be thought necessary or requisite to Salvation.

In the name of the Holy Scripture we do understand those Canonical Books of
the Old and New Testament, of whose Authority was never any doubt in the
Church; that is to say, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy,
Joshua, Judges, Ruth, 1st of Samuel, 2d of Samuel, etc. And the other Books (as
Hierom says) the Church does read for example of Life, and instruction of
Manners, but yet does it not apply them to establish any Doctrine; such are
these following, The 3d of Esdras, the 4th of Esdras, the Book of Tobias, the
Book of Judeth, the rest of the Book of Hester, the Book of Wisdom, etc. All
the Books of the New Testament, as they are commonly received, we do receive
and account them Canonical.


Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to Salvation; so that whatsoever
is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, although sometimes it may be
admitted by God's faithful People as pious, and conducing unto order and
decency; yet is not to be required of any Man that it should be believed as an
Article of the Faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to Salvation.

VI. The Old Testament is not to be rejected.
The Old Testament is not to be rejected, as if it were contrary to the New,
but to be retained. Forasmuch as in the Old Testament as in the New,
everlasting Life is offered to Mankind by Christ, who is the only Mediator
betwixt God and Man, being both God and Man. Wherefore they are not to be
heard, who feign, that the old Fathers did look only for transitory Promises.
Although the Law given from God by Moses, as touching Ceremonies and Rites, do
not bind Christian Men, nor the Civil Precepts thereof ought of necessity to be
received in any Commonwealth; yet notwithstanding no Christian Man whatsoever
is free from the obedience of the Commandments, which are called Moral.


VII. The three Creeds.
The three Creeds, Nice Creed, Athanasius Creed, and that which is commonly
called the Apostles Creed, ought thoroughly to be received And believed.
; for they may be proved by most certain Warrants of the Holy Scripture.

VIII. Original Sin.
Original Sin stands not in the following of Adam, (as the Pelagians do
vainly talk, Left out.
and at this day is affirmed by the Anabaptists) but it is the fault and
corruption of every Man, that naturally is engendered of the Offspring of Adam,
whereby Man is very far gone from Original Righteousness, and is of his own
nature inclined to evil; so that the Flesh lusts always contrary to the
Spirit; and therefore in every Person born into this World it deserves God's
Wrath and Damnation. And this Infection of Nature does remain, yea in them that
are regenerated, whereby the lust of the Flesh, called in Greek (...), which
some do expound the Wisdom, some Sensuality, some the Affection, some the
desire of the Flesh, is not subject to the Law of God. And although there is no
condemnation for them that believe and are baptized, yet the Apostle does
confess, that Concupiscense and Lust has of it self the nature of Sin.

IX. Of Free Will. The condition of Man after the Fall of Adam is such, that he
cannot turn and prepare himself, by his own natural strength and good Works, to
Faith and calling upon God. Wherefore we have no power to do good Works
pleasant and acceptable unto God, etc.

We have no power to do good Works pleasant and acceptable to God, without the
Grace of God by Christ preventing us, that we may have a good will and working
with us, when we have that good will.

X. Of Grace.
The Grace of Christ, or the Holy Ghost which is given by him, does take from
Man the heart of Stone, and gives him a heart of Flesh. And though it
rendereth us willing to do those good Works, which before we were unwilling to
do, and unwilling to do those evil Works, which before we did, yet is no
violence offered by it to the will of Man; so that no Man when he has sinned
can excuse himself, as if he had sinned against his will, or upon constraint;
and therefore that he ought not to be accused or condemned upon that account.

XI. Of the Justification of Man.
Justification by Faith only in Jesus Christ, We are accounted Righteous before
God only, for the merit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ by Faith, and not
for our own Works or deservings. Wherefore that we are justified by Faith, is a
most wholesome Doctrine, and very full of comfort, as more largely is expressed
in the Homily of Justification.
in that sense wherein it is set forth in the Homily of Justification, is the
most certain and most wholesome Doctrine for a Christian Man. XII. Of Good
Works.

Albeit the Good Works, which are the Fruits of Faith, and follow after
Justification, cannot put away our Sins, and endure the severity of God's
Judgment, yet are they pleasing and acceptable unto God in Christ, and do
spring out necessarily of a true and lively Faith, insomuch that by them, a
lively Faith may be as evidently known, as a Tree discerned by the Fruit.




XII. Works before Justification.
Works done before the Grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his Spirit, are
not pleasant to God, forasmuch as they spring not of Faith in Jesus Christ;
neither do they make Men meet to receive Grace, or (as the School Authors say)
deserve Grace of Congruity; yea rather for that they are not done as God has
willed and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have the nature of
Sin.

XIII. Works of Supererrogation.
Voluntary Works besides, over and above God's Commandments, which they call
Works of Supererrogation, cannot be taught without arrogance and impiety; for
by them Men do declare, that they do not only render unto God as much as they
are bound to do, but that they do more for his sake, than of bounden Duty is
required; Whereas Christ says plainly, When you have done all that are
commanded to you, say, we are unprofitable Servants.

XIV. None but Christ without Sin.
Christ in the truth of our Nature, was made like unto us in all things, (sin
only excepted) from which he was clearly void, both in his Flesh and in his
Spirit: He came to be a Lamb without spot, who by Sacrifice of himself once
made, should take away the Sins of the World; and Sin (as St. John says) was
not in him: But all we the rest (although baptized and born in Christ) yet
offend in many things; and if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and
the Truth is not in us.

XV. Of the Sin against the Holy Ghost.
Not every deadly Sin, willingly committed after Baptism, is Sin against the
Holy Ghost, and unpardonable. Wherefore the grant of Repentance is not to be
denied to such as fall into sin after Baptism. After we have received the Holy
Ghost, we may depart from Grace given, and fall into sin, and by the Grace of
God (we may) arise again and amend our Lives. And therefore they are to be
condemned which say, They can no more sin as long as they live here, or deny
the Place of Forgiveness.
place of Penance to such as truly repent.

XVI. The Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost.
The Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost is then committed, when any Man, out of
malice and hardness of heart, does wilfully reproach and persecute in an
hostile manner, the Truth of God's Word, manifestly made known unto him. Which
sort of Men, being made obnoxious to the Curse, subject themselves to the most
grievous of all wickednesses; from whence this kind of Sin is called
unpardonable, and so affirmed to be by our Lord and Savior.

XVII. Of Predestination and Election.
Predestination unto Life, is the everlasting Purpose of God, whereby (before
the Foundations of the World were laid) he has constantly decreed by his
Counsel, secret unto us, to deliver from Curse and Damnation, those whom he
has chosen In Christ.
out of Mankind, and to bring them by Christ to everlasting Salvation, as
Vessels made to Honor. Wherefore they which be endued with so excellent a
benefit of God, be called according to God's Purpose, by his Spirit working in
due season, they through Grace obey the Calling, they be justified freely, they
are made Sons of God by.
Adoption, they are made like the Image of His.
the only begotten Jesus Christ; they walk religiously in good Works, and at
length, by God's Mercy, they attain to everlasting felicity.

As the godly consideration of Predestination and Election in Christ, is full
of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable comfort to godly Persons, and such as feel
in themselves the working of the Spirit of Christ, mortifying the Works of the
Flesh, and their Earthly Members, and drawing up their mind to high and
heavenly Things, as well because it does greatly establish and confirm their
Faith of eternal Salvation, to be enjoyed through Christ, as because it does
fervently kindle their love toward God: So for curious and carnal Persons,
lacking the Spirit of Christ, to have continually before their eyes the
sentence of God's Predestination, is a most dangerous downfall, whereby the
Devil does thrust them either into desparation, or into wretchlesness of most
unclean living, no less perilous than desparation.

Furthermore, Left out.
though the Decrees of Predestination be unknown to us, yet must we receive
God's Promises in such wise as they be generally set forth to us in Holy
Scripture; and in our doings, that Will of God is to be followed, which we have
expressly declared unto us in the Word of God.

XVIII. Everlasting Salvation to be obtained only in the Name of Christ.
They also are to be had accursed, that presume to say, That every Man shall be
saved by the Law or Sect which he professes, so that he be diligent to frame
his Life according to that Law, and the Light of Nature: For Holy Scripture
does set out unto us only the Name of Jesus Christ, whereby Men must be saved.

XIX. All Men are bound to keep the Precepts of the Moral Law.
Although the Law given from God by Moses, as touching Ceremonies and Rites, do
not bind Christian Men, nor the Civil Precepts thereof ought of necessity to be
received in any Commonwealth; yet notwithstanding no Christian Man whatsoever
is free from the obedience of the Commandments which are called Moral.
Wherefore they are not to be heard which teach, that the Holy Scriptures were
given to none but to the Weak, and brag continually of the Spirit, by which
they do pretend, that all whatsoever they preach is suggested to them, though
manifestly contrary to the Holy Scripture.

XX. Of the Church.
The Visible Church of Christ, is a Congregation of faithful Men, in which the
pure Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered, according
to Christ's Ordinance, in all those things that of necessity are requisite to
the same.

As the Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch have erred, so also the
Church of Rome has erred, not only in their Livings, and manner of Ceremonies,
but also in Matters of Faith.

XXI. Of the Authority of the Church.
The Church has power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and Authority in
Controversies of Faith. It is not lawful for the Church, etc.
It is not lawful for the Church to ordain any thing that is contrary to God's
Word written, neither may it so expound one place of Scripture, that it be
repugnant to another; Wherefore although the Church be a Witness and Keeper of
Holy Writ, yet as it ought not to decree any thing against the same, so besides
the same ought it not to enforce any thing to be believed, for necessity of
Salvation.

XXI. Of the Authority of General Councils.
General Councils may not be gathered together without the Commandment and Will
of Princes. And when they are gathered together, forasmuch as they be an
Assembly of Men, (whereof all be governed with the Spirit and Word of God) they
may err, and sometimes have erred, even in things pertaining unto God.
Wherefore things ordained by them, as necessary to Salvation, have neither
strength nor authority, unless it may be declared, that they be taken out of
Holy Scripture.

XXIII. Of Purgatory.
The Doctrine of the Schoolmen concerning Purgatory, Pardons, Worshipping, and
Adoration, as well of Images as of Relics, and also Invocation of Saints, is
a fond thing vainly invented, and grounded upon no warranty of Scripture, but
rather perniciously repugnant to the Word of God.

XXIV. No Man to minister in the Church except he be called.
It is not lawful for any Man to take upon him the Office of public Preaching,
or ministering the Sacraments in the Congregation, before he be lawfully called
and sent to execute the same. And those we ought to judge lawfully called and
sent, which be chosen and called to this Work by Men, who have public
Authority given unto them in the Congregation, to call and send Ministers into
the Lord's Vineyard.

XXV. All things to be done in the Congregation in such a Tongue as is
understood by the People.
It is most fit, It is a thing plainly repugnant to the Word of God, and the
custom of the Primitive Church, to have public Prayers in the Church, or to
minister the Sacraments in a Tongue not understood by the People.
and most agreeable to the Word of God, that nothing be read or rehearsed in
the Congregation, in a Tongue not known unto the People; which Paul has
forbidden to be done, unless some be present to interpret.

XXVI. Of the Sacraments.
Our Lord Jesus Christ gathered his People into a Society, Sacraments ordained
of Christ, be not only Badges and Tokens of Christian Men's Profession, but
rather they be certain sure Witnesses, and effectual signs of Grace, and God's
good Will toward us, by the which he does work invisibly in us, and does not
only quicken, but also strengthen and confirm our Faith in him.

There are two Sacraments ordained of Christ our Lord in the Gospel, that is to
say, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord.

Those five commonly called Sacraments, That is to say, Confirmation, Penance,
Orders, Matrimony, and Extreme Unction, are not to be counted for Sacraments of
the Gospel, being such as have grown partly of the corrupt following of the
Apostles, partly are states of life allowed in the Scriptures, but yet have not
like nature of Sacraments, with Baptism and the Lord's Supper, for that they
have not any visible Sign or Ceremony ordained of God.

The Sacraments were not ordained of Christ to be gazed on, or to be carried
about, but that we should duly use them. And in such only as worthily receive
the same, they have a wholesome effect or operation; but they that receive them
unworthily, purchase to themselves damnation, as St. Paul says.


by Sacraments very few in number, most easy to be kept, and of most excellent
signification; that is to say, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord.

The Sacraments were not ordained of Christ to be gazed upon, or to be carried
about, but that we should duly use them: And in such only as worthily receive
the same, they have a wholesome effect or operation; not as some say, Ex opere
operato, which terms, as they are strange and utterly unknown to the Holy
Scripture, so do they yield a sense which savoureth of little Piety, but of
much Superstition: but they that receive them unworthily, receive to themselves
damnation.

The Sacraments ordained by the word of God, be not only Badges or Tokens of
Christian Men's Profession; but rather they be certain sure Witnesses, effectual
signs of Grace, and God's good Will toward us, by the which he does work
invisibly in us; and does not only quicken, but also strengthen and confirm our
Faith in him.

XXVII. The Wickedness of the Ministers takes not away the Efficacy of Divine
Institutions.
Although in the Visible Church, the Evil be ever mingled with the Good, and
sometimes the Evil have chief Authority in the ministration of the Word and
Sacraments; yet forasmuch as they do not the same in their own Name, but in
Christ's, and do minister by his Commission and Authority, we may use their
Ministry both in hearing the Word of God, and in receiving of the Sacraments:
Neither is the effect of Christ's Ordinance taken away by their wickedness, nor
the Grace of God's Gifts diminished from such as by Faith rightly do receive
the Sacrament, ministered unto them, which be effectual because of Christ's
Institution and Promise, although they be ministered by evil Men.

Nevertheless it appertains to the Discipline of the Church, that inquiry be
made after Evil Ministers.
them, and that they be accused by those that have knowledge of their Offenses;
and finally, being found guilty, by just judgment be deposed.

XXVIII. Of Baptism.
Baptism is not only a sign of Profession, and mark of Difference, whereby
Christian Men are discerned from others that be not Christened; but it is also a
sign of Regeneration, or New Birth, whereby, as by an Instrument, they that
receive Baptism rightly, are grafted into the Church; the Promises of
forgiveness of sin, and of our Adoption to be the Sons of God by the Holy
Ghost, are visibly signed and sealed; Faith is confirmed, and Grace increased,
by virtue of Prayer unto God. -- The Baptism of young Children is in any wise
to be retained in the Church, as most agreeable to the Institution of Christ.
The Custom of the Church for baptising young Children, is both to be
commended, and by all means to be retained in the Church.

XXIX. Of the Lord's Supper.
The Supper of the Lord, is not only a sign of the Love that Christians ought
to have amongst themselves one to another; but rather it is a Sacrament of our
Redemption by Christ's Death: Insomuch that to such as rightly, worthily, and
with Faith receive the same, the Bread which we break* is a partaking of the
Body of Christ, and likewise the Cup of Blessing, is a partaking of the Blood
of Christ.

Transubstantiation (or the change of the Substance of Bread and Wine) in the
Supper of the Lord, cannot be proved by Holy Writ; -- but is repugnant to the
plain words of Scripture, overthrows the nature of a ^acrament, and has
given occasion to many Super^^itions.

The Body of Christ is given, taken and eaten in the Supper, only after an
Heavenly and Spiritual Manner, And the mean whereby the Body of Christ is
received and eaten in the Supper, is Faith.


but it is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture, and has given occasion
to many Superstitions.

Since the very Being of humane. Nature does require, that the Body of one and
the same Man, cannot be at one and the same time in many places, but of
necessity must be in some certain and determinate place; therefore the Body of
Christ cannot be present in many different places at the same time. And since
(as the Holy Scriptures testify) Christ has been taken up into Heaven, and
there is to abide till the end of the World; it becomes not any of the
Faithful to believe or profess, that there is a Real or Corporeal presence (as
they phrase it) of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Holy Eucharist.

The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, was not by Christ's Ordinance reserved,
carried about, lifted up, or worshipped.

XXIX. Of the Wicked which eat not the Body of Christ in the Lord's Supper.
The wicked, and such as be void of a lively Faith, although they do carnally and
visibly press with their Teeth (as St. Augustine says) the Sacrament of the
Body and Blood of Christ; yet in no wise are they partakers of Christ, but
rather to their condemnation do eat and drink the Sign or Sacrament of so great
a thing.

XXX. Of both Kinds.] The Cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the
Lay People: For both the parts of the Lord's Sacrament (by Christ's Ordinance
and Commandment) ought not to be ministered to all Christian People alike.

XXX. Of the one Oblation of Christ finished upon the Cross.
The Offering of Christ once made, is a perfect Redemption, Propitiation, and
Satisfaction for all the Sins of the whole World, both Original and Actual, and
there is none other Satisfaction for Sin but that alone: Wherefore the
Sacrifices of Masses, in which it was commonly said, That the Priests did offer
Christ for the Quick and the Dead, to have remission of Pain or Guilt, were
blasphemous
Fables, and dangerous Deceits.

XXXI. A single Life is imposed on none by the Word of God.
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, are not commanded by God's Law, either to vow
the estate of a single Life, or to abstain from Marriage. Therefore it is
lawful for them, as for all other Christian Men, to Marry at their own
discretion, as they shall judge the same to serve better to Godliness.


XXXII. Excommunicated Persons are to be avoided.
That Person which by open Denunciation of the Church, is rightly cut off from
the Unity of the Church, and Excommunicated, ought to be taken of the whole
Multitude of the Faithful, as an Heathen and Publican, until he be openly
reconciled by Penance, and received into the Church, by a Judge that has
Authority thereunto.

XXXIII. Of the Tradition of the Church.
It is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be in all places one and
utterly alike; for at all times they have been diverse, and may be changed
according to the diversities of Countries, Times, and Men's Manners, so that
nothing be ordained against God's Word. Whosoever through his private judgment
willingly and purposely does openly break the Traditions and Ceremonies of the
Church, which be not repugnant to the Word of God, and be ordained and reproved
by common Authority, ought to be rebuked openly, (that others may fear to do
the like) as he that offends against the common Order of the Church, and
hurts the Authority of the Magistrate, and wounds the Consciences of the
weak Brethren. Every Particular or National Church, has Authority to ordain,
change or abolish Ceremonies or Rites of the Church, ordained only by Man's
Authority, so that all things be done to edifying.


XXXIV. Of the Homilies.
The second Book of Homilies, the several Titles whereof we have joined under
this Article, does contain a godly and wholesome Doctrine, and necessary for
the Times; as does the former Book of Homilies, which were set forth in the
time of Edward the 6th: and therefore we judge them to be read in Churches by
the Ministers, diligently and distinctly, that they may be understood of the
People.

The Names of the Homilies.

Of the Right Use of the Church. Of Repairing Churches. Against the Peril of
Idolatry. Of Good Works, etc.


The Homilies lately delivered and commended to the Church of England by the
King's Injunctions, do contain a godly and wholesome Doctrine, and fit to be
embraced by all Men; and for that cause they are diligently, plainly, and
distinctly to be read to the People.

XXXV. Of the Book of Common Prayer, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church of England.
The Book lately delivered to the Church of England by the Authority of the
King and Parliament, containing the manner and form of public Prayer, and the
Ministration of the Sacraments, The Book of Consecration of Archbishops and
Bishops, and ordering of Priests and Deacons, lately set forth in the time of
King Edward the Sixth, and confirmed at the same time by Authority of
Parliament, does contain all things necessary to such Consecration and
Ordering. Neither has it any thing that of it self is superstitious and
ungodly; And therefore whosoever are Consecrated and Ordered according to the
Rites of that Book, since the second Year of the aforementioned King Edward, unto
this time, or hereafter shall be Consecrated or Ordered, according to the same
Rites, we decree all such to be rightly, orderly, and lawfully Consecrated and
Ordered.
in the said Church of England; as also the Book published by the same
Authority for ordering Ministers in the Church, are both of them very pious, as
to truth of Doctrine, in nothing contrary, but agreeable to the wholesome
Doctrine of the Gospel, which they do very much promote and illustrate. And for
that cause they are by all faithful Members of the Church of England, but
chiefly of the Ministers of the Word, with all thankfulness and readiness of
mind, to be received, approved, and commended to the People of God.

XXXVI. Of the Civil Magistrates.
The King of England is after Christ, The Queens Majesty has the chief Power
in this Realm of England, and other her Dominions, unto whom the chief
Government of all Estates of this Realm, whether they be Ecclesiastical or
Civil, in all Cases does appertain, and is not, nor ought to be subject to any
Foreign Jurisdiction.

Where we attribute to the Queens Majesty the chief Government by which Titles
we understand the minds of some slanderous Folks to be offended: We give not to
our Princess the Ministry, either of God's Word, or of the Sacraments; the
which thing the Injunctions lately set forth by Elizabeth our Queen, do most
plainly testify; but that only Prerogative, which we see to have been given
always to all godly Princes, in holy Scriptures by God himself; that is, that
they should rule all Estates committed to their charge by God, whether they be
Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with the Civil Sword the stubborn and
evil Doers.

The Bishop of Rome has no Jurisdiction in this Realm of England.

The Laws of this Realm may punish Christian Men with Death, etc.


the Supreme Head on Earth of the Church of England and Ireland.

The Bishop of Rome has no Jurisdiction in this Realm of England.

The Civil Magistrate is ordained and approved by God, and therefore is to be
obeyed, not only for fear of Wrath, but for Conscience Sake.

Civil or Temporal Laws may punish Christian Men with Death for heinous and
grievous Offenses.

It is lawful for Christian Men, at the Commandment of the Magistrate, to wear
Weapons, and to serve in the Wars.

XXXVII. The Goods of Christians are not common.
The Riches and Goods of Christians are not common, as touching the Right,
Title, and Possession of the same, as certain Anabaptists do falsely boast.
Notwithstanding every Man ought, of such things as he possesses, liberally to
give Alms to the Poor, according to his Ability.

XXXVIII. It is lawful for a Christian to take an Oath.
As we confess that vain and rash Swearing is forbidden Christian Men, by our
Lord Jesus Christ, and James his Apostle; so we judge that Christian Religion
does not prohibit, but that a Man may swear when the Magistrate requires, in a
Cause of Faith and Charity, so it be done according to the Prophet's teaching,
in Justice, Judgment, and Truth.

These Articles were left out in Queen Elizabeth's Time.

XXXIX. The Resurrection of the Dead is not past already.
The Resurrection of the Dead is not past already, as if it belonged only to
the Soul, which by the Grace of Christ is raised from the Death of Sin, but is
to be expected by all Men in the last Day: for at that time (as the Scripture
does most apparently testify) the Dead shall be restored to their own Bodies,
Flesh and Bones, to the end that Man, according as either righteously or
wickedly he has passed this Life, may, according to his Works, receive Rewards
or Punishments.

XL. The Souls of Men deceased, do neither perish with their Bodies.
They who maintain that the Souls of Men deceased, do either sleep, without any
manner of sense, to the Day of Judgment, or affirm that they die together with
the Body, and shall be raised therewith at the last Day, do wholly differ from
the Right Faith, and Orthodox Belief, which is delivered to us in the Holy
Scriptures.

XLI. Of the Millenarians.
They who endeavor to revive the Fable of the Millenarians, are therein
contrary to the Holy Scriptures, and cast themselves down headlong into Jewish
Dotages.

XLII. All Men not to be saved at last.
They also deserve to be condemned, who endeavor to restore that pernicious
Opinion, That all Men (though never so ungodly) shall at last be saved; when
for a certain time, appointed by the Divine Justice, they have endured
punishment for their Sins committed.

Number 56. Instructions given by the King's Highness, to his right trusty and
right well-beloved Cousin and Counselor, Francis Earl of Salop, and Lord
President of his Grace's Council, resident in the North Parts; and to all
others hereafter named and appointed by his Highness to be of his said Council,
to be observed by the said Counselors, and every of them, according as the
same hereafter is declared.
FIrst, Ex MS. Dr. Johnson.
His Majesty much desiring the Quietness and good Governance of the People and
Inhabitants in the North Parts of this Realm of England, and for the good,
speedy, and indifferent administration of Justice to be there had, betwixt
Party and Party, intends to continue in the same North Parts, his Right
Honorable Council, called, The King's Majesty's Council in the North Parts.
And his Highness knowing the approved Wisdom and Experience of his said Cousin,
(...) with his assured discretion and dexterity in the Execution of Justice,
has appointed him to be Lord President of the said Council; and by these
Presents does give unto him the Name of Lord President of the said Council,
with Power and Authority to call together all such as be, or hereafter shall
be, named and appointed to be of the said Council at all times, when he shall
think expedient: And otherwise by his Letters, to appoint them, and every of
them, to do such things for the Advancement of Justice, and for the repression
and punishment of Malefactors, as by the Advice of such of the said Council as
then shall be present with him, he shall think meet, for the furtherance of his
Grace's Affairs, and for the due Administration of Justice between his Highness
Subjects.

And further, his Majesty gives unto the said Lord President, by these
Presents, a Voice Negative in all Councils, where things shall be debated at
length for the bringing forth of a most perfect Truth or Sentence, which his
Highness would have observed in all Cases that may abide Advisement and
Consultation, to the intent that doubtful Matters should as well be maturely
consulted upon, as also that the same should not pass without the consent and
order of the said Lord President.

And his Highness wills and commands, that all and every of the said
Counselors, named and to be named hereafter, shall exhibit and use to the said
Lord President, all such Honor, Reverend Behavior, and Obedience, as to their
Duty appertains; and shall receive and execute in like sort, all the Precepts
and Commandments to them, or any of them, for any Matter touching his Majesty,
to be addressed, or any Process to be done or served in his Grace's Name.

And his Highness Pleasure is, That the said Lord President shall have the
keeping of his Graces Signet, therewith to Seal Letters, Processes, and all
such other things as shall be thought convenient by the said Lord President, or
by two of the Council, being bound by those Articles, to daily attendance upon
the said Lord President, with his assent thereunto.

And to the intent the said Lord President thus established, for the abovesaid
Purposes, may be furnished with such Numbers and Assistants, as be of Wisdom,
Experience, Gravity, and Truth, meet to have the Name of his Grace's
Counselors; his Majesty, upon good advisement and deliberation, has elected
those Persons, whose Names ensue hereafter, to be his Counselors, joined in
the said Council in the North Parts, with the said Lord President; that is to
say, The right Trusty and well-beloved Cousins, Henry Earl of Westmoreland,
Henry Earl of Cumberland; his right Trusty and well-beloved Cuthbert Bishop of
Duresme; William Lord Dacres of the North; John Lord Conyers; Thomas Lord
Wharton; John Hind Knight. one of his Majesty's Justices of the Common Pleas;
Edmond Moleneux Knight. Sergeant at Law; Henry Savel Knight. Robert Bows Knight. Nicholas
Fairfax Knight. George Conyers Knight. Leonard Becquith Knight. William Babthorp Knight.
Anthony Nevill Knight. Thomas Gargrave Knight. Robert Mennel Sergeant at Law; Anthony
Bellasis Esquire; John Rockely Doctor of Law; Robert Chaloner, Richard Morton,
and Thomas Eymis, Esquires.

And his Highness, by these Presents, does appoint the said Thomas Eymis to be
Secretary to the said Council, diligently and obediently to exercise the same
Room as he shall be appointed by the said Lord President, or by two of the
Council, whereof the one to be of the Quorum, with the assent of the Lord
President. And his Highness Pleasure is, That the said Lord President, and two
others of the said Council, being of the Quorum, shall be sworn Masters of the
Chancery, to the intent that every of them may take recognisance in such Cases,
as by the said Lord President, or by two of the said Council, being of the
Quorum, shall be thought convenient, and the Case so requiring. All which
number of Counselors before specified, as his Majesty doubts not but that
they, and every of them, according to his Grace's expectation and trust reposed
in them, will be, at all times, diligent and willing toward, and ready to do
unto his Grace such Service as they can devise or imagine may be best to his
contentation, and to the discharge of their Duties toward his Highness,
leaving apart all Respects and Affections in all Matters that may touch their
nighest Kinsman, Friend, Servant, Tenant, or others, when the same shall come
in question before the same Lord President and Council. So his Grace trusts
that every of the same will have such regard to Malefactors as appertains,
and to bring all such unto the said Lord President and Council, when they shall
be thereunto appointed, or may otherwise do it of themselves; informing the
said Lord President and Council of their Offenses, as the same shall happen, in
place where they have Rule and Authority, within the limits of their Commission.

And for so much as it should be very chargeable to many of the said Counselors,
if they should continually attend upon the said Lord President and Council,
threfore his Highness, of his Grace's Goodness, minding to ease that Charge,
and to instruct every of the said Counselors how to demean themselves for
their Attendance; that is to wit, who shall be bound to continual Attendance
upon the same Council, and who shall attend but at times most requisite, at
their pleasures, unless the same Lord President shall require them to remain
for a time, for some weighty Affairs or Purposes; the which Requests in such
Cases, every of them shall accomplish. His Majesty therefore ordains that his
Cousins, the Earls of Westmoreland and Cumberland; the Bishop of Duresme, the
Lord Dacres, the Lord Conyers, the Lord Wharton, Sir John Hind, Sir Edmond
Molineux, Sir Henry Savell, Sir Nicholas Fairfax, George Conyers, Anthony
Nevil, Knights; Robert Mennel Sergeant at Law; Anthony Bellasis, John Rockbey
Doctor of Law, and Richard Norton, shall not be bound to continual Attendance,
but to go and come at their pleasures, unless they be required by the said Lord
President to remain with him for a time, for some weighty and great Causes
which then they shall accomplish.

And further, his Grace's Pleasure is, that they shall be present at such of
the general Sittings as shall be kept near unto their dwelling Places, and at
other Sittings and Places, where they shall be commanded by the said L.
President, all Excuses set apart as appertains. And because it shall be
convenient that a Number shall be continually abiding with the said L.
President, with whom he may consult and commit the Charge and Hearing of such
Matters as shall be exhibited unto him for the more expedition of the same, his
Highness, by these Presents, does ordain, that Sir Robert Bows, Sir William
Babthorp, Sir Leonard Becquith, Sir Thomas Gargrave, Knights; Robert Chaloner,
and Thomas Eymis Secretary, Esquires, shall give their continual attendance on
the said Lord President, or at the least two of them; and that none of them,
appointed to continual Attendance on the said Lord President, shall depart at
any time from him, without his special License, and the same not to exceed
above six weeks at one season.

And his Highness, by these Presents, for the better entertainment of the said
Lord President and Council of both sorts, when they are, or any of them shall
be present, does give a yearly Stipend of 1000 l. by the Year to the said Lord
President, toward the Furniture of the Diet of himself and the rest of the
said Counselors, with such number of Servants as hereafter shall be appointed
and allowed to every of them; that is to wit, every Knight, being bound to
continual Attendance, four Servants; and every Esquire, being bound to like
Attendance, three Servants. And his Highness ordains every of the said
Counselors, to sit with the said Lord President at his Table, or in some other
place in his House, to be by him conveniently prepared for their Degrees and
Behaviors; and their Servants allowed, as is before-said, to have Sitting and
Diet in the said Lord President's Hall, or in some other convenient place in
his House.

And further, his Highness, of his mere Goodness, and great Benignity, for the
better entreatment, as well of such of the said Council as be not well able to
forbear their own Affairs, and attend upon the said Council, without further
help for the charge of the Horse-meat and Lodgings, when they shall attend in
Council to serve his Highness. As for such others that might better themselves
with their Learning and Policies, if they were not detained there about his
Grace's Affairs, does by these Presents limit and appoint, to diverse of the
aforesaid Counselors hereafter named, certain particular Fees, as ensues;
that is to say, To Sir Robert Bows Knight. in respect of his Attendance, and
toward his Horse-meat and other Charges, an hundred Merks yearly; to Sir
William Babthorp Knight. for the like, 50 l. yearly; to Sir Leonard Becquith, for
the like causes, an 100 Merks yearly; to Sir Thomas Gargrave Knight. for the like,
50 l. yearly; to Robert Chaloner Esquire, for the like, 50 l. yearly; to
Richard Norton Esquire; for his Fee, 40 l. to Thomas Eymis Secretary, for the like
yearly Fee, 33 l. 6 s. 8 d. And further, his Grace does appoint one Messenger
to serve the said Council, who shall give continual attendance upon the said
Lord President, and have his Meat, Drink, and Lodging, in the said Lord
Presidents, House, and to have yearly for his Fee, 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. And further,
his Grace's pleasure is, That the said 1000 l. for the Lord President, and all
the said other Fees, shall be paid yearly at the Feasts of the Annunciation of
our Lady, and St. Michael the Archangel, by even Portions, of the Revenues of
his Graces Lands in those parts; and that for that purpose an Assignment and
Warrant to be made to the Receiver General of his Grace's Revenues there.

And to furnish the said Lord President and Council in all things with
Authority sufficient to execute Justice, as well in Causes Criminal, as in
Matters of Controversy between Party and Party, his Majesty has commanded and
appointed two Commissions to be made out, under his Grace's Great Seal of
England, by virtue whereof they shall have full Power and Authority in either
Case, to proceed as the Matter occurrent shall require.

And for the more speedy expedition to be used in all causes of Justice, his
Majesty's Pleasure is, That the said Lord President and Council, shall cause
every Complainant and Defendant that shall have to do before them, to put and
declare their whole Matter in their Bill of Complaint and Answer, without
Replication, Rejoinder, or other Plea or Delay to be had or used therein; which
Order the said L. President and Council shall manifest unto all such as shall
be Counselors in any Matter to be entreated and defined before them; charging
and commanding the said Counselors and Pleaders to observe this Order upon
such Penalties as they shall think convenient, as they will eschew the danger
of the same; and not in any ways to break it, without the special License of
the said Lord President, and that only in some special Causes.

And further, his Highness, by these Presents, does give full Power and
Authority to the said Lord President and Council, as well to punish such
Persons as in any thing shall neglect, contemn, or disobey their Commandments,
or the Process of the Council, as all other that shall speak seditious Words,
invent Rumors, or commit suchlike Offenses, (not being Treason) whereof any
Inconvenience might grow, by Pillory, cutting their Ears, wearing of Papers,
Imprisonment, or otherwise at their Discretions. And the said L. President and
Council, at their discretions, shall appoint Counselors, and other Requisites,
to poor Suitors having no Money, without paying Fees or other things for the
same. And his Highness gives full Power and Authority to the said L. President
and Council being with him, or four of them at the least; whereof the said L.
President, Sir John Hind, Sir Edmond Molineux, Sir Robert Bows, Sir Leonard
Becquith, Sir Anthony Nevill, Sir Thomas Gargrave, Knights; Robert Mennell, and
Robert Chaloner, to be two with the Lord President, to assess Fines of all
Persons that shall be convict or indicted of any Riot, how many soever they be
in number, unless the Matter of such Riot shall be thought unto them of such
importance, as the same shall be meet to be signified unto his Majesty, to be
punished in such sort, by the Order of his Council attending upon his Grace's
Person, as the same may be noted for an Example to others. And his Grace gives
full Power and Authority to the said Lord President and Council, or four of
them at the least, whereof the Lord President and two others bound to continual
Attendance; to be three to Award and Assess Costs and Damages, as well to the
Plaintiffs as to the Defendants, by their discretions, and to award execution
of their Decrees and Orders; and to punish the breakers of the same, being
Parties thereunto, by their discretions: All which Decrees and Orders, the
Secretary shall be bound incontinently, upon the promulgation of the same, to
write, or cause to be written, in one fair Book, which shall remain in the
hands and custody of the said Lord President.

And to the intent it may appear to all Persons there, what Fees shall be paid
and taken for all Processes and Writings to be used by the said Council, his
Majesty therefore appoints, that there shall be a Table affixed in every
place where the said Lord President and Council shall sit, at any Sessions; and
a like Table to hang openly, that all Men may see it, in the Office where the
said Secretary and the Clerks shall commonly sit and expedite the said
Writings; wherein shall be declared what shall be paid for the same. That is to
say, For every Recognisance, wherein one alone or more stands bounden: 12 d.
for the cancelling of every like Recognisance, 12 d. For the entering of every
Decree, 6 d. for the Copy of the same if it be asked, 6 d. For every Letter,
Commission, Attachment, or other Precept or Process sent to any Person, 4 d.
For every Dismission before the said Council (if it be asked) 4 d. For the
Copies of Bills, and Answers, and other Pleas, for every ten lines, reasonably
writ, 1 d. for the Examination of every Witness, 4 d. And his Grace's Pleasure
is, That the Examination of Witnesses, produced in Matters before the said
Council, shall be examined by such discreet Person and Persons, as shall be
thought convenient and meet by the said Lord President, and two of the said
Council, bound to continual Attendance; and that the said Lord President, with
suchlike two of the said Council, shall reform, appoint, and allow such
Persons to write Bills, Answers, Copies, or other Process in that Court, as
they shall think convenient, over and beside the said Secretary and his two
Clerks; which Clerks also, the said Lord President and Council shall reform and
correct, as they shall have cause and occasion. In which Reformation and
Appointments, the said Lord President shall have a Voice Negative.

And for the more certain and brief determination of Matters in those parts,
his Majesty, by these Presents, ordains, that the said Lord President and
Council shall keep four general Sittings or Sessions in the Year, every of them
to continue by the space of one whole Month; whereof one to be at York; another
at Kingston upon Hull; one at New Castle; and another at Duresme; within the
limits whereof, the Matters rising there shall be ordered and decreed, if they
conveniently so may be. And they shall, in every of the same Places, keep one
Goal Delivery; before their departure from thence, his Grace nevertheless
referring it to their Discretions, to take and appoint such other Place and
Places for their said four general Sittings, as they, or the said Lord
President, with three of the Council, bounden to continual Attendance, shall
think most convenient for the time and purpose; so that they keep the full term
of one Month in every such place, if they may in any wise conveniently so do.

And for so much as a great number of his Majesty's Tenants and Farmers have been
heretofore retained with sundry Persons by Wages, Livery, Badg, or Connysance;
by reason whereof, when his Grace should have had service of them, they were
rather at Commandment of other Men, than (according to their Duties of
Allegiance) of his Highness of whom they have their Livings; his Majesty's
Pleasure, and express Commandment is, That none of his said Council, nor
others, shall by any means retain or entertain any of his Graces Tenants, or
Farmers in such sort, as they, or any of them, should account themselves
bounden to do him or them any other Service, than as to his Highness Officers,
having Office, or being appointed in Service there: unless the same Farmers and
Tenants be continually attendant in the House of him that shall retain them.
And the said Lord President and Council, shall, in every their General
Sittings, give special notice and charge, That no Nobleman, nor other, shall
retain any of the said Tenants and Farmers, otherwise than is aforesaid.
Charging also the said Farmers and Tenants, upon pain of the forfeiture of
their Farms and Holds, and incurring of his Majesty's further Displeasure and
Indignation, in no wise to agree to any such Retainers, other than is
before-said, but wholly to depend upon his Highness, and upon such as his
Highness has, or shall appoint to be Officers, Rulers, or Directors over them.

And his Grace's Pleasure further is, That in every such Sitting, and in all
other Places where the said Lord President and Council shall have any notable
Assemblies before them, they shall give strait Charge and Commandment to the
People, to conform themselves in all things to the observation of such Laws,
Ordinances, and Determinations, as be made, passed, and agreed upon by his
Grace's Parliament touching Religion, and the most Godly Service, set forth in
their own Mother Tongue, for their Comforts: And likewise to the Laws touching
the abolishing of the usurped and pretended Power of the Bishop of Rome, whose
Abuses they shall so beat into their Heads, by continual inculcation, as they
may smell and understand the same; and may perceive the same to be declared
with their Hearts, and not with their Tongues only for a form.

And likewise they shall declare the Order and Determination taken and agreed
upon, for the Abrogation of certain vain Holy Days, being appointed by the
Bishop of Rome to blind the World; and to persuade the same, that they might
make Saints at their pleasures; and thereby, through idleness, do give occasion
of the increase of many and great Vices and Inconveniences: which Points his
Majesty does earnestly require, and straightly commmand, the said Lord President
and Council, to set forth with all dexterity, and to punish extremely, for
example, all Offenders in the same.

And his Majesty wills the said Council, as he doubts not but they will
most earnestly set forth all such other Things and Matters, as for the
confirmation of the People in those Matters, and other the King's Majesty's
Proceedings, and things convenient to be remembered, be, or shall be set forth
or devised, and sent unto them for that purpose.

Further, his Highness Pleasure is, That the said Lord President and Council
shall, from time to time, make diligent inquisition of the wrongful taking in
and enclosing of Commons, and other Grounds, and who be extreme therein; and in
taking and exacting of unreasonable Fines and Gressomes, and overing or raising
of Rents; and to call the Parties that have so evil used themselves therein
before them; and leaving all Respects and Affections apart, they shall take
such order for the Redresses of Enormities used in the same, as the poor People
be not oppressed; but that they may live after their Sorts and Qualities.

And if it shall chance that the said Lord President and Council shall vary in
Opinion, either in the Law, or for any Order to be taken in any Matter or Fact
before them, if the case be of very great Weight and Importance, then the
Opinion of the greater, or more part of the number of Counselors appointed to
give continual attendance, shall take place, and determine the Doubt; and if
they be of like like number of Counselors, bounden to continual Attendance,
then that Party whereunto the Lord President shall give his Assent, shall be
followed and take place. And if the Case and Matter be of great Importance, and
the Question of the Law, then the Lord President and Council shall signify the
Case and Matter to the Judges at Westminster, who shall, with diligence,
advertise them again of their Opinions therein. And if the Matter be of great
Importance, and an Order to be taken upon the Fact, then the said Lord
President and Council, attendant upon his Person upon the same, whereupon they
shall have knowledge again how to use themselves in that behalf.

And the said Lord President and Council shall take special regard, upon
complaint of Spoil, Extortions, or Oppressions, to examine the same speedily,
that the Party grieved may have due and undelayed Remedy and Restitution. And
for want of Ability in the Offenders thereunto, they to be punished to the
Example of others. And if any Man, of what degree soever he be, shall, upon a
good, lawful, and reasonable Cause or Matter, and so appearing to the Lord
President and Council, by Information, or otherwise, demand Surety of Peace or
Justice against any great Lord or Nobleman of that Country, the said Lord
President and Council shall, in that case, grant the Petition of the poorest
Man, against the richest or greatest Lord, being of the Council or no, as they
should grant the same (being lawfully asked) against Men of the meanest sort,
degree, and behavior.

And forasmuch as it may chance, the said Lord President to be sometime
diseased, that he shall not be able to travel, for the direction of such
Matters as then shall occur; or to be called to the Parliament, or otherwise to
be employed in the King's Majesty's Affairs, or about other Business, for good
Reformation or Order within his Rule, or for other reasonable cause by his
discretion; To the intent therefore that the said Council may be and remain
ever full and perfect, and that they may be at all times in the same, one
Person to direct and use all things in such and the same order, sort, and form,
as the said Lord President should and might do, by virtue of the afore-said's
Commissions, and these Instructions, his Majesty's Pleasure is, That when the
said Lord President shall be so diseased, absent, or let, as is before-said,
that he cannot conveniently supply his room himself, that then he shall name
and appoint one of the said Commissioners, being appointed, to give continual
attendance to supply his Room for that season, during his said Disease,
Absence, or Let; and shall deliver the Signet to the Person so appointed to
keep, during the same time. And the King's Highness, during the same time,
gives unto the said Person so appointed, the Name of Vice President; which
Name nevertheless he shall no longer continue, than during the time that the
said Lord President shall so be sick, absent, or let, as is before-said. And
his Majesty's Pleasure is, That for the time only, that any of the said
Council, as is before-said, shall occupy the said Room and Place as a
Vice President, that all the rest of the Council shall in all things use him in
like sort, and with like reverence, as they be bound by those Injunctions to
use the Lord President himself; whereunto his Grace doubts not but every of
them will conform themselves accordingly.

And further, his Majesty by these Presents gives full Power and Authority to
the said Lord President and Council, That when the Condition of any
Recognisance taken before them shall be fulfilled, they shall in open Court
cause the same to be cancelled for the discharge of the Parties: Provided that
no Recognisance be in any wise cancelled but before the Lord President, or
Vice President, and three others at the least, sitting in open Court with him.

And further, his Highness ordains, That no Attorney shall take, in one
Sitting or Sessions, for one Matter, above 12 d. nor no Counselor above 20 d.

The rest are wanting.

Number 57. The Memorial of the Charge committed by the King's Majesty to Sir
Richard Morison Knight. his Majesty's Ambassador with the Emperor, the 24th of
September. An Original.
FIrst, You Sir Richard Morison shall, with all diligence, Galba. B. 12.
procure Audience of our good Brother the Emperor; and at your access to him,
deliver our Letters of Credence herewith sent to you, with our most hearty
Commendations, and earnest Declaration, That we be most glad to have
understanding of his good Estate and Health. After the same Delivery and
Salutation, you shall further say, That We understanding his good and
honorable Advancement toward his Low Countries, to the great comfort of the
same. And having also the same love and good will toward the prosperous
success of his said Countries, that our late Father, and our other Progenitors
have had these many Years passed, have willed you expressly in our Names, to
congratulate this his coming thitherward, and to show him, that the good
Success which We wish to him, and his Affairs and Enterprises, is as much as We
would to our Selves, and our own Countries and Patrimonies.

Item. When you shall have opened thus much, with as good words as you may
devise, ye shall begin to descend to this that follows, using therein your
earnestness and frankness, as ye shall see by the former sayings, occasion
given to you by our said Brother's Acceptance thereof, either by his good
Words, or other behavior in his Gesture. Ye shall say, that where we have
lately understood of the great Murders, Spoils, and Cruelties done and
committed, both in Hungary, and upon the Coasts of Naples, and in other parts
of Italy, by the Turks, the old common Enemy, to the Name and Religion of all
Christianity. Likeas We cannot but from our very Heart lament the same, so We
will, for our part, as may be thought expedient for the well-publick of
Christendom, show our self willing to accord with our said good Brother, and
other Christian Princes and States, for the repulse of the said Turk. And if
any such good means may, by the great Wisdom and policy of our said good
Brother the Emperor, be thought good and devised, to bring the same to some
good purpose and effect; We for our part will show our Self so ready and
well-willing thereto, as our said good Brother shall well perceive, that We
have not only that Zeal to the Conservation and Surety of Christendom, which in
a Christian Prince is duly required; but also such consideration and regard to
our said good Brother, and our ancient Amity with the House of Burgundy, as to
Honor and Reason appertains.

Thus much being declared in such good sort, as you shall see occasion does
require; We would that you should stay and pause awhile, as it were, looking
for some answer to be made hereto by our said good Brother; and if you shall
perceive he takes it in thankful part, then may you entertain the Talk
modestly, with such good words as may seem to your wisdom best to confirm our
good Affection to the continuance of the Amity, and our great Offense and
Grief, with the entry of the Turks in Christendom.

And if you shall perceive that the Emperor does in so good part receive this
our Overture, that he shall show himself willing to enter any further Talk, or
devise for the further proceeding in the same, you may, as of your self, show
your readiness and good will to do all that you any ways well may, as a good
Minister, for the bringing this Purpose to some profitable effect; which you
may say, in your own Opinion, shall the better take good entry and success, if
by some special Man to be sent hither, We might understand more fully Our said
good Brother's Mind in this Matter.

Item. If ye shall perceive that the Emperor does not regard this Overture,
either in not liking the Matter it self, or not so regarding our Amity as
Reason would, and as it is on our part offered, then may you use your self,
more coldly, and diminish the declaration of Our earnestness, in like sort as
Our said Brother shows himself; and conclude, that thus having done the
Message committed to your Charge, you will leave the consideration hereof to
him as he shall think good.

And if in the opening of the Premises, Our said Brother shall make any mention
or interpretation against the French King, referring the Turks Invasions to the
said French King as some occasion thereof; and so shall demand directly or
indirectly, whether this our Overture be meant to extend against the French
King, or any others of Christian Name that shall join in League or Amity with
the said Turks. You may thereto say, That you had no more in charge presently
than ye have said; and therefore for further opening of our Mind therein, you
think the same might be best had here.

And if at any time of this your Talk, our said Brother shall gather occasion
to ask you, What We will do for giving Aid against these Invasions made by the
French King upon the Low Countries? You may answer, you have nothing to say
therein, but that you think the Answer that was declared to his Ambassador here
resident upon the Letters sent to Us from our good Sister the Queen of Hungary,
has both been signified to him long before his time; and also as ye trust in
reason contented Her. And in this Point, although ye know what was answered,
yet would we not ye should enter into the dispute thereof, meaning in this and
the rest of things to be treated with our said Brother, that ye would rather
procure the sending of some special Man hither, than to treat any thing by his
Ambassador here, who hitherto has not appeared the fittest Man to increase or
enlarge the Amity betwixt Us and our said Brother.

Finally, Our Pleasure is, That you shall, in the execution of this present
Charge, wholly extend your good Policy and Wisdom, to mark and well-advise all
such words of moment, as the Emperor shall utter to you in this Talk, by what
Order, Behavior, Gesture, or other passion of Joy or Grief the same shall be
spoken, so as We may simply, plainly, and very orderly have the true
Declaration thereof from you; wherein We desire so express and special a report
of this Matter, as upon the same We may better conceive what shall be
expedient, to be further done in this and other our weighty Affairs.

Winchester. Northumberland. J. Bedford. F. Huntingdon. E. Clinton. W.
Northampton. J. Cobham. T. Darcy. Richard Cotton. John Gate.
Number 58. A Letter written by B. Ridley, setting out the Sins of that Time.
To his Well-beloved, the Preachers within the Diocese of London.
AFter hearty Commendations, having regard, especially at this time, Regist.
Ridl. Fol. 239.
to the Wrath of God, who has plagued us diversely, and now with extreme
punishment of sudden Death poured upon us, for Causes certain, known unto his
high and secret Judgment, and as may seem unto Man for our wicked living; daily
increasing unto such sort, that not only in our Conversations the Fear of God
is, alas, far gone from before our Eyes, but also the World is grown into that
uncharitableness, that one, as it appears plainly, goes about to devour
another; moved with insatiable Covetousness, both contrary to God's Word and
Will, and to the extreme peril and damnation of Christ's Flock, bought so
dearly with his precious Blood, and to the utter destruction of this whole
Common Wealth, except God's Anger be shortly appeased: wherein, as according to
my bounden Duty I shall, God willing, in my own Person be diligent and labor;
so I exhort and require you, first in God's Name, and by authority of him
committed unto me in that behalf, and also in the King's Majesty's Name, from
whom I have Authority and special Commandment thus to do, That as you are
called to be setters forth of God's Word, and to express in your livings the
same, so now in your Exhortations and Sermons, you do most wholsomely and
earnestly tell unto Men their Sins, Juxta illud anuncia populo meo scelera
eorum, with God's punishments lately poured upon us for the same, now before
our Eyes: and specially to beat down and destroy, with all your Power and Wit,
that greedy and devouring Serpent of Covetousness, that does so now universally
reign: calling upon God for Repentance, and provoking to Common Prayer, and
amendment of life, with most earnest Petitions, that hereby God's Hands may be
stayed, the World amended, and obedience of Subjects, and faithfulness of
Ministers declared accordingly. Thus I bid you heartily well to fare.

From London, July 25. 1551. Yours in Christ, Nic. London.

Number 59. Bishop Ridley's Letter to the Protector, concerning the Visitation
of the University of Cambridg.
Right Honorable,
I Wish your Grace the holy and wholesome Fear of God, because I am persuaded
your Grace's Goodness to be such unfeignedly, that even wherein your Grace's
Letters does sore blame me, yet in the same the advertisement of the Truth
shall not displease your Grace; and also perceiving that the cause of your
Grace's discontentation was wrong Information, therefore I shall beseech your
Grace to give me leave to show your Grace, wherein it appears to me that your
Grace is wrong informed.

Your Grace's Letters blames me, because I did not (at the first, before the
Visitation began, having knowledge of the Matter) show my Mind; the Truth is,
Before God, I never had, nor could get any fore-knowledg of the Matter, of the
uniting of the two Colleges, before we had begun, and had entered two days in
the Visitation, and that your Grace may plainly thus well perceive.

A little before Easter, I being at Rochester, received Letters from Mr.
Secretary Smith, and the Dean of Paul's, to come to the Visitation of the
University, and to make a Sermon at the beginning thereof; whereupon I sent
immediately a Servant up to London, to the Dean of Paul's, desiring of him to
have had some knowledge of things there to be done, because I thought it meet
that my Sermon should somewhat have savoured of the same.

From Mr. Dean I received a Letter, instructing me only, That the cause of the
Visitation was, to abolish Statutes and Ordinances, which maintained Papistry,
Superstition, Blindness and Ignorance; and to establish and set forth, such as
might further God's Word and good Learning; and else, the Truth is, he would
show me nothing, but bad me be careless, and said, There was Informations how
all things was for to be done; the which, I take God to Witness, I did never
see, nor could get knowledge what they were, before we were entered in the
Visitation two days, although I desired to have seen them in the beginning.

Now, when I had seen the Instructions, the Truth is, I thought peradventure,
the Master and Company would have surrendered up their College; but when their
consent, after labor and travel taken therein two days, could not be
obtained, and then we began secretly to consult (all the Commissioners thinking
it best that every Man should say his Mind plainly, that in execution there
might appear but one way to be taken of all) there when it was seen to some,
that without the consent of the present Incumbents, by the King's absolute
Power, we might proceed to the uniting of the two Colleges, I did, in my course
simply and plainly declare my Conscience, and that there only secretly, among
our selves alone, with all kind of softness, so that no Man could be justly
offended. Also, I perceive, by your Grace's Letters, I have been noted of some
for my barking there; and yet to bark, lest God should be offended, I cannot
deny, but indeed it is a part of my Profession, for God's Word condemns the
dumb Dogs that will not bark and give warning of God's Displeasure.

As for that that was suggested to your Grace, that by my aforesaid barking, I
should dishonor the King's Majesty, and dissuade others from the Execution of
the King's Commission, God is my Judge, I intended, according to my Duty to God
and the King, the maintenance and defense of his Highness Royal Honor and
Dignity. If that be true, that I believe is true, which the Prophet says,
Honor Regis Judicium diligit; and as the Commissioners must needs, and I am
sure will all testify, that I dissuaded no Man, but contrariwise, exhorted
every Man (with the quiet of other) to satisfy their own Conscience; desiring
only, that if it should otherwise be seen unto them, that I might, either by my
absence or silence, satisfy mine. The which my plainness, when some, otherwise
than according to my expectation did take, I was moved thereupon (both for the
good Opinion I had, and yet have, in your Grace's Goodness; and also specially,
because your Grace had commanded me so to do) to open my mind, by my private
Letters, freely unto your Grace.

And thus I trust your Grace perceives now, both that anon, after knowledge
had, I did utter my Conscience; and also that the Matter was not opened unto me
before the Visitation was two days begun.

If in this I did amiss, that before the knowledge of the Instructions, I was
ready to grant to the Execution of the Commission; Truly, I had rather herein
acknowledge my Fault, and submit my self to your Grace's Correction, then after
knowledge had, then wittingly and willingly commit that thing whereunto my
Conscience does not agree, for fear of God's displeasure.

It is a Godly Wish that is wished in your Grace's Letters, that Flesh, and
Blood, and Country, might not more weigh with some Men than Godliness and
Reason; but the truth is, Country in this Matter (whatsoever some Men do
suggest unto your Grace) shall not move me; and that your Grace shall well
perceive, for I shall be as ready, as any other, first thence to expel some of
my own Country, if the Report which is made of them can be tried true.

And as for that your Grace says of Flesh and Blood, that is the favor or
fear of Mortal Man. Yea, marry Sir, that is a Matter of weight indeed, and the
truth is, (alas my own feebleness) of that I am afraid; but I beseech your
Grace, yet once again, give me good leave, wherein here I fear my own frailty,
to confess the Truth.

Before God, there is no Man this day, (leaving the King's Majesty for the
Honor only excepted) whose favor or displeasure I do either seek or fear, as
your Grace's favor or displeasure; for of God, both your Grace's Authority,
and my bound Duty for your Grace's Benefits bind me so to do. So that if the
desire of any Man's favor, or fear of displeasure, should weigh more with me
than Godliness and Reason.

Truly, if I may be bold to say the Truth, I must needs say, that I am most in
danger to offend herein, either for desire of your Grace's favor, or for fear
of your Grace's displeasure. And yet I shall not cease (God willing) daily to
pray God so to stay and strengthen my frailty with holy Fear, that I do not
commit the thing for favor or fear of any Mortal Man, whereby my Conscience
may threaten me with the loss of the favor of the Living God, but that it may
please him, of his gracious Goodness, (howsoever the World goes) to blow this
in the Ears of my Heart, Deus dissipavit ossa eorum qui Hominibus placuerint.
And this, Horrendum est incidere in manus Dei viventis. And again, Nolite
timere eos qui occidunt corpus.

Wherefore I most humbly beseech your Grace, for God's Love, not to be offended
with me, for renewing of this my Suit unto your Grace, which is that whereunto
my Conscience cannot well agree; if any such thing chance in this Visitation, I
may, with your Grace's Favor, have license, either by mine absence or silence,
or other-like means, to keep my Conscience quiet. I wish your Grace, in God,
honor, and endless felicity,

From Pembrook-Hall in Cambridg, June 1. 1549. Your Grace's humble and daily
Orator, Nich. Roffen.

Number 60. The Protector's Answer to the former Letter.
Ex Chartophylac. Kegio.
AFter our right hearty Commendations to your Lordship, we have received your
Letters of the first of June, again replying to those which we last sent unto
you. And as it appears, ye yet remaining in your former Request, desires, if
things do occur so, that, according to your Conscience, ye cannot do them, that
you might absent your self, or otherwise keep silence. We would be loath any
thing should be done by the King's Majesty's Visitors, otherwise than Right and
Conscience might allow and approve: And Visitation is to direct things to the
better, not to the worse; to ease Consciences, not to clog them. Marry, we
would wish that Executors thereof should not be scrupulous in Conscience,
otherwise than Reason would. Against your Conscience, it is not our will to
move you, as we would not gladly do, or move any Man to that which is against
Right and Conscience; and we trust the King's Majesty has not in this Matter.
And we think in this ye do much wrong, and much discredit the other Visitors,
that ye should seem to think and suppose, that they would do things against
Conscience. We take them to be Men of that Honor and Honesty, that they will
not. My Lord of Canterbury has declared unto us, that this makes partly a
Conscience unto you, that Divines should be diminished. That can be no cause;
for, first, the same was met before in the late King's Time, to unite the two
Colleges together; as we are sure ye have heard, and Sir Edward North can tell:
And for that cause, all such as were Students of the Law, out of the
new-erected Cathedral Church, were disappointed of their Livings, only reserved
to have been in that Civil College. The King's Hall being in manner all
Lawyers, Canonists were turned and joined to Michael-House, and made a College
of Divines, wherewith the number of Divines was much augmented, Civillians
diminished. Now at this present also, if in all other Colleges, where Lawyers
be by the Statutes, or the King's Injunctions, ye do convert them, or the more
part of them, to Divines, ye shall rather have more Divines upon this change
than ye had before. The King's College should have six Lawyers; Jesus College
some; the Queen's College, and other, one or two apiece. And as we are
informed, by the late King's Injunctions, every College in Cambridg one at the
least; all these together do make a greater in number, than the Fellows of
Clare-Hall be, and they now made Divines, and the Statutes in that reformed
Divinity shall not be diminished in number of Students, but increased, as
appears, although these two Colleges be so united. And we are sure ye are not
ignorant, how necessary a Study that Study of Civil Law is to all Treaties with
Foreign Princes and Strangers, and how few there be at this present to do the
King's Majesty's Service therein. For we would the increase of Divines, as well
as you. Marry, Necessity compels us also to maintain the Science; and we
require you, my Lord, to have consideration how much you do hinder the King's
Majesty's Proceedings in that Visitation, if now you, who are one of the
Visitors, should thus draw back and discourage the other, ye should much hinder
the whole Doings; and peradventure that thing known, makes the Master and
Fellows of Clare-Hall to stand the more obstinate; wherefore we require you to
have regard of the King's Majesty's Honor, and the quiet performings of that
Visitation, most to the Glory of God, and Benefit of that University; the which
thing is only meant in your Instructions. To the performing of that, and in
that manner, we can be content you use your Doings as ye think best, for the
quieting of your Conscience. Thus we bid you right-heartily farewell.

From Richmond, the 10th of June, 1549. Your loving Friend, E. Somerset.

Number 61. A Letter of Cranmer's to King Henry the 8th, concerning a further
Reformation, and against Sacrilege.
Ex Chartophylac. Regio.
IT may please your Highness to be advertised; that forasmuch as I might not
tarry my self at London, because I had appointed, the next day after that I
departed from your Majesty, to be at Rochester, to meet the next Morning all
the Commissioners of Kent at Sittingbourn; therefore the same Night that I
returned from Hampton Court to Lambeth, I sent for the Bishop of Worcester
incontinently, and declared unto him all your Majesty's Pleasure, in such
things as your Majesty willed me to be done. And first, where your Majesty's
Pleasure was, to have the Names of such Persons as your Highness, in times
past, appointed to make Laws Ecclesiastical for your Grace's Realm. The Bishop
of Worcester promised me, with all speed, to enquire out their Names, and the
Book which they made, and to bring the Names, and also the Book, unto your
Majesty; which I trust he has done before this time.

And as concerning the ringing of Bells upon Alhallow-day at Night, and
covering of Images in Lent, and creeping to the Cross, he thought it necessary
that a Letter of your Majesty's Pleasure therein, should be sent by your Grace
unto the two Archbishops; and we to send the same to all other Prelates within
your Grace's Realm. And if it be your Majesty's Pleasure so to do, I have for
more speed herein drawn a Minute of a Letter, which your Majesty may alter at
your Pleasure. Nevertheless, in my Opinion, when such things be altered or
taken away, there would be set forth some Doctrine therewith, which should
declare the Cause of the Abolishing or Alteration, for to satisfy the
Conscience of the People: For if the Honoring of the Cross, as creeping and
kneeling thereunto be taken away, it shall seem to many that be ignorant, that
the Honor of Christ is taken away, unless some good teaching be set forth
withal to instruct them sufficiently therein; which if your Majesty command the
Bishops of Worcester and Chichester, with other your Grace's Chaplains to make,
the People shall obey your Majesty's Commandment willingly; giving thanks to
your Majesty that they know the Truth, which else they would obey with
murmuration and grutching. And it shall be a satisfaction unto all other
Nations, when they shall see your Majesty do nothing but by the Authority of
God's Word, and to the setting forth of God's Honor, and not diminishing
thereof. And thus Almighty God keep your Majesty in his Preservation and
Governance.

From my Manor at Beckisbourn, the 24th of January, 45. Your Graces most
bounden Chaplain and Beadsman.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Beseech your Majesty, that I may be a Suitor unto the same, for your
Cathedral Church of Canterbury; who to their great unquietness, and also great
Charges, do alienate their Lands daily, and as it is said, by your Majesty's
Commandment. But this I am sure, that other Men have gotten their best Lands,
and not your Majesty. Wherefore this is mine only Suit, That when your
Majesty's Pleasure shall be to have any of their Lands, that they may have some
Letter from your Majesty, to declare your Majesty's Pleasure, without the which
they be sworn, that they shall make no Alienation. And that the same Alienation
be not made at other Men's pleasures, but only to your Majesty's Use. For now
every Man that list to have any of their Lands, make suit to get it into your
Majesty's Hands; not that your Majesty should keep the same, but by Sale, or
Gift from your Majesty, to translate it from your Grace's Cathedral Church unto
themselves.

T. Cantuarien.

The Draught of a Letter which the King sent to Cranmer, against some
superstitious Practices.
To the Archbishop of Canterbury.
FOrasmuch as you, as well in your own Name, as in the Name of the Bishops of
Worcester and Chichester, and other our Chaplains and Learned Men, whom We
appointed with you to peruse certain Books of Service, which We delivered unto
you, moved Us, that the Vigil, and ringing of Bells all the Night long upon
Alhallow-day at Night, and the covering of Images in the Church in the time of
Lent, with the lifting up the Veil that covers the Cross upon Palm Sunday,
with the kneeling to the Cross at the same time, might be abolished and put
away, for the Superstition, and other Enormities and Abuses of the same. First,
Forasmuch as all the Vigils of our Lady, and the Apostles, and all other
Vigils, which in the beginning of the Church were Godly used; yet for the
manifold Superstition and Abuses which after did grow, by means of the same,
they be many Years past taken away throughout all Christendom, and there
remains nothing but the name of the Vigil in the Calendar, the thing clearly
abolished and put away, saving only upon Alhallows-day at Night; upon which
Night is kept Vigil, Watching, and ringing of Bells all the Night long.
Forasmuch as that Vigil is abused as other Vigils were, Our pleasure is, as you
require, That the said Vigil shall be abolished as the other be, and that there
shall be no watching, nor ringing, but as be commonly used upon other Holy Days
at Night. We be contented and pleased also, That the Images in Churches shall
not be covered, as has been accustomed in times past; nor no Veil upon the
Cross; nor no kneeling thereto upon Palm Sunday, nor any other time. And
forasmuch as you make no mention of creeping to the Cross, which is a greater
abuse than any of the other; for there you say, Crucem tuam adoramus Domine;
and the Ordinal says, Procedant Clerici ad crucem adorandum nudis pedibus: And
after follows in the same Ordinal, Ponatur Crux ante aliquod Altar, ubi a
populo adoretur; which by your own Book, called, A Necessary Doctrine, is
against the Second Commandment. Therefore Our Pleasure is, That the said
creeping to the Cross shall likewise cease from henceforth, and be abolished,
with the other Abuses before rehearsed. And this We will, and straightly command
you, to signify unto all the Prelates and Bishops of your Province of
Canterbury, charging them, in Our Name, to see the same executed, every one in
his Diocese, accordingly.

FINIS.
A COLLECTION OF RECORDS, etc. BOOK II.
Number 1. The Proclamation of Lady Jane Grayes Title to the Crown.
JANE, by the Grace of God, Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defender of
the Faith, and of the Church of England, and also of Ireland; under Christ in
Earth the Supreme Head. To all our most Loving, Faithful, and Obedient
Subjects, and to every of them, Greeting. Whereas our most dear Cousin Edward
the 6th, late King of England, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith; and
in Earth, Supreme Head, under Christ, of the Church of England and Ireland; by
his Letters Patents, signed with his own Hand, and sealed with his Great Seal
of England, bearing date the 21st day of June, in the seventh Year of his
Reign; in the presence of the most part of his Nobles, his Counselors, Judges,
and diverse other grave and sage Personages, for the profit and surety of the
whole Realm, thereto assenting and subscribing their Names to the same, has,
by the same his Letter Patents, recited, That forasmuch as the Imperial Crown
of this Realm, by an Act made in the 35th Year of the Reign of the late King,
of worthy memory, King Henry the 8th, our Progenitor, and great Uncle, was, for
lack of Issue of his Body, lawfully begotten; and for lack of Issue of the Body
of our said late Cousin King Edward the 6th, by the same Act, limited and
appointed to remain to the Lady Mary his eldest Daughter, and to the Heirs of
her Body lawfully begotten: And for default of such Issue, the Remainder
thereof to the Lady Elizabeth, by the Name of the Lady Elizabeth his second
Daughter, and to the Heirs of her Body lawfully begotten; with such Conditions
as should be limited and appointed by the said late King of worthy memory, King
Henry the 8th, our Progenitor, our Great Uncle, by his Letters Patents under
his Great Seal, or by his last Will in writing, signed with his Hand. And
forasmuch as the said Limitation of the Imperial Crown of this Realm being
limited, as is aforesaid, to the said Lady Mary, and Lady Elizabeth, being
illegitimate, and not lawfully begotten, for that the Marriage had, between ^he
said late King, King Henry the 8th, our Progenitor, and Great Uncle, and the
Lady Katherine, Mother to the said Lady Mary; and also the Marriage had between
the said late King, King Henry the 8th, our Progenitor, and Great Uncle, and
the Lady Ann, Mother to the said Lady Elizabeth, were clearly and lawfully
undone, by Sentences of Divorce, according to the Word of God, and the
Ecclesiastical Laws; and which said several Divorcements, have been severally
ratified and confirmed by Authority of Parliament, and especially in the 28th
Year of the Reign of King Henry the 8th, our said Progenitor, and Great Uncle,
remaining in force, strength, and effect, whereby, as well the said Lady Mary,
as also the said Lady Elizabeth, to all intents and purposes, are, and been
clearly disabled, to ask, claim, or challenge the said Imperial Crown, or any
other of the Honors, Castles, Manours, Lordships, Lands, Tenements, or other
Hereditaments, as Heir or Heirs to our said late Cousin King Edward the 6th, or
as Heir or Heirs to any other Person or Persons whatsoever, as well for the
Cause before rehearsed, as also for that the said Lady Mary, and Lady
Elizabeth, were unto our said late Cousin but of the half Blood, and therefore
by the Ancient Laws, Statutes, and Customs of this Realm, be not inheritable
unto our said late Cousin, although they had been born in lawful Matrimony; as
indeed they were not, as by the said Sentences of Divorce, and the said Statute
of the 28th Year of the Reign of King Henry the 8th, our said Proge^^^or and
Great Uncle, plainly appears. And forasmuch also, as it is to be thought, or
at the least much to be doubted, that if the said Lady Mary, or Lady Elizabeth,
should hereafter have, or enjoy the said Imperial Crown of this Realm, and
should then happen to marry with any Stranger born out of this Realm, that then
the said Stranger, having the Government and Imperial Crown in his Hands, would
adhere and practice, not only to bring this Noble, Free Realm into the Tyranny
and Servitude of the Bishops of Rome, but also to have the Laws and Customs of
his or their own Native Country or Countries, to be practiced and put in ure
within this Realm, rather than the Laws, Statutes, and Customs here of long
time used; whereupon the Title of Inheritance, of all and singular the Subjects
of this Realm do depend, to the peril of Conscience, and the uttersubversion of
the Commonweal of this Realm: Whereupon our said late dear Cousin, weighing
and considering within himself, which ways and means were most convenient to be
had for the stay of the said Succession, in the said Imperial Crown, if it
should please God to call our said late Cousin out of this transitory Life,
having no Issue of his Body. And calling to his remembrance, that We, and the
Lady Katharine, and the Lady Mary, our Sisters (being the Daughters of the Lady
Frances, our natural Mother, and then, and yet, Wife to our natural and most
loving Father, Henry Duke of Suffolk; and the Lady Margaret, Daughter of the
Lady Elianor, then deceased, Sister to the said Lady Frances, and the late Wife
of our Cousin Henry Earl of Cumberland) were very nigh of his Graces Blood, of
the part of his Fathers side, our said Progenitor, and great Uncle; and being
naturally born here, within the Realm. And for the very good Opinion our said
late Cousin had of our said Sisters and Cousin Margarets good Education, did
therefore, upon good deliberation and advice herein had, and taken, by his said
Letters Patents, declare, order, assign, limit, and appoint, that if it should
fortune himself, our said late Cousin King Edward the Sixth, to decease, having
no Issue of his Body lawfully begotten, that then the said Imperial Crown of
England and Ireland, and the Confines of the same, and his Title to the Crown
of the Realm of France, and all and singular Honors, Castles, Prerogatives,
Privileges, Preheminencies, and Authorities, Jurisdictions, Dominions,
Possessions, and Hereditaments, to our said late Cousin K. Edward the Sixth, or
to the said Imperial Crown belonging, or in any wise appertaining, should, for
lack of such Issue of his Body, remain, come, and be to the eldest Son of the
Body of the said Lady Frances, lawfully begotten, being born into the World in
his Lifetime, and to the Heirs Males of the Body of such eldest Son lawfully
begotten; and so from Son to Son, as he should be of vicinity of Birth of the
Body of the said Lady Frances, lawfully begotten, being born into the World in
our said late Cousins Lifetime, and to the Heirs Male of the Body of every
such Son lawfully begotten. And for default of such Son born into the World in
his lifetime, of the Body of the said Lady Frances, lawfully begotten; and for
lack of Heirs Males of every such Son lawfully begotten, that then the said
Imperial Crown, and all and singular other the Premises, should remain, come,
and be to us, by the Name of the Lady Jane, eldest Daughter of the said Lady
Frances, and to the Heirs Males of our Body lawfully begotten; and for lack of
such Issue, then to the Lady Katherine aforesaid, our said second Sister, and
the Heirs Male of her Body lawfully begotten, with diverse other Remainders, as
by the same Letters Patents more plainly and at large it may and does appear.
Sithence the making of our Letters Patents, that is to say, on Thursday, which
was the 6th day of this instant Month of July, it has pleased God to call unto
his infinite Mercy, our said most dear and entirely beloved Cousin, Edward the
Sixth, whose Soul God pardon; and forasmuch as he is now deceased, having no
Heirs of his Body begotten; and that also there remains at this present time
no Heirs lawfully begotten, of the Body of our said Progenitor, and great
Uncle, King Henry the Eighth; And forasmuch also as the said Lady Frances, our
said Mother, had no Issue Male begotten of her Body, and born into the World,
in the lifetime of our said Cousin King Edward the Sixth, so as the said
Imperial Crown, and other the Premises to the same belonging, or in any wise
appertaining, now be, and remain to us, in our Actual and Royal Possession, by
Authority of the said Letters Patents: We do therefore by these Presents
signify, unto all our most loving, faithful, and obedient Subjects, That
like-as we for our part shall, by God's Grace, show our Self a most gracious
and benign Sovereign Queen and Lady to all our good Subjects, in all their just
and lawful Suits and Causes; and to the uttermost of our Power, shall preserve
and maintain God's most Holy Word, Christian Policy, and the good Laws,
Customs, and Liberties of these our Realms and Dominions: so we mistrust not,
but they, and every of them, will again, for their parts, at all Times, and in
all Cases, show themselves unto Us, their natural Liege Queen and Lady, most
faithful, loving, and obedient Subjects, according to their bounden Duties and
Allegiance, whereby they shall please God, and do the things that shall tend to
their own preservation and sureties; willing and commanding all Men, of all
Estates, Degrees, and Conditions, to see our Peace and accord kept, and to be
obedient to our Laws, as they tender our Favor, and will answer for the
contrary at their extreme Perils. In witness whereof we have caused these our
Letters to be made Patents. Witness our Self, at our Tower of London, the tenth
day of July, in the first Year of our Reign.

God save the Queen.
Number 2. A Letter sent by Queen Katherine, to the Lady Mary her Daughter.
Ex MS. Norfolcianis in Col. Cresham.
DAughter, I heard such tidings this day, that I do perceive (if it be true) the
time is near that Almighty God will provide for you, and I am very glad of it,
for I trust that he does handle you with a good Love; I beseech you agree to
his Pleasure with a merry Heart, and be you sure, that without fail he will not
suffer you to perish, if you beware to offend him. I pray God, you good
Daughter, to offer your self to him; if any pangs come to you, shrive your
self, first make your self clean; take heed of his Commandments, and keep them
as near as he will give you Grace to do, for then are you sure armed. And if
this Lady do come to you, as it is spoken, if she do bring you a Letter from
the King, I am sure, in the self-same Letter, you shall be commanded what you
shall do. Answer you with few words, obeying the King your Father in every
thing, save only that you will not offend God, and lose your Soul, and go no
further with Learning and Disputation in the Matter; and wheresoever, and in
whatsoever Company you shall come, obey the King's Commandments, speak few
words, and meddle nothing. I will send you two Books in Latin, one shall be, de
Vita Christi, with the Declaration of the Gospels; and the other, the Epistles
of St. Hierome, that he did write always to Paula and Eustochium, and in them
trust you shall see good things. And sometimes, for your Recreation, use your
Virginals, or Lute, if you have any. But one thing specially I desire you, for
the love that you owe unto God and unto me, to keep your Heart with a chaste
Mind, and your Body from all ill and wanton Company, not thinking nor desiring
any Husband, for Christ's Passion; neither determine your self to any manner of
living, until this troublesome time be past, for I dare make you sure, that you
shall see a very good end, and better than you can desire. I would God, good
Daughter, that you did know with how good a Heart I do write this Letter unto
you: I never did one with a better, for I perceive very well, that God loves
you, I beseech him of his goodness to continue it: And if it shall fortune that
you shall have no Body to be with you of your Acquaintance, I think it best you
keep your Keys your self, for whosoever it is, so shall be done as shall please
them. And now you shall begin, and by likelihood I shall follow, I set not a
rush by it, for when they have done the uttermost they can, then I am sure of
the amendment. I pray you recommend me unto my good Lady of Salisbury, and pray
her to have a good Heart, for we never come to the Kingdom of Heaven, but by
Troubles. Daughter, wheresoever you become, take no pain to send to me, for if
I may I will send to you.

By your loving Mother, Katherine the Queen.

Number 3. A humble Submission made by Queen Mary to her Father. Anno 1536. An
Original.
MOst humbly prostrate before the Feet of your most excellent Majesty, your
most humble, faithful, and obedient Subject, Cotton Libr. Otho. C. 20.
which has so extremely offended your most gracious Highness, that mine heavy
and fearful Heart dare not presume to call you Father, nor your Majesty has
any cause by my deserts, saving the benignity of your most blessed Nature, does
surmount all Evils, Offenses, and Trespasses, and is ever merciful and ready to
accept the Penitent, calling for Grace in any convenient time. Having received,
this Thursday at Night, certain Letters from Mr. Secretary, as well advising me
to make my humble submission immediately to your Self; which because I durst
not, without your gracious License, presume to do before, I lately sent unto
him; as signifying that your most merciful Heart, and fatherly Pity, had
granted me your Blessing, with condition, that I should persevere in that I had
commenced and begun, and that I should not eft-soons offend your Majesty by the
denial or refusal of any such Articles and Commandments, as it may please your
Highness to address unto me, for the perfect trial of my Heart and inward
Affection. For the perfect declaration of the bottom of my Heart and Stomach.

First, I acknowledge my self to have most unkindly and unnaturally offended
your most excellent Highness, in that I have not submitted my self to your most
just and virtuous Laws. And for mine Offenses therein, which I must confess
were in me a thousand fold more grievous than they could be in any other living
Creature, I put my self wholly and entirely to your gracious Mercy, at whose
hand I cannot receive that punishment for the same that I have deserved.

Secondly, To open mine Heart to your Grace, in these things which I have
heretofore refused to condescend unto, and have now written with mine own hand,
sending the same to your Highness herewith, I shall never beseech your Grace to
have pity and compassion of me, if ever you shall perceive that I shall privily
or apertly vary or alter from one piece of that I have written and subscribed,
or refuse to confirm, ratify, or declare the same, where your Majesty shall
appoint me.

Thirdly, As I have, and shall, knowing your excellent Learning, Virtue,
Wisdom, and Knowledge, put my Soul into your direction; and by the same has,
and will in all things from henceforth direct my Conscience, so my Body I do
wholly commit to your Mercy, and fatherly Pity, desiring no State, no
Condition, nor no meaner degree of living, but such as your Grace shall appoint
me: knowledging and confessing, That my State cannot be so vile, as either the
extremity of Justice would appoint unto me, or as mine Offenses have required
or deserved.

And whatsoever your Grace shall command me to do, touching any of these
Points, either for things past, present, or to come, I shall as gladly do the
same, as your Majesty shall command me. Most humbly therefore beseeching your
Mercy, most gracious Sovereign Lord and Benign Father, to have pity and
compassion of your miserable and sorrowful Child, and with the abundance of
your inestimable Goodness, so to overcome mine Iniquity toward God, Your
Grace, and Your whole Realm, as I may feel some sensible Token of
Reconciliation, which, God is my Judge, I only desire, without other respect. To
whom I shall daily pray for the preservation of Your Highness, with the Queens
Grace, and that it may please him to send You Issue.

From Hunsdon, this Thursday, at eleven of the Clock at Night. Your Graces most
humble and obedient Daughter and Handmaid, MARY.

Number 4. Another of the same strain confirming the former. An Original.
MOst humbly, obediently, and gladly, Cotton Libr. Otho. C. 20.
lying at the Feet of Your most Excellent Majesty, my most dear and benign
Father, and Sovereign Lord, I have this day perceived Your gracious Clemency,
and merciful Pity, to have overcome my most unkind and unnatural Proceedings
toward You, and Your most Just and Virtuous Laws. The great and inestimable
Joy whereof, I cannot express, nor have any thing worthy to be again presented
to Your Majesty for the same Your fatherly Pity extended toward me, most
ingrately on my part abandoned, as much as in me lie, but my poor Heart, which
I send unto Your Highness to remain in Your Hand, to be for ever used,
directed, and framed, whiles God shall suffer life to remain in it at Your only
pleasure, most humbly beseeching Your Grace to accept and receive the same;
being all that I have to offer, which shall never alter, vary, or change, from
that Confession and Submission which I have made unto Your Highness, in the
presence of Your Council, and other attending upon the same; for whose
preservation, with my most gracious Mother the Queen, I shall daily pray to
God, whom eft-soons I beseech to send You Issue, to his Honor, and the Comfort
of Your whole Realm.

From Hounsdon, the 26th day of June. Your Grace's most humble and obedient
Daughter and Handmaid, MARY.

Number 5. Another Letter written to her Father to the same purpose. An
Original.
Cotton Libr. Otho. C. 20.
MY bounden Duty most humbly remembered to Your most Excellent Majesty: Whereas I
am unable and insufficient to render and express to Your Highness those most
hearty and humble thanks for Your gracious Mercy and fatherly. Pity,
surmounting mine Offenses at this time extended toward me, I shall prostrate
at Your most noble Feet, humbly and with the very bottom of my Stomach, beseech
your Grace to repute that in me, which in my poor Heart remaining in Your most
noble Hand, I have conceived and professed toward Your Grace, whiles the
Breath shall remain in my Body; that is, that as I am now in such merciful sort
recovered, being more than almost lost with mine own Folly, that Your Majesty
may as well accept me justly Your bounden Slave by Redemption, as Your most
humble, faithful, and obedient Child and Subject, by the course of Nature
planted in this Your most noble Realm; so shall I for ever persevere and
continue toward Your Highness, in such uniformity and due obedience, as I
doubt not, but with the help of God, Your Grace shall see and perceive a will
and intent in me, to redouble again that has been amiss on my behalf,
conformably to such Words and Writings as I have spoken and sent unto Your
Highness, from the which I will never vary during my Life, trusting that Your
Grace has conceived that Opinion of me, which to remember is mine only
comfort. And thus I beseech our Lord to preserve Your Grace in Health, with my
very natural Mother the Queen, and to send you shortly Issue, which I shall as
gladly and willingly serve with my Hands under their Feet, as ever did poor
Subject their most Gracious Sovereign.

From Hunsdon, the 8th day of July. Your Grace's most humble and obedient
Daughter and Handmaid, MARY.

Number 6. A Letter written by her to Cromwell, containing a full Submission to
the King's Pleasure, in all the Points of Religion. An Original.
GOod Mr. Secretary, how much am I bound unto you, Cotton Libr. Otho. C. 10.
which have not only traveled, when I was almost drowned in folly, to recover
me, before I sunk, and was utterly past recovery, and so to present me to the
face of Grace and Mercy; but also desisteth not sithence, with your good and
wholesome Counsels, so to arm me from any relapse, that I cannot, unless I were
too wilful and obstinate, (whereof now there is no spark in me) fall again into
any danger. But leaving the recital of your Goodness apart, which I cannot
recount; For answer to the Particularities of your Credence, sent by my Friend
Mr. Wriothsley. First, Concerning the Princess, (so I think I must call her
yet, for I would be loath to offend) I offered, at her entry to that Name and
Honor, to call her Sister; but it was refused, unless I would also add the
other Title unto it; which I denied not then more obstinately, than I am now
sorry for it, for that I did therein offend my most gracious Father, and his
just Laws. And now that you think it meet, I shall never call her by other Name
than Sister. Touching the nomination of such Women as I would have about me;
surely, Mr. Secretary, what Men or Women soever the King's Highness shall
appoint to wait on me, without exception, shall be to me right-heartily, and
without respect, welcome; albeit, to express my mind to you, whom I think
worthy to be accepted for their faithful Service done to the King's Majesty,
and to me, sithence they came into my Company, I promise you, on my Faith,
Margaret Baynton, and Susanna Clarencieux, have, in every condition, used
themselves as faithfully, painfully, and diligently, as ever did Women in such
a case; as sorry when I was not so conformable as became me, as glad when I
inclined any thing to my Duty as could be devised. One other there is that was
sometime my Maid, whom, for her Virtue, I love, and could be glad to have in my
Company, that is, Mary Brown, and here be all that I will recommend; and yet my
estimation of this shall be measured at the King's Highness, my most merciful
Father's pleasure and appointment, as Reason is.

For mine Opinion touching Pilgrimages, Purgatory, Relics, and suchlike, I
assure you I have none at all, but such as I shall receive from him that has
mine whole Heart in keeping, that is, the King's most gracious Highness, my
most benign Father, who shall imprint in the same touching these Matters, and
all other, what his inestimable Virtue, high Wisdom, and excellent Learning,
shall think convenient, and limit unto me; to whose presence I pray God I may
once come e're I die, for every Day is a Year till I may have the fruition of
it. Beseeching you, good Mr. Secretary, to continue mine humble suit for the
same, and for all other things whatsoever they be, to repute my Heart so firmly
knit to his pleasure, that I can by no means vary from the direction and
appointment of the same. And thus most heartily fare you well. From Hunsdon,
this Friday, at ten of the Clock at Night.

Your assured loving Friend, during my Life, MARY.

Number 7. A Letter of Bonners, upon his being restored to his Bishopric. An
Original.
To my most loving and dearly beloved Friends, my Cousin Thomas Shirley, the
Worshipful Richard Leekmore, and Roger Leekmore his Brother.
IN most hearty wise I commend me unto you, asserting, that Yesterday I was, by
Sentence, restored again to my Bishopric, and reposed in the same, even as
fully as I was at any time before I was deprived; and by the said Sentence, my
Usurper, Dr. Ridley, is utterly repulsed; so that I would ye did order all
things at Kidmerly and Bushley at your pleasures, not suffering Sheeps-head, or
Ships-side, to be any medler there, or to sell or carry away any thing from
thence; and I trust, at your coming up now at the Parliament, I shall so handle
both the said Sheeps-heads, and the other Calves-heads, that they shall
perceive their sweet shall not be without sour Sauce. This day is looked that
Mr. Canterbury must be placed where is meet for him; He is become very humble
and ready to submit himself in all things, but that will not serve; in the same
predicament is Dr. Smith, my Friend, and the Dean of Paul's, with others.
Commend me to your Bed-fellows most heartily, and remember the Liquor that I
wrote to you for; this Bearer shall declare the rest, and also put you in
remembrance for Beeves and Muttons for my House-fare. And thus our blessed Lord
long and well keep you all.

Written in haste, this 6th of September. Assuredly all your own, Edmond London.

Number 8. A Manifesto set out by Cranmer, declaring his readiness to maintain
the Reformation in a public Dispute. Purgatio Reverendissimi in Christo Patris
ac Domini D. Thomae Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis, adversus infames sed vanos
rumores a quibusdam sparsos, de missa restituta Cantuariae.
QUanquam Satan, vetus Christi hostis, mendax ipse atque From the Copy printed
that Year.
mendacii parens, nullis unquam temporibus abstinuit suis armandis mancipiis
and membris adversus Christum and veram ipsius Religionem, variis subinde
excogitatis mendaciis: idem tamen his nostris temporibus agit sane perquam
sedulo. Nam cum Rex Hen. 8. Princeps illustrissimae memoriae deprehensis
erroribus atque infandis abusibus Latinae Missae, ipsam aliquousque caepisset
corrigere, deindeque filius qui proxime secutus est supremus Dominus noster Rex
Edwardus 6. non ferens hos tantos, tamque manifestos errores atque abusus omnes
poenitus sustulisset, restituta Sacros. Christi caena and plane ad ipsius
institutum atque Apostolorum and Ecclesiae Primitivae exemplum; Diabolus contra
tentavit nuper si posset, rursum ejecta dominica caena, Latinam ac
Satisfactoriam Missam (suum ipsius inventum and institutum scilicet) rursum
hominibus nostris obtrudere. Atque id quo facilius posset effici, ausi sunt
quidam abuti nomine nostro Thomae Cantuarien. Archiepiscopi, spargentes in
vulgum Missam meo jussu Cantuariae restitutam, meque adeo cantaturum fuisse
Missam in funere nuper Principis nostri summi Edwardi 6. Regis, imo idem quoque
facturum recepisse coram Majestate Reginea, and ad Paulum, and nescio ubi
praeterea.

Porro tametsi jam 20. ab hinc annis multos ejusmodi rumores de me vanos and
falsos pertulerim, utcunque fortiter and modeste, nunquam data hactenus
significatione ulla commoti animi ob res ejusmodi; Attamen si quando in fraudem
atque injuriam veritatis Dei talia jactarentur, haud quaquam diutius perferri
posse judico. Quae res me impulit, ut scripto hoc testatum universo orbi
facerem nunquam me autore Missam Cantuariae cantatam, sed vanum quendam
adulatorem, mendacem atque Thortoneus. Suffraganeus Dovorensis.
hypocritam Monachum, me nec consultore, neque conscio ibidem hoc ausum fuisse:
Dominus illi reddat in die illo. Quod porro meipsum obtulerim ad legendam
Missam coram Majestate Reginea aut usquam alibi, quam id vanum sit satis novit
ipsius Majestas; A qua si potestatem impetro, palam omnibus faciam, contraque
omnes diversum putantes probabo, omnia, quae in Communione (quam restituit
innocentissimus idemque optimus Princeps Rex Edwardus 6. in Comitiis Regni)
leguntur, respondere institutioni Christi atque Apostolorum and Primitivae
Ecclesiae exemplo, multis annis observato. Missam contra in plurimis non tantum
hoc fundamento carere Christi and Apostolorum and Primitivae Ecclesiae, sed imo
adversari prorsus atque ex diametro pugnare, undiquaque erroribus atque
abusibus refertissimam. Quamvis autem a nonnullis imperitis and malevolis
Dicatur D. Petrus Martyr indoctus, si tamen nobis hanc libertatem det Majestas
Reginea, ego cum Petro Martyr atque aliis quatuor, aut quinque, quos mihi
delegero, favente Deo confido, nos idem omnibus approbaturos, non solum preces
communes Ecclesiasticas, Administrationem Sacram, cum caeteris Ritibus and
Ceremoniis; Verum Doctrinam quoque universam, ac religionis ordinem constitutum
a supremo nostro Domino Rege Edwardo sexto, puriora haec esse and Verbo Dei
magis consentanea, quam quidquid mill retro annis in Anglia usurpatum novimus.
Tantummodo judicentur omnis per Verbum Dei, ac describantur partis utriusque
argumenta, quo primum possit orbis Universus ea examinare and Judicare, deinde
nequeat pars ulla dicta factave sic descripta inficiari.

Quoniam vero gloriantur illi and jactant Ecclesiae fidem quae fuit 1500.
abhinc annis, nos hac quoque in part cum illis periclitari audebimus, quod
eadem doctrina atque idem ordo ab omnibus servari debeat, qui fuit illo saeculo
ante Annos 1500. ac praeterea docebimus argumentis firmis, totam rationem
cultus divini Ecclesiastici, quae nunc in hoc Regno servatur, Autoritate
Comitiorum eandem esse, atque illam ipsam quae fuit ante Annos 1500. id quod
alii de suis nunquam probaverint.

FINIS.
Lecta public in vico Mercatorum ab amico qui clam Autographum surripuerat 5.
September. Anno Dom. 1553.
Number 9. The Conclusion of Cardinal Pool's Instructions to Mr. Goldwell, sent
by him to the Queen. An Original.
Cotton Libr. Titus B. 2.
FOr the conclusion of all that is comprised in your Instruction, as that the
which contains the whole Sum of my poor Advice and Counsel, it pleases her
Grace to ask of me, you shall say, That my most humble desire is, that in all
deliberation her Grace shall make touching the maintenance of her State, the
same will ever well ponder and consider, what the Providence of God has showed
therein, above that which has been showed in her Predecessors, Kings of this
Realm, in this one Point; which is to have the Crown, not only as a King's
Daughter and Heir, but has ordered, that this Point of right Inheritance shall
depend as it does, of the Authority he has given to his Church, and of the Sea
of Rome, which is the Sea Apostolic, approving her Mother to be Legitimate
Wife of King Henry the Eighth; whereby she is bound, before God and Man, as she
will show her self the very Daughter of the said King Henry the Eighth, right
Heir of the Crown; so also to show her self right Daughter of the Church, and
of them that be resident in the Sea Apostolic, who be the right Heirs of
Peter; to whom, and his Successors, Christ chief Head of the Church in Heaven,
and in Earth, has given in Earth to bear his Place, touching the Rule of the
same Church, and to have the Crown thereof; which well considered and pondered,
her Grace shall soon see how in her Person, the Providence of God has joined
the Right she has by her Father in the Realm, with the Right of the Church,
that she cannot prevail by the one, except she join the other withal; and they
that will separate these two, take away not only half her Right, but her whole
Right, being not so much Heir, because she is King Henry's only Daughter,
without Issue Male, as she is his lawful Daughter, which she has by the
Authority of the Church.

Which thing, prudently and godly considered, she cannot but see what faithful
counsel this is, That above all Acts that in this Parliament shall be made,
does advertise her Grace to establish that, the which pertains to the
establishing of the Authority of the Church, and the Sea of the same; what
rendering to him that is right Successor to Peter therein, his right Title of
Head in the Church in Earth, without the which she cannot be right Head in the
Realm; and this established, all Controversy is taken away; and who will repine
unto this, he does repine unto her right of the Crown.

Wherefore this is my first Advice, That this Point, above all other, should be
entreated and enacted in the Parliament; and so, I know her Graces full mind
was, and is, that it should be: But she fears Difficulties, and hereupon
depends, that her Grace asks my poor Advice, how these Difficulties may be
taken away.

Unto this you may say, That they must be taken, away by the help of him, that
by his high Providence, above Man's expectance, has given her already the
Crown. Which will have as well this second Act known, of the maintenance
thereof to depend of him, as the first in attaining thereto. And to have his
help, the mean is by humble Prayer, wherein I would advertise her Highness, not
only to give her self to Prayer, but also, by Alms to the needy, excitate the
Minds of others to Prayer; these be the means of most efficacy; and with this,
to take that ardent Mind, to establish the Authority of the Church, casting
away all fear of Man, that she to be to have her Crown, and not so much for her
own sake, as for the Honor of God which gave her the Crown. And if any
Difficulty should be feared in the Parliament herein, leave the honor, to take
away the difficulty thereof, to none other, but assume that person to her self,
as most bound thereto; and to propone that her self, which I would trust to be
of that efficacy, that if inwardly any Man will repugn outwardly, the Reasons
be so evident for this part, that joined with the Authority of her Person,
being proponent, none will be so hardy, temerarious, nor impious, that will
resist. And if in this deliberation it should seem strange to put forth these
Matters in the Parliament, as I have said in the Instructions, without
communicating the same with any of her Council, I would think it well her Grace
might confer it with two of the chiefest that be counted of the People most
near her favor, one Spiritual, and another Temporal; with declaring to them,
first, how touching her Conscience before God, and her Right before the World,
she can never be quiet until this Matter be stablished touching the Authority
of the Church, requiring their uttermost help in that, as if she should fight
for the Crown, her Majesty may be sure, she putting the same forth with that
earnest manner, they will not lack to serve her; and they may serve quietly in
the Parliament, after her Grace has spoken to prosecute and justify the same,
with efficacy of words, to give all others example to follow her Grace; leaving
this part unto them, That if the Name of Obedience to the Pope should seem to
bring, as it were, a Yoke to the Realm, or any other kind of servitude beside,
that it should be profitable to the Realm, both before God and Man, that her
Grace that brings it in again, will never suffer it, nor the Pope himself
requires no such thing. And herein also, that they say, That my Person being
the Mean to bring it in, would never agree to be an Instrument thereof, if I
thought any thraldom should come thereby, they shall never be deceived of me.
And if they would say beside, I would never have taken this Enterprise upon me,
except I thought by the same to bring great Comfort to the Country; wherein the
Pope's Authority being accepted, I would trust, should be so used, that it
might be an Example of Comfort, not only to that Country, but to all other that
has rejected it before, and for that cause has been ever since in great misery.

This is the sum of all my poor Advice at this time in this Case; whereof I
beseech Almighty God so much may take effect, as shall be to his Honor, and
Wealth to her Grace, and the whole Realm besides. Amen.

Number 10. A Copy of a Letter, with Articles sent from the Queens Majesty unto
the Bishop of London; and by him and his Officers, at her gracious Commandment,
to be put in speedy execution with effect in the whole Diocese, as well in
places exempt, as not exempt whatsoever, according to the Tenor and Form of
the same.
Sent by the Queen's Majesty's Commandment, in the Month of March, Anno Dom.
1553. By the QUEEN.
RIght Reverend Father in God, Right trusty and well-beloved, We greet you
well. And whereas heretofore, in the time of the late Reign of Our most dearest
Brother, King Edward the Sixth, (whose Soul God pardon) diverse notable Crimes,
Excesses, and Faults, with diverse kinds of Heresies, Simony, Advoutry, and
other Enormities, have been committed within this our Realm, and other our
Dominions; the same continuing yet hitherto in like disorder, since the
beginning of our Reign, without any correction or reformation at all; and the
People, both of the Laity and Clery, and chiefly of the Clergy, have been given
to much insolence and ungodliness, greatly to the displeasure of Almighty God,
and very much to Our regret and evil contentation, and to the slander of other
Christian Realms, and in a manner, to the subversion and clear defaceing of
this our Realm. And remembering our Duty to Almighty God, to be to foresee, as
much as in Us may be, that all Virtue and Godly Living, should be embraced,
flourish, and increase. And therewith also, that all vice and ungodly
behavior, should be utterly banished and put away; or at the least wise, so
nigh as might be, so bridled and kept under, that Godliness and Honesty might
have the over-hand: understanding, by very credible report, and public fame,
to Our no small heaviness and discomfort, that within your Diocese, as well in
not exempted as in exempted Places, the like disorder and evil behavior has
been done and used; like also to continue and increase, unless due provision be
had and made to reform the same, (which earnestly in very deed We do mind and
intend) to the uttermost all the ways We can possible, trusting of God's
furtherance and help in that behalf. For these Causes, and other most just
Considerations us moving, We send unto you certain Articles of such special
Matter, as among other things be most special and necessary to be now put in
execution by you and your Officers, extending to them by Us desired, and the
Reformation aforesaid; wherein ye shall be charged with Our special
Commandments, by these our Letters, to the intent you and your Officers may the
more earnestly and boldly proceed thereunto, without fear of any presumption to
be noted on your part, or danger to be incurred of any such our Laws, as by
your doings, of that is in the said Articles contained, might any wise grieve
you, whatsoever be threatened in any such Case; and therefore we straightly charge
and command you, and your said Officers, to proceed to the execution of the
said Articles, without all tract and delay, as ye will answer to the contrary.
Given under our Hand, at our Palace of Westminster, the 4th day of March, the
first Year of our Reign.

ARTICLES.
1. THat every Bishop, and his Officers, with all other having Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, shall, with all speed and diligence, and all manner and ways to
them possible, put in execution all such Canons and Ecclesiastical Laws,
heretofore in the time of King Henry the 8th used, within this Realm of
England, and the Dominions of the same, not being direct and expressly contrary
to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm.

2. Item. That no Bishop, or any his Officer, or other Person aforesaid
hereafter, in any of their Ecclesiastical Writings in Process, or other
extra-judicial Acts, do use to put in this Clause or Sentence; Regia
Auctoritate fulcitus.

3. Item. That no Bishop, or any his Officers, or other Person aforesaid, do
hereafter exact or demand in the admission of any Person to any Ecclesiastical
Promotion, Orders, or Office, any Oath touching the Primacy, or Succession, as
of late in few Years passed has been accustomed and used.

4. Item. That every Bishop, and his Officers, with all other Persons
aforesaid, have a vigilant eye, and use special diligence and foresight, that
no Person be admitted or received to any Ecclesiastical Function, Benefit, or
Office, being a Sacramentary, infected or defamed with any notable kind of
Heresy, or other great Crime; and that the said Bishop do stay, and cause to be
stayed, as much as lies in him, that Benefices, and Ecclesiastical Promotions,
do not notably decay, or take hinderance, by passing or confirming of
unreasonable Leases.

5. Item. That every Bishop, and all other Persons aforesaid, do diligently
travel for the repressing of Heresies, and notable Crimes, especially in the
Clergy, duly correcting and punishing the same.

6. Item. That every Bishop, and all other Persons aforesaid, do likewise
travel for the condemning and repressing of corrupt and naughty Opinions,
unlawful Books, Ballads, and other pernicious and hurtful devices, engendring
hatred among the People, and discord amongst the same: And that Schoolmasters,
Preachers, and Teachers, do exercise and used their Offices and Duties, without
Teaching, Preaching, or setting forth any evil corrupt Doctrine; and that doing
the contrary, they may be, by the Bishop and his said Officers, punished and
removed.

7. Item. That every Bishop, and all the other Persons aforesaid, proceeding
summarily, and with all celerity and speed, may and shall deprive, or declare
deprived, and amove, according to their learning and discretion, all such
Persons from their Benefices and Ecclesiastical Promotions, who contrary to the
state of their Order, and the laudable Custom of the Church, have married, and
used Women as their Wives, or otherwise, notably and slanderously disordered or
abused themselves; sequestring also, during the said Process, the Fruits and
Profits of the said Benefits, and Ecclesiastical Promotions.

8. Item. That the said Bishop, and all other Persons aforesaid, do use more
lenity and clemency with such as have married, whose Wives be dead, than with
other, whose Women do yet remain in Life. And likewise such Priests, as with
the consents of their Wives, or Women, openly, in the presence of the Bishop,
do profess to abstain, to be used the more favorably; in which Case, after
Penance effectually done, the Bishop, according to his discretion and wisdom,
may, upon just consideration, receive, and admit them again to their former
Administration, so it be not in the same Place, appointing them such a Portion
to live upon, to be paid out of their Benefice, whereof they be deprived, by
discretion of the said Bishop, or his Officers, shall think may be spared of
the said Benefice.

9. Item. That every Bishop, and all Persons aforesaid, do foresee, That they
suffer not any Religious Man, having solemnly professed Chastity, to continue
with his Woman, or Wife: but that all such Persons, after deprivation of their
Benefice, or Ecclesiastical Promotion, be also divorced, every one from his
said Woman, and due punishment otherwise taken for the Offense therein.

10. Item. That every Bishop, and all other Persons aforesaid, do take Order
and Direction, with the Parishoners of every Benefice, where Priests do want,
to repair to the next Parish for Divine Service; or to appoint, for a
convenient time, till other better Provision may be made, one Curat to serve
Alternis Vicibus, in diverse Parishes; and to allot to the said Curat, for his
Labor, some portion of the Benefice that he so serves.

11. Item. That all and all manner of Processions of the Church, be used,
frequented, and continued, after the old Order of the Church, in the Latin
Tongue.

12. Item. That all such Holy Days and Fasting-days, be observed and kept, as
was observed and kept in the late time of King Henry the Eighth.

13. Item. That the laudable and honest Ceremonies which were wont to be used,
frequented, and observed in the Church, be also hereafter frequented, used, and
observed.

14. Item. That Children be Christened by the Priest, and confirmed by the
Bishops, as heretofore has been accustomed and used.

15. Item. Touching such Persons as were heretofore promoted to any Orders,
after the new sort and fashion of Orders, considering they were not ordered in
very deed, the Bishop of the Diocese finding otherwise sufficiency and ability
in those Men, may supply that thing which wanted in them before, and then,
according to his discretion, admit them to minister.

16. Item. That by the Bishop of the Diocese, an Uniform Doctrine be set forth
by Homilies, or otherwise, for the good instruction and teaching of all People;
and that the said Bishop, and other Persons aforesaid, do compel the
Parishoners to come to their several Churches, and there devoutly to hear
Divine Service, as of reason they ought.

17. Item. That they examine all Schoolmasters and Teachers of Children, and
finding them suspect in any ways to remove them, and place Catholic Men in
their Rooms, with a special Commandment to instruct their Children, so as they
may be able to answer the Priest at the Mass, and so help the Priest to Mass as
has been accustomed.

18. Item. That the said Bishop, and all Persons aforesaid, have such regard,
respect, and consideration of and for the setting forth of the Premises, with
all kind of Virtue, godly Living, and good Example, with repressing also, and
keeping under of Vice and Unthriftiness, as they, and every each of them may be
seen to favor the Restitution of true Religion; and also to make an honest
account and reckoning of their Office and Cure, to the Honor of God, our good
contentation, and the profit of this Realm, and Dominions of the same.

Number 11. A Commission to turn out some of the Reformed Bishops.
Rot. pat. prim. Mariae pars septim.
REgina Dei Gratia, etc. perdilectis and fidelibus Consiliariis suis, Stephano
Winton Episcopo, summo suo Angliae Cancellario and Cudberto Dunelmen. Episcopo,
necnon Reverend. and dilectis sibi in Christo Edmund. London. Episcopo, Roberto
Assaven. Episcopo, Georgio Cicestren. Episcopo, and Antonio Landaven. Episcopo
salutem. Quia omne animi vitium tanto conspectius in se crimen habet, quanto
qui peccat major habetur, and quoniam certis and indubitatis testimoniis, una
cum facti notoreitate and fama publica referente, luculenter intelleximus and
manifesto comperimus Robertum Archiepiscopum Ebor. Robertum Meneven. Joan.
Cestren. and Paulum Bristolen. Episcopos, aut certe pro talibus se gerentes,
Dei and animarum suarum salutis immemores, valde gravia and enormia dudum
commisisse and perpetrasse scelera atque peccata, and inter caetera quod
dolenter certe, and magna cum amaritudine animae nostrae proferimus, post
expressam professionem castitatis, express, rite and legittime emissam, cum
quibusdam mulieribus nuptias de facto, cum de jure non deberent, in Dei
contemptum and animarum suarum peccatum manifestum necnon in grave omnium
ordinum, tam Clericorum quam Laicorum scandalum; Denique caeterorum Omnium
Christi fidelium perniciosissium exemplum contraxisse and cum illis tanquam cum
Uxoribus cohabitasse. Ne igitur tantum scelus remaneat impunitum ac multos
alios pertrahat in ruinam, vobis tenore praesentium committimus and mandamus,
quatenus vos omnes, aut tres saltem vestrum qui praesentes Literas
Commissionales duxerint exequend. dictos Archiepiscopum Ebor. Episc. Meneven.
Episc. Cestren. and Episc. Bristollen. diebus horis and locis, vestro, aut
trium vestrum arbitrio, eligend. and assignand. ad comparend. coram vobis, ceu
tribus vestrum, vocetis aut vocari faciatis, vocend. aut vocari faciant, tres
vestru^ (ceu saltem): Si ita vobis aut tribus, vestrum videatur, eosdem
Archiep. and Episc. praedict. adeatis, aut tres vestrum adeant and negotio
illis summarie and de plano sine ullo strepitu and figura judicii exposito and
declarato, si per summariam examinationem and discussionem negotii per vos aut
tres vestrum fiendam eundem Archiep. and Episc. praedictos sic contraxisse, aut
fecisse constiterit; eosdem a dignitatibus suis praedictis, cum suis juribus
pertinen. Universis, omnino ammoveatis, deprivetis and perpetuo excludatis, ceu
tres vestrum sic amoveant, deprivent, perpetuo excludant: poenitentiam
salutarem and congruam pro modo culpae vestro aut trium vestrum arbitrio
imponend. eisdem injungentes, caeteraque in praedictis cum eorum incidentibus
emergentiis annexis and connexis quibuscunque, facientes quae necessaria
fuerint, ceu quomodolibet opportuna. Quae omnia and singula faciend. expediend.
and finiend. Nos tam Autoritate nostra Ordinaria, quam absoluta, ex mero motu
certaque scientia nostra, vobis and tribus vestrum potestatem, Autoritatem and
licentiam concedimus, and impertimur per praesentes cum cujuslibet coercionis
and castigationis severitate and potestate in contrarium facientes non obstant
quibuscunque, In cujus rei, etc. Apud. Westminster. 16. die Martii.

Number 12. Another Commission to turn out the rest of them.
MARY, by the Grace of God, etc. To the Right Reverend Fathers in God, our
Right trusty, and right well-beloved Counselors, Stephen Bishop of Winchester,
our Chancellor of England; Cuthbert Bishop of Duresm; Edmond Bishop of London;
Robert Bishop of St. Asaph; George Bishop of Chichester, our Almoner; and
Anthony Bishop of Landaff, Greeting. Whereas John Tailour, Doctor of Divinity,
naming himself Bishop of Lincoln; John Hooper, naming himself Bishop of
Worcester, and Gloucester; John Harley, Bishop of Hereford; having these said
several pretended Bishoprics given to them, by the Letter Patents of Our late
deceased Brother, King Edward the Sixth, to have and to hold the same during
their good behaviors, with the express Clause, (quamdiu se been gesserint)
have sithence, as has been credibly brought to Our knowledge, both by
Preaching, Teaching, and setting forth of Erroneous Doctrine, and also by
inordinate Life and Conversation, contrary both to the Laws of Almighty God,
and Use of the Universal Christian Church, declared themselves very unworthy of
that Vocation and Dignity in the Church.

We minding to have these several Cases duly heard and considered, and
thereupon such Order taken with them, as may stand with Justice, and the Laws,
have, for the special trust We have conceived of your Wisdoms, Learning, and
Integrity of Life, appointed you four, three, or two of you, to be our
Commissioners in this behalf: giving unto you four, three, or two of you, full
Power and Authority to call before you, if ye shall think so good, the said
John Tailour, John Hooper, and John Harley, and every of them. And thereupon,
either by Order of the Ecclesiastical Laws, or of the Laws of our Realm, or of
both, proceed to the declaring the said Bishoprics to be void, as they be
already indeed void. To the intent some such other meet Personages may be
elected thereunto, as for their godly Life, Learning, and Sobriety, may be
thought worthy the Places. In Witness, etc. Apud Westminster. 15 die Martii.

Number 13. Bonner's Certificate, that Bishop Scory had put away his Wife.
Regist. Bonn. Fol. 347.
EDmundus permissione Divina London. Episcopus, Universis and singulis Christi
fidelibus, ad quos praesentes literae nostrae testimoniales pervenerint; ac eis
praesertum quos infra scripta tangunt, seu tangere poterint quomodolibet in
futurum, salutem in Auctore salutis and fidem indubiam praesentibus adhibere.
Quia boni Pastoris officium tunc nos rite exequi arbitramur, cum ad exemplar
Christi errantes oves ad caulam dominici gregis reducimus, and Ecclesiae
Christi, quae redeunti gremium non claudit, restituimus: and quia dilectus
Confrater noster Joannes nuper Cicestrien. Episcopus in Dioc. and jurisdictione
nostris London. ad praesens residentiam and moram faciens; qui olim laxatis
Pudicitiae and castitatis habenis, contra Sacros Canones and Sanctorum Patrum
decreta ad illicitas and prohibitas convolavit nuptias; se ea ratione non solum
Ecclesiastic. Sacrament. pertractand. omnino indignum; verum etiam a publica
officii sui pastoralis functione privatum and suspensum reddens, transactae
licentiosae vitae valde poenitentem and deplorantem, plurimis Argumentis se
declaravit, ac pro commissis poenitentiam alias per nos sibi injunctam
salutarem, aliquo temporis tractu in cordis sui amaritudine and animi dolor
peregit, vitam hactenus degens laudabilem, spemque faciens id se in posterum
facturum atque ob id ad Ecclesiasticae ac Pastoralis Functionis statum, saltem
cum quodam temperamento, justitia exigente, reponend. hinc est quod nos
praemissa ac, humilem dicti confratris nostri petitionem pro reconciliatione
sua habenda and obtinenda considerantes, ejus precibus favorabiliter inclinati,
eundem Confratrem nostum ad publicam Ecclesiastici Ministerii and Officii sui
Pastoralis Functionem and Executionem, infra Dioc. nostram London. exercend.
quatenus de jure possumus and absque cujusque praejudicio restituimus,
rehabilitavimus and redintegravimus, prout tenore praesentium sic restituimus,
rehabilitamus, and redintegramus; Sacrosanctae Ecclesiae clementia and
Christianae Charitate id exigentibus. Vobis igitur universis and singulis
supradictis praefatum confratrem nostrum, sic ut praemittitur restitutum,
rehabilitatum and reintegratum fuisse, and esse ad omnes effectus supradictos
significamus and notificamus per praesentes sigillo nostro sigillat, Dat. in
Manerio nostro de Fulham die mensis Julii Anno Dom. 1554. and nostrae Transla.
Anno 15.

Number 14. A Letter of the Queen's, to the Justices of the Peace in Norfolk.
MARY the Queen.
TRusty and well-beloved, We greet you well.
And whereas We have heretofore signified our Pleasure, both by our
Proclamation general, and by our Letters to many of you, particularly for the
good Order and Stay of that our County of Norfolk, from Rebellions, Tumults,
and Uproars; and to have a special regard to Vagabonds, and to such as did
spread any vain Prophesies, seditious, false, or untrue Rumors, and to punish
them accordingly; We have nevertheless, to Our no small grief, sundry
Intelligences, of diverse and sundry lewd and seditious Tales, forged and spread
by certain malicious Persons, touching the Estate of our Person; with many
other vain and slanderous Reports, tending to the moving of Sedition and
Rebellion, whose Fault, and passing unpunished, seems either to be winked at,
or at least little considered, which is to Us very strange. We have therefore
thought good, eftsoons, to require and command you, to be not only more
circumspect in the good ordering of that our County, according to our Trust
conceived of you, but also to use all the best means and ways ye can, in the
diligent examining and searching out, from Man to Man, the Authors and
Publishers of these vain Prophesies, and untrue Bruits, the very foundation of
all Rebellions: and the same being found, to punish them as the quality of
their Offense shall appear to you to deserve; whereby the malicious sort may be
the more feared to attempt the like, and Our good loving Subjects live in more
quiet. And for Our better service in this behalf, We think good that ye divide
your selves unto several parts of that our County, so that every of you have
some part in charge, whereby ye may the better butt out the malicious; and yet
nevertheless to meet often together for the better conferring herein. And that
ye signify your Doings, and the state of that Shire, by your general Letters,
once every month at least, to our Privy Council. And like-as We shall consider
such of you to your advancements, whose diligence shall set forwards our
Service in this Part, so shall We have good cause to note great negligence and
fault in them that shall omit their Duty in this behalf.

Given under our Signet, at our Manor of St. James, the 23d of May, in the
first Year of our Reign.
Number 15. The Title of Bonner 's whole Book. Articles to be enquired of in
the General Visitation of Edmund Bishop of London, exercised by him in the Year
of our Lord 1554. in the City and Diocese of London; and set forth by the same,
for his own discharge toward God, and the World, to the Honor of God, and his
Catholic Church; and to the Commodity and Profit of all those, that either are
good, (which he would were all) or delights in goodness, (which he wishes to
be many) without any particular grudg or displeasure to any one, good or bad,
within this Realm; which Articles he desires all Men, of their Charity,
especially those that are of his Diocese, to take, with as good intent and mind
as the said Bishop wishes and desires, which is to the best. And the said
Bishop withal, desires all People to understand, That whatsoever Opinion, good
or bad, has been received of him, or whatsoever usage or custom has been
heretofore, his only intent and purpose, is to do his Duty charitably, and with
that love, favor, and respect, both toward God and every Christian Person,
which any Bishop should show to his Flock in any wise.
Article 1.
Whether the Clergy, to give example to Laity, have in their Living, in their
Teaching, and in their Doing, so behaved themselves, that they (in the judgment
of indifferent Persons) have declared themselves to search principally the
Honor of God and his Church, the Health of the Souls of such as are committed
to their Cure and Charge, the Quietness of their Parishioners, and the Wealth
and Honor of the King and Queen of this Realm?

Article 2.
Item. Whether your Parson, Vicar, or any other ministering as Priest within
your Parish, have been, or is married, or taken for married, not yet separated
from his Concubine, or Woman taken for Wife? Or whether the same Woman be dead,
or yet living; and being living, whether the one resorteth to the other,
openly, secretly, or slanderously, maintaining, supporting, or finding the same
in any wise to the offense of the People?

Article 3.
Item. Whether there be any Person, of what Estate, Condition, or degree he be,
that does, in open talk, or privily, defend, maintain, or uphold the Marriage
of Priests, encouraging or bolding any Person to the defense thereof?

Article 4.
Item. Whether you have your Parson or Vicar resident continually with you upon
his Benefice, doing his Duty in the serving of the Cure; and whether being able
to do, keep Hospitality upon the same, feeding his Flock with his good living,
with his teaching, and his relieving of them to his power?

Article 5.
Item. Whether your Parson, or Vicar, being absent, have a sufficient
Dispensation and License therein; and whether, in his absence, he do appoint an
honest, able, and sufficient learned Curat to supply his room and absence to
serve his Cure?

Article 6.
Item. Whether your Parson, or Vicar, by himself, or his good and sufficient
Deputy for him, do relieve such poor Parishioners; repair and maintain his
House, or Mansion, and things thereunto appertaining; and otherwise do his
Duty, as by the Order of the Law, and Custom of this Realm, he ought to do?

Article 7.
Item. Whether the said Curat, appointed in the absence of your Parson, or
Vicar, do in all Points, the best he can, to minister the Sacraments, and
Sacramentals; and other his Duty, in serving the same Cure, specially in
celebrating Divine Service at convenient hours, chiefly upon Sundays, and
Holy Days, and Procession-days, and ministering the said Sacraments, and
Sacramentals, as of Duty and Reason he ought, moving and exhorting earnestly
his Parishioners to come unto it, and devoutly to hear the same: and whether he
himself do reverently celebrate, minister, and use the same as appertains?

Article 8.
Item. Whether he the said Curat, Parson, or Vicar, have been, or is of suspect
Doctrine, erroneous Opinion, Misbelief, or evil Judgment; or do set forth,
preach, favor, aid, or maintain the same, contrary to the Catholic Faith, and
Order of this Realm?

Article 9.
Item. Whether they, or any of them, do haunt or resort to Alehouses, or
Taverns, otherwise than for his or their honest Necessity and Relief; or repair
to any Dicing-houses, common Bowling-Allies, suspect Houses, or Places; or do
haunt and use Common Games, or Plays, or behave themselves otherwise unpriestly
and unseemly?

Article 10.
Item. Whether they, or any of them, be familiar, or keep company, and be
conversant with any suspected Person of evil Conversation and Living, or
Erroneous Opinion or Doctrine, or be noted to aid, favor, and assist the same
in any wise, contrary to the good Order of this Realm, and the usage of the
Catholic Church?

Article 11.
Item. Whether there be dwelling within any your Parishes, any Priest,
Forreigner, Stranger, or other, who not presented to the Bishop of the Diocese,
or his Officers, examined and admitted by some one of them, does take upon him
to serve any Cure, or to minister any Sacraments, or Sacramentals, within the
said Parish?

Article 12.
Item. Whether there be dwelling within any your Parishes, or repairing thither
any Priest, or other, naming himself Minister, which does not come diligently
to the Church to hear the Divine Service, or Sermons there; but absenteth
himself, or discourageth others by his example, or words, to come unto the
same, expressing their Name and Surname, with sufficient knowledge of them?

Article 13.
Item. Whether there be any Married Priests, or naming themselves Ministers,
that do keep any Assemblies, or Conventicles, with suchlike as they are, in
Office or Sect, to set forth any Doctrine or Usage not allowed by the Laws, and
laudable Customs of this Realm; or whether there be any resort of any of them
to any Place, for any privy Letters, Sermons, Plays, Games, or other Devices,
not expressly in this Realm by Laws allowed?

Article 14.
Item. Whether there be any of them, which is a common Brawler, Scolder, a
sower of Discord among his Parish Churches, a Hawker, a Hunter, or spending his
time idely or unthriftily; or being a Fornicator, an Adulterer, a Drunkard, a
common Swearer or Blasphemer of God or his Saints, or an unruly or
evil-disposed Person; or that has come to his Benefice or Promotion, by
Simony, unlawful Suit, or ungodly Means, in any Ways?

Article 15.
Item. Whether they, and every each of them, to the best of their Powers, at
all times have exhorted and stirred the People to Quietness and Concord, and to
the Obedience of the King and Queens Majesty's, and their Officers, rebuking
all Sedition and Tumult, with all unlawful Assemblies, moving the People to
Charity and good Order; and charging the Fathers and Mothers, Masters and
Governors of Youth, to keep good Rule, and to instruct them in Virtue and
Goodness, to the Honor of God, and of this Realm; and to have them occupied in
some honest Art and Occupation, to get their Living thereby?

Article 16.
Item. Whether they, or any of them, do admit any Person to receive the Blessed
Sacrament of the Altar, who are openly known or suspected to be Adversaries and
Speakers against the said Sacrament, or any other Article of the Catholic
Faith; or to be a notorious evil Person in his Conversation or Doctrine; an
open Oppressor, or evil Doer to his Neighbor, not being confessed, reconciled,
and having made satisfaction in that behalf?

Article 17.
Item. Whether they, or any of them, have of their own Authority admitted and
licensed any to preach in their Cure, not being authorized and admitted
thereunto, or have denied and refused such to preach as have been lawfully
licensed: and whether they, or any of them, having authority to preach within
their Cures, does use to preach, or at the least does procure other lawful or
sufficient Persons to do the same, according to the Order of this Realm?

Article 18.
Item. Whether they, or any of them, since the Queen's Majesty's Proclamation,
has, or does use to say, or sing, the Divine Service, minister the Sacraments,
or Sacramentals, or other things, in English, contrary to the Order of this
Realm?

Article 19.
Item. Whether they, or any of them, in their Suffrages, Collects, and Prayers,
does use to pray for the King and Queen's Majesty, by the names of King Philip
and Queen Mary, according to a Letter and Commandment therein lawfully given
now of late unto them by their Ordinary?

Article 20.
Item. Whether they, and every of them, have diligently moved and exhorted
their Parishioners, how and in what manner Children should be Baptized in time
of necessity; and they the said Parishioners, reverently and devoutly to
prepare themselves to receive and use the Sacraments, especially the Sacrament
of the Altar, or to be confessed and receive at the Priest's hand, the benefit
of Absolution, according to the laudable custom of this Realm?

Article 21.
Item. Whether they, and every each of them, has diligently visited his and
their Parishioners, in the time of Sickness and Need, and ministered Sacraments
and Sacramentals to them accordingly; and whether they have exhorted and
monished them to have due respect to their Souls Health; and also to set an
Order in their Temporal Lands and Goods, declaring their Debts perfectly, and
what is owing unto them; and they so to make their Testaments, and last Wills,
that as much as may be, all trouble and business may be excluded; their Wives
and Children, with their Friends, may be helped and succored, and themselves
decently buried and prayed for; and to have an honest memory and commendations
for their so doing?

Article 22.
Item. Whether they, and every of them, have solemnized Matrimony, between and
his Parishioners, or any other Persons, the Banes not before asked, three
several Sundays, or Holy Days; or without Certificate of the said Banes, from
the Curat of any other Parish, if any of them be of another Parish: And whether
touching the Solemnization and use of this Sacrament of Matrimony, and also of
all other the Sacraments of the Church, they have kept and observed the old and
laudable Custom of the Church, without any innovation or alteration in any of
the same?

Article 23.
Item. Whether they, or every each of them, upon the Sunday at the
Service-time, does use to set forth, and to declare unto the People, all such
Holy Days, and Fasting-days, as of Godly usage and custom has heretofore
laudably been accustomed to be kept and observed in the week following and
ensuing; and whether they, and every of them does observe and keep themselves
the said Holy Days, and Fasting-days?

Article 24.
Item. Whether the Parson, or Vicar, does repair and maintain his Chancel, and
Mansion House, in sufficient reparation; and the same being in decay, whether
he does bestow yearly the fifth part of his Benefice, till such time the same
be sufficiently repaired; doing also further his Duty therein, and otherwise,
as by the Law he is charged and bound in that behalf, distributing and doing as
he is bound by the Law?

Article 25.
Item. Whether there be any Person that does serve any Cure, or minister any
Sacraments, not being Priest; or if any do take upon them to use the Room and
Office of the Parson, or Vicar, or Curat, of any Benefice or Spiritual
Promotion, receiving the Fruits thereof, not being admitted thereunto by the
Ordinary?

Article 26.
Item. Whether they, and every each of them, does go in Priestly Apparel and
Habit, having their Beards and Crowns shaven, or whether any of them does go in
Laymens Habits and Apparel, or otherwise disguise themselves, that they cannot
easily be discovered or known from Laymen?

Article 27.
Item. Whether they, or any of them, have many Promotions and Benefices
Ecclesiastical, Cures, Secular Services, Yearly Pensions, Annuities, Farms, or
other Revenues, now in Title or Possession; and what the Names of them be, and
where they lie, giving all good instruction, and perfect information therein?

Article 28.
Item. Whether such as have Churches or Chapels appropriated, or Mansions or
Houses thereto appertaining, do keep their Chancels and Houses in good and
sufficient reparations; and whether they do all things in Distributions and
Alms, or otherwise, as by Law and good Order they ought to do?

Article 29.
Item. Whether any such as were ordered Schismatically, and contrary to the old
Order and Custom of the Catholic Church, or being unlawfully and
schismatically married, after the late innovation and manner, being not yet
reconciled nor admitted by the Ordinary, have celebrated or said, either Mass
or Divine Service, within any Cure or Place of this City or Diocese?

Article 30.
Item. Whether any Parson, or Vicar, or other, having Ecclesiastical Promotion,
does set out the same to Farm, without consent, knowledge, and license of his
Ordinary, especially for an unreasonable number of Years, or with such
Conditions, Qualities, or Manners, that the same is to the great prejudice of
the Church, and the incumbent of the same, and especially of him that shall
succeed therein?

Article 31.
Item. Whether there be any Parson or Vicar, Curat or Priest, that occupies
buying and selling as a Merchant, or occupies Usury, or lays out his Money
for filthy Lucres-sake and Gain, to the slander of the Priesthood?

Article 32.
Item. Whether they, or any of them, do wear Swords, Daggers, or other Weapons,
in times or places not convenient or seemly?

Article 33.
Item. Whether any Priest, or Ecclesiastical Person, have reiterated or renewed
Baptism, which was lawfully done before, or invented or followed any new
Fashion or Forms, contrary to the Order of the Catholic Church?

Article 34.
Item. Whether the Parson, Vicar, or Curat, do (according to the Law) every
quarter in the Year, upon one solemn Day, or more, that is to wit, upon the
Sunday, or Solemn Feast (when the Parishioners, by the Order of the Church do
come together) expound and declare by himself, or some other sufficient Person,
unto the People, in the Vulgar, or Common Tongue, plainly, truly, and
fruitfully, the Articles of the Catholic Faith, the Ten Commandments expressed
in the Old Law, the Two Commandments of the Gospel, or New Law; that is, of
earnest Love to God, and to our Neighbor; the seven Works of Mercy; the seven
deadly Sins, with their Offspring, Progeny, and Issue; the seven principal
Virtues, and the seven Sacraments of the Church?

Article 35.
Item. Whether that every Priest, having Cure, do admonish the Women, that are
with Child, within his Cure, to come to Confession, and to receive the
Sacrament, especially when their time draws nigh, and to have Water in
readiness to christen the Child, if necessity so require it?

Article 36.
Item. Whether Stipendiary Priests do behave themselves discreetly and
honestly, in all Points, toward their Parson, or Vicar, giving an Oath, and
doing according to the Law, and Ecclesiastical Constitutions, Ordinances, and
laudable Customs in that behalf?

Article 37.
Item. Whether any Parson, Vicar, or other, having any Ecclesiastical
Promotion, have made any alienation of any thing pertaining to their Church,
Benefice, or Promotion; what it is, and what warrant they had so to do.

Number 16. An Address made by the Lower House of Convocation, to the Upper
House.
Ex MS. Col. Cor. C. Cant.
RIght Reverend Fathers in God, We the Clergy of the Province of Canterbury, of
the Lower House, do most humbly pray your good Lordships, That toughing the
Submission and Order of the Lands and Possessions which sometimes did appertain
to diverse Bishops, Cathedral Churches, and to the late suppressed Monasteries,
Priories, Colleges, Chauntries, and free Chapels, and other Churches within
this Realm, and be now in the possession of the Temporality, that it may please
your good Lordships, by your discreet Wisdoms, to foresee and provide, that by
this our Grant, nothing pass, which may be prejudicial or hurtful to any
Bishop, or other Ecclesiastical Person, or their Successors, for or concerning
any Action, Right, Title, or Interest, which by the Laws of this Realm are
already grown, or may hereafter grow or rise to them, or any of them, and their
Successors, for any Lands, Tenements, Pensions, Portions, Tithes, Rents,
Reversions, Service, or other Hereditaments, which sometime appertained to the
said Bishops, or other Ecclesiastical Persons, in the Right of their Churches,
or otherwise, but that the same Right, Title, and Interest, be safe and
reserved to them, and every of them and their Successors, according to the said
Laws.

And further, whereas in the Statute passed in the first Year of Edward the
Sixth, for the suppressing of all Colleges, etc. Proviso was made by the said
Statute, in respect of the same Surrender, that Schools and Hospitals should
have been erected and founded in diverse parts of this Realm, for the good
education of Youth in Virtue and Learning, and the better sustentation of the
Poor; and that other Works, beneficial for the Commonweal, should have been
executed, which hitherto be not performed, according to the meaning of the said
Statute, it may please your good Lordships to move the King's and the Queen's
most Royal Majesty, and the Lord Cardinal, to have some special consideration
for the due performance of the Premises; and that as well the same may the
rather come to pass, as the Church of England, which heretofore has been
hononourably endowed with Lands and Possessions, may have some recovery of so
notable Damages and Losses which she has sustained.

It may please their Highness, with the assent of the Lords and Commons in this
Parliament assembled, and by Authority of the same, to repeal, make frustrate
and void, the Statute of Mortmayn, made in the seventh Year of Edward the
First, otherwise entitled, de Religiosis, and the Statute concerning the same,
made the 15th Year of King Richard the Second. And all and every other Statute
and Statutes, at any time heretofore made concerning the same. And forasmuch as
Tithes and Oblations have been at all times assigned and appointed for the
sustentation of Ecclesiastical Ministers; and in consideration of the same,
their Ministry and Office, which as yet cannot be executed by any Lay Person,
so it is not meet that any of them should perceive, possess, or enjoy the same;
That all Impropriations, now being in the hands of any Lay Person, or Persons,
and Impropriations made to any secular use, other than for the maintenance of
Ecclesiastical Ministers, Universities, and Schools, may be, by like Authority
of Parliament, dissolved, and the Churches reduced to such State as they were
in, before the same Impropriations were made. And in this behalf we shall most
humbly pray your good Lordships to have in special Consideration, how lately
the Lands and Possessions of Prebends, in certain Cathedral Churches within
this Realm, have been taken away from the same Prebends, to the use of certain
private Persons; and in the lieu thereof, Benefices of notable value,
impropriated to the Cathedral Churches in which the said Prebends were founded,
to the no little decay of the said Cathedral Churches and Benefices, and the
Hospitality kept in the same.

Farther, Right Reverend Fathers, we perceiving the godly forwardness in your
good Lordships, in the restitution of this noble Church of England, to the
pristine State and Unity of Christ's Church, which now of late Years have been
grievously infected with Heresies, perverse and schismatical Doctrine, sown
abroad in this Realm by evil Preachers, to the great loss and danger of many
Souls, accounting our selves to be called hither by your Lordships, out of all
parts of the Province of Canterbury, to treat with your Lordships concerning,
as well the same, as of other things touching the State and Quietness of the
same Church, in Doctrine and in Manners, have, for the furtherance of your
godly doing therein, devised these Articles following to be further considered
and enlarged, as to your Lordships Wisdoms shall be thought expedient. Wherein,
as you do earnestly think many things meet and necessary to be reformed; so we
doubt not but your Lordships, having respect to God's Glory, and the good
Reformation of things amiss, will no less travel to bring the same to pass. And
we, for our part, shall be at all times ready to do every thing, as by your
Lordships Wisdoms shall be thought expedient.

1. We design to be resolved, Whether that all such as have preached in any
part within this Realm, or other the King and Queen's Dominions, any Heretical,
Erroneous, or Seditious Doctrine, shall be called before the Ordinaries of such
Places where they now dwell, or be Beneficed, and upon examination, to be
driven to recant openly such their Doctrine in all Places where they have
preach d the same? And otherwise, Whether any Order shall be made, and Process
to be made herein against them, according to the Canons and Constitutions of
the Church in such Case used?

2. That the pestilent Book of Thomas Cranmer, late Archbishop of Canterbury,
made against the most Blessed Sacrament of the Altar, and the Schismatical
Book, called, The Communion Book, and the Book of Ordering of Ecclesiastical
Ministers; all suspect Translations of the Old and New Testament, the Authors
whereof are recited in a Statute made the Year of King Henry the Eighth, and
all other Books, as well in Latin as in English, concerning any Heretical,
Erroneous, or Slanderous Doctrine, may be destroyed and burnt throughout this
Realm. And that public Commandment be given in all Places to every Man having
any such Books, to bring in the same to the Ordinary, by a certain day, or
otherwise to be taken and reputed as a favourer of such Doctrine. And that it
may be lawful to every Bishop, and other Ordinary, to make enquiry and due
search, from time to time for the said Books, and to take them from the Owners
and Possessors of them, for the purpose abovesaid.

3. And for the better repress of all such pestilent Books, That Order may be
taken with all speed, that no such Books may be printed, uttered, or sold,
within this Realm, or brought from beyond the Seas, or other parts, into the
same, upon grievous pains to all such as shall presume to attempt the contrary.

4. And that the Bishops, and other Ordinaries, may, with better speed, root up
all such pernicious Doctrine, and the Authors thereof; We desire that the
Statutes made, Anno quinto of Richard the Second, Anno secundo of Henry the
Fourth, and Anno secundo of Henry the Fifth, against Heretics, Lollards, and
false Preachers, may be by your Industrious Suit revived and put in force, as
shall be thought convenient. And generally, that all Bishops, and other
Ecclesiastical Ordinaries, may be restored to their Pristine Jurisdiction
against Heretics, Schismatics, and their Fautors, in as large and ample
manner as they were, in the first Year of King Henry the Eighth.

5. And that the Premises may be the better executed by the presence of
Beneficed Men in their Cures, the Statutes made Anno 21. of Henry the Eighth,
concerning Pluralities of Benefices, and Non-residence of Beneficed Men; by
reason whereof, a larger Liberty or License is given to a great multitude of
Priests and Chaplains to be absent from their Benefices with Cure, than was
ever permitted by the Canon Laws, and all other Statutes touching the same, may
be repealed, void, and abolished; and that the Bishops, and other Ordinaries,
may call all Beneficed Men to be resident upon their Cures, as before the
making of that Act they might have done.

6. Item. That the Ordinaries do, from time to time, make Process for
punishment of all Simoniacal Persons, of whom it is thought there were never so
many within this Realm. And that not only the Clerks, but also the Patrons, and
all the Mediators of such Pactions may be punished. Wherein we think good that
Order were taken, that the Patrons should lose their Patronage during their
natural Lives, according to the Ecclesiastical Constitutions of this Realm.

7. Item. That the ancient Liberty, Authority, and Jurisdiction, be restored to
the Church of England, according to the Article of the great Charter, called,
Magna Charta; at the least wise, in such sort as it was in the first Year of
Henry the Eighth; and touching this Article, we shall desire your Lordships to
be with us most humble Suitors to the King's and Queen's Majesty, and to the
Lord Legate, for the remission of the importable Burdens of the First Fruits,
Tenths, and Subsidies. In which Suit, whatsoever advancement your Lordships
shall think good to be offered unto their Majesty's for the same, we shall
therein be always glad to do as shall be thought good.

8. Item. That no Attachment of Praemunire be awarded against any Bishop, or
other Ordinary Ecclesiastical from henceforth in any Matter, but that a
Prohibition be first brought to the same, and that it may please the King's and
Queen's Majesty, to command the Temporal Judges of this Realm, to explicate and
declare plainly, all and singular Articles of the Praemunire, and to make a
certain Doctrine thereof.

9. Item. That the Statutes of the Provisors be not drawn by unjust
Interpretation out of their proper Cases, nor from the proper sense of the
words of the same Statutes.

10. Item. That the Statute of Submission of the Clergy, made Anno 25. of Henry
the Eighth, and all other Statutes made during the time of the late Schism, in
derogation of the Liberties and Jurisdictions of the Church, from the first
Year of King Henry the Eighth, may be repealed, and the Church restored in
integrum.

11. Item. That the Statute made for finding of great Horses by Ecclesiastical
Per^^ns, may likewise be repealed.

12. Item. That Usurers may be punished by the Common Laws, as in times past
has been used.

13. Item. That those which lay violent Hands upon any Priest, or other
Ecclesiastical Minister, being in Orders, may be punished by the Canon Laws, as
in times past has been used.

14. Item. That all Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons, and all other having
Prebends, or other Ecclesiastical Promotions or Benefices, from henceforth use
such Priest-like Habit, as the quality of his State and Benefice requires.

15. Item. That Married Priests may be compelled to forsake their Women, whom
they took as their Wives.

16. Item. That an Order may be taken for the bringing up of Youth in good
Learning and Virtue; and that the Schoolmasters of this Realm may be Catholic
Men, and all other to be removed that are either Sacramentaries, or Heretics,
or otherwise notable Criminous Persons.

17. Item. That all exempt and peculiar Places may, from henceforth be
immediately under the Jurisdiction of that Archbishop, or Bishop, and
Archdeacon, within whose several Diocese and Arch-deaconry, the same are
presently constitute and situate. And whereas diverse Temporal Men, by reason
of late Purchases of certain Abbeys, and exempt Places, have, by their Letters
Patents, or otherwise, granted unto them Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the
said Places; That from henceforth the said Jurisdiction be devolved to the
Archbishop, or Bishop, and Archdeacon, within whose Diocese, and
Arch-deaconry the same now be.

18. Item. Where the Mayor of London, by force of a Decree made, Anno of Henry
the Eighth, has attributed unto him the Cognition of Causes of Tithes in
London; that from henceforth the same Cognition, and Jurisdiction, may utterly
cease, and be reduced immediately to the Bishop of London Ordinary there.

19. Item. That Tithes may be henceforth paid according to the Canon Laws.

20. Item. That Lands and Places impropriated to Monasteries, which at the time
of Dissolution and Suppression thereof, were exempt from payment of Tithes, may
be now allotted to certain Parishes, and there chargeable to pay like Tithes as
other Parishoners do.

21. Item. That there be a straight Law made, whereby the reparations of
Chancels, which are notoriously decayed through the Realm, may be duly
repaired, from time to time, by such as by the Law ought to do the same; and
namely, such as be in the King's and Queen's Hands; and that the Ordinaries may
lawfully proceed in Causes of Dilapidations, as well of them as of all other
Parsonages, Vicarages, and other Ecclesiastical Benefices and Promotions.

22. Item. That Order be taken for the more speedy payment of Pensions to all
Priests, Pentionaries; and that they may have the same, without long Suits or
Charges.

23. Item. That an Order be taken for payment of Personal Tithes, in Cities,
and Towns, and elsewhere, as was ^sed in Anno 21. of Henry the Eighth.

24. Item. That such Priests as were lately married, and refuse to reconcile
themselves to their Order, and to be restored to Ministration, may have some
special Animadversion, whereby, as Apostates, they may, be discerned from other.

25. Item. That Religious Women, which be married, may be divorced.

26. Item. That in Divorces, which are made from Bed and Board, Provision may
be made, that the Innocent Woman may enjoy such Lands and Goods as were hers
before the Marriage, or that happened to come to her use at any time during the
Marriage; and that it may not be lawful for the Husband, being for his Offense
divorced from the said Woman, to intermeddle himself with the said Lands or
Goods, unless his Wife be to him reconciled.

27. Item. That Wardens of Churches and Chapels, may render their Accounts
before the Ordinaries, and may be by them compelled to do the same.

28. Item. That all such Ecclesiastical Persons as lately have spoiled
Cathedral, Collegiat, and other Churches, of their own heads and temerity, may
be compelled to restore all and singular things so by them taken away, or the
true value thereof; and farther, to re-edify such things, as by them are
destroyed and defaced.

Number 17. A Bull, constituting Cardinal Beaton Archbishop of St. Andrews,
Legate a Latere in the Kingdom of Scotland. An Original.
PAulus Episcopus Servus Servorum Dei, dilecto Filio Davidi, Ex Chartophylac.
Regio.
and Sancti Stephani in Celiomonte Presbitero Cardinali Sancti Andreae
nuncupato, apud Charissimam in Christo Filiam nostram Mariam Scotorum Reginam
Illustrem, and in toto Scotiae Regno, and Universis and singulis Provinciis,
Civitatibus, Terris, Castris, and Locis praefatae Mariae Reginae mediate vel
immediate Subjectis, nostro Apostolicae sedis Legato, Salutem and Apostolicam
Benedictionem. Licet potestatis plenitudo desuper nobis sit commissa, and
Universi Gregis Domini, divina disponente Clementia, curam habeamus; fines
tamen humanae possibilitatis excedere non valentes, considerantesque quod circa
singula per nos ipsos Apostolicae servitutis Officium absolvere non possumus,
nonunquam aliquos, and praecipue Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae Cardinales, in
Sollicitudinis partem assumimus; ut ipsis vices nostras supplentibus, eorum
cooperatione laudabili nostri oneris gravitatem alleviantes, ministerium nobis
Commissum, Divina favente gratia, facilius and efficacius exequamur: Animo
itaque volventes multa quotidie eventura ob quae opportunum atque necessarium
erit, cum charissima in Christo Filia nostra Maria Scotorum Regina Illustri,
super pluribus Decus, Dignitatem ac Statum Christianae Reipublicae, Sanctaeque
sedis Apostolicae concernentibus pertractare; ac nobis persuadentes quod
Circumspectio tua, quae rerum maximarum usu and experientia, ac singulari in
agendo studio and dexteritate, nec minori prudentia and ingenii Acrimonia ita
praestat, quod quaecunque contigerint cum illa Majestate, nostro and praedictae
sedis nomine communicanda, tractanda, and peragenda, quae nostrum and dictae
sedis honorem ipsamque dignitatem recipient, necnon illa quae eidem
Circumspectioni tuae duxerimus committenda, ea cura, industria, and solertia
prosequeris, and adimplere curabis ut voluntas nostra, quae non nisi ad Gregem
custodiae nostrae commissum, tuendum, and ampliandum invigilat, optatum finem
sortiatur; Habita super his cum venerabilibus fratribus nostris Sanctae Romanae
Ecclesiae Cardinalibus, matura deliberatione, de ipsorum Fratrum Consilio,
Circumspectionem tuam apud dictam Mariam Reginam, necnon in toto Scotiae Regno,
ac universis and singulis Provinciis, Civitatibus, Terris, Castris, and Locis
eidem Mariae Reginae mediate vel immediate subjectis, nostrum and sedis
praedictae Legatum, ad beneplacitum nostrum, Creamus, Constituimus and
Deputamus. Circumspectio igitur tua munus hujusmodi devota mente suscipiens, se
in illius executione sic sollicitam, ac verbo and opere studiosam diligentemque
exhibeat, quod ex tuis laboribus divina favente gratia optati fructus, quod
speramus, succedant: Tuque per sollicitudinem tuam praeter aeternae
retributionis praemium, possis apud nos and sedem eandem merito commendari. Nos
autem, ut ipsi expectati fructus quantocius, emanent, and tu erga Personas
Regni, Provinciarum, Civitatum, Terrarum, Castrorum, and Locorum praedictorum,
necnon familiares tuos continuos, commensales, undecunque originem and
ubicunque Domicilium habentes, tuis obsequiis insistentes, and tibi servientes,
te possis reddere gratiosum, Circumspectioni tuae Matrimoniales and
Beneficiales, ac alias Ecclesiasticas necnon spirituales and prophanas causas
quaslibet, ad forum Ecclesiasticum quomodolibet pertinentes, tam primae
instantiae, quem Appellatione quorumcunque, etiam a quibuscunque Judicibus,
Ordinariis and Delegatis, etiam per nos and sedem praedictam, seu quoscunque
alios etiam a Latere Legatos, and Judices interpositarum pro tempore, and
durante dicta Legatione interponendarum, etiam Summarie, simpliciter, and de
plano, sine strepitu and figura Judicii, sola facti veritate inspecta; cum
potestate citandi, and inhibendi, ac sequestrandi, and exequendi, etiam per
edictum publicum constituto, summariae and extrajudicialiter, de non tuto
accessu, etiam sub censuris and paenis Ecclesiasticis etiam pecuniariis, tuo
vel tuorum Delegatorum arbitrio moderandis, exigendis and applicandis, per te,
vel alium seu alios, audiendas, cognoscendas, and fine debito terminandas,
delegandi; illasque etiamsi per nos aut alios Autoritate Apostolica delegatae
forent, seu alias coram quocunque penderent, cum tibi placuerit, ad te
advocandi, and aliis etiam simpliciter committendi, and adversus quascunque
sententias, and res Judicatas, ac Contractus, and Lesiones quascunque, dictis
tuis familiaribus Beneficium Restitutionis in integrum concedendi. Ac Officium
Tabellionatus quibuscunque personis idoneis, recepto ab eis in forma solita
juramento, concedendi: illosque Tabelliones creandi, and Notariatus Officio
investiendi, alias juxta formam in Quinterno Cancellariae Apostolicae
descriptam: Ac Milites auratos, Comitesque Palatinos, and Poetas Laureatos
creandi, constituendi, and deputandi: Ac personas sufficientes and idoneas ad
Doctoratus, seu Licenciaturae, and Baccalaureatus in utroque vel altero Jurium,
and etiam ad Magisterii tam in Theologia quam Artibus, and Medicina, vel alios
gradus hujusmodi promovendi; eisque insignia solita and debita, conferendi, and
exhibendi, seu exhiberi and conferri faciendi, eisque quod omnibus and singulis
Gratiis, Privilegiis, Libertatibus, immunitatibus, exemptionibus, and indultis,
quibus alii Milites aurati, Poetae Laureati, and Comites Palatini, per nos and
sedem praedictam, creati and instituti, necnon ad hujusmodi Gradus in
Universitatibus Studiorum generalium, juxta illos actus and mores, ac servatis
servandis promoti utuntur, potiuntur and gaudent; seu uti, potiri, and gaudere
poterunt, quomodolibet in futurum; uti, potiri and gaudere, libere and licite
possint, and debeant indulgendi. Ac cum Nobilibus and Graduatis, ut quaecunque
Tria, and si cum eis ad Duo incompatibilia Beneficia Ecclesiastica, insimul ad
vitam obtinenda dispensatum foret; cum eis ut quodcunque Tertium, cum aliis
vero non Nobilibus aut Graduatis, ut quaecunque Duo Curata, seu alias invicem
incompatibilia, etiam si dignitas, Personatus, Administrationes, vel Officia in
Cathedralibus, etiam Metropolitanis, vel Collegiatis: and Dignitates ipse in
Cathedralibus, etiam Metropolitanis, post Pontificiales Majores, seu
Collegiatis Ecclesiis hujusmodi Principales, aut duo ex eisdem Parrochiales
Ecclesiae, vel earum perpetuae Vicariae fuerint: Et ad dignitates, personatus,
administrationes, vel officia hujusmodi consueverint, qui per electionem
assumi, eisque cura immineat animarum, necnon quaecunque duo dissimilia, vel
similia, sub uno, duobus vel tribus tectis dictarum vel aliarum Ecclesiarum
consistentia: Ac cum quibusvis Personis, cujusvis Ordinis, Monachis, Canonicis,
and Religiosis, ut quaecunque duo Beneficia Ecclesiastica, cum cura vel sine
cura regularia, aut cum eorum altero, seu sine illis, unum curatum seculare,
and cum quibusvis Clericis Secularibus, ut unum Beneficium Ecclesiasticum cum
cura, vel sine cura cujusvis Ordinis regulare, etiam si beneficia regularia
hujusmodi Prioratus, praepositurae, praepositatus, Dignitates, Personatus,
Administrationes vel Officia fuerint; and ad illos illas vel illa consueverint,
qui per electionem assumi, eisque cura immineat animarum: Regulares, videlicet
unum ex dictis regularibus beneficiis quod maluerint, si Prioratus,
praepositura, aut alia Dignitas Conventualis, aut officium claustrale fuerit,
in titulum and ipsi regulares reliquum, ac seculare vel alterius Ordinis
regulare; necnon Clerici Seculares unum quod Conventuale aut Claustrale non
sit, in commendam quoad vixerint, vel ad tempus de quo tibi videbitur retinere,
ac de ipsius commendandi beneficii, fructibus, redditibus, and proventibus
disponere, and ordinare, sicuti illud in titulum pro tempore obtinentes, de
illis disponere and ordinare potuerunt, seu etiam debuerunt; Alienatione tamen
quorumcunque bonorum immobilium, and preciosorum mobilium, dicti Benificii in
Commendam retinendi, eis penitus interdicta: Necnon cum petentibus defectum
Natalium etiam regularibus, ut ad omnes etiam Sacros Ordines promoveri, and
quaecumque, quotcumque, and qualiacunque Beneficia Ecclesiastica cum cura vel
sine cura, ac se invicem compatientia, etiam si Canonicatus, and Prebendae in
Cathedralibus, etiam Metropolitanis vel Collegiatis Ecclesiis, hujusmodi ac
alias ut praefertur qualificata fuerint; dummodo dignitates in Metropolitanis
vel aliis Cathedralibus, post Pontificales Majores, and in Collegiatis
Ecclesiis hujusmodi Principales non existant; ac etiam cum eis si graduati non
fuerint, ut praefertur, ad duo, si vero graduati fuerint, ad tria
incompatibilia beneficia hujusmodi, non tamen dignitates majores ut praefertur,
nec Principales, vel cum dispensatis ad duo ut tertium Curatum, vel alias
incompatibile ut supradictum est, and cum regularibus etiam ad beneficia
regularia ut praefertur, qualificata, and competentibus, aetatis defectum etiam
regularibus, supra decimum septimum suae aetatis Annum, ut seculare quodcunque
Beneficium Ecclesiasticum Curatum, vel alias incompatibile, etiam si dignitas,
personatus, administratio, vel Officium in Cathedrali, vel Metropolitana vel
Collegiata, etiam si dignitas ipsa in Cathedrali vel Metropolitana post
Pontificalem majori, and in Collegiata Ecclesia hujusmodi Principalis seu
Parochialis Ecclesia, vel ejus perpetua Vicaria fuerit; and ad dignitates,
personatus, administrationes, vel officia tam secularia quam regularia,
hujusmodi consueverunt, quae per electionem assumi, eisque cura immineat
animarum, Regulares vero beneficium etiam seculare ut praefertur qualificatum,
si eis alias canonice conferatur, aut ipsi eligantur, praesententur, vel alias
assumantur ad illa and instituantur, in eis recipere and insimul quoad vixerint
retinere, illaque simul vel successive, simpliciter vel ex causa permutationis,
quoties sibi placuerit dimittere, and commendae hujusmodi cedere, ac loco
dimissi vel dimissorum, aliud vel alia, simile vel dissimile, aut similia vel
dissimilia, beneficium seu beneficia, Ecclesiasticum vel Ecclesiastica,
quaecunque, quotcunque and qualiacunque compatientia, seu duo aut tria vel
tertium curata, seu alias invicem incompatibilia, ac duo alia similia vel
dissimilia, sub uno vel duobus aut tribus tectis consistentia, ac quaecunque,
quotcunque and qualiacunque cum cura vel sine cura, se invicem and cum
praedictis compatientia, aut supra dictum decimum septimum Annum agentes,
curatum vel alias incompatibile Beneficium Ecclesiasticum respective similiter
recipere, and dummodo inter ipsa tria incompatibilia plures quam duae
Parrochiales Ecclesiae, vel earum perpetuae Vicariae, aut duo Canonicatus and
Prebendae, seu duae dignitates, personatus, administrationes, vel officia, sub
eodem tecto ac pro dictis patientibus, defectum Natalium, dignitates ipsae in
eisdem Cathedralibus etiam Metropolitanis post Pontificales Majores, aut
Collegiatis Ecclesiis hujusmodi modo Principales non existent, insimul quoad
vixerint vel ad tempus retinere. Quodque constituto in sexto decimo, ut ad
Subdiaconatus, and in decimo octavo ad Diaconatus, ac in vigesimo primo suarum
aetatis Annis, etiam si ratione Beneficiorum Ecclesiasticorum per eos
obtentorum arctati fuerint, ad Presbiteratus Ordines, and tam ipsi quam
quicunque alii in aetate legitima constituti, and similiter arctati, promoveri
volentes, ut ad omnes ordines praedictos, etiam extra tempora a jure Statuta,
quibusvis diebus Dominicis, vel Festivis, and prout necessitas exegerit, ad
duos ex ordinibus praedictis eodem die a quocunque maluerint, Catholico
Antistite, gratiam and communionem dictae sedis habente, alias tamen rite
promoveri libere and licite possint. Quodque obtinentes Beneficia Ecclesiastica
curata, seu alias Sacros and Presbiteratus Ordines hujusmodi, tam de jure quam
ex Statuto, fundatione, vel alias requirentia, ut ratione illorum, Usque ad
septennium a fine Anni eis a jure praefixi computandum, ad aliquem ex
Diaconatus and Presbiteratus Ordinibus hujusmodi, dummodo infra primum dicti
septennii Biennium ad dictum Subdiaconatus Ordinem promoti fuerint, se
promoveri facere minime teneantur, nec ad id a quoquam, quavis Auctoritate
inviti valiant coarctari; etiam unum, duo, vel plura septennia, vel alia
tempora ad id per nos aut sedem eandem pluries concessa, and prorogata fuerint,
and pendeant: Et cum quibusvis Personis tertio aut quarto, aut mixtim, tertio
and quarto, etiam multiplici consanguinitatis seu affinitatis gradibus invicem
conjunctis, and quocunque impedimento publicae honestatis, aut cum his qui per
Adulterium se polluissent, dummodo in mortem defuncti conjugis quicquam
machinati non fuissent, ut invicem matrionaliter copulari, and in contractis
per eos scienter vel ignoranter Matrimoniis, cum absolutione a censuris quas
sic scienter contrahendo incurrissent, remanere possint, etiam prolem exinde
susceptam legitimam decernendo, dispensandi. Ac Personis quibuscunque,
Ecclesiasticis Secularibus and Regularibus, ut quoad vixerint, vel ad aliud
tempus in Romana Cura, vel altero Beneficiorum Ecclesiasticorum per eos
obtentorum residendo, aut Literarum Studio in Loco ubi illud vigeat generale
insistendo, fructus, redditus and proventus omnium and singulorum Beneficiorum
Ecclesiasticorum, cum cura vel sine cura, quae in quibusvis Ecclesiis sive
Locis pro tempore obtinebunt, etiam si ut praefertur, qualificata fuerint cum
ea integritate, quotidianis distributionibus duntaxat exceptis, libere
percipere valiant, cum qua illos perciperent, si in eisdem Ecclesiis sive locis
personaliter residerent, and ad residendum interim in eisdem minime teneantur,
nec ad id a quoquam valiant coarctari. Proviso quod beneficia praedicta debitis
propterea non fraudentur obsequiis, and animarum Cura in eis quibus illa
immineat nullatenus negligatur; sed per bonos and sufficientes Vicarios, quibus
de ipsorum beneficiorum proventibus necessaria congrue ministrentur, diligenter
exerceatur, and deserviatur inibi laudabiliter in divinis. Ac quibuscunque
personis liceat habere Altar portatile, cum debitis Reverentia, and honor,
super quo in locis ad id congruentibus and honestis sive alieni juris
praejudicio: Et cum qualitas negotiorum pro tempore ingruentium id exegerit,
antequam elucescat dies, circa tamen diurnam lucem, ita quod id nec eis, nec
Sacerdoti taliter celebranti ad culpam valeat imputari, and cum eos ad loca
Ecclesiastica interdicta supposita contigerit declinare, in illis clausis
Januis, Excommunicatis and interdictis exclusis, non pulsatis Campanis, and
submissa voce possint etiam per se ipsos, si Ecclesiastici and ad Presbiteratus
ordinem rite promoti fuerint, aut per proprium vel alium Sacerdotem, Missas and
alia Divina Officia in sua and famulorum suorum domesticorum praesentia
celebrare, and celebrari facere; dummodo ipsi vel illi causam non dederint
interdicto, nec id ipsis vel illis contigerit specialiter interdici: Proviso
etiam quod parce hujusmodi concessione ante diem, celebrandi and celebrari
faciendi utantur; quia cum in Altaris Ministerio imoletur Dominus noster Jesus
Christus Dei Filius, qui Candor est Lucis aeternae, convenit hoc non noctis
tenebris fieri, sed in Luce. Ac quibuscunque Personis ut Confessorem seu
Confessores idoneos eligere possint, qui eos and eorum quemlibet juxta formam
in quinterno dictae Cancellariae annotatam, poterit absolvere. Necnon quibusvis
Personis Ecclesiasticis secularibus ut quoad vixerint, and quoties eis
placuerit, per seipsas aut cum uno Presbitero, seu Clerico, socio seu
familiari, horas Canonicas diurnas and nocturnas, ac alia divina officia
secundum usum and morem Romanae Ecclesiae, etiam juxta ritum Breviarii noviter
impressi, extra tamen chorum Ecclesiae, dicere and recitare, libere and licite
valiant; and ad alium usum super hoc observandum, etiam ratione beneficiorum
per eas obtentorum, minime teneantur, nec ad id compelli possint, indulgendi.
Quodque quilibet Sacerdos aut Religiosus Ecclesiast. Sacramenta ministrare
valeat, Jurae Parrochialis Ecclesiae, and cujuslibet alterius in omnibus semper
salvo. Concedendi, ac Mulieribus honestis quibuscunque, ut quaecunque
Monasteria, and domos Monialium quarumcunque, etiam observantiae regularis
exempta and non exempta, quomodocunque reclusa, cum aliquibus Matronis etiam
honestis, de consensu eorum qui dictis Monasteriis and Domibus praefuerint,
dummodo inibi non pernoctent, Devotionis causa ingredi valiant: Ac Rectoribus
Parrochialium Ecclesiarum, and aliorum Beneficiorum Ecclesiasticorum,
Curatorum, vel quoscunque eorum, Parrochianos utriusque sexus, ab omnibus and
singulis eorum peccatis, and Criminibus, in Casibus in quibus Ordinarii locorum
de Jure vel consuetudine, aut alias absolvere possint; Et in illis qui sedi
praedictae reservati non fuerint, absolvere, Ac vota quaecunque per eos pro
tempore emissa, preterquam sedi praedictae reservata, in alia pietatis opera
commutare valiant: Ac quibuscunque personis utriusque sexus, Secularibus,
Ecclesiasticis, Religiosis, Mendicantibus, quae Zelo Devotionis accensae,
Sepulchrum Dominicum, and alia pia Loca and Oratoria terrae Sanctae, desiderant
personaliter visitare, quibusvis prohibitionibus Apostolicis in contrarium
factis non obstantibus, Sepulchrum and alia Loca praedicta visitare. Et in
locis in quibus usus olei non habetur, ut Butiro and Caseo and infirmi de
Consilio utriusque Medici, Carnibus Vesci, and licite uti valiant, indulgendi.
Necnon quaecunque Juramenta ad effectum agendi, ac etiam simpliciter ut tibi
videbitur, dummodo alicui exinde magnum praejudicium non fiat, relaxandi. Ac
quoscunque qui Perjurii Reatum incurrerint, ab illo absolvendi, and ad Priores
honores, Statum, and famam restituendi, ac plenarie reintegrandi, omnemque
inhabilitatis and Infamiae maculam sive notam, Praemissorum occasion
contractam, poenitus abolendi: Ac quoscunque per saltum, vel furtive, ad
aliquos sacros Ordines promotos, ab excessu quem propterea incurrerint,
absolvendi; vel ut ad aliquos alios si promoti non essent, alias rite
promoveri, libere and licite possint dispensandi: Absolvendi quoque omnes and
singulos qui Simoniae labem, tam in beneficiis per eos habitis eujuscunque
qualitatis fuerint, quam Ordinibus per eos susceptis contraxerint, ab illa and
excommunicationis aliisque censuris, and paenis Ecclesiasticis quas propterea
incurrerint; and super Irregularitate si quam illis ligati, Missas and alia
Divina Officia, non tamen in contemptum Clavium, celebrando, seu alias se
immiscendo, contraxissent, dispensandi: omnemque inhabilitatis and Infamiae
maculam, similiter per eos dicta occasion, ac etiam si forsan aliqua
beneficia, curata vel alias incompatibilia, post and contra foelicis
recordationis Johannis Papae 22, Praedecessoris nostri, quae incipit,
Execrabilis, Constitutionem detinuissent, and detinerent, fructus perripiendo,
ex eisdem contractam abolendi; dictaque beneficia eis, facta tamen per eos
prius de fructibus male perceptis, debita Compositione pro Camera Apostolica,
denuo conferendi: Et eos qui etiam Parrochiales Ecclesias, vel alia beneficia
Ecclesiastica Presbiteratus vel alium ordinem requirentia, intra Annum vel
aliud tempus pacifice possedissent, and ea postmodum detinuissent and
detineant, ad dictum Presbiteratus ordinem legitimo cessante impedimento,
nullaque per eos desuper dispensatione obtenta, non promoti, fructus etiam
percipiendo, absolvendi; omnemque inhabilitatis and Infamiae maculam, sive
notam, similiter per eos dicta occasion contractam, paenitus tollendi, eisque
de novo de beneficiis praedictis sic detentis providendi, facta tamen debita de
fructibus male perceptis, pro Camera praedicta ut praedictum est, compositione.
Ac quoscunque qui in Clericos and Presbiteros, citra tamen membri mutilationem
and mortem, manus violentas temere injecissent, ab Excommunicationis sententia,
quam propterea incurrerint, si hoc humiliter petierint; Et etiam qui tempore
Bellorum, Rapinas, Sacrilegia, Furta, and alia mala perpetrarunt, debita
satisfactione praevia, and etiam illos, qui horas Canonicas omiserunt, and
debita tempore non recitaverunt, aut inadvertenter dixerunt, cujuscunque
Qualitatis, Ordinis and Conditionis fuerint, ab excessibus and omissione
hujusmodi respective; Necnon etiam quoscunque Religiosos Ordinum quorumcunque,
qui ob sui habitus non delationem, aut alias, Reatum sedis Apostolicae
incurrissent, ab illa ac etiam Excommunicationis, aliisque sententiis, censuris
and paenis Ecclesiasticis, quos propterea etiam juxta instituta suorum ordinum
regularia incurrissent, absolvendi: Ac super irregularitate quacunque,
praeterquam homicidii voluntarii, aut Bigamiae, quovismodo, etiam per
sententiam, etiam sanguinis, ultimi supplicii inde sequuti, aut mutilatione
membrorum contracta, ad omnes etiam Sacros and Presbiteratos Ordines, citra
tamen Altaris Ministerium, and ad dignitates and beneficia Ecclesiastica, cum
cura and sine cura, quaecunque, quotcunque and qualiacunque, se invicem
compatientia, eis alias Canonice conferenda, dispensandi; omnemque
inhabilitatis and Infamiae maculam sive notam etiam inde contractam, paenitus
abolendi. Et contra quoscunque tam Ecclesiasticos quam Laicos, Litterarum
Apostolicarum and Supplicationum ac Commissionum Falsarios, Schismaticos,
Haereticos, Usurarios, Raptores, and aliorum quorumcunque Criminum Reos,
cujuscunque dignitatis, status, gradus, ordinis, vel conditionis existentes,
inquirendi, procedendi, ac reos juxta criminum and excessuum exigentiam, prout
Canonicae disponunt Sanctiones, ut videbitur Conscientiae expedire, puniendi:
Contradictores quoslibet and Rebels, per Censuram Ecclesiasticam, and alia
Juris Remedia, Appellatione postposita, compescendi, and si opus fuerit
auxilium Brachii secularis invocandi, seu praemissa fieri faciendi: Et si ad
Cor reversi, suum errorem recognoverint, and de praemissis volverint, ipsique
humiliter postulaverint, seu supplicaverint, and tibi videbitur eos a
criminibus, and excessibus ac sententiis, censuris, and paenis hujusmodi quas
propterea incurrerint, absolvendi: Ac cum eis, facta tamen cum dicta Camera
Compositione, ad Ordines, Honores and Dignitates, ac etiam Beneficia
Ecclesiastica, quaecunque, quotcunque, and qualiacunque, dispensandi, eosque in
pristinum statum restituendi, reponendi, and plenarie reintegrandi, omnemque
inhabilitatis and Infamiae maculam, sive notam per eos praemissorum occasion
contractam, etiam paenitus abolendi. Ac cum dictis Usurariis super male
ablatis, and perceptis incertis, pro dicta Camera componendi, eisque, ut facta
compositione hujusmodi, ad aliam restitutionem faciendam non teneantur,
concedendi. Ac quascunque Ecclesias, Monasteria, Domos, Universitates, and
Collegia, ac pia Loca, quaecunque etiam exempta, and eidem sedi immediate
subjecta, per te vel alium, seu alios idoneos, visitandi, and quae ex eis
Correctione and Emendatione tam in Spiritualibus quam Temporalibus indigere
cognoveris, tam in Capite quam in membris reformandi, prout secundum Deum, and
Canonicas Sanctiones, ac Regularum suarum instituta, noveris expedire: Ac
quaecunque Statuta, and Ordinationes Ecclesiarum, Universitatum, and Studiorum
generalium, Monasteriorum, Ordinum, and Conventuum, quae tamen Libertatem
Ecclesiasticam non confundant, aut illi derogent vel repugnent, confirmandi,
and approbandi; Supplendique omnes and singulos defectus, si qui forsan
intervenissent in eisdem, illaque si tibi expedire videbitur, moderandi,
corrigendi, and in melius reformandi, ac illis juxta illorum exigentiam
addendi. Necnon quotquot tibi videbitur in nostros and dictae sedis Accolitos;
Capellanos, and Notarios Apostolica Auctoritate recipiendi, and aliorum
nostrorum and dictae sedis Accolitorum, Capellanorum, and Notariorum numero,
and consortio favorabiliter aggregandi; Ac eis quod omnibus and singulis
Privilegiis, Prerogativis, indultis, honoribus, exemptionibus, gratiis,
libertatibus, and immunitatibus, utantur, potiantur, and gaudeant, quibus
utuntur, potiuntur and gaudent, ac uti, potiri and gaudere poterunt,
quomodolibet in futurum alii nostri and dictae sedis Notarii: Exhibendi quoque,
and exhiberi faciendi, eis Insignia Notariatus hujusmodi, recepto tamen prius
ab eis solito Juramento, ac quibusvis personis Ecclesiasticis etiam Praelatis,
Secularibus, and Regularibus, utriusque sexus, etiam juxta formam Qu interni
Cancellariae, hujusmodi licentiam Testandi, concedendi; Ac etiam per te vel
alium seu alios quorumcunque beneficiorum Ecclesiasticorum cum cura and sine
cura, Secularium vel Regularium, etiam quae dictae sedi ex quavis causa
praeterquam ratione Officialium sedis praedictae, in Romana Curia officia sua
actu exercentium, generaliter reservata fuerint, resignationes simpliciter, vel
ex causa permutationis, ac commendatorum and ligitiosorum tam in dicta Curia
quam extra eam, ceffiones litis, causas juris ac commendarum recipiendi, and
admittendi, ac Causas desuper pendentes aduocandi, and lites hujusmodi penitus
extinguendi, dictaque beneficia tam simpliciter quam ex eadem causa, and alia
quaecunque, quotcunque, and qualiacunque, etiam alias, etiam per obitum infra
limits dictae Legationis, and quoad tuos Familiares, continuos, commensales
extra dictos limits ubicunque vacantia, and vacatura, etiam si ut praefertur
reservata, vel affecta, and de jure Patronatus Laicorum fuerint, etiam si
Dignitates Majores and Principales, and beneficia etiam regularia manualia, and
alias quomodolibet qualificata fuerint, personis idoneis etiam quaecunque,
quotcunque, and qualiacunque beneficia Ecclesiastica obtinentibus and
expectantibus, etiam secularibus vel regularibus, conferendi, and de illis
etiam providendi: Necnon quibusvis ministeriis tam Virorum quam Mulierum,
Ordinum quorumcunque Legationis praedictae, quorum tamen videlicet Virorum
fructus, redditus, and proventus ducentorum fleecnorum Auri, de Camera secundum
communem extenuationem, valorem annuum non excedant, nunc and pro tempore
vacantibus, de Abbatibus and Abbatissis, providendi, ac Monasteria and
beneficia hujusmodi quibusvis ad vitam, vel ad tempus, per eos tenenda,
regenda, and gubernanda; ita quod liceat eis, debitis and consuetis illorum
supportatis oneribus, de residuis illorum fructibus, redditibus, and
proventibus, disponere and ordinare, sicuti illa in titulum pro tempore
obtinentes, de illis disponere and ordinare potuerunt, seu etiam debuerunt:
Alienatione tamen quorumcunque bonorum immobilium, and preciosorum mobilium,
Monasteriorum and beneficiorum praedictorum eis penitus interdicta. Commendandi
necnon invicem, vel ad tempus, etiam quibusvis Mensis, Spiritualibus,
Capitularibus, and Conventialibus, uniendi, annectendi, and incorporandi, Ac
Canonicos super-numerarios, de consensu Capituli creandi, ac ad sententiarum,
rerum judicatarum, Exemptorialium, and Censurarum, per resignantes, seu
cedentes in Rota nostri Pallatii Apostolici habitarum, prosecutionem, illos in
quorum favorem resignaverint, seu cesserint, admittendi, seu admitti faciendi,
and mandandi and ad ulteriorem executionem usque ad realem paritionem contra
quoscunque etiam Pontificali praeditos dignitate procedendi, ac verum and
ultimum vacationis modum, etiam si ex eo quaevis generalis reservatio resultet,
pro expressa habend. ac super illorum and quorumcunque aliorum beneficiorum
Ecclesiasticorum fructibus, redditibus, and proventibus, quascunque pensiones
Annuas, non tamen medietatem fructuum, reddituum and proventuum hujusmodi
excedentes, ac etiam omnes fructus loco pensionis, praedictis resignantibus,
vel cedentibus, aut aliis personis idoneis, quoad vixerint per praedicta
beneficia, pro tempore obtinentes, and eorum successores, annis singulis, in
locis and terminis etiam sub privationis and aliis paenis, sententiis, and
censuris Ecclesiasticis, in talibus apponi solitis; persolvendas etiam cum
regressu, ingressu, vel accessu, ob non solutionem earum in forma solita de
consensu eorum qui dictas pensiones persolvere habebunt, reservandi,
constituendi, and assignandi: Ac easdem and alias hactenus and deinceps
reservatas and reservandas pensiones, and fructuum reservationes, de consensu
etiam anticipata solutione, aliquorum Annorum cassandi, and extinguendi, ac
Annullandi. Ac quo ad familiares tuos praedictos qui transferendi facultatem
habuerint easdem pensiones, and fructus de eorum consensu, etiam in quoscunque
per eos nominatos, transferendi, etiam cum hoc quod ipsi in quos transferentur,
quaecunque transferenium debita persolvere, vel alia onera, and conditiones in
ipsis translationibus apposita, adimplere, sub paena invaliditatis
translationis, teneantur: and fructibus hujusmodi clausulam quod earum Litterae
per te concedendae pro expeditis and intimatis, habeantur, de consensu illorum
qui solvere habebunt, apponendi: Ac personas praedictas ad effectum gratiarum
praedictarum, quas pro tempore per te eis concedi contigerit, ad omnibus and
singulis Excommunicationis, Suspensionis, and Interdicti aliisque
Ecclesiasticis Sententiis, censuris and paenis, a jure vel ab homine quovis
occasion vel causa latis, si quibus quomodolibet immediate fuerint,
absolvendi, and absolutas fore censendi. Ac omnia and singula beneficia
Ecclesiast. cum cura, and sine cura, quae etiam ex quibusvis dispensationibus
Apostolicis obtinent, and expectant, ac in quibus and ad quaevis eis
quomodolibet competit, quaecunque, quotcunque, and qualiacunquesint, eorumque,
fructuum, reddituum, and proventuum, veros annuos valores, ac hujusmodi
dispensationum tenores, in Litteris tuis, pro expressis, absque eo quod de
illis vel eorum aliquo mentionem facere teneantur, aut propter non factam
mentionem ipsam, Litterae per te concedendae, surreptionis aut nullitatis vitia
subjacere censeantur, habendo. Necnon quascunque gratias expectativas,
speciales reservationes, uniones, annexiones, and incorporationes,
nominationes, nominandi and conferendi facultates, and mandata per nos and
sedem praedictam, aut Legatos ejusdem, in favorem quarumcunque personarum,
etiam cujuscunque dignitatis, status, gradus, Ordinis, vel Conditionis, aut
Cardinalatus honor fulgentium, sub quibusvis verborum sormis ac clausulis,
etiam derogatariarum, derogatoribus fortioribus, efficacioribus, and insolitis,
etiam motu proprio and ex certa scientia, aut quavis consideratione, intuitu
vel respectu etiam quantumcunque grandi vel excogitabili; etiam Regum,
Reginarum aliacunque Principum and Praelatorum, factas and concessas, ac
faciendas and concedendas, imposterum illorumque vim and effectum omnino
suspendendi. Ac visitantibus quascunque Ecclesias, Seculares vel Regulares,
etiam ad illarum fabricas, seu pro conservatione and instauratione earum, manus
porrigentibus adjutrices, in duabus festivitatibus duntaxat, septem Annos and
totidem Quadragenas, vel infra dictum tempus illud quod tibi videbitur de
injunctis Paenitentiis misericorditer in Domino relaxandi; ita quod perpetuo
vel ad tempus prout tibi videbitur durare habeant. Ac quibusvis personis dictae
Legationis, ac etiam familiaribus praedictis, ut bona immobilia eorundem
Monasteriorum, Dignitatum, Prioratuum, Administrationum, and Officiorum,
aliorumque beneficiorum Ecclesiasticorum, quae obtinent, seu durante Legatione
hujusmodi obtinebunt, permutare, vendere, and ad tempus longum locare, ac in
feudum and Emphiteosim, seu Censum vel affectum concedere, and alias alienare
valiant, cum evidenti Ecclesiarum, Monasteriorum and Beneficiorum
Ecclesiasticorum, ad quae pertinent, utilitate: Proviso quod pretia exinde
provenientia, in hujusmodi utilitatem convertenda, penes aliquam aedem sacram,
aut fide and facultatibus idoneam Personam, cum recognoscibilibus clausulis and
cautelis in similibus apponi solitis, fideliter reponantur. Necnon Regularibus
Personis utriusque sexus, etiam Ordinum Mendicantium, ut de eorum Monasteriis,
Domibus and Locis ad illa Monasteria, Domos and Loca, etiam aliorum Ordinum,
etiam non Mendicantium, in quibus benevolos invenerint receptores, se
transfer, and nova loca recipere: Ac Personis quibuslibet, Ecclesias,
Monasteria and Domos Ordinum Mendicantium, and beneficia Ecclesiastica
quaecunque de novo fundare and dotare and collapsas reparare volentibus, ut
illa in Locis ad hoc honestis and commodis fundare and reparare, ac in
fundatione hujusmodi licita and honesta onera illa pro tempore obtinentibus,
imponere valiant; reservato eis; and dictis tuis familiaribus, etiam quo ad
Ecclesias per eos jam ubilibet constructas seu restauratas, and ulterius vel de
novo construendas and restaurandas, ac eorum posteris, jure Patronatus, and
presentandi personam idoneam, ad illa dum vacabunt, licentiam concedendi; ac
locationes and alienationes de bonis immobilibus Ecclesiarum, Monasteriorum,
Prioratuum, Administrationum, vel Officiorum, aliorumque beneficiorum
Ecclesiasticorum, and locorum factas, si in evidentem utilitatem illorum
cesserint, confirmandi and approbandi: ac singulos defectus, si qui
intervenerint, in eisdem supplendi: Necnon tempus praefixum Executoribus
ultimarum Voluntatum, ad illas exequendum prorogandi; Ac juri patronatus
Laicorum, ad effectum provisionum and commendarum, ac Unionum praedictarum
Canonice pro medietate, and si ex causa permutationis fierent, vel lis
penderet, aut jus patronatus non ex fundatione vel dotatione acquisitum esset,
in totum derogandi. Necnon omnia and singula, quae Major Penitentiarius noster,
in dicta Curia ex speciali vel alia sibi concessa facultate, quomodolibet
facere potest and consuevit, ac quae in praedictis and circa ea necessaria
essent, seu quomodolibet opportuna, faciendi, mandandi, ordinandi and
decernendi, per te vel alium, seu alios, Auctoritate Apostolica tenore
praesentium concedimus facultatem. Decernentes te omnibus and singulis
facultatibus praedictis, in quibuscunque partibus praedictis, and cum illorum
seu in illis residentibus personis ac familiaribus tuis, libere uti posse: Non
obstantibus defectibus, and aliis praedictis ac Lateranen. Vienen. Pictaven.
and Generalium, ac aliorum Consiliorum, necnon piae memoriae Bonifacii Papae
VIII. etiam Praedecessoris nostri, per quam concessiones percipiendi fructus,
in absentia, sine praefinitione temporis, fieri prohibentur: ac de una vel
duabus Dietis in Concilio generali edita, and aliis Apostolicis, ac in
Provincialibus and Sinodalibus Conciliis editis, generalibus vel specialibus
constitutionibus, and ordinationibus, etiam quibusvis Regulis Cancellariae
Apostolicae editis and edendis, quarum tempora durantia, ac etiam pluries
prorogata and decursa de novo concedere possis: quibus and aliis praemissis,
and in specie valeas derogare statutis and consuetudinibus Ecclesiarum,
Monasteriorum, Universitatum, Collegiorum, and Civitatum hujusmodi, necnon
ordinum quorumcunque, etiam juramento, confirmatione Apostolica, vel quavis
firmitate alia roboratis, etiam si de illis servandis and non impetrandis
Literis, contra ea, and illis etiam ab alio vel aliis impetratis, seu alias
quovismodo concessis, non utendo personae quibus indultum de percipiendis
fructibus in absentia hujusmodi concessum fuerit praestitissent, eatenus vel
imposterum forsan praestare contigerit, juramentum ac quibusvis privilegiis and
indultis generalibus vel specialibus, ordinibus quibuscunque etiam Cluniacens.
and Cistercien. quomodolibet concessis, confirmatis and renovatis, innovatis,
quae praemissis quovismodo obstarent, per quae praesentibus non expressa vel
totaliter non inserta, effectus earum impediri valeat, quomodolibet vel
differri, and de quibus quorumque totis tenoribus de verbo ad verbum habenda
sit in nostris Literis m^ntio specialis, quae quoad hoc nolumus cuiquam
suffragari: quibus omnibus and fundationibus quibuscunque prout expedierit
secundum rei and Casus exigentiam ut tibi placuerit valeas derogare; quodque
aliqui super provisionibus sibi faciendis de hujusmodi vel aliis Beneficiis
Ecclesiasticis in illis partibus speciales vel generales dictae sedis vel
Legatorum ejus Literas impetratas, etiam si per eas ad inhibitionem,
reservationem, and decretum, vel alias quomodolibet, sit processum: quibus
omnibus personas, quibus per te de beneficiis praedictis providebitur, in eorum
assecutione volumus anteferri; sed nullum per hoc eis quoad assecutionem
beneficiorum aliorum praejudicium generari. Seu si Locorum Ordinariis and
Collatoribus, vel quibusvis aliis communiter, vel divisim ab eadem sit sede
indultum, quod ad receptionem vel provisionem alicujus minime teneantur, and ad
id compelli, aut quod interdici, suspendi vel excommunicari non possint,
quodque de hujusmodi vel aliis beneficiis Ecclesiasticis ad eorum collationem,
provisionem, presentationem, electionem, seu quamvis aliam dispositionem,
conjunctim vel separatim spectantibus, nulli valeat provideri, seu commenda
fieri per Literas Apostolicas; non facientes plenam and expressam, ac de verbo
ad verbum de indulto hujusmodi mentionem, and qualibet alia dictae sedis
indulgentia, generali vel speciali, cujuscunque tenoris existat, per quam
praesentibus non expressam, vel totaliter non insertam effectus Literarum
tuarum impediri valeat, quomodolibet vel differi and de qua cujusque toto
tenore habenda sit in nostris Literis mentio specialis. Et quia difficile esset
praesentes in singulis Literis tuis super praemissis comedendis inferri, aut ad
omnia Loca, in quibus de eis fides facienda esset deferri; volumus and
decernimus, earum transumptis etiam per impressionem factis and tuo sigillo
munitis; ac manu tui Secretarii aut Regentis Cancellariae tuae subscriptis,
dictisque Literis tuis absque earundem praesentium in toto vel in part
insertione, eam ubique fidem in Judicio and extra adhiberi, quae ipsis
praesentibus adhiberetur, si originaliter exhiberentur. Dat. Romae apud Sanctum
Petrum, Anno Incarnationis Domini Millesimo quingentessimo quadragessimo
tertio. Tertio Kalend. Februarii, Pontificatus nostri Anno decimo.

C. L. de Torres. N. Richardus.


In Dorso. Data in Secretaria Apostolica. De Torres.

Number 18. A Letter of the Queen's, recommending the Promotion of Cardinal
Pool to the Popedom; written to the Bishop of Winchester, the Earl of Arundel,
and the Lord Paget, then at Calice. An Original.
MARY the Queen.

Cotton Libr. Titus. B. 2.
RIght Reverend Father in God, right trusty and right well-beloved; and right
trusty and right well-beloved Cousin and Counselors, and right trusty and
well-beloved Counselors, We greet you well. And where We do consider that
Christ's Catholic Church, and the whole state of Christendom, having been of
late so sundry ways vexed, it should greatly help to further some quiet stay
and redress of that is amiss, if at this time, of the Pope's Holiness Election,
some such godly, learned, and well-disposed Person may be chosen to that Place,
as shall be given to see good Order maintained, and all Abuses in the Church
reformed; and known besides, to the World, to be of godly Life and Disposition.
And remembering, on the other side, the great Inconveniency that were like to
arise to the State of the Church, if (worldly Respects being only weighed in
this choice) any such should be preferred to that Room, as wanting those godly
Qualities before remembered, might give any occasion of the decay of the
Catholic Faith; We cannot, for the discharge of our Duty to God and the World,
but both earnestly wish, and carefully travel, that such a one may be chosen,
and that without long delay or contention, as for all respects may be most
fittest to occupy that Place, to the furtherance of God's Glory, and quietness
of Christendom. And knowing no Person in our mind more fit for that purpose,
than our dearest Cousin the Lord Cardinal Pool, whom the greatest part of
Christendom has heretofore for his long Experience, integrity of Life, and
great Learning, thought meet for that Place, We have thought good to pray you,
that taking some good occasion for that purpose, you do, in our Name, speak
with the Cardinal of Lorrain, and the Constable, and the rest of the
Commissioners of our good Brother, the French King, praying them to recommend
unto our said good Brother, in our Name, our said dearest Cousin, to be named
by him to such Cardinals as be at his Devotion, so as the rather, by his good
furtherance and means, this our Motion may take place. Whereunto if it shall
please him to give his Assent, like-as upon knowledge thereof, We shall, for our
part, also labor to set forwards the Matter the best We may; So doubt We not,
but if this Our good Purpose take effect, both He, and We, and the rest of all
Christendom, shall have good cause to give God thanks, and rejoice thereat.
Assuring him, that if We had in our Conscience thought any other Person more
fit for than Place that our said dearest Cousin, We would not, for any private
Affection, have preferred his Advancement before God's Glory, and the Benefit
of Christendom: the furtherance whereof is (We take God to Record) the only
thing We seek herein, which moves Us to be the more earnest in this Matter.
The overture whereof We have taken in hand, (as you may assure them on our
Honor) without Our said dearest Cousin's knowledge or consent. And because We
need not to remember the Wisdom, Sincerity of Life, and other godly Parts,
wherewith Almighty God has endowed our said dearest Cousin, the same being
well enough known to Our said good Brother, and his said Commissioners, and the
rest of the World; We do refer the manner of the opening and handling of the
rest of the Matter unto your own Wisdoms; praying you, We may understand from
you, as soon as ye may, what answer ye shall have received herein at the said
Commissioners hands.

Given under Our Signet, at Our Honor of Hampton Court, the 30th of May, the
first and second Years of Our Reigns.
Number 19. An Order prescribed by the King and Queens Majesty's, unto the
Justices of Peace of the County of Norfolk, for the good Government of their
Majesty's loving Subjects within the same Shire, March 26. 1555. An Original.
Philip R. Mary the Queen.

FIrst, The said Justices of the Peace assembling themselves together, Cotton
Libr. Titus B. 2.
and consulting by what good Means, good Order and Quietness may be best
continued, shall after divide themselves into eight, ten, or twelve parts, more
or less, as to their discretions, having regard to the quantity of the Shire,
and number of themselves, shall seem most convenient; endeavoring themselves,
besides their general care, that every particular number may give diligent
heed, within their Limits appointed to them, for conservation of Quietness and
good Order.

Item. The said Justices of the Peace, shall not only be aiding and assisting
unto such Preachers as be, and shall be sent unto the said County, but shall
also be themselves present at Sermons, and use the Preachers reverently,
traveling soberly with such, as by abstaining from coming to the Church, or by
any other open doings shall appear not persuaded to conform themselves, and to
use such as be wilful and obstinate, more roundly, either by rebuking them, or
binding them to good bearing, or committing them to Prison, as the Quality of
the Persons, and Circumstance of their Doings, may seem to deserve.

Item. Amongst all other things, they must lay special weight upon those which
be Preachers and Teachers of Heresy, or Procurers of secret Meetings for that
purpose.

Item. The said Justices of Peace, and every of them, must by themselves, their
Wives, Children, and Servants, show good example; and if they shall have any of
their own Servants faulty, they must first begin to reform them.

Item. The said Justices of the Peace, and every of them, shall, as much as in
them lies, procure to search out all such as shall by any means spread false
Tales, or seditious Rumors, causing them, when they shall be known, to be
further apprehended and punished according to the Laws.

Item. They shall procure to have in every Parish, or part of the Shire, as
near as may be, some one or more honest Men, secretly instructed, to give
information of the behavior of the Inhabitants amongst or about them.

Item. They shall charge the Constables, and four, or more of the most Honest
and Catholic of every Parish, with the order of the same Parish, unto whom
idle Men, Vagabonds, and such as may be probably suspected, shall be bound to
give a reckoning how they live, and where they shall be come from time to time.

Item. They shall have earnest regard to the execution, and keeping of the
Statutes against rebellious Vagabonds, and Reteinours, Alehouses, and for
keeping of the Statute of Huy-and-Cry; and shall give order for keeping of good
and substantial Watches, in places convenient, the same to begin the 20th day
of April next.

Item. As soon as any Offenders for Murder, Felony, or other Offenses shall be
taken, the said Justices of the Peace, shall cause the matter to be forthwith
examined and ordered, as to Justice shall appertain, according to the Tenor of
the Commission of Oyer and Terminer, addressed presently unto them for that
purpose.

Finally; The said Justices of Peace shall meet and consult together, at the
Sessions, every month, and more-often, as occasion may require, conferring
among themselves, upon the state of all particular parts of the Shire, and
taking such order for all Misorders, as to their Wisdoms may seem requisite.

Number 20. A Letter written by the King and Queen, requiring the Bishop of
London to go on in the prosecution of the Heretics.
Philip R. Mary the Queen.

RIght Reverend Father in God, right trusty and well-beloved, Regist. Bonn.
Fol. 363.
We greet you well. And where of late We addressed our Letters unto the
Justices of the Peace within every of the Counties of this our Realm; whereby,
amongst other Instructions given therein, for the good Order and quiet
Government of the Country about, therein they are willed to have a special
regard unto such disordered Persons, as forgetting their Duties toward
Almighty God and Us, do lean to any Erroneous and Heretical Opinions, to show
themselves conformable to the Catholic Religion of Christ's Church; whom, if
they cannot by good admonition and fair means reform, they are willed to
deliver unto the Ordinary, to be by him charitably traveled withal, and
removed (if it may be) from their naughty Opinions; or else, if they continue
obstinate, to be ordered according to the Laws provided in that behalf:
Understanding now, to our no little marvel, that diverse of the said disordered
Persons, being by the Justices of the Peace, for their contempt and obstinacy,
brought to the Ordinaries to be used as is aforesaid, are either refused to be
received at their hands, or if they be received, are neither so traveled with
as Christian Charity requires, nor yet proceeded withal according to the Order
of Justice, but are suffered to continue in their Errors, to the dishonor of
Almighty God, and dangerous example of others. Like-as We find this Matter very
strange, so have We thought convenient, both to signify this Our knowledge, and
therewith also to admonish you, to have in this behalf such regard henceforth
to the Office of a good Pastor and Bishop, as when any such Offenders shall be
by the said Justices of Peace brought unto you, ye do use your good wisdom and
discretion, in procuring to remove them from their Errors, if it may be, or
else in proceeding against them, (if they shall continue obstinate) according
to the order of the Laws; so as through your good furtherance, both God's Glory
may be the better advanced, and the Commonwealth the more quietly governed.

Given under Our Signet, at Our Honor of Hampton Court, the 24th of May, in
the first and second Years of Our Reigns.
Number 21. Sir T. More's Letter to Cromwell, concerning the Nun of Kent.
Right Worshipful,
Ex MSS. Norfolcianis in Col. Gresham.
AFter my most hearty recommendation, with like thanks for your Goodness, in
accepting of my rude long Letter. I perceive, that of your further goodness and
favor toward me, it liked your Mastership to break with my Son Roper, of
that, that I had had communication, not only with diverse that were of
Acquaintance with the lewd Nun of Canterbury, but also with her self; and had,
over that, by my writing, declaring favor toward her, given her advice and
counsel; of which my demeanor, that it likes you to be content to take the
labor and the pain to hear, by mine own writing, the truth, I very heartily
thank you, and reckon my self therein right deeply beholden to you.

It is, I suppose, about eight or nine Years ago since I heard of that Housewife
first; at which time, the Bishop of Canterbury that then was, God assoil his
Soul, sent unto the King's Grace a roll of Paper, in which were written certain
words of hers, that she had, as report was then made, at sundry times spoken in
her Trances; whereupon it pleased the King's Grace to deliver me the Roll,
commanding me to look thereon, and afterward show him what I thought therein.
Whereunto, at another time, when his Highness asked me, I told him, That in
good faith I found nothing in these words that I could any thing regard or
esteem; for seeing that some part fell in Rithm, and that, God wots, full rude
also; for any reason, God wots, that I saw therein, a right simple Woman might,
in my mind, speak it of her own wit well enough. Howbeit, I said, that because
it was constantly reported for a truth, that God wrought in her, and that a
Miracle was showed upon her; I durst not, nor would not, be bold in judging the
Matter. And the King's Grace, as me thought, esteemed the Matter as light as it
after proved lewd.

From that time, till about Christmas was twelvemonth, albeit that
continually there was much talking of her, and of her Holiness, yet never heard
I any talk rehearsed, either of Revelation of hers, or Miracle, saving that I
heard say diverse times, in my Lord Cardinal's days, that she had been both with
his Lordship, and with the King's Grace, but what she said, either to the one
or to the other, upon my Faith, I had never heard any one word. Now, as I was
about to tell you, about Christmas was twelvemonth, Father Risby Friar
Observant, then of Canterbury, lodged one night at mine House; where, after
Supper, a little before he went to his Chamber, he fell in communication with
me of the Nun, giving her high commendation of Holiness, and that it was
wonderful to see and understand the Works that God wrought in her; which thing,
I answered, That I was very glad to hear it, and thanked God thereof. Then he
told me, that she had been with my Lord Legate in his Life, and with the King's
Grace too; and that she had told my Lord Legate a Revelation of hers, of three
Swords that God has put in my Lord Legat's hand, which if he ordered not well,
God would lay it sore to his Charge. The first, he said, was the ordering the
Spirituality under the Pope, as Legate. The second, The Rule that he bore in
order of the Temporality under the King, as his Chancellor. And the third, she
said, was the meddling he was put in trust with by the King, concerning the
great matter of his Marriage. And therewithal I said unto him, That any
Revelation of the King's Matters I would not hear of, I doubt not but the
goodness of God should direct his Highness with his Grace and Wisdom, that the
thing should take such end as God should be pleased with, to the King's Honor,
and Surety of the Realm. When he heard me say these words, or the like, he said
unto me, That God had specially commanded her to pray for the King; and
forthwith he brake again into her Revelations concerning the Cardinal, that his
Soul was saved by her Mediation; and without any other Communication went unto
his Chamber. And he and I never talked any more of any such manner of matter,
nor since his departing on the Morrow; I never saw him after, to my
remembrance, till I saw him at Paul's Cross.

After this, about Shrovetide, there came unto me, a little before Supper,
Father Rich, Friar Observant of Richmond; and as we fell in talking, I asked
him of Father Risby, how he did? And upon that occasion, he asked me, Whether
Father Risby had any thing showed me of the Holy Nun of Kent? and I said, Yea,
and that I was very glad to hear of her Virtue. I would not, quoth he, tell you
again that you have heard of him already; but I have heard, and known, many
great Graces that God has wrought in her, and in other Folk, by her, which I
would gladly tell you, if I thought you had not heard them already. And
therewith he asked me, Whether Father Risby had told me any thing of her being
with my Lord Cardinal? and I said, Yea: Then he told you, quoth he, of the
three Swords: Yea verily, quoth I. Did he tell you, quoth he, of the
Revelations that she had concerning the King's Grace? Nay forsooth, quoth I,
nor if he would have done, I would not have given him the hearing; nor verily
no more I would indeed, for since she has been with the King's Grace her self,
and told him, me-thought it a thing needless to tell me, or to any Man else.
And when Father Rich perceived that I would not hear her Revelations concerning
the King's Grace, he talked on a little, of her Virtue, and let her Revelations
alone; and therewith my Supper was set upon the Board, where I required him to
sit with me; but he would in no wise tarry, but departed to London. After that
night I talked with him twice, once in mine own House, another time in his own
Garden at the Friars, at every time a great space, but not of any Revelations
touching the King's Grace, but only of other mean Folk, I knew not whom of,
which things, some were very strange, and some were very childish. But albeit,
that he said, He had seen her lie in her Trance in great pains, and that he had
at other times taken great spiritual comfort in her Communication; yet did he
never tell me that she had told him those Tales her self; for if he had, I
would, for the Tale of Mary Magdalen which he told me, and for the Tale of the
Hostie, with which, as I have heard she said she was Houseled at the King's
Mass at Calice: If I had heard it of him, as told unto himself by her Mouth for
a Revelation, I would have both liked him and her the worse. But whether ever I
heard the same Tale of Rich or of Risby, or of neither of them both, but of
some other Man since she was in hold, In good faith I cannot tell; but I wot
well when or wheresoever I heard it, me thought it a Tale too mavelous to be
true, and very likely that she had told some Man her Dream, which told it out
for a Revelation. And in effect, I little doubted but that some of these Tales
that were told of her were untrue; but yet since I never heard them reported as
spoken by her own Mouth, I thought nevertheless that many of them might be
true, and she a very virtuous Woman too; as some Lies be peradventure written
of some that be Saints in Heaven, and yet many Miracles indeed done by them for
all that.

After this, I being upon a day at Sion, and talking with diverse of the Fathers
together at the Grate, they showed me that she had been with them, and showed
me diverse things that some of them misliked in her; and in this talking, they
wished that I had spoken with her, and said, they would fain see how I should
like her. Whereupon, afterward, when I heard that she was there again, I came
thither to see her, and to speak with her my self. At which Communication had,
in a little Chapel, there were none present but we two: in the beginning
whereof, I showed that my coming to her was not of any curious mind, any thing
to know of such things as Folk talked, that it pleased God to reveal and show
unto her, but for the great Virtue that I had heard so many Years, every day
more and more spoken and reported of her; I therefore had a great mind to see
her, and be acquainted with her, that she might have somewhat the more occasion
to remember me to God in her Devotion and Prayers; whereunto she gave me a very
good virtuous Answer, That as God did of his goodness far better by her than
she, a poor Wretch, was worthy, so she feared that many Folk yet beside that
spoke of their own favorable minds many things for her, far above the Truth,
and that of me she had many such things heard, that already she prayed for me,
and ever would; whereof I heartily thanked her. I said unto her, Madam, one
Hellen, a Maiden dwelling about Totnam, of whose Trances and Revelations there
has been much talking; she has been with me of late, and showed me, that she
was with you, and that after the rehearsal of such Visions as she had seen you
showed her, that they were no Revelations, but plain Illusions of the Devil,
and advised her to cast them out of her mind: And verily she gave therein good
credence unto you, and thereupon has left to lean any longer unto such Visions
of her own: Whereupon she says, she finds your words true, for ever since,
she has been the less visited with such things as she was wont to be before.
To this she answered me, Forsooth Sir, There is in this point no praise unto
me, but the goodness of God, as it appears, has wrought much meekness in her
Soul, which has taken my rude warning so well, and not grudged to hear her
Spirit and her Visions reproved. I liked her, in good Faith, better for this
Answer, than for many of these things that I heard reported by her. Afterward
she told me, upon that occasion, how great need Folk have, that are visited
with such Visions, to take heed, and prove well of what Spirit they come of;
and in that Communication she told me, That of late the Devil, in likeness of a
Bird, was flying and fluttering about her in a Chamber, and suffered himself to
be taken; and being in hands, suddenly changed, in their sight that were
present, into such a strange ugly fashioned Bird; that they were all afraid,
and threw him out at a Window.

For conclusion; we talked no word of the King's Grace, or any great Personage
else, nor in effect, of any Man or Woman, but of her self and my self; but
after no long communication had, for or ever we met, my time came to go home, I
gave her a Double Ducate, and prayed her to pray for me and mine, and so
departed from her, and never spoke with her after. Howbeit, of a truth, I had a
great good opinion of her, and had her in great estimation, as you shall
perceive by the Letter that I wrote unto her. For afterward, because I had
often heard that many right worshipful Folks, as well Men as Women, used to
have much communication with her; and many Folk are of nature inquisitive and
curious, whereby they fall sometimes into such talking, and better were to
forbear, of which thing I nothing thought while I talked with her of Charity,
therefore I wrote her a Letter thereof; which since it may be peradventure, that
she brake or lost, I shall insert the very Copy thereof in this present Letter.

These were the very words.
GOod Madam, and my right dearly-beloved Sister in our Lord God, after most
hearty Commendation, I shall beseech you to take my good Mind in good worth,
and pardon me, that I am so homely as of my self unrequired, and also without
necessity, to give counsel to you, of whom for the good Inspirations, and great
Revelations that it likes Almighty God of his goodness to give and show, as
many wise, well-learned, and very virtuous Folk testify, I my self have need,
for the comfort of my Soul, to require and ask Advice. For surely, good Madam,
since it pleases God sometime to suffer, such as are far under and of little
estimation, to give yet fruitful advertisement to such other as are in the
Light of the Spirit so far above them, that there were between them no
comparison; as he suffered his High Prophet Moses to be in some things advised
and counseled by Jethro, I cannot, for the love that in our Lord I bear you,
refrain to put you in remembrance of one thing, which in my poor mind I think
highly necessary to be by your Wisdom considered, referring the end, and the
order thereof, to God and his Holy Spirit, to direct you. Good Madam, I doubt
not, but that you remember that in the beginning of my Communication with you,
I showed you, that I neither was, nor would be, curious of any knowledge of
other Men's Matters, and least of all of any Matter of Princes, or of the Realm,
in case it so were, that God had, as to many good Folks before-time, he has
any time revealed unto you such things, I said unto your Ladyship, that I was
not only not desirous to hear of, but also would not hear of. Now Madam, I
consider well that many Folk desire to speak with you, which are not all
peradventure of my mind in this Point; but some hap to be curious and
inquisitive of things that little pertain unto their parts; and some might
peradventure hap to talk of such things as might peradventure after turn to
much harm; as I think you have heard how the late Duke of Buckingham, moved
with the fame of one that was reported for an Holy Monk, and had such talking
with him, as after was a great part of his destruction, and disheriting of his
Blood, and great slander and infamy of Religion. It suffices me, good Madam,
to put you in remembrance of such things, as I nothing doubt your Wisdom, and
the Spirit of God shall keep you from talking with any Person, specially with
high Persons, of any such manner things as pertain to Princes Affairs, or the
State of the Realm, but only to commune and talk with any Person, high and low,
of such manner things as may to the Soul be profitable for you to show, and for
them to know. And thus, my good Lady, and dearly beloved Sister in our Lord, I
make an end of this my needless advertisement unto you, whom the Blessed
Trinity preserve and increase in Grace, and put in your mind to recommend me
and mine unto him in your devout Prayers. At Chelsey, this Tuesday, by the Hand
of

Your hearty loving Brother and Beadsman, Thomas More Knight.


At the receipt of this Letter, she answered my Servant, that she heartily
thanked me: Soon after this there came to mine House the Prior of the
Charterhouse at Shene, and one Brother Williams with him, who nothing talked to
me, but of her, and of the great joy that they took in her Virtue, but of any
of her Revelations they had no communication. But at another time Brother
Williams came to me, and told me a long Tale of her, being at the House of a
Knight in Kent, that was sore troubled with Temptations to destroy himself; and
none other thing we talked of, nor should have done of likelihood, though we
had tarried together much longer, he took so great pleasure, good Man, to tell
the Tale, with all the Circumstances at length. When I came again another day
to Sion, on a day in which there was a Profession, some of the Fathers asked me
how I liked the Nun? And I answered, that, in good Faith, I liked her very well
in her talking; howbeit, quoth I, she is never the nearer tried by that, for I
assure you, she were likely to be very bad, if she seemed good, e're I should
think her other, till she happened to be proved naught; and in good Faith, that
is my manner indeed, except I were set to search and examine the truth, upon
likelihood of some cloaked evil; for in that case, although I nothing suspected
the Person my self, yet no less than if I suspected him sore, I would as far,
as my wit would serve me, search to find out the truth, as your self has done
very prudently in this Matter; wherein you have done, in my mind, to your great
laud and praise, a very meritorious Deed, in bringing forth to light such
detestable Hypocrisy, whereby every other Wretch may take warning, and be
feared to set forth their own devilish dissembled falsehood, under the manner
and color of the wonderful Work of God; for verily, this Woman so handled her
self, with help of that evil Spirit that inspired her, that after her own
Confession declared at Paul's Cross, when I sent word by my Servant unto the
Prior of the Charterhouse, that she was undoubtedly proved a false deceiving
Hypocrite; The good Man had had so good opinion of her so long, that he could
at the first scantly believe me therein. Howbeit it was not he alone that
thought her so very good, but many another right good Man besides, as little
marvel was upon so good report, till she was proved naught.

I remember me further, that in Communication between Father Rich and me; I
counseled him, that in such strange things as concerned such Folk as had come
unto her, to whom, as she said, she had told the causes of their coming, e're
themselves spoke thereof; and such good Fruit as they said that many Men had
received by her Prayer, he, and such other as so reported it, and thought that
the knowledge thereof should much pertain to the Glory of God, should first
cause the things to be well and sure examined by the Ordinaries, and such as
had Authority thereunto; so that it might be surely known whether the things
were true or not, and that there were no Letters intermingled among them, or
else the Letters might after hap to aweigh the credence of these things that
were true. And when he told me the Tale of Mary Magdalen, I said unto him,
Father Rich, that she is a good virtuous Woman, in good Faith, I hear so many
good Folk so report, that I verily think it true; and think it well-likely that
God works some good and great things by her; but yet are, you wot well, these
strange Tales no part of our Creed; and therefore before you see them surely
proved, you shall have my poor counsel, not to wed your self so far forth to
the credence of them, as to report them very surely for true, least that if it
should hap that they were afterward proved false, it might minish your
estimation in your Preaching, whereof might grow great loss. To this he thanked
me for my counsel, but how he used it after that, I cannot tell.

Thus have I, good Mr. Cromwell, fully declared to you, as far as my self can
call to remembrance, all that ever I have done or said in this Matter, wherein
I am sure that never one of them all shall tell you any further thing of
effect; for if any of them, or any Man else, report of me, as I trust verily no
Man will, and I wot well truly no Man can, any Word or Deed by me spoken or
done, touching any breach of my legal Truth and Duty toward my most redoubted
Sovereign, and natural Liege Lord, I will come to mine Answer, and make it good
in such wise as becomes a poor true Man to do; that whosoever any such thing
shall say, shall therein say untrue: for I neither have in this Matter done
evil, nor said evil, nor so much as any evil thing thought, but only have been
glad, and rejoiced of them that were reported for good; which condition I shall
nevertheless keep toward all other good Folk, for the false cloaked Hypocrisy
of any of these, no more than I shall esteem Judas the true Apostle, for Judas
the false Traitor.

But so purpose I to bear my self in every Man's Company, while I live, that
neither good Man nor bad, neither Monk, Friar, nor Nun, nor other Man or Woman
in this World, shall make me digress from my Truth and Faith, either toward
God, or toward my natural Prince, by the Grace of Almighty God; and as you
therein find me true, so I heartily therein pray you to continue toward me your
favor and good will, as you shall be sure of my poor daily prayer; for other
pleasure can I not do you. And thus the Blessed Trinity, both bodily and
ghostly, long preserve and prosper you.

I pray you pardon me, that I write not unto you of mine own hand, for verily I
am compelled to forbear writing for a while, by reason of this Disease of mine,
whereof the chief occasion is grown, as it is thought, by the stooping and
leaning on my Breast, that I have used in writing. And thus, eft-soons, I
beseech our Lord long to preserve you.

Number 22. Directions of Queen Mary to her Council, touching the Reformation
of the Church, out of her own Original.
Ex M. S. D, G. Petyte.
FIrst, That such as had Commission to talk with my Lord Cardinal at his first
coming, touching the Goods of the Church, should have recourse unto him, at the
least once in a week, not only for putting these Matters in execution, as much
as may be, before the Parliament, but also to understand of him which way might
be best to bring to good effect, those Matters that have been begun concerning
Religion, both touching good Preaching, I wish, that may supply and overcome
the evil Preaching in time past; and also to make a sure Provision, that no
evil Books shall either be printed, bought, or sold, without just punishment.
Therefore I think it should be well done, that the Universities and Churches of
this Realm, should be visited by such Persons as my Lord Cardinal, with the
rest of you, may be well assured to be worthy and sufficient Persons to make a
true and just account thereof, remitting the choice of them to him and you.
Touching punishment of Heretics, me thinks it ought to be done without
rashness, not leaving in the mean while to do Justice to such, as by Learning
would seem to deceive the simple; and the rest so to be used, that the People
might well perceive them not to be condemned without just occasion, whereby
they shall both understand the Truth, and beware to do the like. And especially
in London, I would wish none to be burnt, without some of the Councils
presence, and both there and everywhere, good Sermons at the same. I verily
believe that many Benefices should not be in one Man's hand, but after such
sort as every Priest might look to his own Charge, and remain resident there,
whereby they should have but one Bond to discharge toward God; Whereas now
they have many, which I take to be the cause that in most part of this Realm
there is overmuch want of good Preachers, and such as should with their
Doctrine overcome the evil diligence of the abused Preachers in the time of
Schism, not only by their Preaching, but also by their good Example, without
which, in mine Opinion, their Sermons shall not so much profit as I wish. And
like-as their good Example, on their behalf, shall undoubtedly do much good, so
I account my self bound, on my behalf also, to show such example, in
encouraging and maintaining those Persons, well-doing their Duty, (not
forgetting, in the mean while, to correct and punish them which do contrary)
that it may be evident to all this Realm how I discharge my Conscience therein,
and minister true Justice in so doing.

Number 23. Injunctions by Hugh Latimer Bishop of Worcester, to the Prior and
Convent of St. Mary House in Worcester, 1537. Hugh, by the goodness of God,
Bishop of Worcester, wishes to his Brethren, the Prior and Convent aforesaid,
Grace, Mercy, Peace, and true knowledge of God's Word; from God our Father, and
our Lord Jesus Christ.
Forasmuch as in this my Visitation, L. 3 us Reg. Prior. and Convent. Wigorn.
I evidently perceive the Ignorance and Negligence of diverse Religious Persons
in this Monastery to be intolerable, and not to be suffered; for that thereby
does reign Idolatry, and many kinds of Superstitions, and other Enormities: And
considering withal, that our Sovereign Lord the King, for some part of Remedy
of the same, has granted, by his most gracious License, that the Scripture of
God may be read in English, of all his obedient Subjects. I therefore, willing
your Reformation in most favorable manner, to your least displeasur; do
heartily require you all, and every one of you, and also in God's behalf
command the same, according as your Duty is, to obey me as God's Minister, and
the Kings, in all my lawful and honest Commandments, that you observe and keep
inviolably, all these Injunctions following, under pain of the Law.

FIrst; Forasmuch as I perceive that some of you neither have observed the
King's Injunctions, nor yet have them with you, as willing to observe them;
therefore ye shall from henceforth, both have and observe diligently and
faithfully, as well special commandments of Preaching, as other Injunctions
given in his Graces Visitation.

Item. That the Prior shall provide, of the Monasteries charge, a whole Bible
in English, to be laid fast chained in some open place, either in their Church
or Cloister.

Item. That every Religious Person have, at the least, a New Testament in
English, by the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord next ensuing.

Item. Whenever there shall be any Preaching in your Monastery, that all
manner of Singing, and other Ceremonies, be utterly laid aside in his preaching
time; and all other Service shortened, as need shall be; and all Religious
Persons quietly to hearken to the Preaching.

Item. That ye have a Lecture of Scripture read every day in English amongst
you, save Holy Days.

Item. That every Religious Person be at every Lecture, from the beginning to
the ending, except they have a necessary Let allowed them by the Prior.

Item. That every Religious House have a Layman to their Steward, for all
former Businesses.

Item. That you have a continual Schoolmaster, sufficiently learned, to teach
your Grammar.

Item. That no Religious Person discourage any manner of Layman or Woman, or
any other from the reading of any good Book, either in Latin or English.

Item. That the Prior have at his Dinner or Supper, every day a Chapter read,
from the beginning of the Scripture to the end, and that in English,
wheresoever he be in any of his own Places, and to have edifying communication
of the same.

Item. That the Covent sit together, four to one Mess, and to eat together in
common, and to have Scripture read in likewise, and have communication thereof;
and after their Dinner or Supper, their Relics and Fragments to be
distributed to the poor People.

Item. That the Covent and Prior, provide Distributions to be ministered in
every Parish, whereas ye be Parsons and Proprietaries, and according to the
King's Injunctions in that behalf.

Item. That all these my Injunctions be read every month, once in the Chapter
House, before all the Brethren.

Number 24. A Letter of Ann Boleyn's to Gardner.
Ex Chartophylac. Regio.
Mr. Stephens, I thank you for my Letter, wherein I perceive the willing and
faithful Mind that you have to do me pleasure, not doubting, but as much as is
possible for Man's Wit to imagine, you will do. I pray God to send you well to
speed in all your Matters, so that you would put me to the study, how to reward
your high Service: I do trust in God you shall not repent it, and that the end
of this Journey shall be more pleasant to me than your first, for that was but
a rejoicing hope, which ceasing the lack of it, does put me to the more pain,
and they that are partakers with me, as you do know: And therefore I do trust
that this hard beginning, shall make the better ending.

Mr. Stephens, I send you here Cramp-Rings for you and Mr. Gregory, and Mr.
Peter, praying you to distribute them as you think best. And have me
recommended heartily to them both, as she, that you may assure them, will be
glad to do them any pleasure which shall lie in my power. And thus I make an
end, praying God send you good health.

Written at Greenwich, the 4th day of April. By your assured Friend, Ann Boleyn.

Number 25.
The Office of Consecrating the Cramp-Rings. Certain Prayers to be used by the
Queen's Highness, in the Consecration of the Cramp-Ring.
DEus misereatur nostri and benedicat nos Deus, Ex M S. in Biblioth. R. Smith.
Land
illuminet vultum suum super nos and misereatur nostri.

Ut cognoscamus in terra viam tuam, in omnibus gentibus salutare tuum.

Confiteantur tibi Populi Deus, confiteantur tibi populi omnes.

Laetentur and exultent gentes, quoniam judicas populos in equitate, and gentes
in terra dirigis.

Confiteantur tibi Populi Deus, confiteantur tibi populi omnes, terra dedit
fructum suum.

Benedicat nos Deus, Deus noster, benedicat nos Deus and metuent eum omnes
fines terrae.

Gloria Patri, and Filio, and Spiritui Sancto.

Sicut erat in principio, and nunc, and semper, and in soecula, soeculorum.
Amen.

Omnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui ad solatium humani generis, varia ac
multiplicia miseriarum nostrarum levamenta uberrimis gratiae tuae donis ab
inexhausto benignitatis tuae font manantibus, incessanter tribuere dignatus
es, and quos ad Regalis sublimitatis fastigium extulisti, insignioribus gratiis
ornatos, Donorumque tuorum organa atque canales esse voluisti, ut sicut per te
regnant aliisque praesunt, ita te authore reliquis prosint, and tua in populum
beneficia conferant; preces nostras propitius respice, and quae tibi vota
humilime fundimus, benignus admit, ut quod a te majores nostri de tua
misericordia sperantes obtinuerunt, id nobis etiam pari fiducia postulantibus
concedere digneris. Per Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

The Rings lying in one Basin, or more, this Prayer to be said over them.
DEus Coelestium terrestriumque conditor creaturarum, atque humani generis
benignissime reparator, Dator spiritualis gratiae, omniumque benedictionum
largitor, immitte Spiritum Sanctum tuum Paracletum de caelis super hos Annulos
art fabrili confectos, eosque magna tua potentia ita emundare digneris, ut
omni nequitia lividi venenosique serpentis procul expulsa, metallum a te bono
conditore creatum, a cunctis inimici sordibus maneat immune. Per Christum
Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Benedictio Annulorum.
Deus Abraham, Deus Isaac, Deus Jacob, exaudi misericors preces nostras, parce
metuentibus, propitiare supplicibus, and mittere digneris Sanctum Angelum tuum
de Coelis qui Sanctificet and benedicat annulos istos, ut sint remedium
salutare omnibus nomen tuum humiliter implorantibus, ac semetipsos pro
conscientia delictorum suorum accusantibus, atque ante conspectum Divinae
Clementiae tuae facinora sua deplorantibus, and serenissimam pietatem tuam
humiliter obnixeque flagitantibus; prosint denique per invocationem Sancti tui
nominis omnibus istos gestantibus, ad corporis and animae sanitatem. Per
Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Benedictio.
Deus qui in morbis curandis maxima semper potentiae tuae miracula declarasti,
quique annulos in Juda Patriarcha fidei arrabonem, in Aarone Sacerdotale
ornamentum, in Dario fidelis custodiae Symbolum, and in hoc Regno variorum
morborum remedia esse voluisti, hos annulos propitius benedicere and
sanctificare digneris: ut omnes qui eos gestabunt sint immunes ab omnibus
Satanae insidiis, sint armati virtute coelestis defensionis, nec eos infestet
vel nervorum contractio, vel comitialis morbi pericula, sed sentiant te
opitulante in omni morborum genere Levamen. In nomine Patris and Filii and
Spiritus Sancti. Amen.

Benedic anima mea Domino: and omnia quae intra me sunt nomini sancto ejus.
Here follows the rest of that Psalm.
Immensam clementiam tuam Misericors Deus humiliter imploramus, ut qua animi
fiducia and fidei sinceritate, ac certa mentis pietate, ad haec impetranda
accedimus, pari etiam devotione gratiae tuae symbola fideles prosequantur;
facessat omnis superstitio, procul absit Diabolicae fraudis suspitio, and in
gloria tui nominis omnia cedant; ut te Largitorem bonorum omnium fideles tui
intelligant, atque a te uno quicquid vel animis vel corporibus vere prosit,
profectum sentiant and profiteantur. Per Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

These Prayers being said, the Queens Highness rubbeth the Rings between her
Hands, saying;
Sanctifica Domine Annulos istos, and rore tuae benedictionis benignus asperge,
ac manuum nostrarum confricatione, quas olei sacri infusione externa,
sanctificare dignatus es pro ministerii nostri modo, consecra, ut quod natura
metalli praestare non possit, gratiae tuae magnitudine efficiatur. Per Christum
Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Then must Holy Water be cast on the Rings, saying;
In Nomine Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti. Amen. Domine Fili Dei
unigenite, Dei and Hominum Mediator, Jesu Christ, in cujus unius nomine salus
recte quaeritur, quique in te sperantibus facilem ad Patrem accessum
conciliasti, quem quicquid in nomine tuo peteretur, id omne daturum, eum
certissimo veritatis Oraculo ab ore tuo Sancto, quum inter homines versabaris
homo pronunciasti, precibus nostris aures tuae pietatis accommoda, ut ad
thronum gratiae in tua fiducia accedentes, quod in Nomine tuo humiliter
postulavimus, id a nobis, te mediante, impetratum fuisse, collatis per te
beneficiis, fideles intelligant. Qui vivis and regnas cum Deo patre in unitate
Spiritus Sancti Deus, per omnia soecula soeculorum. Amen.

Vota nostra quaesumus Domine, Spiritus Sanctus qui a te procedit, aspirando
preveniat, and prosequatur, ut quod ad salutem fidelium confidenter petimus,
gratiae tuae dono efficaciter consequamur. Per Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Majestatem tuam Clementissime Deus, Pater, Filius, and Spiritus Sanctus,
suppliciter exoramus, ut quod ad nominis tui sanctificationem piis hic
Ceremoniis peragitur, ad corporis simul and animae tutelam valeat in terris,
and ad uberiorem foelicitatis fructum proficiat in Coelis.

Qui vivis and regnas Deus, per omnia soecula soeculorum. Amen.

Number 26. A Letter of Gardiners to King Henry the Eighth, concerning the
Divorce. An Original.
Pleases it your Majesty to understand, Ex Chartophylac. Regio.
that besides all other means used to the Pope's Holiness, for attaining and
atchieving your Highness Purpose and Intent, such as in our common Letters to
my Lord Legat's Grace, and my several Letters to the same be contained at
length. I have also apart showed unto the Pope's Holiness, that which your
Highness showed me in your Gallery at Hampton Court, concerning the
solicitation of the Princes of Almayn, and such other Matter as should and
ought to fear the Pope's said Holiness; adding also those Reasons which might
induce the same to adhere expressly to your Highness, and the French King, and
so to take the more courage to accomplish your Highness Desires: using all ways
possible to enforce him to do somewhat, being a Man of such Nature, as he never
resolves any thing, but by some violent Affection compelled thereunto. And
considering we can speed no better at his hands, it agrees with that your
Majesty, of your high Wisdom before perpended, that his Holiness would do
nothing which might offend the Emperor, unless he first determined himself to
adhere to your Highness, and the French King, and so to declare himself,
containing himself no longer in Neutrality; which he will not do: Ne the State
of the Affairs here considered, it were for his Wealth so to do, unless the
Leagues otherwise proceeded than they yet do, or that his Holiness would
determine himself to leave these Parts, and establish his See in some other
Place; forasmuch, as here being, he is daily in danger of the Imperial's, like
as we have signified by our other Letters. His Holiness is in great perplexity
and agony of Mind, nor can tell what to do: he seems in words, fashion, and
manner of speaking, as though he would do somewhat for your Highness; and yet,
when it comes to the Point, nothing he does: I dare not say certainly, whether
it be for fear, or want of good Will, for I were loath to make a Lie of him, or
to your Highness, my Prince, Sovereign Lord and Master. Finally, I perceive
this by the Pope, and all other here, that so your Highness cause were
determined there by my Lord's Legates, they would be glad thereof; and, as I
think, if the Emperor would make any Suit against that which shall be done
there, they would serve him as they now do your Highness, and so drive off the
time, for they seem to be so minded, as in this Cause they would suffer much,
but do very little: Wherefore if my Lord Campegius will set apart all other
respects, and frankly promise your Highness to give Sentence for you, then must
be your Highness Remedy short and expedite; nor shall there want wit, by
another means, to meet with such delays, as this false counterfeit Breve has
caused. For with these Men here, your Highness shall by no Suit profit; which
thing I write unto your Highness, as of my most bounden Duty I ought to do:
there shall every day rise new Devices, and none take effect, but long delays,
and wasted time: wherefore doing what I can yet to get the best, although we be
fully answered therein, I shall do what I can to get the Commission amplified
as much as may be, and at the least, to extend to the reprobation of the Brief,
if I can, for I dare promise nothing to your Majesty at this Man's hands; and
that which shall be obtained, if any be obtained, shall be, according to your
Highness Pleasure, sent by Mr. Bryan.

And whereas your Highness, in your gracious Letters directed to me and my
Colleagues, marvelleth that I have not e're this advertised the same, of such
Bulls as your Majesty willed me to impetrate here; I thought verily, that
forasmuch as the same be to be impetrate at the Pope's Hand, and that we
signified unto your Majesty, by our Letters, of the Pope's great Sickness, and
how we could not have access unto the same, that it had been superfluous for
me, in my Letters, to make any mention of the said Bulls: signifying unto your
Highness now, that having those Matters, as it becomes me to have in good
remembrance, I have not yet broken with the Pope's Holiness in them, nor
thought good to interrupt the Prosecution of your Highness Matter, with the
pursuit of those, saving that I spoke a word to the Pope's Holiness, de
Ecclesiis Cathedralibus, and his Holiness said nothing could be done till the
Cardinal Sanctorum Quatuor be recovered. In other things I speak not; for our
Audience with the Pope's Holiness has been so scarce, that we thought it
little enough to spend the same in your Highness principal Matter.

And to advertise your Highness what Counsel is here conducted for the defense
of your Majesty's Cause, the same shall understand that this Court, as it has
suffered in all other things, so it is also much appeyred in Learned Men, and
of them that be, we dare not trust every one, ne Causa Majestatis vestrae illis
denudata, they should, prodere illam Adversariis; wherefore counselling, as yet
only with two, the one called Dominus Michael, the other Dominus Sigismundus;
we perceiving nothing to be solicited openly on the other side, and that here
as yet, has been no need to dispute openly, have communicate your Highness
Matter to no more. And as for that Article, Quod Papa non possit dispensare,
the Pope himself will hear no Disputations in it; and so he might retain your
Highness good Mind, he seems not to care for himself, whether your Highness
Cause be decided by that Article or no, so he did it not: but surely it
appears, as a Man may gather by his fashion and manner, that he has made his
account no further to meddle in your Highness Matter, neither with your
Majesty, nor against the same, but follow that shall be done by his Legates
there. Wherefore if my Lord Campegius would promise your Majesty to give
Sentence frankly and apertly, having propitium Judice, I would trust, being
there with such Consultations as I should bring from hence to say somewhat to
this Breve there, Apud illos and ista est Sacra Anchora Majestatis vestrae, for
from hence shall come nothing but Delays; desiring your Highness not to show
this to my Lord Campegius, nor my Lord's Grace.

Mr. Gregory sends presently unto your Highness the Promise made by the
Pope's Holiness, concerning your Highness Cause, at such time as I went to
Venice for his Cause, which Promise in the first three words, viz. Cum nos
justitiam ejus Causae perpendentes, etc. does make as much, and more, for the
maintenance of that shall be done in your Highness Cause; then if the
Commission Decretal, being in Cardinal Campegius's Hands, should be showed: and
this your Highness at your liberty to show to whom of your Council it shall
please your Grace, thinking, in my poor Opinion, that it were not the best
therefore to move the Pope in that Matter again in this adverse Time.

I most humbly desire your Majesty, that I may be a Suitor to the same for the
said Mr. Gregory; so as by your most gracious Commandment, payment may be made
there to his Factors, of such Diets as your Highness allows him: for omitting
to speak of his true, faithful, and diligent Service, which I have heretofore,
and do now perceive in him here; I assure your Highness, he lives here
sumptuously and chargeably, to your Highness Honor, and in this great
Scarcity, must needs be driven to Extremity, unless your Highness be a gracious
Lord unto him in that behalf.

Thus having none other Matter whereof privately to write unto your Majesty,
besides that is contained in our common Letters to my Lord Legat's Grace,
desiring your Highness, that I may know your Pleasure what to do, in case none
other thing can be obtained here. I shall make an end of these Letters, praying
Almighty God to preserve your most noble and royal Estate, with a short
expedition of this Cause, according to your Highness Purpose and Desire.

From Rome, the 21 day of April. Your Highness most humble Subject, Servant,
and daily Orator, Stephen Gardener.

Number 27. The Writ for the burning of Cranmer.
PHILIP and MARY, etc.

Rot. Pat. 2, and 3, Phil. and Mar. 2. par.
TO Our right trusty Nicholas, Archbishop of York, Lord Chancellor of England,
Greeting. We Will and Command you, that immediately upon the sight hereof, and
by Warrant of the same, ye do cause to be made a Writ for the Execution of
Thomas Cranmer, late Archbishop of Canterbury; and the same so made, to Seal
with our Great Seal of England, being in your Custody, according to the Tenor
and Form hereafter following.

PHilippus and Maria Dei Gratia, etc. Majori and Ballivis Civitatis Oxon.
Salutem. Cum Sanctissimus Pater noster Paulus Papa ejusdem Nominis Quartus, per
sententiam definitivam juris Ordine in ea part requisito in omnibus observato,
and juxta canonicas sanctiones judicialiter and definitive, Thomam Cranmer
nuper Cantuariensem Archiepiscopum, fore Haeresiarchum, Anathematizatum, and
Haereticum manifestum, propter suos varios nefandos Errores manifestos and
damnabiles Haereses, and detestandas and pessimas Opiniones, Fidei nostrae
Catholicae, and Vniversalis Ecclesiae determinationi obviantes and repugnantes:
and praedict. Thomam Cranmer multis modis contract. comiss. dict. affirmat.
perpetrat. and public and pertinaciter tent. and defens. judicavit,
declaravit, pronunciavit and condemnavit. and eadem causa idem Sanctissimus
Pater noster Papa Paulus quartus Iudicialiter and definitive, more solito,
praedictum Thomam Cranmer a praedicto Archiepiscopatu, aliis Praelaturis,
dignitatibus, Officiis and Beneficiis deprivavit and abjudicavit, prout cunctam
inde habemus noticiam: Cumque etiam Reverendus in Christo Pater Edmundus
Londini Episcopus, and Thomas Elien Episcopus Authoritate ejusdem Sanctissimi
nostri Patris Papae praedictum Thomam Cranmer ab omni Ordine, Gradu, Officio
and Dignitate Ecclesiastica, tanquam Haeresiarcham and Haereticum manifestum
realiter degradaverunt; Vigore cujus idem Thomas Cranmer in presenti Haereticus
and Haeresiarcha just, legitime, and Canonice Iudicatus, condemnatus and
degradatus existit; Et cum etiam Matter Ecclesia non habet quod ulterius in hac
part contra tam putridum and detestabile membrum and heresiarchum faciat aut
facere debeat, Iidem Reverendi Patres eundem Thomam Cranmer damnatum Haereticum
and Haeresiarcham brachiis and potestati nostris secularibus tradiderunt,
commiserunt and reliquerunt, prout per Literas Patentes eorundem Reverendorum
Patrum superinde confect. nobis in Cancellaria nostra Certificatum est. Nos
igitur ut Zelatores Iusticiae, and Fidei Catholicae Defensores, volentesque
Ecclesiam Sanctam, ac Iuxa and Libertates ejusdem, and Fidem Catholicam
manutenere and defendere, hujusmodi Haereses and Errores ubique, quantum in
nobis est, eradicare and extirpare, and praedictum Thomam Heresiarcham ac
convictum, damnat. and degradat. animadversione condigna punire. Attendentesque
hujusmodi Heretic. and Heresiarch. in forma praedicta convict. damnat. and
degradat. juxta Leges and consuetudines Regni nostri Angliae in hac part
consuetas ignis incendio comburi debere; Vobis Praecipimus quod dictum Thomam
Cranmer, in custodia vestra existen. in Loco publico and aperto, infra
Libertatem dicti Civitatis nostrae Oxon. ex causa praedicta, coram Populo igni
Committi, ac ipsum Thomam Cranmer in eodem igne realiter comburi facietis, in
hujusmodi Criminis detestationem, aliorum Christianorum exemplum manifestum: Et
hoc sub paena and periculo incumbente, ac prout nobis subinde respondere
volueritis, nullatenus Omittatis. Test. nobis ipsis apud Westmonasterium,
Vicesimo quarto Februarii, Annis Regis and Reginae secundo ac tertio.

And this Bill, signed with the hand of Us the said Queen, shall be your
sufficient Warrant and Discharge for the same.

Number 28. A Commission to Bonner, and others, to search and raze Records.
PHILIP and MARY, etc.

TO the Right Reverend Father in God, Rot. Pat. 3, and 4, Phil. and Mar. 12.
Pars.
Edmond Bishop of London; and to Our trusty and well-beloved Henry Cole, Doctor
of Divinity, and Dean of the Cathedral Church of St. Paul, London; and Thomas
Marten Esquire; Doctor of the Civil Law, Greeting. Where is come to Our knowledge
and understanding, that in the time of the late Schism, diverse and sundry
Accounts, Books, Scroles, Instruments, and other Writings, were practiced,
devised, and made, concerning Professions against the Pope's Holiness, and the Sea Apostolic: And also sundry and diverse infamous Scrutinies were taken in
Abbeys, and other Religious Houses, tending rather to subvert and overthrow all
good Religion, and Religious Houses, than for any Truth contained therein;
which Writings, and other the Premises, as We be informed, were delivered to
the Custody and Charge of diverse and sundry Registers, and other Officers and
Ministers of this Our Realm of England, to be by them kept and preserved. And
minding to have the said Writings, and other the Premises, brought to knowledge,
whereby they may be considered and ordered, according to Our Will and Pleasure.
And trusting in your Fidelities, Wisdoms, and Discretions, We have appointed,
and assigned you to be Our Commissioners; and by these presents do give full
Power and Authority unto you, or two of you, to call before you, or two of you,
all and singular the said Registers, and other Officers and Ministers within
this Our said Realm, to whose hands, custody, knowledge, or possession, any of
the said Accounts, Books, Scroles, Instruments, or other Writings concerning
the Premises, or any part thereof, did, or is come; giving straight charge and
commandments to them, and every of them, to bring before you, or two of you, at
their several appearance, all and singular the said Accounts, Books, Writings,
and other the Premises whatsoever: And them, and every of them, to charge by
Oath, or otherwise, to make a true Certificate and Delivery of all and singular
the said Premises, to the hands of you, or two of you; commanding you, or two
of you, to attend and execute the Premises, with effect, by all ways and means,
according to your Wisdoms and Discretions.

And of all and singular your doings therein, Our Pleasure and Commandment is,
Ye shall make Certificate unto the most Reverend Father in God, and our dearest
Cousin Reginald Pool, Lord Cardinal, Archbishop of Canterbury, Metropolitan
and Primate of England, with diligence, to the intent that further Order may be
taken therein as shall appertain; charging and commanding all and singular
Justices of Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and all other Our
Officers, Ministers, and Subjects, to be aiding, helping, assisting, and at Our
Commandment in the due execution hereof, as they tender Our Pleasure, and will
answer to the contrary at their perils.

In Witness whereof, etc. Witness the King and Queen, at Greenwich, the 29th
day of December. Per Regem and Reginam.

Number 29. Cromwell's Commission, to be Lord-Vicegerent, in all Ecclesiastical
Causes.
HEnricus Octavus, Dei Gratia, Angliae and Franciae, Rex, Cotton Libr. Cleop.
F. 2.
Fidei Defensor, Dominus Hiberniae ac in Terris Supremum totius. Ecclesiae
Anglicanae sub Christo Caput,
dilectis nobis A. B. C. D. Salutem.
In terris, supremam Ecclesiae Anglicanae sub Christo Autoritatem, etsi Regiae
Nostrae dignitati, ut praecellenti, jam inde ab adepto primum divina disponente
gratia, hujus Regni nostri Angliae Sceptro, jure nobis competierit, nunc denuo
exercere quodam modo impellimur; nempe quum hi, qui curam illius and regimen
sibi potissimum arrogabant, suis potius ipsorum privatis commodis, quam
publicae illius saluti, aut compendio consulentes, eam tandem eo calamitatis,
tum nimia licentia and in Officiis eiis commissis oscitantia, tum suis malis
exemplis devenire passi sunt, ut non ab re metuendum sit, ne illam Christus
nunc suam non agnoscat sponsam. Quamobrem nostrae Regiae excellentiae, cui
prima and suprema post Deum Auctoritas in quoscunque hujus Regni nostri
incolas, nullo sexus, aetatis, ordinis aut conditionis habito discrimine, sacro
testante eloquio, coelitus demandata est, ex muneris hujusmodi debito
potissimum incumbit, dictam Ecclesiam vitiorum vepribus, quantum cum Deo
possumus, purgare, and virtutum seminibus and plantis conserere. Porro cum hi,
qui in eadem de caeteris antehac censuram sibi vindicabant, de se vero nullam a
quovis mortalium haberi sustinebant, tum aliis hominibus plura indies
corrigenda committant, tum ex eorum corruptis moribus majori prae caeteris sunt
plebi offendiculo; ut non immerito iidem and bonorum omnium, si boni, and
malorum omnium, si contra certissimi sint Authors: Ab his igitur veluti font
and scaturigine ad universalem hujus Regni nostri and Ecclesiae Anglicanae
reformationem jure auspicandum esse duximus, haud vanam spem habentes, quod,
font primitus purgato, purus deinde and limpidus decurret rivus. Caeterum quia
ad singula hujus Regni nostri loca pro praemissis exequendis nos ipsi
personaliter obire non valemus, alios quorum Vicaria fide freti munus hujusmodi
veluti per ministros exequamur, qui quum vices nostras in ea part suppleant,
in partem solicitudinis adstitimus and vocamus. Cum itaque nos alias
praedilectum nobis Thomam Cromwell Secretarium nostrum primarium, and Rotulorum
nostrorum Magistrum sive custodem, Nostrum, ad Causas Ecclesiasticas quascunque
nostra Autoritate uti supremi capitis dictae Ecclesiae Anglicanae quomodolibet
tractand. seu ventiland. atque ad exercend. expediend. and exercend. omnem and
omnimodam jurisdictionem, Authoritatem, sive potestatem Ecclesiasticam, quae
nobistanquam supremo capiti hujusmodi competit, aut quovismodo competere
possit, aut debeat, ubilibet infra Regnum nostru^, Angliae and loca quaecunque
nobis subjecta, Vicem gerentem, Vicarium Generalem, ac Commissarium specialem
and principalem, cum potestate alium vel alios Commissarium sive Commissarios
ad praemissa, vel eorum aliqua ordinanda and deputanda, per alias literas
nostras Patentes, sigillo nostro majori communitas, constituerimus,
deputaverimus and ordinaverimus, prout ex tenore literarum nostrarum hujusmodi
before liquet. Quia tamen and ipse nostris and totius hujus Regni nostri
negotiis praepeditus existit, quominus praemissa personaliter obire and exequi
possit; Idem Thomas Cromwell Vicem gerens, Vicarius generalis and Officialis
principalis noster hujusmodi, vos A. B. C. D. prelibatos ad infra-scripta omnia
and singula vice and nomine nostris exequenda Commissarios nostros deputaverit,
ordinaverit and constituerit; Nos igitur deputationem, ordinationem, and
constitutionem hujusmodi ratam and gratam habentes, ad visitandum tam in Capite
quam in Membris, de tam plena, quam vacant, quoties, and quando vobis
opportunum visum fuerit, omnes and singulas Ecclesias, etiam Metropoliticas,
Cathedrales and Collegiatas, Hospitalia quaeque and Monasteria, tam Virorum
quam Mulierum, Prioratas, Preceptorias, Dignitates, Officia, Domos and Loca
alia Ecclesiastica, tam Scholaria quam Regularia, exempta and non exempta,
quaecunque infra Regnum nostrum Angliae, and Provincias, Civitates, Terras,
Dominia and Loca nobis Subjecta, ubicunque sita seu constituta, cujuscunque
Dignitatis, Praerogativae, Ordinis, Regulae sive conditionis existant: deque
statu and condition eorundem tam in Spiritualibus quam in Temporalibus, necnon
vita, moribus and conversatione, tam Praesidentium sive Praelatorum eorundem
quocunque nomine and dignitate, etiamsi Archiepiscopali vel Episcopali,
praefulgeant, quam aliarum personarum in eis degentium quarumcunque,
inquirendum and inquiri faciendum. Ac illos quos in ea part curiosos vel
culpabiles fore compereritis, pro modo culpae hujusmodi corrigendi, puniendi
and coercendi; ac si delicti qualitas poposcerit, officiis sive beneficiis suis
pro tempore vel in perpetuum privandi and amovendi, vel ad tempus ab eisdem
suspendendi: fructus quoque, redditus and proventus Ecclesiarum and Locorum
hujusmodi, si videbitur, sequestrandos, ac sub salvo and tuto sequestro
custodiri faciendos, atque mandando^ sequestrumque hujusmodi relaxandum ac
computum calculum and rationem, de receptis and collectis per sequestros
hujusmodi tempore sequestri, and de administratione per eosdem exigenda and
recipienda, ac been and fideliter computantes quietando and liberando deque
statu dictarum Ecclesiarum and Locorum tempore visitationis hujusmodi,
annotationem, necnon de bonis rebus and localibus eorundem inventaria facienda
and exigenda.

Statuta insuper, Ordinationes and Injunctiones particulares and generales pro
bona and laudabili conservatione, seu reformatione personarum, locorum and
ordinum praedictorum, juxta rei exigentiam, Auctoritate nostra faciendo and
imponendo: paenasque convenientes in earum violatores infligendas and
irrogandas, Synodosque, Capitula and Convocationes, tam speciales quam
generales pro praemissis vel aliis causis, and rationibus quibuscunque, quoties
and quando and ubicunque vobis visum fuerit magis expedire nomine and
auctoritate nostris concedendos and convocandos ac eas and ea celebranda
continuanda and proroganda. Clerumque and Populum ad Synodos and capitula
hujusmodi convocando and congregando ac Synodis capituli, and congregationibus
hujusmodi interessendo and praesidendo eaque inibi statuendo and ordinando quae
pro reformatione vel emendatione locorum, personarum and ordinum praedictorum
visa fuerint quomodolibet expedire. Dictasque Ecclesias, loca and personas
modis omnibus, quibus melius and efficacius valeatis ad statum honestiorem,
probatioresque vivendi mores, reducendo and reponendo. Crimina quoque,
excessus, and delicta quorumcunque subditorum nostrorum juxta comperta and
detecta quaecunque debite reformando, corrigendo and puniendo. Quoscunque
insuper subditos nostros, pro praemissis vel quibuscunque aliis causis ad forum
Ecclesiasticum quomodolibet spectantibus and pertinentibus, undecunque and
quacunque infra hoc nostrum Angliae Regnum vobis videbitur melius expedire, ad
vos and coram vobis citando and evocando: contumacesque and rebels, tam per
censuras and paenas Ecclesiasticas, quam per mulctarum impositionem ac alia
juris hujus Regni nostri remedia coercendo and puniendo. Causasque and negotia
Ecclesiastica hujusmodi cognoscendo, examinando ac sine debito terminando: and
subditos hujusmodi rei per vos judicatae stare and acquiescere cogendo and
compellendo. Resignationes insuper sive cessiones Ecclesiarum, seu locorum and
quascunque quorumcunque praedictorum factas sive faciendas recipiendo and
admittendo. Ecclesiasque and loca resignata, Vacantia, and pro vacantibus
habenda fore pronunciando and declarando: Licentiasque ad tractandu^ and
communicandu^ and concludendu^ and super pensionibus and fructibus and
emolumentis, necnon dictarum Ecclesiarum and locorum commissorum assignando:
necnon de and super, quacunque permutatione fienda quibuscunque personis
idoneis id petentibus concedendo. Pensionesque annuas congruas and moderatas,
resignantibus hujusmodi, assignando and limitando: Ecclesiasque and loca
praedicta de and super pensionum hujusmodi solutione and praestatione onerando
and obligando, ac decreta and summas in ea part necessarias seu requisitas
ferendas and promulgandas.

Electionibus quoque Praelatorum, qui per electionem hujusmodi assumi soleant
quorumcunque interessendi and praesidendi, eligendumque in eisdem dirigendo and
informando. Electiones insuper quascunque rite factas and celebratas, and
personas electas sive eligendas confirmando: ac aliter factas and celebratas
cassando and annullando, ac rite electos and confirmatos installando seu
installari faciendo. Institutiones quoque and investituras in quibuscunque
Ecclesiis and locis praedictis pendente visitatione nostra hujusmodi personis
idoneis and rite presentatis quibuscunque conferendo and concedendo, ac eos in
realem, actualem and corporalem possessionem Ecclesiarum and locorum
praedictorum indicendo seu sic induci faciendo atque mandando, cum suis juribus
and pertinentibus universis. Quaecunque insuper instrumenta, literasque tam
testimoniales, quam mandatores and rescripta alia quaecunque in ea part
necessaria, oportuna, etc.

Desunt caetera.

Number 30. A Letter written by the Monks of Glassenbury, for the new Founding
of that Abbey. An Original.
To the Right Honorable, the Lord Chamberlain to the Queen's Majesty.
Ex M S. Nob. Illustr. Com. de Huntington.
RIght Honorable, in our most humble wise, your Lordships daily Beadsman,
sometimes at the House of Glassenbury, now here Monks in Westminster, with all
due submission, we desire your Honor to extend your accustomed Virtue, as it
has been always heretofore propense to the Honor of Almighty God, to the
honorable Service of the King and Queens Majesty; So it may please your good
Lordship again, for the honor of them, both of God and their Majesty's, to put
the Queen's Highness in remembrance of her gracious Promise, concerning the
Erection of the late Monastery of Glassenbury; which Promise of her Grace has
been so by her Majesty declared. That upon the same, we your Lordships daily
Beadsmen, understanding my Lord Cardinals Grace's Pleasure to the same, by the
procurement hereof, our Reverend Father Abbot, has gotten out the Particulars;
and through a Warrant from my Lord Treasurer, our Friends there has builded,
and bestowed much upon Reparation: Notwithstanding, all now stands at a stay;
we think the cause to be want of remembrance; which cannot so well be brought
unto her Majesty's understanding, as by your Honorable Lordships favor and
help. And considering your Lordships most Godly disposition, we have a
confidence thereof to solicit the same; assuring your Lordship of our daily
Prayers while we live, and of our Successors during the World, if it may so
please your good Lordship to take it in hand.

We ask nothing in Gift to the Foundation, but only the House and Site, the
residue for the accustomed rent; So that with our Labor and Husbandry, we may
live here a few of us in our Religious Habits, till the Charity of good People
may suffice a greater number: and the Country there being so affected to our
Religion, we believe we should find more help amongst them, toward the
Reparations and Furniture of the same; whereby we would happily prevent the
ruin of much, and repair no little part of the whole, to God's Honor, and for
the better prosperity of the King and Queen's Majesty's, with the whole Realm;
for, doubtless, if it shall please your good Lordship, if there has ever been
any flagitious Deed, since the Creation of the World, punished of God, in our
Opinion the overthrow of Glassenbury may be compared to the same, not
surrendered, as other, but extorted; the Abbot preposterously put to death, with
two innocent virtuous Monks with him; that if the thing were to be skanned by
any University, or some learned Council in Divinity, they would find it more
dangerous than it is commonly taken: which might move the Queen's Majesty to
the more speedy Erection; namely, that being an House of such Antiquity, and of
Fame through all Christendom; first begun by St. Joseph of Arimathea, (who took
down the dead Body of our Savior Christ from the Cross) and lies buried in
Glassenbury: and him most heartily we beseech with us, to pray unto Christ for
good success unto your Honorable Lordship, in all your Lordships Affairs; and
now especially in this our most humble Request, that we may do the same in
Glassenbury for the King and Queens Majesty's as our Founders, and for your
good Lordship, as a singular Benefactor.

Your Lordships daily Beadsmen of Westminster, John Phagan. John Not. William
Ailewold. William Kentwyne.


Number 31. A Letter from Sir Edward Carne from Rome, showing how the Pope
dissembled with him concerning a General Peace. An Original.
Pleases it your most Excellent Majesty to be advertised, Ex Chartophylac.
Regio.
That Francis the Post arrived here upon Corpus Christi Day, with your
Majesty's most gracious Letters, as well for the expedition of the Bishoprics
of Winchester and Chester, as also for his Holiness beside; with your most
gracious Letters of the 30th of March to me: According to the purport whereof,
I sued for Audience at his Holiness Hands, the next day following; whereof I
had Answer, That I should come to his Holiness, viz. the sixth of this; and
being with his Holiness, after the delivery of your Majesty's most gracious
Letters, with your Majesty's humble Commendations, After he had read your
Majesty's Letter, in the presence of the most Reverend Lord Cardinal Morone, he
said, how much he was bound to that Blessed Queen, and most Gracious and Loving
Daughter, that had written to him so gratefully and humbly; saying, That he
would keep that Letter to be read openly in the Consistory, before all the most
Reverend Lords his Brethren; and said, that he was much bound to his Legate
there, to make that good Report of him to your Majesty. Whereupon I declared
unto him your Majesty's Pleasure, according to my Instructions, with such
Thanks and Congratulations as your Pleasure was I should use to his Holiness,
with the rest of my Instructions; leaving no part thereof undeclared and
spoken: Whereunto he said, That his Affection to that blessed Queen (making a
Cross upon your Majesty's Name contained in the Letter) was not, neither could
be as much as the goodness of her Majesty required; but this your Majesty
should be sure of, he said, that his good Affection, and good Will, should not
only continue, but increase to the utmost, to the satisfaction of your Majesty
in all that may lie in him.

And as touching the Peace to be had perfectly, betwixt the Emperor's Majesty,
and the King's most Excellent Majesty, and the French King, he was wondrous
glad to hear that your Majesty's furtherance should not want in helping to
bring the Truce, late concluded, to a perfect Peace. And of his part, he said,
that he sent two Legates for that purpose, for his discharge toward God: Or
else, he said, if he should overpass, and not declare unto them the great
Necessities of the Commonweal of all Christendom to have a perfect Peace, God
would impute his silence therein unto him, being appointed over his Flock here
as he is: For, he said, it is more than time to be doing therein, considering
that the Realm of Polonia does so waver, and that the King there neither can
nor dare, being compassed with naughty Sects round about him, do any thing
against them. And likewise the King of Romans about him. They call upon his
Holiness for help, and some Provision for Amendment; which thing he cannot do
without a General Council, which, he said, cannot be well done, unless the said
Peace be made; for though there be an Abstinence from War, yet the grudg of the
Doings heretofore, and the incertainty of Peace, will be an occasion to keep
Men of War, and the one shall be in mistrust of the other, in such sort, as the
Passages cannot be sure for those that should come to the said Council:
Therefore he will travel, as much as is possible for him, to have a Peace,
without the which it will not be possible to do any good in the Council. His
Holiness is minded to have the General Council here in St. John Latarenense,
and thinks it the most meetest Place, for diverse Considerations which he
declared; For it is the Head Church of Christendom, and there has been diverse
times many wholesome and Holy Councils in times past. And for that this City is
Communis Patria, and free to all the World to resort to freely, trusting that
all Necessaries shall come hither, both by Sea and Land. And also forasmuch as
in diverse Councils begun in times of his Predecessors, little good could be
done; and Men thought that more good might have been done, if the Pope had been
present himself in the said Councils, therefore his Holiness would be present
himself in this Council; which he cannot, being in a manner decrepit for Age,
in case it were kept far here-hence; he not being able to travel for Age,
unless it be kept here, where he trusts to be himself in Person. And for to
conclude this Matter, in such sort as the necessity of Christendom requires,
he has dispatched the two Legates, de Latere suo, at this present, wherein he
knows that your Majesty may do more than any others, and doubts not but
your Majesty will so do. Concluding that God has preserved your Majesty to
help all the World; whereunto I said, That there should not want neither good
Will, neither any other thing that your Majesty might do for the furtherance
thereof.

As touching the Provisions of Winchester and Chester, it shall be done with
all the speed that may be. And his Holiness has promised all the favor that
he can conveniently show for your Majesty's sake: It must have somewhat longer
time, for that the Process made there by my Lord Legat's Grace, for to try the
Yearly Value of Winchester, must be committed to certain Cardinals, for to
report in the Consistory, before the new Tax can be made; but there shall be no
time lost, for it shall be diligently solicited.

Also concerning the Pention to my Lord Cardinal's Grace, of a thousand Pounds
Sterling Yearly, the Pope his Holiness will assign it according to your
Majesty's Pleasure; so that all shall be done therein with all the speed that
may be, God willing; wherein the most reverend Lord, Cardinal Morone, who
rejoiceth much in your Gracious Letters sent to him, to his great comfort, does
travel, as he is most ready always, in all that touches your Majesty, or any
of your most noble Realms.

As concerning the Occurents here, since my last Letters of the fifteenth of
the last, be none other, but that the Cardinal de Caraffa, departed here-hence
toward France, the fourteenth of the last, with diverse Antiquities to be
presented to the French King. Some say here, that part of his Charge is, to
move the French King to take the Dukedom of Paleano in his Protection, as he
has Parma and Mirandula. There be a great number of Workmen already gone to
Fortify Paleano, Neptuno, and Rocca del Papa; and certain Captains appointed
and gone thither also.

The Legate to the Emperor's Majesty, and the King's Majesty, departed the 30th
of the last.

The Ambassador of Polonia is returned toward his Master. His Petition, as I
am informed, to his Holiness, was, to have License for Priests to Marry, and
all Lay-folk to receive the Communion, Sub utraque specie, in the Realm of
Polonia, and certain Dismes upon the Clergy, to be spent against the Turk. His
Answer, as I hear, was, in general, with relation of all such Matters to the
General Council.

Also there came hither four Ambassadors very honorably from the State of
Genua, with the Obedience of that State to his Holiness: Which Ambassador did
visit me, delaring the good Will, Amity, and Service, that the said State bare
toward the King, and your most Excellent Majesty, desiring me advertise your
Majesty thereof.

The 24th of the last, the Pope his Holiness kept the Anniversary of his
Coronation: I was warned to be at the Chapel, by the Officers appointed for
that purpose. Also one of his Holiness Gentlemen was sent to invite me to dine
with his Holiness that day. At my coming to the Court, the Ambassador of
Portugal being there, at his Holiness coming forth, would have kept the Place,
amongst all the Ambassadors, from me, that I was wont to stand in, that is next
the French Ambassador; And next to me would be the Ambassador of Polonia. I
came to the Ambassador of Portugal, as gently as I could; and for that he would
not give me my Place, I took him by the Shoulder, and removed him out of that
Place, saying, That it was your Majesty's Ambasdor's Place always. Beneath me
he would not stand, neither next me he should not, for the Ambassador of
Polonia who claimed next to me: Whereupon the Portugal went and complained to
the Duke of Paleano, who went straight to the Pope; and after him went the said
Ambassador of Portugal to him himself. His Holiness willed him to depart
therehence. He desired that I should depart likewise. And thereupon the Duke
came to me, saying, That the Pope his Pleasure was, I should depart also. I
asked him, Why? He said, That his Holiness, to avoid dissension, would have me
to depart. I told him, I made no Dissension; for if the other would keep his
own Place, and not usurp upon the Place, that always the Ambassors of England,
in times past, were wont to be in, he might be in quiet, and suffer me to be in
quiet likewise, and not to seek that seemed him not. All this Year he never
sought it till now, why now, I cannot tell; but he may be sure he shall not
have it of me, unless your Majesty command it. Also the Master of the Household
with his Holiness, said, That I was invited, and that Portugal was not, but
came upon his own head.

I am much bound to the Marquess, he was very angry with the Portugal, being
his Brother, to attempt any such thing against your Majesty's Ambassador; and
sent to me, as soon as he heard of it. Indeed he was not there, I kept my Place
from him, sending him to seek his Place in such sort, that all the Ambassadors
thought it well done; and others that were indifferent said no less. I told the
Duke that I would not lose a jot of your Majesty's Honor for no Man. For it is
the Place of Ambassadors of England, nigh a thousand Years before there was any
King in Portugal.

Other Occurents here be none. And thus I beseech Almighty God to conserve your
most Excellent Majesty, in long and most prosperous Life.

From Rome, the 9th of June, 1556. Your Majesty's most Humble Subject, and Poor
Servant, Edward Carne.

Number 32. A Commission for a severer way of proceeding against Heretics.
PHilip and Mary, by the Grace of God, King and Queen of England, Rot. Pat. in
Dorso. Rot. 3, and 4. Phil. and Mar. 2 p.
Spain, France, both Sicills, Jerusalem, and Ireland, and Defenders of the
Faith; Archdukes of Austria, Duke of Burgundy, Millain, and Brabant, Counts of
Harspurge, Flanders, and Tyroll. To the Right Reverend Father in God, Edmond
Bishop of London, and to the Reverend Father in God, Our right trusty, and
right well-beloved Counselor, Thomas Bishop of Ely; and to Our right trusty,
and right well-beloved, William Windsor Knight. Lord Windsor; Edward North Knight. Lord
North; and to Our trusty and right well-beloved Counselors, John Bourne Knight.
one of Our chief Secretaries; John Mordaunt Knight; Francis Englefield Knight.
Master of our Wards and Liveries; Edward Walgrave Knight. Master of Our great
Wardrobe; Nicholas Hare Knight. Master of the Rolls in our Court of Chancery; and
to Our trusty and well-beloved Thomas Pope Knight. Roger Cholmley Knight. Richard Read
Knight. Thomas Stradling Knight. and Rowland Hill Knight. William Rastall Sergeant at Law;
Henry Cole Clark, Dean of Paul's; William Roper, and Randulph Cholmley Esquires;
William Cook, Thomas Martin, John Story, and John Vaughan, Doctors of Law,
Greeting.

Forasmuch as diverse devilish and clamourous Persons, have not only invented,
bruited, and set forth diverse false Rumors, Tales, and seditious Slanders
against Us, but also have sown diverse Heresies and Heretical Opinions; and set
forth diverse seditious Books within this our Realm of England, meaning thereby
to move, procure, and stir up Divisions, Strife, Contentions, and Seditions,
not only amongst Our loving Subjects, but also betwixt Us and Our said
Subjects; with diverse other outrageous Misdemeanors, Enormities, Contempts,
and Offenses daily committed and done, to the disquieting of Us and Our People;
We minding and intending the due punishment of such Offenders, and the
repressing of suchlike Offenses, Enormities, and Misbehaviours from
henceforth, having special trust and confidence in your Fidelities, Wisdoms,
and Discretions, have authorized, appointed, and assigned you to be our
Commissioners; and by these presents do give full Power and Authority unto you,
and three of you, to enquire, as well by the Oaths of twelve good and lawful
Men, as by Witnesses, and all other means and politic ways you can devise, of
all and sundry Heresies, Heretical Opinions, Lollardies; heretical and
seditious Books, Concealments, Contempts, Conspiracies, and of all false
Rumors, Tales, Seditious and Clamorous, Words and Sayings, raised, published,
bruited, invented, or set forth against Us, or either of Us; or against the
quiet Governance and Rule of Our People and Subjects, by Books, Letters, Tales,
or otherwise, in any County, City, Borough, or other Place or Places within
this Our Realm of England, and elsewhere, in any Place or Places beyond the
Seas; and of the bringers in Users, Buyers, Sellers, Readers, Keepers, or
Conveyers of any such Letters, Books, Rumor, or Tale; and of all and every
their Coadjutors, Counselors, Consorters, Procurers, Abetters, and
Maintainers; Giving to you, and three of you, full Power and Authority, by
virtue hereof, to search out, and take into your hands and possession, all
manner of heretical and seditious Books, Letters, Writings, wheresoever they,
or any of them shall be found, as well in Printers Houses and Shops, as
elsewhere; willing you, and every of you, to search for the same in all Places,
according to your discretions. And also to enquire, hear, and determine, all
and singular Enormities, Disturbances, Misbehaviours, Misdemeanors and
Negligences, done, suffered, or committed, in any Church, Chapel, or other
hallowed Place within this Realm. And also for and concerning the taking away,
or the withholding of any Lands, Tenements, Goods, and Ornaments, Stocks of
Money, or other things belonging to any of the same Churches and Chapels, and
all Accounts and Reckonings concerning the same. And also to enquire and search
out all such Persons as obstinately do refuse to preach the Blessed Sacrament
of the Altar, to hear Mass, or come to their Parish, or other convenient
Places, appointed for Divine Service; and all such as refuse to go in
Processions, to take Holy Water, or Holy Bread; or otherwise do misuse
themselves in any Church, or other Hallowed Place, wheresoever any of the same
Offenses have been, or hereafter shall be, committed within this Our said
Realm. Nevertheless Our Will and Pleasure is, That when, and as often as any
Person or Persons hereafter to be called or convented before you, do
obstinately persist or stand in any manner of Heresy, or heretical Opinions,
that then ye, or three of you, do immediately take order, that the same Person,
or Persons, so standing or persisting, be delivered and committed to his
Ordinary, there to be used according to the Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Laws.
And also We give unto you, or three of you, full Power and Authority to enquire
and search out all Vagabonds and Masterless Men, Barretors, Quarrellers, and
suspect Persons, Vagrant, or abiding within the City of London, or ten miles
compass of the same; and all Assaults and Affrays done and committed within the
same City, and Compass. And further, to search out all Wastes, Decays, and
Ruins of Churches, Chancels, Chapels, Parsonages, and Vicarages, in
whatsoever Diocese the same be within this Realm. Giving to you, or any three
of you, full Power and Authority, by virtue hereof to hear and determine the
same, and all other Offenses and Matters above specified and rehearsed,
according to your Wisdoms, and Consciences, and Discretions; willing and
commanding you, or three of you, from time to time, to use and devise all such
politic ways and means, for the trial and searching out of the Premises, as by
you, or three of you, shall be thought most expedient and necessary; and upon
enquiry, and due proof had, known, perceived, and tried out by the Confession
of the Parties, or by sufficient Witnesses, before you, or three of you,
concerning the Premises, or any part thereof, or by any other ways or means
requisite, to give and award such punishment to the Offenders, by Fine,
Imprisonment, or otherwise; and to take such order for redress and reformation
of the Premises, as to your Wisdoms, or three of you, shall be thought meet and
convenient. Further willing and commanding you, and any three of you, in case
you shall find any Person or Persons, obstinate or disobedient, either in their
appearance before you, or three of you, at your calling or assignment; or else
in not accomplishing, or not obeying your Decrees, Orders, and Commandments, in
any thing or things touching the Premises, or any part thereof, to commit the
same Person, or Persons, so offending, to Ward, there to remain, till they be
by you, or three of you, enlarged and delivered. And We give to you, and any
three of you, full Power and Authority, by these Presents, to take and receive,
by your Discretions, of every Offender, or suspect Person, to be convented or
brought before you, a Recognizance or Recognizances, Obligation or Obligations
to Our use, of such Sum or Sums of Money, as to you, or three of you, shall seem
convenient, as well for the personal appearance before you, of any such suspect
Person, or for the performance and accomplishment of your Orders and Decrees,
in case you shall think so convenient, as for the sure and true payment of all
and every such Fine and Fines, as shall hereafter be by you, or three of you,
taxed or assessed upon any Offender that shall be before you, or three of you,
duly convinced, as is aforesaid, to Our use, to be paid at such days and times,
as by you, or three of you, shall be sealed, limited, or appointed: And you to
certify any such Recognizance, or Obligation, as being taken for any Fine, or
Fines, not fully and wholly paid before you, under your Hands and Seals, or the
Hands and Seals of three of you, into Our Court of Chancery, to the intent We
may be thereof duy answered, as appertains.

And furthermore, We give to you, or three of you, full Power and Authority, by
these Presents, not only to call before you all and every Offender and
Offenders, and all and every suspect Person and Persons in any of the Premises,
but also all such, and so many Witnesses as ye shall think meet to be called;
and them, and every of them, to examine and compel to Answer, and Swear, upon
the Holy Evangelist, to declare the Truth in all such things, whereof they, or
any of them shall be examined, for the better trial, opening, and declaration
of the Premises, or of any part thereof.

And furthermore, Our Will and Pleasure is, that you, or three of you, shall
name and appoint, one sufficient Person to gather up and receive all such Sums
of Money as shall be assessed or taxed by you, or three of you, for any Fine or
Fines, upon any Person or Persons, for their Offense; and you, or three of you,
by Bill, or Bills, signed with your Hands, shall, and may assign and appoint,
as well to the said Person for his pains in receiving the said Sums, as also to
your Clark, Messengers, and Attendants upon you, for their travel, pains and
charge to be sustained for Us about the Premises, or any part thereof, such sum
and sums of Money for their Rewards, as by you, or three of you, shall be
thought expedient. Willing and commanding you, or three of you, after the time
of this Our Commission is expired, to certify into our Exchequer, as well the
Name of the said Receiver, as also a note of such Fines as shall be set or
taxed before you, to the intent, that upon the determination of the account of
the same Receiver, We may be answered, that that to Us shall justly appertain.
Willing and Commanding, also all Our Auditors, and other Officers, upon the
sight of the said Bills, signed with the Hands of you, or three of you, to make
to the said Receiver, due allowance, according to the said Bills upon his
account. Wherefore We Will and Command you, our said Commissioners, with
diligence to execute the Premises, with effect: any of Our Laws, Statutes,
Proclamations, or other Grants, Privileges, or Ordinance, which be, or may
seem to be contrary, to the Premises notwithstanding.

And moreover, We will and Command, all and singular Justices of Peace, Mayors,
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and all other our Officers, Ministers, and
faithful Subjects, to be aiding, helping, and assisting to you, at your
commandment, in the due execution hereof, as they tender Our Pleasure, and will
answer to the Costs, at their utmost Perils.

And We Will and Grant, That these Our Letters Patents shall be a sufficient
Warrant and Discharge for you, and any of you, against Us, Our Heirs and
Successors; and all, and every other Person or Persons whatsoever they be, of,
for, or concerning the Premises, or any parcel thereof, or for the execution of
this Our Commission, or any part thereof.

In Witness whereof, We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patents, and
to continue and endure for one whole Year next coming after the Date hereof.
Witness our Self at Wistminster, the 8th day of February, the third and fourth
Years of Our Reign.

Number 33. A Letter writ by the Council, expressing their Jealousies of the
Lady Elizabeth. An Original.
Cotton Libr. Titus B. 2.
Mr. Pope, after our very hearty Commendations, ye shall understand, That
amongst diverse other devilish Practices, attempted from time to time, by Dudly
Aston, and other Traitors in France, for the disturbance of the Quiet of the
Realm; they have now lately sent over one Cleyberdo, who (if I the Lord
Chancellor be not deceived in the Man) was, whilst I was President in Wales,
indicted of a Burglary, and should have been, if he had not escaped by the
means of certain his Accomplices, who took him from the Sheriffs Man, as well for
the said Burglary, as for diverse other notable Robberies, and other Offenses,
made sure enough from attempting this Enterprise now. This Man being sent by
the foresaid Traitors into the extreme parts of Essex and Suffolk; where naming
himself to be Earl of Devonshire, he has, by spreading abroad of slanderous
Letters and Proclamations, abused the Lady Elizabeth's Graces Name; pronouncing
thereby, as much as in him lay, to stir the King's and Queen's Majesty's
Subjects in those parts to Rebellion, as by the Copies of the said Letters and
Proclamations, which we send unto you herewith, may at better length appear
unto you. And albeit the People there have showed themselves so true and
obedient Subjects, as immediately upon the understanding of this Enterprise,
they did of themselves, and without any Commandment, apprehend as many of the
Attempters of this devilish Practice as they could come by, whereby their
good will and truth to the King and Queen's Majesty's does well appear. Yet
because this Matter is spread already abroad, and that peradventure many
Constructions and Discourses will be made thereof, we have thought meet to
signify the whole Circumstances of the Cause unto you, to be by you opened unto
the Lady Elizabeth's Grace, at such time as ye shall think convenient; to the
end it may appear unto her how little these Men stick, by falsehood and untruth,
to compass their Purpose; not letting, for that intent, to abuse the Name of
her Grace, or any others: which their Devises nevertheless are (God be thanked)
by his Goodness discovered from time to time to their Majesty's preservance,
and confusion of their Enemies. And so bid you heartily well to fare.

From Eltham, the 30th of July, 1556. Your Loving Friends, Nichol. Eborac.
Canc. Arundel. Thomas Ely. R. Rochester. Henry Jernegam.


Number 34. A Letter from Sir Edward Carne, concerning the suspension of
Cardinal Pool's Legatine Power. An Original.
Pleases it your most Excellent Majesty's, Ex Chartophylac. Regio.
according as I advertised your Highness in my Letters of the 8th of this; So I
have informed all the Cardinals that be here of the Congregation of the
Inquisition, as the most Reverend Lord Cardinal Morone advised me, informing
them of the good Proceedings and Reformations made, by the most Reverend Lord
Cardinal's Grace there, as well in Clero as in Populo; not only in things
pertaining ad cultum Dei, but also in other, pertaining to the Commonweal of
Christ's Church, in such sort as Christ's Religion does so prosper there, that
there is good hope all things should come to their perfection in time. And for
that purpose his Grace had called there a Synod of the Clergy of the Realm,
where many good Ordinances, for the maintenance of the Premises been past
already; and many ready in hand for to pass, and not fully ended nor perfected:
which should be staid, in case the Legacy should be there-hence revoked, which
might turn to the great danger and damage of many in that your Majesty's
Realm, in case due Reformation throughout and perfectly were not made:
Therefore I desired them, that when the Matter were moved amongst them, so to
weigh it, as such a good beginning, that through your Majesty's Goodness has
been there, be not brought by their doings here, into no worse terms, then your
Majesty's, with no little pain, has always traveled to bring it unto: Adding
besides diverse Cases that daily might fall, which could not be helped without
the Authority of this See: And that Men newly reduced to the Unity of the
Church, would rather stand in their naughty Doings, whose Examples might be
noisome to many; than repair hither for any help; But having the Legate there,
would gladly seek help at his hands being present amongst them.

And likewise for reduction of your Majesty's Realm of Ireland to the Unity of
the Church, which whether it were past or no, I doubted, and ended thoroughly:
And if it were, yet were it most expedient that there should be Reformation, as
well in Clero as in Populo; which could not well be, in case the Legacy
continue not there. This is the effect of the Points that I informed them upon,
who all thought it most expedient, that the Legacy should continue there, and
would not fail to stay, as much as might lie in them, for these Considerations
above rehearsed; and thought, being of such importance, that if my Lord's Grace
were not there already, it were most expedient that he should be sent thither,
rather than to be revoked; and hereof, as well Cardinal Morone, as all the
other, would needs I should move his Holiness.

Whereupon the 12th of this, I went to the Pope himself, upon pretense to give
him thanks for the Provision of the Church of Chichester, and of the most
gracious and honorable Report that he made in the Consistory the same time, of
your Highness my Sovereign Lady the Queen; where his Holiness declared so much
Goodness and Virtue of your Majesty, that he, and this See, could not, he said,
show so much favor to any of yours, as the same required. As undoubtedly, as
far as I could hear, he does, whenever he has occasion to speak of your
Majesty, so reverently as more could not be; who prevented me, and said, that
he was glad that I was come unto him, and trusted that God had sent me thither:
for there had been with him, the day before, Cardinal Pacheco, who showed him
of the good inclination of your Majesty, my Sovereign Lord, to have Peace with
him and the Church. And that also he had received a Letter from the most
Reverend Lord Cardinal's Grace there-hence, who had spoken with your Majesty,
and found the same so well inclined to have Peace with his Holiness, as might
be desired; which his Holiness said he liked very well, and held up his hands,
beseeching Almighty God to continue your Majesty in that good mind. And then he
began to declare, how that God provided, and always confirmed you, the Queen's
Majesty, not only to do good to that Realm, but to all Christendom also; in
whom his Holiness had such hope, that the same will so help with the King's
Majesty, that Peace may follow betwixt the Church and him: and he of his part
coveted nothing more, as it should appear, if the King's Majesty would treat of
it; Yea, he said, though he should sustain great Damage thereby, he will win
his Majesty if he can.

And where his Majesty is informed, that his Holiness would hear none of those
that were sent to him from his Majesty, as Francisco Pacheco, and one Citizen
of Naples; he said, That he never heard that either the said Francisco, or the
said Citizen, had any Letter or Word to him from his Majesty; If they had had,
he, as he said, who gives Audience daily to as many as do seek it at his
hands, without denial, would have heard them, or any that had been sent from
his Highness; and this, he said, all that be about him can testify, and called
God to Record of it. And yet, he said, that the King's Majesty is informed of
the contrary; whereupon, he said, that his Majesty was brought in belief, that
it was sufficient for his Highness to offer himself to be heard, and seeing he
could not, he was discharged toward God, and so lay the fault in his Holiness;
from the which Error, so his Holiness named it, he would and wished that his
Majesty should be brought: for his Holiness caused to be enquired of them,
Whether they had any Letters, or any thing to say of his Majesty's behalf to
him, and could hear of none; Wherefore his Holiness desired me to write to your
Majesty, and to signify the same to your Highness; and of his Holiness behalf,
to pray you to advertise the King's Majesty, that therein was no lack of his
Holiness: Saying, If his Majesty had sent to him, he would have gladly heard
him; or if it may please his Majesty yet to send, no Man will be more glad
thereof than he: And said further, that God, who had called him to that place,
knew that he always has been of mind to have a General Council for a
Reformation throughout Christendom, and in such Place as had been meet for it;
and doubted not, but that he would have seen Christendom in such Order, that
such Enormities as do reign in many Parts, should have been reformed, if these
Wars had not troubled him: Saying therewith, That the Power of the Church is
not able to maintain Wars of it self, but that God had provided Aid elsewhere;
but if he can have Peace, he will embrace it, he said, though it were to his
loss. And prayed me to desire your Majesty, of his behalf, to put to your good
help toward it. To whom, after thanks first given to his Holiness for the said
good Opinion that he had of your Majesty, and also of the Provision made of the
said Church of Chichester, I said, that I was glad to hear of that good
inclination of his Holiness to Peace; and said, that I would gladly signify to
you, the Queen's Majesty, according to his Holiness Pleasure: And that I had
heard of diverse, that his Holiness would not give Audience, to such as you my
Sovereign Lord had sent to him; whereof I was sorry, and yet nevertheless
trusted that betwixt his Holiness and your Majesty, should be as great Amity as
appertains; and had not so good hope thereof, sithence this War began, as now
hearing his Holiness to be so well inclined to it; not doubting but all the
World should perceive no lack of your Majesty's behalf, as far as any Reason
required.

Whether this be done for a practice to please, least any stir be there against
the Frenchmen, which is most feared here, I am not able to say, for there
lacks no practice in this Court that they think may serve for their purpose.
The truth is, that there is jarring betwixt the Pope and the French now; with
whom the Pope is nothing contented, neither they with him, as it is credibly
reported here. All the Italians that the Pope had in the French Camp be all
gone; the French handled them very ill and vile, and especially Don Antonio de
Caraffa the Pope's Nephew: So that it is thought here, that the Pope will turn
the Leaf, if any were here of your behalf, the King's Majesty, that had
Authority to treat with his Holiness: And if it please your Majesty to send any
hither for that purpose, by the Opinion of all your Majesty's well-willers
here, there can come but good of it.

After this Communication, I lamented to his Holiness greatly of one thing,
that I had heard his Holiness pretended to do: And forasmuch as your Majesty
had placed me here with his Holiness, and that the case was such, that it
touched the maintenance of the Commonwealth of Christian Religion within your
Majesty's Realm there, so much, that of Duty I could do no less but open it to
his Holiness, trusting that the same, who had always showed himself most ready,
with all benignity, to do for You, the Queen's Majesty, and your Realm, would
so continue still: Which thing was, I said, That his Holiness would revoke his
Legate there, which should be too great a prejudice to the Church of that Realm,
to be done before all things were truly stablished there, and opened unto his
Holiness all the Considerations before rehearsed, whereof I had informed the
Cardinals in as ample manner as I could. Then, he said, that there was nothing
that he could do for you, the Queen's Majesty, or your said Realm, but he would
do it most gladly, unless occasion should be given there-hence that he might
not. And as touching the Revocation of the Legate in England, he said, That it
was done already, and not for to provide any thing within that Realm, but only
for because, it was not convenient that any Legate of his should be within any
of the King's Majesty's Realms or Dominions; and therefore he revoked his
Nuncio's from Naples, from Spain, and all other parts of the King's Majesty's
Realms and Dominions, and of England therefore: Nevertheless, he said, if you
the Queen's Majesty would write to him, for the continuance of his Legate there,
he would restore him to his former Authority, or any thing else that your
Majesty should think expedient for him to do. Then, I said, It would be long
time before Answer can come from England hither; and if his Revocation should
be once known in England, what would come of it, I doubted. Therefore I
besought his Holiness not to suffer it to pass, for if it be once known abroad,
it shall be a great comfort to the Wicked, and discomfort to the good, whereby
many Inconveniences might ensue. Then, he said, that that is done, cannot be
undone. I said, That his Holiness had not so far gone in his Decree, but that
he might moderate it, that it need not extend to England. And then I told him,
that he had showed me, that in all his Proceedings, he would have your
Majesty's Realm of England separated from all other the King's Majesty's
Realms, and now had set it as far further as any of the other; therefore, I
said, his Holiness should consider it, and that the Decree in no wise should
extend thither. Then, he said, That it could not stand with the Majesty of the
Place that he sat in, to revoke any part of the Decree solemnly given in the
Consistory, in the presence of all the Cardinals. I said, That his Holiness,
with his Honor, might well do it; considering that when he gave the Decree, he
was not informed of such Inconveniences that might ensue thereof; and now being
informed by me, his Holiness had not only a just cause to revoke it, but also
of congruence ought to do it; considering that his Holiness had the Cure of all
Men's Souls: and if any Inconveniency should follow through his Holiness Doings,
it could not be chosen but his Holiness must answer for it; where his Holiness
suffering all things to proceed in his due course, as it has been begun, all
Dangers that have been before rehearsed might be avoided; therefore now his
Holiness had a good Cause to stay his Decree in that behalf: All which he took
in good part, and said thus, I must needs do for that Realm what I can, and
therefore to morrow is the Congregation of the Inquisition, and then the Matter
shall be propounded, where, he said, he would do what he could; and willed me
to resort to the Cardinal St. Jacobo to inform him, that he might procure it
there. I said, I would; indeed I had been with the said Cardinal before, and
had informed him fully; nevertheless I went to him again, to show him the
Pope's Pleasure therein; who said, he would do his Duty therein. Indeed that
Matter occupied the Pope and the Cardinals all that Congregation time. The next
morrow, as the Cardinals said, the Conclusion was, That the Pope would make
answer to me himself. Indeed he thought to take Counsel of the said
Congregation, before I had been with them about the same Decree, but not to
revoke any part thereof, but to have their advice in framing of it. So that if
I had not gone to him, the Decree had gone forth, with the intimation thereof,
and the inhibition; but being with his Holiness this Evening, to know what was
to be had herein; his Holiness, after a long Oration, in commendation of you
the Queens Majesty, he said, That in case your most Excellent Majesty would
write to him for the continuance of his Legate, for such Causes as should seem
good to the same, the Legate to be yet expedient therein, he would appoint my
Lord's Grace there to continue, but he could in no wise revoke his Decree made
in open Consistory. I laid many things that his Holiness might do it, and that
diverse of his Predecessors had done it, upon Causes before not known; with
diverse Examples that I showed him in Law; that at the last, he said plainly, He
would not revoke his Decree; but for because of my Suit, he said he was content
to stay, and to go no further till your Majesty's Letters do come, and charged
the Datary, and his Secretary Berigno, that they send forth no intimation of
his Decree of the said Revocation, without his special Commandment; where-else
he said, the Intimation had been sent forth with an Inhibition also: And so all
is stayed, that nothing here-hence shall go forth till your Pleasure, the
Queen's Majesty, be known therein; which the Pope does look for: Until which
Intimation, the Legacy there does continue.

Occurrents here be no other, but that the 10th of this, the late made Duke of
Paleano departed here-hence toward the Duke's Camp, which does lie yet in the
Siege of Civitella, within your Majesty's Realm of Naples. They that seem to
bear their good Wills here toward your Majesty, do say here, that they may lie
there long before they take it, for they cannot hurt it much with Battery. And
they say, the Counts de Sancto Flore, and de Sarme, be within the Town with two
thousand Soldiers; many of the Frenchmen be slain there. Nevertheless, others
do say, that it stands in danger of taking; for because the Frenchmen have
gotten a Hill, from the which they do beat sore into the Town, and have
withdrawn certain Waters from them of the Town, and do undermine it; the most
part here thinks they shall lose their labor, for it is very strong.

The Galleys of Marseilles arrived at Civita Vechia, six or seven days past,
and brought twelve Ensigns more of French Soldiers to reinforce the French
Army; and as far as I can learn, they return again to fetch more, always to
refresh their Camp with fresh Soldiers, in the lieu of such as be perished: Of
the which twelve Ensigns, the French Ambassador chose out three, which he has
sent to the Duke of Guise, well furnished; the rest he discharged, but all the
other that came, be gone to the Camp, to such Captains as will retain them
there, for such of the other as be slain, or otherwise perished. Don Antonio de
Carraffa does as yet return to the Camp, neither intends to go as I hear. I
heard say, That the Duke of Alva was within sixteen miles of the Frenchmen,
with a great Army of Horsemen and Footmen, what he does is not spoken of here,
for there is none that can pass to them, or from them hither; there is such
strait keeping, and dangerous passing.

Here be ill News from Piedmont, for they say here, the Frenchmen in those
Parts have taken Cherasto, a very strong Town in Piedmont, which I trust be not
true. The common Report is here, That if the Frenchmen be not withstanded in
time, they will do much hurt in Italy.

The Pope does set forth a Bull for Money, that one of every hundred shall be
paid of the value of all the Lands that be within the Churches Dominions, which
they say will draw to Two or three Millions, if it be paid.

And having no other at this present, I beseech Almighty God to conserve both
your most Excellent Majesty's, in long and most prosperous Life together.

From Rome, the 15th of May, 1557. Your Majesty's most humble Subject, and Poor
Servant, Edward Carne.

Number 35. The Appeal of Henry Chichely, Archbishop of Canterbury, to a
General Council from the Pope's Sentence.
IN Dei Nomine Amen. Ex M. SS. D.G. Petyt.
Per Presens publicum instrumentum cunctis appareat evidenter, quod anno ab
incarnatione Domini secundum cursum and computationem Ecclesiae Anglicanae
1427. indictione quinta Pontificatus Sanctissimi in Christo Patris and Domini
nostri Domini Martini, Divina Providentia Papae quinti, Anno decimo, mensis
vero Aprilis die sexto. Reverendissimus in Christo Pater and Dominus, Dominus
Henricus Dei Gratia Cantuarien. Archiepiscopus totius Angliae Primas, and
Apostolicae Sedis Legatus, in Capella Majori Manerii sui de Ford Cantuarien.
Diocaeseos personaliter existens, mihi Notario Publico, and testibus
infra-scriptis presentibus, quandam appellationem in scriptis redactam fecit,
legit and interposuit, ac appellativit sub eo, qui sequuntur, tenore verborum.
In Dei Nomine. Amen. Coram vobis authentica persona and testibus hic
Presentibus, Ego Henricus dictus Cant. permissione divina Cantuar.
Archiepiscopus, totius Angliae Primas and Apostolicae Sedis Legatus, dico,
allego, and in his scriptis propono, quod fui and sum Ecclesiam Sanctam Cant.
cum jure Legationis natae, prerogativis, consuetudinibus, compositionibus,
aliisque jurisdictionibus, juribus, libertatibus, and pertinentibus suis
universis canonice assecutus, ipsamque sic assecutam nonullo tempore pacifice
and inconcusse possedi, prout sic possideo de presenti; fuique and sum
Ecclesiae Romanae, and Sedis Apostolicae obedientiae, Filius Catholicus, ac
jurium and libertatum dictarum Ecclesiae and Sedis juxta posse, assiduus
defensor, and promotor; integri status, bonae famae and opinionis illesae and
in possessione eorundem existens, nullisque suspentionis aut excommunicationis,
seu irregularitatis, aut interdicti sententiae vel sententiis innodatus:
Quodque ex part mei Henrici Archiepiscopi praedicti in possessione
praemissorum omnium, and quasi ex verisimilibus conjecturis ac
communicationibus quampluribus mihi and Ecclesiae meae, ac juri legationis,
prerogativis, consuetudinibus, compositionibus, jurisdictionibus, juribus,
libertatibus, and pertinentiis Ecclesiae, Cantuar. praedictae factis, circa
praemissa and eorum singula grave posse prejudicium generari; Ne Sanctissimus
in Christo Pater and Dominus noster Dominus Martinus, divina providentia Papa
quintus, vel quivis alius quavis Autoritate, vice vel mandato, scienter vel
ignoranter ad sinistram vel minus veram suggestionem, aut informationem
emulorum personae, dignitatis aut Ecclesiae meae (quod absit) me non vocato,
legitimeve praemonito, causae cognitione and juris, justitiaeque ordinem
praetermisso, in prejudicium status mei, dignitatis, legationis, prerogativae,
consuetudinum, compositionum, jurisdictionum, jurium, libertatum and
pertinentium jure Metropolitico, vel alias dictam Ecclesiam meam Cantuar. and
me ejus nomine concernentium quicquam attemptet, seu faciat aliqualiter
attemptari, citando, monendo, mandando, inhibendo, decernendo, suspendendo,
interdicendo, excommunicando, privando, sequestrando, pronunciando, definiendo,
and declarando, seu quovis alio modo gravando; Ad Sacrosanctum Concilium
generale facientes, constituentes and representantes, facturos, constituturos
and representaturos, si ipsum caelebrari contigerit, and in defectum ipsius
Concilii tenendi, and celebrandi, ad tribunal Dei omnipotentis and Domini
nostri Jesu Christi, cujus idem sanctissimus Pater, Commissarius and Vicarius
existit in terris, in his scriptis ob and ad tuitionem, protectionem and
defensionem omnium, and singulorum praemissorum fuerit and sit legitime
provocatum. Sanctissimus tamen in Christo Pater, and Dominus noster, Dominus
Martinus dicta providentia hujus nominis Papa quintus asserens, ut dicta fide
dignorum relatione, ad suum pervenisse auditum, quod ego, qui ad defensionem,
obedientiam jurium, and honorem Sedis Apostolicae in Provincia Cantuarien.
Legatus natus sum, propter emolumenta Ecclesiastica provenientia ex Ecclesiis
Cathedralibus totius Regni Angliae tempore vacationum eorundum, quae ex quadam
(ut me asserere dicit) consuetudine usibus meis applicare dignoscor ad
resistendum provisionibus Apostolicis de Ecclesiis hujusmodi Cathedralibus sum
proclivior, Et quod jura and honorem Sedis Apostolicae non defendo nec protego,
imo potius impugno, and impugnantibus assisto, in animae meae periculum,
praedictae Sedis contemptum, dictarumque Ecclesiarum Cathaedralium prejudicium
and scandalum plurimorum; Cum tamen, suae benedictionis beatitudinis reverentia
semper salva, nullum horum quae sic mihi impinguntur sunt vera, sed notorie
minus vera, post and contra praemissam provocationem per me factam, me a
Legatione dictae Sedis, necnon ab omni jurisdictione, superioritate, potestate
sive Dominio percipiendi emolumenta Ecclesiastica, aliarum Ecclesiarum
Cathaedralium dicti Regni usque ad beneplacitum suum, and Sedis Apostolicae
Authoritate Apostolica, and ex certa scientia (ut asserit) nullatenus in ea
part monitum, citatum, convictum vel confessum, sed absentem, non per
contumaciam causae, cognitione juris and judiciorum ac justitiae ordine in
omnibus praetermisso, voluntary and minus praepropere duxerit suspendendum,
hisque non contentus, sed gravamina accumulans mihi in virtute obedientiae
nihilominus injunxerit, ne de legatione Sedis Apostolicae praedictae, necnon
jurisdictione, Authoritate, and Dominio percipiendi emolumenta hujusmodi
tempore vacationum Ecclesiarum praedictarum per me vel per alium, seu alios
quovis quaesito ingenio, vel color de caetero quomodolibet me intromittam: Et
insuper jurisdictionem, superioritatem, potestatem, and dominium dictarum
Ecclesiarum Cathaedralium tempore illarum vacationum ad capitula singularum
Ecclesiarum devolvi voluit, singulos processus, necnon excommunicationis
suspensionis and interdicti sententias, and alias paenas ac censuras
Ecclesiasticas, si quod per me vel alium seu alios contra capitula Ecclesiarum
Cathedralium praefatarum, aut alias personas quascunque occasion consuetudinis
memoratae, at legationis, officii (dicto durante beneplacito) ferri contigerit
quomodolibet, vel haberi, irritos and inanes decrevit (salva semper suae
Sanctitatis reverentia in omnibus) minus just in personae meae, status,
dignitatis, juris, legationis natae, prerogativae, consuetudinum,
compositionum, jurisdictionum, jurium, libertatum and pertinentiarum
praedictarum, necnon Ecclesiae meae Cantuariensis praedictae praejudicium non
modicum and gravamen. Unde ego Henricus dictus Cantuariae Cantuariensis
Archiepiscopus pro praedictis sentiens me, statum, dignitatem and Ecclesiam
meam praedictam ex omnibus and singulis gravaminibus praedictis, nimium
praegravari, and praegravatum ab eisdem omnibus and singulis, and his, quae
eorum and cujuslibet eorum occasion colligi poterunt, aut debebunt; ad
Sacrosanctum Concilium Generale, universalem Ecclesiam representans, and ad
personas and status Concilium Generale facientes, constituentes and
representantes, facturos, constituturos and representaturos; and ad ipsum
Concilium Generale proxime celebrandum, ubicunque ipsum celebrari contigerit,
and defectu ipsius Concilii tenendi and celebrandi, ad Tribunal Dei
Omnipotentis, and Domini nostri Jesu Christi, cujus idem Sanctissimus Pater
Commissarius and Vicarius existit in terris, Appello; and Apostolos peto
instanter, instantius and instantissime mihi dari, liberari and fieri cum
effectu: and juro ad haec Sancta Dei Evangelia per me corporaliter tacta, quod
non sunt december dies plene elapsae, ex quo mihi certitudinaliter primo constabat
de gravaminibus antedictis; Quodque nescio certitudinaliter ubi invenirem
dictum Sanctissimum Dominum nostrum ad notificandam eidem Appellationem
praedictam, quatenus de jure notificanda est infra tempus a part juris
limitatum: Et Protestor me velle dictam Appellationem meam corrigere and
emendare, eidem addere and ab eadem detrahere, ac eam omnibus, quorum interest,
notificare and intimare pro loco and tempore opportunis toties, quoties mihi
expediens fuerit, juris beneficio in omnibus semper salvo. Super quibus idem
Reverendissimus Pater and Dominus Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis me Notarium
Publicum subscriptum requisivit, sibi unum vel plura conficere instrumentum vel
instrumenta. Acta sunt haec omnia prout subscribuntur and recitantur sub Anno
Domini, indictione Pontificatus, mense, die, and loco praedictis; praesentibus
tunc ibidem venerabilibus, and discretis vivis M. W. Lyn Curiae Cant. Officii,
and Thoma B. Archidiacono Sanctarum in Ecclesia Linc. utriusque juris
Doctoribus.

In Dei, etc. Coram vobis, etc. Ego Henricus dictus C. etc. Unde ego H. dictus
C. etc. sentiens me, statum, dignitatem and Ecclesiam meam praedictam, ex
omnibus and singulis gravaminibus praedictis nimium praegravari, and
praegravatum, ab eisdem omnibus and singulis gravaminibus praedictis and his,
quae eorum and cujuslibet eorum occasion colligi poterunt aut debebunt, ad
dictum Sanctissimum Dominum nostrum, and Sedem Apostolicam melius informandum,
and informandam, Appello and Apostolos peto instanter, instantius and
instantissime mihi dari, liberari, and fieri cum effectu, etc.

Number 36. Instructions sent by the Privy Council, representing the State of
the Nation to King Philip, after the loss of Calais.
First, to say,

Cotton Libr. Titus B. 2.
THat we be most bounden unto his Majesty for his good Affection toward this
Realm; and his gracious Disposition and Offer, to put this Force to the Field
this Year, being else otherwise determined for the recovery of that Honor and
Reputation, which this Realm has lost by the loss of Calais.

To say, That this Offer of his Majesty we should not only have, upon our
Knees, accepted, but also in like wise have sued first for the same.

And so undoubtedly we would have done, if other respects hereafter following,
which we trust his Majesty will graciously understand, had not been (to our
great regret) the let thereof.

First; We do consider, That if we should send over an Army, we cannot send
under 20000 Men; the levying, and sending over whereof, will ask a time; before
which time, considering also the time the Enemy has had (being now almost a
Month) to Fortify and Victual the Place, it is thought the same will be in such
strength, as we shall not be able alone to recover it.

We do consider how unapt and unwonted our People be to lie abroad, and
specially in the Cold: And what Inconveniency might follow also at their hands,
(besides the loss of Charges) if their hope for recovery of Calais should not
come to pass.

The Charge of this Army (if it should go over) would stand the Realm in one
hundred and seventy thousand pounds at the least, for five months; which Sum
(having regard to other necessary Charges for the Defense of the Realm, both by
Land and by Sea, which the People only have in their Heads, with a wan hope of
the recovery of Calais) neither we doubt will be granted of the People; nor if
it were, can be conveniently levied in time to serve the turn.

Great Garrisons continually, and an Army for Defense against the Scots and
Frenchmen by Land, must of necessity be maintained, the charge whereof will be
one way and another (go the next way we can) e're the Year go about, an hundred
and fifty thousand pounds.

The defense of the Seacoast, and the Isles, and the setting forth of an Army
by Sea, will cost the Realm in a Year (all things accounted) above two hundred
thousand pounds; and yet all will be too little that way, if the Danes and the
Sweeds, which we very much doubt, should be our Enemies.

The Sums amounting in the whole, to five hundred and twenty thousand pounds,
besides Provision of Ammunition, which will be chargeable; and Furniture of
Ordnance, whereof we have great lack, by the loss of Calais and Guisnes.

We see not how it can be levied in one Year to save us, unless the People
should of new have strange Impositions set upon them, which we think they would
not bear.

The Queen's Majesty's own Revenue, is scarce able to maintain her Estate.

The Noblemen and Gentlemen, for the most part receiving no more Rent than they
were wont to receive, and paying thrice as much for every thing they provide,
by reason of the baseness of the Money, are not able to do as they have done in
times past.

The Merchants have had great losses of late, whereby the Cloathiers be never
the richer.

The Farmers, Grasiers, and other People, how well-willing soever they be taken
to be, will not be acknown of their Wealth, and by the miscontentment of this
loss, be grown stubborn and liberal of Talk.

So that considering our Wants on every side, our lack of Money at home; our
want of credit, by reason of this Loss abroad; the scarcity of Captains and
Leaders of our Men, which be but few; the unwillingness of our People to go
abroad, and leave their Things at home, without a certain hope of recovering
their Loss; the need we have to defend Home, (looking as we do to be assaulted
both by Land and by Sea) how desirous soever we be to recover Calais, and
well-willing to serve his Majesty, (either for that purpose, or in any other
thing wherein it shall please him to employ us) we see not how we can possibly
(at the least, for this Year) send over an Army; nor until we may be assured of
fewer Enemies than we fear to have cause to doubt; and have time to bring such
as be ill Men amongst our People, and now be ready (against their Duties) to
make Uproars and Stirs amongst our selves, to Order and Obedience.

Wherefore, in most humble wise, upon our Knees, we shall beseech the King's
Majesty to accept, in gracious part, this our Answer, which we make much
against our Hearts, if we might otherwise choose. And as for our own Persons, we
shall bestow, with all that ever we have, to the death, where and however it
shall please him, submitting our selves to his Majesty's Judgment in this
Matter, and to the execution and doing of that whatsoever, either his Majesty,
or any other Man, shall devise to be done, better than we have said in this
Answer, and more for the honor and surety of their Majesty's, and
Commonwealth of this their Realm. Feb. 1. 1577.

Number 37. Sir Thomas Pope's Letter, concerning the Answer made by the Lady
Elizabeth, to a proposition of Marriage, sent over by the Elected King of
Sweden.
FIrst, Ex M. S. D, G. Petyt:
After I had declared to her Grace how well the Queen's Majesty liked of her
prudent and honorable Answer made to the same Messenger; I then opened unto
her Grace the Effect of the said Messengers Credence; which after her Grace had
heard, I said, The Queen's Highness had sent me to her Grace, not only to
declare the same, but also to understand how her Grace liked the said Motion.
Whereunto, after a little pause taken, her Grace answered in form following.
Master Pope, I require you, after my most humble Commendations to the Queen's
Majesty, to render unto the same like thanks, that it pleased her Highness, of
her Goodness, to conceive so well of my Answer made to the same Messenger, and
here withal, of her Princely Consideration, with such speed to command you, by
your Letters, to signify the same unto me; who before remained wonderfully
perplexed, fearing that her Majesty might mistake the same; for which her
Goodness, I acknowledge my self bound to honor, serve, love, and obey her
Highness, during my Life: Requiring you also to say unto her Majesty, That in
the King, my Brother's time, there was offered me a very honorable Marriage or
two, and Ambassadors sent to treat with me touching the same; whereupon I made
my humble Suit unto his Highness, as some of Honor yet living can be
testimonies, that it would like the same to give me leave, with his Grace's
favor, to remain in that Estate I was, which of all others best liked me or
pleased me. And in good Faith, I pray you say unto her Highness, I am even at
this present of the same mind, and so intend to continue, with her Majesty's
favor; and assuring her Highness, I so well like this Estate, as I persuade my
self there is not any kind of Life comparable unto it. And as concerning my
liking the said Motion made by the said Messenger, I beseech you say unto her
Majesty, That to my remembrance, I never heard of his Master before this time;
and that I so well like, both the Message and the Messenger, as I shall most
humbly pray God, upon my Knees, that from henceforth I never hear of the one
nor of the other; assure you, that if it should eft-soons repair unto me, I
would forbear to speak to him. And were there nothing else to move me to
mislike the Motion, other than that his Master would attempt the same, without
making the Queen's Majesty privy thereunto, it were cause sufficient. And when
her Grace had thus ended, I was so bold as of my self to say unto her Grace,
(her pardon first required) that I thought few or none would believe, but that
her Grace could be right-well contented to marry, so there were some honorable
Marriage offered her by the Queen's Highness, or her Majesty's Assent.
Whereunto her Grace answered; What I shall do hereafter I know not, but I
assure you, upon my Truth and Fidelity, and as God be merciful unto me, I am
not at this time otherwise minded than I have declared unto you, no, though I
were offered the greatest Prince in all Europe. And yet percase the Queen's
Majesty may conceive this rather to proceed of a maidenly shamefastness, than
upon any such certain determination.

Tho. Pope.

FINIS.
A COLLECTION OF RECORDS, etc. BOOK III.
Number 1. The Device for Alteration of Religion, in the first Year of Queen
Elizabeth: offered to Secretary Cecill.
Question 1.
WHen the Queen's Highness may attempt to reduce the Church of England again to
the former purity, Ex M. SS. Nob. D. Gray dc Ruthen.
and when to begin the Alteration?

Answer.
At the next Parliament; so that the Dangers be foreseen, and Remedies
provided; for the sooner that Religion is restored, God is the more glorified,
and as we trust, will be more merciful unto us, and better save and defend her
Highness from all Dangers.

Quest. 2.
What Dangers may ensue thereof?

Answ. 1.
The Bishop of Rome, all that he may, will be incensed, he will Excommunicate
the Queen's Highness, Interdict the Realm, and give it in Prey to all Princes
that will enter upon it; and stir them up to it by all manner of means.

2. The French King will be encouraged more to the War, and make his People
more ready to fight against us, not only as Enemies, but as Heretics: He will
be in great hope of Aid from hence, of them that are discontented with this
Alteration, looking for Tumults and Discords: He will also stay concluding of
Peace, upon hope of some alteration.

3. Scotland also will have the same Causes of boldness, and by that way the
French King will seem soonest to attempt to annoy us. Ireland also will be very
difficultly stayed in the Obedience, by reason of the Clergy that is so
addicted to Rome.

4. Many People of our own, will be very much discontented, especially all such
as governed in the late Queen Mary's Time, and were chosen the^^to for no other
Causes, or were then most esteemed for being hot and earnest in that other
Religion, and now remain unplaced and uncalled to Credit, will think themselves
discredited, and all their Doings defaced, and study all the ways they can to
maintain their own Doings, destroy and despise all this Alteration.

5. Bishops, and all the Clergy, will see their own ruin; and in Confession,
and Preaching, and all other means and ways they can, will persuade the People
from it; they will conspire with whomsoever, will attempt and pretend to do God
a Sacrifice, in letting the Alteration, though it be with murder of Christian
Men, and Treason. Men which be of the Papists Sect, which of late were in a
manner all the Judges of the Land; the Justices of the Peace chosen out by the
late Queen in all the Shires, such as were believed to be of that Sect, and the
more earnest therein, the more in estimation; These are most like to join and
conspire with the Bishops, and Clergy. Some, when the Subsidy shall be granted,
and Money levied, (as it appears that necessarily it must be done) will be
therewith offended, and like enough to conspire and arise, if they have any
heed to stir them to do it, or hope of Gain or Spoil.

6. Many such as would gladly have Alteration from the Church of Rome, when
they shall see peradventure that some old Ceremonies be left still, for that
their Doctrine, which they embrace, is not allowed and commanded only, and all
other abolished and disproved, shall be discontented, and call the Alteration a
Cloak'd Papistry, or a Mingle-Mangle.

Quest. 3.
What Remedy for the same Dangers? What shall be the manner of doing of it? and
what is necessary to be done before?

Answ. 1.
First, for France, to practice a Peace, or if it be offered, not to refuse it:
If Controversy of Religion be there amongst them, to kindle it. Rome is less to
be feared, from whom nothing is to be feared, but evil Will, Cursing, and
Practicing. Scotland will follow France for Peace, but there may be Practice to
help forward their Division, and especially to augment the Hope of them who
inclined them to good Religion. For certainty, to fortify Barwick, and to
employ Demilances, and Horsemen, for safety of the Frontiers, and some Expenses
of Money in Ireland. The fourth divided in five parts.

1. The first is of them which were of Queen Mary's Council, elected or
advanced to Authority, only or chiefly for being of the Pope's Religion, and
earnest in the same. Every Augmentation, or Conservation of such Men in
Authority or Reputation, is an encouraging those of their Sect, and gives hope
to them that it shall revive and continue, although it has a contrary show:
lest seeing the Pillars to stand still untouched, it be a confirmation of them
that are wavering Papists, and a discouraging of such as are but half inclined
to this Alteration. Dum in dubio est animus, parvo momento huc illuc
impellitur. This must be searched by all Law, so far as Justice may extend, and
the Queen's Majesty's Clemency not to be extended, before they do acknowledge
themselves to have fallen into the lapse of the Law. They must be abased of
Authority, discredited in their Countries, so long as they seem to repugn the
true Religion, or to maintain the old Proceedings; and if they should seem to
allow and bear with the new Alteration, yet not lightly to be credited, quia
neophiti; and no Man, but he loves that time wherein he did flourish, and when
he came, and as he came; those Ancient Laws and Orders he will defend and
maintain, with whom and in whom he was in Estimation, and Authority, and a
Doer: for every Man naturally loves that which is his own Work and Creature.
And contrary, as those Men be abased, so must her Highness old and sure
Servants, who have tarried with her, and not shrunk in the late Storm, be
advanced, with Authority and Credit, that the World may see that her Highness
is not unkind, nor unmindful. And throughout all England, if such Persons, as
are known to be sure in Religion, and God's Cause, shall be slack; yet their
own Safety and Estate, should cause to be vigilant, careful, and earnest for
the conservation of her Estate, and maintenance of this Alteration; and in all
this, she shall do but the same that the late Queen Mary did, to establish her
Religion.

2. The second is, the Bishops and Clergy, being in manner all made and chosen,
such as were thought the stoutest and mightiest Champions of the Pope's Church,
who in the late Queen Mary's Times, taking from the Crown, impoverishing it, by
extorting from private Men, and all other means possible, per fas and nefas,
have sought to enrich and advance themselves. These, her Majesty being inclined
to use much clemency, yet must seek, as well by Parliament, as by the just Laws
of England, in the Praemunire, or other such Penal Laws, to bring again in
order; and being found in the default, not to pardon, until they confess their
Fault, put themselves wholly to her Highness Mercy, abjure the Pope of Rome,
and conform themselves to the new Alteration; and by these means, well handled,
her Majesty's necessity of Money may be somewhat relieved.

3. The third is to amended, even as all the rest above, by such ways as Queen
Mary taught, That no such as were, may be in Commission of Peace in their
Shires; but rather Men meaner in Substance, and younger in Years, so that they
have discretion, to be put in Place. A sharp Law made and extended against
Assemblies of People, without Authority. Lieutenants made in every Shire, one
or two Men known to be sure of the Queen's Devotion. In the mean time, Musters
and Captains appointed, Young Gentlemen, which do favor her Highness. No
Office of Jurisdiction or Authority to be in any discontented Man's hands, so
far as Justice or Law may extend.

4. The fourth is to be remedied otherwise, than by gentle and dulce handling;
it is by the Commissioners, and by the readiness and goodwill of the
Lieutenants and Captains; to repress them, if any should begin a Tumult, or
murmur, or provide any Assembly, or stoutness, to the contrary.

5. The fifth; For the Discontentation of such as could be content to have
Religion altered, but would have it to go, for fear the strait Laws upon the
Promulgation of the Book, and severe execution of the same, at the first would
so oppress them, that it is great hope it shall touch but a few: And better it
were that they did suffer, than her Highness and Commonwealth, should shake or
be in danger; and to this they must well take heed that draw the Book. And
herein the Universities must not be neglected, and the hurt which the last
Visitation in Queen Mary's Time did, must be amended: Likewise such Colleges,
where Children be instructed to come to the University, as Eaton, and
Winchester, that as well the increase hereafter, as this present time, may be
provided for.

Quest. 4.
What may be done of her Highness, for her own Conscience, openly, before the
whole Alteration? or if the Alteration must tarry longer?

Answer.
This consultation is to be referred to such Learned Men as be meet to show
their Minds therein, and to bring a Plot or Book hereof ready drawn to her
Highness; which being approved by her Majesty, may so be put in the
Parliament House. To which, for the time it is thought that these are apt Men,
Dr. Bill, Dr. Parker, Dr. May, Dr. Cox, Mr. Whitehead, Grindall, Pilkington,
and Sir Thomas Smith, to call them together, and to be amongst them: and after
the consultation with these, to draw in other Men of Learning, and grave and
apt Men for your Purpose and Credit, to have their Assents. As for that is
necessary to be done before, it is thought to be most necessary, that a strait
Prohibition be made of all Innovation, until such time as the Book come forth,
as well that there should be no often Changes in Religion, which would take
away Authority in the common Peoples estimation, as also to exercise the
Queen's Majesty's Subjects to Obedience.

Quest. 5.
What Orders be sit to be in the whole Realm, as in the interim?

Answer.
To alter no further than her Majesty has, except it be to receive the
Communion, as her Majesty pleases, at high Feasts; and that where there be
more (...) at the Mass, that they do always communicate with the Executor in
both kinds. And for her Highness Conscience, till then, if there be some other
devout sort of Prayer, or Memory, and the (...) or Mass.

Quest. 6.
What Noblemen be fit to be made privy to those Proceedings, before it be
opened to the whole Council?

Answer.
The Marquess Northampton, the Earl of Bedford, the Earl of Pembrook, Lord John
Gray.

Quest. 7.
What Allowance the Learned Men shall have for the time they are about to renew
the Book of Common Prayers, and Order of certain Ceremonies and Service in the
Church; and when they shall meet?

Answer.
Being so many Persons as must attend still upon it, two Messes of Meat is
thought yet indifferently to suffice for them, and their Servants. The Place is
thought most meet, either in some set Place, or rather at Sir Thomas Smith's
Lodging in Cannon-Row. At one of those Places, must Provision be laid in, of
Wood, of Coal, and Drink.

Number 2. Dr. Sand's Letter to Dr. Parker, concerning some Proceedings in
Parliament. An Original.
Ex MS. Col. Cor. C. Cant.
YE have rightly considered that these times are given to taking, and not to
giving; for ye have stretched forth your hand further than all the rest. They
never asked us in what state we stand, neither consider that we want; and yet
in the time of our Exile, were we not so bare as we are now brought: but I
trust we shall not linger here long, for the Parliament draws toward an end.
The last Book of Service is gone through with a Proviso, to retain the
Ornaments which were used in the first and second Year of King Edward, until it
please the Queen to take other order for them; our gloss upon this Text is,
that we shall not be forced to use them, but that others in the mean time shall
not conveigh them away, but that they may remain for the Queen. After this Book
was past, He was Dean of Windsor and Peterb. in Q. Mary's Time.
Boxall, and others, quarrelled with it, that according to the order of the
Scripture, we had not gratiarum actio; for, says he, Christus accepit panem,
gratias egit, but in the time of Consecration we give no Thanks. This he put
into the Treasurers Head, and into Count de Soreus Head; and he labored to
alienate the Queen's Majesty from confirming of the Act, but I trust they
cannot prevail. Mr. Secretary is earnest with the Book, and we have ministered
Reasons to maintain that part. The Bill of Supreme Government, of both the
Temporality and Clergy, passes with a Proviso, that nothing shall be judged
hereafter, which is not confirmed by the Canonical Scriptures, and four General
Councils. Mr. Lever wisely put such a scruple into the Queen's Head, A Minister
at Frankfort much commended by Calvin, to be followed as an Example.
that she would not take the Title of Supreme Head. The Bishops, as it is said,
will not swear unto it as it is, but rather lose their Livings. The Bill is in
hand to restore Men to their Livings; how it will speed I know not. The
Parliament is like to end shortly, and then we shall understand how they mind
to use us. We are forced, through the vain Bruits of the lying Papists, to give
up a Confession of our Faith, to show forth the Sum of that Doctrine which we
profess, and to declare that we dissent not amongst our selves. This Labor we
have now in hand, on purpose to publish that, so soon as the Parliament is
ended; I wish that we had your Hand unto it. Ye are happy that ye are so far
from this tossing, and gross Alterations and Mutations; for we are made weary
with them; but ye cannot long rest in your Cell, ye must be removed to a more
large Abbey: and therefore in the mean time take your pleasure, for after ye
will find but a little, Nihil est statutum, de conjugio Sacerdotum, sed tanquam
relictum in medio. Lever was married now of late; The Queen's Majesty will wink
at it, but not stablish it by Law, which is nothing else but to bastard our
Children. Other things another time. Thus praying you to commend me to your
Abbesses, I take my leave of you for this present hastily, at London, April
ult. 1559.

Yours, Edwin Sands.

Number 3. The first Proposition, upon which the Papists and Protestants
Disputed in Westminster-Abbey. With the Arguments which the Reformed Divines
made upon it. It is against the Word of God, and the Custom of the Primitive
Church, to use a Tongue unknown to the People in Common Prayers, and
Administration of the Sacraments.
BY these words (the Word) we mean only the written Word of God, Ex M. S. Col.
C. Chapter Cant.
or Canonical Scriptures.

And by the Custom of the Primitive Church, we mean, the Order most generally
used in the Church for the space of five hundred Years after Christ; in which
Times lived the most notable Fathers, as Justin, Ireneus, Tertullian, Cyprian,
Basil, Chrysostom, Hierome, Ambrose, Augustine, etc.

This Assertion, above-written, has two parts.

First, That the use of a Tongue not understood of the People, in common
Prayers of the Church, or in the Administration of the Sacraments, is against
God's Word. The second, That the same is against the Use of the
Primitive-Church.
The first part is most manifestly proved by the 14th Chapter of the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, almost throughout the whole Chapter; in the which
Chapter St. Paul entreats of this Matter, ex professo, purposely: And
although some do cavil, that St. Paul speaks not in that Chapter of Praying,
but of Preaching; yet it is most evident, to any indifferent Reader of
Understanding, and appears also by the Exposition of the best Writers, That
he plainly there speaks not only of Preaching and Prophesying, but also of
Prayer and Thanksgiving, and generally of all other public Actions, which
require any Speech in the Church or Congregation.

For of Praying, he says, I will pray with my Spirit, and I will pray with my
Mind; I will sing with the Spirit, and I will sing with my Mind. And of
Thanksgiving, (which is a kind of Prayer) Thou give Thanks well, but the
other is not edified; And how shall he that occupies the room of the
Unlearned, say Amen to thy giving of Thanks, when he understands not what
thou say? And in the end, ascending from Particulars to Universals,
concludes, That all things ought to be done to Edification.

Thus much is clear by the very words of St. Paul, and the Ancient Doctors,
Ambrose, Augustine, Hierome, and others, do so understand this Chapter, as it
shall appear by their Testimonies, which shall follow afterward.

Upon this Chapter of St. Paul, we gather these Reasons following.

1. All things done in the Church, or Congregation, ought to be so done, as
they may edify the same:

But the use of an Unknown Tongue in Public Prayer, or Administration of
Sacraments, does not edify the Congregation;

Therefore the use of an unknown Tongue, in Public Prayer, or Administration
of the Sacraments, is not to be had in the Church.

The first part of this Reason, is grounded upon St. Paul's words, commanding
all things to be done to Edification.

The second part is also proved by St. Paul's plain words. First, By this
Similitude; If the Trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall be prepared to
Battle? Even so likewise, when ye speak with Tongues, except ye speak words
that have signification, how shall it be understood what is spoken? for ye
shall but speak in the Air, that is to say, in vain, and consequently without
edifying.

And afterward, in the same Chapter, he says, How can he that occupies the
place of the Unlearned, say Amen at thy giving of Thanks: seeing he
understands not what thou say? For thou verily give Thanks well, but the
other is not edified.

These be St. Paul's words, plainly proving, That a Tongue not understood, does
not edify.

And therefore both the parts of the Reason thus proved by St. Paul, the
Conclusion follows necessarily.

2. Secondly; Nothing is to be spoken in the Congregation in an Unknown Tongue,
except it be interpreted to the People, that it may be understood. For, says
Paul, if there be no Interpreter to him that speaks in an unknown Tongue,
taceat in Ecclesia, let him hold his peace in the Church. And therefore the
Common Prayers, and Administration of Sacraments, neither done in a known
Tongue, nor interpreted, are against this Commandment of Paul, and not to be
used.

3. The Minister, in Praying, or Administration of the Sacraments, using
Language not understood of the Hearers, is to them barbarous, an Alien, which
of St. Paul is accounted a great Absurdity.

4. It is not to be counted a Christian Common Prayer, where the People present
declare not their Assent unto it, by saying Amen; wherein is employed all other
words of Assent.

But St. Paul affirms, That the People cannot declare their Assent, in saying
Amen, except they understand what is said as before.

Therefore it is no Christian Common Prayer, where the People understands not
what is said.

5. Paul would not suffer, in his time, a strange Tongue to be heard in the
Common Prayer in the Church, notwithstanding that such a kind of Speech was
then a Miracle, and a singular Gift of the Holy Ghost, whereby Infidels might
be persuaded and brought to the Faith: much less is it to be suffered now among
Christian and Faithful Men, especially being no Miracle, nor especial Gift of
the Holy Ghost.

6. Some will peradventure answer, That to use any kind of Tongue in
Common Prayer, or Administration of Sacraments, is a thing indifferent.

But St. Paul is to the contrary; for he commands all things to be done to
Edification: He commands to keep silence, if there be no Interpreter. And in
the end of the Chapter, he concludes thus; If any Man be Spiritual, or a
Prophet, let him know, that the things which I write are the Commandment of the
Lord. And so, shortly to conclude, the use of a strange Tongue, in Prayer and
Administration, is against the Word and Commandment of God.

To these Reasons, grounded upon St. Paul's words, which are the most firm
Foundation of this Assertion, diverse other Reasons may be joined, gathered out
of the Scriptures, and otherwise.

1. In the Old Testamenc, all things pertaining to the Public Prayer,
Benediction, Thanksgiving, or Sacrifice, were always in their Vulgar and
Natural Tongue.

In the second Book of Paraleipomenon, Cap. 29. it is written, That Ezechias
commanded the Levites, to praise God with the Psalms of David, and Asaph the
Prophet; which doubtless were written in the Hebrew, their Vulgar Tongue. If
they did so in the shadows of the Law, much more ought we to do the like; who,
as Christ says, must pray in Spiritu and Veritate.

2. The final end of our Prayer is, (as David says) Vt populi conveniant in
unum, and annuncient nomen Domini in Sion, and lauds ejus in Jerusalem.

But the Name and Praises of God cannot be set forth to the People, unless it
be done in such a Tongue, as they may understand.

Therefore Common Prayer must be had in the Vulgar Tongue.

3. The definition of Public Prayer, out of the words of St. Paul; Orabo
Spiritu, Orabo and Mente. Public orare, est vota communia mente ad Deum
effundere, and ea Spiritu hoc est, Lingua testari. Common Prayer is, to lift up
our Common Desires to God with our Minds, and to testify the same outwardly
with our Tongues. Which Definition is approved of by St. Augustine de Magist.
C. 1. Nihil opus est (inquit) loqutione, nisi forte ut Sacerdotes faciunt,
significandae mentis Causa, ut populus intelligat.

4. The Ministrations of the Lord's last Supper, and Baptism, are, as it were,
Sermons of the Death and Resurrection of Christ.

But Sermons to the People, must be had in such Language, as the People may
perceive, otherwise they should be had in vain.

5. It is not lawful for a Christian Man to abuse the Gifts of God.

But he that prays in the Church in a strange Tongue, abuses the Gift of
God; for the Tongue serves only to express the mind of the Speaker to the
Hearer. And Augustine says, de Doct. Christ. lib. 4. cap. 10. Loquendi omnino
nulla est causa, si quod loquimur non intelligunt, propter quos, ut
intelligant, loquimur. There is no cause why we should speak, if they, for
whose cause we speak, understand not our speaking.

6. The Heathen, and Barbarous Nations of all Countries, and sorts of Men, were
they never so wild, evermore made their Prayers, and Sacrifice to their Gods,
in their own Mother Tongue; which is a manifest Declaration, that it is the
very Light and Voice of Nature.

Thus much upon the ground of St. Paul, and other Reasons out of the
Scriptures; joining therewith the common Usage of all Nations, as a Testimony
of the Law of Nature.

Now for the second part of the Assertion, which is, That the use of a strange
Tongue, in public Prayer, and Administration of Sacraments, is against the
Custom of the Primitive Church. Which is a Matter so clear, that the denial of
it must needs proceed, either of great Ignorance, or of wilful Malice.

Justinus Apol. 2.
For, first of all, Justinus Martyr, describing the Order of the Communion in
his time, says thus; Die Solis urbanorum and rusticorum caetus fiunt, ubi
Apostolorum, Prophetarumque literae, quoad fieri potest, praeleguntur: Deinde
cessante Lectore Praepositus verba facit adhortatoria, ad imitationem tam
honestarum rerum invitans. Post haec consurgimus omnes, and preces offerimus,
quibus finitis, profertur (ut diximus) Panis, Vinum and Aqua, tum praepositus
quantum potest preces offert, and gratiarum Actiones; plebs vero Amen accinit.
Upon the Sunday Assemblies, are made both of the Citizens and Countrymen;
where as the Writings of the Disciples, and of the Prophets, are read as much
as may be. Afterward when the Reader does cease, the Head-Minister makes an
Exhortation, exhorting them to follow so honest things. After this we rise all
together, and offer Prayers; which being ended, (as we have said) Bread, Wine,
and Water, are brought forth; then the Head-Minister offers Prayers, and
Thanksgivings, as much as he can, and the People answers, Amen.

These words of Justin, who lived about 160 Years after Christ, considered with
their Circumstances, declare plainly, That not only the Scriptures were read,
but also that the Prayers, and Administration of the Lord's Supper, were done
in a Tongue understood.

Both the Liturgies of Basil and Chrysostom, declare, That in the Celebration
of the Communion, the People were appointed to answer to the Prayer of the
Minister, sometimes Amen; sometimes, Lord have mercy upon us; sometimes, And
with thy Spirit; and, We have our Hearts lifted up unto the Lord, etc. Which
Answers they would not have made in due time, if the Prayers had not been made
in a Tongue understood.

And for further proof, Basil. Epist. 63.
let us hear what Basil writes in this Matter to the Clerks of Neocesarea;
Caeterum ad Objectum in Psalmodiis crimen, quo maxim simpliciores terrent
Calumniatores, etc.

As touching that is laid to our charge in Psalmodies and Songs, wherewith our
Slanderers do fray the Simple, I have this to say, That our Customs and Usage
in all Churches, be uniform and agreeable. For in the Night, the People with us
rises, goes to the House of Prayer: and in Travel, Tribulation, and continual
Tears, they confess themselves to God; and at the last rising again, go to
their Songs, or Psalmodies, where being divided into two parts, sing by course
together, both deeply weighing and confirming the Matter of the Heavenly
Saying; and also stirring up their Attention and Devotion of Heart, which by
other means be alienated and plucked away. Then appointing one to begin the
Song, the rest follow, and so with diverse Songs and Prayers, passing over the
Night at the dawning of the Day, all together, even as it were with one Mouth,
and one Heart, they sing unto the Lord a new Song of Confession, every Man
framing to himself meet words of Repentance.

If ye will flee us from henceforth for these things, ye must flee also the
Egyptians, and both the Lybians, ye must eschew the Thebians, Palestines,
Arabians, the Phenices, the Syrians, and those which dwell besides Euphrates.
And to be short, all those with whom Watchings, Prayers, and common singing of
Psalms are had in honor.

These are sufficient to prove, that it is against God's Word, and the Use of
the Primitive Church, to use a Language not understood of the People, in Common
Prayer, and Ministration of the Sacraments.

Wherefore it is to be marvelled at, not only how such an Untruth and Abuse
crept, at the first, into the Church, but also how it is maintained so stiffly
at this Day; And upon what ground, these that will be thought Guides, and
Pastors of Christ's Church, are so loath to return to the first Original of St.
Paul's Doctrine, and the Practice of the Primitive Catholic Church of Christ.

J. Scory. D. Whithead. J. Juel. J. Almer. R. Cox. E. Grindal. R. Horn. E.
Gest.


The God of Patience and Consolation, give us Grace to be like minded one
toward another, in Christ Jesus, that we all agreeing together, may, with one
mouth, praise God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.
Number 4. The Answer of Dr. Cole, to the first Proposition of the Protestants,
at the Disputation before the Lords at Westminster. Est contra Verbum Dei, and
consuetudinem veteris Ecclesioe Lingua Populo ignota uti in publicis precibus,
and Administratione Sacramentorum.
Most Honorable;
Ex MS. Col. Cor. C. Cant.
Whereas these Men here present, have declared openly, That it is repugnant,
and contrary to the Word of God, to have the Common Prayers, and Ministration
of the Sacraments, in the Latin Tongue, here in England; and that all such
Common Prayer, and Ministration, ought to be, and remain in the English Tongue.
Ye shall understand, that to prove this their Assertion, they have brought in
as yet only one place of Scripture, taken out of St. Paul's first Epistle to
the Corinthians, Cap. 14. with certain other places of the Holy Doctors;
whereunto answer is not now to be made: But when the Book, which they read,
shall be delivered unto us, according to the appointment made in that behalf,
then, God willing, we shall make answer, as well to the Scripture, as other
Testimonies alleged by them, so as all good Men may evidently perceive and
understand the same Scripture to be misconstrued, and drawn from the native and
true sense: And that it is not St. Paul's mind there to treat of Common Prayer,
or Ministration of any Sacraments. And therefore we now have only to declare,
and open before you briefly (which after, as opportunity serves in our Answer,
shall appear more at large) causes which move us to persist and continue in the
order received, and to say, and affirm, that to have the Common Prayer, or
Service, with the Ministration of the Sacraments in the Latin Tongue, is
convenient, (and as the state of the Cause stands at this present) necessary.

Second Section.
1. And this we affirm, first, because there is no Scripture manifest against
this our Assertion and Usage of the Church. And though there were any, yet it
is not to be condemned that the Church has received. Which thing may evidently
appear in many things that were sometime expressly commanded by God and his Holy
Apostles.

2. As for Example, (to make the Matter plain) ye see the express Command of
Almighty God, touching the observation of the Sabbath Day, to be changed by
Authority of the Church ( without any Word of God written for the same) into
the Sunday. The Reason whereof appears not to all Men; and howsoever it does
appear, and is accepted of all good Men, without any Controversy of Scripture;
yea, without any mention of the Day, saving only that St. John in his
Apocalypse, names it, Diem Dominicam: In the change whereof, all Men may
evidently understand the Authority of the Church, both in this cause, and also
in other Matters to be of great weight and importance, and therein esteemed
accordingly.

3. Another Example we have given unto us by the Mouth of our Savior himself,
who washing the feet of his Disciples, said, I have herein given you an
Example, that as I have done, even so do you. Notwithstanding these express
words, the Holy Church has left the thing undone, without blame: not of any
Negligence, but of great and urgent Causes, which appears not to many Men,
and yet universally without the breach of God's Commandment (as is said) left
undone. Was not the Fact also, and, as it seems, the express Commandment of
Christ, our Savior, changed and altered, by the Authority of the Church, in
the highest Mystery of our Faith, the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar? For he
ministers the same (as the Scripture witnesses) after Supper. And now if a
contentious Man would strain the Fact to the first Institution, St. Augustine
answers (not by Scripture, for there is none to improve it, but indeed
otherwise) even as the Apostles did, Visum est Spiritui sancto, ut in honorem
tanti Sacramenti, in os Christiani hominis prius intret Corpus Dominicum quam
exteri cibi. It is determined (says St. Augustine) by the Holy Ghost, that in
the honor of so great a Sacrament, the Body of our Lord should enter first
into the Mouth of a Christian Man before other external Meats. So that
notwithstanding it was the Fact of Christ himself, yet the Church moved by the
Holy Ghost, (as is said) has changed that also, without offense likewise. By
the which Sentence of St. Augustine, manifestly appears, that this Authority
was derived from the Apostles unto this Time; the which same Authority,
according to Christ's Promises, does still abide and remain with his Church.

4. And hereupon also rests the Alteration of the Sacrament under one kind,
when as the multitude of the Gentiles entered, the Church instructed by the Holy
Ghost, understood Inconveniences, and partly also Heresy to creep in through
the Ministration under both kinds; and therefore, as in the former Examples, so
in this now, (the Matter nothing diminished, neither in it self, nor in the
Receivers, and the thing also being received before, by a common and uniform
Consent, without contradiction) the Church did decree, that from henceforth it
should be received under the form of Bread only; and whosoever should think and
affirm, that Whole Christ remained not under both kinds, pronounced him to be
in Heresy.

5. Moreover, we read in the Acts, whereas it was determined in a Council
holden at Jerusalem by the Apostles, that the Gentiles should abstain from
Strangled, an^ Blood, in these words, Visum est Spiritui Sancto, and Nobis,
etc. It is decreed, by the Holy Ghost, and Us, (say the Apostles) that no other
burden be laid upon you, than these necessary things, That ye abstain from
things offered up unto Idols, and from Blood; and from that is strangled, and
from Fornication. This was the Commandment of God, (for still it is commanded,
upon pain of damnation, to keep our Bodies clean from Fornication) and the
other, joined by the Holy Ghost with the same, not kept nor observed at this
day.

6. Likewise in the Acts of the Apostles it appears, That among them in the
Primitive Church, all things were common. They sold their Lands and
Possessions, and laid the Money at the Feet of the Apostles, to be divided to
the People as every Man had need; insomuch that Ananias and Saphira, who kept
back a part of their Possession, and laid but the other part at the Apostles
Feet, were declared, by the Mouth of St. Peter, to be tempted by the Devil, and
to lie against the Holy Ghost, and in example of all other, punished with
sudden Death. By all which Examples, and many other, it is manifest, that
though there were any such Scripture which they pretend, as there is not, yet
the Church wherein the Holy Ghost is always resident, may order the same, and
may therein say as truly, Visum est Spiritui Sancto, and Nobis, as did the
Apostles; For Christ promised unto the Church, That the Holy Ghost should teach
them all Truth, and that He himself would be with the same Church unto the
Worlds end. And hereupon we do make this Argument with St. Augustine, which he
writes in his Epistle ad Januarium, after this sort, Ecclesia Dei inter multam
paleam multaque Zizania constituta, multa tolerat; and tamen quae sunt contra
fidem, vel bonam vitam non approbat, nec tacet, nec facit.

To this Major, we add this Minor; But the Catholic Church of God, neither
reproves the Service, or Common Prayer, to be in the Learned Tongue, nor yet
uses it otherwise.

Therefore it is most lawful and commendable so to be.

Third Section.
Another Cause that moves us to say and think, is, That otherwise doing, (as
they have said) there follows necessarily the breach of Unity of the Church,
and the Commodities thereby are withdrawn and taken from us; there follows
necessarily an horrible Schism and Division.

In alteration of the Service into our Mother Tongue, we condemn the Church of
God, which has been heretofore, we condemn the Church that is present, and
namely the Church of Rome.

To the which, howsoever it is lightly esteemed here among us, the Holy Saint
and Martyr, Ireneus, says in plain words thus; Ad hanc Ecclesiam propter
potentiorem principalitatem, necesse est omnes alias Ecclesias convenire; hoc
est omnes undique Fideles. It is necessary (says this Holy Man) who was nigh
to the Apostles, or rather in that time, for he is called (...) Apostolorum)
that all Churches do conform themselves, and agree with the Sea or Church of
Rome, all Churches, that is to say (as he declares himself) all Christian and
Faithful Men. And he alleges the Cause why it is necessary for all Men to
agree therewith, (propter potentiorem principalitatem) for the greater
Preeminence of the same, or for the mightier Principality.

From this Church, and consequently from the whole Universal Church of Christ,
we fall undoubtedly into a fearful and dangerous Schism, and therewith into all
Incommodities of the same.

That in this doing, we fall from the Unity of the Church, it is more manifest
than that we need much to stand upon. St. Augustine, Contra Cresconium
Grammaticum, putting a difference between Heresis and Schisma, says, Schisma
est diversa sequentium secta, Heresis autem Schisma inveteratum.

To avoid this horrible Sin of Schism, we are commanded, by the words of St.
Paul, saying, Obsecro vos ut id ipsum dicatis omnes and non sint in vobis
Schismata.

And that this changing of the Service out of the Learned Tongue, is doing
contrary to the Form and Order universally observed, is plain and evident to
every Man's Eye.

They are to be named Heretics (says he) which obstinately think and judge in
Matters of Faith, otherwise than the rest of the Church does. And those are
called Schismatics, which follow not the Order and Trade of the Church, but
will invent of their own Wit and Brain other Orders, contrary or diverse to
them which are already, by the Holy Ghost, universally established in the
Church. And we being declined from God by Schism, note what follows; There is
then no Gift of God, no Knowledge, no Justice, no Faith, no Works, and finally,
no Virtue that could stand us in stead, though we should think to glorify God
by suffering Death, (as St. Paul says) 1 Cor. 13. Yea, there is no Sacrament
that avails to Salvation, in them that willingly fall into Schism, that
without fear separate and divide themselves from the Sacred Unity of Christ's
Holy Spouse, the Church, as St. Augustine plainly says; Quicunque ille est,
qualiscunque ille est, Christianus non est qui in Ecclesia Christi non ^est;
that is, Whosoever he be, whatsoever degree or condition he be of, or what
qualities soever he has; though he should speak with the Tongues of Angels,
speak he never so holily, show he never so much Virtue, yet is he not a
Christian Man that is guilty of that Crime of Schsm; and so no Member of that
Church.

Wherefore this is an evident Argument; Every Christian Man is bound, upon pain
of Damnation, by the plain words of God, uttered by St. Paul, to avoid the
horrible Sin of Schism.

The changing of the Service Book out of the Learned Tongue, it being
universally observed through the whole Church from the beginning, is a cause of
an horrible Schism; wherefore every good Christian Man is bound to avoid the
change of the Service.

Now to confirm that we said before, and to prove that to have the Common
Prayer, and Ministration of the Sacraments in English, or in other than is the
Learned Tongue, let us behold the first Institution of the West Church, and the
Particulars thereof.

And first, to begin with the Church of France: Dyonisius, St. Paul's Scholar,
who first planted the Faith of Christ in France: Martialis, who (as it is said)
planted the Faith in Spain: And others which planted the same here in England,
in the time of Eleutherius: And such as planted the Faith in Germany, and other
Countries: And St. Augustine, that converted this Realm afterward, in the time
of Gregory, almost a thousand Years ago: It may appear that they had
Interpreters, as touching the Declaration and Preaching of the Gospel, or else
the Gift of Tongues: But that ever, in any of these West Churches, they had the
Service in their own Language, or that the Sacraments, other than Matrimony,
were ministered in their own Vulgar Tongue; that does not appear by any Ancient
Historiographer. Whether shall they be able ever to prove that it was so
generally, and thereby by continuance, in the Latin, the self-same Order and
Words remain still; whereas all Men do consider, and know right-well, that in
all other inferior and barbarous Tongues, great change daily is seen, and
specially in this our English Tongue, which in quovis Seculo fere, in every
Age, or hundred Years, there appears a great change and alteration in this
Language.

For the proof whereof, there has remained many Books of late in this Realm,
(as many do well know) which we, that be now Englishmen, can scarcely
understand or read. And if we should so often (as the thing may chance, and as
alteration daily does grow in our Vulgar Tongue) change the Service of the
Church, what manifold Inconveniences and Errors would follow, we leave it to
all Men's Judgments to consider. So that hereby may appear another invincible
Argument, which is, the Consent of the whole Catholic Church, that cannot err
in the Faith and Doctrine of our Savior Christ, but is (by St. Paul's saying)
the Pillar and Foundation of all Truth.

Moreover, the People of England do not understand their own Tongue, better
than Eunuchus did the Hebrew; of whom we read in the Acts, that Philip was
commanded to teach him; and he reading there the Prophesy of Esaias, Philip (as
it is written in the 8th Chapter of the Acts) enquired of him, Whether he
understood that which he read, or no? He made answer, saying, Et quomodo
possum, si non aliquis ostenderit mihi; in which words are reproved the
intolerable boldness of such as will enterprise without any Teacher; yea,
contemning all Doctors to unclasp the Book, and thereby, instead of Eternal
Food, drink up deadly Poison. For whereas the Scripture is misconstrued, and
taken in a wrong sense, that it is not the Scripture of God, but as St. Hierom
says, Writing upon the Epistle to the Galathians, it is the Scripture of the
Devil: And we do not contend with Heretics for the Scripture, but for the true
sense and meaning of the Scripture.

We read of Ceremonies in the Old Testament, as the Circumcision, the Bells and
Pomegranates; of Aaron's Apparel, with many other, and kinds of Sacrifices;
which all were, as St. Paul says unto the Hebrews, Justitia Carnis; and did
not inwardly justify the Party before God, that objected, in Protestation of
their Faith in Christ to come: And although they had the knowledge of every Fact
of Christ, which was signified particularly by those Ceremonies. And it is
evident and plain, that the High Priest entered into the inner Part of the
Temple, (named, Sanctum Sanctorum) whereas the People might not follow, nor
lawful for them to stand, but there, where they could neither see, nor hear,
what the Priest either said, or did, as St. Luke in the first Chapter of his
Gospel, rehearses in the History of Zachary.

Upon Conference of these two Testaments, may be plainly gathered this
Doctrine, That in the School of Christ, many things may be said and done, the
Mystery whereof the People knows not, neither are they bound to know. Which
things, that is, that the People did not hear and understand the Common Prayer
of the Priest and Minister, it is evident and plain, by the practice of the
Ancient Greek Church, and that also that now is at Venice, or elsewhere.

In that East Church, the Priest stands, as it were, in a Travice, or Closet,
hanged round about with Curtains, or Vails, apart from the People. And after
the Consecration, when he shows the Blessed Sacrament, the Curtains are
drawn, whereof Chrysostom speaks thus; Cum Vela videris retrahi, tunc superne
Coelum aperiri cogita; When thou see the Vails, or Curtains drawn open, then
think thou that Heaven is open from above.

It is also here to be noted, That there is two manners of Prayings, one
Public, another Private; for which cause the Church has such considerations
of the Public Prayer, that it destroys not, nor takes away the Private
Prayer of the People in time of Sacrifice, or other Divine Service; which thing
would chance, if the People should do nothing but hearken to answer, and say,
Amen. Besides the impossibility of the Matter, whereas, in a great Parish,
every Man cannot hear what the Priest says, though the Material Church were
defaced, and he left the Altar of God, and stood in the midst of the People.

Furthermore, If we should confess that it were necessary to have Common Prayer
in the Vulgar Tongue, these two Heresies would follow upon it; that Prayer
profits no Man but him that understands it, and him also that is present
and hears it; and so, by consequent, void was the Prayer for St. Peter in
Prison, by the Church abroad.

Now consider the Practice of this Realm.

If we should grant the Service to be in English, we should not have that in
the same form that it is in now, being in Latin; but be-like we should have
that, as it was, of late days. The Matter of which Service is taken out of the
Psalms, and other part of the Bible, Translated into English, wherein are
manifest Errors, and false Translations, which all by depravation of God's
Scripture, and so, vere mendacia. Now if the Service be so framed, then may Men
well say upon us, That we serve God with Lies.

Wherefore we may not so travel and labor to alter the form of our Common
Prayer, that we lose the Fruit of all Prayer, which by this barbarous
contention, no doubt, we shall do. And the Church of God has no such custom,
as St. Paul alleges in such Contentions. And may not the whole World say unto
us, as St. Paul said unto the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 14. An a vobis Verbum Dei
processit, aut in vos solos pervenit? As though the whole Church had been ever
in Error, and never had seen this Chapter of St. Paul before: And that the Holy
Ghost had utterly forsaken his Office, in leading that into all Truth, till now
of late, certain, boasting of the Holy Ghost, and the sincere Word of God, has
enterprised to correct and overthrow the whole Church.

Augustinus, lib. 1. contra Julianum Pelagium, a Graecis pro sua Heresi
profugum, querentem, ad hunc modum, respondit: Puto (inquit) tibi eam partem
orbis debere sufficere, in qua primum Apostolorum suorum voluit Dominus
gloriosissimo Martyrio Coronari. Et idem paulo post; Te certe (Julianum
alloquitur) Occidentalis Terra generavit, Occidentalis Regeneravit Ecclesia.
Quid ei quaeris infer, quod in ea non invenisti, quando in ejus membra
venisti? Imo, Quid ei quaeris auferre, quod in ea tu quoque accepisti? Haec
ille.

A number of Authorities out of the Doctors we could rehearse, that makes for
the Unity of the Church, and for not disturbing the quiet Government of the
same; which all impugn this their first Assertion by way of Argument. But
because they have framed their Assertion so, that we be compelled to defend the
Negative, (in the probation whereof, the Doctors use not directly to have many
words); therefore of purpose we leave out a number of the Sayings of the
Doctors, (which all, as I said before, would prove this first Matter by way of
Argument) lest we should be tedious, and keep you too long in a plain Matter.

And therefore now to conclude, for not changing the Divine Service, and the
Ministration of the Sacraments from the Learned Tongue (which thing does make a
Schism, and a Division between us and the Catholic Church of God) we have
brought in the Scripture that does forbid all such Schism. And also the Consent
and Custom of the whole Church, which cannot Err, and makes us bold to say as
we do; with other things, as ye have heard, for confirmation of the same. And
in answering to the first Matter, we intend (God willing) to say much more;
beseeching Almighty God so to inspire the Heart of the Queen's Majesty, and her
most Honorable Council, with the Nobility of this Realm, and Us that be the
Pastors of the People in these Causes, that so we may dispose of the Service of
God, as we may therein serve God: And that we do not, by altering the said
Service from the Uniform manner of Christ's Church, but also highly displease
God, and procure to Us infamy of the World, the Worm of Conscience, and Eternal
Damnation; which God forbid: and grant us Grace to acknowledge, confess, and
maintain his Truth. To whom be all Glory. Amen.

Number 5. The Declaration of the Proceedings of a Conference begun at
Westminster, the last of March, 1559, concerning certain Articles of Religion;
and the breaking up of the said Conference, by default and contempt of certain
Bishops, Parties of the said Conference.
THe Queen's most Excellent Majesty having heard of diversities of Opinions in
certain Matters of Religion, Ex Chartophylac. Regio.
amongst sundry of her Loving Subjects; and being very desirous to have the
same reduced to some Godly and Christian Concord, thought it best, by advice of
the Lords, and others of her Privy Council, as well for the satisfaction of
Persons doubtful, as also for the knowledge of the very Truth, in certain
Matters of difference, to have a convenient chosen number of the best Learned
of either Part, and to confer together their Opinions and Reasons; and thereby
to come to some good and charitable Agreement. And hereupon, by her Majesty's
Commandment, certain of her said Privy Council, declared this purpose to the
Archbishop of York, being also one of the said Privy Council, and required
him, that he would impart the same to some of the Bishops, and to make choice
of 8, nine, or ten of them; and that there should be the like number named of
the other part; and further also declared to him (as then was supposed) what
the Matters should be: and as for the time it was thought upon; and then after
certain days past, it was signified by the said Archbishop, that there was
appointed (by such of the Bishops to whom he had imparted this Matter) eight
Persons; that is to say, four Bishops, and four Doctors, who were content, at
the Queen's Majesty's Commandment, to show their Opinions, and as he termed it,
render account of their Faith in those Matters, which were mentioned, and that
specially in writing. Although, he said, they thought the same so determined,
as there was no cause to dispute upon them. It was hereupon fully resolved, by
the Queen's Majesty, with the Advice aforesaid, that according to their desire,
it should be in writing on both Parts, for avoiding of much alteration in
words. And that the said Bishops should, because they were in Authority of
Degree Superiors, first declare their Minds and Opinions to the Matter, with
their Reasons, in writing. And the other number, being also eight Men of good
degree in Schools, (and some having been in Dignity in the Church of England)
if they had any thing to say to the contrary, should the same day declare their
Opinions in like manner. And so each of them should deliver their Writings to
the other to be consisidered what were to be improved therein; and the same to
declare again in Writing at some other convenient day; and the like Order to be
kept in all the rest of the Matters.

All this was fully agreed upon with the Archbishop of York, and so also
signified to both Parties; and immediately hereupon diverse of the Nobility, and
States of the Realm, understanding that such a Meeting and Conference should
be, and that in certain Matters, thereupon the present Court of Parliament
consequently following, some Laws might be grounded, they made earnest means to
her Majesty, that the Parties of this Conference might put and read their
Assertions in the English Tongue, and that in the presence of them, the
Nobility and others of her Parliament House, for the better satisfaction, and
enabling of their own Judgments to treat and conclude of such Laws, as might
depend thereupon. This also being thought very reasonable, was signified to
both Parties, and so fully agreed upon. And the day appointed for the first
Meeting to be the Friday in the Forenoon, being the last of March, at
Westminster Church, where both for good Order, and for Honor of the
Conferences by the Queen's Majesty's Commandment; the Lords and others of the
Privy Council were present, and a great part of the Nobility also.

And notwithstanding the former Order appointed and consented unto by both
Parties, yet the Bishop of Winchester, and his Colleagues, alleging, that
they had mistaken that their Assertions and Reasons should be written, and so
only recited out of the Book, said, Their Book was not then ready written, but
they were ready to Argue and Dispute, and therefore they would for that time
repeat in Speech, that which they had to say to the first Proposition.

This variation from the former Order, and specially from that which themselves
had, by the said Archbishop, in writing before required, (adding thereto the
Reason of the Apostle, that to contend with words, is profitable to nothing,
but to the subversion of the Hearer) seemed to the Queen's Majesty somewhat
strange; and yet was it permitted, without any great reprehension, because they
excused themselves with mistaking the Order, and argued, that they would not
fail, but put it in writing, and according to the former Order, deliver it to
the other Part.

And so the said Bishop of Winchester, and his Colleagues, appointed Dr. Cole,
Dean of Paul's, to be their Utterer of their Minds, who partly by Speech only,
and partly by reading of Authorities written; and at certain times being
informed of his Colleagues what to say, made a declaration of their Meanings
and their Reasons to the first Proposition.

Which being ended, they were asked, by the Privy Council, If any of them had
any more to be said? and they said; No. So as then the other Part was licensed
to show their Minds, which they did accordingly to the first Order, exhibiting
all that which they meant, to propound in a Book written. Which, after a
Prayer, and Invocation made most humbly to Almighty God, for the enduing of
them with his Holy Spirit, and a Protestation also to stand to the Doctrine of
the Catholic Church, builded upon the Scriptures, and the Doctrine of the
Prophets and the Apostles, was distinctly read by one Robert Horn, Bachelor in
Divinity, late Dean of Duresm. And the same being ended, (with some likelihood,
as it seemed, that the same was much allowable to the Audience) certain of the
Bishops began to say contrary to their former Answer, that they had now much
more to say to this Matter; wherein, although they might have been well
reprehended for such manner of cavillation, yet for avoiding any more mistaking
of Orders in this Colloquie, or Conference, and for that they should utter all
that which they had to say, it was both ordered, and thus openly agreed upon of
both Parts, in the full Audience, that upon the Monday following, the Bishops
should bring their Minds and Reasons in Writing, to the second Assertion, and
the last also, if they could, and first read the same; and that done, the other
Part should bring likewise theirs to the same; and being read, each of them
should deliver to other the same Writings. And in the mean time the Bishops
should put in writing, not only all that which Doctor Cole had that day
uttered, but all such other Matters, as they any otherwise could think of for
the same; and as soon as might possible, to send the same Book, touching the
first Assertion to the other part; and they should receive of them that Writing
which Master Horn had there read that day; and upon Monday it should be agreed
what day they should exhibit their Answer touching the first Proposition.

Thus both parts assented thereto, and the Assembly was quietly dismissed. And
therefore upon Monday the like Assembly began again at the Place and Hour
appointed; and there, upon what sinister or disordered meaning, is not yet
fully known, (though in some part it be understanded) the Bishop of Winchester,
and his Colleagues, and specially Lincoln, refused to exhibit or read,
according to the former notorious Order on Friday, that which they had prepared
for the second Assertion; and thereupon, by the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal,
they being first gently and favorably required, to keep the Order appointed,
and that taking no place, being secondly, as it behoved, pressed with the more
earnest request, they neither regarding the Authority of that Place, nor their
own Reputation, nor the Credit of the Cause, utterly refused that to do.

And finally, being again particularly every one of them apart, distinctly by
Name required to understand their Opinions therein; they all (saving one, which
was the Abbot of Westminster, having some more consideration of Order, and his
Duty of Obedience, than the other) utterly and plainly denied to have their
Book read, some of them as more earnestly than other some, so also some others
more indiscreetly and irreverently than others.

Whereupon giving such Example of Disorders, Stubbornness, and Self-will, as
has not been seen and suffered in such an Honorable Assembly, being of the
two Estates of this Realm, the Nobilities and Commons, besides the Persons of
the Queen's Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, the same Assembly was
dismissed, and the Godly, and most Christian Purpose of the Queen's Majesty
made frustrate: And afterward, for the contempt so notoriously made, the
Bishops of Winchester and Lincoln, who have most obstinately disobeyed, both
Common Authority, and varied manifestly from their own Order; specially
Lincoln, who showed more folly than the other, were condignly committed to the
Tower of London; and the rest, saving the Abbot of Westminster, stand bound to
make daily their personal appearance before the Council, and not to depart the
City of London and Westminster, until further Order be taken with them for
their Disobedience and Contempt.

N. Bacon, Cust. Sigill. F. Shrewsbury. F. Bedford. Pembrok. E. Clynton. G.
Rogers. F. Knollys. W. Cecill. A. Cave.


Number 6. An Address made by some Bishops and Divines, to Queen Elizabeth,
against the Use of Images.
To the Queen's most Excellent Majesty.
WE knowing your gracious Clemency, and considering the necessity of the Matter
that we have to move, the one does encourage us, and the other compel us (as
before) to make our humble Petition unto your Highness, and to renew our former
Suit, not in any respect of self-will, stoutness, or striving against your
Majesty, (God we take to Witness) for with David, we confess that we are but as
Canes mortui, aut Pulices in comparison. But we do it only for that fear and
reverence which we bear to the Majesty of Almighty God, in whose Hands to fall,
it is terrible; for it lies in his Power to destroy for ever, and to cast both
Body and Soul into Hell Fire. And lest in giving just offense to the little
Ones, in setting a Trap of Errors for the Ignorant, and digging a Pit for the
Blind to fall into, we should not only be guilty of the Blood of our Brethren,
and deserve the wrathful Vae, and Vengeance of God, but also procure, to our
reclaiming Consciences, the biting Worm, that never dies, for our endless
confusion. For in what thing soever we may serve your Excellent Majesty, not
offending the Divine Majesty of God, we shall, with all humble Obedience, be
most ready thereunto, if it be even to the loss of our Life; for so God
commands of us, Duty requires of us, and we with all conformity have put in
proof. And as God, through your gracious Government, has delivered unto us
innumerable Benefits, which we most humbly acknowledge, and with due Reverence
daily give him Thanks. So we do not doubt, but that of his Mercy He will
happily finish in your Majesty that good Work, which of His free Favor He has
most graciously begun; that following the Examples of the Godly Princes which
have gone before, you may clearly purge the polluted Church, and remove all
occasions of Evil. And for so much as we have heretofore, at sundry times, made
Petition to your Majesty concerning the Matter of Images, but at no time
exhibited any Reasons for the removing of the same. Now, lest we should seem to
say much, and prove little, to allege Consciences without the Warrant of God,
and unreasonably require that, for the which we can give no Reason, we have at
this time put in writing, and do most humbly exhibit to your gracious
Consideration, those Authorities of the Scriptures, Reasons, and pithy
Persuasions, which as they have moved all such our Brethren, as now bear the
Office of Bishops, to think and affirm Images not expedient for the Church of
Christ; so will they not suffer us, without the great offending of God, and
grievous wounding of our own Consciences, (which God deliver us from) to
consent to the erecting or retaining of the same in the place of Worshipping;
and we trust, and most earnestly ask it of God, that they may also persuade
your Majesty, by your Regal Authority, and in the Zeal of God, utterly to
remove this Offensive Evil out of the Church of England, to God's great Glory,
and our great Comfort.

Here follow the Reasons against them, of which I have given a full Abstract in
the History, and therefore do not set them down here, for they are very large.
The Address concludes in these words.
Having thus declared unto your Highness a few Causes of many, which do move
our Consciences in this Matter, we beseech your Highness, most humbly, not to
strain us any further, but to consider that God's Word does threaten a terrible
Judgment unto us, if we being Pastors and Ministers in His Church, should
assent unto the thing, which in our Learning and Conscience, we are persuaded
does tend to the confirmation of Error, Superstition, and Idolatry; and
finally, Heb. 13. 1 Pet. 5.
to the ruins of the Souls committed to our Charge, for the which we must give
an account to the Prince of Pastors at the last Day. We pray your Majesty also,
not to be offended with this our Plainness and Liberty, which all good and
Christian Princes have ever taken in good part at the hands of Godly Bishops.

St. Ambrose, writing to Theodosius the Emperor, uses these words; Sed neque
Imperiale est libertatem dicendi negare, Epist. lib. 5. Epist. 29.
neque Sacerdotale quod sentiat non dicere.

And again; In causa vero Dei quem audies, si Sacerdotem non audies, Ibidem.
cujus Majore peccatur periculo? Quis tibi verum audebit dicere, si Sacerdos
non audeat?

These, and suchlike Speeches of St. Ambrose, Theodosius, and Valentinianus,
the Emperors did take in good part; and we doubt not, but your Grace will do
the like, of whose, not only Clemency, but also Beneficence, we have largely
tasted.

We beseech your Majesty also, in these, and suchlike Controversies of
Religion, to refer the discusement, and deciding of them, to a Synod of the
Bishops, and other Godly Learned Men, according to the Example of Constantinus
Magnus, and other Christian Emperors, that the Reasons of both Parties being
examined by them, the Judgment may be given uprightly in all doubtful Matters.

And to return to this present Matter; We most humbly beseech your Majesty to
consider, That besides weighty Causes in Policy, which we leave to the Wisdom
of the Honorable Counselors, the establishing of Images by your Authority,
shall not only utterly discredit our Ministries, as builders of the thing which
we have destroyed, but also blemish the Fame of your most Godly Brother, and
such notable Fathers as have given their Lives for the Testimony of God's
Truth, who by public Law removed all Images.

The Almighty and Everliving God, plentifully endue your Majesty with His
Spirit and Heavenly Wisdom; and long preserve your most gracious Reign, and
prosperous Government over us, to the advancement of his Glory, to the
overthrow of Superstition, and to the Benefit and Comfort of all your Hignesses
loving Subjects. Amen.

Number 7. The Queen's Commissions to the Visitors that were sent to the
Northern Parts.
ELizabetha Dei Gratia Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regina, Fidei Defensor,
etc.
Charissimis, Consanguineis and Consiliariis nostris Francisco Comiti Salop.
Domino Praesidenti Consilii nostri in partibus Borealibus, and Edwardo Comiti
de Darbia, ac charissimo consanguineo nostro Thomae Comiti Northumb. Domino
Guardiano sive custodi Marchiarum nostrarum de Le East March, and middle March
versus Scotiam, ac perdilecto and fideli nostro Willielmo Domino Evers, ac
etiam dilectis and fidelibus nostris Henrico Piercy, Thomae Gargrave, Jacobo
Crofts and Henrico Gates Militibus, necnon dilectis nobis Edwino Sandys Sacrae
Theologiae Professori, Henrico Harvy Legum Doctori, Richardo Bows, Georgio
Brown, Chistophero Estcot, and Richardo Kingsmell Armigeris, Salutem.
Quoniam Deus Populum suum Anglicanum imperio nostro subjecit, cujus regalis
suscepti muneris rationem perfect reddere non possumus, nisi veram religionem
and sincerum numinis divini cultum in omnibus Regni nostri partibus
propagaverimus: Nos igitur regalis and absolutae potestatis nostrae, nobis in
hoc Regno nostro commissae, respectu, quoniam utrumque Regni nostri statum, tam
Ecclesiasticum, quam Laicum visitare, and certas pietatis ac virtutis regulas
illis praescribere constituimus, praefatum Franciscum Comitem Salop. Edwardum
Comitem de Darbia, Thomam Comitem Northumb, Willielmum Dominum Evers, Henricum
Piercy, Thomam Gargrave, Jacobum Crofts, Henricum Gates, Milites; Edwinum
Sandys, Henricum Harvy, Georgium Brown, Christophorum Estcot, Richardum Bows,
and Richardum Kingsmell Armigeros, ad infrascriptum vice, nomine, and
Authoritate nostris exequendum, vos quatuor, tres aut duo vestrum ad minimum
deputavimus, and substituimus ad visitandum igitur, tam in capite, quam in
membris Ecclesias Cathaedrales, Civitates and Diocaeses Eboracen. Cestrens.
Dunelmen. and Carlionen. necnon quascunque alias Collegiatas, Parochiales and
Praebendales Ecclesias, ac loca alia Ecclesiastica quaecunque, tam exempta,
quam non exempta in and per easdem Civitates and Diocaeses visabiliter
constitutas, Clerumque and Populum earundem in eisdem degentes sive residentes;
Deque statu Ecclesiarum and locorum hujusmodi, necnon vita, moribus and
conversatione, ac etiam qualitatibus personarum in Ecclesiis and locis
praedictis degentium, sive commorantium modis omnibus, quibus id melius aut
efficacius poteritis inquirendum and investigandum: criminosos, ac susceptae
Religioni subscribere obstinate and peremptory recusantes, vel quocunque alio
modo delinquentes; Atque culpabiles condignis paenis, etiam usque ad
beneficiorum, dignitatum, sive officiorum suorum privationem, fructuum vel
reddituum, and proventionem Ecclaesiarum and Locorum, quibus praesunt,
sequestrationem, vel quamcunque aliam congruam and competentem coercionem
inclusive puniendam and corrigendam; Atque ad probatiores vivendi mores modis
omnibus, quibus ad melius and efficacius poteritis, reducendum; Testamenta
quorumcunque defunctorum infra loca praedicta decedentium probanda, approbanda
and informanda, administrationesque bonorum eorundem Executorum in eisdem
testamentis nominatis committendum, administrationesque insuper ac
sequestrationes bonorum ab intestatis sive per viam intestatorum, etiam
descendentes in debita juris forma expediendum and concedendum, ac
committendum; Computas quoque tam executorum, quam administratorum, and
sequestratorum quorumcunque recipiendum, examinandum, admittendum, terminandum:
ac insuper eosdem executores, administratores, and sequestratores, omnes and
singulas acquietandum, relaxandum and finaliter dimittendum, Causasque
quascunque examinandum, audiendum and finaliter terminandum. Contumaces autem,
and rebels, cujuscunque conditionis sive status fuerint, si quos inveneritis,
tam per censuras Ecclesiasticas, quam personarum apprehensionem and
incarcerationem, ac recognitionem, acceptionem ac quaecunque alia juris Regni
nostri remedia compescendum, necnon injunctiones presentibus annexas personis
in eisdem nominatis nomine nostro tradendum, aliasque injunctiones congruas and
competentes vice and authoritate nostris eis indicendum, dandum and
assignandum, paenasque convenientes in earum violatores infligendum, and
irrogandum; Ecclesiis etiam, and alia loca dimissorum, vacantia and pro
vacantibus habenda fore decernendum and declarandum, pensionesque legittimas,
congruas and competentes cedentibus vel resignandis hujusmodi assignandum and
limitandum, praesentatosque ad beneficia Ecclesiastica quaecunque infra
civitates, Ecclesias aut Diocaeses praedictas constituta, durante visitatione
nostra hujusmodi, si habiles fuerint and idonei, ad eadem admittendum, ac de
and in eisdem instituendum and investiendum, cum suis juribus, and
pertinentibus universis, eosque in realem, actualem and corporalem possessionem
earundem inducendum, and induci faciendum, atque mandandum, necnon clericorum
and beneficiatorum quorumcunque tam pro ordinibus, quam beneficiis per eos
adeptis, literas and munimenta exigendum and recipiendum, eaque diligenter
examinandum, and discutiendum, and quos non sufficienter munitos in ea part
comperitis, ab officio dimittendum, and sic jure munitis declarandum, and
pronunciandum. Synodos quoque and capitula, tam generalia quam specialia, cleri
and populi hujusmodi per executionem premissorum aut reformationem quamcunque
faciendum and convocandum: Procurationes quoque Synodalia ratione nostrae hujus
visitationis debite petendum, exigendum, and levandum, ac etiam non solventes
aut solvere recusantes per censuras Ecclesiasticas compellendum, coercendum and
cogendum; necnon concionandi potestatem hujusmodi personis concedendum, quas ad
hoc divinum munus suscipiendum aptas esse judicaveritis: Incarceratos quoque,
and vinculis commissos ob religionis causam antea licet (...) condemnatos,
causis incarcerationis and condemnationis hujusmodi prius examinatis, and
plenarie discussis, examinandum, discutiendum ac in integrum, justitia id
poscente, restituendum, deliberandum and extra prisonam dimittendum, necnon
causas deprivationum examinandum, ac contra statuta and ordinationes hujus
Regni nostri Angliae, vel juris Ecclesiastici ordinem deprivatos restituendum,
ac omnia and singula alia, quae circa hujusmodi visitationis seu reformationis
negotia necessaria fuerint, seu quomodolibet oportuna, etiamsi verba magis
specialia de se exigunt and requirunt, faciendum, and expediendum. Vobis
quatuor, tribus aut duobus vestrum, ut praefertur de quorum eminenti doctrina
morumque, and Concilii gravitate, ac in rebus gerendis fide and industria
plurimum confidimus, vices nostras committimus ac plenam in dicto tenore
presentium concedimus facultatem, cum cujuslibet congruae and legitimae
coercionis potestate. Et praeterea certos viros prudentes, ac pios assignandum,
and nominandum, per quos de statu rerum instruemini and quorum opera presents
utemini, in omnibus causis ad hanc visitationem nostram spectantibus, quantum
vobis convenire videbitur. Iidem viri a vobis commissariis assignati plenam
potestatem habebunt, etiam post Commissariorum decessum, and post finitum etiam
visitationis tempus, de omnibus articulis, ordinibus and institutis ejusdem
visitationis inquirendi, Et violatores eorum, cujuscunque conditionis fuerint,
conveniendi and examinandi; Et omnes quaerelas, quatenus ullum impedimentum aut
offensionem nostrae visitationis continebunt, accipiendi and audiendi, and
hujusmodi personas, offensiones, and quaerelas Comissariis nostris Londini
residentibus, and ad Ecclesiasticaru^ rerum reformationem Delegatis,
praesentabunt, and exhibebunt illis viis and modis, quibus hoc convenientissime
videbunt fieri posse. Mandantes omnibus, and singulis Majoribus,
Vice-comitibus, Justiciariis ac quibuscunque aliis officiariis, ministris and
subditis nostris, quatenus nobis in and circa praemissorum executionem
effectualiter assistant, auxilientur, and suffragentur, ut insuper sagacitatis,
diligentiae, factorumque vestrorum omnium evidens and perpetuum specimen nobis,
posterisque nostris remaneat, inventaque and invenienda pro recordatorum
defectu debitam reformationem correctionemve non subterfugiant, aut a memoria
prolabantur. Nos suprema ac regali authoritate nostra praedicta dilectos, and
fideles subditos nostros Thomam Peircy, and Joanem Hoges, and eorum deputatos
per Comissarios nostros approbandos, notarios praecipuos per antea legitime
existentes, actorum, instrumentorum, decretorum, summarum, judiciorum,
censurarum, caeterorumque omnium, and singulorum, quae per vos, vestrumve
Aliquem in Visitatione hac nostra Regia peragentur, judicabuntur, decernentur,
fient, ferentur, and pronunciabuntur, Scribas, Registrarios nostros praecipuos,
and principales conjunctim and divisim ordinamus, nominamus and constituimus;
eisque officium, and officia Registri Scribat nostri presenti, cum omnibus
officia praedicta tangentia, eorumque deputatis per Comissarios nostros
approbandis conjunctim and divisim damus, deputamus, assignamus, and decernimus
per presents. In cujus rei testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus
Patentes,

Test meipsa apud Westmonast. 24 die Junii, Anno Regni nostri primo.
Number 8. Ten Letters written to, and by Dr. Parker, concerning his Promotion
to the Sea of Canterbury. An Original.
AFter my right-hearty Commendations, Ex M. SS. Reverendis. D. D. Gul. Arch.
Cant.
these are to signify unto you, That for certain Matters touching your self,
which I trust shall turn you to good, I would wish that you should repair
hither to London, with as convenient speed as you can, where you shall find me
at Burgeny House in Pater Noster Row, if it be not overlong e're you come. And
if it chance that I be returned into Suffolk before your coming, then I would
you should make your repair unto my Brother-in-Law, Sir William Cecil, the
Queen's Secretary, declaring unto him, that I appointed you to wait upon him to
know his pleasure touching such Matters as he and I did talk of concerning you.
Thus wishing you well to do, I bid you heartily farewell.

Written the 9th of December, 1558. By Yours assuredly, N. Bacon.

Dr. Parker's Answer to the former Letter. A Copy.
RIght Worshipful, with my thankful Duty of Commendations, hearing of your
sickness still to occupy you, I was right-heartily sorry that I molested you
with so long a Letter, into which fault, for that I will not fall again at this
present, I shall use the fewer words. Sir, If I may know at what time I might,
in your return down, wait on your Worship at Burgeny, or at New Market, I will,
by God's Grace, so appoint my self to be there first, the rather for that I
would not give occasion to have your Journey either protracted, or yet diverted
out of the right Line thereof. In the mean time I shall beseech God to restore
your strength, that ye may the sooner be restored to the Commonwealth, which
in this apparent necessity of worthy Persons, I fear, feels God's Hand in
this his Visitation to be burdenous. I would wish ye were not much stirring
abroad in the distemperance of the Air, so contrarious to the state of Men's
Bodies, once pierced with this insolent Quartane, as Experience shows. I
think the Springtime, as in natural respects, must be expected, though
Almighty God be bound to no time. Thus I heartily commend you to his gracious
protection, this 20th of December.

Your most bounden assuredly to command, M. P.

A Letter written to him by Secretary Cecil. An Original.
AFter my hearty Commendations. The Queen's Highness minding presently to use
your Service in certain Matters of Importance, has willed me so to signify
unto you, to the end you should forthwith, upon the sight hereof, put your self
in order to make your undelaied repair hither unto London; at which your coming
up, I shall declare unto you her Majesty's further Pleasure, and the occasion
why you are sent for; and hereof praying you therefore in no wise to fail, I
bid you well to fare.

From Westminster, the 30th of December, 1558. Your Loving Friend, W. Cecil.

Another Letter of the Lord Keepers to him. An Original.
AFter hearty Commendations, these are to signify unto you, That ye may assure
your self, that you shall have any thing that I can do for you touching the
request of your Letters, or any other Matter being in my Power: I do think that
ye have received, e're this, a Letter from Mr. Secretary, willing you to come
up immediately, if your Health will suffer, for certain weighty Matters
touching the Queen's Service; so as I trust, by your presence, all things to
your own contentation shall come the better to pass. If this Letter be not come
to your Hands, and therewith you be not able to come, it shall be behoveful for
you to signify so much, because I have been willed also to haste your coming
up. Thus right-heartily fare ye well.

Written the 4th of January, 1558. By, Yours assuredly, N. Bacon.

Dr. Parker's Answer. A Copy.
Right Worshipful;
AFter my Duty of Commendations. Where of late I received your Letters to this
effect, That I should repair up unto you at London, upon occasion, as ye wrote,
which may turn me to good, so judged by a late Conference with the Right
Worshipful Sir William Cecil, Secretary to the Queen's Majesty, of long time
my special good Friend and Master, ye shall understand that my Quartane has so
much distempered the state of my Health, that without apparent danger, I cannot
as yet commit my self to the adventure of the Air, as by diverse essays I have
attempted of late, to my greater pain, and further hinderance; whereupon, if
your opportunity might so serve, I would most heartily pray your Worship to
signify so much. And further, yet in confidence of your old good Heart to me, I
would be a Suitor to you, as I was once to Sir John Cheek, my entire good
Friend, and Patron, to the said Sir William Cecil, that where he was desirous,
by his mediation, to do me good, (as here you use to call it) even as I was
then framed in mind, so am I at this day. I would be inwardly heavy and sorry
that his favorable Affection should procure me any thing above the reach of
mine Ability, whereby I should both dishonest my self, and disappoint the
expectation of such as may think that in me, which I know is not; but specially
I might clog and cumber by Conscience to Godward, before whom I look every day
to appear to make mine Answer, which I think, and as I trust, is not far off:
Notwithstanding though I would most fain wear out the rest of my Life in
private state, yet concerning that very small Talent credited unto me, I would
not so unthankfully to God ensue my quiet, that I could not be content to
bestow it, so it were there, whether my Heart and Conscience, before this time,
and daily yet does incline me: I mean, to be no further abled, but by the
Revenue of some Prebend, (without charge of Cure, or of Government) to occupy
my self to dispense God's Word amongst the simple strayed Sheep of God's Fold,
in poor destitute Parishes and Cures, more meet for my decayed Voice, and small
Quality, than in Theatrical and great Audience: which walk, and wish I would to
be near their Quarters, where we both were born, by occasion whereof I might
have opportunity to wait other-while on you at Redgrave, whether I have vowed
my first Journey, immediately upon my strength recovered, by the occasion of
your friendly Request of your Letters ye sent me. And if I might be yet bolder
with you, as I was with the said Sir John Cheek, to disclose my desire of all
Places in England, I would wish to bestow most my time in the University, the
State whereof is miserable at this present, as I have had intelligence from
time to time thereof. And if i^ any respect I could do Service, as a weak
Member of the Commonwealth, I think I might do it with them, having long
Acquaintance, and some Experience in the Doings thereof; which Judgment had the
said Sir John Cheek toward me: And therefore to set me on work, had once, by
the favor of the said Mr. Secretary, procured to have me named to the
Mastership of Trinity College, which yet chanced not to that effect, God
otherwise determining the Matter in his Providence. But to tell you my Heart, I
had rather have such a thing as Bennet-College is in Cambridg, a Living of
twenty Nobles by the Year at the most, than to dwell in the Deanery of Lincoln,
which is 200 at the least. Now Sir, ye may see herein, yet my Ambition in
writing thus much, but I shall pray you to accept the Circumstances, which ye
may better insinuate to Mr. Secretary, than I dare be bold, by my rude Letters,
to molest his favorable goodness, or yet prescribe to your, or his Worship,
Wisdom and Prudence. In conclusion, at the Reverence of God, I pray you, either
help that I be quite forgotten, or else so appointed, that I be not entangled
now of new, with the concourse of the World, in any respect of public state of
living, whereby I shall have an unfeigned signification of your very good Will
to me indeed, and be bound to pray for you during my Life.

Some of your Scholars at Cambridg, enjoying the benefit of your liberal
Exhibition, have sent your Worship now their Letters, some be sick and absent.

Thus reprising the quiet of my Mind, and having good hope in your friendliness
to the considerations aforesaid, I wish you a full recovery of your Health, and
a continuance in God's Grace and Favor, with all your Family.

Your Beadsman to command, M. P.

A long Letter of Dr. Parker's, excusing himself from the Offer of the
Archbishopric of Canterbury. An Original.
RIght Honorable, my Duty presupposed. It is an old said Proverb, Vbi quis
dolet ibidem and manum frequenter habet, beseeching you, for God's sake, the
rather to bear the importunity of this my handwriting, supposing that this may
be one of the last Solicitations that I shall molest you with.

Sir, Your signification uttered to me at my first coming to you at London,
concerning a certain Office ye named to me, did hold me in such carefulness all
my time of being there, with the recurring of a dull Distemperance, set in my
Head by the Dregs of my Quartane, and as yet not remedied, whereby I had no
disposition to my Book; beside some other displeasant Cogi^^tions concerning
the state of this Time, made me have so little joy of my being at London, as I
had never less in my Life: most glad when my Back was turned thereunto. But to
come near to my intent of writing, I shall pray to God, yea, bestow that Office
well, ye shall needcare the less for the residue. God grant it chances neither
on an arrogant Man, neither on a faint-hearted Man, nor on a covetous Man; The
first shall both sit in his own light, and shall discourage his Fellows to join
with him in Unity of Doctrine, which must be their whole strength; for if any
heart-burning be betwixt them, if private Quarrels stirred abroad be brought
home, and so shall shiver them asunder, it may chance to have that success
which I fear in the conclusion will follow. The second Man should be too weak
to commune with the Adversaries, who would be the stouter upon his
pusillanimity. The third Man not worth his Bread, profitable for no Estate in
any Christian Commonwealth, to serve it rightly.

For my part, I pray God I never fall into his Indignation and Wisdom; it were
not for a Subject to deserve his Prince's Displeasure, and sorry would I be to
discontent Mr. Secretary, and you, for whose worshipful Favors, I count my
self more bound to pray to God, and to wish well to them for all the Men in the
Realm beside. I speak it sincerely, without flattery; for though I have little
wit, yet I can discern betwixt Men, who delight to be flattered, and who not,
though I would not consider how dishonest it were for me to use it. But, Sir,
except ye both moderate and restrain your overmuch good Will in the former
respect to me-ward, I fear, in the end, I shall dislike you both, and that your
Benevolencies should, by occasion of my obstinate untowardness, jeopard me into
Prison; yet there shall I bear you my good Heart, which I had rather suffer in
a quiet Conscience, than to be intruded into such Room and Vocation, wherein I
should not be able to answer the Charge, to God, nor to the World, wherein I
should not serve the Queen's Honor, which I wish most heartily advanced in all
her wise and godly Proceedings; nor yet should I live to the Honor of the
Realm, and so finally should but work a further displeasant contemplation to my
good Friends who preferred me.

This, this is the Thing that makes me afraid, my Lord, though I passed not on
mine own shame and rebuke; and therefore, by God's Favor, and your good Helps,
I never intend to be of that Order, better or worse, higher nor lower; Non
omnia possumus omnes; and tutissimum est ut quisque hanc artem exerceat in qua
educatus, and ad quam natura homines forma^^^. And as for other Furnishments, I
am too far behind. When I came first up to London, I had thirty pounds in my
Purse, not ten shillings more, whereof I have wasted a good part; and if I were
placed, as some of my Friends wish to me, what would that do to begin, or to
furnish my Household. And I hear how the Citizens of Norwich pray for the Soul
of their last Bishop, for when upon his departure they seized his Goods, to
answer his Debts to them, streight-way came the Queen's Officers and discharged
them all, which yet were not able, for all his spare Hospitality, to pay half
that he owed.

Furthermore, to come to another Consideration* of a further Imperfection,
which I would have dissembled to you and others, but it cannot be, but I must
open it to you, my assured good Master and Friend, in secrecy, whose old good
Will makes me the less abashed, to be so homely with you at this time. In one
of my Letters, I made a little signification of it, but peradventure ye did not
mark it. Sir, I am so in Body hurt and decayed, coram Deo non mentior, that
whatsoever my Ability were, either of worldly Furniture, or inward Quality; and
though my Heart would right-feign serve my Sovereign Lady, the Queen's Majesty,
in more respects than of my Allegiance, not forgetting what words her Grace's
Mother said to me of her, not six days before her apprehension, yet this my
painful Infirmity, will not suffer it in all manner of Services. Flying in a
Night, for such as sought for me, to my peril, I fell off my Horse so
dangerously, that I shall never recover it; and by my late Journey up, and my
being there at London, not well settled, it is increased to my greater pain. I
am fain sometime to be idle, when I would be occupied; and also to keep my Bed,
when my Heart is not sick.

This was one cause why I was importune to you for that room, whereof I made
mention in my former Letters, by the which I might be abled, by the portion of
that Stipend, in this my Impoverishment, to wear out my Life tolerably, and
should not by that be occasioned to come up to any Convocations, as having no
Voice in that House; and peradventure being there, I might be a mean for the
fewer Matters of disturbance, to come up to Mr. Secretary, now Chancellor
there, to molest him, more than should need, whose gentle affability might
provoke some inconsiderate Men not to regard his other greater Affairs. And yet
though I were so placed, I would not forswear London, or the Court either, at
times as could stand with my Ability and Health of Body, if my Service could be
any ways acceptable, and were agreeable to the proportion of my Capacity.

Sir, Because I may not dissemble with you, I have told you all now, do with me
what ye will, I might be ashamed to spend so many words in a Cause private of
my self; but yet because ye must be Partner of some lack, if I answered not the
expectation, I could no less do, but make you privy beforehand. I pray you
think not that the Prognostication of Mr. Michael Nostre Dame reigns in my
Head. I esteem that fantastical Hotch-potch not so well, as I credit Lucianus
Book, De veris Narrationibus; nor yet all other vain Prophesies o^ Sands, more
than I regard Sir Thomas Moor's Book of Fortunes Answer^ upon the chance of
three Dice casting. I would I saw no more cause to fear the likelihood of God's
Wrath deserved, for disolute Life, to fall upon the Realm, by the evidence of
his true Word, and by God's old practices: and yet no Man considers his ire
already begun, Dum non sinit viros dolosos dimidiare dies suos. I shall pray to
God to defend you and your Family, and that ye may revolve in Mind Christ's
serious Admonition, Quid proderit homini, Mat. 16. Luc. 11.
si totum mundum lucretur, si animae suae detrimentum patiatur. Et non in
abundantia cujusquam, est vita hominis ex his quae possidet.

Sir, My Duty of Heart makes me bold with you, not otherwise meaning before
God, but thanking him many times that Mr. Secretary and you may have the doing
of things in this greedy World, and that ye have so good credit, and ready
access to the Queen's Majesty, to comfort her good Inclination, whom I beseech
the God of Heaven to preserve with her Council, yea, and with the Seniority of
her Spiritual Ministers also, against whom I see a great Charge set before
them, to overcome that, must specially go through their hands by diligent
watching, upon the unruly Flock of the English People, if they were not so much
acloyed with Worldly Collections, Temporal Commissions, and Worldly Provisions.
I speak this the rather in this respect, which I thought good to put to your
understanding; At my last being at London, I heard and saw Books printed, which
be spread abroad, whose Authors be Ministers of good estimation; the Doctrine
of the one, is to prove, That a Lady Woman cannot be, by God's Word, a Governor
in a Christian Realm. And in another Book going abroad, is Matter set out to
prove, That it is lawful for every private Subject to kill his Sovereign,
ferro, veneno, quocunque modo, if he think him to be a Tyrant in his
Conscience, yea, and worthy to have his Reward for his Attempt: Exhorrui cum
ista legerem. If such Principles be spread into Men's Heads, as now they be
framed and referred to the Judgment of the Subject, of the Tenant, and of the
Servant, to discuss what is Tyranny, and to discern whether his Prince, his
Landlord, his Master, is a Tyrant, by his own fancy, and collection supposed,
What Lord of the Council shall ride quietly minded in the Streets, among
desperate Beasts? What Master shall be sure in his Bedchamber? It is the
surest way for every Man to serve God truly in his Vocation, to deserve the
rather his protection: and then both the Devil and Man, Foreign and Intestine,
shall have their Malices retorted upon themselves again. But thus goes the
Devil about to dull the heretical Stomachs of Princely Men, to do good in their
turn of time, to serve God and the Commonwealth. They say that the Realm is
full of Anabaptists, Arrians, Libertines, Free Will Men, etc. against whom only
I thought Ministers should have needed to fight in Unity of Doctrine. As for
the Romish Adversaries, their Mouths may be stopped with their own Books, and
Confessions of late days; I never dreamed that Ministers should be compelled to
impugn Ministers; the Adversarys have good sport betwixt themselves, to
prognostic the likelihood. Some Protestants peradventure, perceiving how Men
nip them to disable them, to keep any Learned Men in House to confer with, and
to beat down these Seditious Sects, if any inconvenience, for want of
preaching, shall fall, they may chance to say a Verse of David's Psalter,
Laetabitque justus, cum viderit vindictam, and manus suas lavabit in sanguine
peccatoris, as not caring for their Assurances, who abase them so low: and some
peradventure have cast already their starting shifts, and make Provision
against all Adventures. Well, I pray God all be Conscience to God, that is
sometime so pretended: Men be Men, yea, after the School of Affliction, Men be
Men, Hypocrisy is a privy Thief, both in the Clergy and in the Laity. To make
an end of such Conference, which I would gladly have told you presently, but I
could not wait so much leisure in you, and opportunity; and loath I was to have
begun my Tale, and not to have ended it, by reason of interruption by others.
But as for the principal occasion of my writing, howsoever it may dislike you,
yet shall I ever-more acknowledge my Duty to you, yea, though now ye give me
quite up: I reverence you so much, that I had rather ye disliked me utterly by
times, with your less repentance, rather than ye and other of my loving Friends
should bear any envy, or any displeasant unthankfulness, and so too late to
repent for your commending of me, (if a persuasion in an appearance, is not
surely grounded to be seen) when Experience should have showed the Trial. And
therefore I write it to you in time again, after the signification of my very
first Letters to prevent you, for I know ye may, with a few words, remedy all
the towardness yet concluded.

And think not, I pray your Honor, that I seek mine private Gain, or my idle
ease, put me where ye will else; and if, as far as my power of Knowledge, and of
Health of Body will extend, I do not apply my self to discharge my Duty, let me
be thrust out again like a Thief. I thank God my Conscience condemns me not,
that I have been aforetime any great gatherer; and now, for the upholding of
two or three Years more of Life, to heap unproportionably, I count it madness;
and more than this purpose, by God's Grace, I dare promise nothing: And as for
such few Folks which I may leave behind me, they shall not say by me, I trust,
That happy be these Children whose Fathers go to the Devil for their sake. Your
Lordship knows with what Patrimony I began the World with, and yet have
hitherto lived with enough, yea, when all my Livings were taken from me, yet
God, I thank him, ministered to me sufficiently, above the capacity of my
understanding, or foreseeing. And thus commending your good Lordship to that
merciful Governance, I pray your Honorable Wisdom to put this scribbling out of
the way, from every Man's sight and intelligence.

Right Honorable, after my duty of Commendations to your Lordship, I am bold
now to send you a Fancy of my Head, expressed in these few Leaves; which if I
had compact in a Letter, it would have seemed overlong, and being comprised in
Leaves, may appear to be but a very little Book of one Sheet of Paper, which
yet I so devised, upon consideration of your Business, which will not suffer
you to be long detained in Matters impertinent, and therefore ye may turn in
the Leaf and read it at diverse leasures, if your Lordship shall vouchsafe the
reading. And thus wishing you joy of Heart, which I feel to be a great Treasure
in this World, as the want, a grievous torment; I pray God preserve your
Honorable Goodness, with my good Lady your Wife. If ye see ought in my Quire
worth reformation, ye know I am disciplinable, and have read, quod meliora sunt
vulnera diligentis, quam fraudulenta oscula odentis: Wherefore reserving mine
unreasonable determination, as you shall know, I shall yield my self wholly
conformable to your Honor, ubi, quomodo, quando, aliquid, vel tandem nihil. Of
an Occasion lately ministered, I have sent my Letters to Mr. Secretary
concerning another Matter, primo Martii.

Your assured Orator, M. P.

A Letter written to him by the Lord Keeper concerning it. An Original.
THat before this time I have not sent you Answer to your last Letters; the
cause has been, for that I could by no mean understand to what end the Matter
mentioned in those Letters would grow unto; but perceiving this day, by a
Resolution made in the Queen's Highness presence, that your Friends shall very
hardly deliver you of the Charge written of in the same Letters, I thought it
good to make you privy thereunto; and therewith to advise you, to commit to the
Judgment of your Friends, your Ability and Disability to serve, where and when
you shall be called. If I knew a Man to whom the description made, in the
beginning of your Letter, might more justly be referred, than to your self, I
would prefer him before you, but knowing none so meet indeed, I take it to be
my duty to prefer you before all others, and the rather also, because otherwise
I should not follow the Advice of your own Letter. The rest, which is much, I
defer until our next meeting. It is like, that e're it be long, you shall
receive Letters subscribed by me and others jointly. Thus right-heartily
farewell.

From the Court the 17th of May, 1559. Yours assuredly, N. Bacon.

An Order sent to him, requiring him to come up to London.
AFter our hearty Commendations. These be to signify unto you, that for certain
Causes, wherein the Queen's Majesty intends to use your Service, her Pleasure
is, That you should repair up hither with such speed, as you conveniently may;
and at your coming up, you shall understand the rest. Thus right-heartily fare
ye well.

From the Court, the 19th of May, 1559. Your loving Friends, N. Bacon. W.
Cecill.


A second Order to the same effect. An Original.
AFter our hearty Commendations. Where before this time we directed our Letters
unto you, declaring thereby, that for certain Causes, wherein the Queen's
Majesty intends to use your Service, you should repair hither with all
convenient speed, whereof we have as yet received none Answer. And therefore,
doubting Jest by the default of the Messenger, the Letter be not come to your
hands, we have thought good again to write unto you, to the intent you should
understand her Highness Pleasure is, That you should make your repair hither
with all speed possible. Thus right-heartily farewell.

From the Court, the 28th day of May, 1559. Your loving Friends, N. Bacon, C.
S. W. Cecill.


Dr. Parker's Letter to the Queen, excusing himself. An Original.
Pleases it your most Honorable Majesty to be gracious Lady, to my poor Suit,
which at this time extreme necessity compels me to make, both in respect of
my constrained Conscience to Almighty God, as also in the regard of my Duty
which I owe to your noble Estate, and most high Authority. So it is, most
gracious and sovereign Lady, where I have understanding of your most favorable
Opinion toward me, your Graces most simple Subject, concerning the
Archbishopric of Canterbury, In consideration whereof, I ought, and do
acknowledge my most bounden Duty to be a faithful Orator for your Grace during
my Life. Yet calling to examination my great unworthiness, for so high a
Function, which mine disability I might alleadg at length in particularity, but
for molesting your Graces most weighty Affairs, I am bold thus, by my writing,
to approach to your Honor to discharge me of that so high and chargable an
Office, which does require a Man of much more Wit, Learning, Virtue, and
Experience than I see, and perfectly know can be performed of me worthily, to
occupy it to God's Pleasure, to Your Grace's Honor, and to the Wealth of your
loving Subjects beside. Many other imperfections in me, as well for temporal
Ability for the furnishing thereof, as were seemly to the Honor of the Realm;
as also of infirmity of Body, which will not suffer me to attend on so
difficult a Cure, to the discharge thereof, in any reasonable expectation. And
where, most gracious Lady, beside my humble Duty of Allegiance to your Princely
Dignity, I am otherwise, for the great Benefits which sometime I received at
Your Graces honorable Mother's Benevolence (whose Soul I doubt not but is in
blisful felicity with God) most singularly obliged, above many other, to be
Your most faithful Beadsman, both in thanking Almighty God for his Fatherly
Protection hitherto over Your noble Person, And also furthermore to pray for
the continuance of your fortunate Reign in all godly Prosperity. So I am right
sorry, and do lament within my self, that I am so basely qualified inwardly in
Knowledge, and outwardly in extern Sufficiencies, to do Your Grace any meet
Service, as I would wish could be acceptable, and to Your Graces expectation:
assuring Your noble Estate, that in any other smaller Vocation, under the
degree of such chargeable Offices, and more agreeable to my Infirmity, if it
shall be so seem, to Your high Wisdom, and merciful Liberality, I shall
endeavor my self to attend thereon; referring yet my self wholly to Your
Grace's Pleasure, rather than by just allegation of my unworthiness, the loyal
Duty of my faithful Heart should be any ways suspected to Your reverend Majesty.

Your Grace's poor Subject, Matthew Parker.

Number 9. The Instrument of Dr. Parker's Consecration; with some Attestations
of the Authenticalness of it.
Rituum atque Ceremoniarum Ordo, in Consecrando Reverendissimo in Christo
Patre, Mattheo Parker, Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, in Sacello suo apud Manerium
suum de Lambeth, die Dominico 17. viz. die Mensis Decembris, Anno Dom. 1559.
habit.
PRincipio, Sacellum Tapetibus ad Orientem adornabatur, Ex MS. Col. Cor. C.
Cant.
solum vero panno rubro insternebatur, Mensa quoque Sacris peragendis
necessaria, tapeto pulvinarique ornata ad Orientem sita erat.

Quatuor preterea Cathedrae, quatuor Episcopis, quibus munus consecrandi
Archiepiscopi delegabatur, ad austrum Orientalis Sacelli partis erant positae.

Scamnum preterea tapeto pulvinaribusque instratum, cui Episcopi genubus flexis
inniterentur, ante Cathedras ponebatur.

Pari quoque modo Cathedra, scamnumque tapeto pulvinarique ornatum,
Archiepiscopo, ad Borealem Orientalis ejusdem Sacelli partis plagam posita
erant.

Hiis rebus ita ordine suo instructis, Mane circiter quintam aut sextam per
Occidentalem portam ingreditur Sacellum Archiepiscopus, toga talari coccinea
caputioque indutus, quatuor precedentibus funalibus, and quatuor comitatus
Episcopis, qui ejus consecrationi inservirent (verbi gratia) Guilielmo Barlow
olim Bathon. and Wellen. Episcopo, nunc vero ad Cicestren Episcopatum electo,
Johanne Scory olim Cicestriae Episcopo and nunc ad Herefordensem vocato, Milone
Coverdallo olim Exoniense Episcopo, and Johanne Hodgskinne Bedfordiae
Suffraganeo. Qui omnes postquam seeds sibi paratas ordine singuli suo
occupassent, Preces continuo matutinae per Andream Pierson Archiepiscopi
Capellanum clara voce recitabantur, quibus peractis, Johannes Scory (de quo
supra diximus) suggestum conscendit, atque inde assumpto sibi, in thema,
Seniores ergo qui in vobis sunt obsecro consenior, etc. non ineleganter
concionabatur.

Finita concione, egrediuntur simul Archiepiscopus reliquique quatuor Episcopi
Sacellum, se ad sacram communionem paraturi, neque mora confestim per borealem
portam in vestiarum ad hunc modum vestiti redeunt. Archiepiscopus nimirum
linteo superpelliceo (quod vocant) induebatur. Cicestrensis electus, capa
serica ad sacra peragenda paratus utebatur. Cui ministrabant operamque suam
prebebant duo Archiepiscopi Capellani, Nicholaus, viz. Bullingham Lincolniae
Archidiaconus, and Edmundus Gest Cantuariensis quoque Archidiaconus, capis
sericis similiter, vestiti. Hereford electus and Bedford Suffraganeneus,
linteis superpelliceis induebantur.

Milo vero Coverdallus non nisi toga lanea talari utebatur,

Atque hunc in modum vestiti and instructi ad communionem celebrandam
perrexerunt Archiepiscopo genubus flexis ad infimum Sacelli gradum sedente.

Finito tandem Evangelio, Hereforden. electus, Bedfordiae Suffraganeus and Milo
Coverdallus (de quibus supra) Archiepiscopum coram Cicestren. electo apud
mensam in Cathedra sedenti hiis verbis adduxerunt; Reverende in Deo Pater, hunc
virum pium pariter atque doctum tibi offerimus atque presentamus, ut
Archiepiscopus consecretur. Postque haec dixissent, proferebatur illico Reginae
diploma sive mandatum pro consecratione Archiepiscopi, quo per Reverendum
Thomam Yale Legum Doctorem perlecto, Sacramentum de Regio Primatu sive suprema
ejus authoritate tuenda juxta Statuta 1. An. Regni Serenissimae Reginae nostrae
Elizabeth. promulgata ab eodem Archiepiscopo exigebatur, quod cum ille
solemniter tactis corporaliter sacris Evangeliis conceptis verbis prestitisset,
Cicestrens. electus quaedam praefatus atque populum ad orationem hortatus, ad
Litanias decantandas Choro respondente se accinxit. Quibus finitis, post
quaestiones aliquot Archiepiscopo per Cicestrien. electum propositas, and post
orationes and suffragia quaedam juxta formam Libri antedicti Parliamenti editi,
apud Deum habita, Cicestriensis Herefordiensis, Suffraganeus Bedfordiensis and
Milo Coverdallus, manibus Archiepiscopo impositis. Accipe (inquiunt Anglice)
Spiritum Sanctum, and gratiam Dei quae jam per impositionis manuum in te est
excitare memento. Non enim timoris, sed virtutis, dilectionis and sobrietatis
spiritum dedit nobis Deus. His ita dictis, Biblia Sacra illi in manibus
tradiderunt hujusmodi apud eum verba habentes, In legendo, hortando, and
docendo vide diligens sis, atque ea meditare assidue quae in hisce Libris
scripta sunt, noli in his segnis esse quo incrementum inde proveniens omnibus
innotescat and palam fiat. Cura quae ad te and ad docendi munus spectant
diligenter. Hoc enim modo non teipsum solum, sed and reliquos Auditores tuos
per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum salvabis. Postquam haec dixissent, ad
reliqua communionis solennia pergit Cicestrensis, nullum Archiepiscopo tradens
pastorale baculum: cum quo communicabant una Archiepiscopus, and illi Episcopi
supra nominati cum alliis etiam nonnullis.

Finitis tandem peractisque sacris, egreditur per borealem orientis Sacelli
partis portam Archiepiscopus quatuor illis comitatus Episcopis qui eum
consecraverant, and confestim iisdem ipsis stipatus Episcopis per eandem
revertitur portam albo Episcopali superpelliceo, crimeraque (ut vocant) ex
nigro serico indutus, circa collum vero collare quoddam ex pretiosis pellibus
sabellinis (vulgo Sables vocant) consutum gestabat. Pari quoque modo
Cicestrensis and Herefordensis, suis Episcopalibus amictibus, superpellicio
scilicet and crimera uterque induebatur. D. Coverdallus vero and Bedfordiae
Suffraganeus togis solummodo talaribus utebantur. Pergens deinde Occidentalem
portam versus Archiepiscopus Thomae Doyle Economo, Johanni Baker Thesaurario,
and Johanni March computo rotulario, singulis singulos Albos dedit Baculos,
hoc scilicet modo eis muneribus and officiis suis ornans.

Hiis itaque hunc ad modum ordine suo, ut jam ante dictum est peractis, per
occidentalem portam Sacellum egreditur Archiepiscopus generosioribus quibusque
sanguine ex ejus familia eum precedentibus, reliquis vero eum a tergo
sequentibus.

Acta gestaque haec erant omnia in praesentia Reverendorum Episcoporum, Edmundi
Gryndall Londinensis Episcopi electi, Richardi Cocks Eliensis electi, Edwini
Sands Wigorniensis electi, Anthonii Huse Armigeri, Principalis and Primarii
Registrarii dicti Archiepiscopali, Thomae Argall Armigeri Regrarii Cicestriae
Prerogativae Cantuariensis, Thomae Willet, and Johannis Incent Notariorum
publicorum, and aliorum quoque nonnullorum.

Concordat cum Originali in Bibliotheca Collegii Corp. Christi apud
Cantabrigiens. Ita testor Matthew. Whinn Notarius Public. and Acad. Cantabr.
Registrarius Principalis.

Jan. 8.1674.
Cambridg. Jan. 11. 1674.
WE whose Names are hereunto subscribed, having seen the Original, whereof
this Writing is a perfect Copy, and considered the Hand, and other
Circumstances thereof, are fully persuaded that it is a true and genuine
Record, of the Rites and Ceremonies of Archbishop Parker's Consecration, and
as ancient as the Date it bears. In Witness whereof we have hereunto set our
Hands, the Day and Year above written.

Hen. Paman Orat. Publicus. Hen. More D. D. Ra. Widdrington S. T. D. and D.
Marg. P.


C. C. C. C.
WE the Master and Fellows of Corpus Christi College, in the University of
Cambridg, do hereby declare and certify, That this Writing, being a Narrative
of Archbishop Parker's Consecration, in Lambeth Chapel, is faithfully
transcribed from the Original Record in our College Library: and that we are
fully satisfied that the said Records is as ancient as the Date it bears, and
the occasion to which it does refer. Nor can we doubt, but the plain and
evident Tokens of Antiquity which it carries, will as much satisfy any
ingenuous Persons who shall have a sight thereof: Which therefore we shall
readily afford to those who shall repair to the College for that purpose.

John Spencer D. D. Master of the Coll. John Peckover, B. D. Erasmus Lanc, B.
D. Ri. Sheldrake, B. D. Sam. Beck, B. D. Hen. Gostling, B. D. Will. Briggs, M.
A. John Richer, M. A.


Number 10. An Order set down for the Translating of the Bible, by King James.
Ex MS. D. Bolase.
The Places and Persons agreed upon for the Hebrew, with the particular Books
by them undertaken.

Westminster.
Mr. Dean of Westminster. Mr. Dean of Paul's. Mr. Doctor Saravia. Mr. Doctor
Clark. Mr. Doctor Leifield. Mr. Doctor Teigh. Mr. Burleigh. Mr. King. Mr.
Tompson. Mr. Beadwell.
Penteteuchon. The Story from Joshua to the first Book of Chronicles, exclusive.

Cambridg.
Mr. Livelye. Mr. Richardson. Mr. Chatterton. Mr. Dillingham. Mr. Harrison. Mr.
Andrews. Mr. Spalding. Mr. Burge.
From the first of the Chronicles, with the rest of the Story, and the
Hagiographi, viz. Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Canticles, Ecclesiastes.

Oxford.
Doctor Harding. Dr. Reynolds. Dr. Holland. Dr. Kilbye. Mr. Smith. Mr. Brett.
Mr. Fairclough.
The four, or greater Prophets, with the Lamentations, and the twelve lesser
Prophets.

Cambridg.
Doctor Dewport. Dr. Branthwait. Dr. Radclife. Mr. Ward, Eman. Mr. Downs. Mr.
Boys. Mr. Ward, Reg.
The Prayer of Manasses, and the rest of the Apochrypha.

The Places and Persons agreed upon for the Greek, with the particular Books by
them undertaken.

Oxford.
Mr. Dean of Christ-Church. Mr. Dean of Winchester. Mr. Dean of Worcester. Mr.
Dean of Windsor. Mr. Savile. Dr. Perne. Dr. Ravens. Mr. Haviner.
The four Gospels. Acts of the Apostles. Apocalypse.

Westminster.
Dean of Chester. Dr. Hutchinson. Dr. Spencer. Mr. Fenton. Mr. Rabbet. Mr.
Sanderson. Mr. Dakins.
The Epistles of Saint Paul.

The Canonical Epistles.

The Rules to be observed in Translation of the Bible.
1. THe ordinary Bible read in the Church, commonly called the Bishops Bible,
to be followed, and as little altered, as the Truth of the Original will permit.

2. The Names of the Prophets, and the Holy Writers, with the other Names of
the Text, to be retained, as nigh as may be, accordingly as they were vulgarly
used.

3. The old Ecclesiastical Words to be kept, viz. the word Church not to be
translated Congregation, etc.

4. When a Word has diverse significations, that to be kept which has been
most commonly used by the most of the Ancient Fathers, being agreeable to the
Propriety of the Place, and the Analogy of the Faith.

5. The division of the Chapters to be altered, either not at all, or as little
as may be, if necessity so require.

6. No Marginal Notes at all to be affixed, but only for the explanation of the
Hebrew or Greek words, which cannot, without some circumlocution, so briefly
and fitly be expressed in the Text.

7. Such Quotations of Places to be marginally set down, as shall serve for the
fit reference of one Scripture to another.

8. Every particular Man of each Company, to take the same Chapter, or
Chapters, and having translated, or amended them severally by himself, where he
thinks good, all to meet together, confer what they have done, and agree for
their parts what shall stand.

9. As any one Company has dispatched any one Book in this manner, they shall
send it to the rest, to be considered of seriously and judiciously, for his
Majesty is very careful in this Point.

10. If any Company, upon the review of the Book so sent, doubt or differ upon
any Place, to send them word thereof; note the Place, and withal send the
Reasons; to which if they consent not, the difference to be compounded at the
General Meeting, which is to be of the chief Persons of each Company at the end
of the Work.

11. When any Place of special obscurity is doubted of, Letters to be directed,
by Authority, to send to any Learned Man in the Land, for his judgment of such
a Place.

12. Letters to be sent from every Bishop, to the rest of his Clergy,
admonishing them of this Translation in hand; and to move and charge, as many
as being skilful in the Tongues; and having taken pains in that kind, to send
his particular Observations to the Company, either at Westminster, Cambridg, or
Oxford.

13. The Directors in each Company, to be the Deans of Westminster and Chester
for that Place; and the King's Professors in the Hebrew or Greek in either
University.

14. These Translations to be used, when they agree better with the Text than
the Bishops Bible, viz.

Tindall's. Matthew's. Coverdale's. Whitchurch's. Geneva.
15. Besides the said Directors before mentioned, three or four of the most
Ancient and Grave Divines, in either of the Universities, not employed in
Translating, to be assigned by the Vice Chancellor, upon conference with rest
of the Heads to be Overseers of the Translations, as well Hebrew as Greek, for
the better observation of the 4th Rule above specified.

Number 11. A Declaration of certain principal Articles of Religion, set out by
the Order of both Archbishops, Metropolitans, and the rest of the Bishops, for
the Unity of Doctrine to be taught and holden of all Parsons, Vicars, and
Curats, as well in testification of their common Consent in the said Doctrine,
to the stopping of the mouths of them that go about to slander the Ministers of
the Church, for diversity of Judgment: as necessary for the instruction of
their People, to be read by the said Parsons, Vicars, and Curats, at their
Possession-taking, or first entry into their Cures. And also after that,
yearly, at two several times; that is to say, the Sundays next following
Easterday, and St. Michael the Archangel, or on some other Sunday, within one
month after those Feasts, immediately after the Gospel.
FOrasmuch as it appertains to all Christian Men, but especially to the
Ministers and the Pastors of the Church, being Teachers and Instructers of
others, to be ready to give a Reason of their Faith, when they shall be
thereunto required: I for my part now appointed your Parson, Vicar, or Curat,
having before my Eyes the Fear of God, and the Testimony of my Conscience, do
acknowledge for my self* and require you to assent to the same.

I.
First; That there is but one living and true God, of infinite Power, Wisdom,
and Goodness; the maker and preserver of all Things. And that in Unity of this
Godhead, there be three Persons of one Substance, of equal Power and Eternity;
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

II.
I believe also whatsoever is contained in the Holy Canonical Scriptures. In
the which Scriptures are contained all things necessary to Salvation; by the
which also, all Errors and Heresies may sufficiently be reproved and convicted;
and all Doctrine and Articles, necessary to Salvation, established. I do also
most firmly believe and confess all the Articles contained in the Three Creeds;
The Nicene Creed, Athanasius Creed, and our Common Creed, called, the Apostles
Creed; for these do briefly contain the principal Articles of our Faith, which
are at large set forth in the Holy Scriptures.

III.
I do acknowledge also that Church to be the Spouse of Christ, wherein the Word
of God is truly taught, the Sacraments orderly ministered, according to Christ's
Institution, and the Authority of the Keys duly used. And that every such
particular Church, has authority to institute, to change, clean to put away
Ceremonies, and other Ecclesiastical Rites, as they be superfluous, or be
abused; and to constitute other, making more to Seemliness, to Order, or
Edification.

IV.
Moreover, I confess, That it is not lawful for any Man to take upon him any
Office or Ministry, either Ecclesiastical or Secular, but such only as are
lawfully thereunto called by their High Authorities, according to the
Ordinances of this Realm.

V.
Furthermore, I do acknowledge the Queen's Majesty's Prerogative and Superiority
of Government of all Estates, and in all Causes, as well Ecclesiastical as
Temporal, within this Realm, and other her Dominions and Countries, to be
agreeable to God's Word, and of right to appertain to her Highness, in such sort
as is in the late Act of Parliament expressed; and sithence by her Majesty's
Injunctions declared and expounded.

VI.
Moreover, touching the Bishop of Rome, I do acknowledge and confess, that by
the Scriptures, and Word of God, he has no more Authority than other Bishops
have in their Provinces and Diocesses: And therefore the Power which he now
challenges, that is, to be the Supreme Head of the Universal Church of Christ,
and so to be above all Emperors, Kings, and Princes, is an usurped Power,
contrary to the Scriptures and Word of God, and contrary to the Example of the
Primitive Church; and therefore is, for most just Causes, taken away and
abolished in this Realm.

VII.
Furthermore, I do grant and confess, That the Book of Common Prayer, and
Administration of the Holy Sacraments, set sorth by the Authority of
Parliament, is agreeable to the Scriptures, and that it is Catholic,
Apostolic, and most for the advancing of God's Glory, and the edifying of
God's People; both for that it is in a Tongue that may be understanded of the
People, and also for the Doctrine and Form of ministration contained in the
same.

VIII.
And although, in the Administration of Baptism, there is neither Exorcism,
Oil, Salt, Spittle, or hallowing of the Water now used; and for that they were
of late Years abused, and esteemed necessary. Where they pertain not to the
substance and necessity of the Sacrament, they be reasonably abolished, and yet
the Sacrament full and perfectly ministered, to all intents and purposes,
agreeable to the Institution of our Savior Christ.

IX.
Moreover, I do not only acknowledge, that Private Masses were never used amongst
the Fathers of the Primitive Church; I mean, public Ministration, and
receiving of the Sacrament by the Priest alone, without a just number of
Communicants, according to Christ's saying, Take ye, and eat ye, etc. But also
that the Doctrine that maintains the Mass to be a Propitiatory Sacrifice for
the Quick and the Dead, and a mean to deliver Souls out of Purgatory, is
neither agreeable to Christ's Ordinance, nor grounded upon Doctrine Apostolic.
But contrary-wise, most ungodly and most injurious to the precious Redemption
of our Savior Christ, and his only-sufficient Sacrifice offered once for ever,
upon the Altar of the Cross.

X.
I am of that mind also, That the Holy Communion, or Sacrament, of the Body and
Blood of Christ, for the due obedience to Christ's Institution, and to express
the virtue of the same, ought to be ministered unto the People under both kinds.
And that it is avouched by certain Fathers of the Church, to be a plain
Sacrilege to rob them of the Mystical Cup, for whom Christ has shed his most
precious Blood, seeing he himself has said, Drink ye all of this. Considering
also, That in the time of the Ancient Doctors of the Church, as Cyprian,
Hierom, Augustine, Gelasius, and others, six hundred Years after Christ, and
more, both the Parts of the Sacrament were ministered to the People.

Last of all.
As I do utterly disallow the extolling of Images, Relics, and feigned
Miracles; and also all kind of expressing God Invisible, in the form of an Old
Man, or the Holy Ghost in form of a Dove; and all other vain worshipping of
God, devised by Man's fantasy; besides, or contrary to the Scriptures, As
wandering on Pilgrimages, setting up of Candles, praying upon Beads, and
suchlike Superstition; which kind of Works, have no promise of Reward in
Scripture, but contrary-wise, Threatenings and Maledictions: So I do exhort all
Men to the Obedience of God's Law, and to the Works of Faith, as Charity,
Mercy, Pity, Alms, devout and fervent Prayer with the affection of the Heart,
and not with the Mouth only; Godly Abstinence and Fasting, Chastity, Obedience
to the Rulers and Superior Powers, with suchlike Works, and godliness of Life
commanded by God in his Word; which, as St. Paul says, has Promises both of
this Life, and of the Life to come; and are Works only acceptable in God's
sight.

These things, above-rehearsed, though they be appointed by common Order, yet
do I, without all compulsion, with freedom of Mind and Conscience, from the
bottom of my Heart, and upon most sure persuasion, acknowledge to be true and
agreeable to God's Word. And therefore I exhort you all, of whom I have Cure,
heartily and obediently to embrace and receive the same; That we all joining
together in unity of Spirit, Faith, and Charity, may also at length be joined
together in the Kingdom of God, and that through the Merits and Death of our
Savior Jesus Christ. To whom, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all
Glory and Empire, now and for ever. Amen.

Imprinted at London, in Paul's Churchyard, by Richard Jugge, Printer to the
Queen's Majesty.

Cum Privilegio Regiae Majestatis.

* Number 12. Sir Walter Mildmay's Opinion, concerning the keeping of the Queen
of Scots ( October 26. 1569.) at Windsor Castle. An Original.
The Question to be considered on, is, Whether it be less perilous to the
Queen's Majesty, and the Realm, to retain the Queen of Scots in England, or to
return her home into Scotland?
IN which Question, these things are to be considered. On the one side, What
Dangers are like to follow if she be retained here; and thereupon, if so
avoiding of them, it shall be thought good to return her, then what Cautions
and Provisions are necessary to be had.

On the other side, are to be weighed the Dangers like to follow if she be
returned home; and thereupon, if for eschewing of them, it shall be thought
good to retain her here, then what Cautions and Provisions are in that Case
necessary.

Dangers in retaining the Queen of Scots.
Her unquiet and aspiring Mind, never ceasing to practice with the Queen's
Subjects. Her late practice of Marriage between the Duke of Norfolk and her,
without the Queen's knowledge. The Faction of the Papists, and other Ambitious
Folks, being ready and fit Instruments for her to work upon. The Commiseration
that ever follows such as be in misery, though their Deserts be never so
great. Her cunning and sugared entertainment of all Men that come to her,
whereby she gets both Credit and Intelligence. Her practice with the French and
Spanish Ambassadors, being more near to her in England, than if she were in
Scotland; and their continual solicitation of the Queen for her delivery, the
denial whereof may breed War. The danger in her escaping out of Guard, whereof
it is like enough she will give the Attempt. So as remaining here, she has
time and opportunity to practice and nourish Factions, by which she may work
Confederacy, and thereof may follow Sedition and Tumult, which may bring peril
to the Queen's Majesty and the State. Finally, it is said, That the Queen's
Majesty, of her own disposition, has no mind to retain her, but is much
unquieted therewith, which is a thing greatly to be weighed.

Cautions if she be returned.
To deliver her into the Hands of the Regent, and the Lords now governing in
Scotland, to be safely kept. That she meddle not with the State, nor make any
alteration in the Government, or in Religion. That by sufficient Hostages it
may be provided, that neither any Violence be used to her Person, nor that she
be suffered to Govern again, but live privately, with such honorable
Entertainment as is meet for the King of Scots Mother. That the League
Offensive and Defensive, between France and Scotland, be never renewed. That a
new and perpetual League be made between England and Scotland, whereby the
Queen's Majesty may show an open Maintenance and Allowance of the King's
Authority and Estate, and of the present Government, so as the Scots may wholly
depend on her. That the Regent, and the Lords of Scotland, do make no
composition with the Scots Queen, neither suffer her to marry, without consent
of the Queens Majesty. That the Faults whereof she has been accused, and her
declining and delaying to Answer that Accusation, may be published to the
World, the better to discourage her Factious Party, both here and in Scotland.

Dangers in returning Her.
The manner how to deliver her Home, with the Queen's Majesty's Honor and
Safety, is very doubtful. For if she be delivered in Guard, that came hither
free, and at liberty, how will that stand with the Queen's Honor, and with the
Requests of the French and Spanish Kings, that have continually solicited her
free delivery, either into Scotland or France; or if she die in Guard, either
violently or naturally, her Majesty shall hardly escape slander. If, again, she
be delivered home at Liberty, or if being in Guard she should escape, then
these Perils may follow.

The suppressing of the present Government in Scotland, now depending upon the
Queen's Majesty, and advancing of the contrary Faction depending upon the
French. The alteration of Religion in Scotland. The renewing of the League,
Offensive and Defensive, between France and Scotland, that has so much
troubled England. The renewing of her pretended claim to the Crown of this
Realm. The likelihood of War to ensue between France, Scotland, and Us, and the
bringing in of Strangers into that Realm to our annoyance, and great charge, as
late Experience has showed. The supportation that she is like to have of the
French and Spanish Kings. And though Peace should continue between England and
Scotland, yet infinite injuries will be offered by the Scots Queen's Ministers
upon the Borders, which will turn to the great hurt of the Queen's Majesty's
Subjects, or else to her greater Charges to redress them; for the change of the
Government in Scotland, will change the Justice which now is had, unto all
Injury and Unjustice. The likelihood she will revoke the Earl Bothwell, now her
Husband, though unlawful, as it is said, a Man of most evil and cruel Affection
to this Realm, and to his own Countrymen: Or, if she should marry another that
were a-like Enemy, the Peril must needs be great on either side.

And albeit to these Dangers may be generally said, That such Provision shall
be made, by Capitulations with her, and by Hostages from the Regent, and the
Lords of Scotland, as all these Perils shall be prevented.

To that may be answered.
That no Fact which she shall do here in England will hold, for she will
allege the same to be done in a Foreign Country, being restrained of Liberty.
That there is great likelihood of escape, wheresoever she be kept in Scotland;
for her late escape there, shows, how she will leave no way unsought to
atchieve it; and the Country being, as it is, greatly divided, and of nature
marvellously Factious, she is the more like to bring it to pass. Or if the
Regent, by any practice, should yield to a composition, or finding his Party
weak, should give over his Regiment, Then what assurance have we, either of
Amity or Religion. That the Regent may be induced to do this, appears by his
late secret Treaty with the Duke of Norfolk, for her Marriage, without the
Queen's Majesty's knowledge. And though the Regent should persevere constant,
yet if he should be taken away directly, or indirectly, (the like whereof is
said, has been attempted against him) then is all at large, and the Queen of
Scots most like to be restored to her Estate, the Factions being so great in
Scotland, as they are; so as the Case is very tickle and dangerous to hang upon
so small a Thread, as the Life of one Man, by whom it appears the whole at
this present is contained.

And touching the Hostages, though that Assurance might be good to preserve her
from Violence in Scotland, yet it may be doubted how the same will be
sufficient to keep her from escaping or governing aagain, seeing, for her part,
she will make little Conscience of the Hostages if she may prevail; and the
punishing of the Hostages, will be a small satisfaction to the Queen's Majesty
for the Troubles that may ensue. And for the doubt of her escape, or of
Rebellion within this Realm, it may be said, That if she should not be well
guarded, but should be left open to practice, then her Escape, and the other
Perils, might be doubted of; but if the Queen's Majesty hold a stricter hand
over her, and put her under the Care of a fast and circumspect Man, all
practice shall be cut from her, and the Queen's Majesty free from that Peril.
And more safe it is for the Queen to keep the Bridle in her own Hand, to
restrain the Scottish Queen, than in returning her home, to commit that trust
to others, which by Death, composition, or abusing of one Person, may be
disappointed.

And if she should, by any means, recover her Estate, the doubt of Rebellion
there, is not taken away, but rather to be feared, if she have ability to her
Will. And if she find strength, by her own or Foreign Friends, she is not far
off to give Aid, upon a main Land, to such as will stir for her; which, so long
as she is here, they will forbear, lest it might bring most Peril to her self,
being in the Queen's Hands. The like respect, no Doubt will move Foreign
Princes to become Requesters, and no Threatners, for her delivery.

And where it is said, That the Queen's Majesty cannot be quiet so long as she
is here, but it may breed danger to her Majesty's Health. That is a Matter
greatly to be weighed, for it were better to adventure all, than her Majesty
should inwardly conceive any thing to the danger of her Health. But as that is
only known to such as have more inward Acquaintance with her Majesty's
disposition, than is fit for some other to have. So again, it is to be thought,
that her Majesty being wise, if the Perils like to follow, in returning her
Home, were laid before her; and if she find them greater than the other, she
will be induced easily to change her Opinion, and thereby may follow to her
Majesty's great satisfaction and quietness.

Cautions if she be retained.
To remove her somewhat nearer the Court, at the least within one days Journey
of London, whereby it shall be the more easy to understand of her Doings.

To deliver her in custody to such as be thought most sound in Religion, and
most void of practice.

To diminish her number, being now about forty Persons, to the one half, to
make thereby the Queen's Charges the less, and to give her the fewer means of
Intelligence.

To cut from her all Access, Letters and Messages, other than such as he that
shall have the Charge shall think fit.

To signify to all Princes, the occasion of this straight Guard upon her, to be
her late practice with the Duke of Norfolk, which has given the Queen cause to
doubt: further assuring them, that she shall be used honorably, but kept
safely from troubling the Queen's Majesty, or this State.

That she be retained here, until the Estate of Scotland be more settled, and
the Estate of other Countries now in garboil, be quieted, the Issue whereof is
like to be seen in a Year or two.

Number 12. A Letter written by the Earl of Leicester, to the Earl of Sussex,
concerning the Queen of Scots; taken from the first Draught of it, written with
his own hand.
MY good Lord, I received your Letter in the answer of mine; Ex M. SS. Nob. D.
Evelyn.
and though I have not written sooner again to your Lordship, both according to
your desire, and the necessity of our Cases at this time; yet I doubt not but
you are fully advertised of her Majesty's Pleasure otherwise. For my own part,
I am glad your Lordship has prospered so well in your Journey, and have
Answered, in all Points, the good Opinion conceived of you.

And touching her Majesty's further Resolution, for these Causes, my Lord, I
assure you, I know not well what to write. First, I see her Majesty willing and
desirous, as Reason is, to work her own Security, and the quietness of her
State, during her time, which I trust in God shall be far longer than we shall
live to see end of. And herein, my Lord, there be sundry Minds, and among our
selves, I must confess to your Lordship, we are not fully agreed which way is
best to take. And to your Lordship, I know I may be bold, beside the Friendship
I owe you, the Place you hold presently, does require all the understanding
that may be, to the furtherance of her Majesty's good Estate; wherefore I shall
be the bolder even to let you know as much as I do, and how we rest among us.

Your Lordship does consider, for the State of Scotland, her Majesty has those
two Persons, being divided, to deal with, the Queen of Scotland, lately by her
Subjects deprived, and the young King her Son Crowned and set up in her Place.
Her Majesty, of these two, is to choose, and of necessity must choose which of
them she will allow and accept, as the Person sufficient to hold the principal
Place. And here grows the Question in our Council to her Majesty, Which of
these two are most fit for her to maintain and join in Amity with? To be plain
with your Lordship, The most in number do altogether conceive her Majesty's
best and surest way is, to maintain and continue the young King in this his
Estate, and thereby to make her whole Party in Scotland, which by the settling
of him, with the cause of Religion, is thought most easiest, most safest, and
most probable for the perpetual quieting and benefit to her own Estate, and
great assurance made of such a Party, and so small Charges thereby, as her
Majesty may make account to have the like Authority, and assured Amity in
Scotland, as heretofore she had in the time of the late Regent.

The Reasons against the other, are these shortly.

The Title that the Queen claims to this Crown: The overthrow of Religion in
that Country: The impossibility of any assurance for the observing of any Pact
or Agreement made between our Sovereign and her. These be Causes your Lordship
sees sufficient to dissuade all Men from the contrary Opinion. And yet, my
Lord, it cannot be denied, upon indifferent looking into the Matter on both
sides, but the clearest is full enough of Difficulties. And then, my Lord, is
the Matter disputable; and yet I think verily, not for Argument-sake, but even
for Duty and Conscience Sake, to find out Truth, and safest means for our
Sovereign's best doing. And thus we differ. The first you have heard touching
the young King.

On the other side this it is thought, and of these I must confess my self to
your Lordship to be one: And God is my Judge, whether it be for any other
respect in this World, but that I suppose, and verily believe it may prove best
for her Majesty's own quietness during her time.

And here I must before open to your Lordship indeed her Majesty's true State
she presently stands in; which, though it may be granted the former Advice the
better way, yet how hardly it lays in her Power to go through withal, you
shall easily judge. For it must be confessed, That by the taking into her
protection the King and the Faction, she must enter into a War for it: And as
the least War being admitted, cannot be maintained without great Charge: so
such a War may grow, France or Spain setting in foot, as may cause it to be an
intolerable War. Then being a War, it must be Treasure that must maintain it.
That she has Treasure to continue any time in War, surely, my Lord, I cannot
see it: And as your Lordship does see the present Relief for Money we trust
upon, which either failing us, or it rising no more than I see it like to be,
not able long to last; Where is there further hope of help hereafter? For my
own part I see none. If it be so, then, my Lord, that her Majesty's present
estate is such as I tell you, which I am sure is true; How shall this Counsel
stand with security, by taking a Party to enter into a War, when we are no way
able to maintain it; for if we enter into it once, and be driven, either for
Lack, or any other way, to shrink, what is like to follow of the Matter, your
Lordship can well consider; the best is, we must be sorry for that we have
done, and per-chance seek to make a-mends, where we neither would nor should.
This is touching the present State we stand in. Besides we are to remember what
already we have done; how many ways, even now together, the Realm has been
universally burdened.

First, For the keeping of new bands, after the furnishing of Armor; and
therein how continually the Charge sooner has grown, than Subsidies paid.

And lastly, the mavelous charge in most Countries against the late
Rebellion, with this Loan of Money now on the neck of it. Whether this State
does require further cause of imposition, or no, I refer to your Lordship? And
whether entering into a further Charge than her Majesty has presently
wherewithal to bear, it will force such a Matter or no, I refer to wiser to
judge.

And now, my Lord, I will show you such Reasons as move me to think as I do. In
Worldly Causes, Men must be governed by Worldly Policies; and yet so to frame
them, as God, the Author of all, be chiefly regarded. From him we have received
Laws, under which all Men's Policies and Devices ought to be Subject; and
through his Ordinance, the Princes on the Earth have Authority to give Laws; by
which also, all Princes have the Obedience of the People. And though in some
Points, I shall deal like a Worldly Man for my Prince, yet I hope I shall not
forget that I am a Christian, nor my Duty to God.

Our Question is this; Whether it be meeter for our Sovereign to maintain the
young King of Scotland, and his Authority; or upon Composition, restore the
Queen of Scots into her Kingdom again? To restore her simply, we are not of
Opinion, for so I must confess a great oversight, and doubt no better Success,
than those that do Object most Perils thereby to ensue. But if there be any
Assurances in this World to be given, or any Provision by Worldly Policy to be
had, then, my Lord, I do not see but Ways and Means may be used with the Queen
of Scots, whereby her Majesty may be at quiet, and yet delivered of her present
great Charge. It is granted and feared of all sides, that the cause of any
trouble or danger to her Majesty, is the Title the Queen of Scotland pretends
to the Crown of this Realm. The Danger we fear should happen by her, is not for
that she is Queen of Scotland, but that other the great Princes of Christendom
do favor her so much, as in respect of her Religion, they will in all Causes
assist her; and specially, by the color of her Title, seem justly to aid and
relieve her, and the more lawfully take her and her Causes into their
Protection. Then is the Title granted to be the chief Cause of danger to our
Sovereign. If it be so, Whether does the setting up the Son in the Mothers
Place, from whence his Title must be claimed, take away her Title in the
Opinion of those Princes, or no, notwithstanding she remain Prisoner? It
appears plainly, No; for there is continual Labor and means made, from the
greatest Princes, our Neighbors, to the Queen's Majesty, for restoring the
Queen of Scotland to her Estate and Government, otherwise they protest open
Relief and Aid for her. Then though her Majesty do maintain the young King in
his present Estate, yet it appears that other Princes will do the contrary: And
having any advantage, how far they will proceed, Men may suspect. And so we
must conceive, that as long as this Difference shall continue, by the
maintaining of these two, so long shall the same Cause remain, to the trouble
and danger of the Queen's Majesty. And now to avoid this whilst she lives, What
better Mean is there to take this Cause away, but by her own consent, to
renounce and release all such Interest or Title as she claims, either
presently or hereafter, during the Life of her Majesty, and the Heirs of her
Body. Albeit, here may two Questions be moved.

First, Whether the Scots Queen will renounce her Title, or no?

Secondly, If she will do so, What Assurance may she give for the performance
thereof?

To the first, It is most certain she has, and presently does offer, wholly
and frankly, to release and renounce all manner of Claims and Titles,
whatsoever they be, to the Crown of this Realm, during her Majesty's Life, and
the Heirs of her Body.

And for the second; She does likewise offer all manner of Security and
Assurances that her Majesty can devise, and is in that Queen's possible Power
to do, she excepteth none.

Then must we consider what may be Assurances, for here is the difficulty. For
that Objections be that Princes never hold Promises longer than for their own
Commodity; and what Security soever they put in, they may break if they will.
All this may be granted; but yet that we must grant also, that Princes do daily
Treat and deal one with another; and of necessity are forced to trust to such
Bonds and Assurances as they contract by. And as there is no such Surety to be
had in Worldly Matters, but all are subject to many Casualties; yet we see such
Devices made, even among Princes, as does tie them to perform that, which if
they might conveniently choose, they would not. And in this Matter of the Queen
of Scotland, since she does offer both to leave the cause of the difference
that is between the Queen's Majesty and her; and also to give all Surety that
may be by our selves devised to observe the same; I do not see but such means
may be devised to tie her so strongly, as though she would break, yet I cannot
find what advantage she shall get by it. For beside, that I would have her own
simple Renunciation to be made by the most substantial Instrument that could be
devised. The assent of some others should confirm the same also. Her own
Parliaments at home should do the like with the full Authority of the whole
Estates. They should deliver her Son, and such other principal Noblemen of her
Realm for Hostages, as the Queen's Majesty should name. She should also put
into her Majesty's Hands, some one piece or two of her Realm, and for such a
time as should be thought meet by her Majesty, except Edinburgh. The Queens
Majesty might also, by ratifying this by a Parliament here, make a Forfeiture,
if the Queen of Scotland should any way, directly or indirectly, go about to
infringe this Agreement of all such Titles and Claims that did remain in the
Queen of Scotland, after her Majesty and her Issue, never to be capable of any
Authority or Sovereignty within this Realm. These I would think to be
sufficient Bonds to bind any Prince, specially no mightier than she is. And
this much more would I have, that even as she shall be thus bound, for the
relief of her Title to the Queen's Majesty and her Issue; So shall she suffer
the Religion received and established in Scotland already, to be confirmed, and
not altered. In like sort, the Amity between these two Realms, to be such, and
so frankly united, as no other League with any Foreign Prince, should stand in
force to break it. For I think verily, as the first is chiefest touching her
Majesty's own Person, so do I judge the latter, I mean, the confirmation of the
Religion already there received, to be one of the assuredst and likeliest means
to hold her Majesty a strong and continual Party in Scotland. The trial hereof
has been already sufficient, when her Majesty had none other Interest at all,
but only the maintenance of the True Religion, the same Cause remaining still
the same affection in the same Persons that do profess it, I trust, and it is
like, will not change. And thougn the Scots Queen should now be settled in her
Kingdom again, yet is she not like to be greater or better esteemed now than
heretofore, when both her Authority was greater, and her good will ready to
alter this Religion, but could not bring it to pass. No more is it like these
further Provisions being taken, she shall do it now. And the last Cause also is
not without great hope of some good Success; for as the oppression of Strangers
heretofore had utterly wearied them of that Yoke, so has this peaceable time,
between them and us, made them know the Liberty of their own, and the Commodity
of us their Neighbors.

This, my Lord, does lead me to lean to this Opinion, finding thereby rather
both more surety, and more quietness, for my Sovereign's present time, having,
by the contrary, many occasions of trouble cut off, and the intolerable Charge
eschewed, which I cannot find by any possible means, her Majesty able to
sustain for any long time.

Thus hastily I am driven to end my long, cumbersome Letter to your Lordship,
though very desirous to impart my mind herein to your Lordship.

Number 13. The Bull of Pope Pius the Fifth, Deposing Queen Elizabeth;
absolving her Subjects from the Oaths of Allegiance, and Anathematising such as
continued in their Obedience.
Pius Episcopus Servus Servorum Dei ad futuram rei memoriam.

REgnans in Excelsis, cui data est omnis in Coelo, and in Terra Potestas,
Potestas Petri,
unam Sanctam, Catholicam, and Apostolicam Ecclesiam, extra quam nulla est
Salus, uni soli in Terris, videlicet Apostolorum Principi Petro, Petrique
Successori Romano Pontifici in potestatis plenitudine tradidit gubernandam.
Hunc unum super omnes gentes, and omnia Regna Principem constituit, qui
evellat, destruat, disperdat, plantet and edificet: ut fidelem populum mutuae
charitatis nexu constrictum, in unitate Spiritus contineat, salvumque and
incolumem suo exhibeat Salvatori. Quo quidem in munere obeundo nos ad
praedictae Ecclesiae gubernacula Dei benignitate vocati, nullum laborem
intermittimus, omni opere contendentes, ut ipsa Unitas and Catholica Religio
(quam illius author ad probandum suorum fidem, and correctionem nostram, tantis
procellis conflictare permisit) integra conservetur.

Sed impiorum numerus tantum potentia invaluit, Elizabethae Flagitia.
ut nullus jam in Orb locus sit relictus, quem illi pessimis doctrinis
corrumpere non tentarint, adnitente inter caeteros flagitiorum Serva Elizabetha
praetensa Angliae Regina, ad quam, veluti ad asylum, omnium infestissimi
profugium invenerunt. Haec eadem Regno occupato, Supremi Ecclesiae capitis
locum in omni Anglia, ejusque praecipuam autoritatem atque Jurisdictionem
monstrose sibi usurpans, Regnum ipsum jam tum ad fidem Catholicam and bonam
frugem reductum, rursus in miserum exitium revocavit. Usu namque verae
Religionis, quam ab illius desertore Henrico Octavo olim eversam, clarae
memoriae Maria Regina legitima, hujus sedis praesidio reparaverat, potenti manu
inhibito, Secutisque and amplexis Haereticorum erroribus, Regium Consilium ex
Anglica Nobilitate confectum diremit, illudque obscuris hominibus Haereticis
complevit; Catholicae Fidei cultores oppressit, improbos Concionatores, atque
impietatum administros reposuit; Missae Sacrificium, Preces, Jejunia, ciborum
delectum, Coelibatum, Ritusque Catholicos abolevit: libros manifestam Haeresim
continentes, toto Regno proponi, impia mysteria. and instituta ad Calvini
praescriptum a se suscepta, and observata, etiam a subditis servari mandavit:
Episcopos, Ecclesiarum Rectores, and alios Sacerdotes Catholicos, suis
Ecclesiis and Beneficiis ejicere, ac de illis, and aliis rebus Ecclesiasticis,
in Haereticos homines disponere, deque Ecclesiae causis decernere ausa,
Prelatis, Clero and Populo, ne Romanam Ecclesiam agnoscerent, neve ejus
praeceptis Sanctionibusque Canonicis obtemperarent, interdixit; plerosque in
nefarias leges suas venire, and Romani Pontificis autoritatem, atque
obedientiam abjurare, seque solam in Temporalibus and Spiritualibus Dominam
agnoscere, jurejurando coegit: poenas and supplicia eis, qui dicto non essent
audientes, imposuit, easdemque ab iis, qui in unitate fidei and predicta
obedientia perseverarunt, exegit: Catholicos Antistites and Ecclesiarum
Rectores in vincula conjecit; ubi multi diuturno languore and tristitia
confecti, extremum Vitae diem misere finierunt.

Necessitas Pontificem ad judicium impellens.
Quae omnia cum apud omnes Nationes perspicua and notiora sint, and gravissimo
quam plurimorum testimonio ita comprobata, ut nullus omnino locus excusationis,
defensionis, aut tergiversationis relinquatur: Nos multiplicatis aliis atque
aliis super alias impietatibus and facinoribus, and praeterea fidelium
persecutione, religionisque afflictione, impulsu and opera dictae Elizabethae,
quotidie magis ingravescente; quoniam illius animum ita obfirmatum atque
induratum intelligimus, ut non modo pias Catholicorum Principum, de sanitate
and conversatione preces, monitionesque contempserit, sed ne hujus quidem sedis
ad ipsam hac de Causa Nuncios in Angliam trajicere permiserit; ad arma
justitiae contra eam de necessitate conversi, dolorem lenire non possumus, quod
adducamur in illam animadvertere, cujus majores de Rep. Christiana tantopere
meruere.

Illius itaque autoritate suffulti, qui nos in hoc supremo Justitiae Throno,
licet tanto oneri impares, voluit collocare, de Apostolicae potestatis
plenitudine, declaramus praedictam Elizabetham Haereticam, and Haereticorum
fautricem, eique adherentes in predictis, anathematis sententiam incurrisse,
Sentiae Declaratio.
esseque a Christi Corporis unitate praecisos: Quin etiam ipsam praetenso Regni
praedicti jure, necnon omni and quorumque Dominio, dignitate, privilegioque
privatam: Et item proceres, subditos and populos dicti Regni, ac caeteros
omnes, qui illi quomodocunque juraverunt a Juramento hujusmodi, ac omni prorsus
dominii, fidelitatis, and obsequii debito, perpetuo absolutos, prout nos illos
praesentium authoritate absolvimus, and privamus eandem Elizabetham praetenso
jure Regni, aliisque omnibus supradictis. Praecipimusque and interdicimus
Universis and singulis Proceribus, Subditis, Populis and aliis praedictis; ne
illi, ejusve monitis, mandatis, and legibus audeant obedire: Qui secus egerint,
eos simili Anathematis sententia innodamus. Quia vero difficile nimis esset
presents quocunque illis opus erit perferre; Volumus ut earum exempla, Notarii
Publici manu, and Prelati Ecclesiastici, ejusve Curiae Sigillo obsignata,
eandem illam prorsus fidem in judicio and extra illud ubique gentium faciant,
quam ipsae presents facerent, si essent exhibitae, vel ostensae.

Datum Romae apud Sanctum Petrum, Anno Incarnationis Dominicae Millesimo
quingentesimo Sexagesimo Nono, Quinta Kalend. Martii, Pontificatus nostri Anno
Quinto. Cae. Glorierius. H. Humyn.

AN APPENDIX Concerning some of the Errors and Falsehoods IN SANDER's Book OF
THE English Schism.

AN APPENDIX.
IT has been observed of Thieves, that by a long practice in that ill course of
Life, they grow so in love with it, that when there is no Advantage to be made
by Stealing, yet they must keep their Hand in use, and continue their address
and dexterity in it: so also Liars, by a frequent Custom, grow to such a habit,
that in the commonest things, they cannot speak Truth, even though it might
conduce to their Ends more than their Lies do. Sanders had so given himself up
to vent Reproaches and Lies, that he often does it for nothing, without any
End, but to carry on a Trade, that had been so long driven by him, that he knew
not how to lay it down. He wrote our History, merely upon the Reports that were
brought him, without any care or information about the most public and most
indifferent Things: but not content to set down those Tattles, he shows his Wit
in refining about them, and makes up such Politics and Schems of Government,
as might suit with these Reports, and agree with his own Malice. His Work is
all of a piece, and as it was made out in the former Volume, how ignorantly and
disingeniously he writ concerning King Henry the Eighth's Reign, so I shall add
a further Discovery of the remaining parts of his Book, which will sufficiently
convince, even the most partial Readers of the impudence of that Author; who
seems to have had no other design in writing, but to impose on the credulity
and weakness of those, who he knew were inclined to believe every thing that
might cast blemishes on a Work, against which they were so strongly prejudiced,
as the Reformation of this Church: since a Field which they so often reaped,
and with whose Spoils their Court was so enriched, was no more at their
Devotion. So they are ever since concerned in Interest to use all the ways they
can think on, to disgrace a Change that was so fatal to them. But as the
Reformation of this Church has hitherto stood, notwithstanding all their
Designs against it, so it is to be hoped, that the History of it will be
hereafter better understood, notwithstanding all the Libels and Calumnies by
which they have endeavored to represent it, in such black and odious Colors
to the World.

Sanders says, Page 176.
King Edward was in the 9th Year of his Age when he came to the Crown.

This is of no great consequence, but it shows how little this Author
considered what he writ, when in so public a thing as the King's Age, he
misreckons a Year, for he was born the 12th of October 1537; so in January
1547, he was in the 10th Year of his Age.

2. He says, King Edward was not only declared King of England, Ibid.
and Ireland, but made Supreme Head of the Church; and upon that runs out, to
show how incapable a Child was of that Power.

This is set down in such terms, as if there had been some special Act made for
his being Supreme Head of the Church, distinct from his being proclaimed King,
whereas there was no such thing; for the Supremacy being annexed to the Crown,
the one went with the other: and it being but a Civil Power, might be as well
exercised by the King's Governors, before he came to be of Age, as the other
Rights of the Crown were.

Page 177.
3. He says, The Earl of Hartford was made by himself Duke of Somerset.

This was done by order of the whole Council, in pursuance of King Henry's
Design, proved by those Witnesses that were beyond exception: and that King
having by his Will charged his Executors to fulfill those things which he
intended to do, this was found to be one of them.

Page 178.
4. He says, The Duke of Somerset made himself the only Governor of the King,
and Protector; none daring to oppose it openly, but Wriothesley, whom King
Henry, when he was dying, had made Lord Chancellor.

The Protector was advanced to that Dignity, by the unanimous consent of the
whole Council; to which the Lord Chancellor consented, and signed the Order
about it, the Original whereof is yet extant; for though he argued against it
before it was done, yet he joined with the rest in doing it: Nor was he made
Chancellor by King Henry at his Death, but two Years before.

Ibid.
5. He says, On the 27th of February, two days before the King was crowned, the
Protector persuaded the King to create many new Peers; who were all Heretics,
except Dudley Earl of Warwick.

Our Author, by this show of exactness, would persuade the Reader, that he had
considered Dates, and the smallest particulars, with the care that became an
Historian: But he little thought that any would come after him, and examine
what he said. By this Account the King must have been crowned the first of
March, but it was done Feb. 20. and the Peers were created on the 16th of
February, four days before. They were not all Heretics, for he forgot that
Wriothesley was at the same time made Earl of Southampton, which he afterward
insinuates was done upon another account. But all those Creations, were in
persuance of King Henry's Designs, and in obedience to his latter Will.

Ibid.
6. He says, They forced Wriothesley to resign his Office, and turned both him,
and the Earl of Arundel, out of the Council, because they were Catholics.

Wriothesley was turned out upon no account of Religion, but for putting the
Great Seal to a Commission, that was against Law, (according to the Opinion
which the Judges declared under their hands) without any Warrant from the
Council; himself acknowledging the justice of the Sentence. The Earl of Arundel
was not turned out of the Council; on the contrary, in the Patent by which the
Protector held his Office, that passed after the Chancellor was removed, he is
named to be one of the Privy Council.

7. He says, Page 179.
The Protector would needs force all the Clergy to submit in every thing to the
King's Orders; and sets down the Form in which the King writ to Archbishop
Cranmer.

In this nothing was done, but what was begun by King Henry, and to which all
the Clergy, even his beloved Bonner not excepted, had formerly submitted. So
this was no new thing set up by the Protector, it being only the renewing the
Bishops Patents in the new King's Name: And this was no part of the
Reformation, for it was done only to awe the Popish Bishops, but was soon after
laid aside. What he sets down as a Letter of King Edward's to Cranmer, is the
Preamble of the Patent he took out. So little did this Writer know the things
that truly make to the advantage to the Cause, which he designed to assert.

8. He says, The New Protector, among the first things he did, Page 180.
restrained all Preaching, and silenced all the Bishops and Pastors: so that
none were licensed to preach, but the Lutherans and Zuinglians.

The first Injunctions set out in the King's Name, required all Bishops to
preach at least four times a Year, in their Diocesses; and to keep Learned
Chaplains who might be able to preach, and should be often much employed in it.
And thus Matters stood the first Year of this Reign: In the beginning of the
second Year, upon complaints made of the rashness of some Preachers, a
Proclamation was put out, that none should preach without a License from the
King, or the Archbishops, or the Bishop of the Diocese; except Incumbents in
their own Parishes. Afterward there was, for some little time, a total
prohibition of Preaching, but that was to last for a short while, till the Book
of Common Prayer, which was then a preparing, should be finished. This was
equally made on both hands; for the Prohibition was universal, without
exception: so falsely has our Author stated this Matter; which one would think
he ignorantly drew from what Queen Mary did, applying it to this Reign; for
she, upon her coming to the Crown, did prohibit all Preaching, excepting only
such as were licensed to it by Gardener, under the Great Seal.

9. He says, Latimer was turned out of the Bishopric of Worcester, Page 181.
by King Henry, upon suspicion of Heresy.

Latimer did freely resign his Bishopric, upon the passing of the Act of the
six Articles, with which he could not comply with a good Conscience.

10. He says, The Protector put Cox and Cheek about the King, Page 182.
that they might corrupt his Mind with Heretical Doctrines.

These were put about him three Years before, by King Henry's Order; as that
young King himself informs us in his Journal.

Page 184.
11. He says, The Heads of the Colleges were turned out, and the Catholic
Doctors were forbid to preach.

I do not find one Head of a College in either University was turned out; for
though they generally loved the Old Superstition, yet they loved their Places
much better. And indeed the whole Clergy did so readily conform themselves to
every Change that was made, that it was not easy to find Colors for turning
out Bonner and Gardener. All Preachers had the liberty of their own Pulpits,
except for a very little while.

Ibid.
12. He says, They decried the School Divinity, and the Works of Lombard,
Aquinas, and Scotus, and so threw all Learning out of the Schools.

They could not do that more, than Sir Thomas More, Erasmus, and other Popish
Writers had done before them; who had expressed their scorn of that way of
Treating Divine Matters, so copiously, that it was no wonder it was much
despised. Those Writers had, by a set of dark and barbarous Maxims and Terms,
so entangled all the Articles of Faith, and imposed by the World, on an
appearance of saying somewhat, when really they said nothing: and pretending to
explain Religion, they had so exposed it, that their way of Divinity was become
equally nauseous and ridiculous.

Page 186.
13. He says, Bucer and Peter Martyr, being brought out of Germany, did corrupt
the Universities; and entertained the Youth with Discourses of Predestination,
Reprobation, and a fatal necessity of things.

This was so far from being much taught, that on the contrary, in one of the
Articles of Religion, the curious Enquiries into those abstruse Points, was by
Public Authority forbid. Bucer and Martyr read for most part in the Chairs,
upon the Mass, and the other Corruptions of the Popish Worship. They also
declared St. Austin's Doctrine about Grace, but I do not find they ever meddled
with Reprobation.

Page 190.
14. After a long Invective, which is to pass as a piece of his Wit and Poetry,
he says, Bucer was inclined to become a Jew, and was descended from Jewish
Parents; and that the Lord Paget had heard him say, That the Corporal Presence
was so clear in the Scripture, that no Man could deny it, who believed the
Gospel; but for his part, he did not believe all that was said in the New
Testament concerning our Savior.

This is as suitable to our Author's Honesty as can be: Bucer was never accused
of this by any of his Enemies, as long as he lived. No Man in that Age writ
with a greater sense of the Kingdom of Christ than he did. And for the Story of
the Lord Paget, we have nothing for it but the Author's word; and Poets must
make Circumstances, as well as more signal Contrivances, to set off their
Fables. But there was no occasion for Bucer's saying this, since he never
declared against the Corporal Presence; but was for taking up that Controversy
in some general Expressions. So it was not suitable to his Opinion in that
Matter, for him to talk so loosely of the Scriptures. And is it credible that a
Story of this nature, should not have been published in Queen Mary's Time, and
been made use of, when he was condemned for an Heretic, and his Body raised
and burnt. But our Author, perhaps, did not think of that.

15. He says, Page 191.
Peter Martyr was a while in suspense concerning the Eucharist, and stayed till
he should see what the Parliament should appoint in that Matter.

P. Martyr argued and read in the Chair against the Corporal Presence, four
Years before the Parliament meddled with it: For the second Common Prayer Book,
which contained the first public Declaration that the Parliament made in this
Matter, was enacted in the fifth Year of King Edward; and Peter Martyr, from
his first coming to England, had appeared against it.

16. He said, The first Parliament under King Edward, Page 193.
appointed a new Form to be used in ordaining Priests and Bishops; who till
that time had been Ordained according to the Old Rites, save only, that they
did not swear Obedience to the Pope.

This is a further Evidence of our Author's care in searching the printed
Statutes; since what was done in the Fifth Year of this Reign, he represents as
done in the First. His Design in this was clear; he had a mind to possess all
his own Party with an Opinion, that the Orders given in this Church were of no
force, and therefore he thought it a decent piece of his Poem, to set down this
Change as done so early: since if he had mentioned it in its proper place, he
knew not how to deny the validity of the Orders that were given the first four
Years of this Reign, which continued to be conferred according to the old Forms.

17. He says, The Parliament did also at the same time, Ibid.
confirm a new Book of Common Prayer, and of the Administration of the
Sacraments.

This is of a piece with the former; for the Act confirming the Common Prayer
Book, which is also among the Printed Statutes, passed not in this Session of
Parliament, but in a second Session, a Year after this. These are Indications
sufficient to show what an Historian Sanders was, that did not so much as read
the Public Acts of the Time concerning which he writ.

18. He says, They ordered all Images to be removed, Ibid.
and sent some lewd Men over England for that effect; who either brake or burnt
the Images of our Savior, the Blessed Virgin, and the Saints; therein
declaring against whom they made War; and they ordered the King's Arms, three
Leopards, and three Lillies, with the Supporters, a Dog and a Serpent, to be
set in the place where the Cross of Christ stood: thereby owning that they were
no longer to worship Jesus Christ, whose Images they broke, but the King, whose
Arms they set up in the room of those Images.

In this Period there is an equal mixture of Falsehood and Malice. 1. The
Parliament did not order the removal of Images; It was done by the King's
Visitors, before the Parliament sat. 2. The total removal of Images was not
done the first Year, only those Images that were abused to Superstition, were
taken down, and a Year after the total removal followed. 3. They took care that
this should be done regularly, not by the Visitors, who only carried the King's
Injunctions about it, but by the Curats themselves. 4. They did not order the
King's Arms to be put in the place where the Cross had stood. It grew indeed to
be a custom to set them up in all Churches, thereby expressing, that they
acknowledged the King's Authority reached even to their Churches; but there was
no Order made about it. 5. I leave him to the Correction of the Heralds, for
saying, the King's Arms are Three Leopards, when every Body knows they are
three Lions, and a Lion, not a Dog, is one Supporter, and the other is a
Dragon, not a Serpent. 6. By their setting up the King's Arms, and not his
Picture, it is plain they had no thought of worshipping their King, but did
only acknowledge his Authority. 7. It was no less clear, that they had no design
against the Worship due to Jesus Christ, nor that inferior respect due to the
Blessed Virgin and Saints; but intended only to wean the People from that,
which at best was but Pageantry: but as it was practiced, was manifest
Idolatry. And the painting on the Walls of the Churches the Ten Commandments,
the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, with many other passages of Scripture that were
of most general use, showed, they intended only to cleanse their Churches from
those mixtures of Heathenism, that had been brought into the Christian Religion.

Page 193.
19. He says, They took away the Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of Christ, that
they might thereby give some color to the converting of the Sacred Vessels to
the King's use.

They took away no part of the Institution of Christ, for they set it down in
the Act past about it; and recited all the words of the first Institution of
the Sacrament; they only condemned private Masses, as contrary to Christ's
Institution. They did not convert the Holy Vessels to the King's use, nor were
they taken out of the Churches till five Years after this; that the Necessities
of the Government, either real or pretended, were alleged to excuse the taking
away the superfluous Plate that was in Churches: But this was not done by Act
of Parliament, but by Commissioners empowred by the King, who were ordered to
leave in every Church, such Vessels as were necessary for the Administration of
the Sacraments.

Ibid.
20. He says, The Parliament ordered the Prayers to be in the Vulgar Tongue; and
upon that he infers, that the Irish, the Welsh, and the Cornish-men, were now
in a much worse condition than before; since they understood no English, so
that the Worship was to them in a Tongue more unknown than it had formerly been.

The Parliament made no such Order at this Time: the Book of Common Prayer was
set out first by the King's Authority, and ratified by the subsequent Session
of Parliament. There was also a Design, which though it was then accomplished,
yet it was done afterward, of translating the Liturgy into these Tongues: but
still the English was much more understood by all sorts of Men among them, than
the Latin had been.

21. He says, The Office of the Communion, Page 194.
appointed by this Parliament, differed very little from the Mass, save that it
was in English.

The Error of the Parliaments appointing the new Offices, runs through all he
says on this Subject. But in the new Office of the Communion, the Idolatry of
worshipping, carrying about, or exposing the Sacrament, was laid aside. The
trade of particular Masses for private Occasions, the Prayers to the Saints,
the denying the People the Chalice, with a great many of the Rites and
Gesticulations formerly used, were all laid aside; so that there were great
changes made. Every thing was not done at once, but they began with the Abuses
that did most require a Reformation, and went on afterward to the changing of
lesser things.

22. He says, Ibid.
Sir Ralph Sadler took the Wife of one Matthew Barrow; so upon pretense of his
being dead, his Wife married Sadler: but her first Husband coming home, he
sought to have his Wife again. It was brought into the Parliament in King
Henry's Time, and now it was enacted, that she should be Sadler's Wife; he
being the richer and greater Man. So against the Laws of the Gospel, a Wife
while her Husband was yet alive, was adjudged to a second Husband.

This is, as far as I can learn, a Forgery from the beginning to the end: and
it seems Sadler, that was a Privy Counselor in Queen Elizabeth's Time, did
somewhat that so provoked Sanders, that he resolved to be revenged of him and
his Family, by casting such an aspersion on him. I find no Footsteps of any
such Story; sure I am, there is nothing concerning it in the Records of this
Parliament. And for the Business of the Dissolution of Marriages for Adultery,
Absence, or any other Cause, there was so great, and so strict an enquiry made
into it; after, the Parliament was ended, in the Case of the Marquess of
Northampton, that it is clear it was the first of that sort that was examined;
and might perhaps, after it was confirmed in Parliament, in the 5th Year of
this Reign, have been made a Precedent for other Cases; but this of Sadler, in
the first Parliament, is a Contrivance of our Authors. It is not improbable,
that when afterward it was judged, that the Marriage-Bond was dissolved by
Adultery, they might likewise declare it dissolved, upon voluntary and long
absence, since St. Paul had said, That a Brother or a Sister were not under
Bondage in such Cases.

22. He says, Gardener, Bonner, Tonstal, Heath, and Day, Page 196.
were much grieved at the Changes that were made: yet they complied in many
things, till being required to deliver some Blasphemous Doctrines in their
Sermons, they refusing to give Obedience in that, were deprived; but were
afterward condemned to perpetual Imprisonment under Queen Elizabeth; all which
were the Effects of God's Displeasure on them, for complying with K. Henry in
his Schism.

I shall grow tedious, if I insist on all the Falsities that do occur in this
Period. First, Only Gardener and Bonner were questioned and deprived for their
Sermons: Tonstall was deprived for Misprision of Treason; Heath and Day were
judged by Lay-Delegates; so it is like, their Offenses were also against the
State. 2. There was nothing enjoined Bonner or Gardener to preach, upon which
they were censured, but that the King's Authority was the same when he was
under Age, that it was afterward; which is a Point that belongs only to the
Laws and Constitution of this Government: and so there was just reason to
impute their Silence in that particular, when they were commanded to touch upon
it in their Sermons, to an ill Design against the State. 3. Three of these
Bishops did concur in all the Changes that were made the first four Years of
this King's Reign, and both preached and wrote for them; and even Bonner and
Gardener did not only give Obedience to every Law or Injunction that came out,
but recommended them much in their Sermons. 4. These did not suffer perpetual
Imprisonment under Queen Elizabeth; Gardener and Day died before she reigned,
and so were not imprisoned by her. Heath was never put in Prison by her, but
lived at his own Country House; and Tonstal lived at Lambeth in as much ease,
and was treated with as much respect, as if it had been his own House: so that
Bonner was the only Man that was kept in Prison; but that was believed to be
done in kindness to him, to preserve him from the Affronts which otherwise he
might have met with, from the Friends of those he had butchered.

Page 197.
24. He says, The Lady Mary never departed from her Mothers Faith and Constancy.

It appears, by many of her Letters, that she complied with every thing that
had been done by her Father; so it seems she was dispensed with from Rome, to
dissemble in his time; for otherwise her constancy had very likely been fatal
to her, but she presumed on the mildness of her Brother's Government, to be
more refractory afterward.

Page 198.
25. He says, The King was sorry, when he understood how hardly his Sister had
been used by the Council.

It was so far otherwise, that when the Council being much pressed by the
Emperor to connive at her having Mass, were resolved to give way to it, the
King himself was so averse to it, thinking it a sin in him to consent to the
practice of Idolatry, that the Council employed the Bishops to work on him, and
they could hardly induce him to tolerate it.

Page 200.
26 He says, The Visitors carried with them over England, Bibles of a most
corrupt Translation, which they ordered to be set up in all the Churches of
England.

In King Henry's Time, it had been ordered, that there should be a Bible in
every Church; so this was not done by the Visitors in this Reign, as may appear
by the Injunctions that were given them, which have been often printed.

27. He says, The Visitors did everywhere enquire, Ibid.
Whether all the Images were broken down; and if the Altars were taken away,
and Communion Tables were put in their rooms; and if all the old Offices were
destroyed.

Here he confounds in one Period, what was done in several Years. In the first
Year, the Images that had been abused by Pilgrimages, were ordered to be
removed. In the second Year, all Images were taken down without exception. In
the third Year, the old Books of the former Offices were ordered to be
destroyed. And in the fourth Year, the Altars were turned to Communion Tables;
so ignorantly did this Author write of our Affairs.

28. He say, Page 201.
The Visitors did every where encourage the Priests to Marry, and looked on
such as did not Marry, as inclined to Popery.

The Marriage of the Clergy was not so much as permitted till near the
beginning of the third Year of this Reign; and then it was declared, that an
unmarried State was more honorable and decent; so that it was recommended, and
the other was only tolerated; and so far were they from suspecting Men to be
firm to the Reformation that were married, that Ridley and Latimer, the most
esteemed next to Cranmer, were never married: nor was any ever vexed for his
not being married, as he falsely insinuates.

28. He says, Page 202.
The Protector bore great hatred to Gardener and Tonstal, both because they
opposed the Heretics, and because they had been made equals to him, if not
preferred before him by King Henry's Will, in the Government during the King's
being under Age.

This is another of our Author's Figures. Gardener was not mentioned in King
Henry's Will, neither as an Executor, nor so much as a Counselor; and by it
none were preferred to another, all being made equal. And for Tonstal, he
continued still in a firm friendship with the Protector, and was so well
satisfied with the first Changes that were made, that he was complained of as
well as Cranmer, by Gardener, in the Letters which he writ to the Protector.

29. He says, Ibid.
The Protector made a Speech about Religion before the King; and thereafter he
put, first Gardener, then Tonstall, and at another time, the Bishops of London,
Chichester, and Worcester, in Prison.

Gardener and Bonner were indeed imprisoned some time, during the Protector's
Government; the latter was also deprived while he was Protector. But Tonstall
was not put in Prison till two Years after, and it was at the time of the Duke
of Somerset's total fall, and by the same Persons means that wrought his Ruin:
From which it appears, he was always a firm Friend to the Duke of Somerset. The
Bishops of Worcester and Chichester were also brought in trouble, long after
the Government was taken out of the Protector's Hands.

30. He says, 'They were all deposed from their Degree. Ibid.
They were not deposed from their Degree, but deprived of their Bishoprics;
for they having accepted Commissions, by which they held their Sees, only
during the King's Pleasure, they might well be deprived by a Sentence of the
Delegates. But had they been to be deposed, and thrust from their Order, it
must have been done by a Synod of Bishops. They were deprived, as many Bishops
were under the Christian Emperors, by selected Synods that sat in the Court,
and judged of all Complaints that were brought before the Emperors.

Page 204.
31. He reckons up the Judgments of God upon the Heretics; and says, the
Protector made kill his Brother, and Dudley took him away.

This is a way of writing familiar enough to our Author, to represent things in
such a manner, as might fill the Reader with horror; as if these Persons had
been secretly murdered, whereas the one was condemned in Parliament, the other
by a Judgment of his Peers.

Ibid.
32. He says, King Edward died not without suspicion of being poisoned by
Dudley, and the Duke of Suffolk, who aspired to the Crown.

It was never suspected that the Duke of Suffolk had any hand in poisoning the
King, nor could I ever see any reason to conclude that he was poisoned: but
neither of these Dukes aspired to the Crown; the one resigned any Pretension he
could ever have, to his Daughter; and the other intended only that his fourth
Son should reign.

Page 205.
34. He says, The Protector's Lady claimed the precedence of the Queen Dowager;
and upon the denial of it, conspired the ruin of the Admiral.

All this is a contrivance of the Enemies of that Family; for as it had been
absurd for the Duchess of Somerset to have disputed Precedence with the Queen
Dowager; so in that whole Matter it is plain the Admiral began with his
Brother, and conspired his ruin: and the Protector was often reconciled to him,
and forgave him many Faults, till it appeared that his Ambition was incurable.

Ibid.
34. He says, There being no ground of any Accusation against him, the Duchess
of Somerset got Latimer to accuse him of Treason in a Sermon.

The Articles upon which he was condemned, show what Matter there was against
him. Latimer did never accuse him of Treason, but being a Man of great
plainness of Speech, he reflected on him as Ambitious, and not sincere in the
Profession of Religion: And when it was suspected that the Duchess of Somerset
had set him on to make these Reflections, he did vindicate her in a most solemn
manner. Nor is there any reason to think, that how indiscreet soever he might
be in preaching in such a sort, that he did it to flatter or to aspire by such
means, for he refused to accept of any Preferment, though the House of Commons
interposed to have him repossessed of the Sea of Worcester.

Ibid.
35. He says, At the same time that he was Beheaded, the Queen Dowager died.

She died in September. 1548, and he was beheaded in March following: and one of
the Articles against him was, That after her Death, he intended to have married
the King's Sister Elizabeth; and it was suspected, that to make for that, he
had poisoned her.

36. He says, The Men of Devonshire and Cornwall did, Page 206.
with one consent, take up Arms for the Faith.

In one thing he says true, that this Rebellion was set on by the Priests, and
made on the account of Religion; but the brutal cruelty of those Rebels, showed
it was not for the Faith, but in compliance to their Priests and Leaders, that
they rose.

37. He says, Page 209.
The Clergy finding that their being Married was generally an ungrateful thing,
procured an Act of Parliament, declaring that there was no Humane Law against
their Marriages; and this was all they were concerned in, for they cared little
for the Law of God.

This is a genuine piece of our Author's Wit. If the Parliament meddles in
declaring what is the Law of God, he accuses them for meddling in things without
their Sphere: And if they only declare what is the Law of the Land, he says,
they have no regard to the Law of God: So he is resolved, do what they will,
they shall not escape his Censure. But in this he shows his Ignorance, as well
as his Malice. The lawfulness of the Marriage of the Clergy was enquired into
with such exactness, that scarce any thing can be added since, to what was then
written on that Argument. It was made out, that there was no Law of God against
it: It was also proved, that there was no general Law made by the Primitive
Church about it; but that it was a part of the Yoke that the Popes laid on the
Clergy, to engage them more zealously in their Concerns. It was at first
carried in the Convocation, that they might lawfully Marry; then an Act of
Parliament passed permitting it; of all which our Author takes no notice. Then
three Years after, some that were ill-affected to them, taking advantage from
the words of the Statute, as if the Permission had only been such a conniving
at it, as had been formerly to the Stews, a second Act passed confirming those
Marriages, and the Issue by them.

38. He says, The Catholic Doctors in the Universities, Page 210.
grew more courageous in the Defense of the Faith; and so desired a public
Dispute concerning the Corporal Presence.

They were so courageous, that as soon as any Change was made, they all
complied most obsequiously to it; as will appear both by Oglethorp and Smith's
Submissions. But while the Changes were under consultation, they seeing it
could bring them into no trouble, were very stout; but as soon as they were to
loose or suffer any thing for their Consciences, then they grew as tractable as
could be. In such a Zeal, let him glory as much as he will.

39. He says, Ibid.
Smith did often challenge Peter Martyr to a public Dispute at Oxford; but he
declined it, till Dr. Cox, a Man of a lewd Life, was sent to moderate in the
Dispute; and till Dr. Smith was banished the University.

Smith did once challenge Peter Martyr to a Dispute, to which he presently
consented: upon two Conditions; the one was, that a License should first be
obtained of the King and Council, and Delegates be appointed by them to make a
just Report of the Dispute: the other was, That it should be managed in the
Terms of Scripture, and not in the School Terms: They were both more proper for
Matters of Divinity, and more easily understood by all People. Upon this, the
Council sent down Delegates: and then Smith, who intended only to raise a
tumult in the Schools, withdrew himself, and fled beyond Sea; but was never
banished. His calling Dr. Cox a Man of a lewd Life, is one of the Flowers he
stuck in to adorn the rest. All the Writers of that Age make honorable mention
of him; He was first set about this King by his Father, and continued with him
in all the turns of Affairs, and did so faithfully discharge that high Trust,
that it appears he must have been a very extraordinary Man. This was so well
known to the whole Nation, that in the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign, he met
with more than ordinary Favor. This, considering the hatred which the Popish
Party bore him, is a clear evidence of his great Worth; and that they were
afraid to be severe to a Man so universally esteemed.

Ibid.
40. He says, Cox saw he was so much pressed by the Doctors that disputed with
him, and the Hearers did so hiss him down, that he broke off the Dispute,
giving Peter Martyr a high commendation for his Learning, and exhorting the
rest to live peaceably. Peter Martyr afterward printed the Disputation falsely;
but by the Judgment of the University he was doubly bafled; both that he
refused to dispute with Smith, and that he did acquit himself so ill with those
Doctors that disputed with him.

It is probable the Hearers might have been set on to hiss, but the printed
Disputation will decide this Matter, and show who argued both more nervously,
and more ingenuously. We have no reason to believe it was falsely printed,
unless we will take it on this Author's word: for I do not find the Popish
Doctors did, either at this Time, or afterward in Queen Mary's Reign, when the
Presses were all in their hands, publish any thing to the contrary of what P.
Martyr printed; so that he neither refused to dispute with Smith, nor was he
baffled by those that undertook it. Smith fled, and the rest were clearly
worsted. And for the University, there was no Judgment passed by them, unless
he means the Rudeness and Clamours of some that might be set on to it.

Page 211.
41. He says, The Dispute with Bucer at Cambridg, had the same effect.

It had so indeed, the printed Relation shows the weakness and disingenuity of
the Popish Disputants, and that was never contradicted.

Ibid.
42. He gives account of many other Disputes, and of Gardiner's Book, under the
name of Marcus Constantius; which he says was a full confutation of all the
Books then written for the contrary Opinion. He also mentions the Sermons and
Imprisonment of Crispine, Moreman, Cole, Seaton, and Watson.

These other Disputes could be no more than private Conferences; but I can give
no account of these, having met with them in none of the Writers of that Time.
As for Gardiner's Book, such as will compare it with Cranmer's Book, which it
pretends to answer, will soon see in it the difference between plain simple
Reasoning on the one side, and sophistical Cavilling on the other. But for the
Sufferings of that Party, there is no great reason to boast of them; for they
universally complied with every thing that was commanded: even the Lady Mary's
Chaplains did it, in the Churches where they were beneficed. Nor do I find any
one Man turned out of his Cure for refusing to Conform; but it was found, some
of these did privately say Mass, either in the Lady Mary's Chapel, or in
private Houses; and did secretly act against what they openly professed: and it
was no wonder if such Dissemblers were more severely handled. But there was no
Blood shed in the Quarrel; so that if the Popish Party made such ressistance,
as our Author pretends they did, it very much commends the gentleness of the
Government at that Time, since they were so mercifully handled. It was far
otherwise in Queen Mary's Time.

43. He runs out in a Discourse of the Sufferings of his Party, Page 212.
of their Zeal and Constancy: and particularly mentions Story, who, he says,
suffered Martyrdom under Queen Elizabeth. He had said in the Parliament, Woe to
thee, O Land, whose King is a Child; and this drew so much hatred on him, that
he was forced to fly out of England.

What the Zeal and Constancy of the Party was, may be gathered from what has
been already said. This Story did say these words in the House of Commons, and
was, by Order of the House, sent to the Tower: for though it was a Text of
Scripture that he cited, yet the Application carried with it so high a
reflection on the Government, that it well deserved such a censure: but upon
his Submission, the House of Commons sent an Address to the Protector, that he
and the Council would forgive him, which was done, and he was again admitted to
the House: so that he was not forced on this Account to fly out of England. And
for his Martyrdom under Queen Elizabeth, the Record of his Trial shows the
ground of that Sentence: He had endeavored all he could, to set on many in
Queen Mary's Time to advise the cutting off Queen Elizabeth: His ordinary
Phrase was, It was a foolish thing to cut off the Branches of Heresy, and not
to pluck it up by the Root. He knowing how faulty he had been, fled over to
Flanders in the beginning of her Reign: and when the Duke of Alva was Governor
there, he pressed him much to invade England; and gave him a Map of some of the
Roads and Harbors, with a Scheme of the way of conquering the Nation. He had
also consulted with Magicians concerning the Queen's Life; and used always to
curse the Queen when he said Grace after Meat. These things being known in
England, some got him to go a-board a Ship in Flanders, on another pretense,
and presently set sail for England; where yet the Government was so gentle,
that two Years past before he was brought to his Trial: and then the Defense he
made, was, That he was not accountable for what he had done in Flanders, it not
being in the Queen's Dominions; and that he was not her Subject, having sworn
Allegiance to the King of Spain. But this being contrary to his natural
Allegiance, which he could never shake off, he was found guilty of Treason, and
was there executed. These are our Author's Martyrs, and are of a piece with his
Faith.

Page 216.
44. In the room of the Bishops that were turned out, he says, there were put
some Apostate and Lustful (that is, as he explains it, married) Monks, Scory,
Bird, Holgate, Barlow, Harley, Coverdale, and Ridley; on whom he bestows many
such Epithetes, as may be expected from him.

This is such a piece of History, as one can hardly meet with any thing like
it. 1. Bird was made Bishop of Chester by King Henry, and was the first that
sat in that See, it being of that King's Foundation. 2. Holgate was put in the Sea of York by King Henry, when it was void by Lee's Death. 3. Barlow was also
put in Bath and Wells, by the same King, it being likewise void by the Death of
Knight. 4. Coverdale was put in the Sea of Exeter, upon Veysey's free
Resignation, he being then extreme old. 5. Harley was also put in Hereford,
upon the former Bishop's Death. 6. Ridley and Harley were never married, nor
Coverdale, for ought I can find; so exact is our Author in delivering the
History of that Time.

Ibid.
45. He says, Poinet, that was made Bishop of Worchester in Gardiner's Room,
besides one Wife to whom he was married, took ^ Butchers Wife from him; but the
Butcher sued for his Wife, and recovered her out of his hands: and to make this
pass the better, he adds a Jest of Gardiner's about it, that he had said, Why
might not he hope to be restored to his Bishopric, as well as the Butcher was
to his Wife?

The falseness of this Story, is clearly evinced, by the Answer that Dr. Martin
set out in the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign, to a Book that Poinet had writ
in the defense of the married Clergy. Martin's Answer is writ with so much
spite, and so many indecent Reflections, that though it is not reasonable to
believe all he says, yet it is almost a certain Argument, that this Story
concerning Poinet is a Forgery; since if it was a thing so public, as our
Author makes it, Martin must have heard of it, especially living in Gardiner's
House: and it is not to be imagined, that if he did know it, he would have
concealed it: So this, and the Jest that hangs upon it, must pass as one of the
flourishes of our Author's Pen.

Page 217.
46. He says, Hooper, that used formerly to rail at the Luxury of the Catholic
Bishops, being made a Superintendent himself, for so the Zuinglians called
their Bishops, enjoyed at once two Bishoprics, Worcester and Gloucester.

The Zuinglians had no Superintendents, for ought I can find; nor was Hooper
ever called Superintendent, but Bishop. He was made Bishop of Gloucester, which
had been before King Henry the Eighth's Time, a part of the Bishopric of
Worcester. And now these Sees came to be united; so that Hooper had not two
Bishoprics, but one that had been for some Years divided into two: He only
enjoyed the Revenue of Gloucester, for Worcester was entirely suppressed.

47. He says, On the 9th of July, Page 219.
the Money was cried down one fourth part; and forty days after another fourth
part: so that the whole Nation was thereby robbed of the half of their Stock.

This King's Counselors found the Coin embased; and they were either to let it
continue in that State, to the great prejudice of the state of the Nation, or
to reduce it to a just Standard: so our Author condemns them for correcting
what they found amiss. But no wonder, he that quarrels with them so much for
reforming of Religion, should be likewise offended with them for reforming the
Coin.

48. He says, The Duke of Somerset was condemned, Page 222.
because he had come into the Duke of Northumberland's Chamber, with intention
to have killed him, and was thereupon beheaded.

This was indeed said to be the cause of his Death; but it is not mentioned in
the Record, in which it is only said, that he intended to have seized on the
Duke of Northumberland, without adding, that he designed to have killed him.

49. He says, The two younger Sisters of Lady Jane Gray, Page 223.
were married to the eldest Sons of the Earls of Pembroke and Huntington.

This Error is of no great consequence, but it shows how much our Author was a
stranger, even to the most public Actions: for the youngest Sister to the Lady
Jane, was married to one Keys that was Groom Porter. The Earl of Huntington's
Son married the Duke of Northumberland's Daughter.

50. He says, Soon after the Marriages, the King began to sicken, Ibid.
and to fall in decay.

The King had been ill four months before these Marriages were made: and it is
probable, his sickness made them be the more hastened.

51. He says, Ibid.
Dudley was very desirous to have the Lady Mary in his power, not being much
concerned about the Lady Elizabeth, for she being descended of Ann Boleyn, he
did not much consider her.

It was natural for Dudley to desire rather to have the elder Sister in his
power, than the younger; who could not claim to the Crown, but after the other:
but it appeared, by the submission of the whole Nation to Queen Elizabeth,
though still professing Popery, that she was every whit as much considered, as
her Sister had been formerly.

52. He says, Lady Mary having been sent for by Dudley's Order, Page 224.
understood, when she was not for from London, that the King was expiring; and
that she would be in great danger, if she came to Court; upon which she turned
back.

Queen Mary had not been sent for by Dudley's Order, the Council had writ to
her, that the King being Ill, desired her Company: The News sent her from Court
was, That the King was Dead; so she was desired to stir no further: and upon
that, retired to her House in the Country.

Ibid.
53. He says, Twenty days after that, she heard the King was dead; whereupon she
made proclaim her self Queen.

The discovery of the former Error clears this; for she immediately gathered the
People of Suffolk about her, and gave them her Royal Word, that they should
enjoy their Religion, as it had been established in King Edward's Time: But
though they were the first that proclaimed her Queen, and came about her to
defend her Right, they were among the first that felt the Severities of her
Reign.

Page 225.
54. He says, Mary Queen of Scots, was married to the Dolphin of France.

She was then but a little past ten Years old, and was not married to the
Dolphin, till five Years after this.

Page 229.
55. He says, Queen Mary, as soon as she came to the Crown, without staying for
an Act of Parliament concerning it, laid aside the profane Title of being Head
of the Church.

We may expect as true a History of this Reign, as we had of the former; when
in the first Period of it, there is so notorious a Falsehood. She held two
Parliaments before she laid aside that Title; for in the Writ of Summons for
both, she was styled Supreme Head of the Church; and all the Reformed Bishops
were turned out by virtue of Commissions which she issued out as Supreme Head.
There was also a Visitation made over England by her Authority; and none were
suffered to preach, but upon Licenses obtained under her great Seal; so that
she both retained the Title and Power of Supreme Head, a Year after she came to
the Crown.

Ibid.
56. He says, She discharged the Prisoners she found in the Tower, recalled the
Sentence against Cardinal Pool, and discharged a Tax due to her by the Subjects.

The Queen did free the Prisoners of the Tower at her coming to the Crown, and
discharged the Tax at her Coronation: but for recalling the Sentence against
Cardinal Pool, that being an Act of Parliament, she could not recall it; nor was
it done, till almost a Year and an half after her coming to the Crown.

Ibid.
57. He says, She took care of the Coin, that her Subjects might suffer no more
by the embasing it; so that they all saw the difference between a Catholic and
Heretical Prince.

I do not find any care was taken of the Coin all her Reign; and the bringing
that to a just Standard, is universally ascribed to Queen Elizabeth. If there
was a public joy upon her coming to the Crown, it did not last long; and there
was a far greater when she died. This Observation is much more proper to the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, who began and continued to Reign with so
great and so interrupted a Felicity, that none but a Writer like our Author,
would have made such a Remarque on the beginnings of this Reign.

58. He says, She overcame Wiat's Rebellion, Page 230.
rather by her own Faith, than by any Force she had about her.

This is to make the Reader think, she defeated Wiat, as Gideon did the
Amalekites; but Wiat brought up not above 3000 Men, and she had thrice that
number about her. It was a desperate Attempt, and that which was rather the
effect of a precipitated Design, than of prudent Counsel.

59. He says, She put her Sister in the Tower, Ibid.
when it had appeared to the Senate (which in his Style is the Parliament) that
she had been engaged in Wiat's Conspiracy.

This is said, to cover her barbarous Cruelty toward her Sister; the Matter
never came before the Parliament, and there was no ground ever given to justify
the Suspicion. It is true, Wiat hoping to have saved his Life, by so foul a
Calumny, accused her: but when he saw he must die, he vindicated her openly on
the Scaffold. It is certain, if they could have found any Colors to have
excused severe proceedings against her, both the Queen and the Clergy who
governed her, were much inclined to have made use of them.

60. He says, Page 231.
The Queen was more ready to pardon Crimes against her self, than Offenses
against Christ and Religion.

The more shame for those who governed her Conscience, that made her so
implacable to all whom she esteemed Heretics; since the Christian Religion
came not into the World, as the Author of it says of himself, to destroy Men's
Lives, but to save them: Yet she was not so merciful as he would represent her,
witness her Severities against her Sister, and against Cranmer, even after he
had signed the Recantation of his former Opinions.

61. He says, Though some of the Bishops were guilty of Treason, Ibid.
yet she would not have them to be tried by the Temporal Laws, and referred,
even Cranmer himself, to the Spiritual Jurisdiction.

Cranmer was tried for Treason, by virtue of a Commission issued out by the
Queen; and all the other Reformed Bishops were turned out by Delegates,
empowred for that end by the Queen's Commissions.

62. He says, Ibid.
Cranmer was condemned of Treason in the Parliament.

He was found Guilty of Treason by a Jury of Commissioners, and thereupon
condemned by a Commission of Oyer and Terminer; and not by the Parliament. It
is true, the Parliament did afterward confirm the Sentence.

63. He says, Before he was Condemned, Ibid.
he feigned himself a Catholic, and signed his Retractation seventeen times
with his own hand: But the Bishops discovering his Hypocrisy, degraded him and
delivered him to the Secular Arm, upon which he was burnt at Oxford.

The Popish Party have but too great Advantages against Cranmer, in this last
part of his Life; so it was needless for our Author to have mixed so much
falsehood with this Account: but he must go on in his ordinary method, even
though it is not necessary for any of the Ends he had set before himself.
Cranmer stood out above two Years and a half, in all which time he expressed
great constancy of mind, and a readiness to die for that Faith, which he had
before taught: nor would he fly beyond Sea, though he had many opportunities to
do it, and had reason enough to apprehend he could not escape at home. Upon his
constant adhering to his former Doctrines, he was Condemned, Degraded, and
appointed to be burnt; and then the fears of Death wrought that effect on him,
that he did recant, which he signed thrice: but the Queen being set on Revenge,
would needs have him burnt after all that: so there was no discovery made of
his Hypocrisy, nor was there a Sentence past upon it; but he, for all his
Recantation, was led out to be burnt: and then he returned back to his former
Doctrines, and expressed his Repentance for his Apostasy, with all the
seriousness and horror that was possible.

Ibid.
64. He says, The Laws for burning Heretics were again revived, and by them not
only Cranmer, but some hundreds of the false Teachers were burnt.

A Man's Inclinations do generally appear in the Lies he makes: so it seems our
Author wished it had been, as he relates it was; but so far it was from this
number, that there was not above a quarter of a hundred of the Ministers burnt,
(there were some hundreds of others burnt) so ignorant was he of our Affairs.

Page 232.
65. He says, The Queen did at first command all the Strangers that were
Heretics, to leave the Kingdom; upon which above 30000, as was reckoned, went
out of England.

The greatest number of the Strangers, were the Germans, and of these not above
200 went away, as themselves published it; but our Author was generous and
free-hearted, so that he would make the Exiles to bear some proportion to the
Ministers that were burnt; and as he made some hundreds of the one, so 30000
was but a moderate number to be exiled, 200 would have sounded pitifully in
such an Heroical Work.

Ibid.
66. He says, It was brought under Debate, whether Peter Martyr should be burnt;
but because he came into England upon the Public Faith, he was let go; yet his
Wives Body was raised out of the Churchyard, and cast into a Dunghill; and
Bucer and Fagius's Bodies were burnt.

It could not be debated whether Peter Martyr should be burnt; for the Laws of
Burning were not made till a Year after he went out of England: and the raising
his Wives Body, and the burning the other Bodies, was done almost four Years
after this; though our Author relates it as done at the same time.

67. He says, Ibid.
The Queen at first could not repeal the Laws then in force for Heresy; but she
suspended them all, and exhorted her Subjects to return to the Catholic Rites,
upon which the People did universally return to them.

The Queen could neither repeal nor suspend the Laws then in force; and she did
neither. When she was in Suffolk, she promised the Religion established by Law
should not be changed: When she came to London, she declared she would force no
Consciences; but soon after she added a Limitation to this, Till the Parliament
should order it. After that, all People were encouraged to set up the Mass
everywhere, and it did spread into most parts of the Kingdom: but this was
done both against Law, and the Queen's Royal Word.

68. He says, 'All Pulpits were opened to Catholic Preachers, Ibid.
and the Heretics were not suffered to preach.

This he relates, as if it had been the effect of the Peoples Zeal; but it
flowed from a Proclamation of the Queen's, that none should preach unless he
obtained a License under the Great Seal, which was as high an Act of Supremacy
as ever her Father did.

69. He says, Ibid.
She made first of all Funeral Rites to be performed for her Brother, after the
form of the Catholics, though he had died in Heresy: and intended to have had
such Rites from her Father, but being better instructed, she found it could not
be done, for him that had been the chief Author of the Schism, and of all the
evil that followed it.

King Edward was buried according to the Rites of the English Liturgy; so that
the Funeral Rites were not according to the old Forms. It is true, the Queen
had in her own Chapel such Rites for him. As for her Father, some of the
Writers of that Time, say, it was much pressed, to have his Body at least
raised and carried out of the Consecrated Ground, if not burnt: and in this she
is said to have stood upon the Dignity of a Crowned Head, and the decency of a
Daughters Duty to her Fathers Ashes; so that she would not consent to so
barbarous a thing.

70. He condemns those, who having been defiled with Heresy, Page 233
and thereby under Censures, did, notwithstanding that, administer the
Sacraments, and do the other Offices of Priesthood, before they were reconciled
to the Sea of Rome. This, he says, was such a Sin, that it may be reckoned one
of the Causes of that Queen's dying so soon, and he sets down as a Caution for
the future, that if we should come to be again reconciled to that See, we might
not relapse into the like Error.

This was indeed Cardinal Pool's Advice, that the whole Kingdom ought to have
been put under an Interdict, and that all Holy Offices were to cease, till they
were reconciled to the Sea of Rome: but the whole Clergy, not only many, as he
says, being involved in those Censures, if they had stayed for officiating,
till they had been reconciled to the Sea of Rome, perhaps it had not been done
at all.

Ibid.
71. He says, The Queen, partly by her Authority, partly by the concurrence of
the Parliament, got the ancient way of the Service to be again restored, the
Heretics not daring to oppose it much.

All that was done in the first Parliament, was the restoring things to the
same state they had been in, when King Henry died; which was indeed the setting
up that they called Schism by Law. It was no wonder those he calls Heretics
could not oppose it much; when so many of their Bishops had been turned out and
imprisoned; others were violently thrust out of the House of Lords, and the
Elections of the Members of Parliament had been so managed, that in many places
Force was used, and false Returns were made in other Places.

Page 234.
72. He says, Only one that was bolder than the rest, threw a Dagger at him who
preached the first Catholic Sermon at St. Paul's: and another discharged a
Pistol at another, preaching in the same place.

This, one would think by his Relation, was done after the Parliament had set
up the Mass again; whereas it was soon after the Queen came to the Crown, long
before the Parliament, and that of the Pistol was some months after the
Parliament. But if he had designed to deliver a true History to the World, he
should have added, that upon the Tumult that was raised against the Preacher,
he prayed Mr. Bradford and Mr. Rogers (two afterward burnt for the Reformed
Religion) to speak to the People, and persuade them to be quiet; upon which
they both exhorted the People to behave themselves more peaceably and
reverently; and Bradford went into the Pulpit, that he might be the better
heard; and so near was he to the Danger, that the Dagger pierced his Sleeve;
yet these two were had in such esteem, that the Tumult was quieted; and they
carried the Preacher safe home. One of them being to preach in the Afternoon,
exhorted the People to be peaceable and quiet, and severely condemned the
Tumult that had been in the morning. But such was the gratitude and justice of
the Popish Party, that it was pretended, because they had appeased the Tumult,
that therefore they had also raised it: so they were upon that pretense put in
Prison, where they lay a Year and a half, till the Laws for burning were
revived, and were then burnt for Heresy.

Page 235.
73. He says, Commendone was sent by Order from the Pope into England, who
obtained a Writing from the Queen, wherein she promised Obedience to the Sea of
Rome; upon which Pool was appointed Legate.

It is no wonder our Author understood not the Affairs of the Reformation
aright, when he was so ill informed about the Transactions of his own Party.
Commendone was not sent by the Pope to England. The Legate at Brussels sent him
over from thence, without staying for Orders from Rome.

Page 239.
74. He says, William Thomas, Clerk of the Council, had conspired to kill the
Queen; for which he justly suffered.

Of this I find nothing on Record; so it must depend on our Author's Credit,
which is not infallible.

75. He says, The Imposture of Elizabeth Crofts, Ibid.
was set up by the Persuasion of many of the Heretics: and when it was
discovered, she confessed she had been set on to it by others, and by one Drake
in particular; but they all fled.

In the Account that was then published of that Imposture, Drake only is
accused for it: what he was, does not appear to me, for I have never found him
mentioned but on this Occasion; so there was no reason to transfer the private
Guilt of this Conspiracy on a whole Party, as our Author does; though upon his
Credit, one of our Writers has also done it.

76. He says, Those in whose hands the Church Lands were, Page 243.
had great apprehensions of their being forced to restore them, because the
Queen had restored all the Land that were in her hands, and had again converted
the Collegiat Church of Westminster into an Abbey; But to prevent the ill
Effects that might have followed on this, the Cardinal did, in the Pope's Name,
absolve them from all Censures, for possessing those Lands, and that was
confirmed by Letters sent over from the Pope.

He observes the order of Time very exactly, when he sets the Queen's restoring
the Church Lands, and founding the Abbey of Westminster, as the occasions of
the Fears the Laity were in, of being forced to restore the rest of the
Church Lands; and of the Cardinal's absolving them from all Censures, for
keeping them still in their hands. The Order in which this was done, was thus;
In November. 1554, in the Act of Reconciliation with the Sea of Rome, there was a
special Proviso made for the Church Lands, which the Cardinal confirmed in the
Pope's Name. In the Year after that, the Queen gave up into the Cardinal Hands,
all the Church Lands that belonged to the Crown; and two Years after, she
founded the Abbey of Westminster; so little influence had these things on the
other that were done before. But he was grossly mistaken, when he said the Pope
approved All: for he, in plain terms, refused to ratify what the Cardinal had
done; and soon after set out a severe Bull, Cursing and Condemning all that
held any Church Lands.

77. He says, Page 244.
All the Bishops being sensible of their Schismatical way of entering into their
Sees, did desire and obtain a Confirmation from the Pope. Kitchen, Bishop of
Landaff, only excepted, who afterward relapsed into Heresy under Queen
Elizabeth; and says, it is likely the want of this Confirmation, made him be
more easily overcome.

This our Author wrote, being a thing very probable; and seldom do his
Authorities for what he asserts, rise higher. It was also a pretty strain of
his Wit, to make the omitting of it, fall singly on the only Bishop that
conformed under Queen Elizabeth. But it is certain, there was no such thing
done at all; for if any had done it, Bonner was as likely as any other; since
as none had been more faulty in King Henry's Time; so none studied to redeem
that with more servile compliances than he did; yet there is nothing of this
recorded in his Register, which continues entire to this day.

Page 246.
78. He says, The State of the Universities was restored to what it had been,
and Oxford in particular; by Petrus a Soto's means, who was in the Opinion of
all, much preferred to P. Martyr.

He that gathered the Antiquities of Oxford, though no partial Writer on this
occasion, represents the state of that University very differently; that there
were almost no Divines in it, and scarce any public Lectures. But when Sanders
writ his Poem, the Spanish Councils were so much depended on, by him and his
Party, that it was fit to put that Complement on the Nation, concerning Petrus
a Soto. Whether it was true or false, was a Circumstance which he generously
overlooked, for most part.

Page 248.
79. He says, Queen Elizabeth had done many things in Queen Mary's Time, both
against her Person and Government.

He knew this was so false, that there was never a Circumstance, or a
Presumption brought against her; but the Information which Wiat gave, hoping
thereby to save himself; and yet he denied that on the Scaffold. If there had
been any color to have justified the taking away her Life, both the Queen and
her Counselors were as much inclined to it, as our Author himself was.

Ibid.
80. He says, King Henry said in Parliament, she was not, and could not be his
Daughter, for a secret Reason which he had revealed to the Archbishop of
Canterbury.

This was aptly enough said by a Writer, that had emancipated himself from the
Laws of Truth and Veracity, to appeal to such a Story; yet to have made it pass
the better, he should have named other Circumstances; for such a thing cannot
be easily believed, since after Ann Boleyn's Death, the King continued to treat
Elizabeth still as his Daughter; so that when she writ to his next Queen, she
subscribed Daughter: she was in all things educated with the Care and State
that became a King's Child; and was, both by Act of Parliament, and by his
Will, declared to be so. Now to think that such a King would have done all
this, after he had in Parliament declared that she could not be his Child, is a
little too coarse to be believed, and so should have been supported with more
than ordinary Proofs.

Ibid.
81. He says, She came to the Crown, merely by virtue of the Act of Parliament,
without being Legitimated.

In this, she and her Sister were upon the same Level; for neither of them were
declared Legitimate; so this was not to be objected to the one, more than to
the other Sister.

Page 249.
82. He says, Queen Mary being declared, by Act of Parliament, in the beginning
of her Reign, Legitimate; and her Mothers Marriage being declared good,
Elizabeth was thereby of new Illegitimated; yet she never repealed the Laws
against her Title: but kept the Crown merely upon the Authority of an Act of
Parliament, without having any regard to her Birth.

Queen Mary came to the Crown, being in the same Condition; and was either a
lawful Queen before that Act was made, or else that Act was of no force, if it
had not the Royal Assent given by a lawful Queen. So Queen Elizabeth was as
much Queen before any such Act could have passed, as afterward: and therefore
since it was not necessary for the securing her Title, it was a sign of her
tenderness of her Father's Memory, to which Queen Mary had no regard, not to
revive the remembrance of things that must have turned so much to his
dishonor, as that would have done.

83. He says, Page 250.
Queen Mary not being able to prevent her Sisters Succession, sent a Message to
her on her Deathbed, desiring her to pay her Debts, and to preserve the
Catholic Religion; both which she promised, but performed neither.

This is said without any Proof, and is not at all probable; but is an Ornament
added to set off the one, and blemish the other. Queen Mary's Sickness was
concealed as much as was possible. A week before her Death, they were burning
Heretics as busily as ever; and by the managing Affairs in the Parliament, it
appears there was great care taken to conceal the desperate Condition she was
in: so it is not likely that any such Messages was sent by her to her Sister.

And thus far have I traced our Author in the History he gives of the Reigns of
King Henry the Eighth, Edward the Sixth, and Queen Mary, and have discovered an
equal measure of Ignorance and Malice in him: but he was the fitter to serve
their Ends who employed him, and were resolved to believe him, how false or
improbable soever his Relation might be. We see what use they have made of him
ever since that Time. His Friends were so sensible of the Advantage their Cause
received from such a way of Writing, that they resolved to continue down the
History through Queen Elizabeth's Reign, in which, we are told, Sanders himself
made some Progress; but that not being done to such a perfection as Rishton and
others intended to bring it, they undertook it; and have written so skilfully
after the Copy Sanders had given them, that if it is possible, they have
outdone him in these two particular Excellencies of writing Histories, in
which he was so great a Master, Impudence, and Falsehood as to Matter of Fact.
In one thing they had manifestly the better of him, that they writing of what
fell out in their own Time, could not be ignorant of the truth of Things;
whereas he writing of what was done before he was born, or when he was but a
Child, might have said many things more innocently, delivering them as he had
them by report. But this Excuse cannot fit them, who did knowingly, and on
Design, prevaricate so grossly in Matters of Fact: A little taste of these I
shall give, only so far as I have carried down the History of this Queen, for
to examine all the Faults they have committed, would require a new Volume; but
from the taste I shall give the Reader, he will easily know what judgment to
pass on the whole work.

As for the Decency of the Style, the first Period gives an Essay of it, in
which the Author promises such a Description of the Queen's Reign, that this
Lioness shall be known by her Claws: And for his sincerity in writing, the
whole Preface is one indication of it, in which he accuses the Queen for acting
against the Laws of Nature and Religion, in assuming the Supremacy; and
represents it so, that the Reader must needs think she was the High Priest of
England, that ordained Bishops and Ministers, and performed all other Holy
Offices: whereas she was so scrupulous in this Point, that as she would not be
called the Supreme Head of this Church, so she made it be declared, both in one
of the Articles of Religion, set forth in the beginning of her Reign, and
afterward in an Act of Parliament, what was the nature of that Supremacy which
she assumed; making it both a part of the Religion, and the Law of the Land. By
these it was declared, that they gave her not the Ministry of God's Word, or of
the Sacraments; but only that Prerogative which was given by God himself in the
Scriptures, to Godly Princes; that they should rule all committed to their
charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with
the Civil Sword, the stubborn and evil Doers. If Men were not past shame, they
could not, after such an express and public Declaration, put on the confidence
of writing as this Author does. I shall follow him in some more steps, and
doubt not not but I shall convince the Reader, that he was the fittest Man that
could be found, to have writ a Continuation of Sanders's History.

Page 255.
1. He says, Henry the Second of France, in a solemn Assembly, did, after Queen
Mary's Death, declare the Queen of Scotland his Daughter-in-Law, Queen of
England and Ireland.

This was neither done in a Solemn Assembly, nor presently after Queen Mary's
Death; nor was it done by Henry the Second. The Queen of Scotland did, by her
Uncles Advice, assume that Title, without any public Act: and it was not done
till they understood that Philip was moving for a Dispensation in the Court of
Rome, for marrying Queen Elizabeth; King Henry did only connive at it, but
neither ordered it, nor justified it, when the Queen's Ambassador complained of
it. An Author that is so happy in his first Period, as to make three such
Mistakes, is likely to give us an excellent History.

Ibid.
2. He says, The Archbishop of York, and all the other Bishops, one only
excepted, refused to anoint her.

This was one of the most extraordinary things that ever was in any Government;
that the Bishops refusing to crown the Queen, were not only not punished for
it, but continued to hold their Bishoprics still: and the Archbishop of York
was continued a Privy Counselor many months after this. This is none of the
Claws of a Lioness, but rather a slackness and easiness of Clemency, that
deserves censure, if it had not been that the Queen resolved to begin her
Reign, with the most signal Acts of Mercy that were possible.

Page 256.
3. He says, Cecil and his Friend Bacon, raised vast Estates to themselves, and
involved the Government into vast Difficulties, and brought the Queen's Revenue
into great, or rather inextricable Confusion.

This may pass among Foreigners, and perhaps be believed; but we at home, that
when we wish for happy Times, and excellent Counselors, do naturally reflect
on the Days of that glorious Queen, and her wise Councils, will not be much
wrought on by it. The Revenue was never better managed, the Undertakings of the
Government were never greater, and the Charge was never less. This gives a
Character of those Ministers beyond all exception. Sir Nicholas Bacon never
raised himself above that Quality which he brought with him into the Court. And
Cecil was not advanced above the lowest Rank of Nobility, tho he was in the
chief Ministry above thirty Years; and though they both left good Estates
behind them, yet far short of what might have been expected after so long a
course in such great and high Employments.

4. He says, Page 257.
There was an Oath enacted in the Parliament for the Queen's Supremacy; and
those who refused to swear it, for the first Offense were to forfeit their
Benefices, and all their Goods, and to be Prisoners for Life; the second
Offense was made Treason.

Such a false recital of a printed Act, deserves a severer Animadversion than I
shall bestow on it. The refusing that Oath, did infer no other punishment, but
the forfeiture of Benefices and Offices; and the Parties so refusing, were
subjected to no other Danger; nor was the Oath to be put to them a second Time.
It is true, if any did assert the Authority of any Foreign Potentate, that was
more penal: Yet that was not as our Author represents it; for the first Offense
there was a forfeiture of ones Goods; or in case of Poverty, one Years
Imprisonment; the second Offense brought the Offender within a Praemunire; and
the third was Treason.

5. He says, The Change that was made, Page 258.
of the Title of Supreme Head, into that of Supreme Governor, deceived many;
yet others thought that the Queen might have thereby assumed an Authority for
Administering the Sacraments; but to clear all Scruples, she in the first
Visitation ordered it to be thus explained, that she thereby pretended to no
more Power than what her Father and Brother had exercised.

In the first Visitation ordered by the Queen, there was an Injunction given
Explanatory to the Oath of Supremacy; declaring that she did not pretend to any
Authority for the Ministry of Divine Service in the Church, and challenged
nothing, but what had at all times belonged to the Crown of England; which was
a Sovereignty over all manner of Persons under God: so that no Foreign Power
had any Rule over them; and so was willing to acquit such as took it in that
sense, of all the Penalties in the Act. So that it is plain she assumed nothing
but the Royal Authority, and was ready to accept of such Explications as might
clear all Ambiguities.

6. He reckons, among the Laws that were made, this for one, Page 259.
that Bishops should hold their Sees only during the Queen's Pleasure, and
exercise no other Authority, but only as they derived it from her.

The Laws he reckons, were those made by King Henry now revived; but this Law
is falsely recited in both the parts of it: for the Bishops were to hold their
Sees, as all others do their Free-holds, without any dependence on the Queen's
Pleasure; and were to exercise their Jurisdiction in their own Names, and
according to the Ecclesiastical Laws, and were not forced to take Commissions
to hold their Bishoprics during the Queen's Pleasure, as had been done both in
King Henry and King Edward's Time.

Page 263.
7. After a long discourse against the Queen's Supremacy, he says, The Laws
concerning it, and other Points of Religion, did pass with great difficulty in
the House of Lords, all the Bishops opposing them, and those Noblemen in
particular, who had gone to Rome upon the Embassy Queen Mary sent thither, did
very earnestly dissuade it.

It is true, all the Bishops did oppose them, tho both Tonstal, Heath,
Thirleby, and some others had consented to, and written for King Henry's
Supremacy; which was (at least as to the manner of expressing it) of a higher
strain than that to which the Queen did now pretend. They had also submitted to
all the Changes that had been made in King Edward's Time. For the Temporal
Lords, none dissented from the Act of Supremacy, but the Earl of Shrewsbury,
and the Viscount Montacute, so the opposition was small, where so few entered
their Dissents; and of these, only the Viscount Montacute had been at Rome,
sent thither by Queen Mary. It is true, the Marquess of Winchester, and the
Lords, Morley, Stafford, Dudley, Wharton, Rich, and North, dissented from the
Bill for the Book of Common Prayer, and some other Acts that related to the
Reformation; but these being but few in number, were far short of those that
were for them: and it is clear, the Queen left the Peers wholly to their
freedom, since the Marquess of Winchester, notwithstanding his Dissent,
continued to hold that great Office, of Lord Treasurer, in which he had been
put in King Edward's Time, and which he had kept all Queen Mary's Reign, till
his Death, fourteen Years after this; this may perhaps be justly censured, as
looking too like a remissness in the Matters of Religion, when he that
dissented to the Reformation, was yet so long employed in the greatest Trust in
the Kingdom; but certainly this is none of the Claws to know the Lioness by.

8. He says, The Queen gave the Earl of Arundel some hopes that she would marry
him, and so persuaded him to consent to the Laws now made; but afterward
slighted him, and declared, she would live and die a Virgin.

The Journals of Parliament show how false this is; for the Address was made to
the Queen, persuading her to marry; to which she made the Answer set down by
our Author, on the 6th of February, and the Act of Supremacy, with the other
Acts concerning Religion, passed in April thereafter: so that the Queen, after
so public a Declaration of her unwillingness to marry, could not have deluded
the Earl of Arundel with the hopes of it.

Ibid.
9. He says, She wrought on the D. of Norfolk, by promising him a Dispensation
in the Business of his Marriage, which he could not obtain of the Pope.

It is not like the Duke of Norfolk was denied any such Dispensation from Rome,
nor are there any Dispensations granted in England for marrying in the
forbidden Degrees: Cousin Germans are the nearest that may marry. The obtaining
a License for that at Rome, is a matter of course, so the Fees are but paid;
and the Law allows that to all in England. Nor are there any Dispensations in
Matrimonial Matters, except concerning the Time, the Place, or the asking of
Banes; and it is not likely these were ever denied to any at Rome. As for his
long Excursion concerning that Duke's Death, it not falling within the compass
of my History, I shall not follow him in it.

10. He says, The Protestants desired a public Disputation: Page 266.
so the Queen commanded the Bishops to make ready for it; they refused it a
great while, since that seemed to make the Faith of the Church subject to the
judgment of the ignorant Laity; but at last they were forced to yield to it;
and the Points were, Communion in both kinds, Prayer in a known Tongue, and the
like.

The Act of Council has it otherwise: By it we see that the Archbishop of York
being then a Privy Councellor, did heartily agree to it, and undertook that the
rest of his Brethren should follow the Orders that were made by the Council
concerning it; tho it is not to be denied, but some of the Bishops were
secretly dissatisfied with it: as they had good reason; since a public
Disputation was like to lay open the weakness of their Cause, which was never
so safe, as when it was received in gross, without descending to troublesome
Enquiries concerning it. The Communion in both kinds was not one of the
Articles.

11. He says, Bacon a Layman was Judge, Ibid.
the Archbishop of York sitting next to him, only for forms-sake.

Bacon was not Judge; the whole Privy Council were present to order the Forms of
the Debate; and he, as the first of that Board, did only give directions,
according to the order that had been formerly agreed on.

12. He says, On the 3d of April they disputed, Ibid.
but there was nothing done with Order or Justice, the time was spent in
Declamations, while the profane Judge directed all things at his pleasure, so
that it came to nothing.

It is true, the Order was broken: But it had been unkindly done of our Author
to tell by whom. The Papists refused the first day to give their Reasons in
writing, as had been agreed on before; and as was accordingly done by the
Reformed; and upon the second day they refused to proceed, unless, contrary to
what had been concluded, the Reformed should read their Papers first: So the
Disputation broke up, it appearing evidently, that the one side were not afraid
of a public Hearing, but that the other were.

The Conclusion.
I Pursue these Calumnies no further, because I cannot offer a Confutation of
them, without a larger digression: since I break off my History in the second
Year of this Reign; so that I cannot refer the Reader to those more copious
Accounts given by me, as I have done in the former Remarques; where a short
hint was sufficient. And I do not judge it worth the while, to enter into such a
full search of these Matters, as a Confutation would require, only to expose
Rishton. These Evidences which I have given of his Ignorance and Injustice,
will satisfy impartial Readers; and I am out of hopes of convincing those that
are so wedded to an Interest, that they are resolved to believe all that is
said of their side, how improbable soever it may appear, or how slenderly
soever it may be proved.

And now I hope, the Reformation of this Church appears in its true Colors,
and the Calumnies by which its Adversaries have endeavored so long to disgrace
it, are so evidently confuted, that they will be no more supported by their own
side, nor so tamely assented to, by any that in their Hearts may perhaps love
the Reformation, and yet are too easily prevailed on to drink in the Prejudices
that are raised by the confidence with which those Slanders have been vented.
Now the Matter is better understood, and tho at this distance, and after the
rasure of Records made in Queen Mary's Reign, it must be acknowledged that
there are many things, either quite past over, or so defectively related by me,
that this Work wants that perfection which were to be desired. Yet
notwithstanding all these disadvantages, besides the faults of style, Method,
or way of Expression, which may be more justly put to my account, tho having
done it in the best manner I could, I have little to answer for, but the
presumption of undertaking a Design too high for me to perform with that Life
and Perfection that such a Subject required; and even in that, I rather
submitted to the Authority of others, who engaged me in it, than vainly fancied
my self able to accomplish it; but after all those Allowances that are
necessary, of which there can none be more sensible than my self, I am not out
of hope but this Work may have some good effect, on such as shall read it
impartially and with candor; and that those who are already of our Church,
shall be induced to like it the better, when they see what the beginnings of
our Reformation were: and those who are not of our Communion, may the more
easily be brought into it, when they see by what Steps, and upon what Reasons
the Changes were made: and if this Success follows my poor Endeavors, I shall
think my Time and Pains have been well employed.

I am apprehensive enough of the Faults I may be guilty of, but I shall now
give the Reader such an assurance of my readiness to correct them, as soon as I
am convinced of them, that I hope, if any thing occurs to any that deserves
censure, they will communicate it first to my self; and if I do not, upon
better information, retract what I have written then I shall allow them to make
it public in what manner they please. And it may be presumed I will not be for
the future unwilling to do this, by the following account of the Mistakes which
I made in the former Part, communicated to me by Mr. Fulman, of whom I made
mention in the Preface. With these I conclude this Work.

Some Mistakes in the First Part of this History, communicated to me by Mr.
William Fulman, Rector of Hampton Meysey; in Glocestershire.
LOrd Almoner] It is questionable whether the Almoner was then called Lord,
Page 7. line 10. from bottom.
and more questionable whether Wolsey were then Almoner, when he was thus
recommended to the King's Favor; for Polidore Virgil who lived in England at
that time, or very near it, says he was Chaplain to King Henry the 7th, and now
made Almoner to King Henry the 8th, being before that time Dean of Lincoln,
made so 2 Feb. 1508. installed by Proxy, 25 March 1509. and personally 21
August 1511. and so only he is styled in the University Register, 12 April
1510. when he was made Bachelor of Divinity.

These Numbers seem questionable, P. 8. Margent
the Temporalities of Lincoln are said to be restored, 4 March, 5 Regni, i. e.
1513/4; but then it was done before his Consecration, which Godwin says, was
the 26th of March that Year. But this might be to give him a right to the mean
Profits, by restoring the Temporalities before Lady Day, though he was not
consecrated till the 26th. before November, there should be (6) added, for on
that day was he translated to York. And whereas it is said he had the
Bishopprick of Winchester. May 4. 20 Regni, i. e. 1528. this must be a mistake,
for Fox's Register reaches to the 9th of September. that Year; so perhaps it was
4 March, 20 Regni, i. e. in March 1528/9. But I took all these Dates from the
Rolls; and I must add one thing, that I have often seen cause to question the
exactness of the Clerks in the enroling of Dates, though it seems a presumption
to question the Authority of a Record.

Here, and in several other places, as page 35, 36, 134, 208, 321, P. 10. l.
16. from bottom.
it is supposed, That the next Heir of the Crown was Prince of Wales. The Heir
apparent of the Crown is indeed Prince, but is not Prince of Wales, strictly
speaking, unless he has it given him by a Creation. And it is said, That there
is nothing on Record to prove that any of K. Henry's Children were ever created
Prince of Wales. There are indeed some hints of the Lady Mary's being styled
Princess of Ways; for when a Family was appointed for her, 1525. Veysey Bishop
of Exeter, her Tutor, was made President of Wales. She also is said to have
kept her House at Ludlow; and Leland says, That Teken-hill, an House in those
Parts built for Prince Arthur, was repaired for her. And Tho. Linacre dedicates
his Rudiments of Grammar to her, by the Title of Princess of Cornwall and Wales.

Besides the Letter of Pope Leo's declaring K. Henry, P. 19. l. 26.
Defender of the Faith, there was a more pompous one sent over by P. Clement
the 7th, March 5. 1523/4, which, as is supposed, granted that Title to his
Successors, whereas the first Grant seems to have been only Personal.

P. 22. l. 2.
No wonder there was no Seal to that Grant of King Edgars, for Seals were little
used in England before the Conquest.

Ibid. l. 10.
The Monks were not then settled in half the Cathedrals in England, their chief
Seats were in the Rich Abbeys, that were scarce subject to the Bishops.

Ibid. Marg.
April 1524, was not the 14th Year of the King's Reign, as it is put on the
Margent, but the 15th.

P. 44. l. 5. from bottom.
The Lord Piercy was in the Cardinal's Family, rather in a way of Education (not
unusual in those Times) than of Service.

P. 47. l. 12. from bottom.
The General of the Observants in Spain, seems an improper expression, for the
Generals have the government of the whole Order everywhere; yet I find him so
called in some Originals, see Coll. page 22, 23. whether it was done
improperly, or whether that Order was then only in Spain, I cannot determine.

P. 56. l. 19.
How far the Cardinal had carried the Foundation at Ipswich, it is not known;
but it is certain he did never finish what he had designed at Oxford. But in
this I went according to the Letters Patents, by which it appears he had then
done his part, and had set off both Lands and Money for these Foundations.

P. 69. l. 16. from bottom.
Campegio's Son is by Hall, none of his Flatterers, said to have been born in
Wedlock, i. e. before he took Orders. This is also confirmed by Gauricus
Genitur. 24. who says, he had by his Wife three Sons and two Daughters.

P. 77. l. 18.
Campegio might take upon him to direct the Process, as being sent Express from
Rome, or to avoid the imputation that might have been cast on the Proceedings,
if Wolsey had done it, but he was not the ancienter Cardinal, for Wolsey was
made alone, Sept. 7. 1515. and Campegio, with many more, was advanced, July 1.
1517.

P. 81. l. 32.
The Lord Herbert says, the King gave him only the use of Richmond, which is
more probable.

P. 82. l. 6.
The Cardinal died November. 29. as most Writers agree; so it is wrong set in the
History the 28, and in the Picture 26 for 29.

P. 85. l. 21.
This Book is in the end of it, said to be printed 1530, in April; but it seems
an Error, for 1531: for the Censures of the Universities, which are printed in,
and mentioned in several places of it, do all bear date after that April,
except those made by these of Oxford and Orleans.

from bottom. P. 86.
What is said concerning the Author of the Antiquities of Oxford, has been much
complained of by him. I find he has Authorities for what he said, but they are
from Authors whose Manuscripts he perused, who are of no better Credit than
Sanders himself, such as Harpsfield, and others of the like Credit. And I am
satisfied, that he had no other Design in what he writ, but to set down things
as he found them in the Authors whom he made use of.

Calvin's Epistle seems not to belong to this Case, for besides that, P. 92.
he was then but 21, and tho he was a Doctor of the Law, and had often preached
before he was 24, for then he set out Seneca de Clementia, with Notes on it;
Yet this was too soon to think he could have been consulted in so great a Case.
That Epistle seems to relate to a Prince who was desirous of such a Marriage,
and not of dissolving it; though it is indeed strange, that in treating of that
Question, he should make no mention of so famous a case as that of King Henry,
which had made so much noise in the World.

The Letter dated the 8th of December. P. 110. l. 22.
should have been mentioned immediately after that of the 5th, being but three
days after it, and the Appeal that followed should have been set down after it.
It were also fit to publish the Appeal it self, for the power of Appealing was
a Point much contraverted. Pope Pius the 2d condemned it 1549; yet it was used
by the Venetians 1509, and by the University of Paris, March 27. 1517.

Pool, as Dean of Exeter, P. 113. l. 4.
is said to be have been one of the Lower House of Convocation; which does not
agree with the Conjecture, p. 129. that the Deans at that time sat in the Upper
House of Convocation.

These sent by the King to Rome, came thither in February, P. 120. l. 8.
not in March; and the Articles they put in were 27, not 28, as it is there
said. These, with other small Circumstances, appear from a Book then printed of
these Disputes.

If Cranmer was present at Ann Boleyn's Marriage, P. 126. l. 11.
which was certainly in November. Warham having died in August before, he could
not have delayed his coming to England six months. Antiq. Brit. says, he
followed the Emperor to Spain; but Sleiden says, that the Emperor went no
further than Mantua this Year, and sailed to Spain in March following; and
Cranmer would not go then with him, for he was consecrated, not on the 13th of
March, (which is an Error) but on the 30th of March.

The order in which these Books were published, is not observed, P. 137. l. 10.
they were thus printed.

1. De vera differentia Regiae Potestatis and Ecclesiasticae, (written by Edw.
Fox Bishop of Hereford) 1534.

2. De vera Obedientia, (by Stephen Gardener) 1535. set out with Bonner's
Preface before it, in Jan. 1536.

3. The Institution of a Christian Man, 1537. which was afterward reduced into
another Form, under another Title, viz. A Necessary Doctrine, and Erudition for
any Christian Man, 1540. But there was another put out before all these.

De potestate Christianorum Regum in suis Ecclesiis contra Pontificis
Tyrannidem; and the distinction there made between the Bishop's Book, and the
King's Book seems not well applied. It is more probable that the Institution of
a Christian Man, set out by the Bishops, was called their Book; and that being
afterward put in another Method, and set out by the King's Authority, it was
called his Book.

P. 150. l. 19.
Bocking is called a Canon of Christs-Church in Canterbury. But there were then
no Canons in that Church, they were all Monks.

P. 158. l. 6.
The Bishops Suffragans were before common in England, some Abbots, or rich
Clergymen, procuring under Foreign, or perhaps feigned Titles, that Dignity;
and so performing some parts of the Episcopal Function, in large or neglected
Diocesses; so the Abbot or Prior of Tame was one, Coll. p. 148. Such was Robert
King Abbot of Oseney, after Bishop of Oxford; and Thom. Cornish a Residentiary
of Wells, who by the name of Thomas Episcopus Tinensis, did confer Orders, and
performed other Episcopal Functions for Fox while he was Bishop of Exeter, from
1487, to 1492. and afterward, when he was Bishop of Wells, as appears by both
those Registers: he died in the Year 1513. Of this I could give more Instances
if it were necessary.

P. 203. l. 5, 6.
It is said, some were judged to be Hanged, and others to be Beheaded. But this
being a Case of Treason, the Judgments must have been the same, tho executed in
different ways, by order from the King. This I copied from Judge Spelman's
Commonplace Book.

P. 203. l. 21.
The Original Declaration should have been set down, but I thought that not
necessary, for the L. Herbert has published it, only he forgot to add the
Subscription to it, which I ought to have mentioned in its proper place, but it
escaped me, and therefore I do it here.

P. 226. l. 24.
Andre' Thevet, a French Franciscan, who writ some Years after this an
Universal Cosmography, says, Lib. 16. cap. 5. That he was assured, by diverse
English Gentlemen, that Mark Smeton at his Death, among his other Sins,
repented in particular of the wrong he had done the Queen, in destroying her by
a false Accusation. And tho Thuanus makes him an Author of no Credit, yet there
is no reason to suspect him in this Particular, for Writers seldom lie against
their Interest; and the Franciscan Order had suffered so much for their
adhering to Queen Katherine's Interests, in opposition to Ann Boleyn, that it
is not likely one of that Order would have strained a Point to tell an
honorable Story of her. This was made use of in Queen Elizabeth's Time, to
vindicate her Memory; see Saravia Tract. cont. Bezam. cap. 2. versus finem.

P. 220. l. 4, 5
The King's Protestation was not published till about eight or nine months after
that was obtained, which you there mention, which was the 20th of July, 1536.
And in the Protestation, mention is made of the putting off the Council from
May to November. 1537. which came out in April or May that Year. And in April
1538. the King set out another Protestation against a Bull for the Council at
Vincenza, which is not mentioned in the History.

Pool lived at Padua long before this time, and not after it, (as Antiq. P.
221. l. 10.
Brit. from whom it is vouched has it) but that Society of Learned Men was now
removed to Rome, whither Pool seems to have gone to them.

No wonder Chester was not here mentioned, P. 263. l. 7.
since it was erected before. And so it might well be, tho the Charter for the
present Foundation bears date after; for the former might be surrendered and
cancelled, probably because of some mention made in it of the Pope's Bull, of
which you speak p. 121.

Fox adds another Passage of that Discourse between Cromwell and the Duke of
Norfolk, which perhaps offended him much; P. 265. l. 17. from bottom.
that he was never so far in love with Wolsey, as to have waited on him to
Rome, as he understood the Duke of Norfolk would have done.

Coventry and Litchfield were never two different Bishoprics, P. 228. l. 23.
but two different Seats of the same See, which had sometimes a third at
Chester.

This was no designed interview; P. 272. l. 1.
but Charles hearing of the Tumult at Ghent, went from Spain to Flanders,
through France, as his nearest way, and was met by Francis at Loches in Berry,
and not at Paris.

Cromwell was then Dean of Wells, P. 279. l. 20.
and that was the reason of the Proviso.

Hall and L. Herbert say, This was on the 25th, P. 280. l. 5.
which you put on the 24th of June.

He in that place belongs to the King named before; P. 297.
so it should have been expressed, that it is Bonner that is here meant.

It was not necessary to restore the Lord Cromwell in Blood, P. 312. l. 12.
for he was made a Baron, when his Father was made an Earl, so that his Blood
was not corrupted by his Fathers Attaindor.

Interludes were not then brought in first to Churches, P. 318. l. 8.
but had been used in the Times of Popery, the greatest part of their Religion
being placed in outward Shows, so that these did well enough agree with it; and
such Representations are yet in use sometimes in the Roman Church, so that, by
which they had formerly entertained the People, was now turned on themselves.

Fox sets down a Confession of Anne Askews, P. 342. l. 1.
(perhaps Ascough was her right Name, for so is the Name of the Family in
Lincolnshire written) in which she her self relates this Passage of the Lord
Chancellors racking her with his own hands; so there is no reason to question
the truth of it; and Parsons, who detracts as much from Fox's Credit as he can,
does not question this particular.

P. 344. l. 10.
The Story concerning Cranmer, must belong to the former Year, for Butts that
bore a share in it, died on the 17th of November. 1545, as appears by the
Inscription on his Tombstone in Fulham Church: So this Passage being after the
Duke of Suffolk's Death, which was in August that Year; this must be placed
between August and November. 1545.

P. 346. l. 6.
The Earl of Surrey had not lived long a Widower, for his youngest Son,
afterward Earl of Northampton, is said to have been at nurse at his Father's
Death.

P. 355. l. 17. from bottom.
The Year of Sir Tho. More's Birth is not certain; by Erasmus his Reckoning, it
was in the Year 1479, if not higher; others say it was 1480; and others 1484.

P. 359. l. 30.
William Peyto: Thuanus, calls him William, and says, he was Loci Ignobilis;
but his true Name, by which he was made Cardinal, was Peter; whether he was so
Christened, or assumed it only when he became a Friar, is not certain. He was
descended from an Ancient and Eminent Family in Warwickshire, yet remaining.

P. 204. l. 14. from bottom.
And not many of these. Here seems to be a word or more wanting; It is wanting
in the Original, but it should have been supplied by a conjecture on the
Margent; Armed seems to be the word that agrees best to the sense.

FINIS.
Errata in the former Volume, that are not marked in the Table of them.
PAge 10. line 17 from bottom, for 18 of June, read 28. P. 22. l. 11. fr. bott.
f. Frediswood, r. Frideswoide. P. 26. l. 24. f. Sartre, r. Sautre; l. 29. f. it
as like, r. it is like. P. 27. l. 12. fr. bott. f. 1611, r. 1511. P. 41. l. 25.
for Dorchester, r. Dorset. P. 47. l. 24. f. Puccy, r. Pucci. P. 59. l. 18. f.
great, r. got. P. 72. l. 11. f. Simpson, r. Sampson. P. 85. Marg. l. 28. f. 2
Feb. r. 24. P. 91. l. 14. f. 19 of June, r. 10. of June. P. 163. l. ult. f.
rented, r. rated. P. 242. l. 8. f. this Kings, r. this kind. P. 247. l. 9. f.
1635. r. 1535. ibid. l. 15 fr. bott. f. 7 Dec. r. 17. P. 249. l. 11. f. refuse,
r. refute. P. 262. l. 18. f. Reat, r. rents. P. 280. l. 21. f. Person, r.
Prison. P. 285. f. came, r. come. P. 333. (misprinted 343) l. 24. f. Dell, r.
Bell. P. 343. l. 18. f. Alrich, r. Holgate.

A Table of the Records and Papers that are in the Collection, with which the
Places in the History to which they relate are marked; the first Number, with
the Letter C. is the Page of the Collection; the second with the Letter H. is
the Page of the History.
C. H. THe Journal of King Edward's Reign, 1 1 1. His Preface to some
Scriptures against Idolatry, 68 157 2. A Discourse concerning the Reformation
of diverse Abuses, 69 ibid 3. A Reformation of the Order of the Garter,
translated into Latin by him, 73 205 4. A Paper concerning a Free Mart in
England, 78 208 5. The Method in which the Council represented Matters of State
to him, 82 219 6. Articles for the Regulation of the Privy Council, 86 213

The First Book.
1. The Character of King Edward given by Cardan, 89 2 2. The Commission taken
out by Archbishop Cranmer, 90 6 3. The Councils Letter to the Justices of
Peace, 92 13 4. The Order for the Coronation of King Edward, 93 ibid 5. The
Commission for which the Lord Chancellor was deprived of his Office; with the
Opinion of the Judges about it, 96 17 6. The Duke of Somersets Commission to be
Protector, 98 18 7. The King's Letter to the Archbishop of York concerning the
Visitation, 103 26 8. The form of bidding Prayers before the Reformation, 104
30 9. A Letter of Bishop Tonstal's proving the subjection of the Crown of
Scotland to the King of England, 106 32 10. A Letter sent by the Scottish
Nobility to the Pope, concerning their being an Independent Kingdom, 109 ibid
11. The Oath given to the Scots, who submitted to the Protector, 111 35 12.
Bonner's Protestation, with his Submission, 112 36 13. Gardiner's Letter
concerning the Injunctions, ibid ibid 14. The Conclusion of his Letter to the
Protector against them, 114 38 15. A Letter of the Protectors to the Lady Mary,
justifying the Reformation, 115 39 16. Petitions made by the Lower House of
Convocation, 117 47 17. A second Petition to the same purpose, 118 ibid 18.
Reasons for admitting the Inferior Clergy to sit in the House of Commons, 119
48 19. A Letter of Martin Bucers to Gropper, 121 51 20. Questions and Answers
concerning the Divorce of the Marquess of Northampton, 125 58 21. Injunctions
given in King Henry's Time to the Deanery of Doncaster, 126 59 22. A
Proclamation against Innovations without the King's Authority, 128 ibid 23. An
Order of Council for the removing of Images, 129 60 24. A Letter, with
Directions sent to all Preachers, 130 61 25. Questions concerning some abuses
in the Mass, with the Answers made by some Bishops and Divines to them, 133 62
26. A Collection of the chief Indulgences then in the English Offices, 150 66
27. Injunctions for a Visitation of Chauntries, 152 67 28. The Protector's
Letter to Gardener, concerning the Points that he was to handle in his Sermon,
154 70 29. Idolatrous Collects and Hymns in the Hours of Sarum, 156 61 30. Dr.
Redmayn's Opinion of the Marriage of the Clergy, 157 92 31. Articles of
Treason against the Admiral, 158 98 32. The Warrant for the Admiral's
Execution, 164 100 33. Articles for the King's Visitors, 165 102 34. A Paper of
Luther concerning a Reconciliation with the Zwinglians, 166 105 35. The
Sentence against Joan of Kent, 167 111 36. A Letter of the Protectors to Sir
Philip Hobbey, of the Rebellions at home, 169 120 37. A Letter of Bonners after
his Deprivation, 170 128 38. Instructions to Sir W. Paget, sent to the Emperor,
171 131 39. A Letter of Pagets to the Protector, 173 132 40. Another Letter of
his to the Protector, 177 133 41. The Councils Letter to the King against the
Protector, 183 136 42. The Protector's Submission, 184 ibid 43. A Letter from
the Council to the King, 185 137 44. A Letter writ by the Council to Cranmer
and Paget, 187 ibid 45. Cranmer and Pagets Answer, 188 ibid 46. Articles
objected to the Duke of Somerset, 189 138 47. A Letter of the Councils to the
Bishops, assuring them that the King intended to go forward in the Reformation,
191 143 48. Cardinal Wolsey's Letter for procuring the Popedom to himself, upon
Pope Adrian's Death, 192 147 49. Instructions given to the Lord Russel, and
others, concerning the delivery of Bulloign to the French, 198 148 50. Other
Instructions sent to them, 201 ibid 51. The Patents for the German
Congregation, 202 154 52. Injunctions given by Bishop Ridley, 205 153 53.
Oglethorp's Submission and Profession of his Faith, 207 161 54. Dr. Smith's
Letter to Cranmer, 208 ibid 55. Articles of Religion set out by the King's
Authority, 209 166 56. Instructions to the President of the North, 221 217 57.
Instructions to Sir Rich. Morison, sent to the Emperor, 229 220 58. A Letter of
Ridley's, setting out the Sins of that Time, 231 227 59. Ridley's Letter to the
Protector, concerning the Visitation of the University of Cambridg, 232 120 60.
The Protectors Answer to the former Letter, 234 ibid 61. A Letter of Cranmer's
to King Henry, concerning a further Reformation, and against Sacrilege, 236 196

BOOK II.
1. THe Proclamation of L. Jane Gray's Title to the Crown, 239 235 2. A Letter
writ by Q. Katherine to her Daughter, 242 240 3. A humble Submission made by Q.
Mary to her Father, 243 241 4. Another of the same strain confirming the
former, 245 ibid 5. Another to the same purpose, 246 ibid 6. A Letter written
by her to Cromwell, containing a full submission in all Points of Religion to
her Fathers pleasure, 247 ibid 7. A Letter of Bonner's, upon his being restored
to his Bishopric, 248 248 8. Cranmer's Manifesto against the Mass, 249 ibid 9.
The Conclusions of Instructions sent by Car. Pool to the Queen, 250 260 10.
Injunctions sent from the Queen to the Bishops, 252 274 11. A Commission to
turn out some of the Reformed Bishops, 256 ibid 12. Another Commission for
turning out the rest of them, 257 ibid 13. Bonner's Certificate that Bishop
Scory had put away his Wife, 258 275 14. The Queen's Letter to the Justices of
Peace in Norfolk, 259 288 15. The Articles of Bonner's Visitation, 263 289 16.
Address made by the lower, to the upper House of Convocation, 266 295 17. A
Bull making Card. Beaton, Legate a Latere, in Scotland, 271 292 18. A Letter of
the Queen's, recommending Card. Pool to the Popedom, 282 311 19. Directions
sent to the Justices in Peace of Norfolk, 283 ibid 20. A Letter from the King
and Queen, requiring Bonner to go on in the prosecution of Heretics, 285 312
21. Sir T. Mores Letter to Cromwell, concerning the Nun of Kent, 286 316 22.
Directions of the Queen's to the Council, touching the Reformation of the
Church, 292 317 23. Injunctions given by Latimer to the Prior of St. Mary's,
293 319 24. A Letter of Ann Boleyn's to Gardener, 294 321 25. The Office of
Consecrating the Cramp-Rings, 295 ibid 26. Letter of Gardiner's to K. Henry,
concerning his Divorce, 297 ibid 27. The Writ for the burning of Cranmer, 300
334 28. A Commission to Bonner, and others, to raze Records, 301 341 29.
Cromwell's Commission to be the King's Vicegerent, 303 ibid 30. A Letter of the
Monks of Glassenbury, for raising that Abbey, 306 342 31. A Letter of Carne's
from Rome, 307 344 32. A Commission for a severe way of proceeding against all
suspect of Heresy, 311 347 33. A Letter of the Councils, expressing their
Jealousies of the Lady Elizabeth, 314 351 34. Letter from Carn, concerning the
suspension of Pool's Legation, 315 353 35. The Appeal of Archbishop Chichely to
a General Council, from the Pope's Sentence, 321 ibid 36. Instructions
representing the State of the Nation to King Philip, after the loss of Calais,
324 360 37. Sir T. Pope's Letter concerning the L. Elizabeth's Answer to the
Proposition of Marriage sent her by the K. of Sweden, 325 361

BOOK III.
1. THe Device for alteration of Religion in the first Year of Q. Elizabeth's
Reign, offered to Secretary Cecil, 327 377 2. Dr. Sandys's Letter to Dr.
Parker, concerning the Proceedings in Parliament, 332 386 3. The first
Proposition upon which the Papists and Protestants disputed in Westminster
Abbey; with the Arguments which the Reformed Divines made upon it, 333 390 4.
The Answer which D. Cole made to the former Proposition, 338 389 5. A
Declaration made by the Council concerning the Conference, 345 392 6. An
Address made by some Bishops and Divines to the Queen, against the use of
Images, 348 397 7. The High Commission for the Province of York, 350 400 8. Ten
Letters written to and by Dr. Parker, concerning his Promotion to the Sea of
Canterbury, 353 401 9. The Instrument of his Consecration, 363 404 10. An Order
for the Translating of the Bible, 366 406 11. A Profession of Religion made in
all Churches by the Clergy, 365 405 12. Sir Walter Mildmay's Opinion
concerning the keeping of the Queen of Scots, 369 417 12. A Letter of the E. of
Leicester's touching the same thing, 373 ibid 13. The Bull of P. Pius the 5th,
deposing Q. Elizabeth, 377 418 An Appendix concerning some of the Errors and
Falsehoods in Sanders's Book of the English Schism, 383 Some Mistakes in the
former Volume, 410

ERRATA.
PAge 9. line penult, after be, read not. P. 13. l. 17. ever, 1. every. P. 15.
l. 42. M^^b^^gs, r. Marbridge. P. 72. l. 42. muta, r. imbuta. P. 74. l. 32.
tenetis, r. tenentem. P. 75. l. 8. ^^im qui, r. eum qui. P. 91. l. 28. ac, r.
ad. duratutatum, r. duraturas. P. 110. l. 1. pracesse, r. praesse. l. 7. hunc,
r. nunc. l. 27. intemur, r. nit^mu^. l. 50. proximus, r. proximis. l. ult.
proprior, r. propior. P. 115. l. antepenult. ^, r. ac. P. 122. l. 26. summa, r.
summis. l. 36. panam, r. Perram. P. 128. l. 3. down. r. undone. l. 29. done, r.
undone. l. 39. injure, r. incur. P. 156. l* ^8. Devine, r. Domine. p. 167. l.
29. after Flesh, r. manutenuisse. P. 168. l. 19. resipiscisse, r. resipuisse.
P. 173. l. 17. pl^no, r. plano. l. 20. saying, r. saving. l. 21. in, r. of. P.
178. l. 14. after should, r. not. P. 197. l. 18. after there, r. which. Page
199. l. 44. least, r. last. Page 200. l. 27. after ^^, r. or. Page 209. l. 9.
Ghost, r. Trinity. Page 214. l. 25. after be, r. not. Page 217. l. 14. dele
not. l. ult. reproved, r. approved. P. 220. l. 13. after Bodies, r. nor
s^^podlily. P. 237. l. 17. sent, r. was to se^^^. P. 248. l. 13, 14. Leekmore,
r. Leechmore, l. 15. asserting, r. ascertaining. P. 251. l. 34. to be, r. took.
l. 40. before outwardly, r.; P. 256. l. 29. vocend, r. vocant. P. 258. l. 32.
Christians, r. Christiana. P. 263. l. 34. dele and. P. 299. l. 22. Judice, r.
Judicem. P. 320. l. 15. after does, r. not. P. 321. l. 39. ordinem, r. ordine.
P. 321. l. 21. nullum, r. nulla. l. 29. after contumaciam, put, and dele, after
causa. l. 43. at, r. ac. P. 342. l. 44. before lawful, r. was it. P. 343. l.
33. after all, r. art. p. 366. Margent, Bolase, r. Borlase. p. 378. Marg.
sentia, r. sententia. p. 396. l. 20. Worchester, r. Winchester. p. 398. l. 44.
interrupted, r. uninterrupted. p. 411. l. 8. dele (). l. 28. after Heir, r.
apparent. l. 33. dele afterward. p. 411. Marg. l. 4. to l. 16. and from
bottom. p. 412. l. 19. Winter is called Wolsey's Bastard, r. Campegioe's Son is
called his Bastard, l. 36. had, r. has. p. 412. Marg. l. 1. 14. r. 20. Marg. l.
11. 15. r. 32. p. 413. l. 32. would, r. could. l. 44. put out, r. written. p.
414. l. 28. Mark S^^ton, r. K. Henry. Marg. l. 3. for 203, r. 202. Marg. l. 4.
226, r. 206. p. 415. Marg. 297. l. 16. add fr. bottom. p. 416. l. 19.
Frideswoide, r. Frideswide. P. 2. Contents, Numb. 52. r. Injunctions given by
Bishop Ridley, 205 158. P. 3. Contents, Numb. 15. r. The Articles of Bonner 's
Visitation, 260.

BOOKS printed for, and sold by Richard Chiswell.
FOLIO.
SPeed's Maps and Geography of Great Britain and Ireland, and of Foreign
Parts. Dr. Cave's Lives of the Primitive Fathers. Dr. Cary's Chronological
Account of Ancient Time. Wanly's Wonders of the little Word, or History of Man.
Sir Tho. Herbert's Travels into Persia, etc. Holyoak's large Dictionary, Latin
and English. Sir Rich. Baker's Chronicle of England. Causin's Holy Court.
Wilson's Complete Christian Dictionary. Bishop Wilkin's Real Character, or
Philosophical Language. Pharmacopoeia Regalis Collegii Medicorum Londinensis.
Judge Jone's Reports of Cases in Common Law. Judge Vaughan's Reports of Cases in
Common Law. Cave Tabulae Ecclesiasticorum Scriptorum. Hobbes's Leviathan. Lord
Bacon's Advancement of Learning. Bishop Taylor's Sermons. Sir Will. Dugdale's
Baronage of England, in two Vol. R^^anolli Bibliotheca Theologica, in three
Vol. Lord Cook's Reports in French. -- Idem. in English. Judge Yelverton's
Reports. Sir John Davies's Reports. Herod^ti Historia, Gr. Lat. Accesserunt
huic editione, Stephani Apologia pro Herod^to, item Chronologia, Tabula
Geograph. Necnon variae lectiones and Notae ex MSS. and Antiq. Script. 1679.
QVARTO.
THe several Informations exhibited to the Committee, appointed by Parliament,
to enquire into the burning of London. 1667. Godwin's Roman Antiquities. Dr.
Littleton's Dictionary. Bishop Nicholson on the Church Catechism. The Complete
Clerk. Presidents of all Sorts. Dr. Pierce on God's Decrees. History of the
late Wars of New England. Dr. Outram de Sacrificiis. Bishop Taylor's Disswasive
from Popery. Garissolius de Chr. Mediatore. Corpus Confessionum Fidei. Spanhemi
Dubia Evangelica, 2 Vol. Dr. Gibb's Sermons. Parkeri Disputationes de Deo.
Description and History of the Future State of Europe. 1 s. Fowler's Defense of
the Design of Christianity, against John Bunyan. 1 s. Lyford's Discovery of the
Errors and Heresies of the Times. 4 s. Dr. Sherlock's Visitation Sermon at
Warrington. Dr. West'o Assize-Sermon at Dorchester, 1671. Mr. Dodson's Sermon
at Lady Farmers Funeral, 1670. 8 d. Directions for Improvement of Barren Land.
Culverwel's Discourse of the Light of Nature. Sheppard's Grand Abridgment of
the Law, in English, 3 Vol. Swinburn of Wills and Testaments. Aston's Entries.
Dr. Meric Casaubon's Letter to Dr. Du Moulin, about Experimental Philosophy.
Lord Hollis's Relation of the Unjust Accusation of certain French Gentlemen
charged with a Robbery, 1671. The Magistrates Authority asserted, in a Sermon
by James Paston.
OCTAVO.
THe Posing of the Parts of Speech. Elborow's Rationale upon the English
Service. Burnet's Vindication of the Ordination of the Church of England.
Winchester Phrases. Bishop Wilkins of Natural Religion. Hardcastle's Christian
Geography and Arithmetic. Ashton's Apology for the Honors and Revenues of the
Clergy. Lord Hollis's Vindication of the Judicature of the House of Peers in
the case of Skinner. -- Jurisdiction of the House of Peers in case of Appeals.
-- Jurisdiction of the House of Peers in case of Impositions. -- Letter about
the Bishops Vote in Capital Cases. Zenophont. Cyropaedia. Gr. Lat. Duporti
Versio Psalmorum Graeca. Grew's Idea of Philological Hist. continued on Roots.
Wingates Abridgment of the Statutes in force. Fitzherberts Natura Brevium.
Judge Hales's Pleas of the Crown. Wilkinsons Office of Sheriffs. Lord Cook's
Complete Coppy-holder. Dialogue in English betwixt a Doctor and a Student,
concerning the Laws of England. Finch of the Law. Spaniards Conspiracy against
the State of Venice. Batei Elenchus motuum nuperorum in Anglia. Brown's Religio
Medici. Several Tracts of Mr. Hales of Eaton. Bishop Sanderson's Life. Dr.
Tillotson's Rule of Faith. Gregorii Etymologicon Parvum. Pasoris Grammatica
Grae. Novi Testamenti, 4 s. Rossei Gnomologicon Poeticum. Gouge's word to
Saints and Sinners. Dr. Simpson's Chemical Anatomy of the Yorkshire Spaws; with
a Discourse of the Original of Hot-Springs and other Fountains, and a
Vindication of Chemical Physic, 3 s. -- His Hydrological Essays; with an
Account of the Allum-works at Whitby, and some Observations about the Jaundice,
1 s. 6 d. Dr. Cox's Discourse of the Interest of the Patient, in reference to
Physic and Physicians, and Detection of the Abuses practiced by the
Apothecaries, 1 s. 6 d. Organon Salutis: Or an Instrument to cleanse the
Stomach: with diverse New Experiments of the Virtue of Tobacco and Coffee: To
which is prefixed a Preface of Sir Hen. Blunt, 1 s. Dr. Cave's Primitive
Christianity, in three Parts. A Discourse of the Nature, Ends, and Difference
of the two Covenaants, 1672. 2 s. Ignatius Fuller's Sermons of Peace and
Holiness, 1672. 1 s. 6 d. Lipsius's Discourse of Constancy, 2 s. 6 d. Willis's
Anglicisms Latinized 3 s. 6. d. Buckler of State and Justice against France's
Designs of Universal Monarchy, 1673. A free Conference touching the Present
State of England at home and abroad, in order to the Designs of France, 1673. 1
s. Bishop Tailor of Confirmation, 1 s. 6 d. Mystery of Jesuitism, third and
fourth Parts. 2 s. 6 d. Sanderson Judicium Academ. Oxoniens. de Solenni Liga, 6
d. Dr. Samway's Unreasonableness of the Romanists, 1 s. 6 d. Record of Urines,
1 s. Dr. Ashton's Cases of Scandal and Persecution, 1674. 1 s.
DUODECIMO.
FArnabii Index Rhetoricus. Ciceronis Orationes selectae. Hodder 's
Arithmetic. Horatius Menellii. Sands Ovid Metamorphosis. Grotius de Veritate
Religionis Christianae. Bishop Hacket 's Christian Consolations. Littleton 's
Tenures in French and English.
VICESIMO QUARTO.
LVcius Florus. Lat. -- -- Id. French. 16o Crumbs of Comfort. Valentine's
Devotions. Guide to Heaven.
Books lately Printed.
GVillim's Display of Herauldry with large Additions. -- Dr. Burnet's History
of the Reformation of the Church of Engl. Fol. in a Vollums. Dr. Burlace's
History of the Irish Rebellion. Mr. John Jenison's Additional Narrative about
the Plot. Cole's Latin and English Dictionary with large Additions, 1679.
William's Sermon before the L. Mayor, October. 12. 1679. -- History of the
Gunpowder Treason. -- Impartial Consideration of the Speeches of the Five
Jesuits Executed for Treason. Fol. Trials of the Regicides, 8o Dangerfield's
Narrative of the Pretended Presbyterian Plot. Mr. Jam. Brome's two Fast
Sermons. The Famine of the Word threatened to Israel, and God's Call to Weeping
and Mourning. Account of the Public Affairs in Ireland, since the Discovery of
the late Plot. Dr. Jane's Fast Sermon before the House of Commons, April 11.
1679. Dr. Burnet's Letter written upon the Discovery of the late Plot. 4 to. --
His Translation of the Decree made at Rome, March 2. 1679. condemning some
Opinions of the Jesuits, and other Casuists. 4 to. -- His Relation of the
Massacre of the Protestants in France. 4 to. Mr. John James's Visitation
Sermon, April 9. 1671. 4 to. Mr. John Cave's Fast Sermon, on Jan. 30. 1679. 4
to. -- His Assize Sermon at Leicester, July 31. 79. 4 to. Certain Genuine
Remains of the Lord Bacon, in Arguments Civil, Moral, Natural, Medical,
Theological, and Bibliographical; with a large account of all his Works, by Dr.
Tho. Tenison. 8 to. Dr. Puller's Discourse of the Moderation of the Church of
England. 8 to. The Original of all the Plots in Christendom; with the Danger
and Remedy of Schism. By Dr. William Sawel, Master of Jesus College Cambridg. 8
o. A Discourse of Supreme Power and Common Right. By a Person of Quality. 8 o.
Dr. Edw. Bagshaw's Discourse upon Select Texts against the Papist and Socinian.
8 o. Mr. Rushworth's Historical Collections: The second Volume. Fol. -- His
large and exact Account of the Trial of the Earl of Strafford; with all the
Circumstances preliminary to, concomitant with, and subsequent upon the same,
to his Death. Fol. Remarques relating to the State of the Church of the three
first Centuries, wherein are interspersed Animadversions on a Book, called, A
View of Antiquity; By J. H. written by A. S. Speculum Baxterianum, or Baxter
against Baxter. 4 to. The Country-Mans Physician. For the use of such as live
far from Cities, or Market Towns. 8 o. Sir Rob. Filmer's Patriarchae. 8 o.
Juvenile Rambles of Tho. Dangerfield. 8 o. Dr. Burnet's Sermon before the Lord
Mayor, upon the Fast for the Fire. 1680. 4 to. -- His Account of the Conversion
and Persecutions of Eve Cohan, a Person of Quality of the Jewish Religion,
lately Baptized a Christian. 4 o. -- His Fast Sermon before the House of
Commons, December. 22. 1680. -- His Fast-Sermon before the Aldermen and Liveries
of the City of London, on the 30th of January, 1680. New England Psalms. 12o.
An Apology for a Treatise of Humane Reason. By Ma. Clifford Esquire; 12o. The Laws
of this Realm concerning Jesuits, Seminary Priests, Recusants, the Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance explained, by diverse Judgments and Resolutions of the
Judges; with other Observations thereupon. By William Cawley Esquire; Fol. Bishop
Sanderson's Sermons. Fol. Fowlis's History of Romish Conspiracies, Treasons,
and Usurpations, 1681. Fol. The Tything-Table. 4 to. Markham's Perfect
Horseman, 1681. 8o. The History of the Powder Treason; with a Vindication of
the Proceedings and Matters relating thereunto, from the Exceptions made
against it, and more particularly of late Years; by the Author of the Catholic
Apology, and others. To which is added, A Parallel betwixt That and the present
Plot, 1681. 4 to. The Counter-Scuffle. 4 to. Mr. Langford's plain and useful
Instructions, to raise all sorts of Fruit Trees that prosper in England, in
that method and order that every thing is to be done in: Together with the best
Directions for making Liquors of the several sorts of Fruit, 1681. 8o.
FINIS.

