The CASE OF THE CLOTHIERS OF GLOUCESTER-SHIRE AGAINST THE AULNAGERS, HUMBLY
OFFERED To the Honorable HOUSE of COMMONS IN PARLIAMENT ASSEMBLED.
THE Aulnagers have ever since about Christmas was Two Years, demanded of the
Clothiers 9 d. per Cloth for Subsidy and Aulnage of Clothes commonly called
Gloucester-shire Whites and Reds, and other Clothes of the very same Dimensions
and Make; for which never more than 6 d. per Cloth was till about that time
paid, or so much as demanded: and though the Clothiers have constantly ever
since Christmas was Two Years paid or offered to pay 6 d. per Cloth, as
formerly, yet the Aulnagers have caused great quantities of their Clothes of
very great Value, to be seized as forfeited, and many times detained them Three
or Four Months; and sometimes they open them, and thereby do them great damage;
whereby the Clothiers commonly lose their Sale (the Merchants looking upon the
Clothes that are opened, as returned Goods) and this is generally done after
the usual Seals are fixed on their Clothes, and the Duty of 6 d. paid.

The Aulnagers (to color this their Innovation) pretend that about the said
Christmas was Two Years they discovered that these Clothes were 44 yards long
and upwards, and had a Forrel and the Makers Mark in the middle; by which the
Clothes are cut, and then they become Two entire Clothes, each of which they
say by Law ought to pay 4 d. Subsidy, and a halfpenny Aulnage, that is 9 d.
each Cloth; for non-payment whereof they make Seizures as aforesaid.

An Answer to which Suggestion, first as to the Fact, and next as to what the
Law is in this Point, will make a full State of the Case.

These Clothes do contain when Wet generally (and very seldom otherwise)
between 34 and 36 yards in length, and when Strained are between 42 and 44
yards long, and are in breadth when Wet, about 5 quarters and a half, and when
Strained are 6 quarters broad; and that the said Forrel has always been used
to be made cross the middle of these Clothes breadth-wayes, as now it is, and
was never known to have been left out; which Forrel is and has always used to
be made by the Direction and for the Convenience of the Merchants, both for the
more commodious pressing and making up of the Clothes and likewise, that if
they be minded to die one half of a Cloth of one Color, and the other half of
another Color (as they very frequently do) they may the more conveniently part
the said Clothes into halfs; But notwithstanding the Forrel, yet the Pieces of
the length aforesaid, have been always reputed to make, and do both of them
make, but One single, entire Cloth; and have always, till the said Christmas
was Two years, paid 6 d. per Cloth as such and no more.

And that the Aulnagers have but newly discovered this Forrel is improbable,
one of them having dealt in these Clothes several years himself, and the Forrel
having been always used to be made; And why this Forrel should make them Two
Clothes now, when it never did so before the said Christmas was Two years, no
reason can be given.

And that it is not the quantity of these Clothes (which has always been about
the same it now is) but only this Forrel, that can be pretended to countenance
this New Incroachment, appears in this, That in Worcestershire there are
Clothes made of 40 yards length and upwards, when Wet, and 6 quarters breadth,
which because they have no Forrel in the middle, the Aulnagers allow to be but
Single Clothes, and demand but 6 d. per Cloth for them, though larger than
Gloucester-shire Whites and Reds, which are but between 34 and 36 yards long,
when Wet, and 5 quarters and a half broad, as aforesaid: so that this of it
self is a sufficient Demonstration, That no more than 6 d. per Cloth is due:
But besides, as to the Matter of Law,

I. We hope, That these Clothes being of different lengths and breadths from
what was ever prescribed for Gloucester-shire Whites and Reds by any Statute,
will be taken to be New Drapery, for which the Duty is payable by Weight, and
not for Statute Clothes: And if so, then these Clothes being about 72 l. weight
a-piece, and 4 d. halfpenny being the Duty and Subsidy for 64 l. Weight, 6 d.
is at that rate above the full Duty. And the Subsidy being payable by Weight,
there would be no need of Opening the Clothes after they are made up; and so
the inconvenience that comes by Opening the Clothes will be prevented.

II. Secondly, Admitting the Subsidy for these Clothes be not to be paid by
Weight, but by Measure, yet we insist upon it for Law, That they ought to pay
according to Measure when they are Wet, and not when they are Strained and Dry:
And the Case as to this Point stands upon the Statute of 4 Jac. 1. and 2. which
appoints the Lengths and Breadths of several Clothes, and thorow-out the whole
Statute speaks of Lengths and Breadths when Wet, and of the Weight only when
Dry; and the Measure of no Cloth is there mentioned to be taken, when Dry; and
particularly Sect. 5. does Enact, That Gloucester-shire Whites and Reds shall
contain in length, being Wet, between 26 and 28 yards, and in breadth 6
quarters and a half: And then comes Sect. 24. of the same Statute, and says,
That forasmuch as of late it has been reputed, That a Broad Woollen Cloth
should and ought to consist of 24 such Yards and Inches as aforesaid, and not
above; and Payments and other Duties have been accordingly demanded and paid
for the same: Be it therefore Enacted, That if any Broad Woollen Cloth be made
longer or shorter than 24 such said Yards and Inches, all Duties and Payments
hereafter to be made for the same, shall be demanded and made proportionable,
according to the Rate and Proportion of 24 such said Yards and Inches for a
Whole Cloth, and not otherwise. Now if the Measure be to be taken when the
Clothes are wet, then 6 d. would be the full Duty and Subsidy for 32 Yards of
the Statute Breadth, that is 6 quarters and a half broad; and more than the
full Duty, according to that Rate and Proportion for Clothes that are but 5
quarters and a half broad, though they are between 34 and 36 Yards long when
Wet, as the Gloucestershire Whites and Reds are.

III. Thirdly, Admitting the Subsidy ought to be paid by Measure of the Clothes
when Dry and Strained, and not when Wet, (though the Statute is plain for Wet
Measure) yet Payments being to be made according to the Rate and Proportion of
24 such Yards and Inches as the Statute specifies: And the Statute speaking as
to Gloucestershire Whites and Reds of Clothes of the Breadth of 6 quarters and
a half when Wet; we think we ought according to that Proportion and Rate, to be
allowed a quarter in every Yard, the Clothes Manufactur'd by us being when Wet
but 5 quarters and a half broad; and so proportionably when Dry and Strained.

There has been a Special Verdict found in the Exchequer, and Judgment upon it,
without ever being argued by the Clothiers Council; but it is not thereby
determined what the Clothiers ought to pay: For the Special Verdict finds the
particular Clothes, that were then seized, to be 44 yards a-piece in length,
and that 6 d. had been paid for each Cloth; and then concludes specially, that
if the Duty ought by Law to be paid by Weight, Then the Clothes were duly
fealed and the Duty paid: But if by Law the Duty be to be paid by Measure, Then
they find that the Clothes were not duly sealed, nor the Duty paid. So that the
Judgment upon this Verdict does not ascertain the Duty, but only adjudgeth the
Clothes to be forfeited.


