A Just Rebuke to the Quakers Insolent Behavior, in their Two Books, i. e. A
Just Censure, etc. the other, A Sober Reply, etc. both presented to some
Members of Parliament. Also a Dialogue between a Civilian and a Quaker.
Christian Reader,
THE first of these Books is Entitled, A Just Censure of Francis Bugg 's
Address to the Parliament: This shows their Impudence, or want of good Manners
at least; had they Confuted my Arguments, or Convicted me of one False
Quotation, thereby to Misrepresent them, they, in Justice to themselves, might
have Confuted what was False, either in Fact or Argument: But, not being able
so to do, for them, in a Magisterial way, to Censure my Speech to the
Parliament, and Address to my Superiors, for which I have (as an Englishman) as
good Right as they, and every way equally Privileged with them, this was in
them both Bold and Presumptuous, as well as want of Wisdom, not to stay their
Censure until the Parliament had past theirs, whose Right it was, if they had
seen Cause, and to whom I ought to have submitted, as in Duty bound; but no
Symptoms of that did appear, but Pride (as it is written) goes before
Destruction, and a Haughty Mind before a Fall. And as it is impossible for a
Blackamoor to change his Skin, or a Leopard his Spots, so is it impossible for
the Quakers to cease their Insulting and Domineering Method; as if they may
present their Books and Papers Fifty Years together, and none may Confront them.

They begin with the Man; he has angered them, by discovering their Errors and
Blasphemies; they go on with Personal Reflections against him, which affects
not the Cause, and which he has long since repeatedly Answered in Print; but
still the Man, the Man, he is an Ill Man, say they; what! Worse than the Quaker
Teachers? No sure; for if he were, believe me, he were an Ill Man indeed; for I
think there is not worse than some of them are, and have been, even in Newgate,
notwithstanding their high pretense to a Sinless Perfection, and Infallibility
of Judgment; many of whom have been highly guilty of Cheating, Couzening, Lying
and Defrauding, of Drunkenness, Whoredom, Felony, and Treason, Condemned both
by the Law of God and Man; and some of them Hanged for their (...) Merit; some
Instances you will find in the Preface to (...) Pilgrim's Progress, etc. p.
266, to p. 284. p. 329. ibid. (...) as I find no Name to the Books, so I find
no denial of Matter of Fact to Mod. Def. Nihil dicit is Confessing of Judgment,
and I shall wait patiently to see the Execution, and thereupon I shall say the
less in Answer to it, since as it plainly appears, that the Quakers does not
deny Matter of Fact, because in truth they could not; so will their Silence be
taken for a tacit Confession of the Charge.

But say they, p. 40. For as we cannot quit any Point of our own [Books] so we
abhor every one of them as given by him, [Fran Bugg]. The English of which is,
They cannot quit any one Error, any one Blasphemy, etc. in their own Books,
though they abhor them in my Books; that is, of my Reciting, of my Transcribing,
of my Reprinting; Oh! this they abhor with great detestation: And why? Because
I seldom do it without using some Arguments to discover their Hypocrisies;
this, yea, this enrages them; for this they are angry: And therefore I would
desire the Quakers to Reprint G. Whitehead's Book, Ishmael and his Mother cast
out, etc. where in p. 10. is this passage, viz. And here thy Antiquity, and thy
Reasons, and the Three Persons which thou Dreams of, which thou [i.e. Mr.
Townsend the Minister] would divide out of one like a Conjurer, are ALL denied,
and thou SHUT UP with THEM in PERPETUAL DARKNESS for the LAKE and the PIT, etc.
This indeed is their Ancient Principles, and they cannot quit them, or retract
them in their own Books, but tell us their Principles are now no other than
they were then, only they can word the Matter otherwise: I grant they hate,
abhor and detest these things of my reciting, etc. But as they lie snug in
their own Books, they read them in their own Meetings; they are sweet Morsels
of Quaker Consolation; read A Modest Defense, etc. Part II. p. 22. for more of
this, where I have Reprinted their whole Book Ishmael, etc. to avoid their
Cavils of Curtailing and Splitting Sentences, as well as to show Quakerism in
its Native Complexion.

In their Sober Reply, etc. p. 11, 14, 15. in Answer to the Norfolk and Suffolk
Petition, etc. they say, To the first we say, It is strange you should fear the
Christian Religion should be polluted by the Quakers, who, of all that go under
the Protestant Name, are generally acknowledged to be furthest removed from,
and most averse to Popish Superstition -- so we always offer our Doctrines and
Principles to be examined by the Scriptures. To the second we say, -- They
desire they may Enjoy their wisht-for Happiness of a peaceful Life; we envy it
them not; but God forbid they should swim into it through a Sea of Innocent
Blood, etc.

1. In Answer to the first, That the Quakers are furthest removed from Popish
Superstition than any that go under the Name Protestant, this I deny in their
Name, and have made it appear from their Doctrine in their Books, as in the
Preface to my Pilgrim's Progress, 2d Edit. etc. and that from these following
Instances, in which they do not hold Negative Doctrines from the Romish Church;
they only differ which of them twain is the true Church, to which these
Qualifications are duly attributed, etc.

I. That the Quakers are the One Only Church of Christ. II. They agree in the
Doctrine of Infallibility. III. And that none can be Saved out of the True
Church. IV. They both agree in the Doctrine of Miracles. V. Also about the
Judge of all Controversies in Matters of Faith. VI. They agree in their
Contempt of the Protestant Ministers. VII. They agree in their Contempt of the
Holy Scriptures. VIII. They agree in the Authority of their Unwritten
Traditions. IX. Also in the Pope of Rome, and Pope Fox. X. They agree in their
Idolatry to each Pope.
2. That they always desired their Doctrine and Principles might be examined by
the Scriptures; this is false in Fact, when they did in the Face of the World
deny it to the Norfolk Clergy at West-Dereham, to George Keith at Turners-Hall,
being thereunto Invited Four Years one after another; to my Self at
Milden-Hall. See New Rome Unmasked, etc. p. 1, to p. 9. as also at several
other times, notwithstanding their false and bold denial. A Just Censure, etc.
p. 7.

3. They desire they may Enjoy their wished for Happiness of a Peaceful Life. We
envy it them not, (say the Quakers) but God forbid they should swim into it
through a Sea of Innocent Blood.

If it be to swim through a Sea of Blood, only to desire that the Quakers
Errors and Blasphemous Principles, (which contemn the Scriptures, deny that
Jesus of Nazareth who suffered on the Cross to be the Son of God, and damn to
the Pit of Hell the Ever-blessed Trinity) should lie Censured and Condemned,
and their Books, that so teach, Burnt by the Common Hangman, then indeed they
are guilty: But if this be not Persecution, but agreeable to the Law of the
Land, the Votes of Parliament, His Majesty's Royal Will and Pleasure declared
in his Proclamation, then they are not guilty of Persecution, nor of running
through a Sea of Innocent Blood in the Defense of Christianity, as the Quakers
would impose upon their Readers, to avoid the dint of an Examination,
notwithstanding their pretense. A Reply, etc. p. 11. We are ready to undertake
the Proof of every Doctrine we hold by and from the Scriptures.

I have read in St. Jude's Epistle, that as in ver. 3. he exhorts us to contend
earnestly for the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints, so, ver. 9.
That Michael the Archangel when contending with the Devil, he disputed about
the Body of Moses, durst not bring against him a Railing Accusation, but said,
The Lord rebuke thee. And now I am Disputing with the Quakers, his chiefest
Emissaries, and immediate Servants, I hope I shall not bring a Railing
Accusation: But as it is Natural for a Worm when trodden upon to turn again,
and for an Englishman to set the Saddle on the right Horse, so I hope I shall
as long as Life last, especially when St. Jude has so rightly described the
Men, as ver. 8. saying, Likewise also these filthy Dreamers defile the Flesh,
despise Dominions, and speak evil of Dignities, as I have showed in my Modest
Defense, etc. Part I. p. 10, 13, 14, 15.

But say they, A just Censure, etc. p 1, 2. The Man -- he and his Abetters are
ill Men. P. 11. It were greatly to be wished, that these Zealots would turn
their Spleen against Sin -- what fair Quarter all sorts of Enormities meet with
from some of them.

But that none allow fairer Quarter to Vice and Immorality than the Quakers,
and Leaders of the Quaker Church, is plain. See Pilgrim's Progress, etc. p.
244, to p 284 And one Reason I take to be is their own Guilt, which would make
their Reproofs sound like the Kettle calling the Pot Black. A --; and therefore
it is the Inconsideration of their Hearers that supports the Credit of such
Vicious Hypocrites, who are upheld by their Character rather than their Virtue,
and are become much less loved than feared; for I demand an Instance of any one
Book wrote against their Vicious Teachers and Hearers, provided they keep Fox's
Commandments about the Hat, Thee, Thou, not Marrying or Burying with us, and
the like unwritten Traditions; but I can give you an Account of Hundreds of
Books wrote against such as dissent from them, and conform themselves to the
Church of England, calling them Apostates, Betraying Judasses, Malicious
Informers, Renegadoes, Beasts, Dogs, Wolves, Children of the Devil, Enemies of
all Righteousness, Devils Incarnate, and a Hundred other Names. And they call
the Public Ministry, for endeavoring their Conversion, Witches, Devils,
Thieves, Robbers, Antichrists, the Bane of Soul and Body, threatening them with
all direful Vengeance; and this, if rightly considered, is not the least part
of their Insolent Behavior to the Government.

Now whether your Just Censure, etc. was in Answer to my former Sheet, with a
Scheme of your Yearly Meeting; or to my Modest Reply, etc. or both, since it is
said to be a Just Censure of my Address to the Parliament, and I presented none
under that Title, I will not determine, since it seems to the first, though given
in since my last; yet I cannot but admire at your Impudence in your Reply, etc.
in Answer to my Modest Defense, where you say, p. 7. But sure we are, and
always ready to make it appear, that neither are our Books Blasphemous, nor our
Principles Pernicious. Again, p. 11. We are ready to undertake the Proof of
every Doctrine we hold by and from the Scriptures; this is False in Fact, and a
Notorious Lie in the Face of the Government. First, In that you knew I had
presented to the Parliament the Reprint of an entire Book of yours, styled,
Ishmael, etc. which is both pernicious to the Fundamentals of Christianity, and
horridly Blasphemous. Secondly, In refusing to prove any one Doctrine you held
at West Dereham. Thirdly, In refusing to meet Geo. Keith upon any of his
Invitations.

Again, p. 10. We sincerely own all that is written in the Scriptures
concerning Christ, respecting his Conception, Birth, Life, Miracles, Doctrines,
Death, Burial, Resurrection, Ascension, Mediation, and Future Coming to
Judgment, when in reality you own not one of those Articles rightly, nor as all
Orthodox Christians own them, as G. Keith's 4th Narrative, has from your Books
made evidently to appear.

Again, p. 6. ibid. That we assume Rules of Discipline in Church Matters, they
are for our selves only, Powers in Matters of Religion, for and among our
selves only. Nor (say they) do we see how those Acts could be truly called Acts
of Toleration to Dissenters, if they did not tolerate each sort of Dissenters,
to assume Rules of Discipline, Power in Matters of Religion, and Forms of
Church Government for and amongst themselves, etc. Again, p. 11. And if it
relate to Religious Performances, as it seems to do by the next words, i. e.
having their Monthly, Quarterly, and Yearly Meetings, etc. From whence it is
plain, that these Monthly, Quarterly, and Yearly Meetings, then when it suit
their turn they own to be Religious Meetings, and as such tolerated by the Act
of Toleration; and without allowing them, the Act could not be called An Act of
Toleration: Yet to show that Liars had need to have good Memories, they, in
Contradiction to themselves, when pinched from another Quarter for keeping
their Doors Locked, Barred, or Guarded, to prevent Inspection, they in their
Just Censure, etc. p. 26. confess, saying, These Meetings are not intended for
Worship; what then? What? For Government, and to assume Rules of Discipline,
and Forms of Church Government, which is more than the Established Church can
legally do without His Majesty's License, and therefore worse and more
dangerous, their Doors being kept Locked or Guarded; and expressly against the
very Act of Toleration, in which is this Clause, viz.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
Assembly of Persons, Dissenting from the Church of England, shall be had in any
place for Religious Worship, [and such only the Act tolerates] with Doors
Locked, Barred, or Bolted, during any time of such meeting together, all and
every such Person or Persons, that shall come to, and be at, such Meeting,
shall not receive any Benefit from this Law, but be liable to all the Pains and
Penalties of all the aforesaid Laws receited in this Act, for such their
Meeting, notwithstanding his taking the Oaths, and his making and subscribing
the Declaration.

And likewise, as the Learned in the Law say, Such Meetings with Doors Locked,
etc. to assume Rules of Discipline, and Forms of Church Government, are
expressly against the Rights of Parliaments, the King's Prerogative, and Liberty
of the Subject, and these Statutes following, viz. 28 H. 8. c. 19.21. 27 H. 8.
c. 15. 37 H. 8. c. 17. 3 Ed. 6. c. 10, 11. 1 Eliz. c. 12. 5 Eliz. c. 1. 1 Ed.
6. c. 2. 8 Eliz. c. 1. 1 K. W. and Q. M. Magna Charta c. 29. Pet. Right. and
that such as so meet, run themselves into a Praemunire: But the Quakers being a
united Confederacy, a Body Politic Incorporated, and having a Fund or Common
Bank to support and propagate their Principles, they are too powerful for any
single Person; and thereupon the Government is prayed to take it into their
Consideration: And that these Meetings are not within the Act of Toleration,
but obnoxious to the Laws, and of a dangerous Consequence, I have more fully
shown in my Pilgrim's Progress from Quakerism to Christianity, etc. 2d Edit. in
Octavo, wherein I have more largely set forth their Monthly, Quarterly,
Second-day, Six week and Yearly Meetings, showing they are not only for
Government, as themselves now confess, but a Government Imperium in Imperio.

But one thing I cannot but observe in these Meek, Harmless Quakers, viz. in
their representing the Justices, Grand Juries, and Burgesses of Norfolk and
Suffolk, as a Bloody-minded sort of Tyrants, and that to the Right Honorable
and Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons Assembled in
Parliament, then no wonder they treat me at that disdainful rate they do, and
the Reverend Clergy for my sake; but as hitherto, Thanks be to God, the
Protestant Magistrates, and the Episcopal Clergy, have been a Bulwark against
Popery, so I trust they will against the prevalency of Quakerism, and the
danger of them, which seems to threaten both them and the Nation. A Just
Censure, etc. p. 12. And consider, (say they) whether it was decent in the
Aldermen and Burgesses of Bury, etc. thus to Impeach the Wisdom and Conduct of
the Government. P. 13. That all those high Charges in the Petition exhibited
against us, are grounded but upon their own groundless Jealousies; they (how
mannerly (say they) let others judge) offer the Parliament Hobson 's Choice, --
cut our Throats, or knock out our Brains. And would they have the Honorable
the House of Commons undertake this Inhumane piece of Butchery, (...) their
Hands in the Innocent Blood of so many Thousands of harmless People, to Enact
such a Barbarous Tragedy only to remove the groundless Fears of a few
Jealous-headed Aldermen, Justices, [Grand Juries, etc.] of Bury, etc. P. 15.
God forbid they should swim into it [i. e. a peaceful Life, and the Enjoyment
of their Religion] through a Sea of Innocent Blood, etc.

But why is all this? Why? It Is only that they prayed the House of Commons to
take these things into their Consideration; and that the Principles and
Practices of the Quakers might be Examined, and their Errors Censured and
Suppressed, [whether by obliging them to Retract their Errors, or if not, to
order their Books to be Burnt by the Common Hangman, or any other Method] as to
their great Wisdom shall appear to deserve, etc. and for this Noble Act, this
Generous and Christian Undertaking, with that Modesty which highly became them,
to be thus Censured by the Quakers, to Impeach the Wisdom of the Parliament, to
excite them to a Barbarous Tragedy, to cut their Throats, that they may swim
through a Sea of Blood, is not only a False, Pernicious, and Scandalous
Representation of the Petitioners, and their Right of Petitioning; but it is
Imperious in the Superlative degree, and will give them further ground to
believe, that when the Government have leisure to examine them, and that they
are willing to wait, it will let the Quakers see they have nothing to do with
Queen Elizabeth's Motto; Much suspected by me,
Nothing proved can be.
and that they will be forced to sing another Song, and to change their Motto;
viz. Many things are fairly moved,
And also as fully proved,


by me, Fra. Bugg.

Now follows a short Discourse by way of Dialogue, between Jacob the Wet
Quaker, and a Civilian, for diversion-sake, after a piece of hard Drudgery; viz.
Civilian. Oh! Friend Jacob, how do thou do? Come, let us have a Bottle of
Red, and half an Hours Chat.


Quaker. With all my Heart; pray what is the News?


Civ. News? I know but little; I meddle not with State Affairs: But to be free
with you, I was astonished at your Deportment the other Day at the Commons Lobby
toward Fra. Bugg, when he gave away his Book to the Members of Parliament, and
how Imperiously you Menaced him, whose gray Hairs might have commanded your
better Respect, and perhaps may be as good a Man as your self, if your Debts
were paid; bidding him put off his Hat to the Members, which with great respect
he did, and needed not your Doctrine, which had been fitter for your self to
have observed, and the morose Clowns your Brethren, who neither respect your
Superiors, nor regard your Betters: Besides, you cannot but know how many of
your Teachers are, and have been, guilty of gross Immoralities, as Gerard
Roberts, and his Son Thomas, together with Newton, Gosnell, Billing, Antrobus,
Archer, Burr, Travers, Murford, Tailor, Clark, etc. besides your Hearers, as,
Bracy, Boswell, Plumstead, Northcott, French, Stone, Firth, Olive, Goodwin,
Cadey, etc. besides what he has put in the Cage of Unclean Birds, in his
Pilgrim's Progress, 2d Edit. p. 294.


Qua. Hold, Friend, thee seem to be in a Passion; thou saw as soon as I
perceived how the Members took his Books, and the People showed their dislike,
I came away.


Civ. I am not angry; but since in your Reply to his Modest Defense, etc. p. 8.
you seem to allow the liberty of Printing, why are you so angry with him, since
you have not power, as in Pensilvania, where you both Fined, Imprisoned, and
took away the Printer's Tools for so much as Printing an Appeal, since he does
no more than you practice, and seem now to allow?


Qua. Be not mistaken, we are an Innocent People, and vindicate Truth and
Innocence.


Civ. Again, p. 7. ibid. you say, You are ready to make it appear that your
Books are not Blasphemous. Again, p. 11. We are ready to undertake the proof of
every Doctrine we hold by and from the Scriptures.


Qua. We are ready, and dare undertake it.


Civ. To the first I answer, it is impossible; for in his Book to the Parliament
he has Reprinted one of your Books, in which is horrible Blasphemy, writ by G.
Whitehead, etc. to the second, I say Fra. Bugg has Challenged your Teachers
Fifty times, and G. Keith as many; yet you are not ready to vindicate either
your Doctrine, or the Books which contain them, and since that, Whitehead
seldom appeared at Parliament.


Qua. I grant that Book has put a sad damp on our Friends; but you must know,
that giving us G. Whitehead's Method in his Truth and Innocence, etc. viz. of
leaving out words, and adding words to, and transposing words, we dare meet
them. As for instance, in the last Recital adding two words, Never and Any, and
putting out Every, and it should run thus, We are Never ready to undertake the
proof of any Doctrine we hold.


Civ. This is brave Work indeed; any thing may do at this rate; pray what say
you to p. 11. ibid. where you grant, that were it not for the Act of
Toleration, your Monthly, Quarterly, and Yearly Meetings were illegal; but yet
they relating to Religion, are allowed by the Act, whilst in another Book,
where being charged with the Doors of their Meeting being Locked, Barred, or
Bolted, A Just Censure, etc. p. 26. there you say these Meetings are not
designed for Worship; and it is plain none besides Religious Meetings are
tolerated by the Act; what say you to this?


Qua. I perceive thou do not know us, nor our way, which is to carry two
Faces under one Religious Hood; you must not measure us by our words, but by
our meaning, and that of our own giving too; and if thee wilt but be a Friend
to us, I will give thee as good a Hamper of Wine as ever thee did tip over
Tongue.


Civ. This is all downright Hypocrisy, for at this rate no Man can tell either
your Faith or Principles: And as to your Present I will not accept thereof; for
a Gift may pervert, and my Religion to me is more than all; nor am I so mean
spirited to betray my Conscience for all the Wine in thy Cellar. But, Friend,
there is another thing in which I would be satisfied, namely, your answering
Books, wherein you falsify the Text, drop Words, split Sentences, and mar the
Sense of your Opponant's Argument; I will give you but one Instance in a Sheet
presented to the Parliament by Fra. Bugg, with a Scheme of your Yearly Meeting,
etc. Col. 2. Reason 6. In one sort of their Books they pretend to Love, Own,
and Honor the King, yea, to Pray for all Men, for Kings, and all that are in
Authority; but in their contrary sort of Books they tell you, That all Kings
and Emperors sprung up in the Night since the Days of the Apostles, among the
Antichrists; that they own no King, but Jesus; nor no Government, but the
Government of the Lamb; that they are Traitors against Christ that desire an
earthly King: Do you read (say the Quakers) that there were any Kings sense the
Days of the Apostles, but among the Apostate Christians? That Kings are the
Spiritual Egyptians -- Oh what a Sincerity was once in the Nation! What a dirty
nasty thing it would have been to have heard talk of a House of Lords among
them? -- A Parliament chosen by most Voices are not like to act for God, and
the good of his People. -- It was through Ignorance that the People subjected
themselves to Hereditary Government, or to the Government standing in a single
Person successively; -- and our Nation have been under Bondage on this Account.
Now all that the Quakers in their Just Censure, etc. p. 18. recite, is as
follows, viz. ^^one sort of our Books we seem to Own, Love, and Honor the
King, yea, to Pray for all Men, for Kings, and all that are in Authority; but
in the other sort of our Books we tell People, that Kings and Emperors sprung
up in the Night, and among Apostate Christians; and that we are against the
English Government, etc. Now how short and defective they are herein, is
obvious by comparing each.


Qua. Friends Intentions are good, they mean well, and can now word their
Matter otherwise, and yet mean the same thing; for our Principles are now no
other than they were in the beginning: And by Reason thereof, and that we
cannot quit our Infallibility, some that went from us, throw in their Bombs
amongst us, which does fearfully annoy us, and have split our Mainmast of
Infallibility, and broken the Helm of our Sinless Perfection.


Civ. Now, Friend Jacob, it grows late, I cannot stay, I shall only sum up a
few Observations from the Premises, and then take my leave of you.

1. As to F. B. whether he has New Clothes, or not, what he had left when his
Horse, and Pocket-money for his Expedition, was discounted, make nothing to the
purpose; he has given as great a proof that he has not been Mercenary, in
writing 16 or 18 Years together against you without Money, as any Quaker can
give.

2. Your Leaders are very Saucy to meddle with the Bishops Certificate, as in
any thing you have attempted: Suppose he had been mistaken in the Man, he did
not say he gave it forth from the Eternal Infallible Spirit of God; he only
said he had known him some Years, this you do not disprove; That he appeared to
him to be an Honest, Sober, Industrious Man, this might be for ought you either
say or know; and if he had been mistaken, he does not pretend to know the
Heart, nor to discern who are Saints, who are Devils, and who are Apostates, as
the Quakers do; and if he had been mistaken, it had been no more than some of
your Teachers have been: That he had taken much Pains to Undeceive and Convert
the Quakers, by publishing useful Books, and not without Success, this he might
safely say, for it was true in Fact; for at that time Mr. Rands, his Wife, and
others that had left the Quakers, declared to some, that his Book, The Painted
Harlot Stripped and Whipped, etc. was instrumental therein; and since that, many
others are come off who have acknowledged as much. And that by the Hardness of
Times, Charge of Printing, he was reduced, etc. this was true in Fact;
wherefore (says he) I apprehend him a Real Object of Charity, and that he does
truly deserve the Bounty of well-dispos'd Persons, unto whom I recommend him;
what hurt is in all this? And what had your Friends to do with it? May you hold
a Yearly Meeting with Doors Locked, issue out your Epistles for Money to
relieve your Friends, as you say; and may not a Bishop of the Established
Church recommend one of their Members to welldisposed Persons of the same
Communion, without your Censure? Can you not be content to Censure the Acts of
Corporations, Grand Juries, and Justices, but must your Boldness extend to the
Exposing and Censuring the Bishops; I think you are a Peg too high.

3. Whereas they pretend to undertake the proof of every Doctrine they hold,
this appears to be a Lie told in Hypocrisy: Let them Confute the Six Articles
above exhibited, and Defend themselves from the Ten Instances wherein they are
Charged to be one in Doctrine with the Romish Church: Let them Answer F. B's
Seventy Queries, or else it will be taken pro Confesso, and that they are never
able to clear themselves from being guilty of Idolatry, Blasphemy, Contempt of
God's Word, and an Hundred other gross and vile Errors.

4. In Oliver's time then the Clergy put in Books into the Parliaments Hands,
and it was your Business to Answer, and but reasonable you should defend your
selves; and that the Government should hear both sides; this Privilege none
denied you: But now you put Books into their Hands not only in Sessions time,
but send them the Nation round to their Houses in the interval of Parliaments,
and F. Bugg Answers them, and presents them in Sessions time; this now you
cannot bear, this angers you, and you fall upon the Man; the Man is an Ill Man,
the Man is Contentious, the Man is Quarrelsom, the Man is an Apostate, a
Renegado; this I tell you is very Bold and Imperious in your Teachers, that
such (...) forsake your Heresy, and conform to the Established Religion, are by
you Censured Apostates and Renegadoes; this highly reflects upon the
Government, and by implication Charges the King and Parliaments Religion to be
Heathen: For it was always accounted that such as forsook the Heathen Worship,
and embraced the Christian Faith, were Converts; and that such as forsook the
Christian Religion, and embraced Heathen Idolatry, (as some did formerly as
well as now) were Apostates and Renegadoes; now by your Quakers Doctrine, the
Church of England is Heathen, and you Christian; how then have you the Face to
appear to such as humble Suitors, and with such Books too, as tell them, by
implication at least, that they are a Heathen Parliament, and that such as
forsake the Quakers, and go to Church with the Parliament, are Apostates,
Renegadoes? etc.

5. In their Just Censure, p. 40. they tell us, We are satisfied that it is no
other Attestation than he has Collected out of our old Adversaries Books, etc.
this F. B. denies, he took not a word of it out of their Adversaries Books.

6. Nor does he believe they are able to produce a Letter of the Late Lord
Archbishop's, to clear W. Penn from the general belief that he is a J -- t; but
if they could, it is not one Negative Evidence will do it, since some of the
very same Order has confirmed that Opinion.

7. If your Teachers be ready, as they boast, to prove every Doctrine they
hold, let them appoint Time and Place, and G. Keith and F. Bugg will not only
meet them, but prove the recited Charge upon them; if not, I will be one that
shall desire they may be set in the Pillory for Examples, on Condition the
Quakers will be obliged, if they do, that they will retract their Errors; this to
be sure is no Persecution, though the only thing they fear; and all in support of
their great Idol Infallibility, and Sinless Perfection.

8. But if they refuse this, it will appear that your Teachers, Friend Jacob,
are great Prevaricators, impudent Liars, horrible Deceivers, great Impostors,
wicked Blasphemers, and gross Idolaters, Subverters of Laws, Religion, and that
their Principles improved, are destructive to all Mankind.

9. And therefore, Friend Jacob, there is not only Bombs sent into your Camp,
but there is a whole Broadside given, which will shake your Strong Hold: That
is to say, by two books, the one by Fra. Bugg, Entitled, The Pilgrim's
Progress, etc. which shows, that your Monthly, Quarterly, Second-day, and
Six-week Meetings are not for Worship, as you now confess, but for Government,
and that that Government is contrary to all the Laws above recited; the other
by Geo. Keith, Entitled, The Fourth Narrative of Proceedings at Turners-Hall,
showing that your Principles are destructive to Christianity, and tend to
overthrow the Christian Religion.

10. And I am glad to see you thus pursued, and for your own good too, in hopes
that our Government will find a time to Examine these things, and prevent your
walking in Masquerade, as well as your deep Design to supplant Christianity.

11. And I am willing further to observe, that as the Proceedings of Francis
Bugg has been a Check upon you, so has he been useful in keeping on foot the
Petition till a Convenient Season; as also in Answering your Books, by which
you Banter the Grand Juries, the Corporations, and the Justices of Peace, which
will be no small Motive to the Prosecution now in hand.

12. Not that I believe or desire Persecution will ensue; no, I am not for
punishing the Swearers and Damners of the Age with Cutting their Throats, or a
Sea of Blood; but that as God permits them to Live, so the Nation suffers them,
though not tolerated by an Act of Indulgence; no more it is hoped will you in your
Blasphemous Errors and Pernicious Principles, unless you do heartily and
sincerely retract them, and thereby make some Atonement for the great Scandal
you have been to the Reformed Religion; and so Adieu.


LONDON: Printed for the Author, by Rich. Janeway, Jun. near Doctors-Commons.
1700.


