In speculo teipsum Contemplare Dr. BLACK. A Looking-Glass for the Black-Band
of Doctors. Wherein may be seen the Ignorance and Malice of these Physicians,
who have Clubbed under the Name of Dr. BLACK, for suppressing by their
Scriblings, and other Calumnies, so great a benefit to the World, as the new
Cure of Fevers. Contained in a 2d. Letter written by Philander to his Friend in
the Country Philomathes. In Defense of Dr. BROVN.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to their most
Excellent Majesty's, 1692.

Dictum Biantis Prienensis.
In speculo teipsum Contemplare, et s^ form^sus apparebis, Age ca quae formam
deceant, sin deformis, qu^d in facie minus est, vel deest, id morum
pulchritudine pensato: Audito multa, l^quere pauca. When every Schoolboy knows
this wise Precept, Learned Club, you cannot be Ignorant of it: But surely the
Reason why you have so much slighted it, must be, because you have by the like
Rapture of Learning, that you expounded Philander, (making thereof fool Andro)
Taken Biantis for Banters, and Pirenensis for pire nonsense.

Advertisement by the Publisher TO The READER.
ALbeit the Clubs Dialogue written against Dr. Brown, contained as much
Impertinency, as might justly have moved any Man of moderat Mildness and
Temper, to have Retorted it with the like. Yet Dr. Brown would so fat surmount
these fools, who had no reason to be provoked, that he would not be provoked
tho he had reason, and so there was in Philanders first Letter, a discreet,
pertinent and solid Answer given them, wherein no man was touched. This
Discretion, and Moderation, it seems, served then to no other use, than it does
to all Brutish, and Degenerous Spirits, to highten their Insolence, as appeared
by A 2d. Essay, emitted by them, a great deal more Infamous and Scurrilous,
than the Former. Which, albeit it appeared very Rediculous to all Wise Men, yet
in regard, a great many of the weaker sort of People, could not but be
exceedingly amazed to see so many Physicians, that pretend to no small Figure
in their Profession, Redicule an Improvement about the Cure of Fevers, made so
Plausible by Dr. Brown and himself, Represented a mere Ignorant, and Impostor;
this, as it proved very surprising, and astonishing, so it makes it very
necessary, for satisfying the Curious, that there should be yet some
Considerations offered, concerning the Buzle made about this very great Concern.

And First, It being plain, that although this Point of a most effectual Method
of Curing Fevers, be of great Import to all Men, yet there are very few able by
pehetrating into the Mystery of the Debate, to be Competent Judges thereof, the
most part do therefore, by Implicit Faith, acqu^^ce in the Authority of these,
they think should, and do know this matter thoroughly.

Yet as, Delirant reges, plectuntur achivi,

So When Doctors rave
They fill the Grave.


For oftimes Physicians by their ascendant over thevulgar, having patcht up an
Authority, calculat only for self Interest, they do thereby most Severely and
Succesfully Tyrannize over Improvements, and their advancers: In regard they
are jealous, such Improvements come to Supplant them, and steal away their Gods
of Profit, and Esteem.

And next, since, in consequence of this, there seems to be no means left to
Extrica^ this Improvement out of the Pounces of such Cormorants and Harpyes;
but to represent them to the World, in their Natural and true Shape, and
despoil them of their borrowed Plumes of unmerited Esteem, acquired through
vulgar Ignorance, and Mistake.

It seems absolutely necessary, for undeceiving the the World, and rescuing the
true Interest of Mankind, to give Exact C^aracters of these Blacks, Wolfs in
Sheeps Clothing, and Enemies to Men, at least in so far as their Scriblings and
Calumnies declare them.

And so there being only here represented a true History of Dr. Black's
Phenomena, and these plainly solved, by laying down a solid Hypothesis of his
Nature: I hope the Candid Reader will not Construct, that Dr. Broun is
provoked, or that he intends Reviling for Reviling: but only that he designs,
for the Public Good, to give a true Representation of the weak Foundation of
that Tyrannical Authority, which in its being is Calculated, and Contrived, and
in its use is most advantageously exercised and employed, for the Overthrow,
and Suppression of so great Benefits, as Improvements in Medicine are; Their
safety and progress being indeed no ways attainable, so long as men that can
securely level at Self, and private ^nterest, although at the public Coast, remain
in Power and Credit with the World.

Philander has not gone to beg pitiful stories at the Common Strumpet Fame, to
make up their History with, where perhaps he might have made als good purchase
of Reproachful Tales, as Black has done, (none of the Black Club being either
so Innocent in themselves, or such Darlings of Fame) for

Tam ficti pravique tenax quam nuncia very.

But he has only made use of such Documents, as are drawn from their Writings,
and other Actings about this Affair, and when no body is Named, if they hit not
right, there is no miss made, and no body can Complain. And because Dr. Broun
was unwilling to expose these Enemies of Truth, before he essayed all means for
their Reformation, and endeavored to beg Peace at their hands, long before
they were Printed, he gave in his whole Papers to them, to be Considered, with
the following Letter annexed thereto.

To all Physicians that are Dr. Broun's Enemies, or these who have Calumniat
him by Printing against him, or otherwise, A Charitable Offer of Forgiveness
and Peace.
THat Scurrilous Dialogue, Printed and Dispersed, with design to suppress my
honest Endeavors in Relation to the Advancement of Medicine, and wherein you
have been concerned, as Contrivers, Authors, Publishers or Approvers, I studied
a while to connive at, and to give it so General an Answer, as might not
reflect particularly on any of you, either directly, or by broad hints: Tho my
Vindication in the Opinion of some, seemed in so far defective, that it stood
merely on the Defensive, and not paying you home in the same Coin, wanted some
Trapings of Rallery, to have made it more Fashionable and Passing (that Rallery
being always flat where no body is hit)

Until your 2d. Essay a great deal more Impertinent then the former, backed
also with with your constant verbal Calumnies, obliged me something to change
the former Measures, and to give this Answer, which (as intending to be more
Generous, than at a stolen Dint, to make any of you Ridiculous,) I have sent
you before it be Printed, to be perused: And if there be any thing therein you
can evince Impertinent, either to my Vindcation or the Vindication of the
Improvement, I endeavor to advance, or a more severe Retaliation, than the
Provocation Craved (your Scurilities and Calumnies indeed admitting of no other
Answer.) I am content (as being willing to do my Enemies all Justice) it be in
so far Reformed.

There was never any man's Reputation designed to be Impeached by me, unless in
so far as it is Employed to bar out Improvements; Some of your Reputations, I
endeavored to advance pari passu with this Improvement; But If any man's
backwardness, becoming too plain, derogat from that Portion of Reputation he is
in possession of, he knows whom to blame for that. When Discoveries, and Men's
Reputation turn Antipods, and opposite, the Discoveries tending to the Zenith,
their Reputation will down to Nadir. And the greater Pouther be made about
Discoveries, when they become Conspicuous, their defects will be the more
Legible that make it: And as common Prudence would oblige all that have common
sense, rather hover a While, than precipitantly condemn matters of Experiment,
which others have found, but they themselves have never seen; So indeed I think
a very small touch of the Conscience of your Duty, as Physicians, would make you
carefully watch all opportunities to observe whether or not this Practice hold
to be as Succesful, as it is given forth, and this (which is very strange,)
none of you has ever yet taken the pains to do: And so how you can Answer,
either for this neglect, or for your other behavior in this matter, to God or
Man, I truly do not understand. If I have wronged any of you, I am content of
just overturs for further satisfaction, than what already you have taken at
your own hands, if further be due: And if you cannot make any wrong appear
(which I think ye will not) I am content that being least in the Transgression,
I have the honor to be first in the desiring a Just Accommodation. It may be
sufficiently known to you, that I am several ways (especially in regard of the
cause) so advantageously stated, that I need not fear your attempt^ any other
ways, then that they may hurt your selves, and prejudge a while the advancement
of Medicine. It Is therefore Peace and Charity to you, and love to the Public
Good, moves me to this Advertisement,

Since then I am content on very easy terms to pass from any Retaliation, or
exposing you, as here you see, as this I conceive, will be a considerable
evidence to the World, of my Peaceable and Charitable Disposition, so it will
be a pregnant Testimony of my affection to the Art which by a Representation of
the Matter, or a just Retaliation, may perhaps come to suffer: And show to all
Men, that (like Solomon's true Mother, that would by no means endure the
dividing of the living Child) that I am so tender of the Art, that I incline
scarce at any rate to do ought that may tend to the exposing, or vilifying
thereof; and further, these Considerations (as I humbly conceive) ought to
invite you also to give the like Testimony of your peaceable Disposition, and
of your like tender affection to the Art, in reasonably preventing, what may
any further mar the Honor or Advance thereof.

If your return to this Letter, be any thing but Peace, and Accommodation, you
may expect the World will be acquainted with it in Print,

THe Clubs return to this, was in their old chat of reproaches, some of them,
especially the Lame and the Maimed answered it in a new Cant to the Tune of
Cudgelling, and Ear-cropping. O brave Doctors, who, having long since
Banquerouted your Learning and Reason, took first refuge in Ba^ter and
Ribauldrie, and now being banged out of that, has no shelter left you, but to
thuart nature so far, as to give your selves out for Hectors!

And so Candid Reader, I crave pardon for detaining you so long in prefacing to
Philanders Letter, which will more sully give you the account of the whole
matter, and so bids you adieu.

Your humble Servant, Philarchus.

ADVERTISEMENT.
LEarned and Witty Club, when I reflect, how Ingenuously you deciphered
Philander, just as a Mountibank's Fool would have done, taking it for Fool
Andro. I would earnestly entreat, that ye do not Sore again so high, with an
Icarian flight in Learning, and take this Philarchus for your Fool Arche, that
mere Pageant of Learning, who being on of the Authors of that Learned Dialogue,
written against Dr. Broun, thought to escape his Reward, because he was
sheltered in a Chair; yet the Impudent Pretender Declaiming, or rather
Belsching from the Chair his Foppry and Impertinency, has so well chastized
himself, that no body needs to be further solicitous to take any other
Correction of him, than by Publishing to the World his Inaugural Oration, with
some Natural and Pertinent remarks thereupon; etc.

Unto which, if there be added, a full plan and History of the Means and
Methods of his, most deserved Promotion; as thereby it will be clear, that the
Air of our Climat is most apt to blow up Bubles, letting more solid things fall
to the Bottom: So such a History as this will not be little delghtful to the
Curious, to understand plainly all these petty Arts, and sham Tricks, by which
this a^e of Learning managed his Intrigue of applause Catching, and fame
forstalling.

If Hogen Mogen finding the pleasant Effects of this Pretty Art, complain that
they are gulled, and that for Juno they have embraced a cloud. I must crave
Mynheer pardon, if I tell him, that he must not think himself abused* by these
who gave the Man a brave recommenoation, for the Scots Proverb, and Practice
is, that these who are ill of their Harbor, a^e best of there away Ken; and
indeed the easiest way to be easily rid of atroublesome Guest is always to ruse
him.

A second Letter Written by Philander, to his Friend in the Country Philomathes
in Vindication of Dr. Brown.
Dear Philomathes.
I Was not a little surprised as well as your self, when my former Letter
written to you, and Published to the World in Vindication of Dr. Broun's Book,
was Answered by his Opposers, to whom it was not Directed: Animadversions, or
Observations thereon, the Black Dr. might have Published, but his giving an
Answer of a Letter not directed to him, seemed a nonsensical piece of business,
I ruminated long to see if this Bull of the Black Drs. could be any way
excused, at last I think I hit it, for leing how Learnedly Dr. Black had
deciphered Philander, making it Fool Andr^. I clearly understood, that the
Black Dr. after the same manner, had deciphered your Name Philomathes, taking
it for Fool Matthew one of their Society: this surely has made them rather
Ignorantly, than altogether Impertinently Answer it, tho by as great a mistake,
as if one should take Dr. Black for a Candid Dr. or White for Black, there
being as great a difference betwixt Phiomathes and Fool Matthew, so, as the
Clinking of the Bell makes the Fool think, does, the gingling of Words make
these wise Drs. rave. And now Philomathes, it were in vain to tell you how
Infamously these Drs. in their Scurrillous Libels, bestow their Talent, and
bewray their little Wit: every body that does not, will fully shut his Eyes,
must of necessity see every Line of these reproachful Stories against Dr.
Brown, drawn in the black Characters of Envy and Malice: and surely, because
Dr. Brown's Enemies could say little in the cause, and bring less against his
Ingenuity, and Sincerity, they endeavor to mis-represent his extrinsick
Qualifications, his Discretion, his Humor, o^ his Carriage, as if by making
him Ridiculous in any of these, they can but abate Men's Reverence to him, their
Confidence in him will not long hold out: For as on^ says bare honesty, being
looked on as a Leafless Tree, no body will trust himself to it is shelter: Thus
Socrates was treated by his Enemies, when they could no otherways suppress his
Reputation, they hired Aristophanes the comic Poet, to Personat him in
redicule on the Stage.

And indeed I think no wonder these Gentlemen, for all their Impudence, had
never Confidence enough to own to the World what they had done against Dr.
Broun. all Crimes have had their Fauters and Abettors, but Lying, especially
reproachful Lying, is so much the Dregs and Refuse of Wickedness, that none has
yet had Chimistry enough to Sublime it unto Reputation, so as any body will
^enter to own it: and among the several Aggravations, this Crime is capable of
(besides the cause a Man suffers reproach for) the putting of such reproachful
lies in Print, seems none of the least: But let George Mosman look to that.

I must confess, we are got into a very Merry World, if Men will be so foolish,
as to suffer themselves at the expense of their Health, the most valuable
concern of Life, to be laughed and lied too, out of so useful, and clear an
Improvement to the Common Nature, as the Cure of Fevers. Dr, Broun has in his
Schedule, given an Idea of: I am willing to believe, there are a great many
still, who have perspicacity enough to see through such sort of Addresses, So
that these Merchants will lie under a necessity to deal with the more Ignorant
Chapmen, and with them their Counterfeit Wairs will go best off.

But pray let us take a sober view of what these Fopps, and Enemies to Mankind
will be at: Here then, good Drs: Let us carefully weigh the matter, and lay in
one Scale, the dearest concern under Heaven, the Health and Life of Men. and
their nearest Relations, frequently overturned by th^se continual Fevers, the
danger and precipitant Invasion thereof; which by a sudden Eruption and
Devastation, in a trice overturn our Hopes and Comforts, do therefore make the
loss of Life more bitter: and which is yet very recent with many, your former
and present unsuccesfulness in the Cure of these Fevers.

And in the other Scale, let us lay the undoubted Obligation* chargeable on the
Adepts, and Sons of Art, to Ransact and Muster all the Supplies, Study,
Industry and Observation can make up for the Resistance of the sudden Ravage
and Dissolution made by these Fevers: together with the great, constant and
daily Success, which to the great Comfort of Men, and their Relations, is
observed to follow this new Method of Curing Fevers.

Now, my very good reverst Friends, to which of the side does the Balance
incline to with you, and since you either close your Eyes from the wonderful
Effects of this new Method, or dissemble, what you understand of it, are you
not then in love with these many Ruins, and Distresses these Fevers bring along
with them, and content to let your Blood freeze within you, in the midst of
such extreme heat, when upon every trivial occasion, at other times, it is ready
to break out in the strangest Ebulition: Is not this to prove your selves
Fopps, your Art ^ Trick, and Induce the World to cry out, you can do nothing,
when there is most ado with you: Good Doctors, who appear to the vulgar
sprightly Heroes in Medicine, I amal mostina fright, when ^ consider with all,
what a rem^ra many such dead weights as you, really is in the way of true
Practical Improvement in Medicine, to the great hurt of Mankind, and the
scandal of all faithful Physicians, you are in truth, the dead Flees that
Corrupt all their Perfums: For shameimust honest Dr. Broun meet with such
dishonest treatment from you, for his Charitable Endeavors, to deliver the
World from the fetters of Prejudice* and Ignorance, and wherein no Man is
touched or wronged; it is not his own things he seeks, it is the Interest of
Humanity, in so noble a Discovery of a new and most succesful method of Curing
these formidable Fevers; So the mali^e must be strange and more than humane,
that prosecuts him.

Since then Philom. as every body knows, this fearful havoc of our Dearest
Concerns made by these Fevers, often falls out, under the Presidence and
Government of the Physicians, and seeing their Trust makes it nearly their
concern, to enquire seriously, whether Negligence or Mistaks may be Concuring
to the Course of so sudden and formidable a Devastation: and also, Seeing we
perceive Men are always with great difficulty, drawn from their former Customs
and Practices: and with all Ranks and Stations of Men, Improvements are hardly
entertained and ^mbraced; but most of all, with those whose Esteem, and
Reputation can be preserved entire without their entertaining them, as in
Medicine, I apprehend it is too easy to do.

Upon these Considerations Philomath, I am not only clearly Induced to
entertain shrewd and harsh thoughts of those that are offended at the
Preliminaries of Dr. Broun's Book; but I also think, he has made no Impertinent
degression, but a very necessary Preliminary, and Preface to his Work, where he
has made a Towr to Summond up the whole Force of that Obligation, lying on
Phisicians, to Diligence and Improvement, to conjure down negligence, and to
areaign all vulgar Errors and Mistakes capable to stiffle, or deprave
Improvement in that Art, it being indeed the^e that seem like Mountains, to
stand in the way to Improvement; do they not then deserve by serious
Consideration, to be Levelled and Removed.

Now Philom. Knowing you are a Curious Enquirer into the Causes of all the
various Phenomena of the Civil, as well as the Natural World; and that the
behavior, and Nature of these Blacks, pretending to be Physicians, may appear
very strange, and un-accountable to your self, as well as others, and put many
in hazard to think, that all which Dr. Broun has offered in this matter, is
nothing but D^l^sion, and Foppry: I judge it not Impertinent to offer you my
un-byassed Sentiments, in Relation to a clear, and Rational Solution of these
Men's Actions, and Phenomena; by giving a solid Hypothesis of their Nature,
whereby, I hope it will be plain, that the Dignity and Excell^ncy of an
Improvement in Medicine, may not only be very consistent with snarlings and
reproaches thrown, thereupon by Interested and By-assed Physicians: but that
all eminent Improvements are necessarily attended with that fate: so Philom, I
realy think the World is not a little indebted to the Man, has the courage to
make the venture to bring such to see the Light. For it is no more Plain, than
it is Lamentable, that after the Laborious Penetrating of the Judicious, who
raking the Bowels of Nature, has dug and refined any Improvement in the Cure
of these Fevers, (perhaps of more value then all the Gold of the Indies) out of
it is Natural Min and Oar, where it was hid and Inaccessable by the Block and
Sluggard, yet before it can become acceptable, and of general use, it is put to
encounter various Skirmisies, with the several Interests, Humors, yea Caprices
of Men; and not only every Dunce or Fop has an Itch to stain and fully that
virtue he could never imitate, yea, scarce comprehend: yet he (as sufficiently
qualified to encounterfit the Physician with the vulgar) is in a great measure
capable to disgrace it, but even these that seem more Polishe^, and Refined,
and have Engrossed any Esteem, finding a new Title of applause in favors of
the undertakers, necessarily follow such undertakings, shrewdly suspect it, as
topping and veighing with their Reputation, to be at their Coast, and they
Endangered thereby to have their merit Eclipsed: this raises such a Torrent of
Heat and Envy against it, and its advancrs; that they are often made to stagger
under them: and where the thing is so Conspicuou^, that they dare not meddle
with it; and also finding it would be dangerous and fatal to themselves, to
make a quarrel of a man's virtue; they can, by means of their Art, and
Authority, by a devilish Chimistry, Extract and Pick one out of the most
Innocent Deportment to b^spatter his Merit, and which will also serve them as a
Cloak for their envy, and malice to the boot.

Thus men to save the borrowed Luster of their Skill, fully their Candor: which
although a stain little Conspicuous ^s yet very dangerous; in Physicians for
Ingenuity the common spur to Industry, the Parent of Skill, being languid in
them; it must only be by the favor of Artifice, and Popular Error, without any
solid worth, that such have through time ( which vulgar opinion makes to ripen
the most insipid of them) scrambled up to any Eminency, and Enhaunced the
Opinion of Experienced: But considering the false bottomed Reputation of these
Parasits to fame, is like fairie Money, which is brought in a night, and
carried away the ^ixt: no wonder if vulgar humor* and applause that has set
them on the Tottering Pinnacle of unmerited esteem do as easily, but far more
justly* throw them down again. And indeed Philomath, I am tempted to tell you,
that ^hink true worth, as it spares no Labor in acquiring, so it saves no
Coast to welcome true Improvements: and is always among the first that shakes
hands with them. Whence it may be clear, that what ever benign aspect such
Discoveries may carry to the World, yet if they bear in reverse ought
Malevolent to any Man's ill acquired Esteem, or private Interest, a cold welcome
is to good, nay a very hot one they must look for, from such Men: A clear
evidence (among any others) of this, was the Quarrels, Contentions, and
Skirmishings, that arose about that merely Theoretical Improvement the
circulation of the Blood, And if it fare so here, how will it go, if an useful
and practical Improvement offer to set up the Head, and the Devils Game, as
well as Man's be marred or these Traps, or Snares that Precipitate Men into the
Kingdom of Darkness, be in danger to be removed, by any Considerable
Improvement in the Cure of these Formidable Fevers: then well see, as Dr. Broun
Intimats further in hi^ Preface to his Book: That the Serpentine Brood, which
is still big with Malice, and Envious of the good of Men, and and which was
never more Dominant, than at this time, will raze all the Corners of the
Infernal Pit, for Venom to bespatter such a Project, and its Advancers with.
And so the Interest both of Men and Devils being at the stake, and both being
attack't by this Improvement in Medicine, no wonder (as the French King and
Turk have done) That Men and Devils Confederat against their Common Enemy
Practical Improvement in Medicine.

Now how far all this may be applied to Dr. Broun's opposers, any that will be
at the pains to consider both his and their Papers, may very easily Judge: and
if the^eby, they clearly understand, that in advancing one of the most
desirable Concerns of Men, he is as pertinent and solid in Reasoning, than they
to depress it, turning quite from the Subject, are pregnant in vile Railling
and Cavelling, they will not hover long to give their Sentence.

After my former Letter emitted, and Published in his Vindication, and in
Answer to their Dialogue, and wherein the new Method was confirmed, by several
Examples, it was thought Impertinency, was by sound Reasoning, so dashed out of
Countenance, that it durst never appear any more on that Errand.

But* 2d. Essay, a great deal more Impertinent, and Infamous than the former,
made all Spectators understand, that no Humane Reason can tame Devilish
Insolency, and that its as hard to check their scolding humors, as it was to
Crub that br^zen Zantipes Vein, whose unruly Member, after her Husband had
several ways (but all in vain) endeavored to ^ame (she still calling him
Lousie Rogue, Lousie Cuckold) at last he tried her with ducking, but she
putting up both her hands, above the Water, and joining the Nails of her Thumbs
in a Crack-house posture, showed how little she was dantoned. Even so these
Men, when they are plunged over Head and E^rs, in the derision of all sober
Men, still attempt to give the most ridiculous ven^ to their Impertinent cha^t.
And withal the most favorable Construction can be put upon their behavior
seems this: These Blacks being such a waspish venomous Kind o^ Creatures, that
when they are Irritate, (which is always upon the appearance of any good to
the World) the Venom Ferments and Works so within their Breasts, that it is
ready to burst them, unless it break out with a Ratle at Railling Row: And
notwithstanding Philomathes of all the venomous Eructations, and Floods of
Viperspaun, disgorged against Dr. Brown, by one of these Blacks, a bitter
Viper: I heard say (which I think a very strange Phinomenon, that the Paroxisms
and fits use to be so violent in him still, that he is forced to be kept
elasped in Iron Bands, for without these, his Fits, like Gunpouder, would make
such a sorrowful parting betwean poor Back and Breast, that the old sitten on
Friends would never meet again, In speculis contemplare teipsum, Sin deformis
id morum pensato pulchritudine: audito multa, and loquere pauca.

Mistake me not Philomath, as if I intended, transgressing all humanity, to
insult over any Man's Personal Defects; no no, but being to solve the Phenomena
of his Wicked Actions, I am necessarily led to his Cursed Nature, which having
undoubtedly depraved his Shape and Body that lodges it (a discreet Guest
indeed) no wonder it spares nothing it falls in hands with; and inde^d I am
tempted to take the Liberty to tell you Philomath, as bodily defects in my
Opinion, lay a double Obligation on the Subject to Discretion and Virtue, and
the virtue such, are endued with, not only gives a Proportionable Supply of
their other Defects; but is also it self more Conspicuous, and renders the
Person more Amiable, so wicked Malice, making them justly more Odious and
Abominable; makes Reasonably all their outward defects, more Remarkable, and
that Common Saying, Cavendum ab his quos Deus and natura notarunt, tho it may
Justly have sometimes its exceptions, yet I think without breach of Charity, I
may be Confident this Subject is none of them; for that Viper, without any
Provocation, but his Conscience of honest Dr. Brown's Ingenuity and Zeal for
the Public good (Which is I confess enough of Provocation to a malicious Brat)
has by Printing, and all other ways, employed the utmost efforts of his
Devilish Malice against him; as may be seen through all the Clubs Papers,
whereof the bitterest and most invective Passages are the Hissings of this
Viper, butekpecially may be seen in the account he gives of my Lord Crichtouns
Case, which like a venomous Serpent, in the pride of his Bunches, and Majesty
of his Scales setting up his brisles, he fronts with this Malicious and
Venomous Hiss. (the baseness of Dolphintouns temper) as if he intended the
effect of his malice should not die with Dr. Brown himself, but should descend
to his Heirs, who appearantly may have the Designation of Dolphinton after him:
But as Dr. Brown may justly glory in the Cause he suffers for, so may he do in
the Instrument he suffers by; and he will be highly unjust both to his Cause
and to Mankind, if he do not acquaint the World, that their Calumnies may have
the less Impression, what kind of Creatures (Malice being indeed the highest
degree of Baseness) the principal Adversaries of his Cause only are.

But considering, that the Devil rages most before he be cast out; this gives
equally a presage of Dr. Brown's success, and makes the Efforts of his
Instruments no ways strange, or unaccountable. And in sum Dr. Brown needs not
grudge his Enemies should Commence the mostabsolute Masters of Vile Railing,
and Dis-ingenuous Cavelling, while he carries it in solid Reasoning, and safe
Curing Fevers, which hitherto have been so dismal to Mankind. But he may indeed
Triumph, that all these Reproaches and Impertinencies ear so clearly in reverse
his hardy attempt for the public good, which these Black Doctors construct is
(...), first to Devils, and next to there Petty, and private Interest. For any
other grounds of their Calumnio^s Libells, he defies them to make appear,

Moreover to show how sensible he is of the great benefi^ this Enemies have
done him, by their Printed and verbal Calumnies, whose p^rversness, adding
difficulty to his Enterprises, raise the Honor of his Success: and whose
Ignorance Characterizing their Authors his Opposers, has for the most part
inclined the Judicious to his side: this favor, tho done far beyond their
Intension, he has most gratefully remunerate, with another not a whit less
beneficial to them, but far more meritorious, as being designed and
Intentional, and that is, albeit they have named him with all the Names, and
Nicknames they pleased, yet he has still forborne to Name any of them, some
thinks it is because he is ashamed of such antagonists, but I rather think it is
out of Pity; least there should be a standing memorial of their Rediculous
Impertinencies and Folly, which would so conspicuously Blunder them, when their
Embrac^ing both his Theorie and Practice, becomes unavoidable, (as in all
probability it shortly will) that it might really ^ndanger them to hang
themselves.

But there is one of them that Iam truly sorry for, because he ha^ had the hard
fate to prove so Public a Tool to execute the Malicious Contrivances of the
more Politic pates of that Crew, that a Honorable retreat to him, is scarce
Possible: for that Man not being able to Contribute any of the least pittance
to that stock of sorry will their Pamphlets are stuffed with, was content for
his part to Contribute his Pains to drudge at the Press for the rest: and also
to do the Office, of the Coal-ste^ller Bo^es, in dispersing their Malicious
Papers: Alace, the Club has done with that poor soul, as the willie Pug does
with the Cat, with whole Feet he scapes his Chestnuts out of the Fire (and I
believe the Monkey was handling the Cat of Sm^^holm, so when she spoke wonders)
and to Cool his burnt Paves, the Good Man of the Club, who had never any great
Kindness for him before, (when he thought it not worth his pains to go himself,
being in the midst of the Storm) sent the Poor Singed Doctor a highland Journey
for him, where he would get Snow-Water, but a Green Burn, like a Green Wound is
half whole, behold the end, and that the Titling was not sent along with the
Go^k, came from the Goodman's tender care of the poor Titling, who would have
certainly been lost in a wreath of Snow, if he had gone.

There is another effect their Pamphlets has had, which is very pleasant, and
it is this: The Apothecaries finding the Club had contrived their Papers so
abominably nauseous, that they would easily turn many tender Stomachs begun to
suspect the Club had a design against their Trade, and that they might perhaps
serve their Patients with Vomitors, and Purges of such stuff, giving them so
many Leaves out of one of their Pamphlets for a Dose, according to their
Constitutions and Deseases. And this Jealousy was so warm among the
Apothecaries Boys, that it had almost raised them in a Tumult to have Rabled
the Club.

As on the one hand, the Black Drs. Scurilous Pamphlets does, in the Eyes of
all Judicious Men, evince them the most foolish and malicious of all Men, so on
the other other hand, when they come to any thing that is serious, and offers to
reach a hit at Dr. Brown's new Theory or Practice, they discribe themselves the
most Ignorant in the World: and therefore their last Essay was looked on as
worthy of no other regard but Scorn and Contempt, yet because the usurped and
falls bottomed Authority of a great many Senior Dunces, of that gang; whose
Credit lies undoubtedly in Pand on this Plea, does amuse the Ignoant vulgar,
who, perhaps making the far greatest part of the World deserve not a little to
be Considered and Satisfied, to the end that they may take better measures
where to repose the trust of so great Concerns: Therefore it was not thought
altogether Improper, to give a further and clearer Representation of that
Theory, and the pitiful Reasons brought by the Learned Club against it.

How rediculous then are these Men by a few impertinent and incoherent
Assertions, bearing in their Front only (it is certain) without any other proof,
or evidence, and these so mingled with bitter invictives that are able to quite
choke the most clear Reasoning in the World. How ridiculous are they, I say, to
attempt to overturn an Hypothesis, not taken up gratis, but riveted and founded
by a solid Reasoning on the most part of the principal Phenomena occurring
about the Aeconomie of Man's Body, and these so clearly solved thereby, and
made so nea^ly to quadrat therewith, as Dr. Brown's Theory of Fevers in his
Schedule, seems to have done; Indeed by their manner of Impugning it, they
assure the World, that they never understood it; for any that will be at the
pains to Consider it closely (what is in Debate being every man's near concern)
will find it an Hypothesis that is clearly demonstrat to include that
Metaphysical Consideration, as being most suitable to the Perfection of the
animal Aeconomie, and Mechanism; and as seeming exceedingly suitable to the
design of the Architeck, and an Hypothesis, which has also its Parallel in
other Actions of the ^conomie, such as the contraction and delatation of the
Pupil of the Eye, and in Actions from Irritation, commonly so cled.

An Hypothesis that quadrats with the Composition of the Blood, which is made
up of many little G^^bules, whose Number, Bulk or Figure may easily be supposed
to become vitiated.

A Hypothesis having the Concatnation of the Procatartick and external Causes
of Fevers favoring it, such all ways being apt to produce viscosity and
grosness in the Blood and Humors.

An Hypothesis that is founded in the Consequences of that great, tho Insensible
Evacuation of Perspiration l^sed, and in the Nature and Lesion of Digestion of
the Stomach; also both the frequent Causes of Viscosity and Fevers.

A Hypothesis, by which are solved clearly the natural Penomena in Fevers, such
as Frequency of the Pulsie, Heat, Inquietness, Pains, Anxieties, delirium, and
Spots. Where, also the Phenomena of helpers in Fevers stand clearly of its
side, as first Blooding, and the various Phenomena occuring about it, solved
conform thereto, and made to confirm it. As also that Magtsterial Remedy, of
Purging, Clearing and Confirming that Hypothesis, with the use and benefit of
the Paregorick, and quieting Medicine, Homologating the same.

Where also it is showed how the Benefit from volatile, and fixed Salts, and
testaceous Concrets, exceedingly ^avours this Hypothesis, and also how the
benefit of Cupings Leiches and Frictions confirm it. A Hypothesis which has
cleared the hurt of the mere Diaphoretique method in Fevers, and where many
other Phenomena of Hurters are fully solved conform thereto.

Whosoever then shall think that an Hypothesis, more clearly founded than ever,
I think any yet h^s been, in reference to that subject of Fevers, and which has
never been Comprehended, or understood by them, far less Considered or Expended
so, as to make them Capable to Impung it) should be overturned by the dash of a
few Impertinent I^ consequential and False Assertions, concluding with all
nothing, against the Hypothesis, they may as well think Arthurs Seat will be
overturned bya few Mol-hills casten up therein, by the poor blind Moles, and
this I think, will fall in nobodies head, but these that are fully as Ignorant,
blind and Blockish, as these black Doctors. And now Phil. civility obliges me
to usher in what I am now to take up your time with, with a craving Pardon,
knowing you can bestow your minutes better than on such Trash: for no better
Epithet can I give what they have said against Dr. Browns Theory, as you shall
easily per^eive, by and by, and is mentioned in the Page 13. and 14 of their
Answer.

First, They say That every Part that is Contracted has an Inate faculty to
perform that Action which is done, by the Influx of the Animal Spirits into the
Fi^res. This will prove a direct Contradiction, an Action to depend on an Inate
faculty of the Part, and yet to be done by the Influx of the Animal Spirits,
which are quite Extraneous thereto, and in a perpetual Flux, seems clearly
repugnant, and als absurd as to say, that a Miln-wheel has an Inate Faculty to
move about, which idon^e by the falling of the Water upon it.

2. They say next, All Parts when delated do suffer ever, violence from the
Humors, and what else they contain, does the Dilatation of the Brain, or Breast
come from violence I pray, of what, yea does the heart it self suffer violence
from the Blood. These Men are so Giddy themselves that they labor to turn all
the Moderat and Benign Motions in Nature making Life, into reeling, violent,
and Preter-natural ones, they are so much in Love with Jarring, that they dream
of nothing but Force and Discord.

3. They say, That the ventri^les of the heart are of the same substance with
the Inner coats of the Arteries and Veins (which is scarce sense) and that
they are sensible of Irritation, that the Dilatation of the Heart, the weight,
the distention through e^^ervescence of the Blood, does Irritate it: To say the
Truth, this Principal of Irritation, which they most foolishly make the Cause
of the natural motion of the Heart, must have its rise from that Irritation
raised in themselves, upon the appearance of Truth and Light, whereby, like men
that have the Yellow Jandice, who think all things yellow, they think every
thing Irritate, when they are so themselves. And there is no doubt, if ye will
ask them, ye will likewise find they fancy, that the Sun, Moon and Stars, and
all other motions in the universe move from Irritation, yea, bark and Irr too
when their Chimerical Hypothesis is Impugned, and that the Harmony of the
Spheres must turn Jargon as well as the Heart for Company:

Now how Rediculous is this to any Person, but a little acquainted with
Speculation, it being plain that the Contraction of the Muscles, is the more
natural of the two Motions: For the Resolution of the oposite Muscle is still
followed with the Contraction of the other, and the Heart being a Muscle, the
Contraction thereof, rather than the Dilatation is a Natural Motion, and
therefore does depend on no Irritation, but is the perpetual Law of the
Aeconomy subservient to the great end of Distribution of the nourishment to the
whole: and is no more from Irritation than the like Conveyance of the Nutrition
in Vegetables is. Would it not be brave Philosophy to say, the Sap goes from
the Root of the Plant to the Branches by Irritation.

And further the quanrity of Blood squized into the Heart, suppose a dram is as
far from Irritating it, as a convenient Portion of Meat received into the
Stomach, which is not sent out till after Digestion, but then by no Irritation.

As also the Effervescence of the Blood either in a Natural or preter-natural
state is a stale Error, reasonably Exploded by Dr. Brown, according to the
bestnew Authors, as Blancard, Bohn, Brounerus, Charleton. And Esservecence
being an Intestine Commotion of the minute Parts of Bodies, which most
frequently, happens by Heterogeneous mixtures. It can never be reasonably said
to be, but where the Senses discover it: pray with which of the Senses did ever
these acute Drs. discover the same in the Blood: if all the World must believe
against their Senses with these subtle Doctors, pray let them ^sher in
Transubstantiation next, for they have broken the great But that kept it out.

4ly, They say, This Irritation makes the Heart contract it self, without
respect to a final Cause. This is a clear Repugnancy for all Irritations in the
Parts, when they are, are Preter-natural Motions, from Preter-natural Causes,
and are raised to rid the Parts offended of the Irritating Marter, and here
Nature may be said not very Improperly to Act for an end, yea, and if such an
Irritation, as this were Competent to the Heart, in its Natural Motion, it
clearly implayes the like acting for an end, the ^ne end quite distinct from
that Employed in Dr. Brown's Vindicatorie schedule: for indeed their Hypothesis
obliges the Heart to throw out the Blood to be rid of it, as a Grievance, which
is no sooner done, than like Sysiphus Labor maliciou^ Nature sends in another
Dash or Squirt to vex it, and this being perpetua^ puts the Heart in a
Continual Chaff at the poor Blood, which comes no sooner into the Heart, but as
a troublesome Guest, is immediately thrown out into the Arteries, Irritating
them likewise, which presently sends it a packing into the Veins, which having
als little Kindness for it are at Continual toil to send it back again to the
Heart, Where it gets als little rest; One would think the poor Blood is
followed with Hue and Cry, and that Nature is at a Fox hunting with it from
Hill to Dail, back and forward, and at Death the Blood, having lost its Legs,
is Catched: and so the Game ends.

Risum teneatis amici. But to be serious about their Irritation and Vi^^lnce,
there two principles of Natural Motion, I pray you Witty Club, what violents
the Heart to Dilatation and I^ritats it to Contraction, when it beats, being
out of the Body of some Animals, without any Blood, coming in, or going out.
This one Instance, if they had read Dr. Brown's Book with any more Attention
than the Parats speaks Words, would never have suffered them to slipped so foully.
There offering to Answer the Book being an Assirmation that they have read it,
I will not offer to Contradict it, as being loath to call them both Fools and
Liars, but one of them they must surely be.

Next they say, That the Pulse that strickes the Finger, is nothing but the
Dilatation of the Arteries, occasioned by the Contraction of the heart which is
granted, Then they add, for Dr. Brown to say, that in a Fever, the Pulses are
more frequent, and yet to say the Circuit Motion of the Blood is more sl^w is
great nonsense. O brutish Ignorance, for first, this last Assertion is no
ways consequentiall to the former, tho they bring it in Consequence thereof;
and next, any that considers the matter will find, the last Assertion a plain
falsehood for to say in a F^ve^, the Circuit Motions of the Blood is m^re slow,
and yet the Pulse more frequent, is al^ good Sense, as to say, that the
strokes of a Pump may be doubled, and yet the Water come out more slowly than
at other times it does by single strokes.

And this Phenomenon in the Pump is obvious to the Senses, with its Cause, for
if either the Liquor Pumpe^ be more viscuous, or if the Top-hole be not clear,
the frequent agitation of the Pump will pour out less Liquor than the moderat
working thereof, when the Liquor is sufficiently tenuious and thin, and the
Top-hole clear. As also the short and thick strokes of a Pump pours out less
Water then long and rare strokes do; even so the Pulse of the Heart and
Arteries, although more than usual frequent, may convey less Blood into the Veins,
when the Blood it self is more gross, or the Passages betwixt them obstructed,
or not sufficiently Patent: then a lesser frequency of the Pulse does, when the
Blood, or Passages are not under these Faults. And it is clear that the Pulse is
less frequent in health, because, after the Arteries by their Dilatation have
beat the touch they are Contracted very near their Center, and do expel into
the Veins almost all the Contained Blood, so, in the subsequent Dilatation, as
moving more space, viz. From the Center to the Circum^erence, they most of
necessity take more time to Dilate, and Consequently seldomer beat the touch,
than in the Case where the Blood is with difficulty admitted from the Arteries,
into the Veins, because then they Contract Less, much of the Contained Blood
remaining, hinders their Coats from coming so near their Center, as in the
former Case, and so their Terms or Bounds of Contraction and Dilatation being
near, they are moved from the Bound of their Contraction, unto the bound of
their Dilatation, and strick the Touch sooner, and in less time, and so the
space betwixt every Pulse is Commensurat by, and proportionat to the greater or
lesser Contraction, a great Contraction making still a rare Pulse, and a
lesser, a frequent one: And a clear resemblance of this is seen in Respiration,
which in the Natural mode is more slow, and more Air received into the Lungs,
and more expelled at every turn of Respiration, and then the Breast also
Dilated and Contracted more, th^n in frequent and short Respiration, where less
Air is received, and less expelled at every turn, and the Breast also less
Dilated and Cnntracted: much like the former Phenomenon, in the Pump, where
short and thick strokes pours out less Water, than long and rare ones do. And
in the Motion of the Blood, the Heart furnishes the quantity to the Arteries,
in proportion only, as the Arteries are Emptied into the Veins, which in the
Natural State, when the Circuit Motion is perfotmed Vegetly, may be a Dram or
more, but when that Motion is Torpid and Lo^tering, and the Blood with
difficulty passes from the Arteries into the Veins, the Heart at every Pulse
conveyes so much Blood into the Arteries only, as they by emptying themselves
into the Veins have made room for, which may sometimes be very little; for in
Agonizing or Expiring Persons, where the Pulse beats the Touch with the
greatest frequency imaginable, it is because the Contraction is so little and
consequently the blood squized out of the Arteries, so very little, that the
Dilatation is again immediately felt on the Touch: and this is so frequent,
that it is rather called a Tremulous Motion of the Arteries, than a distinct
Pulse consisting of sensible Contraction and Dilatation, But according to the
Hypothesis of the Grand Club, the Blood should then Circulat more rapidly, than
which there can be no thing invented more Ridiculous.

In Consequence of all, by the leave of that Learned Crew of Ignorant Black
Doctors, it is very good Sense, and Reason both to say* that the frequenter the
Pulse beats, the Circuit Motion of the Blood may not only be more slow, but
also, by the multitude of the Phenomena before mentioned, solved by Dr. Brown,
confirming this Hypothesis, is proven actually to be more slow* And also by the
same Leave, it may not be impertinent to allege, since Nature does not
accelerat Motion in Vain, That, that Frequency, beside what is illustrat
before, is excited also, to overcome the slowness and resistance betwixt the
Arteries and Veins, as ^^ at more length held forth by Dr Brown in his
Sch^dule. And how the Progress and Circulation of the blood is made through all
he Meanders and Narrow windings, betwixt the Arteries and Veins, and that in so
short a time as Nature requires it in the Natural State to Circle about (which
according to Dr. Lower, is less than the 6th part of an hour) is very wonderful
and difficult to conceive; and without very much Elevating and Abstracting our
thoughts we can scarce have any Satisfaction of it: and therefore the
Circulation of the blood was opposed by many, because they thought it
impossible; but to supperadd to that stupenduous Motion, so inconceivable a
Property, or accident, as an Augmentation or Increase, the mind must suffer
strange Torture and Rack, to Comprehend it: but how easily may that Motion be
conceived to be ^^minished.

It was indeed the Inconceivableness of the Rapidity of the Suns motion by the
common Hypothesis, which made Copernicus fix the Sun and send the Earth a
Rambling about it: By which all the Phenomena were als-wel solved, and a more
comprehensible and satisfieing Notion of the Motion established to the boot:
But these blacks make so much Noise with their Babble, of Rapidity, Violence,
and Irritation, that cert^inly they will fright Phaetions Horses whom
Copernicus had quietly stabled up, and send them a packing again about the
World, and then they must fetch Vulcan to nail down the Earth to its fixed
Centure again, for if the Sun and Earth come to shoulder others in their Orbs,
they may give a terrible Jolt. And if the Rapidity of the Suns motion be
inconceiveable still let the Sun look to that, as well as the Blood.

And with all such a Falls Notion as this of the Circulation of the Blood
augmented does not stay here as being a mere Theoretical Error and of no
further purport: But Alace it puts the Artiest in his practice upon the most
dangerous measures, and Precipitates him into the most Fatal Errors, as
impelling him to put Clogs and Bars on that motion, wherein consists Life,
often already too much Loittering and Fetterred. And is as pernicious as it
would be Rediculous to see these witty Doctors load a Horse that can scarce go
Empty, for fear of his running away.

Moreover, as Dr. Broun has observed in the Preface to his Book, this
Circulation of the Blood did strangely lie in the dark for many Ages, and was
long opposed, because it was thought impossible, (what then would these
opposers have said to hear its augmented now) and also it was opposed by
others, because although it seemed to Illustrate the Theorie of Medecin, yet it
made no improvement in the practice thereof.

But now by this Theorie of Dr. Brouns, that noble discovery is not only
Confirmed, and not everted (as these men through the Grossest mistake ignorantly
assert) but also is delivered from that reproach of useless. For he clearly
does evince this motion of the Blood Diminished, and its slowness depending
upon the Grosness, to be the nearest Cause, if not of most diseases, yet of
Continual Fevers: And further since he has showen by what Complication and
Concatenation of other Causes, this nearest Cause by O^der or Congress is
fomented: How many solid and fruitful Indications, altogether for merly lying
in the Dark, may there be drawn from thence: Especially seeing we may be
furnished with sufficient means to satisfy these Indications: And that either
by Correcting; Intercepting, or Eradicating these Causes, being destinctly
known. And so this Theorie seems not only to be clear in it self, but also
leads to the Practical Improvement of the Circulation of the Blood: And
notwithstanding all the applause the Circulation of the Blood, has deservedly
met with in the World, this Theorie is as much preferable to it, as the best
Practical Improvement is preferable to a mere Theoretical one, and in
consequence every man's Demerit In relation to the Advancing and Opposing this
most Plausible and Useful Theorie of Dr. Brouns, must be Commensurable
according to the value, it will really be found to be of.

As for the rest of their Assertions, viz, That it is always a received Opinion
that heat in Fevers is the effect of rapid motion of the Blood. Many of the
best Authors, as Silvius, Wills Paracelsus and Helmont, etc. Attribute it to
other causes, and albeit it had been a Commonly received Opinion, does that
hinder but that it may be a Vulgar Error, and as they do not attaque, one of
Dr. Broun's reasons against it, so they do not bring one for it: Then they make
a digression into the cause of hea^ in an Inflammation, In handling of which
they first say, that the Blood is then Extravasated, and immediately they say,
that the Ateries are distended therewith, pray let them reconcile these. And
next they say, The quantity of Blood is the cause of heat in an Inflammation,
then which there can be nothing more false, for in an, Anewrisma, which is a
bag of Arterial, Blood with a continual Pulsation, and the part has far more
Blood then an Inflammation or an^ Aerisipelas, but far less heat: Yea none at
all beyond the rest of the Skin.

And in fine their whole Chat for reasoning I cannot call it is so pitiful and
impertinent and nothing conclusive, that it appears they not only want the
sense to lay down any plausible Hipothesis of their own, but that they never
have Considered, Traced, nor Expended Dr. Broun's Conclusions: Far less can it
be expected they will confute them: Which, albeit they had been false, could
not have been distinctly done but in a Book at least three times as big as his,
yet this curtaleing Club pretends to do it in less than one Leaf.

As to what the Black Drs, allege there is nothing answered to these matters
of Fact, wherewith Dr* Broun stands Branded in their Dialogue I^'s answered
first, that the Black Mouthed Dis. Tongues are no Slander: Next it seems the
heat of Black's Fury has drained his Common sense and Reason, for did not my
former Letter tell him that their Dialogue contained nothing but Lies, Cavells
and Calumnies: How come they now to ask what answer can be given to them. It
seems these Black's has as little Skill in Common sense, as in Physic. For
since these Slanders were denied, they should in the 2d, P^mphlet have brought
their proof and witness, since Philander's denial is a^ good as either Fool
Sanders, or Fool Mathews Affirmation.

That where the Black says, since Dr, Brown subjected his Book to the
consideration of all Ingenuous and Faithful Physicians, now he has got the
Sentiments of some of them little to his Satisfaction.

First, who gives Black this Testimony but himself, and dare such Rogues
Arrogate that name that dare not appear but in Masquerade. These Censurers for
all their disguise will be found out by their sent to be no better than some
piece of flat, Little Bobus or viper riden Fopp, and some ill natured Brate,
whom God and Nature has not made so Ridiculous as his Serpentine Viperish Humor
has made Ignominious: And their Opinions of it is so much to Dr. Browns
satisfaction, that he would never have been well satisfied with his Book* if
these silly and ill hewn pieces had not been mad at it. But ask what testimony
Dr. B^. and Dr, B^e gave of the Book, to many famous witnesses, who yet can
bea^ Testimony of it, and whose Names ^ could easily mention; but I suppose
these Physicians will minch yet nothing of what was their Sentiments of it. Not
that I mention this to Establish any more Reputation to Dr, Browns Book, then
every reader shall be convinced is due to it, none having the power to
Monopolize all men's Judgments, ^o great a Fool is Black to attempt it.

As for these passages mentioned in their Dialogue and taken out of Dr, Browns
Schedule, and called either nonsense or Contradiction; It Is answered Dr, Black
has here proven very honest, and appears in his true Juggling Nature for any
that will be at the pains to compare these passages with Dr, Brouns Book will
find, that the most part of them are wrong (...) down or Courtailled, all of
them, the thread and Cohe-rence of the discourse br^ken and interrupted.

And for that one sentence concerning acuteness, which is taxed of nonsense Dr.
Brown has his end, when they break their Shines on it, for when he is speaking
of acutness necessary in a Physician, he thought fit to wrap up the matter in a
littly obscurity to be a Touchstone for a sufficient acumen, and so those
Blocks having deservedly stumbled on it, is a clear concession they are
Incapable to penetrate far greater mysteries, and with^l there are such
manifest Contradictions in their Dialogue, that he that runs may read (for
indeed few will stay long to read it) This one I shall among many others name,
first they represent Dr. Brown such a stranger to learning, that he has never
piped beyond the Title pages of Books, and a little after, they represent him
to have stolen his Book out of ten or twelve of the best Phisiological Authors
in Physic. --. Dialogue page.

As to what the Black Dr* says that his old method approved by thousands for
many hundreds of years, should not be overturned to establish a new one with
such manifest Contradiction. Now Black speaks like himself, a down right sitten
on brate in Medicine that will allow no advance o^ Improvement therein for
hundreds of years, But, how ever long his method has been used, it has been
surely very little succe^ful, especially since I was any thing capable to make
observation about things, and about three years ago as I remember there was a
Physician in town Confessed that of 30 Patients he had that year of Fevers,
only two of them recovered. And if Black deny this, there will be a list of
their Names gotten and publ^shed, and at that same time fevers treated by the
new method were all happily Cured.

And tho Fevers be not now so frequent as then, perhaps many of them being
frighted away or Metamorphosed into other shapes, because of this Civil war
among Physicians, yet it, ^ very plain, that to diseases formerly called
Fevers, our Physicians now give the n^m^ of Surfeits, Colds, Rheum^tismes,
Feverish fitts, and I do not know what But what effect this is like to have ye
may judge by this story, ane Apothecary came to a Dr, with a great complaint,
saying their Trade would be all ruined, for their Patients and Friends, said
they could take no thing the Physician had prescribed him, for they told the
Physician mistook their Disease, because when they were sure it was a Fever he
called it they do not know what.

And indeed Philom all ordinary Fevers are als well known, and their Intention
and remission, to any intelligent Patient or by stander as to a Physician: And
that by their sensible symptoms, such as Heat, Drought, Pain of the Back, or
Head, a Frequent pulse, and most part sudden invasion of the Desease, etc. Tho
in some Fevers that are called Malignant, the ordinary symptoms are ^ither mild
or absent, or bears no proportion, here the Physician has only the priveledge
to be Vmpire and sole arbitrator: But where ever he usurp^ over Peoples senses
and reason, all he gain^ is to become himself rediculous. Yea some Physicians
lately in Town, professed Enemies to this Method, having cured Fevers by the
same, but under the name of another Desease, when the Patient after he was
recovered, heard what the Drs. called his Disease, he was almost frighted into
the Fever again. thinking what a danger he had been in, when his Physician
mis-tooke his Disease, but at length the Apothicary came, and Cured him, by
telling him the Knack how after this manner they concealed the new Cure of
Fevers.

Where the Black Dr. says, there are only 2 or 3. Young Physicians that
follow, or favor that new Practic^ ^f Curing Fevers. It may be Answer^d, that
there are more that favor it, than follow it, perchance hindered by a too
servil Veneration to Elder Physicians, (that is more for fear of their ill than
any hope of their good,) who perhaps may get that woe, like the Pharisees, for
neither following it themselves, nor suffering others, and these that now own
it, having done it, before ever they knew Dr. Brown, did equally manifest their
accompl^sht Sagacity, in their being among the first that perceived, and
descryed Improvements, and their Ingenuity, that for no Base and By-ends, nor
Slavish Veneration can be brought to pass over, or neglect them, and further
these, tho young in Years are capable to give good proof both by this, and
their other Knowledge, that they are Mature in accomp^ishments, far beyond
these Duarf shits, and sitten on Brats in Medicine, who have made no
advancement therein, in Proportion to their Age; And that Dr. Brown's Enemies
must be such a Fry, appears by their ill natured Papers, Dwarfs and Elfs being
still the most Cursed Creatures in the World.

The Black Dr. Moreover says, that it is not reasonable to believe all these
Persons Instanced by me in my former Letter had Fevers, since Dr. Brown had the
Impudence to call that a Fever, which two of the most eminent Physicians in
Edinburgh said was none; what will he then say, where he is sole Phisician.

It Is Answered, if by Eminent, they mean such as carry that respect to other
Physicians, that the Co^klofts and Garrets do to Houses which a^e always worst
furnished, or which (like the Weathercock above the Churches) serve only to
tell how the Winds of fame Blow. It Is easily gran^ed, that such Eminencies may
sta^e themselves in that Opposition to him, either ou^ of Design, M^lice, or
Ignorance.

But since there is no Persons, or Case named, Dr. Brown is not concerned to do
it: but if any other will do it. I hope there may, for the good of the World,
be given such a clear Representation of the matter, as giv^ng every man his
due, will lend such a blow to their Eminency, that b^^ying their honesty in
its ruin, there will sca^ce be left them als much a^ to swear by.

And withal the Black Doctor says, he could, were it not for fear to give
Offense to their Relations, name a Counterlist of these that have died under
Dr. Brown's new method.

Thanks to Dr. Black for his tenderness, after he has Glutted himself with all
Malicious and vile Calumnies, and Reproaches, wherein Persons of Honor and
good Credit were concerned and named. It seems now he has some remorse, and is
in a fit of Tenderness, and stands at Offense, he that so frankly just now
dealt about Inju^ies; and which is more a^ Offense from a^ unknown hand: when
the Devil. (Oh, I mean the Fox) begins to preach, have a care of the Lambs:
Black is not so desperately wicked, but he can put on a visage of Tenderness to
serve a greater Design: but I think it were greater Tenderness, and more Dr.
Black's Interest too, by such a Counter-list to have alayed the grief raised in
these, who have had their Friends dead under his Methods, upon their seeing so
much probability, they might have been Cu^ed, if they h^d been treated by Dr.
Brown's new Method, and that at a far greater Cost, than such a Ridiculous and
Chimerical Tenderness: but the Truth is, any such List being not only
Impossible to be but there being fines, several that can be added to the List
of these Cured, after the New Method, they are forced to Palliat and smother
the matter after this Ridiculous ^anner, and if it could be given, as the
giving of it in this Case, could not easily offend any Man, so it would be a
considerable Service to the World, and prove a mo^e Solid and Convincing
Evidence for the Club, than all they have either said* or can say: there
pretended Chimerical Tenderness then, is not only Cruelty to the whole World,
but, which none but the highest degree of Fools can be guilty of, Cruelty to
themselves: and therefore whether they be not in this pretense, either Liars,
or Fools, or both, let the World Judge.

It Is here to be Considered, that although this Method of Curing Fevers has proven
as yet so exceeding succesful, that praise to the Author of all Gifts and
Di^coveries, Dr. Brown, and others has for several ye^rs practiced it so
succesfully, that there has scarce any died under it: yet it cannot be thought
Infallible, or ^o sure that it will never miscarry, for there may be such
Compl^cation of other Distempers with the Fever, that sometimes may evacuat the
Effect: yet I think we may ^ay of it, as Donkers in the obs. 32, of his Book de
febre Petechiali says of a Method very like this, which he used so very
succesfully, that scarce any died under it, he thinks it will agree to all
Fevers, whether Epidemical or Malignant, which Testimony of his was most
Learnedly Confuted by one of the Eminencies of the Club, who, upon hearing of
it Magisterially said, he did not much regard the English Physicians, who were
one thing ^o day, and another to Morrow: while in the mean time this Donkers is
a German, and a Physician a^ Cologne*

And albeit the Cardinal Point of this Method of Dr. Sydenhams be Purging, yet
its folly to think, but there is great Art, and Dexteri^y to be used in the
management thereof, the Q^antity, Quality, the Ti^e, and Repetition of the
Purgative, which being used either within, or without the due bounds, and
measure, proves alwayus useless or noxious:

So that the Objection of the Grand Club, that every Apothecaries B^y knows to
do it, is Frivolous and Ignorant: yea, and if ^uch a Method could be found out,
that every Apothecary's Boy could use, it were a rich discovery: and therefore
their Argument tells likewise, they are no ways of Generous or Public Spirits,
but Mean, Base and selfish Persons.

And now ^hilom, I think, I have run over the greatest part of their Learned
mistaken Answer to my first Letter, (passing by the P^^le of di^^orged Viper
Spa^n and fopred, for rakeing therein might raise steem^ very noxious to you)
and sh^wn that they have brought nothing against Dr. Brown, but plain Cavils.
Calumnies, and Foppries, and indeed that which they O^ject in the last place
conce^ning his Education, savours rank of their Innate Ignorance: for they
suppose no Man can be toll^rably qualified, in Medicine, unless he be Bred at a
foreign Un versity. I pray you Club, what Universities were Hypocrates, Galen,
Celsus, and many of the Ancients bred at: and do you not know, that several of
the most accomplished Physicians in England ^ere never out of their own Country,
such as Sydenham, Wills, etc. And that several of the most expert Lawyers in
our own Nation studi^d at home. Pray, did you ever read Hypocrates his Lex,
where he tells* that there are Nomine multi, re vero pauci medici: and he makes
the chief condition, and means of I^stitution, to be Industry and Education
from a Child in the Practice. And indeed Dr. Brown being Educat in that Study,
and Practice from his Childhood near 30 Years time, there is no body will
doubt, but this c^teri^ paribus might he a^s good a mean for his acomplishment
i^ a practice suitable to the genius of the Country, as any breeding at a
foraign university, for a short time would be*

A. to what they object in further persuance of their (...) concerning Dr.
Brown's receiving Degrees at Aberdeen

It Is Answered, first, the receiving Degrees, in Medicine in any place, is very
far from being a Testimony, or proof, of any Man's accomplishment: and is always
given abroad periculo peten^^s, to the greatest Dunces that w^l pay for it: And
to prove this, can there be greater Blocks in the World than the Black Club (as
their Papers do bear Witness) who are all Foraign Graduat Doctors: and has
learned no thing ^broad, but to Parat it to the Vulgar, after their r^turn, in
the Gibbrish of Justitutions, D^ss^ctions, Courses of Chimistry, Colleges of
Medicine they learned abroad, and yet they never conned the A, B, C. of true
and solid Knowledge.

N^xt it is the greatest Impertinency Imaginable to disparage Dr. Brown with
receiving his Degrees at Aberdeen^ where there is a Prof^ss^r of Medicine, for,
besides that several of the considerable Members of the College of Physi^^^ns
at London have received their Degrees there, can any Scots man doubt but the
dignitie^ or Honors flowing from the Soveraign^^y of our own Nation, are much
preferab^e to these Conferred by a Foreign, as is clear in Knight ^^od,
N^bility, and who ever d^iparaged a Doctor of Divinity, because he was Graduat
within the Nation.

But with all (and ^^ seem the Black, do not know so much, albeit they be most
of them Members of this College) the Sover^^gnity of this Nation ha^ by the
Patent given to the College of Physi^ians at Edinburgh, annexed a ^rivilege to
these Graduat within the Country beyond any Graduat abroad; and that is, they
are ipso facto free, and licentiat in the College, without any Trial or
Composition; to all which these Graduat abroad art liable, and what is this,
but to hire us to be wise, and to encourage domestic projects of Virtue, and
Improvement, which these Blacks, as Enemies to Mankind in general, and to our
National Improvement in Particular attempt to discourage and as the State has
most justly given encouragement to Domestic Graduation; So it were in my
Opinion, the great happiness of the Nation, because, greatly tending to the
Improvement of Medicine here, that Convenient Encouragement were given for the
study, and Institution of Medicine within the Kingdom also; for thereby there
would not only be saved a great deal of Money that is Yearly spent in the
Breeding of Physicians abroad; but also Students would be thereby better
acomplisht and Educat in the Practice suitable to the Complexion of the Nation,
and Temper of the Climat; and the Deseases, and Cures proper to the Genius of
the Country would become sooner familiar to them: for young Physicians bred
abroad, return often very raw in Medicine, and always quite strangers to the
Genuine Practice of this Country.

And so Philom. every thinking Man may easily Collect, that the only proper
expedient to redeem the Nation from these Inconveniences, and to promote the
Advantages abovementioned, were to Erect within the Kingdom a Profession of
Medicine, with Hospitals for the Sick, subservient thereto.

And as Dr. Brown has done all in him lay to raise Domestic Improvement and
Virtue by his Graduation at home, so he has given a farther evidence of a
public Temper, by his being very Zealous to project that other National
benefit of Domestic Improvement, the study in Medicine also at home: for he
did not only prudently choice such a Patron to his Book, who (himself, and his
Son having a considerabl^ post in the State) seemed qualified to lend the
Project a Lift: and to whom, as Patron he might have more freedom, and access
^o represent, or negotiat it: but also he gave in to his Lo. a scheme of the
Project in Writ, mentioning withal the retrival of (as Dr. Brown judges) Ane
apposi^^ Fo^d to sustain the Charge thereof; and as his very generous Maecenas
at that time was pleased to look upon the O^erture, as not altogether
contemptible: so it is not to be doubted, but after more mature deliberation,
his Lo^ will in that affair discharge the Office of a true Patriot of his
Country. And this Passage I mention Philomath, not only as directly falling in
my way, but more especially, because Dr. Brwn's Enemies have been so Impudent,
as to traduce his Temper, and designs, and Mis. represent him strangely, also
in these; But now ^oeal to all the World, if ever any Physician in the Nation,
(not to speak of that Degenerous and Malicious Crew his Enemies,) gave such
Testimony of Publickspiritedness, as this one passage (not to mention any more)
clearly Imports he has done.

To return to our Purpose Philom. and to touch the Definition of a Fever, which
the Black Club desiderat in Dr. Brown's Book: They essay to give none
themselves, as being like Ignorant bunglers, far better in throwing down other
Men's Work than building themselves; but how nonlen^efi^al a doubt is this: just
as one that had read both the Black Doctors ^amphlets should ask for a
Description of the Black D^ctor, for as he is therein drawn to the Life, an
Ignorant F^^. and malicious Br^te: So almost all Dr. (...) Book is spent in
explaining the Nature and, (...) of Fevers, whose variety being Indefi^te,
according to the various Disposition of the Impellent and Principle of the
Motion, the various Disposition of the moveable Matter, w^ither Solid or Fluid,
and of the Passages throw which the Motion is made: that variety, I say, cannot
allow us to have a clear Idea of them, be brought under such narrow bounds as a
Definition: but is rather the Subject matter of a Scheme: which Dr. Brown has
essayed to draw in his Book.

(...) Sign of a Fever commonly called Pathognomick be the frequency of the
Pulse. yet in some that are unquestionably Fevers, the Pulse is not frequent,
which I suspect may be solved thus. Albeit the Blood circulat as slowly in
these as it does where the Pulse is more frequent* and consequently the
Contraction and Dilatation of the Arteries, are but of the same Extent, as when
the Pulse is frequent, yet because the Velocitie and swiftness of the
Contraction, and Dilatotion is also lesed; and they become Languishing and
slow; there may be als much time spent in that lesser Contraction and
Dilatation, and in Consequence, the Pulse beat a^ sel^om on the Touch, as it
does in health, where it moves with it is due velocitie, and so here the
Velocity of the Contraction and Dilatation seems lesed, as well as the extent,
of them, In Consequence, I think this Description of a Fever not Improper.

A Fever is an universal d^fficult Circulation of the blood and Humors, throw
their grosness, and obstruction of the Passages, having several Phenomena, as
immediate effects, and others mediat from the efforts of the Impellent or first
mover for redintegration of their motion, which is excited by the Impressions
these Immediate effects make on the Impellent, as frequency of the Pulse and
other orgasmes.

A Fever has no Pathognomick Sign omni, it has a Pathe gnomick Sign soli,
that is a frequent Pulse: and where that is wanting, the present state of the
Bloods Circulation is Collected from a Syndrome, or Concurse of Causes (...) to
produce that grosness of the Blood; the Cause of defficult Circulation; and
from the presence of the usual Concomitants of such a Disposition, and from the
other Phenomena that as Irrdiations and Beams are darted from such a
Disposition: all which are more largely held forth by Dr. Brown in his Book.

Now if any would be satisfied to have a description of Dr, Blacks Nature from
his Phenomena, if Horace who certainly was no ways prejudicated his
Description of the man may be trusted, take it as he gives it Lib; 1, Saty, 4,
Line, 81.

-- Absentemqui rodit amicum,
Qui non defendit Alio Culpante: solutos
Qui captat risus hominum Famamque dicacis
Fingere qui non visa potest: Commissa tacere
Qui nequit: hic niger est, hunc tu Roman Caveto
Englished because perhaps the Blacks understand Latin als little as they do
Greek.

Who honest men reviles behind their Backs,
And never defends them, he dots on senselels Knacks
A public Railer; loves to break a Jest;
And to be merry-andro at a Feast.
Tells all he hears, and adds a great deal more
Which never were seen or ever heard before,
My Country men beware of Dr, Black
A Brutish crew, an Ignorant Devilish pack,
There snarling Barking tells they are Black mouthed Dogs,
Their Cavelling quirking tells they are Ignorant Rogues.
who ever desires a short and easy way, that the meanest Capacity may know a
Black by; take this.

Would you a Black clearly discern
If Dr, Brown but meet him,
Black looks on him so cruel stern
As truly he would eat him.
And to confirm^ all take also Hipocrates the most wise of all Phisicians his
Sentiments, in his Book De Art, Where he says whosoever endeavors with
Artifice of Indiscreet and Dishonest words to disgrace and abuse the
Discoveries and Inventions of others, neither Endeavors to amend them, but
traduces them before the Unlearned, He se^ms incapable to be esteemed prudent,
and betrays his Malicions Nature and Ignorance.

But least I be thought to leave this Malice riden Crew in Wrath, (their number
as well as their Condition deserveing pity) I think it better to take a
charitable farewell, and to leave them with a wholesome and sound advice,
providing they be capable to follow it; and its a prescription of which if they
can but get the right Ingredients, and make right up, it will quickly Cure
their Distempers and miseries especially their Ignorance.

Take of Limpid and smartest Menstruum of Natural Acuteness, as much as ye can
get the more the better That which cannot very eas^ly penetrate the
preluminaries of Dr, Brouns Schedule, especially that paragraph in the first
Section concerning Acuteness, is quite dull and naught. * Not the volal^ie for
that is naught, this Salt must be made after the manner prescrived in the first
Sects of Dr, Browns Schedule. * These must be gathered and prepared after the
manner in the 2d, Sect, of Dr, Browns Schedule.
Impregnat this Menstruum with a sufficient quantity of the fixed salt of true
sense of the Physicians duty and obligation lying on him to accomplishment *
theu add unto this Menstruum, thus impregnat als much as will be proportionat
to the quantity of the Menstruum of serious Industry constant Labor and
inquisitive search, * then seal the vessel with the Hermetical Seal of the
Phisicians seque^^ration from other Imployes or Diversions* And set it in the
Balneo of Speculation, let the Balneum be still kept warm with the Constant
heat of serious and Intent Application of the mind till the Menstruum Extract a
Tincture that looks Brown, if it look Black all is spoilled, it will be of a
Corrosive Poisonous Nature: then Filter the Tinctur throw the Filter of
diligent Observation and so ye will have an Excellent Elixir Philosophorum
called Medicinal Prudence, which ye may Aromatize pro renata when ye come to
use it with some Guts or Grains of Personal Prudence to make it more
Palatable and Passing.

The virtues of the Elixir Prudentioe medicoe.

It Cures all Reeling meg^^m* Giddiness in Physicians, all Deliriums, and
Ravings, yea Madness it self, if it be not natural, or from bad Conformation of
the Parts.

Its excellent to clear their sight, helping all fauits of the eyes, especially
Suffusions; yea, it Cures Infallibly that most dangerous and Epidemical Disease
in Physicians, the Gutta Serena, where the Orgains seem Intainted and Sound to
the Spectators, yet there is nothing but Darkness and Blindness within.

It Is good in all deseases from Venom and Viper spaun, and Malignant Humors,
especially against their Parox^^^sms and Fermentations, when being stirsed up,
they cause excesive belshing out of poisonous Eructations, not withstanding
whereof, they are in hazard to burst the Body of the Patient, and obliges him
still to be Clasped in Ir^n-Bands and Fetters, like a Malefactor.

It Is good against all Stupidity and Fopishness in phisicans, cutting all
Snotty viscuous humors, purge* out all Fopred that dulls their Brains.

It Is good for all Rickityness, Dwarsing and Sitting on in Physicians, making
them advance more in on year then they would otherwise do in Twenty, or Thirty.

It Is good for overflowing of the Gall and Heart-burning, for all Chollerick
Deseases, the Black and Yellow Jaundice, which make all things appear wrong to
them.

It Is good also for the Apetitus Caninus in Physicians, which makes them d^^or^
six times a^s much Employment as they are able to digest or dispatch, which is
a disease ordina^ly incident to these that are Duarft, and sitten one in
Medecin.

I should have also given them a cure for there Malice and wickedness: but that
seems to be a Devil that cannot be cast out without Fasting and Prayer,
therefore I must leave it to the Churchmen.

The Publishers Advertisement to the Reader.
Whereas the Black Doctor says he will Answer Dr. Brown no more which if he
do not, and be als good as his Word, I Will swear that it is the first time that a
Skittish Jade after being so touched in the Quick, did not both Fling and F --
t. too.

If Dr, Black's back be Galled with whipping and Smart I have an extraordinary
Anodine Balsome of Consolation to give him and its this.

Desine Flere niger nondum pro viribus egit. Dr. Brown,

solace thy self, weep not Poor Sorry Black;
For Brown has not yet opened half his Pack.
FINIS.
Errata.
P 13. l. 2. for side, 1. sides 16. d. to. Ibid. l. 13. and 14. f. Iamalmostina
1. I am almost in a ibid l. 19. for shameimust 1. shame must p. 15. l, 16. f.
encounterfit 1. counterfit ibid. l. 25. for advaners 1. advancers p. 16. l. g.
f. fair 1, farie ibid. l. 23. for any 1. many p. 17. l. 1. f. rac 1. rake ibid.
l. 13. f. than 1. as ibid. l. 31. f. Crackhouse 1. Crack-louse P. 19. l. 12. f.
but e^specially 1. especially P. 20. l. 31. f. will 1. wit P. 21. l. 3. f.
scapes 1. Scrapes P. 22. l. ult for cled. 1. Called P. 23. l. 5. for
Concatnation 1. Concatenation ibid. l. 15. f. Penomena. 1. Phenomena P. 24. l.
23. f. idone 1. is done P. 26. l. 13. for bur 1. bar. P. 27: l. 6. f. violne 1.
violence P. 30. l. 25. f. Phaetoins 1. Phaetons ibid. l. 28. f. Centure 1.
Centres P. 33. l. 22. f. sent. 1. Scent.

