TO THE PARLIAMENT Of the COMMONWEALTH of ENGLAND, The Present Authority of
these Nations Assembled at WESTMINSTER.
A Presentation, by a faithful Friend to the Nations, in the Name and by the
Spirit of Jesus Christ, King of Righteousness and Peace, That you may take off
oppression, and free the people from all their cruel bonds that have been
imposed upon their bodies, Estates and Consciences in the days of the reign of
Antichrist, that Truth, justice and Righteousness may come nigh unto us, and
the Kingdom of the Son of God set up among us, that you and we may at last be
free subjects of Christ's Kingdom, where Righteousness, Truth and Peace may run
down and be established in the earth for evermore.
FRIENDS,
IT is acknowledged that the Lord God (who rules over all in the kingdoms of
men) has done great and honorable things by you, and with the face of your
Authority in your days, and since your first appearing on the Throne, mighty
things has been brought to pass in our Nations, by the hand of the Lord,
insomuch that many mountains have been abased, and many sturdy oaks have been
cut down, and many cruel Laws have been made void and even the way of the
Lord, and the way of the coming of his Kingdom has seemed to be prepared; For
the kingdom of Antichrist, and the beast, and the whore (the false Church) has
in many things received a mortal wound in this Nation, and there has been
diverse times the fair blosoms of the glorious appearance of Truth,
Righteousness and Peace, and there have been many fair promises and pretenses
made by many of you, like as if the Kingdom of Jesus had been at our door,
ready to have entered in our Nations, whereby many good hopes we have had to
have been made a perfect free people ere this day, from the chains of
Antichrist and the Whore (the false Church) and from every branch thereof, and
that we might have gotten together in peace and unity, and in freedom from all
the oppressions of our enemies.

But alas, (...) Glorious work of Reformation has been interrupted before our
eye, and the precious buds and good appearance of Glorious fruits has been
withered and blasted in our sight, so that our good hopes have perished, and
our Freedom has been intercepted, through the evil dealing of many unfaithful
men, so that Antichrists kingdom has not been utterly rooted out, nor the
oppressive Laws of the Whore (the false Church) wholly broken down, but the
rather have seemed to be revived again, and the Kingdom of the Son of God has
been warred against, and Truth, Righteousness and just Judgment has yet been
kept out of the Throne, and the Lamb and his Army and followers have been
opposed by open and secret Rebellion, so that though there has been great
appearances of good things now and then, yet ever and anon Clouds and
darkness has overshaddowed the Nations again, and the good hopes of faithful
people have been driven backwards, and Reformation stopped, and your own vows
promises and pretenses have remained unfulfilled, and we are yet an oppressed
people; and the cause of this has been from some unfaithful men that have
neglected the good work of the Lord once entrusted with them, and have sought
themselves, and their own honors and interests, and have setten down at ease
and rest in the flesh, glorying in the spoil of their enemies, and thereby have
they become unfaithful, and unprofitable in carrying on the Lords work, for
some have been of a sincere mind for a season, and made a good progress
toward the attaining a Kingdom of Righteousness, and the removing of all
oppressions, yet when they have begun to seek themselves in this World, and to
take unto themselve the honors and Titles, and possession of their enemies
(whom the Lord cast out before them) and so have become guilty of their enemies
sins, then they have been choked, and the good work of the Lord by them could
not prosper, but it has fallen in their hands even because of their Apostasy,
whom the Lord has removed in his wrath, which to you all may be examples that
ye follow not their steps; For, for these causes I tell you has the true
Reformation been turned backward, and the work of the Lord remained unfinished,
insomuch, that Oppression and injustice, and Tyranny yet remains upon the
people, and ten thousands lies groaning under the yoke and bondage of
Antichrist, and of the Whore (the false Church) in persons, estates and
Consciences, and are ready to depart out of all good hope and considence, that
they shall never see, through you, the finishing of that long since begun good
work of perfect Reformation, and freedom from all oppressions and amongst the
many great oppressions and cruel burdens yet remaining in our Nation, there is
at this day one particular Oppression abounding, under which thousands of the
free People of the Lord and of these Nations, lies unjustly suffering in their
bodies, estates and consciences (to wit) this, way of forced maintenance of the
Ministry by Tithes and money, and yearly stipend, which many are violently
forced to pay through oppression, and contrary to equity, and because hereof is
God not well pleased with you, but his wrath is kindled already, for the cry of
the unjustly afflicted under this one oppression, has entered into his ear,
and he will be avenged speedily, even because of the oppression of his People
in this very particular, who cannot out of a good conscience pay Tithes or
money or any other thing contrary to equity, to the maintaining of this
Ministry and these Ministers which they receive no benefit by, neither are
under their Ministry. And forasmuch as this way of maintaining Ministers and
Ministry by force is wholly Antichristian and of the Whore, (the false Church)
and never was in the True Churches of Christ in the Apostles days, neither did
ever Christ or his Apostles give institution or example for such way of
maintenance to Christ's Ministers; but being that this way of forced maintenance
by Tithes, and money and yearly stipends is come up long since the Apostles
days, and is the very institution of the false church of Rome, and was first
practiced by her authority in our Nation, and by the same spirit at this day
this oppression remains among us; and likewise it is wholly unreasonable that
one sort of people should be compelled to maintain an others Ministers whom
they do not bear, nor receives their Ministry; and also this way of Maintenance
is one of the greatest oppressions in our Nation, and many hundreds of my
Brethren have suffered great oppression thereby, (...) the loss of estates, and
many the loss of their liberties, and some the loss of their lives also, in so
much that this ^poression is fully ripe to be cut down, and removed out of our
land.

Wherefore it lies upon me from the Lord, to request it of you, and to lay it
upon you, as being the present Authority that has power to do it, that you
speedily order the removing of this oppression of forced maintenance to
Ministers out of the Nation, and that no man henceforth be compelled or forced
to maintain Ministers and Ministry by Tithes or money or otherwise, but that
every man be left free, to give what and how much as he pleases, to what
Minister as he will; only if any do hire a Minister, and promise so much, then
it is equity that he that is hired have the benefit of the Law, to receive what
he is promised by force, if he cannot freely; But let not any people be forced
by your Law to hire Ministers, neither one fore to maintain another peoples
Minister, but let every sort of people live under what Ministry, and hear whom
they please, and also maintain their own Ministers that labors for them, and
this is reasonable, and would content all the faithful people, for it is wholly
unequal that any people should be so ^ed and compelled to maintain another
peoples Minister, which does no work for them, and it is also wholly
inconsistent with the good Government of a Commonwealth, and absolute contrary
to Christian Liberty, and is a very chain of Antichrist upon the good people,
and the main cause of heartburnings, and strifes and envyings among subjects,
and one of the chief props of deceivers and false ministers, that covets to run
after great benefices, and cares not for Souls, and also the God of Heaven is
vexed with this abomination, and it is certain that you and the Nations shall
near be established in true and perfect peace and unity, while this oppression
remains, nor till that in all things Conscience be left free, to the exercise
of the Spirit of God.

Wherefore I am come to your door on the behalf of the Lord and all (...)
people, and (...) cry, and ten thousands with me (in (...) your Nation, let
this unreasonable, oppressive and Antichristian practice of forcing maintenance
to Ministers be speedily removed out of our Land, and let the persons, Estates
and Consciences of your faithful Friends be freed from this cruel burden, that
they have long born by your and their very enemies; and also I lay it upon you,
that you clear and free your selves in all things from the false church, and be
not servants to her, drink not her cup of fornications, neither in any thing
carry the Whore; And hereby should that long born and heavy yoke of Antichrist
be removed, that has laid upon the good peoples Persons, Estates and
Consciences, and false ministers that runs for hire, and not to win Souls (who
are oppressors) should hereby be limited, and the faithful Ministers of
Christ, who are sent of him, would be the more encouraged to Minister freely,
who have received freely, and this would be the way to bring Blessings and
Peace amongst us, and to rejoice the hearts of the Righteous, and to stop the
spirit of oppression, and hereby you would be made honorable, and the Lord
himself glorified, and his people a free people; So that for these causes, it
is upon me to demand it of you, that you remove the oppression aforesaid, of
forcing maintenance for Ministers, and leave every sort of people free to
maintain their own Ministers, as the Lord shall lead them.

For this was the way in the true Churches, the Ministers of Christ did eat of
the milk of the flock which they kept, and of the fruit of the vineyard which
they had planted, freely given them, and they reaped carnal things where they
sowed spiritual, yet as a free gift unto them, and not by force, nor as a debt,
for this way of forcing maintenance was never in being among the true Churches,
but is of the false church, both in its Original and in its standing to this
day, and out of her cup (who has made Nations drunk) has our Nation drunk
this abomination and oppression, and it is the remainder and one of the
strongest parts of the Whore of Rome yet left in England, and it is full time
to be removed clean away from us. And if you do it, then shall we have cause to
believe that you intend well to the Nations, and our long decayed hopes
concerning you will be again revived, and our Faith will be increased, that you
will yet suffer Reighteousness and Mercy to flourish, if you take off every
oppression, and make the people free; but if you do it not, but will be the
imposers of unrighteous things upon the people under you, and will carry the
Whore, and yet drink her cup, and compel others to drink it, then the Lord will
break you to pieces, and bring freedom to this Nation some other way, and you
and they and the Beast and the Whore and your oppressions shall all fall
together, and sink as a stone into the Sea, and your remembrance shall be
blotted out, and perpetually perish; and these are the Words of the Lord God
unto you, wherefore that you may live in true honor, and not perish in
perpetual shame, and that the Lord may bless you, and not make you a curse, and
that the Lords people may pray for you, and not against you; I say, consider in
the fear of God, and with a willing mind grant this my desire, and in so doing
you fulfill the Will of the Lord, and thereby be established over all your
enemies. Many things more on the Lords behalf I have to demand of you, but this
for present, from a lover of Righteousness, and a Friend to this Nation.

EDWARD BVRROVGHE.
London, the 12th of the 7th Month, 1659.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1659.


