Unto his Grace, His Majesty's high Commissioner and the Right Honorable the
Estates of Parliament. The humble PETITION of Mr. John Buchan Agent for the
Royal Burrows.
Shows,

THat where I entered into a Contract with the Royal Borrows, in the year 1690,
whereby for the Power and Commission which they granted to me, to cause put the
Act of Parliament made in their favors, the 14th of J^^ne, 1690. To Execution
against unfree Traders, and to apply all the Fynes, Penalties and Casualities
to my own use and behoof, and to Communicate the benefit of Trade to Burghs of
Regality and Barrony, and others, as I should think fit, I oblidged my self to
relieve the said Royal Burrows during the time of the said Contract of Ten
Pounds of the Hundred Pound of the Taxt Rolls imposed upon the Royal Burrows by
Act of Parliament, which Contract was by the Act of Parliament, 1693. Entitled
Act for the Communication of Trade, Ratified and Approven, and ^arder, It was
statute that sicklike Execution should pass against the Burghs of Regality and
Barronie, and others, for inbringing of their Proportion for Relief of the
Roy^l Burrows, which any of them should agree to, ^or the said Communication in
the same manner as is usewal against the Royal Burrows, for inbringing of the
Cess payable by them; Likeas by the said Act, all Persons whatsomever, are
strictly discharged to Exercise any kind of Trade, under the Penalties
contained in the Acts of Parliament, except Burgesses, Indwellers in Royal
Burghs, and these who pay their Proportion of the said Quota to be paid by the
Burghs of Regality and Barrony, and other unfree Traders a foresaid.

In prosecution of which Contract and Act, I agreed with a few Burghs of
Regality and Baronie that for the Communication of a free Trade, they should
undertake their proportion of the said Ten pound, such as Greenock,
Borrowstounness and Prestounpans, etc. Likeas there arising some Debate betwixt
the Merchant-Traders and the Craftsmen in the said Burghs, the Lords of Session
by their Decree in foro, Found, that the Craftsmen tho not Merchant-Traders
should be liable to be stented with the Merchant Traders of the said Burgh,
seeing they and their Children might have the benefit of the said Communication,
sicklike as Craftsmen in Burrows Royal; but all my Diligence not proving
successful to bring the Generality of the Vnfree-traders in Burghs of Regality,
Barony, and others, to an Agreement for what might be their just Propertions of
the said Ten pound, tho both small and easy, I to facilitat the matter, did
proportion the said Ten pound upon the several Shires of the Kingdom, for the
Unfree-Traders within the same, observing this Rule after the Experience I had
learned in this Affair, by much Trouble and vast Expenses, that the Proportions
were so ordered, so as the Unfree-Traders in all the several Shires did not pay
the half of what was paid by the Royal Burrows within the said Shire (Trade
with Trade being compared) Which List of Proportions I likewise exhibited to
the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council, who after having considered the same,
did find it so reasonable, both for the Ten pound, and three pound ten shilling
more, which they allowed me to add to it, for my Advance of Money, and great
Charges and Expenses, that they ordered a Proclamation to be emitted,
appointing the Commissioners in the respective Shires to meet, in order to the
treating with me and my Substitutes, how the said Quota's for the Shires might
be subdivided upon the Burghs of Regality and Baronie, and other Vnfree-Traders
within the same, but though I by my self and Substitutes did attend the Meeting
of the said Commissioners, yet their Meeting and my, Treating with them, by
reason of little Questions moved by these Vnfree-Traders proved successless;
And that notwithstanding that I had obtained Decreets in foro before the Lords.
Finding. 1. That all Retailers of foreign Commodities and Staple-goods, not
Burgesses and Indwellers in Burghs Royal, were liable as Vnfree-Traders. And 2.
That the pain of Vnfree-Traders was Escheat of Movables, and that the same
fell to me by the foresaid Contract and Act of Communication; Which Difficulty
proving thus insuperable, I was necessitate to lay the case before the Royal
Burrows, who being satisfied that I had used all possible Diligence, both with
the Unfree-Traders themselves, and likeways with the Commissioners of the
respective Shires, and by recovering the foresaid Decreets before the Lords of
Session, were willing to take my Contract off my hand for hereafter, but still
leaving the Burden of Bygones upon me, which plainly is such a Burden as I am
not able to bear, but will infallibly sink me and my small Fortune, if Remedy
be not provided, seeing then that the Grounds above laid down, do fully obviat
all the Petitions offered against me, as particularly that from Air Shire,
which complains of my making of their Corns, Cattle and Malt liable, whereas I
only charge the Vnfree-Traders in foreign Commodities and Staple-Goods. and
that from Musleburgh which directly complains of the Lords Decree in foro
against themselves, without any Protest. And that of Kelso which only complains
of Exorbitancy throw their own default, without any Reason, and so of the rest;
And that I have truly paid in to the General Receiver what I crave to be
relieved of, and that I am content this Honorable Court of Parliament appoint
any Course that may be effectual for my foresaid most just Relief in a matter
wherein I have acted most carefully and diligently by warrant of the foresaid
Act of Communication; I shall only farther propose to your Grace and the
Honorable Estates of Parliament, that the Method that appears most necessary
and expedient for remeeding this Affair is, That there may be a Commission of
Parliament to a few able and proper Persons to proportion and settle the
foresaid Sub-division amongst the unfree Traders with power to Determine, and
with siclike Execution as is appointed for His Majesty's Cess, which Method is
humbly suggested to the Parliaments Choice with all Deference to their better
Judgment for my relief as to bygones: And as for the time to come, I most
humbly offer to give over my Contract, and that if this High and Honorable
Court of Parliament shall think fit, the Condition of the Royal Burrows may
return to the same State wherein it was before my said Contract, and the Act
1693, Ratifieing the same.

May it therefore please your Grace, and the High and Honorable Court of
Parliament, to take the Premises to your Consideration, and appoint such
Methods and Remeedies, as I may be Relieved and Re-imbursed of the great Sums I
have Advanced in manner foresaid; and that for time coming this Matter may be
so ordered as may be most easy for all Traders, and most Advantageous for the
Common-Good of the Kingdom, And your Grace, and Lordships Petitioner shall ever
pray etc.




