THE CASE OF THE Hackney-Coachmen.
THAT by an Act made in the 13th. and 14th. Years of the Reign of the late King
Charles the II. the Number of Hackney-Coaches was limited to Four Hundred, and
the Rent at 5 l. per Annum for every Coach, which Act expired about Fourteen
Years ago, that during the time the said Act was in Force, whilst Horsemeat was
cheap, the Coachmen supported themselves, and paid their Rent, but in dear
Years many of them broke, and were not able to pay, whereby they lost their
Licenses.

That soon after the Expiration of the said Act, many Inholders, Victuallers,
and other Persons set up Coaches, and by the greatness of their Number
destroyed one another, for there have not been fewer than Fifty Persons that
have broken in every Year since the said Act expired; and those that are now in
Being, have run out all they are worth, and besides that, have contracted great
Debts to Tradesmen, in hopes of keeping up the Trade until it should be
regulated again in Parliament, so that there is not now in being one Coachman
in a Hundred that is worth One Hundred Pounds and all his Debts paid.

That two Years since, when the Coachmen by the Poll Act, were appointed to pay
Five Pounds for every Coach, diverse of them not being able to pay it, were
constrained to leave off their Calling, and by that means they and their
Families are become chargeable to the Parishes where they live, and a many
others by the dearness of Horsemeat, and decay of Trade, are daily forced to
leave their Trade, so that the Number of Hackney-Coaches kept in London, and
the Places comprised within the Weekly Bills of Mortality, in January last,
amounted to Eight Hundred and Thirty Three, and no more, as appears by an
estimate taken by two credible Persons, and proved by their Affidavit taken
before a Master in Chancery: And if all the Money these Coachmen now get were
deposited in one Persons hands, and equally distributed to them all, it would
not be sufficient to buy their Horses Meat; And if the Act should pass for
setting a Fine of One Hundred Pounds on every Coach, and four Pounds per Annum
Rent, and the Number at Eight Hundred, the said Coachmen will be thereby
utterly undone, and they and their Families must become chargeable to the
Places where they live, they having not been brought up to any other Trade or
Calling.

l. a License, and did not many Persons Licensed, that had no Coach, let their
Licenses to hire for 10 s. per Week, and why may not the same be done now.

l. per Annum; and as to the letting out their Figures at 10 s. per Week; true
it is that some Licensed Persons, who had not Coaches, did in Winter time, when
a Parliament was sitting, and Horsemeat cheap, let their Licenses so, but then
this was but for a small time, for those persons would have been glad to have
let their Licenses to any person by the Year, at Four Shillings a Week. And
further, the Number then was but Four Hundred, and by this Act, the Number is
proposed to be doubled, so that there can of course be but half that Work to
every Coach.



Charles the II. and it has made the Streets more commodious to walk in then
they were, by which the Coachmens work is much abated.

The Truth of which matters the Hackney-Coachmen can make appear to the
Honorable House of Commons if they may be permitted so to do.


