THE CASE OF THE Distillers in and about London, In reference to a Duty of
Excise intended to be laid upon Low-Wines, By a Bill for an Additional Excise
upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquors.
IN the twelfth year of King Charles the Second, two pence a Gallon was laid
upon Strong Waters or Aqua-vitae, but there was never any Duty laid upon
Low-wines till the twenty second year of King Charles, and then two pence a
Gallon was laid for six years upon Low-wines made of Wine, or Syder, or other
Materials Imported; by reason of which Duty last mentioned, the Distiller could
not make the same as formerly, so that the King had not any advantage thereby,
as by the Entries in the Excise may appear.

Low Wines is only a preparation for making of Proof-Spirits or Aquavitae, and
is not sold nor consumed in Kind, nor is it fit to be Drank, but is constantly
Distilled into Proof-Spirit or Aqua-vitae; and three or four Gallons of Low
Wines will make but one Gallon of Proof-Spirit, all the rest is thrown down the
Kennel, not being fit for any use.

In the First Year of the late King James, four Pence a Gallon Additional Duty
was laid upon Proof-Spirits or Aquae-vitae, which makes the First Duty upon it
six Pence a Gallon; and that Duty was and is so heavy upon the Distillers, that
many have sunk under it, being a third of the full value of the Proof-Spirit
when made, and several of them are become Prisoners, not being able to advance
their Spirits proportionable to so great a Duty, which has hindered the
Consumption of great quantities of course Malt, fit only for the Distillers use.

If a Duty shall be laid upon Low Wines, which is but a preparation for making
the Proof-Spirit or Aqua-vitae, it will not only hind^^ the Consumption of many
thousand Quarters of Malt yearly, and the Consumption of Molosses and course
Sugar that comes from their Majesty's Plantations, but also Ruin the
Distiller, and consequently many hundred Families, and will not Advance their
Majesty's Revenue.

There is a Clause mentioned in this Bill, that it shall be Lawful for the
Officer at all times to enter into the House of any Distiller, Retayler or
Dealer in any Spirits or Aqua-vitae, which Clause is Destructive to the
Distillers Trade, for that few Persons will deal in Aqua-vitae or Spirits, if
they shall be disturbed at all times in the Night, only for dealing in the said
Commodity: And that Clause can be of no Advantage to their Majesty's, because
the Maker is only liable to pay the Duty, as the Brewer is for Beer and Ale;
and it was never thought reasonable to give Power to any Officers to disturb
the Victualer at any time for dealing, in Beer and Ale.

THE Case of the Distillers, June 12. 1689.


