The Character of a Judge. In a Letter from the Country, to a Friend in the
City.
SIR,
HAving heard a Report, that you are to be made a Judge; I shall, in confidence
of our former Familiarity, take that Liberty, betimes; which your
after-Character might restrain; by giving my Thoughts concerning the Weights of
this Post.

It Is one of the most difficult, and dangerous, to the person who undertakes
it, that occurs in the Government of this World; and you are entering into one
of the most Capable and Best Societies in Christendom, who will very narrowly
observe your Halting.

The Truth of my Position will best appear, by laying down the ordinary
Qualifications of a Tolerable Judge: Which may be Reduced to two main Heads;
namely, Capacity, and Integrity.

Under Capacity, is Comprehended:

1mo. A Competent Knowledge of Law, Governed by Good Sense. Neither of which,
separatly, will suffice.

I shall not enlarge upon this Point; because, common Subjects, must suppose,
that their Rulers have taken care thereof.

2do. Courage, Tempered with Modesty, is Requisite for Exerting such Knowledge
as is mentioned above.

Either of these, by it self, may, perniciously Deboard. For,

Natural Complexion may be such, as, on the one hand, being Heated, Swells over
all the Banks of Law: Or, on the other hand, may, be so Chilled, upon the
appearing of a great Party or Public Cause; as to sink under the Weight of
Timidity. Both which proceed from a Secret Spring of Natural Defects; often,
without any set Design of doing Injustice.

The Cure of which Diseases will be suggested under a subsequent Head, of
Self-observation.

Integrity does Comprise many Ingredients, Reducible to Impartiality, and
Diligence.

Without these Virtues, even a solid Understanding accompanied with a discreet
Boldness, will not serve the Ends of Judgment designed by GOD and Man; but, on
the contrary, may be abused to the worst purpose of perverting Justice more
Effectually.

Impartiality Excluds:

1mo. All Respect of Persons (beyond Civility of Good Breeding) whether Parties
or Pleaders, concerned in a Cause: And is entirely directed by the Merit or
Demerit of the thing, proven or to be proven, in Law.

Nothing is more agreeable to the nature of Judgment; and more necessary for
Restraining the Arbitrary Proceedings of Judges: Which is the ground whereupon,
Scripture, Reason, and Humane Authority, has fixed this Indefezible Rule. And
which is to be extended even to casus pro amico; Though, in the most dubious
Case, or smallest Matter.

Because,

For discovering this great Snare (of casus pro amico) the most dangerous that
is laid by the Fowler; It is to be observed,

1mo. That there are Rules in Law, for decideing the most dubious Cases which
can occur. And therefore,

2do. These Rules are not to be broken, for personal Respect to any private
Friend, or public Party, whatsomever.

The Rules are obvious in the Laws and Lawyers of all Nations; Even when the
Arguments on both Sides are, otherways, perfectly Equal, and the Judges
Conscience cannot distinguish any difference in the Balance: Namely, that in a
matter thus doubtful, he is to give his Answer for the Defendant, or Possessor;
Except in some Cases, where the Legal Favor of the Cause (not of the Person)
predomines the Privilege or Presumption which stands for the said Defendant or
Possessor; as it falls out sometimes, pro pia causa, pro Liberate etc. contra
fiscum, contra animum donandi etc.

These Subsidiary Maxims of the Law it self, make the most unclear Case in it
self, to become most clear, as to the Issue of Decision: And therefore, it is
still according to Law. Or if, after all, it still remain obscure, so that the
Judge cannot vote from full Conviction (which Paul calls, of Faith) then the
Law it self allows a Non-Liquet.

But to Surrogate in place thereof, the Judges Personal Respect; is
inconsistent with all the Principles of Nature and Religion. For, it is an
Usurpation; he having no Commission from GOD or the Sovereign, to make the
least Distinction betwixt his proper Friends; and those who are not so: It Is
Robbery; to take from another, who has the Misfortune not to be his Friend, and
adjudge it to the person who happens to claim that peculiar Privilege: It Is
directly opposite to Sacred Write, which forbids Respect of Persons in
Judgment, without Limitation; The very favoring of the Lowness of the Poor,
as well as the Luster of the Mighty: It Is Incompatible with the Oath de fideli;
which reguards, Equally, all the Leidges, without Exception of the Receivers
Kin* Friend, or Allay: It Is against the common Sense of Mankind, painting
Astraea, or Justice, with a Balance perfectly equal, without those Senses,
which might discover Names; And thereby Inveigle in a Bias: It does not answer
that Confidence, which Prince and Subjects may and ought to expect in Judges:
The Prince being no more concerned in their Friends than other Leidges; And
which of the Subjects would not stand in Horror and A-gast, if the Judges
Friends (whether Parties or Pleaders) might be lawfully preferred, in all such
Cases as he shall imagine to be dubious?

Yet, still, it may be said that there remains a Legal Felicity in standing
Friendly with Judges: Since, thereby, 1mo. They, having a good Opinion, by
Knowledge, of the Parties Character, may Watch the more narrowly that a
prevailing Impression or Influence do not overrun a Cause, Just in it self.
Yea 2do, In order to search out that Justice which he knew not; being
overlooked by Lawyers; I do not see why a Judge may not borrow from his own
private time, for supplying ea quae desunt Advocatis, in point of Law; or even
such Facts as arise from those which are Represented in the Process.

Thus, You see the utmost that I (though claiming a great share in your
Friendship) do pretend to, if my Cause ever come before you.

Diligence, ought to be versant about two main Objects: Namely, It Is to be
observant of the Judge himself; and of the Business of Judgment.

As to the first,

Though a Judge be possessed of the forgoing good Qualities, yet he needs to have a
continual Watch over his Affections and Demeanaor; least he be surprised by
sudden Emergents, that may derogat from the Respect due to his Character; or,
at least, bring a stain on Religion, and Diffidence in his Justice; when his
Conduct approaches to, or has the appearance of, Evil; though it fall out merely
through Indolence or Inadvertance, without any formed Project of wresting
Justice. Thus;

When one has a Plea to manage with a Person of Eminency in Church or State,
or of singular Parts; a Man of a considerable Party, or one that is near in
Blood-Relation, or Confidence, or of the same Fraternity, with the Judge; some
are apt officiously to Pity and simpathise with the Party supposed to ly under
these disadvantages: Unless the Judge disabuse them by discovering a more than
ordinary tenderness to his side.

When a Man is obnoxious to the Judges displeasure; either, because of his
having ill Principles or Practices, Private or Public, without doors; or upon
account of by-quarrels: He Is presently in a Terror that this will Sway
Judgment against him; and others are too apt to go in with this Foolish
Notion: Unless it be Confuted by the Judge's distinguishing the Person from the
Cause, and one Case from another.

Yea, though a Regular Passion be justly Excited in a Judge; as when Parties are
Litigious, drive off their Causes to the End of a Session, Lawyers are weak, of
suspected Character, or Ramble; it no ways alters the Rule of Judgment in the
principal Cause: but only Subjects the Person to Legal Chastisements, of
Expenses, Fine, or Reprimand.

Nothing gives greater occasion to the Scandalous Trade of Counting Noses,
before hand, upon the presumption of a Judge's having espoused a side; then the
voteing of a Cause in Bulk, upon the whole Matter; As if the particular
Decisive Points thereof could not abide the test. And a Judges going through to
vote in every Point (though perhaps not tenible, by it self) of a Cause, thought,
by him, to be just in the main; is equally inexcusable: For evil is not to be
done that Good may come of it.

A Judges useng weak, or Impertinent, Arguments, even for a Good Cause; gives
an Impression to the Audience, that he is too earnest, that it should carry,
without Respect to the Justice or Merits of it: As the Passions of Anger, or
Pleasure, betrayed by Words or even Gestures; give Impressions, that Affection
predomines over Reason, in that Matter.

If one speak much, where there is no necessity in respect that the general
Bent goes Right; Beholders will conclude, that it is a Vanity to be esteemed
Valuable, or to inhaunce Employment on his Dependants: Besides, that it is a
Robbing the Leidges of that time, to which they are Entitled for dispatching
their Causes.

Yea, even an Affectation of Gratifying one, or Mortifying another; though the
Cause will bear the Decision; is acting from a wrong Principle, in an Irregular
manner, and to a sinistrous End: Either of which, does vitiat a thing, though
good upon the Matter.

A Christian must abstain not only from Evil, but likeways from the very
Appearance of it, or approaches to it. And therefore, when ever the Judge
Discovers, by the Appearance, of the Parties, or Pleaders, or Cause; that the
perverse Notion of a Bias may be surmised: He ought, with a Jealous Eye, to be
upon Guard, and take a peculiar Care, for making appear to the World, that he
decides from a Principle of Justice, and is not acted by any base End of
Gratification, etc.

But nothing is more unlike to this Spirit and Conduct; if any should lead
about, industriously, those B -- ts (called P -- ts) as ware exposed to the
People; or make a Semblance of ordering Processes so, as to Enhaunce the
Perquisites of Servants. Obstinacy, likeways, in an Intenible Point, does,
mostly, presuppose such Springs, though often Invisible; and Tirrannical
Grimaces, make a show of Will, frequently, when Power is deficient: at least,
we who are Countrymen, and our Agents, make this Interpretation of such
Appearances: Wherein it is not fit to be more explicit.

There are many other Duties, though somewhat of different nature, Incumbent on
a Judge; the Omission whereof does mightily stain his Character. Thus

The useing Scripture-Phrases, merely to make a Chime or Jest; is the worst of
Sacrilege: And even Coarse Expressions, tho quaint enough in private
Conversation; Expose the Gravity of a Judge's Character, to the scorn of the
Mobb. Solomon sought out fit Words.

A Court ought to beware of Covering, by a Decision betwixt two Parties; any
Transaction in prejudice of a third: Or laying a Precedent, as a train; for
another succeeding Case. Which is, in some degree, like the sentence against
NABOTH; and a prostituting Judgment, to a Cloak of Intrigue. An endeavor to
spoil a just Interloquitor, by an ackward state of the Case; or stretching the
words so high, (tho needlessly) as it cannot stand: and finally, all Captious
Cunning, against the true Import of the thing, or the meaning, of the Majority;
may be Ranked under the same head.

Let every one be persuaded in his own mind; for what is not of Faith (doubting)
is Sin. And therefore, no reguard to the party, or a fellow Judges opinion,
must make one to stiffle his own, deliberate, Sentiment; and Reasons for it.
Since that would be to hold the Truth in unrighteousness; and he who does not
Endeavor to hinder wrong, when he ought, and (probably) may do it; is an
Interpretative actor in it.

No Judge ought to make use of his Authority (but at most by modest and
Reasoning Offices) to Induce a Transaction; whatever be his Inclination or
interest therein. Least, like the Sons of Eli, he make Justice to be abhored
upon the account, of what is, even, Ceded to by that Concussion.

What is premised does agree pretty Exactly with the Scripture- and
Law-Character of a Judge.

A Man of Truth, fearing GOD, able and ready to Judge the People at all
Seasons; neither respecting the Person of the Poor, nor Honoring the Person of
the Mighty. He Searches out the Cause, which he knows not; and to that end,
stays Judgment, tho it seem Just, at the time, till the other party come and
Search it out. He Is never Ruffled with Passion, whatever Occurr; knowing that
GOD guides the meek in Judgment; and the Wrath of Man works not the
Righteousness of GOD. If the Case be too hard at present; he waits till this
also be revealed to him: But Acts nothing through heast; for A furious Man
abounds in Transgression. Tho there be a Real, Yea unnacountable, Escape in
a fellow-Judge; yet they are to Honor one another before the People. And even
as to private Persons, whose Names fall to be mentioned in a Cause; the Judge
is not to receive an evil Report; since Veritas convitii non Excusat
in-Juriantem, except in so far as it Influenceth the Cause, being a direct
Ingredient in the Decision thereof. He will, likewise, commend himself to the
Consciences of others; Especially those that are without. He Will Covet Respect
rather from Love than fear: This last being the affection for which the Devil
desires Sacrifice from the Pagans. Redeeming of others time, from his own Idle
words; and speaking the Truth in his Heart; must Superceed Vain Discourses, and
Exclude Arguments which a Man himself does not believe. As the wresting
another words, is Equal to that Contention and Foolish Babbling, which is
forbidden in Religion.

But the most dangerous Rock, to an Honest-Man; is a pretense of Equity, or
Private knowledge; in Collision with Law, or Public Knowledge, by the Records
of Process, etc. As to which: The Ordinary Distinctions will Easily dissentangle
him with sufficient safety. For

As to Law: Legal Equity (called quitas Scripta) is a Law: And the Law it self
has bounded it, to Forms, Penalties, ceasing of the adequate Reason of a
Statute or Custom, etc. Which therefore, the Pretorian or Chancry-power may
apply. But Imaginary Cerebrine Equity that starts up upon sight, and Fancies
that the Law it self is not Just in a particular Case; Turns the Judge (who is
only an Executor) to a Legislator; and Sets up indigested notions or Magotes,
in place of the Solid Rules of Law that have been Established by the wisdom and
Experience of Nations. In a word, it opens a Sluice to the greatest mischeifs,
of Ignorance, Lasieness, or Affection; that would Reduce our Rights and State
to a Chaos.

As to Fact. Nothing is more Inconsistent then one Man's being Judge and Witness
in the same Cause; which plainly Excludes private knowledge, or unproven
Assertions of the parties, from being his Rule. Besides, that he is only a
single Testimony at best; and, frequently, the Subject is not Capable of such a
proof, even tho there were Witnesses Concurring. Nevertheless; it is Generally
thought, that though, positively, he cannot Decern on his proper knowledge; where
there is not sufficient Legal Proof: Yet, Negatively, he may assoilzie; when
the pretended Legal Evidence ei non faciunt fidem, upon his proper certain
assurance of the Contrary: at the least he may, in that Case, abstain from
Judging.

As to the second; Concerning the Judges Diligence in Expediteing the Business
of Judgment: It may be Comprised under two Heads; Namely 1mo. What relates to
the Discussion of Processes. 2do. What reguards Acts of Court or Sederunt, for
dispatch thereof.

It Is needless to Expatiat upon the Diligence requisite in Processes; either as
to keeping particular Legal Dyets, or a careful perusal of Papers put into the
Boxes: Since you will see a bright Example thereof in your Colleagues. Who are,
to the Conviction of all that have opportunity of knowing it; under a
surprising Fatigue; and consider the several Points of Causes, more Minutely
and Gradually, then, perhaps, any other Judicature in Europe. There being few
Cases of Intricacy or Import, which want a Triple-Concoction (at the Fore-Bar,
Side-Bar, and Inner-House) in a very short time: And this is Equivalent, with
far less Dela y, Trouble, and Expense; to the several Appeals that are made
from Court to Court in other Constitutions.

This Industrious Study of Processes has two Incident Advantages; Namely, One,
to the Public; For when the Ordinary Possesses the Cause, he can Reduce it to
nete Points: Which not only abridges much Writting and time, when it is
determined by himself, or Reported; but, likewise, will shortly, make the Body
of our Law, one of the most distinct and determined, in Europe; by a Tract of
Multiplicity and uniformity of Decisions. The other good Effect thereof will
Redound to the Judge himself: So fixing his knowledge of the true State of the
Case, that, thereafter, he soon discovers, with Ease; any Fallacious
Representation of it, made to himself or the whole Lords: and thereby, is proof
against the various Inventions of parties; for prolonging the Plea, or making
the Judges Affections to Swerve, in it.

The Convictions of Conscience, upon afounded knowledge, are the surest
antidote against the Plague, of all manner of Solicitations: because, this
Inextinguishable Light cannot be Evaded by the Delusive Colors, whereby the
best Laws that ever were made for Impartiality, may be incroched on; Not
Excepting the Excellent Fences which the Noble Bench have Set; Calling in
Honor to their Assistance; against this pest.

Notwithstanding of all which Amaseing Accurracy of our Judges: Yet there is a
great prejudice or Vulgar Error; taken up by severals of the less-thinking, at
home, and amongst our Neighbors; against that part of the Constitution, by
which they may, and do, alter Interloquitors; upon a second View of the Case:
before it be Terminat by an Vltimale Extract.

But this mistake will Evanish, or rather, resolve into one of the greatest
Glories of that Judicatory; when it is considered: 1mo. That, in the Nature of
the thing; Man is Fallible: And therefore, if he either shut his Eyes, from a
Headstrong Obdiuracy; against further Light (under competent Regulations) or
do not change upon Discovery of greater Light, which afinite Mind may not have
looked too with penetration enough, at the first presentment: It Is a Criminal
Debarring of Truth, or a direct Stiffling of Conscience. 2do. In Reputation;
nothing can more Demonstrate the Impartiality and self-denial of the Judge;
then the giveing up of his own (Imaginary) Honor (which some, falsely think to
be Interested in a former Vote) as an Act of Fealty and Homage to venerable
Justice; which is a Ray of Divinity; when it comes to appear in it is true
Luster. But further 3tio. In Experience; these alterations, for the most part,
Occurr upon Representations of new Fact; not formerly Informed Distinctly by
the Lawer; or, in the throng of Bussiness, not narrowly noticed by the Judge.
Neither of which is a ground of the least Reflection upon the best Humane
Understanding and Memory; in such a Multiplicity of Affairs, as are known to
flow upon that Court, especially toward the End of Sessions. For 4to. In the
Examples of other Nations; there is a far greater variation allowed. Thus, not
only does one Court alter, upon Appeal, what another had determined (all which
Gradations, are Comprised in the Constitution of our Seffion as aforesaid) but
likewise, even the same Supreme Court does, frequently, overrule what was
Established before; as appears by their Printed Reports and Decisions. And
there is a Revisio Revisionis at least, allowed of the same individual Cause;
in those Sovereign Tribunals which pretend to be the most Nice and Expeditious.

There is an Obvious Advertisement which arises, naturally; from this
prodigious Toil, in taking up at first; or Subsequent Review of Causes,
amongst us; and from many other greater Drudgeries incident to Ordinaries, on
the Bills, Witnessess, Compts, and Rankings, etc. Namely, that the Judge do his
duty, with Cheerfulness; without fretting at so great a Labor. For; he has
Sworn this Fealty to his GOD and Prince: And therefore must not Grudge in
paying that Redendo of Homage and Service. There is a Natural and Religious
Delight in doing good, with all the might; whence it Follows, That the greater
fatigue, Especially when it is Successful; will Enhance and Aggrandize the
allacrity Besides that, such Common Offices being Transmuted to Acts of
Religion toward GOD and Man: they look forward to proportional Degrees of
Glory, at the last Recompense of Reward. Lastly, this Rational Exercise of the
Soul, is the most Manly and Noble, that Exists in Humane, Civil, Society: Not
being Subject to the uncertainties of the Philosophers, and Physicians; nor
obnoxious to the Variety of Humors, which disturb the Lawyer, and Statsman,
etc. And therefore, the most Ingenious and Sensible Man must be Enamoured with
it.

In reflecting upon Acts of Sederunt: I remember to have heard, that, by your
Institution, you have sufficient Powers for making us Easy; without troubling
the Legislative: Who may mistake, and thereby mar, so nice a Constitution; as
to such Forms, which, by their mutual Dependence, are like the Wheels of a
Clok, one whereof being altered, (though, in Appearance, to the better) makes the
whole Machine to reel.

I doubt not but so eminent a Set of Judges as you're to enter too, will exerce
their Legal Faculty: Especially with Reguard to what does not Lose the
Substance of the Establishment. Such as; the Cuting off some needless
Scrupulosities of Forms; which served rather to make the Law a Mystery or
Trade, than for a Regular vehicle of Justice; and whereof the wise Romans were
weary at last (Tit. C. de antiquis formulis tollendis) and which has been the
genius of Proceedings, with us, since the Revolution. Of the same kind is the
Restraint, by gradual Penalties; of Bills: found to be Groundless: Or of
unnecessary Bills; upon Subjects which an Ordinary might be empowered to
expede. And it will be a Glory to the Honorable Bench, if they fall upon a
Measure, for Removing the Reproach, by the Dispatch, of Compts, and Rankings:
which, at present, irremediably stick: I mean, for want of Power in the
Auditor; of appointing proper Assistants to Clerks (according to the Nature of
the Respective Subjects) for ordering the Fact in Minutes; and a competent
Reward of these Pains: Reserving to the Ordinary himself, both the power of
Supervising those Minutes, and pronuncing the Law Interloquitors thereon etc.
which Sort of Method has been found necessary and expedient; by all the
Sovereign Judicatories Abroad, and our Neighbors at Home* and has been,
sometimes, successfully used amongst our selves, in our Supreme Courts etc.

But there is one Caution, which I presume to hint, if you come to be
concerned; Namely, that when such Acts are offered, upon Deliberation of some
of your Colleagues; you do not obstruct: Though the Matter or Expression answer
not, precisely, to what you think best. For, such Peculiarities are an Embargo,
for the most part, upon any Proceedings; there being, commonly, in Subjects not
already determined; as great a Variety of Opinions as of faces, Yet, if you are
truly afraid, that the Rule proposed will, upon the Matter, be pernicious in
it is Consequences; but not able to persuade, the Majority, thereof: Then, why
may it not be tried for a Session, or a Year? To expire at a determined Time,
unless if be continued. Of which kind of Temporary Acts for Experiment; There
are many Precedents; in the Records, even, of the Legislative Wisdom here and
in England.

I suppose that er'e now, you desire to be Relieved from the impertinent length
of my Address; Though there are a great many other Things, in which it might be
useful for you to know the Sense of the Country: But, to supply the rest;
without running back to Examples of Antiquity Civil or Sacred, or incroaching
on the Modesty of Living Instances; I leave with you two recent Patterns, one
in our own, and the other in our Neighboring Nation: Namely, the Lord Chief
Justice Hales, and the Lord President Stair; as possessed of all that Learning,
Wisdom, and Religion, which their excellent Works derive down, to late
Posterity. And that you may possess the Spirit which Inligthned and Conducted
those Illustrious Heroes; is the earnest Wish of,

SIR, Your most Faithful Friend, and most Humble Servant etc.


