THE CASE OF THE Cow-keepers, within the Weekly Bills of Mortality, in Relation
to the BILL now Depending before this Honorable House, For the better
Regulating Select Vestries.
THAT it is too well known, how the Poors Rates have increased of late Years,
and what very great Losses the Cow-keepers have lately sustained; Indeed they
have suffered so much, that they would inevitably been Ruined, had not His
MAJESTY been Graciously Pleased to have been Bountiful to them.

THAT by the Bill now Depending, it is Humbly Conceived, That all Houses,
Lands, and Personal Estates, will be Charged with an equal Pound Rate, which
will be a very heavy Burden, not upon the Land-Owners, but upon the
Land-Holders (especially the Cow-keepers) within the Weekly Bills of Mortality;
and if the Cow-keepers are made liable to this Charge, they will not be able to
follow their Employments, so absolutely necessary for the Supplying the Cities
of London, Westminster, Borough of Southwark, and Suburbs thereof; For the Rent
of such Land, as lies within the Weekly Bills of Mortality, is very high, and
the most Considerable Return, a Tenant or Land-Holder can make from such Land,
is by the Stock kept thereupon; so it is Humbly Hoped, That Stock upon Land
shall be Exempted out of the present Bill Depending, the Legislator having
thought fit to Exempt all Stock upon Land, from the Tax laid upon Personal
Estates, by Virtue of the several Acts past, for Raising Money by a Land Tax,
etc.

THAT since all the Land, or the greatest Part of it, within the Weekly Bills
of Mortality, is generally held by long Leases, from the Land-Owners, the
Tenants will be obliged to Pay the Pound Rate, so intended to be laid upon
Land, whereby they will Pay almost a double Tax; which the several Parishes
must unavoidably lay upon the Cow-keepers, unless Provision be made in the
Bill, That the Land may bear only a Proportion, of Two Third Parts to the
Charge upon Houses; which has been Practiced for several Years, in such
Parishes, where a Pound Rate has been laid, for Raising the Poors Rates.

IT is Humbly Prayed, That this Honorable House will be pleased to take into
Consideration the great Losses the COW-KEEPERS have sustained, and the many
Debts they have incurred by Reason thereof, and what Hardships they will be
under, if the Bill aforesaid should Pass, as it is now drawn, and to give them
such Relief, as to Your Honors shall seem Reasonable.

AND they will ever Pray, etc.

THE CASE OF THE Cow-keepers, within the Weekly Bills of Mortality, in Relation
to the BILL, now Depending before this Honorable House, For the better
Regulating Select Vestries.


