THE CASE OF THE MERCHANTS OF LONDON, In reference to the Arrears of Excise,
Stated and Examined.

Printed in the Year, 1662.

The Case of the Merchants of London, in reference to the Arrears of Excise,
Stated and Examined.
THe Excise of all Imported commodities by the several pretended Acts and
Ordinances of Excise, made in the times of the late Usurping Powers, was
always charged upon the first Buyer of the Commodity, and not upon the
Merchant Importer. It being contrary both to the Nature of this Duty, and to
the Intention of the Imposers themselves, that the Merchant should be any wise
charged therewith. Forasmuch as an Excise in its proper definition is a Tax
intended to be imposed upon so much only of the Commodities and Merchandises of
any Nation, as comes to Actual consumption within it self, which in the hand of
the Merchant is not discernable: But when it is bought from the Merchant by the
Shopkeeper, or Retailer, it is always to be supposed to be for Domestic
consumption and use.

And for this Special reason as well as for that it would have been a burden
both too heavy for the Merchant to undergo to pay both Custom and Excise,
before he can fell his Commodity, and subject to great trouble and confusion,
by reason of his exportation of much of the same Commodity again. The Powers
that first Imposed this Tax, did lay the same upon the first Buyer, and not
upon the Merchant, as by the several Schedules of those Goods, which by the
said Acts and Ordinances, were made Exciseable, may fully appear. But for that
by compliance between the Merchant and the first Buyer, the State (as they then
called it) was subject to be much Defrauded of the said Duties, by the
clandestine sale and delivery of Goods without the knowledge or cognizance of
the Officers appointed to receive the same; Thereupon besides the penalties in
such case enacted to be inflicted both upon the Buyer and Seller in case of
such clandestine sale and delivery of Goods, it was thought fit for the better
prevention of such frauds to hold the Merchant-Importer to an annual Account
for the quantity only of his Goods Imported, whereby to discover how, and to
whom he had disposed them.

And therefore by an Article in that pretended Act made in the year, 1649. for
the settlement of the Excise, it was enacted among other things, viz. Article
17. That no Merchant or Importer of Goods or Merchandise from beyond the Seas,
should Land or cause the same, or any part thereof, to be Landed or put on
shore, before due entry were made thereof under his hand with the Officer of
Excise (in that behalf appointed) at the Custom-house of the same Port where
the Goods were first Imported; and that under a severe penalty.

And it was the duty of this Officer daily to deliver into the Excise Office,
all such Entries as he received; which were there fairly registered by way of
Account, under every Merchants particular head, and the Account again
discharged still as the Goods came to be sold. And it was penal for any
Merchant to sell or deliver any Goods without a ticket from the Excise office.
And likewise to the end that such discovery as aforesaid, might be the better
made, and the Merchants Import Account examined for that purpose, by another
Article of the same Act, viz. Article 25. The Commissioners and
Sub-Commissioners of Excise in their respective Divisions, had power, once in
twelve Months, or oftener, if they saw cause, to summon every Merchant in their
respective Divisions to give an Account, under his hand, of what Foraign Goods
Exciseable, he had then in his hands: which Account, if he refused or neglected
to give in, by the space of 28 days, it was Enacted (by way of punishment, for
such his Neglect) That he should be liable to pay the full Excise for all such
Goods as he then stood charged with by his Entries in the Books of the Excise
Office, which were not before discharged by Sales and Deliveries, for which
Tickets had been given out of the Office, and accordingly should be adjudged to
pay the same.

Which Judgment had two apparent operations (though never rightly understood
by most of those that were to put the same in execution) that is to say:

First, that it made him liable to pay the Excise himself for all such Goods as
then stood undischarged in his Account, as aforesaid, which otherwise for the
reasons abovementioned he had not been liable to.

And secondly, That it excluded him from all allowances for Goods exported
again, or remaining in his hands, or for Leakage, Waste, Tret and Tare, and the
like, which otherwise were to be allowed.

And in execution of this Judgment, the Commissioners had a special power given
them by the same Article to warn him to pay in such Sum, as the Excise amounted
unto by the said Judgment; which if he did not do within 14. days after such
warning, they were further empowered to levy double the value upon his Goods and
Chattels by way of Distress, and for want of sufficient Distress to Imprison
his person.

But if within 28. days after summons, the Merchant gave in such Account of
his Rest, then the Commissioners being first satisfied of the truth of such
Rest, had power to adjust his Accounts without demanding any Excise of him for
any of the said Goods, other then for such as by the said Account should be
discovered to have been sold and delivered by him to the first Buyer without
notice given to the Office. In the casting up of which, the Merchant was
likewise to have allowance for the waste and leakage of Wines, Oils, and the
like, as by the very next Article of the same Act appears.

And this was all that the Merchant-Importer was concerned in as to point of
payment; but it was no where said, either in that, or any other of those
pretended Acts, or Ordinances, for the Excise, that the Duty should Originally
lie upon the Merchant. So then, it is clear, That even in the time of those
usurping Powers, when those pretended Acts and Ordinances were supposed to be
in full force, the Merchant-Importer could no way come to be charged with the
payment of any Excise, but either by Judgment upon his Default, which was in
the nature of a Penalty, or by an Account actually agreed upon, adjusted and
stated on both sides.

But upon his Majesty's most happy restoration and return to the possession
and exercise of his Royal Power and Dignity, all those pretended Acts and
Ordinances, and all proceedings thereupon fell to the ground, and became
utterly void of themselves, as not being made by any legal Authority whatsoever.

Nevertheless, in the Parliament begun at West-minster, the 25th day of April,
in the 12th year of his Majesty's reign, two Acts were made for continuing the
Imposition of Excise: the one from the 24th of June, 1660. to the 20th day of
August in the same year; and the other from the said 20th day of August to the
25th of December following. By both which Acts it was enacted among other
things, that the said Imposition, together with all Arrears thereof, should be
continued to be collected, levied and paid during those respective Periods
according unto, and after, the same Rates, Rules, and Proportions, and upon the
same Goods and Commodities, as the same was payable and collected the said 25th
day of April, 1660. With a Proviso nevertheless, That all sorts of Oils, Wines,
Tobacco's of the English Plantations, Silks, Linnens, and diverse other
Commodities therein particularly named, should after, the 24th July, 1660. be
wholly discharged of the duty of Excise.

By virtue of these two Acts, and during the time of their being in force, the
Commissioners of Excise for the time then being, supposing that the Powers
given them by the said pretended Act of the year 1649. were thereby continued;
did summon in diverse Merchants of the City of London, to give in an Account of
their respective Rests, according to the Article above mentioned, some of whom
did accordingly appear, and gave in such Accounts; but the said Commissioners
never proceeded to any adjustment with any of those, but left their Accounts
depending, when the Excise upon foreign Goods fell. But diverse other of the
said Merchants committed default, and never gave in any Rest at all; and
against these it is said, the Commissioners of Excise proceeded according to
the said 25th Article, and made up their Accounts, as they stood charged in the
Books of Excise by their Entries, and against every default, or most of them
entered Judgment for the Sum, and made Demand thereof, but proceeded no
further, as to the levying either the single or the double value of the said
sums, or any of them, upon the refusers or neglecters of payment.

But there were many other Merchants, that were never summoned at all to give
in any Account of their Rest, and so fell not either within the one, or the
other of the two former capacities; that is to say, had neither Judgments
passed against them by the Commissioners of Excise, nor Accounts depending,
when the Excise of Foreign Goods ceased.

So then the Merchants of London, as to this case of pretended Arrears of
Excise, are to be considered in these three capacities, viz.

Those against whom Judgment was entered, upon default of giving in their
Rests.

Those who gave in their Rests, and had their Accounts depending unadjusted.

And those that were never summoned at all, before the ceasing of the Foreign
Excise.

Since which time, viz. in this present Parliament an Act is made for vesting
the Arrears of the Excise and New-Impost in general in his Majesty. Whereby
among other things, his Majesty is enabled to sue for, and recover the same of
every person and persons, their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, having
Assets, who are any way accomptable for the same, as if the same Duties of
Excise had been lawfully Imposed, and as if the several pretended Acts and
Ordinances imposing the same had been good and legal Acts of Parliament, and
had in express words granted the same to the King.

And it having been suggested, that there are vast Arrears of Excise standing
out in the hands of the Merchants of London, which by virtue of this Act are
now recoverable to his Majesty, and thereupon several Informations being
exhibited against several of the said Merchants within every of the said three
capacities; Lest the apprehension of so great a sum to be raised by this means
should divert or delay the Parliaments intentions in providing for his
Majesty's supply otherwise. It will not be amiss to examine first, whether all,
or any of the said Merchants can be chargeable with any such Arrears at all.

And secondly, admitting them not only chargeable, but that the Arrears were
actually recovered, of what value they will be like to be in his Majesty's
purse.

As to the Merchants of the two last capacities, viz. those whose Account were
depending, and those who never were summoned; I suppose, it will be easily
granted from what has been before truly stated, that neither originally as
Importers, nor by any Act, ordefault of their own, nor by any Account stated
before the ceasing of the Foreign Duty, they were answerable for any Excise at
all. And then the question concerning those two sorts will only be, Whether the
Act by which his Majesty is invested as aforesaid, has since made them
accomptable for the same, or not.

And it is humbly conceived, it has not: For although his Majesty be thereby
invested, with all Arrears of Excise in general words, yet it is so far from
making any person accomptable for the same, that was not accomptable before;
that it rather restrains the power it gives his Majesty, to recover such
Arrears to such person or persons only, who at the time of the passing of the
said Act were accomptable for the same. Neither does it make or declare any
thing an Arrear of Excise, that was not then an Arrear by some of the former
pretended Laws of Excise. And although Informations may possibly be exhibited
against some of both these two sorts, as well as against the other; yet it is
to be supposed, that this has proceeded either of the mistake of those who
certified them Debtors, or else perhaps of design to endure them for fear of
trouble, to come in and submit to an Account, which by the Law they are not now
liable unto.

The only remaining question therefore, in which there is any seeming doubt, or
difficulty, will be concerning those against whom for default of giving in an
Account of their respective Rests, Judgments have been actually passed and
enregistred in the Office of Excise before the Excise of Foreign Goods fell to
the ground, viz. Whether the respective sums of Money thereby adjudged against
them, shall be accounted such Sums or Debts of Excise as are intended in the
said Act of Investure. And if they shall, and that nothing be to be pleaded in
bar of his Majesty's demand thereof, upon what evidence they shall be
recoverable.

That no Excise was originally chargeable upon the Merchant by virtue of his
Entries at the Custom-house, has been already shown, and I suppose, will not
be denied; it being always payable by the first Buyer, and not by the Importer.
It will follow then, that if any of those sums, so adjudged, be due, they must
be due by virtue of the Judgments themselves, or not at all. And then the
validity of those Judgments will be to be examined. Now to make a Judgment good
and valid in Law;

First, there must be some Law, Custom, or Statute in force at the time of the
passing thereof, upon which it must be grounded. Secondly, The Judges must be
rightly and duly constituted, and must have sufficient Authority and
Jurisdiction of the thing upon which the Judgment is made. And thirdly, the
Judgment it self must be matter of Record, against which, no Averrment can be,
and if it be defective in any of these, the Judgment is utterly void and null.

But that the pretended Judgments above mentioned are defective in all three, I
conceive it will not be hard to manifest. For first, it will not be denied, but
that all those pretended Acts and Ordinances for the setting up and
establishing of an Excise in the times of the usurping Powers, and amongst the
rest, that of the 14th of August, 1649. (upon which the said Judgment must be
grounded if upon any were in themselves void ab in itio: And could have no
legal force, especially after his Majesty's happy restoration, unless they
had been set up and made valid by Act of Parliament, which I conceive under
favor, they never were.

For although it be true, that in the Parliament begun at Westminster the 25th
day of April, 1660. two shorts Acts were made for the continuance of the
Excise, the one from the 24t^ day of June, 1660. to the 20th of Aug. following,
and the other from thence to the 25th of December. following; in both which it
was enacted, That the said Imposition together with all Arrears thereof should
continue to be collected and paid according unto and after the rates, rules,
and proportions, as the same was payable and collected the 25^h day of April,
1660. yet, under correction, I conceive, that those words did not set up, nor
make valid the said pretended Act of the 14th of Aug. 1649, nor any other of
those pretended Acts or Ordinances, for that no Act or Statute can be
continued, confirmed, or revived, (much less originally set up and made an Act,
being none before) without special words to that purpose. And in this
particular, if it should be admitted, that the words, Rates, Rules, and
Proportions, should intend a setting up of those pretended Acts themselves, it
must follow, they must be either entirely set up that is to say, the whole Acts
in the very words they are penned, or but in part. If entirely, then that part
of the said Act of the 14th of Aug. 1649. which obliged all Commissioners, and
Sub-commissioners, to take an Oath to be true and faithful to the Commonwealth
of England, as it stood then pretended to be established without a King or
House of Lords, and many other like absurdities had been by consequence thereby
likewise established, which no body will be so weak as to admit.

But if it shall be said, That they were set up but in part, then those
particular parts so intended to be set up, must have been specially mentioned
and distinguished, which here they were not. I conclude therefore, that neither
in part, nor in the whole, any of the said pretended Acts or Ordinances were
thereby put in force. And if so, the whole force of the 25 Article of the 14th
Aug. 1649. upon which the said Judgments were grounded was at the time of the
passing of the said Judgment utterly void and of none effect. And the
Merchant-Importer not being originally chargeable either by his Entries, or
otherwise, with the payment of any Excise for his Goods, could not by any
Judgment grounded upon that Act be made liable thereunto.

And as to the second, which concerns the Authority of the said pretended
Judges it will likewise follow, that that was none at all, as to point of
giving Judgment upon any default: for in the first of the two Acts of
Parliament above mentioned, no persons at all are constituted Commissioners for
the Excise. And by the second, though Nathaniel Manton, and others therein
named, are appointed Commissioners, yet they have thereby no other power given
them, but only to collect and receive the said duties according to the former
rates and rules, without any Authority at all to put any of the said pretended
Acts or Ordinances in execution in case of offense or disobedience to the same.

And as to the last point, viz. Whether the said Judgments be matter of Record
or not, I shall need to say little, unless any man shall first show me by what
Act or Statute, the said Nathaniel Manton, and the rest of the Gentlemen in the
said Act named, are constituted a Court of Record, or that they had ancient
Jurisdiction by the Common Law; until When, I conceive, I may save both my self
and the Reader the trouble of that Argument.

Now for the value of these supposed Arrears to his Majesty, if they were
Justly recoverable (as I conceive they are not) it will be found, upon
examination, to be very small and inconsiderable, and not worthy so great an
Odium and discontent, as the very attempt of enforcing the Merchant to pay
them, has already provoked. For although I have heard they have been
represented to amount to, at least, an hundred and fifty thousand pounds, yet
it is to be considered, that the estimate thereof is taken only from the Books
of the late Excise Office, as they stand charged with the Merchants Entries,
before any adjustment made: Upon which,

First, no allowance is yet given them for goods Exported by the Merchant
again, which will be found to be very great quantities.

Secondly, there are thousands of Entries that will be utterly disowned, by the
persons upon whose particular Accounts they are put, it being a most usual and
common practice, in those days, for one Merchant to enter Goods in another
man's name, sometimes by consent between them, and sometimes without consent,
which was done on purpose to confound Accounts, and render it impossible for
the Commissioners ever to prove them, and consequently to make any true
Judgment upon them.

Thirdly, there have been no allowances yet made upon those Accounts for
Leakage, or Wast of the Commodity; which in Wines, Oils, Vinegers, Brandies,
and such like, has been very great, especially in Wines, the Merchant being
always charged in the Excise Office, with the entire quantity, or contents of
the number of Cask Entered without any allowance for Outs, Leakage, or other
Deductions, which are always allowed upon payment of the Customs. And the
greatest part of those pretended Arrears, at least the greatest sums, are
pretended to be due from the Wine-Merchants.

Fourthly, during some part of that very time for which those Accounts are to
be made up, the Excise was by an Act of the same Usurping Powers themselves,
that set it up, in effect, wholly thrown down again or at least suspended. For
on the 11th. of October, 1659. the Rump-Parliament, which was restored to their
sitting but in May then preceding, foreseeing they should be outed again by
Lambert (as within two days after they were) to prevent him from raising Money
to pay his Army, made an Act, by which it was declared High Treason to levy
Customs, or Excise, or any other Tax upon the people. And during all the time
of that Exclusion, until their second restitution (which was about two Months
or more the Excise was understood on all hands to be quite down, and all
Commodities were bought and sold Duty-free. And a very great part of those very
Goods, for the Excise whereof the Merchant now stands charged in Arrear, were
bought and sold within that very time.

Fifthly, it appears not what quantities of the same Goods, the Merchant had
remaining upon his hands unsold, at the time when the Excise of Foreign
Commodities fell; all which several particulars must be allowed and deducted,
in case the Merchant were liable to pay the rest (as indeed he is not.) And
then this great bulk of Merchants Arrears, of which so great a noise has been
made, will appear to be but a Cuckoo, whose body in the feathers seems to be as
big as a Kite, but being pulled, is not so big as a Sparrow.

To manifest which yet a little further, it is most true in fact, that diverse
Merchants standing charged, according to the Books of the Excise Office, with
very great sums, in pretended Arrear, having been, by the Exchequer process
lately sent against them, frighted into a submission to Account, in the Excise
Office, have come off and cleared the whole for half as many shillings, as they
stood Charged with pounds.

Which several particulars are offered to public consideration by a
Well-wisher, as well to his Majesty's Revenue, at to the Merchants of London,
with no other Design; but, First, that the opinion of the Justness and
Recoverableness of so great a sum (as these Arrears have been noised to be) may
not so far be relied upon, as to prejudice his Majesty in point of provision
otherwise, now a Parliament is sitting, and has the Revenue in consideration.

And, Secondly, that in case any endeavors shall be used (as is reported there
are) to procure any Act, or crowd in any Clause, or Proviso, into any Act, that
shall look back upon the Mercants-Importers, to declare or make them liable to
Account, for matters so long past; or to make them liable to the payment of
that as an Arrear, which they were never liable to pay even in the Usurping
times, as a Duty; it may be considered by those to whom it shall appertain,
Whether it will be at all for his Majesty's service; or agreeable to equity and
right reason, seeing the whole matter will be Ex post facto: and that the
discouragements upon Trade are already too Many.

FINIS.

