The CASE, or present State Of the Refiners of SUGARS in ENGLAND.
THE Ancient Trade of Refineing Sugars has (by reason of its great Increase for
Forty or Fifty Years past) occasioned the expending of vast Sums of Money in
Erecting, and Fitting up in several parts of this Kingdom, many large and
convenient Works for the Manageing, and Carrying on of the same.

The Growth and Increase of this Trade, did (for many Years past) run parrallel
with the Success of our English Plantations, and through the Indulgence and
Favor of the Government had not only beaten out the Lisbone Trade, from whence
this Nation was formerly served with White Sugars; But had Extended it self to
the supplying of most Foreign Parts, and particularly the greatest part of the
East Country, which was a very beneficial Trade to this Kingdom, because the
Returns were usually made in those profitable Commodities of Pitch, Tarr and
Hemp.

This Kingdom (being Master of the most Considerable and Profitable Sugar
Plantations in the whole World) stands upon the greatest advantage to Improve
and Enrich it self, by Incourageing the Manufacturing of our own Plantation
Broun-Sugars within its self, and thereby enable the English Merchants (in the
way of their Trasick) to supply Foreign Markets with our own English Refined
Sugars. And certainly, had God and Nature put so great an Advantage into the
Hands of the Dutch, (their Prudence in Trade, leads us to conclude) they would
not have Trifled with it, but by an effectual Encouragement of the Refineing of
their Plantation Broun-Sugars within themselves, they would have secured the
supplying of all Foreign Markets to themselves, and given Laws to the World as
to that Commodity; which still remains in the power of England to do.

Our Neighbors the Dutch, the Hamburgers and the French, have for some Years
past, most Studiously (and that with great Success) Encouraged this expensive
and beneficial Trade within themselves, having been greatly Enabled thereunto,
by an Act made in the First Year of the late King James, allowing the Exporter
of our Plantation Broun-Sugar to draw back, not only the 9 d. per hundred which
is the half Impost, but also the whole Additional Duty of 2 s. and 4 d. which
in the whole makes 3 s. and 1 d. draw back, upon every Hundred Weight of our
Exported Broun-Sugars; By reason whereof our Neighbors have afforded, those
very Refined Sugars, which they have made from our own Plantation Broun-Sugars,
near 20 l. per Cent cheaper then we could, even at those very Foreign Markets,
which were formerly served from this Kingdom; whereby this Trade has been
greatly Discouraged here at home, and the supply of all Foreign Markets put
entirely into the hands of the Dutch.

And by reason of another Act made in the last Sessions of this present
Parliament, for Encouraging the Consumption of Corn, so high a duty is laid,
not only on the low Wines drawn from Plantation Molosses (which pays but the
small and unproportionable duty of 8 d. per hundred inwards) but also, on the
low Wines drawn from our own home made Molosses, the English Refiners are quite
cut off from the Vend of their Molosses here at home, and are now wholly
disabled from carrying on their Trades.

And if this Trade be not timely Releived by the Wisdom of Parliament, it must
unavoidably be Totally lost in this Kingdom, and consequently given up to our
Neighbors.

The Releif that is Humbly Desired, for the preservation of this Ancient Trade
in this Kingdom, Is, that the English Refiners may have (at least) as much
Encouragement to Work our own Plantation Broun-Sugars here at home, as
Foreigners now have to Export them and Work them abroad, by giving the English
Refiners such a draw back upon the Exportation of their Refined Sugar and
Molosses, as shall bare a proportion to the draw back of 3 s. and 1 d. which
the Exporter now has upon the Exportation of our Plantation Broun-Sugars.

This Releif and Encouragement being given to this Trade, the Consequences
thereof will most certainly prove, the great Increase of our English
Navigation, which (under God) is the Strength, Wealth and Glory of this
Kingdom, The Employment and Livelihood of many Thousands of Their Majesty's
Subjects here at home, And a general Increase of the Wealth, and Treasure of
this Kingdom.

The CASE of the Refiners of Sugars in England.


