THE CASE OF THE KERSEY-CLOTHIERS Inhabiting within the Parishes of Hallifax,
Bradford, Bingley, Kighley, and other adjacent Towns and Parishes within the
West Riding of the Country of York, against the Aulnagers: Humbly offered to
the Honorable House of COMMONS in PARLIAMENT Assembled.
THE Aulnagers have for about Fourteen years last past demanded and exacted of
the Clothiers for Subsidy and Aulnage of Clothes commonly called Kerseys, two
pence, and two pence halfpenny and more, for some Seals for some of the said
Kerseys, when by Law they ought not to have had nor taken more for any Kersey
than a penny, nor was there ever any more paid before that time for any Kersey
whatsoever, but only a penny.

The truth of this will appear to this Honorable House by the Testimony of
several Persons, as well Kersey-makers, Merchants and Factors, as by persons
that have formerly been Collectors of the Subsidy and Aulnage.

As to the matter of Law the Case stands thus:

By the Common Law no Subsidy nor Aulnage was due, but the Statute of 27th Ed.
3. cap. 4. gives Subsidy with respect of Value, and Aulnage with respect of
length and breadth: And by the Statute 17 R. 2. c. 2. Subsidy is granted for
Kerseys after the rate which is to be so understood with respect of Value, and
a Penny upon a Kersey is answerable to four pence halfpenny upon a Broad-Cloth
after the rate of Value. It appears by the said Act of 27 Ed. 3. That Subsidy
was granted with respect of Value, for there a Scarlet Cloth is to pay Six
pence, a half Grain five pence, and a White Cloth four pence: But Kerseys did
not pay any Subsidies or Aulnage until the aforesaid Statute of 17 R. 2. And
by that Statute every man might make Kerseys of any length he pleased, paying
Subsidy and Aulnage after the Rate and Value which formerly was paid for other
Clothes, and ever since that time the Statutes have been expounded, That a
Penny is a full Value and Proportion of a Kersey, and no more has been paid
till of late: Nor are the Kerseys now made better in Value than what they
formerly were when a Penny was only paid for them, and no more demanded for
them.

And upon these and other weighty Reasons and Considerations was it, That a
Decree in his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, in the twelfth year of the Reign of
King James the First, was made, which Decree is in these very words, (Viz.) It
is therefore this present day fully and finally Ordered and Decreed, by the
Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Suffolk, Lord High Treasurer of England, Sir
Fulk Grevill Knight, Chancellor and Under-Treasurer of this Court, Sir
Lawrence Tanfield Knight, Lord Chief Baron, and the rest of the Barons of this
Court, That the said Clothiers inhabiting within the Parishes of Hallifax,
Bradford, Bingley and Kighley, and other places thereto or near adjoining in
the County of York, shall from henceforth only pay the Sum or Rate of one
Penny for the Subsidy and Aulnage of every Kersey, and no more, as they have
heretofore of long and ancient time used and accustomed to pay: And that the
aforesaid Clothiers duly paying or tendering the said Penny upon every Kersey,
as aforesaid, to the Collector or Collectors of the said Subsidy and Aulnage,
or to their lawful Deputy or Deputies appointed for the Collecting of the same,
shall be no further molested, troubled or vexed, by Seizure, Information or
otherwise, for any new or further payments touching the same, nor shall be at
any time charged to pay any more than only one penny for the Subsidy and
Aulnage of every Kersey. Notwithstanding which said Decree and the Laws,
Statutes and Customs aforesaid, the Aulnagers have of late Years exacted of the
poor Cloth Kersey-Makers, two pence, and two pence halfpenny for every Kersey
Cloth; and being not able to contend with the Aulnagers, have sometimes
submitted to pay their Exactions tho the same was contrary to Law, rather than
be at the charge of a Suit.

And it is futher humbly offered to this Honorable House, Whether not only the
Office of Aulnage, and the duty of the subsidy (both which are very burthensom
to the poor Clothiers, Co. 2 Inst. fol. 60.
and to their great discouragement) ought to be taken away for these or the
like Reasons.

First, Because the Subsidy was granted upon Cloth, for that the Wool for the
most part was Converted into Cloth within this Kingdom: And in former Times
Wool might be Transported, and then when it was lawful to Transport Wool, the
King had forty Shillings for every Sack of Wool so Transported. But now it is
made Felony to carry Wool out of this Realm, and the Cloth made in England may
be Transported, and great Quantities are Transported, and thereby great
Revenues does arrive to his Majesty for the Customs thereof; and as for the
Office of the Aulnager, the Use of that is totally taken away, as appears by
the Stat. of 29 El. Cap. 10.4. Ja. 1. Cap. 2d. where the trust in which said
Statute, the Trust of Measuring, Sealing, and Searching of Cloth, is
transferred to certain Overseers in every Parish, sworn and bound by
Recognizance to perform their Office truly, who must seal the said Clothes with
a Seal of Lead, containing the length and weight, with the Word [Searched]
printed upon the Seal, and the Cloth Maker is thereby to affix his Seal of
content to every piece; which clothes and Kerseys so sealed shall not be
researched: So that by these Statutes the Aulnagers and Collectors of the
Subsidy of Aulnage, are discharged of their Trust of viewing, searching, and
measuring of Clothes, and so consequently not useful as formerly: And since
the making of the said Statutes, the Aulnagers have forborne to view, search,
and seal Kerseys within the said Parishes, but have delivered their Seals to
the Clothiers, and have sold them by Measures or Numbers, and suffered the
Clothiers to affix those: seals to the Clothes themselves, never regarding what
Clothes they did so affix them to, all their End and Design being only to get
Money for their Seals.


