The Character of a WILLIAMITE.
HE is One, who being lately Bug-bear'd out of his Wits, fancies himself still
haunted by the frightful Ghost of Popery. He is always in Company tormenting a
Man's Ears with some dismal Story; and tells you more Romantic Lies than ever
stood on Popish Legend for the Holy Promotion of Protestant Religion. Three
times a Day at least he says over little Chiswell's News-Book with much more
Devotion than his Prayers; and by a strong Faith, and the hungry Friars
Blessing [Be thou Fish] enters it into his Creed. He piously commends Treachery
and Rebellion to THE LORD'S DOING; and will not be satisfied, unless Providence
work another miraculous Defection to make IT MORE MARVELOUS IN OUR EYES. He
derives his venerable Name from a Rigid Presbyterian, and by consequence does
not hold himself obliged to Solemn Oaths, or any Sacred Ties whatever. He has
entertained so deep a Love for the Second Commandment, that he is willing to
part with any of the rest in Exchange for it. Under pretense of rooting out
Idolatry from off the Earth, he encourages Children to commit Paricide, and in
bold Defiance to the Fifth Commandment Prays, That their Days may be long in
the Land. He roundly maintains the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, by quietly
suffering his Lawful Sovereign to be drove out of his Dominions by Troops of
Treacherous Subjects, and Crueller Strangers. With David he sometimes complains
(on a sudden Gripe of his Spirit) That ye have not kept the Lord's Anointed;
but it is only, because ye have given him a fair Opportunity to recover his own
just Rights again: As appears by his late strange Defending the King's Title,
that is, by taking a New Oath of Allegiance to the Usurper with a formal
Declaration, that has no other meaning in it, that I know of, than ^^at he will
stand by the Present Unlawful Possessors of the Crown with his Life (...)
Fortune, though it be against the plain Dictates of his Conscience. He wipes
(...) Mouth in Innocence, and cries, I had no hand in the Expulsion of my
Prince; but (...) trusts in God he shall never see the Restoration. He views
the Miscarriages of (...) ^nfortunate Master through a magnifying Glass, but
turns the Prospective to (...) on the woeful Miseries have attended his own
Creatures unnatural Invasion. He never speaks of the Bishops being sent to the
Tower without Horror and Amazement; but is now very well contented to have them
Suspended, and Doubts not to see them Deprived, for their malignant Scrupling
to Perjure themselves in their own Preservation. He is a mighty Stickler for
the Liberty and Property of the Subject, and yet tyrannically commands us to
make a New Covenant with the Government for what all the Laws of the Land have
already assured us, is Meum and Tuum: And all this to give us no better a Title
to our Estates than One has to the Crown he wears; which is to last so long as
we give the Dutch Task-makers leave to Lord it over our Souls and Bodies. He
confirms every Body in the Belief, that Things are too far gone ever to think of
King JAMES's Return into England; and at the same Time has a Disturst he may
prove no Conjurer: And therefore represents Him as a Common Enemy, the Hater of
his People, and scares you with Fire and Faggot, and the Lord knows what, to
call in your help to fulfill his malicious Prophecy. You will find him
Flattering and Fawning upon every little Seclary, and has quite worn off that
stiff, rugged Humor of admitting none into his Communion but upon the Terms of
Christ's Institution, that he is now willing to depart from all the
Antichristian Rites of Decency; and ever since he has heard of the Restitution
of Presbyters into the Church of Scotland, begins to talk with a great deal of
Indifferency about his very Episcopal Ordination, (well knowing the Reforming
Spirit of our Governors.) Nay, he is grown so Gentle and Complying, that he
has laid aside the distinguishing Character of the Church of England, (I mean
his Loyalty) as a Title too Invidious and Unsafe for a Protestant Church to
glory in; and does now without a Blush own himself as Religious a Rebel as the
greatest Fanatic Zealot in England, to hold the Faith in Unity of Spirit, in
the Bond of Peace.

-- Nam quis
Peccandi finem posuit sibi? quando recepit
Ejectum semel attrita de front ruborem?

