The CASE of the Salt-Refiners in Suffolk, Essex, and Norfolk.
BY the Late Act of Parliament, for the Granting certain Rates and Duties upon
Salt, amongst other things, it is Enacted, That

For every Gallon of Salt, and Rock-Salt made at the Salt-Works, or taken out
of any Pits within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of
Berwick upon Tweed, the Sum of one Penny half Penny per Gallon, and after that
Rate, for a greater or lesser quantity.

By which Clause, all English Salt is Charged only Three halfpence per Gallon:
And afterward the Statute says --

And to the intent, That Salt made by Melting and Refining of Rock-Salt, may
not, contrary to the true Intent and Meaning of this Act, be Charged more than
other English Salt.

The CASE.
A Salt-Maker of New Castle upon Tyne after the 24th. of March, 1694. makes an
Hundred Weighs of Salt, and fells the same to some of the above Refiners, who
pay the Duty, and send the Salt to Woodbridge with a Certificate, that the
above Duty is paid at New Castle.

The Salt-Refiner at Woodbridge melts this Salt in River-Water, and then boyles
the Liquor in order to the Refining thereof; which having done to such a degree
of Fineness as he thinks convenient, it is Reduced into Salt again, much the
same in quality it was before, only in Cleanness differing from New Castle Salt.

The Salt being as abovementioned Refined, lies some time till the Brine is
well drained from it, and in time becomes fit for Sale; and does not advance in
Weight or Measure any quantity, if any, to Entitle a Second Duty for such Salt
as has paid His Majesty Duty, as the Act Directs.

The Excise-Officers upon the before first mentioned Clause in the Statute
demand a new Duty of Three halfpence in the Gallon from this Refined Salt,
which the Refiner humbly conceives himself not liable to pay, either from the
Letter, or Intention of the Statute.

First, Not from the Letter, which says, That for every Gallon of Salt made at
the Salt-Works, etc. the Sum of One penny halfpenny per Gallon.

The Refiner of Salt, in Common Speech, is not called a Maker of Salt, nor in
any Writing does he so style himself; but is always Called, and Writ, A
Refiner of Salt; neither indeed is he any otherwise a Maker of Salt, than a
Refiner of Sugar can be called a Maker of Sugar.

And it seems most plain, That it was never the Intention of this Statute, that
this second Duty should be paid by the Refiner: Because the Statute to
Encourage the English made Salt Imposed only Three halfpence per Gallon on
English Salt, but laid a double Duty of Three pence per Gallon on all Foreign
Salt Imported, whereas this New Duty demanded of the Refiner for this Refined
Salt (which before Refined, had paid the Legal Duty) is (as is humbly
conceived) a Discouragement, rather than an Encouragement, which the Statute
designed to give to all sorts of English Salt, of what Nature or Kind soever:
For if this Second Duty be Payable by the Refiner, then does English Refined
Salt become Charged with as great an Imposition as the Foreign Salt is
subjected to, and so these Refiners Trade will be utterly Ruined, (seeing the
Profit that arises from the Refining of Salt will not bear the Charge of this
double Imposition) and consequently His Majesty's Interest be so far from being
promoted by this Second Duty, that it will rather be much Lessened; inasmuch as
these Refiners, who now buy great Quantities of Salt from Shields, Sunderland,
or Lemington (where the Salt pays the Duty) must desist from their Trade, and
so there will not be such Quantities bought at those Places as now are; and
consequently His Majesty's Revenue therein be considerably diminished.

Object. But this Refined Salt is of another Species from that Salt from which
it was Refined, and which had paid the Duty; and consequently this Refined Salt
is subjected to the same single Duty that all other English Saltsare liable to
pay.

Answ. This Refined Salt cannot properly be said to be Salt of another Species
from that out of which it was Refined, because it differs not in the Salt
Quality, but only in the Cleanness from Dirt, etc. This being cleansed from
that Filth and Dirt, which all New Castle Salt is subject to; and (it is humbly
conceived) a difference only in this respect cannot truly be said to make a New
Species.

By the before-recited Clause, with Relation to Rock-Salt, it is particularly
expressed, That Rock Salt Refined should not pay as Rock Salt, and therefore
Twelve Pence in the Bushel is allowed to the Refiner for every Bushel of Rock
Salt by him Refined; And the reason of this Allowance that the before-recited
Clause gives, ( viz.) to the Intent, That Salt made by Melting and Refining of
Rock Salt, may not, contrary to the true Intent and Meaning of this Act, be
Charged more than any other English Salt. Now, Although the Refiner of New
Castle Salt be not within the Letter of this Clause, yet (it is humbly
conceived) he is within the Equitable Intention thereof: For what reason is
there to imagine, that the Parliament designed to be so partially favorable to
the Refiners of Rock Salt, as to Exempt them from a double Duty, and at the
same time subject the Refiners of all sorts of other English Salt to this
Second Imposition, wherein they would (with Submission)Act against the Declared
Intent and Meaning of the Statute, which (in substance) says, that it is
contrary to the true Intent and Meaning of the Act, That English Salt, (whether
Refined or Unrefined) should pay more than Three halfpence per Gallon.

Refined Salt is Experimentally found to be far exceeding all other Salt in
preserving our Butter; for which Cause, Suffolk Butter preserved with this
Salt, keeps sweeter than any other sort of Salt Butter not salted therewith:
For Unrefin'd Salt has some mixture of Filth, which soon taints the Butter,
and renders it very Unpalatable: So that the loss of this Refined Salt (which
cannot possibly bear the Charge of Three pence per Gallon, considering what
great Expenses the Refiners are at in their Refining) will be a great prejudice
to the Public, especially to the City of London, which is every Year supplied
with many Thousand Firkins of this Wholesome and Well-Preserv'd Salt-Butter.


