THE CASE OF THE Landlords, of St. George's Parish in the Borough of Southwark
in Surry.
THE said Parish is already assessed for the Year School, at three Shilings in
the pound upon Rents besides Stock amounting together to 1371 l. 13 s. 4 d.
which was the sum laid upon the said Parish according to the Proportion in the
Year 1691, and 1692.

At a Meeting of the Commisioners, for the Hundred of Brixton and Borough
aforesaid the 28th. of March 1699.

It is Ordered by the said Commisioners, Note great part of the said Rents will
be Sold at 6 and 8 year Purchase and yet must be Rated at 6 s. per pound to
raise the Tax for Anno School. and if not prevented will be the same for 1699.
that the sum of 932 l. 13 s. 4 1/2 d. more than the Rate aforesaid, shall be
laid upon the said Parish to make good the Deficiency of the said Year School,
which (if assessed accordingly) will make the same Rate to amount to Six
Shillings in the pound (the Rents of the said Parish being at least one half
abated^ chiefly occasioned by the late Act of Parliament, for regulating abuses
in Prisons, and pretended Privileged Places.

In the Year 1693. the Collectors, Note also that Others of the Rents the
Landlords offer to Surrender to the Ground Landlords, after having laid out
considerable Sums of Money in Building because cannot get what will pay
Ground-rent and Taxes.
of the then Aid Paid to the Receiver General, as appears by his Receip^ the
several sums under mentioned.

Returned by Certificats. l. s. d. l. s. d. The 4th. Quarter in Money 618 13 00
148 12 06 3d.Quarter in Money 629 04 09 135 00 00 2d.Quater in Money 619 12 06
135 00 00 1st. Quarter in Money 621 04 09 135 00 00 2488 14 09 553 12 06
Collectors Poundage 0031 09 03 2520 04 00 Returned where no Distres could be
made 0553 12 06 In all 3073 16 06.

So that the said Parish is Charged to pay in Money for the Three Fourths of the
553 l. 12 s. 6 d. Returned into the Exchequer in 1693. 415 l. 04 s. 04 1/2 d.
which Tax if paid as above, the Consequence will be that all the People of any
Substance will go out of the said Parish; (as several have already) so that
the same will be Depopulated, and the Landlords undon.

The Premises therefore considered, It is humbly hoped and submitted to this
Honorable House, that in their Great Wisdom, Care may be taken to prevent the
Ruin of the said Parish.


