The CASE OF THE Right Honorable William Harbourd, Esquire; and Sir Francis
Guybon, Knight, chosen Members for the Borough of Thetford, to serve in this
present Parliament, The Borough of Thetford is an Ancient Borough; and by
Prescription sends two Burgesses to Represent them in Parliament.
The Right Honorable William Harbourd, Esquire; and Sir Francis Guybon are Chosen
and Returned by the Old Corporation AND Sir Joseph Williamson, Knight, and Adam
Felton, Esquire; by the New One.
In the 16th. of Queen Elizabeth, The Borough of Thetford was incorporated by
the name of the Mayor, Ten Principal Burgesses and Twenty Commoners.

It was directed in the said Charter, That the Mayor and Commoners should, the
Wednesday next before Michaelmas day in every Year, between Nine and Eleven in
the Morning, meet in the Guildhall, or some convenient place in the said
Borough, and there name two of the Chief Burgesses to the Inhabitants, who are
to Elect one of them to be Mayor for the year ensuing.

NOTE, Under this Constitution it continued till 1681. at which time John
Mendham was Mayor, who having got an Acquaintance with Sir Lionel Jenkins, then
Principal Secretary of State to King Charles the Second, did in the same time
of his Mayoralty, endeavor to incline the Corporation, to choose such Men to
represent them as would serve the Designs then on foot; but finding he could
have no influence over them, and that the time of his Mayoralty was almost
expired; did on the Election Day, being Wednesday before Michaelmas, absent
himself till he thought the time of Election was over, thinking thereby to make
void the Election.

Yet notwithstanding, the Commonalty did assemble themselves, and did name two
of the Principal Burgesses to be Mayor for the year ensuing, of whom Wormly
Hethersett (being one) was elected and declared Mayor.

About Eleven of the Clock, Mendham (who had absconded himself) came and
appeared, and being told they had made choice of Hethersett, seemingly approved
of it, and made an excuse that he did not come sooner.

Nevertheless Mendham (although Hethersett had often applied himself to him)
refused to swear him Mayor as he ought to have done; and although several
Mandamus's were sent to him (out of the King's Bench) injoyning him to do the
same, yet he disobeyed them all.

Whereupon he was brought up the next Term by a Tipstaff to answer his
contempt, and was committed in Custody to the Tipstaff, from whom he got away
and rid down Post to Thetford, and there called together such of the Burgesses,
as were of his Party, who Disfranchized two of the Members that were not of
their stamp, and swore two new ones in their places, the one of whom stood at
that time Excommunicated, and the other Mendham's Son, who was not above
sixteen years of age, and who did immediately vote a Surrender of the Charter,
which they but just before swore to maintain, and it was accordingly Surrendered
and Enrolled in Chancery.

Afterward Mendham Solicites and gets a New Charter, wherein himself is made
Mayor, and such others added to him, as would serve the intent of a Surrender.

NOTE, That at thelast Session of Parliament, in a hearing before the Committee
of Elections, concerning those that were chosen by virtue of the New; and those
that were chosen by virtue of the Old Charter: The Committee did declare, that
notwithstanding the Surrender and Inrollment; Those that were returned by
virtue of the Old Charter were duly returned.

And upon Report thereof the House did unanimously agree with the Committee.


