THE CHARACTER OF THE Lord Baron Ginckle, Lieutenant General, and Commander in
Chief of their Majesty's Forces in Ireland: With a Panegyric on his Lordship's
Conduct (this last Campaign) in Reducing Ballymore, Athlone, Galway, and
Lymerick; And his Defeating the Irish Army at Aghrim, etc.

DE WARE VERBEELTENIS Van sijn EXCELLENTIE Den BARON van GINCKEL,
Luytenant-Generael en Commandant en Chef van hare Majesteyten Armees in Yrland.

Met even Lof-reden van sijn Excellenties Conduite (in de laeste Campaign) in
het reduceeren van Balymore, Athlone, Galoway, en Limerick. Mitsgaders het
verslaen van het Yrsche Ledger by Agrim.

Gedruckt naer de Copy van Londen, in's Gravenhage by Jan Aelberts,
Boeckverkooper in de Hofstraet, 1691.

De ware VERBEELTENIS Van sijn EXCELLENTIE Den BARON van GINCKEL,
Luytenant-Generael en Commandant en Chef van hare Majesteyten Armees in Yrland.
Met even Lof-reden van sijn Excellenties Conduites (in de laeste Campaign) in
het reduceren van Balymore, Athlone, Galoway, en Limmerick. Mitsgaders het
verslaen van het Yrsche Ledger by Agrim.
DE Lof van dese grootc Personage te verbreyden is even materie en subject
vereyschende de krachtigste termen van welspreeckentheyt, en de voornaemste
pennen, om deselve eeniger maeten uyt te kunnen drucken: den Orateur heeft hier
de avantage dat, het geene hy van desen Here te seggen heeft, all byvoegselen
van het artificieel, en all geringe assistentien van flattery te boven gaet.

De ware representatie van dese Illustre Personage is even Lof-reden selfs, en
dit kan van hem alleen geseyt werden, dat grootheyt en goetheyt, (so seldom in
andere te samen gevoegt) in hem nochtans inseparabel verknocht sijn, dat hy
uytmuntende is, de Werelt so well door sijn aengebooren goedaerdigheyt als
fameuse exploiten, dat hy niet alleen even Groot Man, maer het selve by
uytnementheyt is.

De reeele grootheyt van menschen werd voornamentlijck gereeckent, af te komen
van haer Aloude Adelijcke geboorte, de Luyster van haere employen, end renomme
van haere daeden, het eerste maeckt haer bequaem tot de grootste bedieningen,
het andere geeft te kennen haer waerdigheyt en capaciteyt, en het laeste
distingueert haer van all andere menschen. Sijn Excellentie heeft de
advantagie van het eerste door even lange ongebroocken reex van voortreffelijcke
Voorouders in Nederland, dat Land heeft hem aen de Werelt gegeven als even
cieraet aen even geslagt, alvoorens geeert met grote bedieningen, hy heeft sijn
geslagt de Werelt nog aengenaemer gemaeckt, hebbende sijn Family boven sijne
Voorouders toegebragt seer grote luyster en eer, maer hoe onnut is de
geluckigste natuyr, wanneer sy niet ge^econdeert were door even Genereuse
opvoedinge, en wat heeft het te beduyden afkomstig te sijn van Heroicke
Voorouders, indien wy niet bequaem gemaekt werden in haere voetstappen te
treden? De opvoedinge maeckt ons seeckerlijck het geene wy sijn Excellentie in
opgevoedt by fulcke Meesters, dewelcke forg gedraegen hebben van hem so well
even volmaeckt Christen als even volmaeckt Edelman te maecken, twee Qualiteyten,
so verre daer van daen, dat sy met den anderen niet soude kunnen bestaen; dat
ter contrary dat den even den anderen oneyndiglijck te hulpe komt, den dienst
van God ons bequaem maeckende tot den dienst van den Prince, sijn naturel hem
leydende tot den Oorlog, heeft sig derhalven van sijn Jonckheyt af all sijne
jaeren t'eenemael over gegeven aen de study van de militaire discipline, de
natuyr heeft hem bequaem gemaeckt tot dat geene, het welcke niet alleen
Duytsland en Holland, maer oock Engeland sedert die tijd in hem geadmireert
heeft, dat is te seggen tot even voortreffelijck Commandant.

En waerlijck dit is de vertooning van dese groote personage sijn leeven, dit
is het Theater, waer op sijne daeden de Werelt met verbaestheyt vervullen, hy
heeft even sterck en gesont Lichaem, bequaem tot de grootste Fatiguen, hy is van
sijn Naturel Actif, even groot liefhebber van excercitien, tot verwonderens toe,
matig in spijs en dranck, hy vreest geen perijckelen, en sal daer oock niet
rockeloos in loopen hy is altoos in even en het selfde humeur, altoos geluckig,
altoos het quaetste voorkomende, en de grootste moejelijckheden te boven
komende, hy heeft noyt sig ondervonden te commandeeren, voor aleer hy wist
volkomen te gehoorsaemen, sijn beginsel was van de laegste employen in de
Armee, en hy is sijn advancement niet schuldig aen de avantage van sijn
geboorte, nochte aen het gesag van sijne Vrienden maer aen sijne eygen
personeele verdiensten, sijn selven so distingueerende, dat de Prins van
Orange end de Staeten altoos het oog op hem hebben gevest.

Maer om geen relaes te done van all het geene hy in sijne verscheyde posten,
in den Staten Armee, onder het Commando van sijne tegenwoordige Majesteyt (te
dier tijdt Prince van Orange) verrigt heeft, het geen de weg soude banen van
dit vel tot even geheel volumen te done opswelle, so sullen wy maer alleen in
het korte aenroeren eenige weynige sijner daden onlangs in Yrland voorgevallen.

Schoon genomen de Revolutie in Engeland geluckig, vreedsaem, en stille
toeging, niet te min heeft Yrland de gedaente van affairen verandert, en is
geworden de setel van Oorlog, dewelcke wy so geluckig gemijdt hebben. Koning
Jacobus heeft aldaer niet alleen even Plaets van retraite, maer daer en boven
even talrijcke Armee gevonden. Hy heeft dat Koninckrijck met even
ongelooffelijcke geswintheyt overgelopen, ontmoetende met weynig often geen
resistentie, als alleen by die van Londonderry, even Plaets alwaer de couragie
van de Inwoonders het gebreck van de Mueren, Fortificatien, Armoede, en all
andere saecken nodich tot het uythouden van even lange Belegering, gesuppleert
heeft.

Den Hertog van Schomberg heeft even korten tijdt daer na het grootste gedeelte
van het Noorden van Yrland voor sijn Koning en Souveraine verseeckert. Sijne
Majesteyt de volgende Campaign in persoon overgaende, heeft niet lange daer na
even veel grooter gedeelte van dat Koninckrijck door die altoos gerenomeerde,
geluckige, en noyt te vergetene Batailje aen de Rivier de Boyne gereduceert;
maer de tijdt tot verdere actie verloopende, en de Belegeringe van Limmerick
opgebroocken sijnde, voornamentlijck veroorsaeckt door de excessive quantiteyt
van regen verscheyde dagen na den anderen onophoudelijck vallende, is sijn
Majesteyt met sijn Konincklijcke Hoogheyt de Prince van Denemarcke, Grave van
Solms, even weynig daer aen na Engeland overgegaen.

Sijn Majesteyt well bekent sijnde datter noch seer veel wercks in Yrland te
done viel, voor en aleer het volkomen gereduceert konde werde, oordeelde
derhalven, dat die enterprise niet licht was, often well soude succederen sonder
even Generael van reputatie en beleydt. De Here van Ginckel, even van de meest
gerenomeerde Capiteyns van dese Eeuw, was des Konings verkiesinge, en dit
dunckt my de hoogste lof te sijn die hem gegeven kan worden, en het best
gedeelte van de schilderye te sijn, die wy nu onderhanden hebben. Dat Orateurs,
Poeten, en Courantiers het de geheele Werelt soude done doorklincke, soude
seeckerlijck remarkabel sijn; maer dat Koning William, die even groote kender
der persoonen is, en die ten regard van wijsheyt, en kloeckmoedigheyt,
conduite en courage, de verwondering van all volcken is, hem dese onderneminge
soude toevertrouwen, maeckt sijn Excellentie bekent als all het geene van hem
geseyt soude konnen werden.

Geen mentie te maecken van Ballymore, even considerable post gedefendeert door
even talrijcke Garnisoen, het welcke sijn Excellentie door sijn beleyt
constringeerde sig op difcretie over te leveren. Wat isser glorieuser en mere
voorspoedig als het Stormen op Atlone, na dat onse Manschap de Rivier
doorwendende tot den hals toe overmarcheerden? En wat is mere verwonderings
waerdig, dat sy dat alles deden in het gesicht van des Vyandts Campement, selfs
wiens Armee veel talrijcker was, dan die van sijn Excellentie; de Viandt
nochtans niet durfde ondernemen dese haer seer importante pas te seconderen;
maer liepen weg, achterlatende van de hare op de plaets ontrent elf-hondert
dooden, end omtrent 350. gevangens.

Wat wijs en geluckig, wat grooter beleydt, vlijdt en bravoure konde van eenig
Generael getoont werden, dan als sijn Excellentie betoonde in de Batailje van
Agrim. De Yrsche Armee campeerde omtrent dry mijlen aen geene sijde de kleyne
Stadt Ballymote; de regter vleugel van haer Campement breyde sich uyt van de
Kerck van Killecoumodon tot aen de plaets genaemt Hurinapry aen de lincker,
ontrent twee mijlen in de lengte.

Aen de lincker vleugel liep even kleyn Riviertje, hebbende stijle bergen, en
kleyne Morassen aen beyde de sijde; naest daer aen was even groote roode Moras
sijnde by na even mijl in de lengte, en op het eynde van dien stont het Kasteel
Agrim, commanderende de weg na haer Campement, het welcke van de Ruyterye niet
door waer konde werde, als alleen ontrent het Casteel, om dat even Rivier
loopende door even vogtige grondt tot in het geheel even Moras maeckte, het
welcke sich uytbreyde tot aen des Viandts rechter vleugel, alwaer oock even
andere pas was genaemt Vrachree, hebbende even rysende grondt aen beyde de
kanten. Het voornaemste van haer Campement was op de sijde van even Bergh, en de
grachten well voorsien met schiet-geweer tot het uyterste eynde, verscheyde
defilees so naeuw, dat twee man naest malkanderen qualijck konde approcheeren,
hare retranchementen waren sulcks, dat men soude geoordeelt hebben het
onmogelijck te sijn de selve te attacqueren. Voegt hier by, dat haer Armee
numereuser was dan het onse; maer daer schijnt geen swarigheyt te sijn, het
welke het beleyt en de resolutie van den groten Ginckel, (geassisteert met de
couragie en de braveur van sijn volck) niet bequaem is te boven te komen: want
de attacken waren so well geordineert, dat onse Manschap, onder de conduite van
den Generael, haer met sulck even onversaegden couragie, en resolutie gequeten
hebben, dat sy in weynig uyren der Vyanden Campement niet alleen geforceert
hebben, maer daer en boven haer principaelste lichaem t'eenemael geslagen,
doodende omtrent 7000, en nemende gevangen ontrent 450. sijnde aen onse kant
ontrent 500. dooden.

Omme geen gewag te maecken van het innemen van het Fort Galloway, de tijdige
voorkominge van Boldarick Odonnels voorgenome secours, met het dwingen van die
Stadt tot even spoedige overgaef, dienende tot verhaesting van de Armees
spoedige marsch om de imprenabele Fortress van Limmerick te belegeren; het
forceren van de geseyde plaets tot de overgaef, kroont niet alleen den arbeyt
van dese glorieuse, voorspoedige, en altijds geluckige Campaign, maer heeft met
eenen den Oorlog in dat Koninkrijck t'eenemael ten eynde gebragt, dat volck
hier door volkomentlijck onder de gehoorsaemheyt van haren Majesteyten gesag
gebracht sijnde.

Sijne Excellenties onvermoedelijcke naerstigheyt gevoegt by sijne
extraordinary conduite, en militaire stratagemes, in de verscheydene voorvallen
geduyrende de belegeringe van Limmerick (te veel om hier te particulariseren)
moet geheel Europa verstelt done staen. Sijne groote ervarentheyt in Militaire
affairen was oorsaeck, dat de Soldaten onder sijn Command couragieux en gerust
waren in all hare attacken. Geen attacke scheen hardt, als het maer geschiede
door sijne order. Hy is beyde de liefde en terreur van de jaren: want geen
Generael was oyt mere afkerig van violentie; selfs ten reguarde van de geene
die hy vermeestert had. Hy heeft den Oorlog niet gevoert als sommige
Generaels over Zee gedaen hebben, alwaer het branden van Steden, geheele
Landschappe in de assche te leggen, geene ouderdom, often sex te sparen,
gereeckent were even groote lof voor de posteriteyt te sijn.

All 't geene hier geseyt is, is maer even gedeelte van die groote Personage
sijn afbeeltsel. Hy is te admireren in sijne private en publijcke bequaemheden;
end daer is alsoo grooten Catalogue van sijn deugden als exploicten.

Groot en goet te sijn is extraordinair, en beswaerlijck in even persoon te
vinden: te leven in het gedruys van violentie en Oorlog, en des niet
tegenstaende te bewaren even Godtsdienstige humeur, en even tedere conscientie
gevoelig van 't minste quaedt, is seer raer te vinden. Het werck te maecken ons
selven so well als onse vyanden t'onder te brengen, is even deugt ten top
gestegen. All dese sijn in onsen Generael in den hoogsten graedt: Hy is
spreecksaem, opregt en obligant: Het valt hem swaerder even gunst te weygeren,
als het even ander doedt geweygert te werden: Hy geeft niemant tijdt ietwes te
versoecken, wanneer hy bevint datter reele verdiensten sijn; en het geene hy
niet kan toestaen dat weygert hy met even seer groote beleeftheyt. In het korte,
hy sal by de posteriteyt leeven, door het groote gedeelte dat hy voor sig
selven in de History van dese Eeuwe opgeleydt heeft; en dese sijne naem kan
niet vergeten werden, so lang als men genegentheyt, en gelegentheyt heeft
groote, en vertueuse actien te admireren.

EYNDE.
THE CHARACTER OF THE Lord Baron Ginckle, Lieutenant General, and Commander in
Chief of their Majesty's Forces in Ireland: With a Panegyric, on his
Lordship's Conduct (this last Campaign) in Reducing Ballymore, Athlone, Galway,
and Lymerick; And his Defeating the Irish Army at Aghrim, etc.
THE Praises of this Great Man is a Theme on which may be spent all the
Beauties of Eloquence, and a Subject worthy the best Pens; in which the Orator
has this Advantage, that what he has to say is above the Improvement of Art,
and the mean Assistance of Plattery.

The true Representation of this Noble Person is of it self a Panegyric; and
only this is to be said of him, That Greatness and Goodness, so seldom united
tagether in others, are in him inseparably linked: That he is Conspicuous to
the World by good Actions, as well as famous Exploits: That he is not only a
Great, but also en Excellent Man.

The real Greatness of Men is chiefly derived from the Nobility of their
Bierth, the Splendor of their Employments, and the Reputation of their
Performances: The one is a kind of Capacity for the greatest Trusts; the other,
an Argument of their Worth and Abilities; and the last, a splendid Distinction
from the Herd of Mortals, who act within a narrow Sphere, and are forgotten in
the Crowd.

The Baron has the Advantage of the First, by a long and uninterrupted Descent
of Honorable Ancestors in the Lower Germany. That Country gave him to the
World, as a new Ornament to a Family already honored with great Offices: He
has brought their Inclinations into the World, and made since a vast Addition
to their Stock of Fame and Honor.

But how unprofitable is the happiest Nature, if it be not seconded by a
genorous Education? And what does it signify to be descended from Heroic
Ancestors, if we are not made capable of Treading in their Steps? Education
makes us truly what we are.

The Baron was brought up by those Masters who took Care to perfect in him the
Cristian, and the Gentleman; tho Qualities so far from being inconsistent, that
the one infinitely helps the other; the Service of God fitting us for that of
the Prince. His Genius leading him to Martial Affairs, he has, for a long
Series of Years, given himself wholly to the Study of Military Discipline.
Nature has fitted him for what, not only Germany and Holland, but England has
since admired him; that is, for an Eycellent Commander.

And really, this is the Scene of this Great Man's Life: It is the Theater
where his Actions replenished the World with Astonishment. He has a strong and
haalthful Body, capable of the greatest Hareships. He is naturally Active, a
great Lover of Exercise, Temperate to Admiration. He neither courts nor sears
Danger; ever Himself ever Fortunate, ever Preventing the Worst, and Surmounting
the greatest Difficulties.

He did not presume to Command, before he knew perfectly how to obey. He began
by the smallest Charge of the Army, and owed his Advancement neither to the
Advantage of his Quality, nor to the Credit of his Friends, but to his own
Personal Merit; distinguishing himself so, as to fix the Eyes of the Prince of
Orange, and the States upon him.

But omitting the Account of what he did in the several Posts he was in, in the
States Army, under the Command of His Present Majesty, when Prince of Orange,
which would be the way to swell this Sheet into a Volume, we shall confine our
selves to some brief Hints of his late Actions in Ireland.

Though England suffered a Happy, Peaceable and Quiet Revolution, yet Ireland
altered the Face of Affairs, and proved the Seat of that War which we had so
happily avoided. There King James found not only a Retreat, but also a numerous
Army. He overrun that Kingdom with an incredible Celerity, and found little
Resistance but in Londonderry, a Place where the Courage of the Inhabitants
supplied the Want of Walls, Guns, and all other things necessary for the
Maintenance of a long Siege.

The Late Duke of Schonberg soon after secured to his Royal Master the greater
part of the North of Ireland: And the next Campaign, His Majesty going over in
Person, by the ever-famous, happy, and never to be forgotten Fight at the
Boyne, soon after reduced a far greater part of that Kingdom: But the Season
for Action growing over, and the Siege of Lymerick being Raised, occasioned
chiefly by the excessive Quantities of Rain that fell for many Days
incessantly, his Mxjesty, with his Royal Highness, and soon after the Count de
Solmes, returned for England.

His Majesty well knowing there was a great deal of Work still to be done in
Ireland, before it could be entirely reduced, therefore did not think the
Enterprise easy, or likely to succeed, without a General of Reputation and
Conduct. Ginkle, one of the famousest Captains of this Age, was the King's
Choice; and this I take to be the highest Commendation can be given him, and
the finest part of that Picture which is now drawing: That Orators, Poets and
Gazetteers should raise it all the Worls over, would indeed be considerable:
But that King William, who has so great an Insight in Men, who is himself, for
Wisdom and Valor, for Conduct and Courage, the Admiration of all People,
should trust him with the Undertaking, speaks the whole Character of the Baron,
better than any thing that can be said of him.

Not to mention Ballymore, a considerable Post, defended by a numerous
Garrison, whom the Baron forced Conduct, to surrender themselves at discretion.
What more Glorious and Successful than the Storming of ATHLONE, after our Men,
by Fording the River, had marched up to their Crevats in Water? And what is
more astonishing, in the very sight of the Enemy's Camp, whose Army was more
numerous than the Baron's; yet durst not attempt the Succor of their most
importan Pals, but run away, leaving behind them near Eleven hundred of their
Number dead on the Spot, and about 350, that were taken Prisoners.

What more Wise and Fortunate, or what greater Conduct, Diligence, and Bravery
could be shown by a General, than that of the Baron's at the Battle of Aghrim?
The Irish Army lay about Three Miles beyond the little Town of Ballynaefloe,
their Camp extending it self from the Church of Killcommodon, on the Right, to
a Place called Gurtnapary, on the Left, about Two Miles in Length.

On their Left ran a small Brook, having steep Hills and little Bogs on each
side; next to which, was a large red Bog, almost a Mile over, at the end of
which, stood the Castle of Aghrim, commanding the Way to their Camp; which was
passable no way for Horse, but just at the Castle, by reason of a River, which
running through a moist Ground, made the whole a Morass, or Bog, which extended
it self along to the Enemies Right, where was also another Pass, called
Vrachree, having a rising Ground on each side of it. Their main Camp was on the
side of a Hill, very well Ditched, and the Ditches as well lined with Shot to
the very edge of the bog, several Defiles being so narrow, that not above Two
Men could enter abreast; their Intrenchments being such, that to ones
thinking, made them almost impossible to be attacked: Add to this, their Army's
being more numerous than ours: but there seems to be no difficulty, but what
the Conduct and Resolution of the Great Ginckle, assisted by the Courage and
Bravery of his Men, is able to overcome; for the Attacks were so well ordered,
that our Men, under the Conduct of the General, behaved themselves with such
undaunted Courage and Resolution, that in a few hours time, they not only
forced the Enemy's Camp, but gave their main Body a Total Defeat, killing about
7000, and taking above 450 Prisonners, with the loss of about 500: on our Side.

Not to mention the taking the Fort of Galway, the timely preventing Baldarick
O Donnel's intented Succor, with the forcing that City to a speedy Surrender,
in order to the Army's making the moon timely March to the Siege of that almost
impregnable Fortress of Lymerick; the forcing of which said Place to a
Surrender, not only crowns the Work of this Glorious, Successful, and ever
Happy Campaign, but puts a Final End to the War in that Kingdom, by bringing
those People entirely under the Obedience of Their Majesty's Authority.

The Baron's Indefatigable Diligence, with that of his Extraordinary Conduct,
and Military Stratagems, in the several Series of Actions during the Siege of
Lymerick, (too many here to particularize,) cannot but be admired by all
Europe. His vast Skill in Military Affairs made the Soldiers, in all their
Attempts at the Siege bold and secure under him: No Attempt seemed difficult,
if but done by his Command. He is the Love, as well as the Terror of the
Irish; for no General was ever so averse from Violence, even against those he
had vanquished. The War has not been managed by him, as by some Generals on the
other side of the Sea; where Burgning of Towns, Laying a whole Country in
Ashes, and sparing neither Agenor Sex, is looked upon as a great Commendation
to Posterity.

All that as been said here, is but one part of this Great Man's Character: He
is as admirable in his Private, as in his Public Capacities; and there is as
ample a Catalogue of his Virtues, as of his Exploits.

To be Great and Good is extraordinary and difficult: To live in the Noise and
Violence of Wars, and yet preserve a Religions temper, and a Conscience tender
of the least Evil, is infinite. To be as intent to overcome our selves, as our
Enemies, is the highest Improvement of Vertve. All this is in our General, to
an eminent Degree: He is of an Affable, Candid and Obliging Nature: It is
harder for him to deny a Favor, than to another to be denied: He never suffers
himself to be asked, when he sees real Merit; and refuses with an extreme
Civility, what he cannot grant. In short, He will live to Posterity, by the
large Share he has secured to himself of the History of his Age and this Name
cannot be forgotten, so long as Men are capable of Admiring Great and Vertuons
Actions.

FIN.

