THE CASE OF THE RESPECTIVE ARTIFICERS Belonging to Their Majesty's Office of
the Ordnance, etc.
THE said Artificers being a Society of several sorts of People, who for many
Years have made it their business in their diverse Qualifications, to furnish
the said Office with all manner of Stores, Provisions, and Utensils of War,
viz. Great Guns, small Guns, great Shot, small Shot, Powder, Match, Cordage,
Ship and Field-Carriages, and all sorts of Arms. Tents, Bedding, and near 2000
Species of other Stores, too tedious here to Enumerate, such as are daily
adapted to the proper Service of the Crown in that Office; and in which Service
are concerned the whole Body of Artificers, whose Callings have dependence
thereon, and who have been at all times ready, to their utmost Power, to serve
the Crown with their Estates and Fortunes; and are now left to bemoan their
unhappiness of being deprived of their good Intentions of proceeding in their
accustomed Methods in serving the said Office, being therein totally disabled
as follows, Viz.

I. By a Debt left upon them by King Charles the Second for Stores served in,
and Services performed by Direction from the Officers of the Ordnance,
amounting to about 100000 l. which has been frequently Solicited for, and
often promised, though yet unpaid: Great part of which Stores have been
Transferred to the Service of the present Crown, and all applied for the
Service of the Nation.

II. By Debts owing them from the said Office, contracted since their present
Majesty's Accession to the Crown, amounting to about 150000 l. Which said great
Debts having so Exhausted both the Stocks and Credits of the said Artificers,
that they are left (though willing) altogether incapable of proceeding any
further in the Performance of the aforesaid Services, without a speedy Supply
of Money.

They therefore humbly Supplicate this Honorable House, to take into their
speedy Considerations, the deplorable Condition of the said Artificers (Great
part of those Instruments of War, which by them are to be provided, cannot be
had at a Moments warning, but at certain Seasons in the Year,) That some speedy
Provision may be made to satisfy the late Debts contracted; As also the former
Debt in this following Method, or any other way or means as this Honorable
House shall think convenient, the better to Enable them to prosecute their
Wonted Vigor in serving their Majesty's in the said Office, which otherwise
they will be Compelled into an Incapacity of doing, and will prove the Ruin of
them and their Posterities.

WE are informed that SALT in several Countries pays a very great Duty, Forty
pushels makes a Way and ^ere is Im^^ted a^out 22000 Way in a (...)
as it has done here in former Years, and great Quantities being here Imported,
there is laid upon it but 12 d. per Way, which, in truth, may bear 4 l. per
Way; So that in some time, the Artificers may be paid the Debt owing to them in
King Charles the Second's time, if this Honorable House shall not Order some
other way to satisfy it: And if this Duty be found convenient to be continued
and appropriated to the Office of the Ordnance, it will go a great way in
defraying the ordinary Charge of that Office; and this Duty will hardly be felt
in Vending the said Commodity, computing how small a quantity a Family uses in
a Year. The great Objection that has been made against laying a higher Duty on
this Commodity, is the Fishery: To overcome that Difficulty, We pray this
Honorable House, That all Salt, made use of for the Fishery, may be drawn back
out of His Majesty's Customs, it will prevent the Ruin of many Hundreds of
Families, and pay a just Debt, which, in Process of time, will be a greater
benefit to the Nation, in encouraging the making of that Commodity.


