HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

THE KING'S MAJESTY'S LETTER TO HIS PARLIAMENT, Met at Edinburgh, 28. of July,
1670.

With the LORD COMMISSIONER'S SPEECH TO THE PARLIAMENT.

C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
MAJESTY, 1670.

THE KINGS MAJESTY'S LETTER TO HIS PARLIAMENT, Met at Edinburgh, 28. of July,
1670.
CHARLES R.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THe manifold experience We have of your Loyalty and dutiful Affection to Our
Person and Service, especially in your late Session, invites Us on all
occasions to signify to you, how sensible We are thereof. It is Our constant
study to do it by Acts of Our Royal Care of the Concerns of that Our ancient
Kingdom, the Peace and Welfare whereof, are very dear to Us. At present, We
know not how to express does better, then by acquainting you with the dear
confidence We have, of the constant continuance of your ready concurrence in
every thing We do design for the Public Good, whereof you gave Us, in your
last Letter of the twenty third of December, renewed assurances. In pursuance
therefore, of the Proposal We made to you at your first meeting, of a nearer
conjunction of these first meeting, of a nearer conjunction of these Our two
Kingdoms of Scotland and England, by as strict an Union as possible can be
attained, We have commanded Our Commissioner to mind you of effectuating all
those particulars you so readily offered, in order to a Treaty for
accomplishing the desired Union, wherein We and Our Houses of Parliament here,
not only have freely concurred, but have done every thing else that is thereto
requisite, in behalf of this Our Kingdom of England. It remains therefore, that
you perform, as they have, what is further to be done by you; And you may be
confident, nothing will be wanting on Our part, that by Gods blessing may
render the Treaty effectual. You will find Our Commissioner, to whom you shall
give entire trust, sufficiently instructed by Us in all other matters, that
either We could think on, or you can desire, for maintaining the settled
Government of Church and State in its luster and security, by making such Laws
as may be found yet further necessary for the preservation of Peace and Union
in that Our Kingdom. For effec^ ^ting whereof, We know your Zeal to Our Service
will lead you to do all that is requisite on your part, as Our Affection to you
and all Our good Subjects there, carries Us to intend nothing with greater
fervor, then what We judge conducible to your common welfare, wherein We
account Our own inseparably concerned. And so We bid you heartily farewell.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the seventh day of July, one thousand six
hundred and seventy, and of Our Reign the twenty two year. C. R.

HIS MAJESTY'S COMMISSIONER'S SPEECH TO THE PARLIAMENT, Met at Edinburgh, 28.
of July, 1670.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
HIs Majesty has been graciously pleased, by His Letter which you have now
heard, so fully to renew the expressions of His constant and continued care of
this His ancient Kingdom, His confidence of this Parliament, and His sense of
the Zeal to His Service, which you manifested in your last Session, that there
is little left for me to say at this time. I need not repeat the assurances of
His Majesty's constant and unalterable Zeal, for maintaining and defending the
ture Reformed Protestant Religion in this His Kingdom; And that with no less
Zeal and Constancy, He will maintain the ancient Government by Archbishops and
Bishops, now happily restored and established here: For, in all the exercises
of His Royal Authority, He does daily give full and undeniable Testimonies
thereof.

At the opening of the first Session of this Parliament, I told you in His
Majesty's Name, that He would not endure those numerous and unlawful
Conventicles that tend to Sedition and Schism, which had been too frequent in
some Shires of this Kingdom; and the King did then require you, and all in
Authority under Him, vigorously to suppress such Meetings, and to bring the
most Guilty to condign punishment. In prosecution of which, the Lords of the
Privy Council have done their duty carefully, though not with that success
which they desired: For, His Majesty has been informed, that this Summer
diverse seditious and numerous Conventicles have been kept, even in the open
fields, which look liker endeavors to rendezvous for Rebellion, then any
pretense of Religious Worship, and that in high contempt of His Majesty's
Authority, and of this Parliament, which they well knew was so soon to
assemble. Yea, such has been the insolent barbarity of that incorrigible sort
of Non-conformists, that in some places, the Houses of Orthodox and Peaceable
Ministers have been robbed, their Persons and Families wounded, and they
threatened to be murdered, if they stay at their Churches.

Therefore, His Majesty does most seriously recommend it to your special care,
by good Laws and vigorous prosecution of them, to curb, punish and prevent
those seditious Conventicles; to cure the withdrawing of Protestants from
their Paroch-churches and the Ordinances there, which is the occasion of those
Conventicles, and cannot be pretended for Conscience, but must be esteemed only
out of design to perpetuate Faction and Schism (seeing the form of Worship here
is the same which has been since the Reformation) As also, to punish
examplarly those barbarous Roberies and Assassinates, committed against honest
and peaceable Ministers; and generally, to provide what you shall think
necessary for continuing the Peace of the Kingdom. The work will be easy, and
I doubt not your care in it. The Kingdom generally is Loyal, Peaceable and
Dutiful; it is but a small part of it which is tainted with such Principles and
Practices; and I am fully instructed to give the Kings Royal Assent to these,
or any other good Laws you shall think necessary in this Session.

But, your first work is, to perfect what remains to be done toward the Treaty
of the Union. The King did seriously recommend it to you at your first meeting,
and you did dutifully declare your hearty concurrence; and in order thereto,
your willingness that Commissioners be appointed for this Kingdom, to Treat
with such as should be employed for the Kingdom of England, upon the Grounds
and Conditions of the Union, reserving always to the Parliament, the allowing
and dis-allowing the same, as they shall judge fit. You did also freely and
heartily offer to His Majesty, the nomination of the persons to Treat for this
Kingdom, with the appointing the Number, Quorum, Time and Place of their
meeting: Since that time, the two Houses of Parliament in England have as
heartily concurred, and as freely left the Persons, Quorum, Time and Place to
His Majesty; And farther, His Majesty, by and with their advice and consent,
has past an Act of Parliament, Authorizing the Commissioners for the Realm of
England to Treat. The Act it self is in print: most of you, I think, have seen
it; and I am confident, you will cheerfully pass such another Act, which shall
be prepared at the Articles against your next meeting: And I assure my self,
His Majesty will, out of His Fatherly care of both His Kingdoms, name such
Persons as shall be fit for going about so good a Work.

FINIS.

