Unto his Majesty's High Commissioner, His Grace, and the Honorable Estates of
Parliament.
John Cala^der of Craigeforth.
Humbly shows,
THAT whereas I sometime before the Revolution, being employed to furnis^
several Particulars to the Castle, and Garrison of Stirling; And for that
effect, I having entered into a Contract with the then Cashkeeper,
condescending upon the Particulars that were to be furnished: And accordingly I
having furnished the Particulars, and wrought the Work, conform to the
Contract; And obtained Receipts and Declarations, from the several Persons that
had the oversight of the Work; And having applied to the Lords of Theasurie for
Payment, And the Instructions being given in, and the Accounts fitted and found
to be sufficiently instructed, conform to Contract. It was approven, and my
Payment was Ordered and I received payment accordingly; And I being thereafter
employed to work some Work, and furnish several things to the Garrison of
Inverlochie, and Others; And having applied to the Lords of Theasurie for
payment of my Account, Mr. Alexander Higgins who is no ways concerned in the
Affair, but only out of mere Splein and Malice against me, which he did most
groundlesly take up, upon the account of an Action at Law, depending betwixt
him and me, Gave in a most calluminous and false Information to the Lords of
(...) against me, as if I had gotten allowance and Payment from the Lords of
Theasurie of certain Articles, albeit the samen had not been truly furnished,
or for more then was wrought and furnished, which was done of design to stop my
Payment of the Work which I had wrought, subsequent to the said Allowance and
Approbation, and the Lords of Theasurie were pleased so far to Indulge Mr.
Higgins as that without laying the Account open, which had been fitted closed
and approven, allowed him to adduce Witness for proving of the points upon
which he had informed: And accordingly he adduced a number of Witnesses; And I
was likewise allowed to adduced some Witnesses, which did fully clear the whole
matter: And it being made appear to the Lords of Theasurie, that Mr Higgins
Information was absolutely calumnious, they proceeded no farther in the affair:
But Mr. Heggins still continuing in his implacable malice against me, without
any shadow of reason, he did apply to the Parliament to take Cognition of the
said matter; And it being Remitted to the Commit for private affairs, and I
was most willing to have cleared the whole matter before the Committee: But Mr.
Higgins, as he has usually done before, still tergiversed, postponed and
delayed the affairs; And yet he has now the confidence to give in a Peti^ion to
the Parliament, representing the same things, that he had formerly informed the
Lords of Theasurie and Committee for private affairs, that many of the Articles
whereof I had gotten allowance and payment were stated the Triple or Quadruple
beyond the true weight, and that there was 800 Stone of new Iron of several
particulars given in the account, which are not Extant; And that I had carried
these particulars away after they were wrought, and brought them home for my
own use, and that the Witnesses whom I had adduced for clearing of the matter,
had contradicted themselves in their Testimonies, and that my other accounts in
relation to Inverlochie, Castle of Edinburgh, Palace of Holyrood-house, and
other places are not attested, at least some of them are attested by persons
who are not Authorized for that effect.

As to which it is Answered, That what is represented in Mr. Higgins Petition,
is absolutely false from the Beginning to the Ending. For First, As to all the
Work wrought, and Particulars furnished to Stirling Castle, the samen was duly
instructed before the Lords of Theasurie, and allowed and approven conform to
the Instructions then given in, and my Payment Ordered, and I received payment
accordingly; And it was hardly ever heard of, That after any person was
employed by the Publict, to work any Work, and to furnish Particulars for the
samen, and that after he had given in his Accounts, and obtained the samen to
be allowed, and gotten payment, That he could be obleidged again to subject
himself to a new Account.

2 do. Albeit I needed to say no more, but to oppone my fitted Account and
Approbation, which as to me, is a full and ample Exhonoration; Yet I was
content that the Committee should consider the Depositions of the Witnesses
adduced be Mr. Higgins; Which are no ways probative, for all that they
Declare, is. That they did only see such and such Particulars in the Castle of
Stirling, and that several years after the Work was wrought; But it does not
follow, That there was not more Particulars furnished, and Work wrought at the
time, So that all the Probation that Mr. Higgins adduces, does not so much as
amount to a negative Probation, and upon the Matter, This is no Probation at
all, Next, even as to the Particulars they depone upon, there is no concurring
Testimonies:

3 tio. As the Instructiones produced be me before the Lords of Theasurie, did
clearly instruct my Account; And which was approven, and Payment made
accordingly, And that the Probation adduced by Mr. Higgins proves nothing at
all, for redarguing of that Account, so that I was absolutely secured upon both
these considerations; Yet e^ super abundanti, and which was more than in Law I
was obleidged to do; But only to show how grossly calumnious Master Higgins is
in his Information (For which he ought to be severly censured, First, For
offering to Impose upon the Lords of Theasurie, and next upon the Honorable
Estates of Parliament) I have adduced two of Mr. Higgins own Witnesses, who do
fully clear that all the particulars of my account given in to the Lords of
Theasurie, and which is (...) furnished and delivered into the persons who was
allowed to receive them by the publict, conform to my account, and that there
was nothing brought be me from the Castle of Stirling to my own House, but the
workmens Tools, and such matterials, as left of the work, and which properly
was my own; So that there was never a more false and callumnious Information
given, than what Mr. Higgins has offered to inform against me, and there is no
man that had any sense of their Credit and Reputation would have offered to
have given such a false Information as Mr. Heggins has done.

4 to. It is likewise most false, that these Witnesses adduced by me, did
contradict their former testimonies, for first they being Mr. Higgins his own
Witnesses, he could not object against them; Next the depositions were most
clear and consistent, only Mr. Higgins did omit to interrogate them upon
several particulars of purpose to keep things in the dark: But thereafter when
they were adduced by me, and interrogat upon particular interrogators; They
fully cleared the whole matter, and their Testimonies did agree with my
accoumpt; But because they clearly redargue Mr. Higgins callumnious
information, therefore he contends they have contradicted themselves.

5 to. As to the Account of the particulars, in relation to Inverlochie Castle
of Edinburgh, and Abbay of Holy Road-House, which was furnished by me since the
Revolution. It is absurd and Rediculous for Mr. Haggins to quarrel these
accounts, either before the Lords of Thesaurie or Parliament, for these
accounts are not yet fitted and closed, but ly open before the Lords of
Theasurie; And if I cannot sufficiently instruct the sad men before the Lords
of Theasurie, the loss will be my own, and Mr. Haggins is not concerned in it,
but all that he designs is, That upon his Calumnious Information he may keep
the Action depending against me in relation to preceding accounts, which are
long since fitted and closed of purpose to hinder me to get payment of the last
account, before the action take effect as to preceding accounts; And seeing it
is now clearly made appear from what is already said, that Mr. Haggins
Information given in against me, is not also absolutely irrelevant and
groundless, but most grossly false and Calumnious.

It is therefore humbly craved, That his Grace, His Majesty's High
Commissioner, and the Honorable Estates of Parliament, may be pleased to take
the Premises to their Consideration, and to recommend to the Committee for
private affairs, That they may proceed in the said matter; and prepare a Report
to the Parliament, with all the diligence that can be, to the effect that Mr.
Haggins Information being so groundless and callumnious as it is, I may have
recourse to the Lords of Theasurie for payment of my subsequent Accounts, or if
the Committee for Private Affairs cannot get that matter dispatched this Session
of Parliament, in respect of the many business that are depending before them,
that the Parliament may be pleased to remit the said Action to the Lords of
Theasurie and Exchequer to be determined by them. And that in respect Mr.
Haggins Information is so calumnious, he may be ordained to find Caution in
eventu, to refound me a large sum for my Expenses; And also seeing I can make
it appear that he has been endeavoring to suborn Witnesses against me which is
a falsehood; And also that he has granted Double Rights to several parties,
which be the 105 Act, Par: 7 Ja: 5th. Is declared to be punishable with
infamy, and otherwise at the Kings will, and be the 142 Act. Par: 12 Ja: 6th.
It is declared to be punished as crimen stellionatus, and that he may be
remitted to the Lords of Justiciarie to be pursued for these Crimes, And Your
Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.


