To his Grace, His Majesty's high Commissioner, and the Right Honorable the
Estates of Parliament,
Mary Countess of Callender, and her Husband for his Interest,
Humbly shows,
THat where I being conveened before the Lords of Their Majesty's Privy
Council, at the Instance of James now Earl of Callender and the Earl of
Linlithgow, and his other Tutors for their Interest; he obtained against me the
Modification of one Thousand pounds Scots of Aliment yearly, to be paid to him
out of my Jointure, wherein I was secured by all the Security that Law could
make me: By which Sentence being greatly grieved, I cannot but lay before this
high and Honorable Court of Parliament, the many and strong Reasons that I
offered to the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council, in my own Defense. As
first, That there was no pressing Necessity for any Aliment, since the Earls
Mother had given him a thousand Merks yearly, as was acknowledged, and he was
but an Infant, whom such a Sum in his Circumstances might very well serve. 2.
The Necessity being taken off, and this question of Aliment dipping visibly
upon the Point of Civil Right, it was undeniable that the Pursuit was more
proper to be intented before the Lords of Session than before the Lords of the
Privy Council, who are not in use to receive Complaints of that kind, except
where the Necessity is urged, as a matter that admits of no delay, which could
not be alleged in this case. But 3. To show that your Petitioner desired no
delay but a fair Discussion in Point of right, I offered to consent that the
matter should be summarly discussed by the Lords of Session. 4. To come close
to the Case it self, I did contend that the ordinary Motives of Equity for
giving the Heir an Aliment against the Liferenter, did wholly cease in my case,
in as much as I am nothing in Blood to this Earl of Callender, and that he is
not Lineally descended of me, nor is the Debt that straitnes him either my
Husbands or his predecessors Debts, but on the contratrary, Debts contracted by
his Father after my Husbands decease, and that I was possessed of my Jointure,
so that to burden me with an Aliment in this Earls favors, where there was
neither ty of Blood, nor the least color of Equity, upon the account of my
Husbands Debts, was a case wholly unprefidented.

But 5. As I truly am a Stranger to the Family in Blood, though never in
kindness, so any Jointure I have was most onerously purchased by the Portion I
brought with me, which was no less than 38000 pounds Scots, and for which all
the Jointure was but about 8000 Merks yearly, which is the least that a Person
of my Quality can live upon, and the same can admit of no Deduction: whereby it
is evident, that there is no more Reason to take an Aliment off me, than of any
other singular Successor. 6. In an Agreement with this Earls Father, I got from
him an Ratification of my Jointure, with an express Reunnciation of all Claims
of Aliment, which in sense and Reason seems effectually to exclude this Earl
who is his Son and Heir. 7. Upon the whole matter I am in effect, no more
liable to an Aliment to this Earl of Callender, than if by his own Debt and
Mismanagement he had brought himself to this Necessity, which no person will,
or can say should ever be a Strait upon me, for as to me this Earl and his
Father are both the same person, and the Fathers Debt does now straiten his
Son: It was never my Husbands Debt, but contracted after his death, and my
Possession of my Jointure: and farther this Claim of Aliment is renunced by the
Father, so that on all these Considerations, it is plain and evident that I can
be no more obliged to Aliment this Earl, then if he had brought himself to this
Distress by his own Mismanagment and Extravagancie, which no rational man will
allege; seeing, therefore that my Case is so singular, and my Defenses were so
strong: and that notwithstanding, I clearly proved every Point, that I alleged
in matter of Fact: it was yet cast by the Lords of Councils Sentence, I cannot
but in all humility Address my self to this High and Sovereign Court, as the
only Court and Power where any Help or Remedy may be found.

My it therefore please your Grace and Lordships, in consideration of the
Premises, to suspend the foresaid Sentence of Council, and all further
Execution upon it, and to grant Warrant to Cite the said Earl and his Tutors
for their interest, to compear before your Lordships, to hear the foresaid Case
and Question, with the Sentence upon it reviewed and rectified, or otherways to
remit the Discussion thereof to the Lords of Council and Session, the only
proper Judges of Right, that they may determine therein, notwithstanding of the
foresaid Sentence of Privy Council, and as if the same had never been
pronounced.

And your Grace and Lordships Petitioner shall ever pray.


