His Majesty's Most Gracious SPEECH To both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT, On Wednesday
the 15th. of December, 1680.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

Dublin, Reprinted by Benjamin Took and John Crook, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty; and are to be sold by Mary Crook at His Majesty's Printing
House in Skinner-row 1680.

His Majesty's Most GRACIOUS SPEECH To both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT. On Wednesday
the 15th of December 1680.
My Lords and Gentlemen.
AT the opening of this Parliament I did acquaint You with the Alliances I had
made with Spain and Holland, as the best Measures that could be taken for the
Safety of England, and the Repose of Christendom.

But I told you withal, That if Our Friendship became unsafe to trust to, it
would not be wondered at, if Our Neighbors should begin to take new
Resolutions, and perhaps such as might befatal to Us.

I must now tell you, That Our Allies cannot but see how little has been done
since this Meeting* to encourage their dependence upon Us: And I find by them,
that unless We can be so united at home, as to make Our Alliance valuable to
them, it will not be possible to hinder them from seeking some other Refuge,
and making such new Friendships, as will not be consistent with Our Safety.
Consider, that a neglect of this Opportunity is never to be repaired.

I did likewise lay the matter plainly before you touching the estate and
condition of Tangier, I must now tell you again, That if that Place be thought
worth the keeping, you must take such consideration of it, that it may be
speedily supplied; it being impossible for Me to preserve it at an Expense so
far above My power.

I did promise you the fullest satisfaction your hearts could wish, for the
Security of the Protestant Religion, and to concur with you in any Remedies,
which might consist with preserving the Succession of the Crown in its Due and
Legal course of Descent: I do again, with the same Reservations, renew the same
Promises to you.

And being thus ready on My part to do all that can reasonably be expected from
Me, I should be glad to know from you, as soon as may be, how far I shall be
assisted by you, and what it is you desire from Me.

FINIS.

