His Majesty's GRACIOUS SPEECH To both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT, On Wednesday,
February the 18. 1662. Being the first day of their meeting after their
Prorogation.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

Reprinted at Edinburgh by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, 1663.

His Majesties-Gracious SPEECH to both Houses of Parliament, on Wednesday
February the 18. 1662. Being the first day of their meeting after their
Prorogation.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Am very glad to meet you here again, having thought the time long since We
parted, and often wished you had been together to help Me in some occasions
which have fallen out; I need not repeat them unto you, you have all had the
noise of them in your several Countries, and (God be thanked) they were but
noise without any worse effects.

To cure the distempers, and compose the differing minds that are yet among Us,
I set forth my Declaration of the 26. of December, in which you may see I am
willing to set bounds to the hopes of some, and to the fears of others; of
which, when you shall have examined well the grounds, I doubt not but I shall
have your concurrence therein: The truth is, I am, in my nature, an enemy to
all severity for Religion and Conscience, how mistaken soever it be, when it
extends to capital and sanguinary Punishments, which I am told were begun in
Popish times; therefore, when I say this, I hope I shall not need to warn any
here not to infer from thence that I mean to favor Popery. I must confess to
you, there are many of that Profession, who having served my Father and my Self
very well, may fairly hope for some part in that Indulgence I would willingly
afford to others who dissent from Us: But let me explain my Self, lest some
mistake me herein, as I hear they did in my Declaration: I am far from meaning
by this, a Toleration or qualifying them thereby to hold any Offices or places
of Trust in the Government; nay further, I desire some Laws may be made to
hinder the growth and progress of their Doctrine. I hope you have all so good
an opinion of my Zeal for the Protestant Religion, as I need not tell you I
will not yield to any therein, not to the Bishops themselves, nor in my liking
the Uniformity of it, as it is now established, which being the Standard of Our
Religion, must be kept pure and uncorrupted, free from all other mixtures; and
yet if the dissenters will demean themselves peaceably and modestly under the
Government, I could heartily wish I had such a power of Indulgence, to use upon
occasions, as might not needlessly force them out of the Kingdom, or staying
here, give them cause to conspire against the peace of it.

My Lords and Gentlemen, It would look like flattery in Me to tell you to what
degree I am confident of your wisdom and affection in all things that relate to
the greatness and prosperity of the Kingdom. If you consider well what is best
for Us all, I dare say we shall not dis-agree. I have no more to say to you at
present, but once again to bid you heartily welcome.

FINIS.

