C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
HIS MAJESTY'S GRACIOUS DECLARATION, For the Encouraging the Subjects of the
United Provinces of the Low Countries, to Transport themselves with their
Estates, and to settle in this His Majesty's Kingdom of England.
Published by the Advice of His Privy Council.
CHARLES R.

WHereas His Majesty was Graciously pleased, in His late Declaration of War
against the States General of the United Provinces, of the 17. of March,
1671/2. among other things to Declare, That if any of the Low Countries
Subjects, either out of affection to His Majesty, or His Government, or because
of the Oppression they meet with at home from their Governors, should come
into His Kingdoms, they should be by His Majesty protected in their Persons and
Estates: His Majesty continuing in the same Gracious Inclination toward all
such of the Subjects of the said Low Countries, as shall desire to deliver
themselves from, the Calamity and Distress into which the ill Counsels of some
prevailing persons in the Government of those Countries have justly drawn them,
has thought fit in pursuance of His said Gracious Intention, hereby further to
Declare,

I. That all such of the Subjects and Inhabitants of the United Provinces of
the Low Countries, of what Profession, Rank, or Condition soever, as shall
desire to withdraw themselves out of those Countries, shall have, and from
henceforth they have, by virtue of these Presents, full Leave, License and
Permission from His Majesty to Transport themselves, together with their
Families, Estates, Goods and Merchandises into this His Majesty's Kingdom of
England, in what Ships or Vessels they shall think fit, without Seizure,
Confiscation, Restraint, Trouble or Molestation whatsoever.

II. That all such persons being arrived in this His Majesty's Kingdom, shall
be free in their Estates and Persons, with liberty to settle themselves and
families where they please, and as they please, and shall have and enjoy full
Liberty of Conscience, as to matters of Religion and Worship, together with all
and singular the privileges, Immunities and Advantages, enjoyed by, or
belonging to, His Majesty's Natural born Subjects of this His Kingdom; and
particularly not to pay, or be liable to any Customs, Payments, or Duties
whatsoever, other then are paid by His Majesty's Natural born Subjects of this
Kingdom.

III. That for their greater security in this particular, His Majesty will at
the next Meeting of the Parliament Pass a Bill for the Naturalizing such.
Persons, their Children and Servants, and that in the mean time they shall be
immediately, and without delay made free Denizens of this His Kingdom of
England, without their Charge or Trouble.

IV. All such Ships, Boats, Busses, and Vessels whatsoever, as do or shall
belong to any of the persons so Transporting themselves as aforesaid, shall be
held and acounted as of English Built, and shall have and enjoy the same and
like Privileges and Immunities in matters of Trade, Navigation and Customs, to
all Intents and Purposes, as if they had been Built in England, and did
actually belong to His Majesty's Natural born Subjects of this His Kingdom: And
if any person or persons shall hereafter bring over to His Majesty any Ships of
War belonging to the United Provinces, every such person or persons shall
forthwith have and receive to their own use one full moiety of the true value
of such Ships, their Tackle, Guns, Ammunition, and Provisions.

V. And for the greater encouragement of all such Seamen, Mariners, Fishermen,
Shipwrights, Carpenters and other Artificers relating to Shipping or
Sea-Affairs, as shall desire to make use of this His Majesty's Gracious Favor
and Compassion, His Majesty is pleased further to add, and accordingly He does
hereby Declare and Promise, That all such persons, and every of them shall be
and remain free an and exempt from any Press.

VI. And lastly, His Majesty does Declare, and Promise, That he will from time
to time grant His free Passports and Safe Conducts under His Royal Sign Manual,
for the Persons, Families, Ships, Goods and Merchandises of all such as shall
thus desire to Transport themselves; and if it be found necessary, will appoint
even Convoys to secure them and their Estates in their Passage, against
whatsoever force, violence or molestation: Further Promising and Declaring,
That in supply of the want of such Passports, where the parties might not have
the Convenience of Procuring them, His Majesty will give effectual Order, That
whatsoever Ships or Goods shall at any time hereafter happen to be taken at
Sea, being bound for any Port of this His Majesty's Kingdom, and shall truly
belong to any person so Transporting himself and his Estate into this His
Majesty's Kingdom of England, shall forthwith, and without all delay be
discharged from any such Seizure Or Detention, and be immediately restored to
the Owners.

EDINBURGH, Reprinted in the Year 16(...)


