HIS MAJESTY'S DECLARATION TO All his Loving Subjects, Concerning the
TREASONABLE CONSPIRACY Against His Sacred Person and Government lately
Discovered.
Appointed to be Read in all Churches and Chapels within this Kingdom. By His
MAJESTY'S Special Command.
CHARLES REX.

IT has been Our Observation, that for several years last past, a Malevolent
party has made it their business to promote Sedition by false News, Libellous
Pamphlets, and other wicked Arts; whereby they endeavored not only to render
our Government odious, and our most faithful subjects suspected to the People,
but even to Incite them to a dislike and hatred of our Royal Person: Whereupon
it was evident to us, that the heads of this party could have no other aim, but
the ruin of Us and Our Government.

And whilst by our utmost care, we manifested to all our subjects our Zeal for
the maintenance of the Protestant Religion, and our resolutions to Govern
according to Law; It was a great trouble to Us to find, that evil Persons by
misrepresenting out actions to the People, should so far insinuate themselves
into the Affections of the weaker sort, as that they looked upon them as the
only Patriots and Assertors of their Religion and liberties, and gave
themselves up entirely to their conduct.

As their Numbers increased, so did their boldness, to that height, that by
often showing themselves in tumults and riots, and unlawful and seditious
conventicles, they not only engaged, but proclaimed an impunity to their own
party, who thought themselves already too strong for the Laws; and they seemed
to believe; that in a short time they should gain upon the People, so as to
persuade them to a total defection from the Government.

But it pleased God, by these their Violent Ways, to Open the Eyes of Our good
Subjects, who easily Foresaw what Troubles these Methods would Produce; And
thereupon with great Courage as well as Duty and Affection toward Us, upon all
Occasions did Manifest their Resolution and Readiness in Defense of Our Person,
and Support of Our Government, and the Religion Established: And did likewise
Convince the Common People of the Villainous Designs of their Factious Leaders,
and the Miseries that would befall them in pursuing such Courses.

By these means the Factious Party lost Ground daily, and finding that it was
impossible to keep up the Spirits of their Followers, against the Religion
Established, and the Laws; whilst we were Steady in the Maintenance and
Execution of them, became Desperate, and Resolved not to Trust any longer to
the slow Methods of Sedition, but to betake themselves to Arms; not doubting,
but that they remained still strong enough by Force to Overturn the Government
which they could not Undermine.

It is hard to imagine how men of so many different Interests and Opinions,
could join in any Enterprise; but it is certain, They readily Concurred in the
Resolution of taking Arms to Destroy the Government, even before they had
Agreed what to set up in the place of it.

To which purpose, they took several Ways; For, whilst some were Contriving a
General Insurrection in this Kingdom, and likewise in Scotland; Others Were
Conspiring to Assassinate Our Royal Person, and Our Dearest Brother, and to
Massacre the Magistrates of Our City of London, and Our Officers of State, That
there might be no Appearance of Government, nor any Means for Our Subjects to
Unite for their Defense.

In case it had pleased God to permit these wicked Designs to have taken
Effect, There could have been nothing in Prospect but Confusion: For, instead
of the Reformation they pretended, their Success would have produced Divisions,
and Wars among themselves, until the Predominant Party could have Enslaved the
rest, and the whole Kingdom.

But the Divine Providence, which has preserved Us through the whole Course of
Our life, has at this time in an Extraordinary manner, showed it self in the
Wonderful and Gracious Deliverance of Us and Our Dearest Brother, and all Our
Loyal Subjects from this Horrid and Damnable Conspiracy.

As it is therefore Our desire that all Our Loving Subjects should join with Us
in giving Thanks to Almighty God for this Mercy, so We thought it necessary
they should be now in some measure Informed of the Fact as it has been
Discovered to Us by undoubted Proof, and the Confession of diverse of the
Accomplices in this Conspiracy; whereof, though We have not as yet perfectly
Traced all the Particulars, the Principal and main Designs of it nevertheless,
have appeared to be as follows.

About the beginning of October last, when the Heads of the Faction saw the
Magistracy of Our City of London Settled in Persons of Loyal Principles, they
became impatient; and fell immediately to Consult of Rising in Arms; for which
some thought their Party ^, that they could not fail of attaining their ends
whenever they should break out into open force.

Whereupon there was a Meeting of some of the Principal Conspirators, to Agree
about the best means to Master Our Guards, and to Seize Our Person; but upon
Consideration, they found it necessary to prepare their Friends in the several
Counties, as also the Disaffected Party in Scotland to join with them, without
which, any Attempt in Our said City, or upon Our Guards, appeared too rash to
be undertaken; so that they laid aside the thoughts of a present Rising, and
disposed themselves to find, by a Correspondence with Scotland, and with
several parts of this Our Kingdom, how sat they might be Assisted by a General
Insurrection, so that they might not in Human probability fail of Success.

Whilst this first Design was Forming, some Villains were likewise carrying on
that Horrid and Execrable Plot of Assassinating Our Royal Person, and Our
Dearest Brother, in Our coming from Newmarket, and Money was deposited for that
purpose: But by the shortness of the time (We being then immediately upon Our
Return) and for want of necessary Preparations, they were forced to defer the
Execution of it till further Opportunity.

It was then proposed among them, Whether they should Attempt the same at Our
next going to Newmarket in March last? But some objected, That Our Guards which
usually remain here some time after Our Departure, would be capable of making a
great Opposition upon the Arrival of the News. For which Reason, and because
they were not then in a sufficient Readiness, It was Agreed to be done at Our
Return from Newmarket.

The place Appointed was the House of one Richard Rumbold a Maltster, called
the Rye, near Hoddesdon in the County of Hertford: And it was Resolved, That
Forty Persons in number, who were to be Actors in this Assassination, under the
Command of the said Richard Rumbold, should hide themselves in or near the said
House; And when our coach should come over against them, then Three or Four
were to Shoot with Blunderbusses at the Postilion and Horses, and if they
should fail of killing the Horses, some were to be ready in the way, who in the
Habit of Laborers should Turn a Cart cross the Passage, and so stop our Coach.
Others were appointed to Shoot into the Coach, where our Royal Person, and our
Dearest Brother were to be: Others to Fire upon the Guards that should be then
Attending Us. And it was further Resolved, That upon the same Day, Many Lords,
and other Persons of Quality, whom they supposed favorable to their Design,
should be Invited to Dine in our City of London, That they might be the more
ready to Appear among the Citizens upon Arrival of the News. The Actors in the
said Assassination having Contrived the manner of their Escape, by nearer
Passage than the usual Road; By which means they hoped to get to London as soon
as the News could be brought thither.

They thought it would be Easy upon their Perpetrating this Horrid Fact, to
possess themselves of the Government, presuming upon the Numbers of the
Disaffected.

But lest the Blackness of such an Action might Deter any from joining with
them, They Prepared to Palliate it, as far they could, by some Remonstrance, or
Declaration, which was ready to be Printed and Dispersed in that Confusion, to
Amuse the People. And lest Our Officers of State, and the Magistrates of Our
said City, with the Militia thereof, and other Our Loyal Subjects, should be
able to put some Stop to their Carreir, They Resolved to follow this Blow with
a Massacre; wherein they particularly Designed for immediate Slaughter, Our
Officers of State; the Present Lord Mayor, and Sheriffs, and other our Subjects
that had been most Eminent for their Loyalty.

But it pleased Almighty God, by his wonderful Providence, To Defeat these
Councels by the sudden Fire at Newmarket, which necessitated Our Return from
thence before the time We had Appointed.

Yet these Villains were not thereby discouraged from Pursuing the same Bloody
Design, but Resolved to take the first Opportunity for Effecting the same, and
proposed to themselves, That it might be done either in Our Passage from
Windsor to Hampton Coars, or in Our Journey to Winchester, or when We should go
by Water in Our Barge, or under Bedford Garden Wall, as We should pass that
way, or at the Bull Feast, which was to be in Red-Lyon-Fields; they being
informed, That We and Our Dearest Brother had Intentions of coming thither.

And that they might be the better prepared when there should be occasion, by
having a certain number of Arms lying always ready for that Purpose; Arms for
forty men were bespoke in all haste, (vizt.) Thirty Carbines with Belts and
Swivels, Thirty Cases of Pistols, and Ten Blunderbusses, which were accordingly
Made and Paid for.

And for the more easy Drawing their Party together against the time of
Execution, they Con^rived to Divide Our Cities of London and Westminster, and
the Suburbs, into Twenty Parts; from each of which they expected Five hundred
men to be ready at the first Onset; And some Agitators were to give an Account
of the men to be furnished in each Division, and to give out Orders to them, as
there should be occasion.

And to the end the Forces they should Raise might be the sooner Modelled into
the Form of an Army, there were One hundred Old Officers, who had been Engaged
in the late Rebellion, ready in Town to take the Command of them; In the
pursuit of which Project they continued, till they knew that a Discovery had
been made unto Us.

During all this time, the Principal Conspirators were Managing their other
Design for a General Insurrection in both Kingdoms.

The late Earl of Shaftsbury, who had at first Pressed them to sudden Rising,
which he would have had before the Seventeenth of November last, or upon that
day at the farthest, sent to the Conspirators, at a Meeting appointed by them,
to know their Resolution; and finding they would not adventure without farther
Preparation, Conveyed himself secretly into Holland, to avoid the Danger he
might be in by a Discovery.

His withdrawing himself from their Councels did not Discourage them from
Pursuing their Design, only made them more Cautious; Whereupon a new Council
was appointed of Six Persons that were to have the Chief Management of Affairs,
in Order to a General Insurrection, by a Correspondency with their Party in
Scotland, and several Counties of this Our Kingdom. And because a
Correspondency by Letters was thought dangerous, it was held necessary that
some Person should be sent into Scotland, to Invite the Heads of the
Disaffected Party in that Our Kingdom, to come hither, under pretense of
Purchasing Lands in Carolina; But, in truth, to Concert with them the best
Means for carrying on the Design Jointly in both Kingdoms: And a Treaty was
thereupon had with Archibald Campbell late Earl of Argile, already Attainted of
Treason, who demanded Thirty thousand Pounds at first; But afterward Agreed to
accept of Ten thousand pounds, for Buying of Arms in Holland, and making other
Provisions necessary for a Rebellion within Our Kingdom of Scotland.

In the said Council of Six it was Debated, Whether the Rising in this Kingdom,
should be first in our City of London, where, by reason of the vast Numbers
that might readily Unite, they thought they might easily Master the Guards, or
rather in some remote Parts, whereby We should be under a necessity of sending
Our Guards to suppress them and thereby the Rising in Our said City would
become more Secure and Effectual: But at last it was Resolved, as most
convenient, That it should be in all Parts at the same time, lest Our City
might be Defended by the Militia thereof, without the help of Our Guards, which
We might send for the Suppressing any Insurrection in the Country; And they
did all dispose themselves accordingly, for the Compassing their Design, which
was very near taking effect.

But such was the abundant Mercy of Almighty God, while they were yet
meditating their Execrable Mischiefs against Our Royal Person, our dearest
Brother, and the Government, a Discovery made unto Us by one of the
Accomplices, on the Twelfth of June last; since which time We have used the
best Means We could for the Detecting, and Prevention of so Hellish a
Conspiracy.

But so it has happened, That diverse of the Conspir^^^^s, having notice of
Warrants Issued out for their Apprehension* are fled from Justice: viz. James
Duke of Monmouth, the Lord Melvin, Sir John Cochrane, Sir Thomas Armestrong,
Robert Ferguson, who was the common Agitator Entrusted by all Parties in the
several Conspiracies, Richard Goodenough, Francis Goodenough, Kichard Rumbold
the Maltster, William Rumbold his Brother, Richard Nelthorp, Nathaniel Wade,
William Thompson, James Burton, Joseph Elby, Samuel Gibbs, Francis Charleton,
Joseph Tyley. (...) Casteers, (...) Lobb, both Nonconformist Preachers, Edward
Norton, John Row, John Ayloff, and John Atherton.

Ford Lord Gray being Apprehended, made his Escape out of the hands of a
Sergeant at Arms, and Arthur late Earl of Essex, being Committed to the Tower
for High Treason, killed himself.

Others have been Taken and Committed to Custody, some of whom, viz. The Lord
William Russel, Thomas Walcot, William Hone, and John Rouse, have upon their
Trials been Convicted, Attainted, and Executed according to Law.

This We thought it fit to make known to Our Loving Subjects: that they being
sensible (as We are) of the Mercy of God in this great Deliverance, may
Cheerfully and Devoutly join with Us in Returning Solemn Thanks to Almighty God
for the same.

For which end We do hereby Appoint the Ninth day of September next, to be
observed as a Day of Thanksgiving in all Churches and Chapels within this our
Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, in such
manner as shall be by Us Directed, in a Form of Prayer with Thanksgiving, which
We have Commanded to be prepared by Our Bishops, and Published for that purpose.

And it is Our Pleasure, That this Declaration be Publicly Read in all the
said Churches and Chapels, as well on Sunday the Second of September next, as
upon the Day of Thanksgiving aforesaid.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Eight and twentieth day of July, 1683. In
the Five and thirtieth Year of Our Reign.
AT THE COURT AT WHITE HALL This 27th of July 1683.
By the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the Lords of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.
IT is this day Ordered by His Majesty in Council, That this Declaration be
forthwith Printed, and Published.

PHIL. LLOYD.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by DAVID LINDSAY, 1683.


