His Majesty's GRACIOUS LETTER TO HIS PARLIAMENT OF SCOTLAND, May 23. 1672.

WITH THEIR ANSWER* AS ALSO The Speech OF His Grace the Lord Duke of
Lauderdail, His Majesty's High Commissioner for His Kingdom of Scotland, at the
opening of this Session of PARLIAMENT. June 12. 1672.

Published by Authority.

EDINBVRGH* Reprinted by Andrew Anderson, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1672.

HIS MAJESTY'S GRAIOUS LETTER TO HIS PARLIAMENT OF SCOTLAND, May the 23d. 1672.
CHARLES R.

THe constant Proofs We have had of your Loyalty and Zeal for our Service in
your former Sessions, give Us assurance of the continuance of it in this,
especially since our Principal Designin calling you together at this time, is,
that you may consider your own Security, as well as Our Honor and Interest, now
whilst we are Engaged in a very Just and Necessary War, against the States
General of the United Provinces; And that you may provide fitting Remedies
against all Accidents that may befall through this Occasion. We have always
been very Tender of any thing which might bring Burdens upon that Our Ancient
Kingdom; and therefore We propose nothing, but leave you to provide for your
own Safety, and Our Honor, by such ways as may be most Suitable to the
Condition of the Kingdom. We have instructed the Duke of Lauderdaile Our
Commissioner fully in all things relating to Our Service, or your Advantage;
And he can well Inform you of Our constant Affection to, and Care of all the
Concerns of that Our Kingdom; And of him We think fit to tell you, that the
Long and Great Sufferings he has endured for Us, and the many and great
Services he has done to Us, have made Us put upon him, the greatest Marks of
Our Favor; And that if it were not the Care We have of the Weal in that Our
Kingdom, We could not have dispensed with His absence from Our Person at this
time, when his Service is so useful to Us: And therefore from such a
Commissioner and such a Parliament, We cannot but expect, not only a readiness
to conc^u^^ in all things relating to Our Service, but such prudent Results
from this Session, as the Subjects of that Our Kingdom, and their Posterity,
may reap Honor and Prosperity by them: And so We bid you heartily Farewell.

Given at Our Court at Whitehal the three and twentieth day of May, 1672. and
of Our Reign the Twenty fourth Year.

To the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commissioners of Shires and of
Buroughs Assembled in our Parliament of Scotland.
THE ANSWER OF THE PARLIAMENT Of SCOTLAND, TO HIS MAJESTY'S GRACIOUS LETTER.
Most Sacred SOVEREIGN,
THe many Proofs Your Majesty has been pleased to Give of Your constant
affection to, and care of, the Concerns of this Your Ancient Kingdom, with the
renewed Expressions thereof, contained in Your Letter of the 23. of May last,
engages Us Your Parliament of Scotland, from time to time to renew Our
Acknowledgments, and the Returns of Our Allegiance, Loyalty, and Obedience to
Your Majesty; but more especially at this time, when Your Majesty is engaged in
a most Just and Necessary War against the States General of the United
Provinces: The Motives and Grounds whereof have been so fully represented to Us
by the Duke of Lauderdaile, Your Majesty's Commissioner, That we conceive our
Selves obliged in Duty, to make this Solemn Declaration of the Sense and
Resentments we have of Your Majesty's Honor and Interests in it, as well as of
what may concern Our own Security: And therefore We for Our selves, and in Name
of this your Ancient Kingdom whom we represent, Do with all humble Duty
Declare; That as Your Majesty's Safety, Honor and Interest are Near and Dear
to Us above all things in this World, so we will be ready on all occasions,
with cheerfulness, to offer Our Lives and Fortunes, in this and every Case
wherein they or any of them may be concerned; And in order thereunto, We shall
be careful to provide effectually for the Security of this Your Kingdom against
Invasion and Intestine Commotions, which the Enemy may endeavor to raise and
^oment, and so settle the Militia, as that the Forces of this Kingdom may be in
readiness, whenever Your Majesty shall be pleased to make use of them for Your
Honor and Interest.

Your Majesty will receive more prticular Accounts of Our proceedings from Your
Commissioner, whose Eminent Sufferings and Services for Your Majesty and Your
Royal Father of Blessed Memory have justly recommended him to these greatest
Marks of your Royal Favor, which Your Majesty has most worthily conferred upon
him; And experience of whose Usefulness in the former Sessions of Parliament,
has rendered his presence so necessary, for carrying on Your Majesty's Service
here at this time, That we are confident by his Grace's Assistance and conduct,
the Results of this Session shall prove for the advancement of Your Majesty's
Honor, and the Security, Peace, and Quiet of this Your ancient Kingdom. And
this We have ordered to be Signed by Your Majesty's Chancellor, in Name of,

Your Majesty's most Faithful, most Obedient, and most Humble Subjects and
Servants, ROTHES, Cancel. I. P. D. Par.
Ed^nburgh* 18. June. 1672.
For the KING'S most Sacred and Excellent Majesty.
THE SPEECH Of His GRACE The Lord Duke of LAVDERDAILE, HIS MAJESTY'S High
COMMISSIONER for His Kingdom of SCOTLAND, at the Opening of this Session of
Parliament, June the 12th. 1672.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
BY the Kings Gracious Letter you see, he has again sent me hither to have the
Honor to serve him in this Station; and in this Letter His Majesty has been
pleased, so fully and so Graciously to repeat the great sense he has of your
Loyalty and Zeal for his Service in your former Sessions, together with his
confident assurance of the continuance of it now also, that I shall not offer
to enlarge what you have heard better expressed under his own Royal hand: Yet
seeing the Kings principal Design in calling you now together is, That you may
seriously consider his Honor and Interest, and your own Security (which are
indeed inseparable) and that you may effectually provide for both, against all
accidents, during this so just, so necessary, and even so unavoidable a War
into which he is Engaged; It has pleased His Majesty to command me to acquaint
you with that Grounds and Motives of it. I need not put you in mind how soon
after his Happy Return, His Majesty made it his Work to settle Peace, and
establish a good Correspondence with all his Neighbors, and particularly with
the States General of the United Provinces; he could not forget their early
compliance with a pretended Ambassador from those, who gave their Authority for
the Murder of h^s Royal Father; not how after Worcester they omitted a
Proclamation against Foreign Princes coming into their Country without leave;
he well knew whom they meant; neither forgot ^e their Barbarous Ban^shing him
and his Royal Brother; yet he generously Sacrificed his own Resentments, to his
great desires of Peace, and did conclude a strict League with them upon equal
Terms. This League the King kept inviolably on his part: But in the Year 1664.
His Majesty was stirred up by the Complaints of h^s People, and the unanimous
Votes of his Two Houses of Parliament in England, to a just Resentment of the
Injuries and Oppressions of those States; yet that Summer was spent in
Negotiations and Endeavors to bring them to reasonable Terms, which proving
ineffectual, the War insued in the Year 1665, and continued to 1667, wherein
His Majesty's Victories and their Losses, were memorable enough, to put them ^n
mind of being more Faithful to their Leagues: But instead of that, the Peace
was no sooner made at Breda, then they returned to their usual Custom of
breaking Articles. I shall not repeat their man^^est violations of the Articles
relating to the East and West Indies, which are instanced in the Kings
Declaration of War; not asist on their protect^ng some of the worst of Subjects
of this Kingdom, who Printed most Treasonable infamous Lords against the King
and his Government, and scattered them here, t^^^ugh the Dutch Ambassadors were
called upon to perform the Treaty o^ Breda in relation to such) but they rose
yet higher, even to the scandal of His Majesty's Person and Authority, fi^^^g
their Towns with abusive Pictures, and false Historical Medals and P^ll^t^,
some of them by command of the States themselves, which certainly ought to
ta^se the highest Indignation in the Hearts of all his good Subjects: then they
proceeded to another palpable violation of the last Treaty: The respect due to
His Majesty's Flag ^n the British Seas is most ancient and unquestionable; it
is expressly acknowledged in the Treaty of Breda; yet last Summer it was not
only violated by their Commanders at Sea, and that violation afterward
justified at the Hague, but it was also insolently represented in many Courts
abroad, as ridiculous for His Majesty to Demand; Notwithstanding all those
Breaches and Provocations, His Majesty patiently expected satisfaction, whilst
they ceased not to provoke, and endeavored to engage the most Christ^an King
against His Majesty, of which they thought themselves so secure, that for above
a Year, they threatened the King with it. At length hearing nothing from them,
the King sent an Ambassador to them, who after many pressing Memorials, could
receive no answer till after he had declared his revocation; Then they offered
a Paper to this Effect, That in this Conjuncture, they would condescend to
strike to the Kings Flag, if he would assist them against the French; but upon
condition, that it should never be taken for a President hereafter to their
prejudice: Since the return of the Kings Ambassador, they sent an extraordinary
one to London who would not Sign any offer of satisfaction, till he should send
^at^ to his Masters Thus finding that no good was to be done by Treaties with
them whom no former Obligations, (...) of gratitude (...) can bind, His Majesty
has been forced for vindication of His Honor, and the f^ed^ity of all his
Subjects, to enter into an open War. And I am Commanded to aquaint you how
careful His Majesty has been by good and Honorable Treaties; so to engaged
^^s Neighboring Friends and Allies, that this War is only against the States
General to bring down their Pride and Insolence, and to secure His Kingdoms
against them His Majesty being at Peace with all the World besides. And
although it has pleased God so to bless His Majesty's Forces, and those (...)
by Sea and Land, that a considerable Impression is already made upon the Enemy,
and that by the continuance of the Divine assistance, we may reasonably hope
for good success; yet seeing the Event of War, never so just, is uncertain, it
is absolutely necessary to provide in time against Foreign Invasion, or
inte^i^e Commotions, which will be endeavored to be raised here by the Enemy,
who contrary to Treaty entertain and cherish the most Seditious of the Kings
Subjects, and who have engaged in their Forces both by Sea and Land diverse out
of the three Kingdoms, contrary to their Allegiance, into open War against the
King. Therefore I am Commanded most seriously to recommend to this Parliament,
the safety of this Kingdom, in either of those cases. You know my, Lords and
Gentlemen, how loath His Majesty has been to lay extraordinary Burdens on this
Kingdom, and how exactly careful, that the Supply granted by the last Session,
should not in the least be diverted from the uses for which it was designed.
And although He has no occasion to lay any Burden on you upon his own account,
yet he is most assured you will provide such effectual means, as the Forces of
this Kingdom may upon occasion serve for His Majesty's Honor and ^^^^rest, and
may be a terror to His Enemies, and a security to this Kingdom; and I do leave
the Ways and Means of this so absolutely necessary a Work, to your own
consideration

I am particularly Commanded to renew again to you the assurances of His
Majesty's most constant continuance, in his unalterable resolutions, to
maintain the true Reformed Protestant Religion and the Government of this
Churh, by Archbishops, and Bishops, whatever Seditious and Disaffected Persons
may suggest to the contrary; and I am fully empowered to all such farther Acts,
as you shall judge convenient, for the quieting the Minds of peaceable People,
and for Curbing and punishing Seditious Conventicles, for preventing the
increase of Schism, and by all good means securing the Peace of the Church.

You have certainly been informed of the Little that past at London, toward
the Treaty of Union, If you think it necessary you shall have a particular
account, and though nothing was concluded, yet his Majesty's Fatherly care of
both his Kingdoms will appear, and the Faithfulness of those named by His
Majesty for this Kingdom, together with their care of the Rights, Privileges
and Interests of Scotland.

In the last place I am to let you know, that by His Majesty's Grace and Favor,
I am sufficiently Empowered toward whatsoever Laws shall be found fit and
convenient for the peace and Good of this Kingdom in all its concerns, so by
Gods Blessing, and your prudent care, we may all be confident, of a happy
conclusion of this Session of Parliament.

FINIS.

