Charles R.

To Our trusty and welbeloved, the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Sheriffs of Our
City of London.
TRusty and Welbeloved, We greet you well.
Whereas We have received several Informations of great sums of Money
endeavored to be borrowed of Our City of London by some direction proceeding
from both Our Houses of Parliament, and likewise that great labor is used to
persuade Our Subjects to raise Horse, and to furnish Money, upon pretense of
providing a Guard for Our Parliament; These are to let you know, that
(notwithstanding any scandalous Votes which have presumed to Declare Our
Intention of leavying War against Our Parliament, and to by other aspersions on
Us, so fully disavowed by Us in the presence of Almighty God, by Our several
Answers and Declarations) all Our desires and purposes are for the public
Peace, and that we have not the least thought of raising or using Force, except
We are compelled to it, for the defense of Our Person, and in Protection of the
Law: And therefore we expect, that you suffer not your selves to be misled by
such vain and improbable suggestions, and to declare, that if you shall lend
any sums of Money toward the relief of Ireland (to which We have contributed
all the assistance could be desired of Us, which way soever the Money given and
raised to that purpose is disposed) or toward the payment of Our Scots
Subjects, We shall take it as an acceptable Service at your hands; but if upon
general Pretenses contrived by a few, Factious persons against the peace of
the Kingdom, you shall give or lend any Money, or provide or raise any Horses
or Arms toward the raising such a Guard, We shall look upon it as the raising
Force against Us, and to be done in malice and contempt of Us and Our
Authority. And we do therefore straightly charge and command you to publish this
Our Letter to the several Masters and Wardens of the several Companies, they
they may be assured, that such Money as they shall lend out of their good
affection to the Kingdom, may be only employed for Ireland or Scotland, and
not toward such Guards, which (in truth) are intended by the Contrivers of that
Design (though We believe many honest men seduced by them do not yet see their
end) to be employed against Us: And if you and they shall herein fail
punctually and severally to observe Our commands, We shall not only proceed
against the several Companies for deceiving the Trust reposed in them; but
against the particular persons, as Contemners and Opposers of Our Authority,
and of the Law of the Land, in the most exemplary way the known Law of the Land
shall prescribe to Us; And shall be compelled to question the Charter of your
City, which We are willing yet to believe (notwithstanding the Barbarous and
Insolent demeanor of the meaner and baser sort) in a good degree to continue
Loyal to Us. And of your obedience to these Our Commands We do expect and
require a full Account, and of the names of such Persons who shall oppose the
same. Hereof fail you not as you will answer the contrary at your peril.

Given at Our Court at York the 14 day of June, in the 11 year of Our Reign.
1643.
Printed at London for T.A. 1642.


