His Majesty's GRACIOUS SPEECH To the Honorable HOUSE of COMMONS In the
Banqueting House at White Hall, March 1. 1662.

Printed at London by His Majesty's Printers; and Reprinted at Edinburgh,
Anno, 1662.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
His Majesty's Gracious Speech to the Honorable House of Commons, at Whitehall,
March 1. 1662.
Mr. Speaker and Gentlemen of the House of Commons,
FInding it necessary to say somewhat to you, I thought once of doing it by a
Message, which has been the most usual way; but when I considered, that
speaking to you My Self, with that plainness and freedom I use to do, has more
of kindness in it, and with what affection you use to receive what I say to
you; I resolved to deliver My Message to you My Self, and and have therefore
sent for you hither, which has been frequently done heretofore, though it be
the first time I have done so.

I do speak My heart to you, when I tell you, That I do believe, that from the
first Institutions of Parliaments, to this hour, there was never a House of
Commons fuller of Affection and Duty to their King, then you are to Me; never
any that was more desirous and sollicitous to gratify their King, then you are
to oblige Me; never a House of Commons, in which there were fewer persons
without a full measure of Zeal, for the Honor and Welfare of the King and
Country, then there are in this: The wonderful alacrity that you showed at
your first coming together, in giving Me so liberal a supply, was an
unquestionable instance of this; and I assure you, made Our neighbors abroad
look upon Me and you with much the more respect and esteem; and I am persuaded,
even broke the heart of some desperate and seditious Designs at home. In a
word, I know most of your faces and names, and can never hope to find better
men in your places.

You will wonder now, after I have willingly made this just acknowledgement to
you, that I should lament and even complain, that I and you and the Kingdom,
are yet without that present fruit and advantage, which We might reasonably
promise Our selves from such a harmony of Affections and a unity in
Resolutions, to advance the public Service, and to provide for the Peace and
Security of the Kingdom, that you do not expedite those good Councels which are
most necessary for both.

I know not how it comes to pass, but for these many weeks past, even since
your last Adjournment, private and particular business have almost thrust the
consideration of the Public out of doors; and in truth, I do not know that you
are nearer settling My Revenue, then you were at Christmas: I am sure I have
communicated My condition to you without reserve, what I have coming in, and
what My necessary Disbursments are; and I am exceedingly deceived, if whatever
you give Me be any otherwise given to Me, then to be issued out for your own
use and benefit; trust Me, it shall be so, and if you consider it well, you
will find that you are the richer by what you give, since it is all to be laid
out, that you may enjoy the rest in Peace and Security.

Gentlemen, I need not put you in mind of the miserable effects which have
attended the wants and necessities of the Crown, I need not tell you, that
there is a Republical party still in the Kingdom, which has the courage to
promise themselves another Revolution; and Me thinks, I should as little need
to tell you, that the only way, with Gods blessing, to disappoint their hopes,
and indeed to reduce them from those extravagant hopes and desires, is, to let
them see, that you have so provided for the Crown that it has wherewithal to
support it self, and to secure you, which I am sure is all I desire, and desire
only for your preservation: Therefore I do conjure you, by all the professions
of affection you have made to Me, by all the kindness I know you have for Me,
after all your deliberations, betake your selves to some speedy resolutions,
and settle such a real and substantial Revenue upon Me, as may hold some
proportion with the necessary expenses I am at for the Peace and Benefit, and
Honor of the Kingdom, that they who look for troubles at home, may despair of
their wishes, and that Our Neighbors abroad, by seeing that all is well at
home, may have that esteem and value of Us, as may secure the Interest and
Honor of the Nation, and make the happiness of this Kingdom, and of this City,
once more the admiration and envy of the world.

Gentlemen, I hear you are very zealous for the Church, and very sollicitous,
and even jealous that there is not expedition enough used in that Affair, I
thank you for it, since I presume it proceeds from a good root of Piety and
Devotion; but I must tell you, I have the worst luck in the world, if, after
all the reproaches of being a Papist whilst I was abroad, I am suspected of
being a Presbyterian now I am come home: I know you will not take it unkindly,
if I tell you, that I am as zealous for the Church of England, as any of you
can be, and am enough acquainted with the enemies of it, on all sides; that I
am as much in love with the Book of Common Prayer, as you can wish, and have
prejudice enough to those who do not love it; who I hope in time will be better
informed and change their minds; and you may be confident, I do as much desire
to see a Uniformitie settled, as any amongst you. I pray trust Me in that
Affair, I promise you to hasten the dispatch of it with all convenient speed,
you may rely upon Me in it.

I have transmitted the Book of Common Prayer with those Alterations and
Additions, which have been presented to Me by the Convocation, to the House of
Peers, with My Approbation, that the Act of Uniformitie may relate to it; so
that I presume it will be shortly dispatched there: And when We have done all
We can, the well-setling that Affair will require great Prudence and
Discretion, and the absence of all Passion and Precipitation.

I will conclude, with putting you in mind, That the season of the Year, the
convenience of your being in the country, in many respects, for the good and
welfare of it; for you will find much Tares have been sowed there in your
absence; the arrival of My Wife, who I expect some time this Month, and the
necessity of My own being out of town to meet Her, and to stay some time
before She comes hither, makes it very necessary that the Parliament be
adjourned before Easter, to meet again in the Winter: And that it may do so, I
pray lay aside private business, that you may in that time dispatch the
Public, and there are few things I reckon more public then your providing for
the Security of the Fenlands, which I have so often recommended to you, and do
it now very earnestly. I pray let no private Animosities or Contests, endanger
a work of so great a Benefit and Honor to the Nation; but first provide for
the support of the Work, and then let Justice be done for determination of
particular Interests.

The mention of My Wives arrival, puts Me in mind to desire you to put that
Complement upon Her, that Her entrance into the Town may be with more decency
then the ways will now suffer it to be: And to that purpose, I pray you would
quickly pass such Laws as are before you, in order to the amending those Ways,
and that She may not find Whitehall surrounded with water.

I will detain you no longer, but do promise My Self great Fruits of this
conversation with you, and that you will justify the Confidence I have in your
Affections, by letting the world see that you take My Concernments to heart,
and are ready to do whatsoever I desire for the Peace and VVelfare of the
Kingdom.

FINIS.

