The Kings Majesty's RESOLVTION CONCERNING HVLL. With his Determination
concerning Sir John Hotham.

Wherein is declared how and in what manner he has besieged it and stopped all
passages by Sea and Land, with intention to starve them.

Whereunto is annexed The Copy of a Letter sent from the Earl of Warwick,
intimating that he had taken a Ship called the Lion, laden with all sorts of
Ammunition, And it is reported that the Lord Finch, late Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal of England is taken in that Ship.

Likewise that he had received intelligence of a great Fleet of Spaniards
landed in Dunkirke, which were bound for England, but intercepted by the
Hollanders.

Ordered to be forthwith published and Printed. Hen. Elsinge, Cler. D.C.

July, 13. LONDON, Printed by T. F. for F. S. 1642.

The Kings Majesty's Resolution concerning Hull, and his determination
concerning Sir John Hotham.
ON Saturday at Night news was brought to the King that a Pinnace was sent
from the Queen, laden with Money and Ammunition, which was intercepted at the
mouth of Humber, by one of the Kings Ships, called the May-flower, but by the
help of a Hull Pilot, she got into a Creek, and so escaped.

His Majesty having intelligence, on Sunday morning at four of the Clock. he
sent three Trumpeters into all parts of the City, to summon 2. Troops of Horse
which were under the Command of the Prince, which was sent toward Hull, to
protect the Ship from violence, after them was sent 3000. Foot Soldiers which
were billited in York.

Upon Tuesday the Lord Digby came to the Court.

Wednesday, the King went to Beverley, attended by three Lords, to see the
Ammunition that came from Holland, where he received intelligence that Sir John.
Hotham had ceased on all the Cattle and Sheep within four Miles, and that he
had drowned the Country three miles round, in regard his Majesty had resolved
to besiege him in Hull.

Thursday there was a great meeting of Light Horse on Heworth-Moore, who was
commanded to repair toward Hull this day the King with a great power of Horse
and Foot, took his Journey toward Beverley, and has besieged Hull with
6000. Horse and Foot, which have intrencht themselves about the Town, Sir
John Hotham made 40. shots in one night with his great Ordnance, against the
Batteries which were making by the Kings Forces, but none could reach or do
any execution.

Four pieces of Ordnance are planted on a Cliffe, near the Town of Paul, to
binder all relief by water, also the Earl of Lindsey has mounted Ordnance at
Barton on Humber, to stop the passage on that side of the Town, it is
generally reported, that the King intends to starve them, for he caused a
Spring to be cut off, which runs to Hull, that it is feared they will want
fresh water, for the Town affords but little, and that not very good.

The Earl of Kingstone proffers to lend the King a hundred Thousand pounds, at
four pound in the hundred.

The People here within this City stick not to say, they hope to see Sir John
Hotham hanged, casting out opprobrious Speeches against the Parliament.

Also there was News brought to the House by a Letter from the Earl of
Warwick, intimating that he had taken the Lion laden with Ammunition of all
sorts, and that Prince Robert was in her whom he had conveyed again into
Holland.

Also there was a Letter sent to the Earl of Warwick, certifying that Prince
Maurice, Lord Denby, Captain Oneale, Captain Hide, Sir Jews Dives, Colonel
Wilson, and diverse other Gentlemen and Commanders sent for out of Germany.

Like wise a Report was made to the Parliament, of agreat Fleet of Spaniards
which lay before Dunkirke, and it is thought that they are bound for England,
but the Hollander having intelligence, thereof, sent out their Fleet, and
surrounded them, that they cannot stir.

His Majesty taking into consideration, the Government of his Navy Royal, his
will and pleasure was, That Sir John Pennington should have the place of
Admiralship resigned unto him, being against his Majesty's will and pleasure,
that the Earl of Warwick should enjoy that place any longer, and to that end
and purpose did send a Message to the Earl of Warwick to give up his place,
and that he should obey his special Command, which was, that he should
resign his place to Sir John Pennington, the said Sir John being near unto
him, expecting the Receipt thereof.

His Majesty was likewise resolved, that he should not enjoy that place any
longer, but that he should obey His Command therein.

These are the troubles and distractions which threaten an inundation of
destruction, yea an almost unavoidable ruin both to the King and Kingdom,
these Foreign preparations and domesticke distentions are almost grown to a
Head, a civil War is begun in this Kingdom, and it is justly to be feared
that it will in the end, produce a most dangerous and fatal effect.

God grant that the truth may prevail, and get the upper hand, and that Peace
may have a peaceable habit on in this distracted Kingdom.

Ordered that this be Printed, and published.

Hen. Elsing D.C.

FINIS.

