C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
HIS MAJESTY'S DECLARATION To all His Loving SUBJECTS, March 15. 1672.
Published by the Advice of His Privy Council.
OUr Care and Endeavors for the Preservation of the Rights and Interests of
the Church, have been sufficiently manifested to the World, by the whole course
of Our Government, since Our happy Restoration, and by the many and frequent
ways of Coercion that We have used for reducing all Erring or Dissenting
Persons, and for composing the unhappy Differences in matters of Religion,
which We found among Our Subjects upon Our Return: But it being evident, by the
sad experience of twelve years, that there is very little fruit of all those
forceable Courses, We think Our Self obliged to make use of that Supreme Power
in Ecclesiastical Matters, which is not only inherent in Us, but has been
Declared and Recognized to be so by several Statutes and Acts of Parliament;
And therefore, We do now accordingly issue this Our Declaration, as well for
the quieting the Minds of Our good Subjects in these Points, for inviting
Strangers in this Conjuncture, to come and live under Us, and for the better
Encouragement of all to a cheerful following of their Trade and Callings, from
whence we hope by the Blessing of GOD, to have many good and happy Advantages
to Our Government; As also, for preventing for the future, the danger that
might otherwise arise from Private Meetings, and Seditious Conventicles.

And in the first place, We Declare Our express Resolution, Meaning and
Intention to be, That the Church of England be preserved, and remain entire in
its Doctrine, Discipline and Government, as now it stands Established by Law;
And that this be taken to be, as it is, the Basis, Rule, and Standard of the
General and Public Worship of GOD, and that the Orthodox conformable Clergy do
receive and enjoy the Revenues belonging thereunto: And that no person, though
of a different Opinion and Persuasion, shall be exempt from paying his Tithes,
or other Dues whatsoever. And further We Declare, That no person shall be
capable of holding any Benefice, Living, or Ecclesiastical Dignity or
Preferment of any kind, in this Our Kingdom of England, who is not exactly
conformable.

We do in the next place Declare Our Will and Pleasure to be, That the
Execution of all and all manner of Penal Laws in Matters Ecclesiastical,
against whatsoever sort of Non-conformists or Recusants, be immediately
Suspended, and they are hereby Suspended. And all Judges, Judges of Assize and
Jail-delivery, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs, and other
Officers whatsoever, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, are to take notice of it,
and pay due Obedience thereunto.

And that there may be no pretense for any of Our Subjects to continue their
illegal Meetings and Conventicles, We do Declare, That We shall from time to
time allow a sufficient number of Places, as they shall be desired, in all
parts of this Our Kingdom, for the use of such as do not Conform to the Church
of England, to meet and assemble in, in order to their Public Worship and
Devotion; which Places shall be open and free to all persons.

But to prevent such disorders and inconveniences as may happen by this Our
Indulgence, if not duly regulated, and that they may be the better protected by
the Civil Magistrate, Our express Will and Pleasure is, That none of Our
Subjects do presume to meet in any Place, until such Place be allowed, and the
Teacher of that Congregation be approved by Us.

And lest any should apprehend, that this restriction should make Our said
Allowance and Approbation difficult to be obtained, We do further Declare, that
this Our Indulgence, as to the Allowance of the public Places of Worship, and
Approbation of the Teachers, shall extend to all sorts of Non-conformists and
Recusants, except the Recusants of the Roman Catholic Religion, to whom We
shall in no wise allow public Places of Worship, but only indulge them their
share in the common Exemption from the execution of the Penal Laws, and the
exercise of their Worship in their private Houses only.

And if after this Our Clemency and Indulgence, any of Our Subjects shall
presume to abuse this Liberty, and shall Preach seditiously, or to the
derogation of the Doctrine, Discipline or Government of the Established Church,
or shall meet in Places not allowed by Us, We do hereby give them warning, and
Declare, We will proceed against them with all imaginable severity: And We will
let them see, We can be as severe to punish such Offenders, when so justly
provoked, as We are indulgent to truly Tender Consciences.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, this fourteenth day of March, in the four and
twentieth year of Our Reign.
EDINBURGH, Reprinted by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, 1672.


