Seasonable THOUGHTS Of Divine PROVIDENCE: Affording Comfort to those who are
in Danger.

Instruction to all that are delivered from the late sad VISITATION.

Wherein we are informed Whether our Preservation be a fruit of God's Special
Love, or of his Common Providence.

London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the three Crowns, at the lower end of
Cheap Side over against the Conduit, 1666.

For the Honorable, my very good FRIENDS, Sir ROBERT HANSON Sheriff, and
ALEXANDER HOLT, Esquire, Alderman of the City of LONDON.
THE common danger of the approaching and spreading Pestilence, (which was
sufficient to awaken every heart) made some impressions upon me, but especially
the number of youth in my Family, did stir up a quicker sense both of danger
and duty, to discharge the trust reposed in me, in caring for their
preservation, as mine own.

Amongst all the Remedies I could think of, I found none so efficacious to
quiet my heart from the fear of evil, as Meditation, and reliance upon Divine
Providence: And the experience that I have had heretofore, That awakening
Judgments do make way for Counsel, has induced me to make these Thoughts
public, hoping that what has been useful to me, may be profitable to others.

In this endeavor, I could not pass you by without special observation and
respect. A great part of the mercy vouchsafed to my Family, being yours, having
four Sons preserved in it: Besides your Interest in the famous City of LONDON,
for whom this is chiefly published, of which you have the Honor, not only to
be Members, but Magistrates; where, by your residence in this time of its
Visitation, you have had advantages above many, to furnish your selves with
instances of Gods Providence toward the City, your own and other Families,
which have been wonderfully preserved in the Valley of the shadow of Death. To
which I may add your interest in me, by which you may entitle your selves to
what ever I may be serviceable to your selves or Families in.

Now that in the perusal of this, you may find, that your lives, and the lives
of your Relations, were given to you in mercy, and that the City, in the midst
of which you have been preserved, may experience, That you have been kept alive
to be blessings to it, shall be the Prayer of

Your affectionate Servant in the LORD, Jo. Chishull.
Enfeild. Jan. 25, 1665.
Seasonable Thoughts OF Divine Providence.
DEUTERONOMY. 33.29. Happy art thou, O Israel; Who is like unto thee, O people, saved
by the Lord.


MOses the Servant of the Lord, having finished his course, and conducted
Israel out of Egypt, and led them through the red Sea, and the Wilderness,
being not permitted to go into Canaan, (though he seriously begged it of God)
receives the sentence of Death, with particular command to go up into Mount
Nebo, and dye: Though he strugled a little in this, and would fain have gotten
a Dispensation to go over into Canaan; yet perceiving that God had otherwise
determined concerning him, he lets fall his suit, and he cheerfully sets
himself to obey the Command of God, when he had first taken care for his
Successor, and prayed for, and blessed his people. In this Chapter we have Moses
his farwell; he takes leave of Israel, as Christ did of his Disciples; his last
words are as full of Love and Consolation as possibly they could be. He deals
out a blessing to every Tribe in particular, and then blesses them in the whole
lump, and not only them, but all the people of God. And being lifted up in his
spirit, he has a far better prospect than he had of Canaan upon Mount Nebo: he
takes a view of what God had done, and of what he had promised to do for them;
and he breaks out in consideration of this, into a serious admiration at their
happy estate, in these words, Happy art thou, O Israel; Who is like unto thee,
Oh people saved by the Lord? In which we have,

First, Moses his judgment concerning Israel's state, Happy art thou O Israel.

Secondly, The confirmation of this, in which he notes the eminency and
singularity of their happiness, Who is like to thee? (i. e.) there is none like
to thee: Thy Privilege and Blessing is remarkable, because thou enjoyest it
alone; none can boast of it but thy self.

Thirdly, He explains this his assertion, and shows wherein the happiness of
God's Israel lies, in these words, Saved of the Lord.

The Reason why Moses pronounces them happy, is, Because God has such a
special care of them, to keep them and save them in all times of trouble and
danger.

The words might be broken into many Propositions, but they may be best taken
in this one Proposition.

Doct. Gods peculiar Care and Providence toward his people, is their peculiar
happiness. Or, It is the happiness of the people of God alone, that they are
under the special Care and Providence of God; he has a p culiar regard to
them, they are the saved of the Lord, for whose safety he provides above all
others; and in comparison of whom, he cares for none in the world besides.

To make this Proposition clear, I am to prove,

First, That God has a people of whom he has a special Care.

Secondly, The people who are the subjects of this peculiar Care and
Providence, are happy above all others.

But I know if I prove the former, the latter will be granted; all men agreeing
in this, That Preservation and Safety, in time of private or public danger, is
a great happiness; and I think all men that have not given up themselves to
gross Atheism, will agree, That the best Security that a man can have against
all kind of Evils, is an Interest in Divine Providence.

I shall therefore endeavor to show you, That God has a peculiar Care of his
People in all conditions, to save them from the many evils that they are
compassed about withal; this being the only thing that needs any proof. In
prosecution of this, I shall show you,

First, Some instances of this Care and Providence, both in reference to the
Church in general, and to particular persons.

Secondly, How this is expressed; what terms the Holy Ghost uses to communicate
the notions of it to us, that our conceptions of it may be regulated.

Thirdly, Wherein this Care for the safety of God's people, is expressed; how it
appears in its particulars, and is proved by actions as well as words.

Fourthly, Some Reasons for this, That though this be far above what we can
rationally expect, considering our unworthiness; yet there is nothing built
more reasonably upon Scripture Suppositions.

Fifthly, The improvement that may be made of this Truth.

First, Then, for the instances which may be given of this Truth: We may see it
in the Care that he takes of his whole Church, when it was confined to the
people of Israel.

What Care did God take of them in Egypt, when they were near to ruin? Pharaoh
and his people had consulted and determined their destruction. But what says
God? Exo. 3.7. I have seen their affliction, and heard their cry, and know
their sorrow. It is a great evidence of his Care, that he observed and weighed
their sufferings.

Secondly, When he begins to work for their deliverance, and stretches out his
hand to bring his sore Judgments upon their Oppressors, he does not send his
Judgments upon the whole Land promiscuously, but he separates betwixt the
Egyptians and the Israelites.

Thirdly, When Pharaoh begins so far to yield, as to admit of a Treaty, never
did any stand stricter upon terms, than he; he would abate nothing of his
demand; never was the Interest of any people better defended, or more carefully
provided for, than theirs: he would not leave a hoof behind, Exodus 10.26. he
would make no composition with Pharaoh, all Israel, and all that was Isreal's,
must be delivered.

Fourthly, When he had brought them thence, and they were come out, according
to his demands, what care did he take of their preservation at the Red Sea,
when they were compassed in on every side, the Sea before, the Mountains on
both sides, and the Egyptians behind them; yet he led them through the Sea, as
on dry Land; and as he left none behind in Egypt, so he lost none here.

Fifthly, When they were in the Wilderness, what care does he take to lead them
in their way, by a Cloud and Pillar of Fire; and to provide for them in that
desolate place, so that they had not only bread and water, food and raiment;
but, as the Psalmist says, They had Angels food.

Sixthly, View them in the Land of Canaan, and you shall find wonders of
Providence, in their preservation from dangers, and deliverance out of them,
when they had brought themselves in trouble by their provocations

Seventhly, God had assured them of his Providential Care of them, while they
walked in his Commands; nay, he had given them one special Command, which they
could not observe without a very great dependence upon his Providence. He had
commanded all the Miles from all parts to appear before him thrice every year.
Now this must needs be dangerous, and against all the Rules of policy, if they
had not had a security in Divine Providence: It might seem a very inconsiderate
thing to go up, and leave all their Country naked, their Wives and Children to
defend themselves in the midst of Enemies, who must needs know the times of
their going up to Jerusalem: But God undertook to guard their Country in the
mean time, and he kept the enemy not only from invading, but also from desiring
it, Exodus 34.24.

Eighthly, Lastly, View them in their Captivity, when they had provoked the
Lord to give them up into the hands of their Enemies; yet the Lord has a
special care of them, to preserve them under the evils which he brought upon
them for their sins; we may see this evidently, Isa. 42.24, 25. and Isa. 43.1,
2. Who gave Jacob to the spoil, and Israel to the Robbers? Did not the Lord, he
against whom they have sinned? for they would not walk in his ways, neither
were they obedient to his Law; therefore he has poured upon him the fury of
his anger, and the strength of battle, and it has set him on fire round about,
yet he knew not; and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart. But now, thus
says the Lord that created thee, O Jacob, and he that formed thee, O Israel;
fear not, for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy Name, thou art
mine, When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and through
the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walk through the fire,
thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.

If ever God would leave his people in time of trouble, it would be in such a
case as this when they were under the trouble which he had brought upon them,
and that for their sin; yea, when they behaved themselves very ill under the
hand of God which was upon them: Israel had so provoked the Lord, that he could
not spare them; yet in their afflictions he could not forsake them. He would go
with them through fire and water. We have very remarkable passages of Gods
Providence to that people in their Captivity, to preserve them from being cut
off; we may read it at large in the Book of Hester; when mischief was intended
against them, and they were designed for ruin, then must Hester by a strange
Providence be brought to the Crown, and Mordecai as strangely and as seasonably
preferred to Honor. For though be had done the King Service before by
discovering the Plot, which was laid against him; yet the King takes no notice
of this till such time as the Jews were in extreme danger to be cut off; and
Haman must be used to help to raise Mordecai to Honor, who had designed not
only his, but the ruin of all the Jews.

Thus you see the Providence of God cures the Church in general. Will you see
it toward particular persons? Consider it then in these few, for instances, of
many that might be given, without number.

What provision did God make for Noah, and the safety of him and his Family,
because he was righteous in that generation, Genesis 6.14. Therefore God directs
him to make an Ark that he might escape that common destruction. After he had
made the Ark by Gods direction, God takes care to call him into the same when
the time was come, that the increase of the waters might not prevent him, Genesis
7.1. When he had called him in, he is careful to shut him in, to secure him
from the waters, Genesis 7.16. God would hereby express the great care that he had
of Noah, that he would not trust to his care in making every place fast where
the water might come in to annoy him; he might for want of skill, being not
acquainted with such a Vessel formerly, or for want of sufficient care, not
knowing what danger he should be in, nor yet understanding the force of the
waters, have left open some cranny, at least, whereat the water might have
broken in upon him. God therefore would shut every door himself, and by a
secret power he did also fortify the several parts of the Ark against the
force of the waters.

When God was about to destroy Sodom and Gomorrah by fire, See what care he
takes of Lot, because he had a righteous Soul that was vexed with the filthy
conversation of the Sodomites, Genesis 19. where we see, first, God sends his
Angels to call him out, and to bring out all that he had in it, v. 12. When
the danger is eminent, and the time draws nigh to destroy the City, they hasten
him, v. 15. when language will not do it, they pluck him out of his own house,
and out of the City, and the destruction of it, v. 16. nay, that he may not
perish out of the City, they grant him a City to fly unto. God shut Noah into
the Ark to keep danger from him, and he pulls Lot out, to keep him from the
danger.

Read but the stories of Abraham, Jacob, Elijah and David, in their Pilgrimage,
and you cannot but acknowledge a special providence of God attending them in all
conditions. When Abraham was in danger, and the weakness of his faith appeared
in it, how does God take care to bring him off with safety and honor! He
afflicts Abimelech's Family, and then acquaints him with the reason of it, Genesis
20.3.

See his care of Jacob when he fled from his Brother Esau; he provides for him,
first, in his Uncles house; and when the time is come, the same Providence
which brought him thither, and kept him there, must make way for his Return, to
bring him off safely; for his place of entertainment, was become his Prison;
his Wealth too great a Booty to let go; but God meets Laban, Genesis 31.24. before
he overtakes Jacob, and prevents him from doing the injury he intended.

After he had escaped the hands of Laban, he must fall into the hands of Esau,
who had long since threatened his death, and has now the opportunity that he
had looked for to cut him off; yet God turns his heart, and makes him kind to
Jacob; so that he might well say, Genesis 33.4. I have seen thy face, as if I had
seen the face of God; for he might see Gods face in his. It was God that made
Esau kind to Jacob; it was a reconciled God, that made a reconciled Brother.

Consider but the care that God takes of Elijah, when he w s distressed by
Famine on the one hand, and the persecution of Jezabel on the other. He feeds
him by an Angel, by the Ravens, and by the Widow of Sareptah. We must needs
confess him to be a great instance of Gods Providence.

The like we have in David, whom Saul had appointed to death, how did he
persecute him, and hunt him like a Partridge on the Mountains; yet God raises
up some to save him: One while his Wife deceives her Father, when he would have
slain him in his bed. Another while Jonothan is of his Council, and gives him
intelligence when danger is near him, and he was fain to fly to save himself,
and is closely pursued in the Wilderness, and in great danger to be taken; he
is preserved by an Invasion made upon the Land by the Philistines, 1 Samuel
23.26, 27. And David made have to get away for fea of Saul, for Saul and his
men compassed Daved and his men round about to take them. But there came a
Messenger unto Saul, saying, Have thee, and come, forth Philistines have
invaded the Land. Wherefore Saul returned from pursuing after David. Saul never
came out with greater resolution, with better preparation, than now: He was
resolved to make a search for him through the whole Land, and to find him where
ever he should conceal himself, ver. 23. If he be in the Land, says he, I will
search him out, thorough out all the thousands of Judah. For preparation, he
had correspondence with the Ziphites, who knew those parts where David was, and
had instruction to search out every lurking place of his; and for strength, he
had men enough to enclose David and all his men in the Wilderness. Saul in all
this confidence, is notwithstanding disappointed; God had otherwise provided to
secure David, and divert Saul by a way that neither thought of. These may serve
for instances of this Truth: A farther proof of it may be,

Secondly, By considering the expressions by which this Providence of God is
set forth in Scripture; and they are such as note a very tender and special
care of them, and they are chiefly these three.

1. Keeping or covering them under his wings.

Deuteronomy. 32.11, 12. As an Eagle stirs up her nest, fluttereth over her young,
spreads abroad her wings, takes them, bears them on her wings; so the Lord
alone did lead them.

The Providence of God which is sometimes compared to the Hens gathering of her
Chickens under her wings, is here set forth by the Eagles care of her young
ones, which is the noblest, the wisest, and strongest of Birds, and for
tenderness to hers, falls short of none. She does not only keep them in the
Nest, but she carries them also with her from the Nest, and that, not with her
Talons, as she does her prey, lest she should hurt them; but, on her wings.
David praying for help in time of his trouble, uses this expression, Psalm.
17.8, 9. Hide me under the shadow of thy wings, from the wicked that oppress
me, from my deadly enemies, who compass me about. David knew well enough, That
under this shadow he should be secret and safe from his enemies, how many or
how strong soever: And the security of such a person he does elsewhere strongly
assert, especially against that Evil which no other strength or skill can
protect us from, I mean the destroying Pestilence, see Psalm. 91. in ver. 1, 4.
he alludes to this expression, and in the following verses he shows the fruit
of this, in a freedom both from the fear of the Judgment, and of the Judgment
it self. V. 1. He that dwells in the secret place of the Most High, shall
abide under the shadow of the Almighty. V. 4. He shall cover thee with his
feathers, and under his wings shall thou trust. But what advantage shall this
be to him? See in the following verses, v. 5, 6. He shall not be afraid of the
terror by night, nor for the arrow that flies by day; nor for the Pestilence
that walks in darkness, nor for the Destruction that wastes at noonday.

Now though this be not an absolute promise of freeing every godly person from
this noisome disease, yet it is a ground for their hope; the people of God may
take hold of this promise, and plead it with God for their preservation; and if
they be found in their duties, acting faith upon God, there is very much spoken
in these words for their security; For God has given his Angels charge over
them, to keep them in all their ways, especially if we make the Most High our
Habitation. If we would have the benefit of Divine Protection, we must be sure
to put our selves under it, by a particular act of Faith.

2. A second expression by which this Providence is expressed, is his hiding his
people in time of danger, Psalm 27.5. In the time of trouble he shall hide me in
his pavillion; in the secret of his Tabernacle shall he hide me: And Psalm.
31.20. Thou shall hide me in the secret of thy presence, from the pride of men,
thou shall keep them secretly in a pavillion from the strife of tongues. This
is another way by which we express the care we take for those we love, when we
fear to be overpowered or oppressed, we hide that which we would keep; where we
suspect our strength to protect what we desire to preserve, we make up that
defect by care and skill. Thus Rahab hid the Spies, whom she could not protect
from the fury of the King of Jericho. And Obadiah had no other way to protect
the Prophets from Jezabel's fury, and the raging Famine, but to hide them by
fifties in Caves. Now the Lord uses this way of expressing his care for his
people, not because there is any defect in him of power to defend and secure
them against all the force and opposition of men, for he can defend them from
all their enemies, as he did Elijah on the top of the Mountain, from the
Captains of Ahaziah, and their fifties. But the Lord uses this to show us, That
his care for his, is no way short of our care for ours; what course we take to
preserve any thing dear to us, that does God take for the security of his; his
Wisdom as well as his Power, is seen in saving them in time of danger.

3. A third expression of his Care is, Keeping them as the Apple of the Eye.
God's Care of Israel is expressed thus, Deuteronomy. 32.10. He found him in a desert
Land, and in the wast howling wilderness; he led him about, he instructed him,
he kept him as the apple of his eye. Now we know that no part of man's body is
kept with more care and tenderness than the eye, not only because it is of so
much use, and so great an ornament to the body, but also because it is so
sensible of the least touch and is offended with that which other parts feel
not; therefore says God, Zach. 2.8. He that touches you, touches the apple
of mine eye. As the Eye, so God is not only sensible of blows, but of touches;
not only great, but small injuries done to the people of God, do affect him;
and as men keep out dust or hairs out of the eye, so does the Lord keep off all
Evils from his people; therefore says he, Psalm. 105.15. Touch not mine
anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. Therefore David calling upon Divine
Providence, bespeaks it in these words, Psalm. 17.8. Keep me as the apple of the
eye. Lay these three expressions together, and tell what can be possibly added
to express the tender care and watchfulness of Divine Providence over the
people of God; He that believes this to be true, can say nothing less than
Moses does here, Who is like to thee, oh Israel, a people sav d by the Lord?
Thus I have shown you how this Divine care is expressed in Scripture Language;
the next thing is, To show wherein this is expressed in deed, and matter of fact:
Which is

Thirdly, The Third Particular; Wherein does God express his Care of his
People? His Actions as well as his Word speak it out plain, if we consider,

1. He has a special Care of them when he sends his Judgments abroad into the
World; and this Care always precedes the Judgment; he consults and provides
always for their safety, before he sends his Judgments forth. As we see in
Noah, provision is made for his safety before the World is drowned; And Lot
must be plucked out of Sodom before it is burnt. And the Mourners in Jerususalem
must be marked, before the destroying Angels are sent out, Ez. 9.4, 5.

And the four Angels must not go forth to hurt the Earth, till the servants of
God are sealed, Rev. 7.2, 3.

Now the Care that God takes of his people in time of public Judgments,
respects either their bodies or souls.

His care of their persons is sometimes to preserve them from those Evils which
are coming upon the World. Thus he kept Noah and Lot, and the Mourners in
Jerusalem; the Angels had a charge not to come nigh them. Or,

2dly, If he suffer any of those Judgments to reach them, yet he supports them
under them. Thus when God brought a Famine upon the Land of Canaan, he provided
bread for Jacob in Egypt; and when it fell upon Israel in Ahabs time, the Lord
provided for Elijah and the Prophets, that they were kept alive. And this was
one great act of God's Providence, to keep Israel alive so many years in a
Wilderness, of which Moses speaking in this Chapter, says, v. 27. The Eternal
God is thy refuge, and underneath are everlasting Arms. God's Care is as much
seen in keeping his people under trouble, as in keeping them from trouble.

Secondly, God's Care of his People under Public Evils, respects their souls;
and that also appears in two particulars.

1. He has a great Care of the Comforts of his People; he provides for These,
as well as for their Lives and Eternal Estates; he would not have their Spirits
sink under any trouble that befalls them. Therefore it is observable, when God
was about to send Judgments upon the earth, especially such as may seem to
reach all, good and bad; he did use to give some warning before hand, and he
first denounc't these Judgments to awaken the wicked; now lest the godly should
be discouraged by these, he did usually interweave those Threatenings with some
of the sweetest Promises: For instance, read over these few, instead of many,
Jer. 30.12, 17. Ezekiel. 14.22. and 16.60. Hos. 1.10. and 2.14. Nah. 1.2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7. Hab. 3.5-13. In all which God is represented very terrible in his
Judgments, so that it may be said of the House of Israel, as of Eli's House,
The ears of him that hears such things, must needs tingle. Yet you shall not
find sweeter Promises in all the Book of God, than in these places where he
has so bitterly denounced his Judgments. This must needs be in favor of his
people, whose hearts he would not have made sad. And it is remarkable, when the
Prophet Nahum had made such a terrible description of God in his Power and
Wrath, in the first six verses, which might make the heart of a Moses to shake,
or an Elijah to cover himself with his Mantle; he adds ver. 7. The Lord is
good, a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he knows them that trust in
him.

Neither is that forementioned of Habbakkuk less observable, who having given
the like dreadful account of God's coming forth to execute Judgment, in which
he says, Hab. 3.5. Before him went the Pestilence, and burning coals went forth
at his feet: Lest his people should fear and fly from him also, he adds, ver.
13. Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people; And because this might
seem incredible, that God should go forth in such a way as this, to save his
people, nothing could be expected but death from such a Providence; he
therefore doubles the expression, Even for salvation with thine Anointed: As if
he would bespeak the comfort of his people in this, What ever you see doing in
the World, or how terrible soever God appears in the way of his Judgments, yet
be not you discouraged, for he intends no hurt to you in all this, in the
latter end; but rather lift up your heads, because the day of your Redemption
draws nigh.

2. As he has a Care of them, to comfort them against the coming of a
Judgment; so when he has brought it, and it reaches them, he takes care to
sanctify it to them: Whatever they sustain or suffer in their Bodies, Names or
Estates, it is made up in the communication of the Divine Nature, and the
increase of Grace, that is made by these things.

The Author to the Hebrews tells us plainly, That the End of God in afflicting
his people, is their profit, Heb. 12.10. But what profit is it that comes by
these? He tells us, it is the partaking of his Holiness. When we are made
partakers of the Life of God, we are gainers, though we should lose our own
lives in the inquest of it. Therefore the Apostle counsels the Saints to
rejoice in their afflictions, Jam. 1.2, 3. My Brethren, count it all joy when
you fall into diverse temptations, knowing this, That the trial of your Faith
works patience. Never be sad for what you suffer, for if you get nothing but
patience, you will be gainers by all your sufferings. Now Faith and Patience
are as much tried and improved by what we suffer from God, as what we suffer
from men. And though it be hard upon this account to rejoice under afflictions,
yet the people of God do often rejoice after them, for the good they have
received by them, as David, Psalm. 119.71. It is good for me that I was
afflicted, that I might learn thy Statutes: For he had said before, v. 67.
Before I was afflicted, I went astray; but now have I kept thy word. Thus you
see the Providence of God appears toward his people, either in keeping them
from the evils which fall upon others, or the sanctifying them to them, and
turning them into good.

Secondly, He has a special Care of his people to preserve them from those
Evils which their Enemies intend and design against them, whether it be the
Devil or wicked men.

1. God has so great a care of his people, that the Devil (their adversary)
who goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, yet cannot
touch them without leave of God; as we see in the case of Job 1.10. The Devil
acknowledges that Job was so well defended by the Hedge that God had made about
him, that there was no touching of him; there was no gap in that Hedge, and it
was too high and strong to break over it; God must open a door, and let him in,
or he could do nothing to Job.

2. His Providence appears greatly in preserving them in the World, in the
midst of their Enemies, the Sons of Belial, and that several ways.

1. He sometimes restraines their Enemies, and overrules their Counsels, that
they cannot speedily resolve upon, or effectually execute what they design.
Thus he withheld Balaam from cursing Israel, and restrained Laban from hurting
Jacob.

2dly, He stirs up secret friends to favor and to shelter his people when
danger is near them. Thus he raised up Obadiah in Ahab's Court, to favor the
Prophets of the Lord, and to hide and feed them in the persecution of Jezabel,
and the sore Famine that was upon the Land.

3dly, He sometimes converts their Enemies, and makes use of those to build the
Church, who had before destroyed it: Thus he did by Paul, who breathed out
threatenings against the Church of God.

4thly, He sometimes changes their minds, though he convert them not; as he
dealt by Esau, whom the Lord made kind to his Brother Jacob, though he
continued the same man he was.

5thly, God some times takes them out of the way, as he did Herod, Matt. 1.20.
who sought after Christ in his Infancy, to cut him off. Thus the Lord preserves
his people from the evils which might fall on them from men.

Thirdly, His Providence is seen in keeping them from those evils which they
are prone to run themselves into through ignorance or inadvertency. God
preserves his people from many secret and unseen dangers, which they are not
sensible of, such as they did not foresee, and therefore could not prevent. He
has given his Angels charge concerning them, to keep them in all their ways,
who shall bear them in their hands, lest they should dash their feet against a
stone, Psalm. 91.11, 12. They have a charge from God to watch over his people,
and they are faithful and affectionate to preserve them from those evils which
they observe not, and are prone to overlook.

Fourthly, God's Providence appears toward his people in this, That when he
sends any Judgment upon the Earth, that is to be executed by an unseen hand, he
will not trust it in the hands of the Evil Angels, but employs the Good Angels,
who are Friends and Guardians to his people, and of the Family with them of the
firstborn. This we see in the case of Sodom and Gomorrah, he sends the Angels
about this Work, who might secure Lot in the destruction of it, Genesis 19.1. And
when the great Plague was sent upon Israel, which destroyed Seventy Thousand
men in three days, 2 Samuel 24.15. it was executed by a good Angel. Doubtless the
Devil would have been glad of such an Employment, but God would not for his
peoples sakes trust him with any such power.

Fifthly, God's Care for his people is so great, that it is without any
intermission, Psalm. 121.3, 4. He will not suffer thy foot to be moved; he that
keeps thee will not slumber: Behold, he that keeps Israel, shall neither
slumber nor sleep. God's Care of his people is a constant, unintermitted Care,
it leaves no door open for the vigilant Enemy. Saul thought himself safe when
he slept amongst his Captains and Soldiers, who had a special charge to watch
for their Kings Life; but while his numerous Guard were all asleep, David went
out into his camp, and took away Saul's Spear, which was at his Bolster, and
with it might have taken away his Life, 1 Samuel 26.12.

But God's Providence for his People neither sleeps nor slumbers; therefore
their Enemies can take no such advantage of them.

Sixthly, So great is the Lord's Care for his People, that their preservation
in the world was the great thing which lay upon the heart of Christ when he was
going out of the world. And we all know, that men's affections are then
discovered; those whom we love, we provide for then. John 17.9. I pray for
them, I pray not for the world, but for them that thou have given me out of the
world. ver. 15. I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but
that thou should keep them from the evil. The whole Chapter is full of the
expressions of his wonderful Love and tender Care for his People, which he
uttered at that time, as he himself tells them, that they might have his Joy
fulfilled in themselves, that all the people of God might know how his heart in
Heaven, is affected toward them on Earth. Thus you see wherein God expresses
his Care of his people; next follow the Reasons that may be assigned for this,
and they are,

Reas. 1. They are his Children; they stand in such a Relation to him, as
engages him to be careful of them. They are born unto him by Regeneration. Now
we cannot think that the God of Nature, who has imprinted this upon every
Creature, to take care of its own, will himself be found wanting in this.

The tenderness and care of men and beasts to their little ones, is all derived
from him; and will not then his Love and Care much more exceed theirs? He tells
us himself, that the Mother may forget the Son of her Womb, that she should not
have compassion on him; but the Lord will not forget his people, Isa. 49.15

Reas. 2. They are his Jewels, of the greatest price to him, his peculiar
Treasure, Exodus 19.5. He sets a higher price upon them, than he does upon all
the world beside. This he confirms by actions, and renders as the reason of
some remarkable Providence of his, Psalm. 105.14. He suffered no man to do them
wrong; yea, he reproved Kings for their sakes. He values their Ransom at a
higher rate, for he gives whole Countries and Kingdoms for them, Isa. 43.3. I
gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee. This is a sufficient
proof of the high esteem that God has of them; and things which we highly
prize, we tenderly care for.

Reas. 3. They are his Portion, his Inheritance, all that he has set apart for
himself in the World, Psalm. 4.3. The Lord has set apart him that is godly for
himself, Deuteronomy. 32.9. The Lords portion is his people; Jacob is the Lot of his
Inheritance. These are mighty expressions, enough to astonish us, That God who
is Lord of of all the World, who has Heaven and Earth, and all that is
therein, should, as it were, quit his Interest in all the rest, and count it
inconsiderable and little worth, in comparison of a few that he has chosen out
of it, who were as bad as the rest, excepting in what they are beholding to him
for, and are made better by his choice.

Reas. 4. His Honor depends upon these, they are the only people that lay his
Concernments to heart, and take care of his glory; others do serve, and help
forward his designs in the world, but they do it not out of design, they mind
only their own things; but his people design to serve and honor him, and mind
his glory as their greatest interest in the world, Phil. 1.20, 21. As always,
so now also, Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by life or
death; for to me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain. The glory of Christ is
that which a Christian aims at in life and death; yea, he makes every
particular action subservient to this, 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eat or drink,
or whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God. Now it is no wonder if God take
care for those who take care for him; if they design his glory, much more does
he their preservation.

Reas. 5. Because he has dearly purchased them, he has bought them at a dear
rate, he has bought them at first with a great price, not of filver and gold,
but with the precious blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Beside this, he
oftentimes makes a providential purchase of them, by giving men and people for
them, Isa. 43, 3. Now we know, that the things which we purchase dearly, we lay
up safely, and keep them carefully, because we will not lose the cost and
charge we have been at. Thus God reasons from former mercies, to future
preservations, Isa 43.4. Since thou have been precious in my sight, thou have
been honorable, and I have loved thee; therefore will I give men for thee, and
people for thy life.

Reas. 6. He is careful of them, because they love him; these are the people of
all the world, that love God; therefore they are the people that he minds above
all the world; he has their hearts, and therefore they have his. Psalm. 91.14.
When God had spoken of his care of his people, and their safety from the
Pestilence, he adds this as the Reason, Because he has set his love upon me,
therefore will I deliver him.

Reas. 7. The Reason of all Reasons is, He has set his love upon them, Psalm.
146.8. The Lord loves the righteous. John 16.27. The Father himself loves
you. Nay, so great is the Love of God to his people, that he is called Love, 1
John 4.16. Now those whom we love, we take care of; we consider not so much
their merit or demerit, if they be in danger; but we feel in our selves what
they suffer; and we can no more forbear to prevent an evil that we see coming
upon them, or labor to remove it when it is come, than we can forbear to seek
out for help for our selves, if we were in the same case. God's Love makes him
sympathize with his people in all their sufferings, therefore he says by the
Prophet, Isa. 63.9. In all their afflictions I was afflicted with them; wonder
not then at what follows, the Angel of his presence saved them, in his love and
in his pity he redeemed them; and he bare them, and carried them all the days
of old. Where Love is so powerful to cause such a sense of affliction, it must
needs awaken our care, and stir up all our circumspection to prevent or remove
the evil which fall upon us, in falling upon those we love.

Thus I have endeavored to make this Truth clear; yet before I improve it, I
must remove some objections out of the way.

Obj. 1. How does the Care of God appear for his people, seeing we find that
they have often been made a prey to the wicked, and the Scripture gives an
account of hard things that they have suffered under them?

Ans. The Scripture which gives us account of their sufferings, tells us also
of their preservation under those troubles, so that rightly considered, they do
not darken, but clear the Providence of God. How did God preserve Israel in
Egypt, Exodus 3.2. though the bush burned with fire, it was not consumed? And as
the Apostle says concerning himself and the Primitive Christians, 2 Cor. 4.9.
Though they were persecuted, yet they were not forsaken.

2. God's Care of his people appears in this, That he increased them by their
Troubles, as well as preserved them under them, Exodus 1.12. the more they
afflicted them, the more they multiplied and grew; and it has been the
experience of the Christian Church, That the blood of the Martyrs has been the
Seed of the Church.

3. His Care appears greatly in caring for their souls; he sanctifies these
troubles to them, and does them a great deal of good in the trying and
strengthening of their Graces, 1 Pet. 1.7. The trial of your Faith being much
more precious than Gold, Romans 5.3, 4, 5. We glory in tribulation, knowing that
tribulation works patience, and patience experience, and experience hope.
Nay, he does not only do them good at present, but makes way for glory, 2 Cor.
4.17. Our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory.

4. Though he has often given them up into the hands of wicked men, that they
might show their malice and hatred against them; yet he never gave them up to
the wills of such; he has not left wicked men at their own liberty, to do as
they pleased; but God has reserved to himself the ordering and proportioning
of their troubles, to their strength; he has appointed what they shall suffer,
for number, how many blows they shall bear; for weight, how heavy they shall
be; and for time, how long they shall continue.

5. God has always had such a Care of them, that they have never perished
under their afflictions. Though they have fallen, yet they have not perished.
They have laid down their lives, but they have not lost them: Their lives have
not been taken away, but upon such terms as they have been willing to part with
them, and in which they are gainers, Phil. 1.21. He that could say, To him to
live was Christ, could also say, to dye is gain; therefore he comforted himself
in this, That though he might lay down his life in those troubles which he
underwent at Rome, yet he should have a considerable value for it, for Christ
should be manifested in his body, whether it were by life or death.

Obj. 2. Scripture and Experience both tell us, That all things fall alike to
all, Eccles. 9.2, 3. so that love or hatred is not to be known by any thing
before us.

Ans. 1. This must be understood of outward things only thus far, That wicked
men have their shares in the good things of this life; and good men have their
part in the evil things of it: There is no outward good, but the wicked have
enjoyed; nor no outward trouble and affliction but has befallen the righteous;
and as they have their shares of these, so they have but a share of them; the
good have not all the evil, nor the wicked all the good of this world; and
there is reason for this, because the wicked have their good things here, and
the good have their evil things.

2. Though all things do fall alike to all, yet all things do not work alike to
all. God's care is seen in ordering those things which befall his people for
their good, in making those things good in the conclusion, which are evil in
themselves; whereas those things which are good in themselves, or at least
reputed so among men, are for the hurt of those who enjoy them, when they fall
into the hands of wicked men, Psalm. 11.6. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares.
There is nothing that such a one enjoys, but it is a snare to him, to entangle
and hold him fast till God cast him into Hell; whereas the same things are
helps to a good man to bring him to Heaven, Romans 8.28. All things work together
for good to those that love God. So that although Good and Evil be dispensed
promiscuously among good and bad, and they seem to fare all alike; yet does God
under these carry on distinct and different works of Mercy and Judgment; of
Mercy to the good for their Salvation; and of Judgment to the wicked for their
hardening: So that herein is seen the Providence of God toward his people, that
he furthers their Salvation by those things which are an occasion of hardening
others; and by those Providence which are common to them and others, he
carries on a special design of Grace and Mercy to them. So that there is a vast
difference betwixt those things which seem to be the same. For though the godly
have all the troubles in the World which any other do meet withal, yet they
have not the Wrath and Displeasure of God in them, but a secret assistance and
support under them; and though the wicked have all the outward blessings that
God bestows upon his own, yet they have not the Love of God in and through
them, and his Blessing with them, as the godly have.

3. Though outward things are not sufficient to discover Love or Hatred, they
alone are not proofs of one or other; yet it is unquestionably true, That the
Love and Hatred of God do run thorough these things also: God orders and
disposes outward things in his love to the Godly; and though sense cannot
discern his Love by these, yet Faith can often see it through them; and the
outward Providence of God speak his displeasure to the wicked; yea, he often
times gives them those things in wrath, in which they blessed themselves; and
when they have both finished their races, and they shall both look back upon
their lives from Eternity, they will both agree in this, That they were in
nothing more unlike, than in that in which they seemed to be alike.

Obj. 3. But we see that not only the godly do partake of the same Judgments
which befall the wicked, but the wicked also do share in the same mercies and
preservations with the righteous; they also are preserved in time of danger
with the other, no judgment, but takes away as good as it leaves behind it;
and leaves as bad as it takes away; where then is seen God's care of his people?

Ans. There is a great difference betwixt the Judgments and Mercies of the good
and bad, though they seem to be the same, and to sense without difference.

For the Mercies of the godly are indeed sent in Mercy to his people; he orders
one Mercy toward another, a temporal Mercy toward a spiritual one, and one
Mercy is a pledge of another; so that a good man can say often times by Faith,
as Leah did, Genesis 30.11. Behold a troop comes. And as David reasoned from his
deliverance from the Lion and the Bear, to his deliverance from the Philistines;
so can a good man reason from one Mercy of any kind to another; but if God give
any thing to a wicked man that seems a Mercy, it is but to prevent a greater
Mercy, a Temporal to prevent a Spiritual; he gives them temporal Rewards here
for any service they do him, to take off their claim to any hereafter.

Again, if he send any Judgment upon his people, it is not to destroy, but to
prevent destruction; he sends temporal judgments to prevent spiritual; he
afflicts them here, that they might not perish with the World; but to the
wicked he sends one judgment to make way for another; thus all the Judgments
which fell on the Egyptians in their own Land, made way for their overthrow at
the Red Sea: For this must be observed, That though public Judgments do spare
bad as well as good, and both seem to be alike wonderfully delivered from it;
yet it is with a great difference, One is a preservation from the Evil, and the
other a reservation for some greater Evil. We read, That the Mourners in
Jerusalem were marked, Ezekiel. 9 4. that they might be preserved from the
destruction which God was bringing upon the City. We find also, that Cain was
marked, that he might not be slain, the first was doubtless in mercy, but most
Interpreters agree in this, That Cain's was a Judgment upon him, a trembling of
his heart and head, which implied his guilt, and was a terror to others, as
well as to himself.

Here then may arise a great and weighty Question worthy of the serious
consideration of those whom the late Judgment of Pestilence has spared.

Quest. How shall I know whether my preservation from this Judgment be a
special Mercy, or a fruit of Common Providence? Or whether it be not worse, a
reservation unto evil?

Ans. You shall know three ways. First, By some things which go before such a
preservation. Secondly, By some things which accompany it. Thirdly, By some
things which follow it.

First, Some things go before such Deliverances as these, when they are in
Mercy; and they are such as these.

First, A sense of the danger that we are in, that so we may be taken off from
all self-confidence, and fitted for the observing and honoring of Divine
Goodness: Thus it was with Paul, 2 Cor. 1.9. We had the sentence of death in
our selves, that we should not trust in our selves, but in God which raises
the dead. He was as a dead man in his own apprehensions, and was taken off from
all hopes and dependencies upon creatures, and had nothing to hold by, but
this, That God was able to raise the dead: This sense of danger ushered in a
great deliverance, and made way for the magnifying of the Mercy of God; and
indeed when God intends to bless and sanctify any deliverance to a man, he
prepares him by the sense of his danger, for a thankful reception of the Mercy.

Secondly, As there is commonly a sense of the danger, so there is also of our
own unworthiness of that mercy which we desire, and of that which we enjoy
already, and of our ill deserving in respect of the evil that we fear. Thus it
was with Jacob when he was in danger of falling into his Brothers hands, Genesis
32.10, 11. I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the
truth which thou have showed unto thy servant; for with my staff I passed over
this Jordan, and now I am become two bands. Deliver me, I pray thee, from the
hand of my Brother. A sense of our unworthiness of what we have already
received of the Lord, is a great argument that God intends us more.

Thirdly, A Spirit of Prayer; to be earnest, and strive with God for the mercy.
God seldom gives any thing to his people in mercy, but he sends a Spirit of
Prayer to usher it in. When God would deliver Jacob from the hands of Esau, he
pours out a mighty Spirit of Prayer, and he wrestled with God all the night,
Genesis 32.24. Now what was his wrestling? the Prophet Hosea expounds it, Hos.
12.4. He had power over the Angel, and prevailed; he wept and made supplication
to him. And what did Jacob pray for this night? he told us before, Genesis 32.11.
Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my Brother, from the hand of Esau,
for I fear him, lest he will come and smite me, and the Mother with the
Children. Jacob saw that his whole Family lay at stake now, there was but a
step betwixt them and death; therefore he bestirs himself, and will not give
over till he gets the victory, and prevail with God; he will not leave praying
till he carry away a persuasion that his prayers are answered.

Fourthly, An humble Spirit, to submit to the hand of God under that affliction
and danger which we pray to be delivered from. It is no contradiction to pray
against an affliction, and yet submit to the will of God. A man may pray
against the evil, and yet submit to the will of God; and this is very
acceptable unto God, it is a forerunner of deliverance from trouble already
come, and may well be a sign of preservation from danger approaching, Lev.
26.41, 42. If their uncircumcised hearts shall be humbled, and they then accept
of the punishment of their iniquity, then will I remember my Covenant with
Israel. This frame of Spirit was found in David, when that heavy affliction
befell him, that his own Son rebelled against him, 2 Samuel 16.11, 12. Let him
alone, and let him curse, for the Lord has bidden him. David stooped under
God's hand in this affliction, and this was an argument that God would deliver
him out of that trouble, as we see he did.

Fifthly, Mourning for those evils which we see God is about to punish. When
God finds us mourning for our own and other men's sins, whether he spare us or
take us away in the judgment that is coming, either is in mercy. If he spare
us, it is to see better days, and to enjoy better things; if he take us away,
it is from the evil that is to come; but commonly God has a care of such to
preserve them from the evil, as we see he did the Mourners in Jerusalem, when a
general judgment was come upon the City, Ezekiel. 9.4, 5, 6.

Now it is our work to reflect upon our hearts, and consider, how we have found
them under the apprehensions of this judgment of the Pestilence approaching; if
we have found such impressions as these, we may conclude that our lives have
been given us in mercy, and that they are the fruits of Gods special providence
and goodness.

Secondly, You shall know by some things which did accompany this preservation.
While this judgment from which you are preserved did hang over your heads, you
had some such impressions as these upon your spirits.

First, A resolution to depend upon God, in the midst of trouble, until the
calamity be over-past. When God intends to give in a mercy of this kind, he
commonly draws forth Faith to act for it, at least a Faith of dependence,
though not a Faith of assurance; and though there may be many fears, yet these
may serve to quicken and stir up Faith of adherence to depend upon God.

This is the meaning of entering into thy chambers, Isa. 26.20. Which does not
deny a prudent use of means to prevent evil and danger, but imply a trusting
more to God to preserve us, then to the means we use. Prove. 3.5, 6. Trust to
the Lord with all thy heart, and lean not to thine own understanding; in all
thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths. A man is not forbidden
to use his own understanding, but to lean to it. There may be not only a care
to prevent danger, but a fear of it; when we have used means, and yet a
dependence upon God, a casting of our selves upon him for help, with a
resolution to rely upon him, and particularly in this case of the Pestilence,
preservation is promised only upon condition of a Faith of reliance and
dependence upon God. As we may see in the connection of the 1, 2, 3 verses, of
the 91. Psalm. He that dwells in the secret place of the most high, shall
abide under the shadow of the Almighty. What is the meaning of this, but that
he that makes God his refuge in danger, shall be safe under his protection;
from this general proposition David takes up a particular resolution to depend
upon God, I will say of the Lord, he is my refuge and my fortress, my God, in
him will I trust. And from thence he infers for his own, the comfort of all
that do thus. Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and
from the noisome Pestilence.

The connection of the 9. and 10. verses of this Psalm, are no less considerable
than these. Because thou have made the Lord, which is my refuge, even the most
high, thy habitation there shall no evil befall thee, neither shall the Plague
come nigh thy dwelling. Where such a particular act of Faith goes before,
preservation from the evil commonly follows; and this is always the fruit of
special grace.

Secondly, Where preservation is in mercy, there is found an acceptance of
life, and liberty, and peace; and what ever we enjoy in this as from the hand
of God, taking all from him. Faith is a Grace that fetches all from God, and
gives all to him; it has to do with God in every thing, and looks over, and
beyond every creature and means, to him; if Faith apprehend a danger, it takes
its preservation from it, as well as its deliverance out of it, equally from
God. This we see in David, Psalm. 18.2. The Lord is my rock, and my fortress,
and my deliverer, my God, my strength, in whom I will trust, my buckler, and
the horn of my Salvation, and my high tower. David gives God all those titles
which we give to those things from whence we expect or receive help; whatever
men fly too, or depend upon in time of danger, that is God unto David;
therefore he ascribes all the deliverance that he had from trouble, to the Lord
alone; he takes his life as given him by the Lord, ver. 16.17. He sent from
above, he took me, he drew me out of many waters, he delivered me from my
strong enemy. And as he acknowledges his preservation from danger, so he also
confesses all the good that he injoys to be peculiarly from the Lord. Psalm.
23.5. Thou preparest a table for me in the presence of mine enemies: thou
anointest my head with oil, my cup runs over: Thus where God gives any thing
in mercy, he gives a heart to acknowledge the mercy to be from him, and to eye
God particularly in it.

Thirdly, A high esteem of the mercy that comes in such a way. The season and
the conveyance of the mercy, do much advance the price of it. To live in dying
times, to be safe when others are in danger, to be in peace when others are in
trouble, is a mercy to be highly prized.

To have all these at such a time, is much; but to have them in answer to
prayer, to have them through the Promise and Covenant of Grace, is a great deal
more. To have these, not as the fruit of common providence, but of special
grace and fatherly care' sets a great luster upon the mercy, and makes it very
precious in the esteem of the soul. We see David was much affected with
deliverance that the Lord gave him, Psalm. 116. Because it was in a time of
great trouble and danger. v. 3. The sorrows of death compassed me. And because
he saw the hand of God eminently in it, v. 6. The Lord preserves the simple, I
was brought low and he helped me. He prized it the more because it came as an
answer to his prayers. v. 1. I love the Lord because he has heard my voice and
my supplications. And chiefly, because through all this, he saw that God had a
singular care of him, and a high esteem of his life; and not only of his, but
of all those that fear him, ver. 15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the
death of his Saints.

Fourthly, Then preservation from danger comes in special mercy to us, when the
same impressions are found upon our spirits, which the affliction sanctified
should have wrought upon us. When the keeping off of an Evil, does work the
same things, that this should have produced, if it had come, and had been
sanctified to the soul, then the preservation from this, is in mercy to the
soul. As for example, Art thou in health, when others are sick? Art thou free,
when others are shut up? Have thou life and strength, when others are upon beds
of languishing? Then enquire, Do thou find those workings of thy heart as are
suitable to a gracious spirit upon a sick bed? Do thou see the vanity of the
World, the shortness of time? Do thou mourn for the loss of time, as they do
who are going into Eternity? And art thou careful to call thy Evidences
together? Do thou see the preciousness of thy soul, the weight of Eternity,
the excellency of Christ, and of an Interest in God, as if thou were upon a
Deathbed? Oh then thy preservation is a mercy to thee; for these should have
been the gracious fruits of such a condition, if thou had been brought into
it; for God has done that good by keeping off the affliction, which he should
have done thee by it, if it had fallen upon thee, and had been blessed unto thee.

Fifthly, Then Preservation is in love, when it is accompanied with a singular
love to God. Thou will find thy heart not only in love with God, but thou will
call upon thy heart more and more to love God. This was David's care, to engage
his heart to God, because of that singular providence of his over him, Psalm.
116.1. He is also much affected with the goodness of God toward his people, he
therefore stirs up others to love him in respect of his Providence, Psalm.
31.19, 20,, 23. Oh how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them
that fear thee, which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee, before the
sons of men. Thou shall hide them in the secret of thy presence, from the pride
of men; thou shall keep them secretly in a pavillion, from the strife of
tongues. Hence he takes occasion, ver. 23. to call upon men to love God: O love
the Lord, all ye Saints, for the Lord preserves the faithful, and plentifully
rewards the proud doer. It is but reasonable that when we see more of God's
love in any Providence, it should engage us to put in more of our love into
every duty. We should be full of affection and zeal for the glory of that God,
who we see cares for us.

Thirdly, We shall know whether this Preservation be in mercy, by those things
which follow it.

First, If there be found in us a care to keep those impressions alive which
were made upon our hearts in the time of danger and trouble, and our
preservation under it. Many men have some sense of the Mercy and Goodness of
God in time of great danger, and seem to be affected with their deliverance;
but these are only made by some extraordinary Providence, these things do not
abide upon their spirits; whereas a good man labors to keep all the
impressions that are made upon his heart, either under affliction, or by any
Mercy, fresh and lively, that so the frame of his heart may be bettered, and
that he may get a sound and good constitution of soul.

Secondly, There will be found in us a great care to live up to the engagements
of such a condition, as we see it was in David, Psalm. 116.8, 9, 12, 13, 14, 17.
Thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from
falling. What follows the sense of this Mercy? see in the following verses: I
will walk before the Lord in the Land of the living. What shall I render unto
the Lord for all his benefits toward me? I will take the Cup of Salvation, and
call upon the Name of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto the Lord now in the
presence of all his people. I will offer to thee the sacrifice of Thanksgiving,
and will call upon the Name of the Lord. Thus we see David's mercies had an
influence upon his whole life, as his outward condition is bettered so his
whole life is bettered, made more holy, and conform to the will of God. He
considered not only what engagements God had laid upon him by his deliverance;
but also what engagements he had upon himself: For there are duties which
spring out of the Mercies which we have received, and there are duties which
arise out of the promises which we have made to God, upon condition of
deliverance; and a good man considers both these.

David had an eye to the former, when he said, What shall I render to the Lord
for all his benefits? And he had respect to the latter, when he says, I will
pay my vows unto the Lord: And God expects it at our hands, that we should call
to mind the Promises that we make in time of trouble; snd the best of God's
People have need to be minded of them; for we are apter to make them, than to
keep them: We may see this in Jacob, who was ready to make a vow in his
affliction, Genesis 28.20, 21, 22. And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be
with me, and keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and
raiment to put on, so that I come again to my fathers house in peace, then
shall the Lord be my God; and this stone which I have set for a pillar, shall
be Gods house. But when God had given him not only food and raiment, but had
multiplied him greatly, he must be called upon to make good this vow, Genesis
35.1. And God said to Jacob, Arise, go up to Bethel, and dwell there, and make
there an Altar unto God that appeared unto thee when thou fleddest from the
face of Esau thy Brother. We should learn of the Mariners in Jonah, who made
vows after they were delivered; Many will make them before, and forget them
afterward; but a good man either makes them after deliverance, or makes good
those that he made before. It is good to take up our vows when our troubles are
ceased, and to turn them into Resolutions, to confirm and strengthen them, as
our Mercies are perfected. Psalm. 23.6. From the experience that David had of
the Mercy and Goodness of God, he takes up a resolution to follow God as long
as he lived; he determines to stick close to God in his prosperity, who stuck
to him in his affliction.

Thirdly, There will be an enquiry after work and service for God, how he may
be serviceable in his generation. He is not satisfied with general service
neither, but is ready to enquire, Whether God has any particular service for
him to do in the World, unto which he has preserved him. God had a peculiar
Work to employ Moses in; therefore he wonderfully preserved him in that time of
common Calamity, and brought him up in Pharoah's Court. And when a man that
understands God's ways and ends, meets with singular preservations, he is
ready to ask, What has God to do for me in the World, that he thus preserves
me, when many others are taken away? and he labors to find out that Work, if
there be any such.

This is certain, that God does nothing in vain; he still proposes an end to
himself, and his ends are the promoting his own glory and interest in the
World: And doubtless his peculiar Works have peculiar Ends: And commonly, what
God chiefly intends, that he sets upon our hearts to seek after, or to comply
with when it is offered unto us; as we see in Moses, God had preserved him for
the deliverance of his people out of Egypt: And see how it was upon his heart
before ever the Lord appeared to him, Exodus 2.12. Nothing does more bespeak our
lives to be given us in Mercy, than when we value our Lives by our Work; when
we can say with Paul, To me to live is Christ. I know nothing worth a living
for, but Christ; I am resolved while I live, to labor for him, and to apply my
self to that peculiar Work to which he has appointed me, and for which he has
so often preserved me.

Fourthly, A holy confidence in God for time to come; a dependence on him, and
resolution to trust in him in all the straits that we shall meet withal. Faith
grows stronger by all the answers and rerurns of prayer: If God give in any
thing as a mercy, by special preservation, it fortifies the soul against doubts
and difficulties for time to come, and a man is able then to reason from
experience, as Paul does, 2 Cor. 1.9, 10. We had the sentence of death in our
selves, that we might not trust in our selves, but in God which raises the
dead, who delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver, in whom we
trust that he will deliver. By these and such like Experiences you shall be
assured that your preservations are the fruit of Divine Love, and that there
was more then a common Providence in your safety. You are the saved of the
Lord, and happy upon this account. But if the workings of thy heart have been
contrary to these, suspend thy joy, thou have less cause than thou art aware
of, to rejoice in thy preservation from this wasting Judgment. It may be but a
reservation for some greater evil. But you will say, Can there be a worse Evil
than this? I tell thee, Yes; Perhaps God may reserve thee for some judgment
that may take thee away when thou art less aware of it; Nay, if God only suffer
thee to live and to be vile and profane after such a deliverance, to abuse his
patience and long suffering, and fill up the measure of thy sins: This will be
a greater judgment then the Pestilence which thou have escaped. The Apostle
speaks to such an one as thou art, Romans 2.4. Despisest thou the riches of his
goodness and forbearance, and long suffering, not knowing that the goodness of
God leads thee to repentance? Mark what is the issue of such a frame as this
is. ver. 3. But after thine hard and impenitent heart, treasurest up wrath
against the day of wrath. It had been better for thee that thou had been
taken away and sent to hell long ago, then thou should live to treasure up
more wrath, against that day of wrath, and to make thy eternal condition so
much the more intolerable Let me therefore persuade thee to look back again
and again, how it has been with thee under this dreadful visitation; and
consider thy self, how has it left thee? Did it find thee stupid and
insensible of danger as many have been? or timorous? if so, Whether did thy
fears drive thee only to the Physician, to their directions for thy security,
and not unto God? And now the danger is something blown over, thou art left as
vain, as unfruitful, yea as profane as before; thou say in effect as they
did, Jer. 7.10. We are delivered to do all these abominations. If this be thy
case, thou art amiserable man or woman; thou art none of those whom Moses
magnifies in this place, whom he admires as a happy people. And if thou
believe this to be a truth, stir up thy self to seek after an interest in
this divine providence: Labor for a life suitable to a saved one, then shall
thou indeed have cause to rejoice in thy deliverance; for the good of
providence is not seen by the visible effects of it, but is legible in the
hearts and lives of the saved.

The Use that you should make of this truth, all you that are under these
gracious impressions of providence, or sincerely laboring after them, should
be,

First, Look upon your mercies as they are, be sure to acknowledge God in all
that you have, and enjoy; give him the glory of his goodness and truth, take
your lives out of his hand, and say, it is the Lord that has saved me alive
this day; Set up your Eben-Ezer, hitherto the Lord has helped me: Call nothing
common that you have, though your lives and preservations may seem common
mercies, because many have been preserved as well as you; yet, if you consider
what has been said, you will find cause to account your lives singular and
special mercies, because there is more in them than there is in others; you
have been preserved by a gracious providence; whereas others have escaped by a
general providence; you have been saved in mercy; whereas others have been
reserved in judgment. Nothing will conduce more to the quickening of your
spirits, and to raise them up to live like your selves, than a true estimate of
your mercies; for this will make you sensible of your engagements; and these
considered, will quicken you to your duties.

Secondly, Love God. There is nothing more natural than this, that we shall
love those who love us, and take the most care of us in our greatest dangers.
This is that which David urges upon all the people of God, not only to love
him every one for the care that God has of him, but every one to love him for
the care that he has of all the faithful. Psalm. 31.23. Oh love ye the Lord,
all ye his Saints, for the Lord preserves the faithful. And let it seem but a
reasonable thing to you, to grant (...) God a peculiar interest in your hearts
and lives, who have a special interest in his providence.

Thirdly, Be careful to pay your vows that you have made to the Lord in the
time of danger. Consider as well the duties which spring out of your promises
made to God, as those which arise out of his providence toward you, and make
conscience of both. Time was, when you valued your lives and the lives of your
relations at a great rate; you offered freely and largely for your selves and
them when trouble was near; O do not undervalue them now; think that enjoyment
of them now, to be as much worth as ever you did esteem them; Seeing God has
taken you at your word, and has given you what you desired, be sure you make
your word good, and give him what you promised.

Fourthly (...), Be of good courage, strengthen your selves in God, from the
experience that you have had of his goodness and truth; and live in a constant
dependence upon him, and hope in him for the time to come; that will be an
evidence, that you believe this truth; and it will be an honoring of Gods
providence.

Nothing can be more rationally deduced from this truth, than a comfortable
reliance upon God; It is the inference of the Holy Ghost from the Premises,
Psalm. 31.24. When he had asserted the Providence of God over his people, in
these Words (The Lord preserves the Faithful) He exhorts or infers this, Be of
good courage, and he shall strengthen your hearts, all ye that hope in the Lord.

Last of all, This truth speaks to every man after this manner. You see nothing
can make a man happy which cannot render him safe, a great part of our
happiness in this life lying in a freedom from evil, rather than in the
enjoyment of good, which (...) the happiness of the life to come. And there is
nothing so much contributes to our safety, as an interest in Divine providence:
Can riches, honors, art, interest in men, say thus to thee, and make it good,
Psalm. 91.5.6. Thou shall not be afraid of the terror by night, nor for the
arrow that flies by day, nor for the Pestilence that walks in darkness, nor
for the destruction that walks at noonday.

But God can speak thus to thy soul, and cause thee to walk without fear in the
valley of the shadow of death.

Make have then, and interest thy self in God, and improve this by Faith and
prayer; it is the best preservative thou can provide for thy self and Family.
Prove. 18.10. The name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the righteous runs into
it, and is Safe. Nay here is shelter for Thine as well as Thee. Prove. 14 26. In
the fear of the Lord is strong confidence, and his Children shall have a place
of Refuge. Would thou be good to thy self and to thy Family, make God thine,
That thou may dwell in the secret of the Lord and abide under the shadow of
the Almighty. And time and experience will confirm thee in this truth, that
they are safe whom God keeps, and happy whom he saves; and with David thou will
conclude, Psalm. 144. verse 15. Happy is that people that is in such a case; Yea
happy is that people whose God is the Lord.

FINIS.

