A Perpetual LEAGUE OF Mutual Defense and Alliance BETWEEN HIS MAJESTY, AND THE
ESTATES GENERAL Of the UNITED PROVINCES Of the Low Countries: Together With a
Confirmation of the Articles of Commerce, agreed upon by th Treaty at Breda.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

EDINBURGH, Reprinted by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, M.DC.LXVIII.

A perpetual League of mutual Defense and Alliance between His Majesty, and the
Estates General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries; Together with a
Confirmation of the Articles of Commerce, agreed upon by the Treaty at Breda.
WHereas by the late Treaty concluded at Breda, between the most Serene and
most Potent Prince and Lord Charles the Second, King of Great Britain on the
one part, and the High and Mighty Lords the States General of the United
Provinces on the other part, the ancient Friendship and good Correspondency
between the two Nations has by the mercy of God been restored; And for the
taking away all occasions of new Differences for the future, and for preventing
such accidents as might happen between the Subjects of either side to the
disturbance of the said Amity and good Correspondence; certain Rules and
Articles of Commerce and Navigation were then agreed upon, and particularly in
the 11. Article of the said Treaty it was agreed, That the said Lord the King,
and the said Lords the States General should be and remain Friends,
Confederates and Allies, for the defending the Rights and Privileges of each
others Subjects, against all persons whatsoever, who should endeavor by Land
or Sea to disturb the Peace of either State, or who being Inhabitants in
eithers Dominions should be declared Public Enemies of either State: But yet
no particular mention being there made of the Aids and Succors wherewith one
Party should in such case be obliged to assist the other; And as well the said
King, as the said States General, resolving to strengthen and to bring yet to
further perfection the said Agreements, have agreed in the first and principal
place to confirm, as by these presents they do confirm, the said Treaty
concluded at Breda, and the said Rules and Articles of Commerce thereto
belonging, mutually obliging themselves to a sincere and perpetual observation
of them, and to cause them to be strictly and religiously observed and
fulfilled by the Subjects on either side, according to the genuine sense and
meaning of the said Treaty, and the Articles therein contained. And further for
ascertaining the Succors to be mutually given, which was omitted in the said
Treaty as aforesaid, as well to improve and increase the Friendship that is
between the said Lord the King, and the said Lords the States General, as for
seasonably providing by a closer Union and Alliance for the mutual safety and
defense of each State against the Hostile attempts and practices of whomsoever,
and under what pretense soever, We whose names are underwritten, by virtue of
the Powers and Commissions to Us granted, and which are to be inserted in the
close hereof, have agreed and concluded, That the said Lord the King of Great
Britain, and the said Lords the States General of the United Netherlands, shall
be, and by virtue of these Presents they are mutually allied, united and
confederate in a perpetual Defensive League, on the Terms and Conditions
following.

I.
That if any Prince or State, or any other of what condition soever, none
excepted, shall under any pretense whatsoever, invade, or endeavor to invade
the Territories, Countries, or any places whatsoever, under the Dominion of the
said King of Great Britain, or exercise any other act of Hostility, either by
Land or Sea, against the said Lord the King, or his Subjects; the said Lords
the States General shall be obliged, and by virtue of these Presents they are
obliged for the Opposing, Suppressing or Repelling of such Attempts, and acts
of Hostility, and for obtaining reparation of damages sustained thereby, to
assist the said Lord the King with forty Ships of War well equipped, of which
14 to carry between 60 and 80 Guns, and 400 men apiece one with another:
Fourteen others, from 40 to 60 Guns, and at least 300 men apiece one with
another; and none of the rest to carry less then 36 Guns, and 150 men: As also
with 6000 Foot, and 400 Horse, or the just value in Money of such succor, at
the choice of the said Lord the King, or with such part of the said succor, or
the value of it in Money, as the said Lord the King shall desire; the said
succors to be given within the space of six weeks after they shall be
required; and the said Lord the King to refund and pay back all the Charges to
the said Lords the States within three years after the end of the War.

II.
That if any Prince or State, or any other whosoever he be, none excepted,
shall upon any pretense whatsoever, invade or endeavor to invade the United
Provinces, or any places under the Dominion of the said Lords the States
General, or where they have a Garrison, or shall exercise any other act of
Hostility by Sea or Land, against the said Lords the States General, or their
Subjects, The said Lord the King shall be obliged, and by virtue of these
Presents he is obliged for the opposing, suppressing and repelling the said
Attempts and Acts of Hostility, and for obtaining reparation of damages thereby
received, to assist the said Lords the States with 40 Ships of War well
equipped, of which number 14 to carry between 60 and 80 Guns, and 400 men
apiece one with another; Fourteen others from 40 to 60 Guns, and at least 300
men one with another, and none of the rest to carry less then 36 Guns, and 150
Men; and also with 6000 Foot and 400 Horse, or a just value in Money for such
succor, at the choice of the said Lords the States, or with such part of the
said succor, or the value of it in Money as they shall desire; the said
succor to be given within the space of six weeks after it shall be required;
and the said Lords the States General to refund and pay back to the said Lord
the King, all Charges within three years after the end of the War.

III.
The said Ships of War, and the Auxiliary Forces of Horse and Foot, together
with the Captains of Ships and Commanders of those Forces, and other the
inferior Officers, shall be under the Command of the party injured, and shall
obey such Orders as they shall receive from him or them who shall have the
Command in chief of his Forces by Sea or Land.

IIII.
And for the better settling and agreeing an exact Rule for computing the
Charges which are to be paid back within 3 years after the War, or the value in
ready Money, which possibly may have been chosen by the party injured, in lieu
of all, or part of the said Ships, and Forces of Horse and Foot, It has been
thought fit that the Charges of 14 Ships, from 60 to 80 Guns, well equipped,
shall be estimated at the rate of eighteen thousand six hundred sixty and six
pounds Sterling, or English Money, by the Month; and those 14 from 43 to 60
Guns, at fourteen thousand pounds Sterling; and the other 12 at six thousand
pounds of the same Money. That the 6000 Foot be valued at 7500 l. Sterling, and
the 400 Horse at one thousand and forty pounds of like Money, by the month. The
said Sums to be paid by the said Lord the King of Great Britain, at London;
and by the Lords the States General at Amsterdam, according to the course of
Exchange at the time when such Payments shall become due: But for the Foot
abovementioned, there shall for the first Month be paid the sum of 6000 l.
Sterling, over and above, that sum being found necessary for the raising of
them.

V.
This League, with all and every thing therein contained, shall be Confirmed
and Ratified by the said Lord the King of Great Britain, and the said Lords the
States General of the United Provinces, by Letters Patents on each side, under
their Great Seals, in due and authentic Form, within the space of 4 Weeks next
ensuing, or sooner if it may be done: And the Instruments of Ratification
interchangeably delivered within the same time.

At the Hague, 13/23 January, 1668. De Gellicom. Asperen. Johan de-Witte. Van
Cromon. Adolph V. Unkel. Johan V. Schrieck. Isbrandts.


FINIS.

