The Kings Majesty's Speech, To the Parliament; Conveaned at Perth, The 25 of
November, 1650.
My Lords, and Gentlemen;
IT has pleased him, who rules the, Nations and in whose hands are the hearts
of Kings; by a very singular Providence, to bring me through a great many
Difficulties, unto this my ancient Kingdom: And to this place, where I may have
your, Advyce, in the great Matters, that concern the Glory of GOD, and the
Establishment of my Throne; and that relate to the General Good, and Common
Happiness of these three Covenanted Kingdoms; over which he has set me. And
truly, I can not express the hight (...) that Joy, wherewith ^ee has filled
my Soull, from this singular. Experiment of his kyndness, non how strong and
servent desires, he has created in me to evidence, my thankfulness, by
studying to reygn for him and with an humble and just subordination to him;
That which increasseth my hope and confidence, that he will yet continue to
deall graciously with me is; That he has moved me to enter in Covenant with
his people, (a favor which no other king can clame to;) And that he has
inclyned me to a resolution by his assistance, to live and die with my people,
in the defense of it. This is my Resolution, J profess it before GOD and you:
And in testimony hereof, J desire to renew it in Your presence; And if it
please GOD to lengthen my days, J hope my actions shall demonstate it: But J
shall leave the enlargement of this; And what so der J should say to my Lord
Chanceller; whom J have commanded, to speak to You at greater length: And
likewise, to inform You of my sense: Not only of the folly, but the sinfulness
of my way-going from this place, and the Reasons of it.

GOD SAVE THE KING

