The Kings Majesty's PROCLAMATION For calling of His PARLIAMENT in SCOTLAND.
CHARLES R.

CHARLES by the grace of GOD, King of Scotland, England, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, To all, and sundry, whom these do, or may concern,
greeting. The confusions and troubles, by which Our good Subjects of this Our
ancient Kingdom of Scotland, have these late years been deprived of that Peace
and Happiness, they justly might have expected, in the administration of Our
Royal Government among them; being now by the special blessing of Almighty GOD,
happily removed: We have thought fit to let them know, That We still retain the
same tenderness and good affection toward them: And as We will cheerfully
interpose Our Authority, in what may be for their good and welfare, and for
securing the just Privileges and Liberties of Our People; So We do expect from
them, those dutiful returns of Obedience and Subjection to Our Person and
Authority, which are suitable to their obligations and the duty of Loyal
Subjects. And, conceiving that a Parliament, in its right constitution, will,
at this time, be a ready mean for establishing a firm Peace to Our People, and
for settling all Religious and Civil, all public and private Interests. We
have therefore thought fit to call a Meeting of Our Estates of Parliament, to
be kept at Edinburgh upon the twelfth day of December, next to come. Our will
is herefore, and We charge and command Our Heralds, Pursevants and Messengers
of Arms, to pass and make publication hereof at the Market Crosses of Our
Royal Buroughs; And in Our Name and Authority, to warn all Our Nobility by
themselves, and the Heritors of Shires (according as after publication hereof,
they shall receive advertisement fra the persons contained in the List hereunto
subjoyned) and Our Royal Buroughs to meet; and according to the Laws of Our
Kingdom, to make choice of fit persons to be their Commissioners to this
ensuing Parliament; and that Our Nobility, Commissioners of Shires and
Buroughs, and all others having interest, do precisly keep this Meeting of Our
Parliament, under the pains prescribed by Our Laws thereanent.

Given at Whitehall the tenth day of October, and in the twelfth year of Our
Reign, 1660. Record. A. PRIMEROSE, Cls. Reg.
By His Majesty's Command, LAVDERDAILE.

The LIST of the Persons entrusted by his Majesty, for Conveening the Shires to
make election of the Commisioners to the Parliament.

Sir Hary Home, for the Sheriffdom of Berwick; Sir Peter Wedderburn, for the
Sheriffdom of Haddington^ Sir James Fowls, for the Sheriffdom of Edinburgh;
William Murray of Stanehop, for the Sheriffdom of Peible^ Robert Ker of Garden,
for the Sheriffdom of Roxburgh; Thomas Scot of Whitslaid, for the Sheriffdom of
Selkirk; Sir William Douglas of Kelhead, for the Sheriffdom of Dumfreiz; Hay
younger of Park, for the Sheriffdom of Wigtoun; Sir James Lockhart of Lie, for
the Sheriffdom of Lanerick; Naper of Kilmahew, for the Sheriftdom of Dumbarton;
Sir George Kinnaird of Rossie, for the Sheriffdom of Pearth; Campbell of
Achenbreck for the Sheriffdom of Argyl; Montgomery of Hasled, for the
Sheriffdom of Air; Sir Arcbibald Stewart of Blackball, for the Sheriffdom of
Renfrew; John Murray of Polmais, for the Sheriffdom of Stirline; David Bruce of
Clackmanan, for the Sheriffdom of Clackmanan; Sir Archibald Stirling of Carden,
for the Sheriffdom of Linlithgow; William Scot of Ardross, for the Sheriffdom
of Fysw; Halyburtoun of Pitcur, for the Sheriffdom of Forfar; David Ramsay of
Balmayn, for the Sheriffdom of Kincardin; Sir Alexander Fraser of Philorth, for
the Sheriffdom of Aberdeen, Sir Alexander Abercrombie of Brokenbou, for the
Sheriffdom, of Bamff; Mckenzie of Pluscarden, for the Sheriffdom of Elgin; The
Lord of Moynes, for the Sheriffdom of Nairn; Sir Vrwhart of Cromerty, for the
Sheriffdom of Innerness; Sir George Mckenzie of Tarbet, for the Sheriffdom of
Ross; Sir Robert Gordon of Embo, for the Sheriffdom of Sutherland; Sir James
Sinclar of Murkle, for the Sheriffdom of Caithness; George Smith of Rapness,
for the Sheriffdom of Orknay; Sir James Stewart of Bute, for the Sheriffdom of
Bute.

A. PRIMEROSE, Cls. Reg.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.


