ARTICLES To be Enquired of IN THE Primary Visitation OF THE Right Reverend
Father in God JOHN Lord Bishop of ROCHESTER: AND EXHIBITED To the
Churchwardens and Sidemen of every Parish within the DIOCESE of ROCHESTER, In
September, 1668.

LONDON, Printed for T. Garthwait, 1668.

The Oath of the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
YOu shall Swear that you, and every one of you will diligently enquire, and
true Presentment make of all such Persons within your Parish as have offended
against the Tenor of any of these Articles, collected out of His Majesty's
Ecclesiastical Laws, and given you in Charge. You shall not Present any Person
out of Malice or Ill Will; nor spare any out of Fear, Favor or Affection.

So help you God; and by the Contents of this holy Book.

ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY Within the DIOCESE of ROCHESTER.
TITUL. I. Enquiries concerning the Church, its Possessions, Ornaments, etc.
IS your Church or Chapel, with the Chancels thereof, in sufficient repair, as
becomes the house of God? Are the Roofs well covered, the Windows well glazed,
the Floors well paved, and is your Steeple in good repair, and the Bells kept
in good order? II. ARE the Ten Commandments, the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and
certain choice Sentences of Scripture, as also the Kings Arms, set up in
convenient Places in your Church? And are there any that refuse to pay their
Proportion of the Levies made for the repair of the Church, and other uses
requisite and accustomed? III. HAVE you a Font of stone for Baptism, and is it
set in the usual place anciently appointed for it? Have you a handsome
Communion Table, conveniently placed for the Celebration of the Lords Supper?
Have you a Carpet of Silk or other decent Stuff to cover it withal in time of
Divine Service; and a fair Linen Cloth to be laid upon the same when the Holy
Communion is administered? And does your Serton or Clark remove such careless
and irreverent people as are apt to sit upon the Holy Table, or otherwise abuse
it in time of Divine Service? Have you a Cup and a Cover of silver for the
Consecrated Bread and Wine? And have you a decent Flagon of Pewter or purer
Metal? and are they kept always very clean for that holy use? IV. ARE your
Reading-pew, and Pulpit well maintained, and placed with the best convenience
for public Prayer and Sermons? V. HAVE you a fair Bible of the largest Volume,
and the last Translation allowed by Authority? Have you a Book of Common Prayer
according to the last Act of Parliament for Vnisormity of public Prayers? Have
you the Book of Homilies allowed by Authority, the Book of Canons made in the
Synod held in the Year of our Lord 1603. and the printed Table of the Degrees
prohibited in Marriage? VI. HAVE you a Parchment Register-Book to register the
several Christenings, Marriages, and Burials which happen within your Parish?
Are they registered therein fairly and distinctly as soon as conveniently can be,
after the respective Offices performed by your Minister? and is there a
Transcript thereof returned once at least every year into the Ordinary's
Public Registry? Have you a Book to set down the Names of such Strangers as
preach in your Parish? Have you a strong Chest with three Locks, wherein to
preserve your Church-Furniture, and the like Alms-Box for the Poor? Have you
also a large and decent Surplice for your Minister to wear in his public
Ministrations? VII. IS your Churchyard sufficiently and well fenced? Are there
any encroachments or Nusances upon it? Or have there any Trees belonging to it,
been cut down, and by whom? VIII. IS your Parsonage or Vicarage-House, and the
Outhouses, as also the Gardens, Orchards and Fences belonging to the same, in
good sufficient repair? Have you a true Terrar of all the Glebe-Lands,
Tenements, and other Revenue whatsoever belonging to your Church? and is there
a true Copy of it brought into the Bishops Registry? Have any of the ancient
Glebe-Lands belonging to your Church been encroached upon, taken away, or else
exchanged without such consent of Parties, and License as is required by the
Law?
TIT. II. Enquiries concerning the Ministers of the Respective Parishes.
IS your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, a Priest ordained according to the Laws of
the Church and Kingdom? Has he been legally instituted and inducted into his
Benefice? Did he, within two Months after his Induction, read the XXXIX
Articles in time of Divine Service, in your Church, and publicly declare his
Assent thereunto? II. HAS he read the Book of Common Prayer, and declared
publicly his Assent and Consent to the use of all things in that Book
contained, within the time limited, and in the manner prescribed in the Act of
Parliament last made for the Uniformity of Public Prayer, and Printed in the
beginning of the Book of Common Prayer? And has he publicly read in your
Church a Certificate of his having subscribed a Declaration of the Unlawfulness
of taking up Arms, against the King; of his Conforming to the Liturgy of the
Church; and of his Disavowing the unlawful Oath commonly called The Solemn
League and Covenant, within such time, and in such manner as is further
required by the said Act? III. HAS he obtained, or is he vehemently suspected
to have obtained his Benefice by Money or other Simoniacal Compact? Is he a man
of sober, chaste, honest and peaceable Life? Spare not to present him if he be
in any way scandalous, or of a Conversation not becoming a Minister of the
Gospel. IV. Does he endeavor to keep and maintain Peace and Love among his
Neighbors, as much as in him lies? Does he also by discreet Applications
(according to his opportunities and Talent) endeavor to reduce Popish
Recusants, Sectaries, Separatists and refractory persons from their Errors;
offering himself (or, if he find not himself so able, using the assistance of
some Grave and Learned Divine of the Neighborhood) to conser with such, in
order to bring them into the bosom of the Church? V. DOES he in the Celebration
of Divine Service, Ministering the one and the other Sacrament, Visiting the
sick, Burying the dead, and in all other Rites and Offices of the Chureh, use
the whole Forms of Prayer prescribed by Authority, without Omission, Addition
or Alteration? More especially, does he read the Litany on every Sunday
throughout the year, at the Morning-Service? Does he read the Litany likewise
on every Wednesday and Friday throughout the Year publicly in his
Parish Church? Does he perform all his Ministrations with Decency, Gravity, and
Reverence, wearing his Surplice with a Hood (if he be a Graduate in the
University) as he is directed by Authority and the laudable Customs of the
Church? VI. DOES he administer the Communion (at least give notice of his
readiness and desire to do it) so often in the year, that Devout people may not
want opportunities to receive it at other times besides the usual solemn
Festivals? And does he, when he warnes a Communion, on the Sunday or Holiday
before, read one of those Exhortations, as he sees cause, which are fitted for
that occasion in the last Edition of the Common Prayer Book? VII. DOES he
administer Holy Baptism in public and private, as occasion requires, with due
Reverence, observing in all Circumstances the Forms and Directions prescribed
by the Church? Is he watchful that no Infant in danger want it by his absence
or delay? Does he earnestly exhort, that Infants, where weakness does not
hinder, be brought to public Baptism in the Church? Does he baptize any
without Godfathers and Godmothers? Or does he admit any person to answer as
such, that have not received the holy Communion? VIII. IS he ready and watchful
to visit the sick upon all occasions, of what Condition or Persuasion soever
they be? Does he Pray with, Comfort and Exhort them in such manner as best
suits with their capacities and needs? And does he offer them and give them his
a ssistance as frequently as the weakness of their Condition will admit of him;
making up, as much as lies in him, all their breaches of Charity with others;
and exhorting such as are able to works of Piety, and Relief for the Poor. IX.
IS he sober, painful and frequent in his Preaching? And does he, being
Licensed, and having no Impediment, preach one Sermon every Sunday in the Year,
in his own Cure, or in some other near adjoining, not venting any thing in his
Sermons that is newfangled or seditious? Does he read some one of the Homilies
appointed, when there happens to be no Sermon? And does he read the Canons once
a Year, as is directed? X. DOES he teach the Church-Catechisme to the younger
sort of his Parish, upon each Lords Day, in the Afternoon, immediately after
the Second Lesson in the Evening-Service; causing some Children of both Seres
(especially those of his own Family, if he have any such) to answer audibly,
and to attend diligently such parts of the said Catechism as he, in his
discretion, shall see cause to inculcate to them, or others? Does he give
notice of all Fasting-days and Holidays on the Sunday before they happen? And
does he go in Perambulation about your Parish, using the Prayers and
Thanksgiving accustomed in the Rogation-Week? XI. IS your Parson or Vicar
Restdent upon his Benefice? or, if his Residence be Legally dispensed with, is
the Cure supplied by a Curate that is approved of and licensed by the Bishop?
And has such Curate a sufficient, plentiful Allowance in proportion to the
value of the Living? And if he be Resident, and keep a Curate, does he,
notwithstanding, himself, at least once a Month, read Common Prayer openly in
your Church; and take occasion, himself to administer both the one and the
other Sacrament not unfrequently among you? XII. HAS your Parson, Vicar or
Curate joined any Couple in Marriage in any private house at an hour not
Canonical, or within the prohibited times? But most especially, has he married
any without having their Banns published three several Sundays or Holidays, not
having special License or Dispensation so to do? XIII DOES your Parish maintain
a Lecturer? Is he Licensed by the Bishop? Has he done in all things as is
required by the Act of Parliament for Uniformity of Public Prayers? Does he
read the whole Service appointed for the Time of the Day, upon the first
Lecture-day of every Month, wearing a Surplice? Does he teach any thing that
is newfangled or seditious, tending to beget in the People a Di ike of the
Government established, or of those who are set over us, either in Church or
State?
TIT. III. Enquiries concerning the Parishioners.
HAve you any in your Parish, who wilfully and without lawful Impediment,
absent themselves from your Church or Chapel, not resorting to Divine Service
and Sermons, on every Lords Day, and other Holidays appointed by Authority? II.
ARE there any that occupy themselves in their usual Trades or daily Labors on
those days; especially Vintners, Victuallers and Alehouse-keepers, that
minister to Tippling and Gaming in time of Divine Service, to the great reproach
of our Christian Profession? III. DO your Parishioners behave themselves
reverently (Men and Youths being uncovered) and giving due attention to all the
parts of Divine Service and Sermon? Are there any that do disturb Holy duties
by talking, walking, going out of the Church, or otherwise behaving themselves
rudely and offensively? IV. ARE there any above the age of sixteen years in
your Parish, and especially such as have been instructed in the Church
Catechism, and confirmed by the Bishop, that do not come to the Lords Supper,
partaking of it reverently three times in the Year at the least, the Feast of
Easter, or the time thereabouts, being one? V. ARE there any in your Parish
that keep their Children unbaptized? Are there any Parents or Masters of
Families that resuse to send their Children or Servants to be instructed by
your Minister, in the Church-Catechisme every Sunday in the Afternoon? Are
there any Popish Recusants or Sectaries that keep private Conventicles in their
own Houses, or elsewhere? What are their Names that do offend in any of these
Particulars? VI. DO all Women that are safely delivered in Childbirth, come to
the Church in due time, to partake in the Office of Thanksgiving appointed for
such Occasions? Do any in your Parish refuse to bury their dead according to
the Rites of the Church of England? Or have they carried them away to some
other Place without Certificate from your Minister? Present their Names that
have offended herein. VII. ARE there any Wills or Testaments of Persons
deceased in your Parish, not proved, or any Goods of Persons dying intestate,
administered without Lawful Authority? Are there any Legacies given to your
Church, or other pious uses, perverted or concealed? What are those Legacies,
and by whom abused? VIII. ARE there any in your Parish that live in Adultery or
Fornication? Are there any Blasphemers of Gods Holy Name, Depravers and
Impugners of the Christian Religion, or the public Worship established by Law
among us; Common Swearers, Common Drunkards, Incestuous Persons, Persons joined
in Marriage within the degrees prohibited; Sorcerers, or Resorters to Witches
or Sorcerers?
TIT. IV. Enquiries concerning Church Officers and other Persons.
I. HAS there any Stranger not Licensed to preach, preached in your Church
upon any occasion? Have there any persons excommunicated been buried in your
Church or Churchyard? II. DOES your Parish-Clerk or Sexton do his Duties
diligently? Is he of an honest Life and Conversation? Is he full 21 years of
Age? Can he write and read? Does he bear his part in answering at the Hymns,
the Litany, and other Responses in the Liturgy? Has he been chosen by your
Minister, and is he paid the accustomed Wages and Dues of his Place? III. DO
any in your Parish teach any public or private School, or instruct the Child
or Children of any Person in any Family, not being duly Licensed thereunto? Or
being so Licensed, does he breed up his Scholars religiously, teaching them the
Catechismes allowed by Authority? IV. DO any in your Parish practice Physic or
Surgery, or the Office of a Midwife, without the approbation and License of
the Ordinary? V. ARE you the Churchwardens chosen by the Consent of your
Minister and Parishioners, according to the use and custom of the Parish? Have
the last Churchwardens given up their Accounts, and the Money (if any)
remaining in their hands? And are those Accounts allowed of, and passed
according to the custom and manner of the Parish? VI. HAVE you or any of your
Parish been cited vexatiously, or upon frivolous pretenses, into any
Ecclesiastical Court or Consistory in this Diocese? Have you or any other,
being to be examined as Witnesses in any Cause depending in the said Court, and
having Day set and assigned by the Judge of the said Court for your
Examination, been delaied or put off by the Examiner? Have you, or any your
Parish paid any other or greater Fees, at any time, to any person belonging to
the said Court, then such as are allowed of by the Table of Fees ratified in
the Year of our Lord, 1597? Is the said Table set up in a convenient place for
public view, in the Consistory-Court, and in the Registers Office of this
Diocese? And have you, or any other been refused the Perusal, or a Copy of the
said Table? Do you know of any Officer belonging to the said Court, that does
abuse his Place by Corruption, Extortion, by demanding Gratuities, or Fees for
Expedition, or by any other way aggrieve and give just cause of complaint to
his Majesty's Subjects? Present their Names, and the Particulars wherein they
have offended.
The Minister of the Parish may join with the Churchwardens and Sidemen in
the Presentment: And if they omit or refuse to Present such Offenders as come
within the Duty of their Enquiry, the Minister himself may do it.

And know you all, that as the free and zealous discharging your Consciences in
this Duty, will be a great means whereby Public Disorders, Sins and Offenses
may be reformed and punished; so if you wilfully refuse to Present such Crimes
and Faults, as either you know, or justly presume to have been committed, the
Guilt of that Refusal and its Consequences will lie upon your Souls; and the
Bishop and his Officers will be obliged to proceed against you according to Law.

Joh. Roffen.

THe Ministers of every Parish are defired to give in the Names of such of the
younger Sort, in their several Parishes, as they judge fit to receive
Confirmation from the Bishop, and to Present them to be Confirmed; especially
such as having competently learned the Catechism, have not yet received the
Holy Communion.


