The Earl of DANBY VINDICATED: IN REFLECTIONS UPON A PAPER ENTITLED, Some
REFLECTIONS upon the E. of DANBY, in relation to the Murder of Sir Edmund-bury
Godfrey.

In a Letter to a Friend, from Mr. Christian.
SIR,
I Will not stay much upon those Reflections in relation to the Earl of Danby,
because I doubt not but God will clear his Lordships Innocence in due time, to
the shame of his Enemies, and to the exposing those, by whose insatiable Malice
his great Worth and Honor is calumniated to the Parliament and Kingdom.

Only I hope no man can fail in his Observation what Sect of men his Lordship
is beholding to for their good-wills, who knew they must destroy not only
Kings, but their great Ministers of State, before they can complete their
Bloody Reformations. For it is well known, not only to Me and others who have
had the honor of serving that Lord, but even to the worst of his Enemies, who
are acquainted with him, (if they will confess Truth) that no man was ever a
greater Assertor of the Church of England, (which is the best Bulwark against
Popery) nor any man more Constant both in his own Devotions, and in the care of
seeing them duly performed in his Family.

A little time (when men will but have patience to be truly informed) will
serve to wipe off such Scandals from so eminent and so good a man: But one so
inconsiderable as I am, may suffer under so foul and false an Aspersion, if I
should not vindicate my self against it; besides that by the falsity of that
part which concerns me, Men will judge of the Truth both of that, and the rest
of those scandalous and false Libels which are dispersed every day, not only
against the Earl of Danby, but against the King himself and his Government.

The Author of that foresaid Libel would have done well, if he could have
concealed his Religion, as well as his Name, that he might have got some little
belief in the World: but although they be workers of darkness, I hope their
works will at last, all come to light.

And upon condition that J. B. the Author would appear, and might be hanged in
case he does not prove what he says against Mr. Christian, (whom he says took
water with Sir Edmundbury Godfrey at Whitehall the day of his being Murdered)
Mr. Christian will submit himself to that Judgment which J. B. deserves, if
either he, or any man else can prove Mr. Christian to be within Threescore
miles of London that day; Mr. Christian being that very day, the whole day, and
night following, at Stamford in Lincolnshire, as will be sufficiently testified.

Note that this Libel was very diligently dispersed the last Sessions of
Parliament in Writing, to diverse Members of that House; and particularly to Mr.
T. a worthy Member thereof. The person that delivered the same at the Lobby of
the House of Commons, asserting to him, That there were Witnesses at a House in
Arundel Buildings, that could prove the truth of the same. At which particular
House the Witnesses were lodged that came from St. Omers, to prove Mr. Oats
not in England, etc. J. B. desires in Gods name, that this may be examined; but
he must come in the Devils name to prove it: and just such Truths upon
Examination will be found, the Earl of Danby's having had any discourse with
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey in some weeks before his death, and his being at the
Lady Cokes Chamber, either at two a clock, or any other time, (although I have
heard he did go through Hambden-house, where the Lady Coke then Lodged, about
eleven of the clock that day) nor was he seen after that hour at the Earl of
Danby's House by any I can hear of, but the Author J. B.

With the same truth is the Earl of Danby said to have Meetings with Doctor
Tongue and Oats at Fox-hall; and yet J. B. draws a great many Conclusions from
those things, being (as he says) certain; and takes upon him to abuse the
House of Commons, by saying, This is the true cause of their adhering to their
Votes.

I must confess, that at first sight, I wondered to think how a man who designs
like J. B. to be thought a good Protestant, and concerned for the safety of the
Kingdom, could make this Relation consist, without blemish to the Reputation of
Mr. Bedlow, and Mr. Praunce, and others, by whose testimony so many were
Condemned and have suffered: but before I had read it half through, his design
was as plain to destroy their Evidence, and make that pass for nothing, as it
was to blast the Honor and Reputation of the Earl; although he would fain seem
to say something in their excuse, by making it worse, (viz.) That we must not
altogether rely upon what the Evidence say, because a great deal of it is by
hearsay: which is to put a worthy Character upon the Judge and Jury.

I should believe this J. B. to be Author also of that pretended Paper,
Entitled, An Answer to the Objections against the Earl of Danby; but (to give
him his due) it is too silly, and would be thought to have some pity and good
nature in it: but I am confident, he is the Author of the Print Entitled, A
perfect Catalogue of all the Lords Treasurers to this present year, with
particular Observations on Thomas Earl of Danby, because of the falsity and
Malice it speaks against this Earl; and yet in spite of his teeth, he has
said more for him in calling him A great Royallist, than he can do for some he
has endeavored to commend.

And as to this Lords Gentility, as it is a great deal more Ancient than he
would have it thought, (although he allows it as long a date, as diverse great
men, and some Lord Treasurers can pretend to) so his Estate when made Lord
Treasurer, was known to be better than any of the greater number of the Lord
Treasurers for one hundred years before him have brought into the Kings
Service; although many of them have left their Places with much greater Estates
than he has done.

As wickedness is ever put under the disguise of Religion and Piety, so J. B.
ends his Paper with very good Prayers and Thoughts, which I fear are least in
his heart, (viz.) That none will escape from Gods vengeance, but such as from
their Souls love Truth, and preserve their hearts from Malice, and hands from
seeking Innocent Blood. Whatever J. B. thinks, I am entirely of that opinion:
and that both he and they may Repent, and turn to the Truth, is the Prayer of

EDW. CHRISTIAN.

POSTSCRIPT.
ANY Person whatsoever that shall produce the Author J. B. that writ and
occasioned the aforerecited Libel to be despersed, shall have Twenty Guinies
reward.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for Freeman Collins, 1679.


