UNTO HIS GRACE HIS MAJESTY'S HIGH COMMISSIONER And the Right Honorable
Estates of Parliament.
The Petition of Sir Robert Chiesly present Lord Provost of the Burgh of
Edinburgh, John Robertson, George Home, Archibald Rule, and Adam Brown present
Baillies thereof, Hugh Blair Dean of Gild and Patrick Thomson Thesaurer. For
themselves and in name of the whole Council and Community of the said Burgh.
Humbly Shows
THAT where by the old Custom and Constitution of the Brugh, and which is
certainly most agreeable to the good Government and quiet of all Burghs, the
Town Clerks of Edinburgh as being the Towns Servants were only durante
beneplacito, until at first the deceast Sir William Thomson, obtained from the
then Magistrates and Council by his extraordinary influence, a gift of the
Clerkship ad vitam, and then upon his being deprived, and some other
Contentious changes, that afterward fell out to the Towns great Vexation and
Expenses. The deceast Sir James Rochead did impetrate and elicite from them, an
Act dated the 30 of August 1678 years, whereby upon a specious narrative of
Right, and the security that Men ought to have for the same, he prevailed with
the then Magistrates and Council to statute and ordain in his favors, that no
Clerk of Edinburgh for hereafter should be challenged or removed from their
office, whatever may be their demerit, but by a certain solemn form of process
of his devysing, and wherein he was to have a subscribing Answer, and all the
process to be carried on both Scripto and viva voce by Advocats if he thought
fit, and by such Intervals and periods, as that it was to last at least four
Weeks. By which Act, wherein there is no provision made for the said Good Town,
either for debarring Advocation, or excluding Suspension, as might well have
been expected after so Cautious a Contrivance for securing of the Town Clerk:
The Towns Power and Liberties were in effect stolen from them, and the Clerks
who are and ought to be their Servants made more than half Masters, And this
when the said Sir James with the said Aeneas came to be admitted and installed
in the said office, they were not only admitted Conjunctly, and with a
survivance to the longest liver, which is also Injurious to the Liberties of
the Burgh, but in their Act of Admission of the date the twenty one of January
1687 years, the same provision of a formal and solemn process in the Terms
foresaid is repeated as a condition, whereby it is evident, that for the
Magistrates and Town Council to offer to bring their Servant the Town Clerk to
a Trial before themseves, were only to engage themselves in contentious Pleas
and Advocations, and Suspensions, to the great Charges, and disorder and
Conusion of the Burgh, during so long a dependence: And therefore the
Magistrates and Town Council of Edinburgh, having not only the foresaid
Incroachment to complain of. But also a charge of several Malversations
against the said Aeneas Mcleod their present Clerk, do in all humility address
themselves to this High and Honorable Court of Parliament, to whose care and
Protection the good order and quiet of all his Majesty's Royal Burghs, does
most properly pertain. And as to the said Aeneas they complain.

1mo. That he entered into the said Office of Clerk as conjunct with Sir James
Rochead, and now injoyes the same by the sole benefice of an unwarantable
survivance, which was granted by the then Magistrates to the prejudice of the
true liberties of the Brugh.

2ly During his being Clerk he has neglected the Registers and Records of the
Brugh which are for the most part left be hind unfilled up and some of them for
so long a time, that they are in hazard to fall in disuse: as first the Dean of
Gilds Register of the locked Book which was begun in the 1487 Years, and ever
since continued until the Twenty fourth of February 1669. has since that time
been altogether neglected, and though there be Scroll Books and Minus made by the
under-Clerkes from the said 24. of February 1669. to this day Yet the foresaid
Register and locked Books are not filled up, but have been at a stand since the
said year 1669. And these scroll Books are altogether vitiat, and cannot make
faith, being all interlined, and many things written upon the Margin.

3ly, There is no Register at all kept of Jedges and warrands for bounding of
Lands within Burgh, albeit their are several Acts of the Town Council
appointing an Register to be exactly kept of all the said Jedges, and
warrands granted by the Dean of Gild and his Council.

4ly, The Register of Decreets, whereof the Records are extant, and in good
order from the third of March 1569 to the 28 of August 1677, have since that
time been altogether slighted, and no Decree Registrate and booked as it ought
to be.

5ly, The Register called, the Council Register, and continued with great care
from the 1557 to December 1691. is since that time now by the space of three or
four years unfilled up, and nelected.

6ly. The Register of Dispositiones and Bonds is carried on very exactly from
the 1561 to the 1690, but since that time is likewise unfilled up, and there are
also Books of Dispositions from the first of January 1678. And to the year
1686. But all of them incomplete, and brought no farther forward than the said
year 1686

7ly. There are Acts of Town Council most confusedly and indistinctly, and in
appearance falsely recorded, as particularly, the Act of the Town Council the
Day of July 1690 years anent a Bond of three Thousand pound Sterling granted
anent the Earl of Melvill, which is begun with one hand, and continued with
another: And neither coherently, or at all agreeable to what was resolved in
the said Town Council about that Bond. viz. That it should be given for the
imposition which was not then obtained, and not for the pitiful Causes therein
set down. And the said Act is also vitiat, and has words delete in the end,
and other words visibly added, and which overrun the Provosts subscription, all
which is manifest to ocular Inspection.

8ly, the said Aeneas has not observed but broken the Trust the Town reposed
in him, in so far as Mr William Stirling Writer did upon the third of
September, 1690 Years, give a note under his hand, wherein the said Aeneas
Mcleod and his Servant John Duncan are witnesses, wherein he obliges himself to
make payment to the Tacksmen of the Towns imposition of the the two pennies of
Excise owing by Widow Lawries Brewarie for the space therein contained, and
declare, that a Charter which he got from the Magistrates of Edinburgh should
lie consigned in their Clerks hands till he satisfied the same. And yet the
said Charter is given up to Mr William Stirling upon the fourth of September
thereafter as Mr Stirlings Receipt testifies. And the said imposition was not
by him paid conform to the foresaid Note

9ly, And the said Aeneas has farther abused his Trust, and transgressed the
duty of his Office, in so far as he has given out Decreets of the Town Council
without any Subscribed warrant, such as a Decree of the Town Council of the
date the twenty firth day of January last by past at the instance of Mary's
Chapple against James Buchannan Wtight, for which there is no subscribed
Warrant.

And lastly what has been lately done by the said Aeneas as to Mr. Duncan.
Robertsons affair, and how he neglected and despised the order of the Committee
of Parliament, is best known to the Committee before whom that matter is
depending. By all which it is manifest that not only the Towns Rights and
Liberties are incroached upon and infringed by the foresaid Aeneas his
provision and Act of Admission to the said Office, and by the said other Act to
which the same Relates, but also that he has malversed in his foresaid office
of trust, for which he ought to be removed and deprived, as also the Towns
Liberties ought to be restored, and the foresaids Acts to their prejudice
reduced and rescinded, and all survivances for hereafter perpetually Discharged.

May it therefore please your Grace, and the Right Honorable the Estates of
Parliament, to grant warrant to cite the said Aeneas upon forty eight hours
warning, he being within the Town of Edinburgh, to compeat before your Grace
and Lordships, to hear and see the premises verified, and proven, and himself
deprived and decerned to remove from the said office and to deliver up the
whole seals Registers and others that belong thereto, as also to reduce and
rescind the foresaids Acts of Council, and to declare survivancies and gifts of
the said Office, to be unlawful, and to discharge the same in all time coming;
according to Justice and Your Grace and Lordships Answer.


