HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE

DIEV ^ ET ^ MON DROIT ^

By the King, A PROCLAMATION For Regulating the Colors to be worn on Merchants
Ships.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by ancient Usage no Merchants Ship ought to bear the Jack, which is
for Distinction appointed for His Majesty's Ships; Nevertheless, His Majesty is
informed, That diverse of His Majesty's Subjects have of late presumed to wear
His Majesty's Jack on board their Ships employed in Merchants Affairs, and
thinking to evade the Punishment due for the same, bear Iacks in Shape and
mixture of Colors, so little different from those of His Majesty, as not to be
without difficulty distinguished therefrom; Which practice is found attended
with manifold Inconveniences: For prevention whereof for the future, His
Majesty has thought fit, with the Advice of His Privy Council, by this His
Royal Proclamation, strictly to Charge and Command all His Subjects whatsoever,
That from henceforth they do not presume to wear His Majesty's Jack (commonly
called, The Union Jack) in any of their Ships or Vessels, without particular
Warrant for their so doing from His Majesty, or the Lord High Admiral of
England, or the Commissioners for Executing the Office of Lord High Admiral for
the time being; And His Majesty does hereby further Command all His Loving
Subjects, That without such Warrant as aforesaid, they presume not to wear on
board their Ships or Vessels, any Iacks made in imitation of His Majesty's; or
any other Flags, Iacks, or Ensigns whatsoever, then those usually heretofore
worn on Merchants Ships, viz. The Flag and Jack white, with a Red Cross,
(commonly called, Saint George's Cross) passing quite through the same; And the
Ensign Red, with the like Cross in a Canton White, at the upper Corner thereof
next to the Staff.

And His Majesty does hereby require the principal Officers and Commissioners
of His Navy, Governors of His Forts and Castles, the Officers of His Customs,
and Commanders or Officers of any of His Majesty's Ships, or upon their meeting
with or otherwise observing any Merchants Ships or Vessels of His Majesty's
Subjects wearing such a Flag, Jack, or Ensign contrary hereunto, whether at
Sea, or in Port, not only to cause such Flag, Jack, or Ensign to be forthwith
Seized, but to Return the Names of the said Ships and Vessels, together with
the Names of their respective Masters, unto the Lord High Admiral, Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty, or the Judge of the High Court of Admiralty for
the time being, to the end the persons offending may be duly Punished for the
same.

And His Majesty does hereby Command and Enjoin the Judge and Judges of the
High Court of Admiralty for the time being, that at the several Sessions to be
hereafter held by His Majesty's Commission of Oyer and Terminer for the
Admiralty, they give in Charge, that strict enquiry be made of all Offenses in
the Premises, and that they cause all offenders therein to be duly punished:
And all Vice-Admirals, and Judges of Vice-Admiralties, are also to do the same,
and to attend the due observation hereof within the several Ports and Places of
their respective Precincts.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Eighteenth day of September 1674. In the
Six and twentieth Year of Our Reign. By His Majesty's Command.

God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the Kings Most Excellent Majesty. 1686.


