BY THE KING.
A PROCLAMATION, For taking away any restraint for the future on the Price of
Coals.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by a late Act of Parliament, and also by Our Proclamation and several
Orders by Us made in Council to prevent and remedy the want and scarcity of
Coals, and the inhauncing the prices thereof, We have manifested Our Princely
care an zeal for the public, and Our tenderness and vigilance on the behalf
of Our Subjects against any Difficulty or Distress likely to befall them, upon
that occasion; In pursuance whereof Our Ministers, especially the Lord Mayor
and Aldermen of Our City of London, (being most nearly concerned in the
exigency of that affair) have in obedience to the Authority of the said Act of
Parliament and Our Proclamation and Orders in Council, and according to the
ancient Vsages of Our said City, acted with great Industry, Vigor and Prudence,
in the putting the same in execution, by setting and moderating the Prices of
Coals, and providing by good and discreet means for the necessi^s of Our people
of the said City; of which transactions We do highly approve, and shall not be
unmindfull (...) aforesaid ready comply ^ce in a matter of so good intent and
great concernment to Our said Subjects. An^ (...) having taken into Our
Princely consideration all imaginable ways and means for compassing the ^nds
aforesaid, did by Our late Proclamation of the six and twentieth of April last,
Declare and Command, That no Sailors, Seamen, or other Person or Persons
employed or to be employed in or about any Ship or Vessel bringing or carrying
Coals from the Town or Port of Newcastle upon Tyne, from Sunderland or other
Ports within Our Dominions, or any the Members or Creeks thereof, or places
adjacent, to or toward the said City of London, or elsewhere in England or
Wales, shall be Pressed or otherwise hindered or molested, either coming or
returning by any Our Press-Masters or other Officers or Ministers whatsoever.
And for the better security of the Persons and Ships bringing and conveying the
said Coals, We did further Declare, that sufficient Convoys should be from time
to time provided for their safe passage and conduct to and from the parts and
places aforesaid, which We do confirm and give full assurance of. And Our
further Will and Pleasure is, and We do by this Our Royal Proclamation declare,
That it shall be lawful for any person or persons of what condition soever, to
set forth any Ship or Ships, or other Vessels for bringing or importing of
Coals from Newcastle or any other the Northern Ports, unto the City of London
or elsewhere: And all those which shall import any Coals into the River, from
and after the Date of this Our Proclamation, shall have full liberty freely to
sell and dispose the same to their best benefit and advantage, Any thing to the
contrary notwithstanding. But Our intent and meaning is, that such Ships which
are at present in the River, and those who have hitherto refused submission to
the Order made by the Lord Mayor in respect of the price, shall not receive
benefit by such obstinacy, but shall be compelled to sell their Coals at the
price appointed, to which the rest have submitted. And all Our Officers,
Ministers, and Subjects whatsoever both by Sea and Land, are required to take
notice of this Our Royal Pleasure and Command, and give due obedience thereunto
at their perils.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the tenth day of May, 1665. in the Seventeenth
year of Our Reign.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
EDINBURGH, Reprinted by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, 1665.


