C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A PROCLAMATION To Restrain the Spreading of False News, and Licentious Talking
of Matters of State and Government.
CHARLES R.

WHereas by the ancient Laws and Satutes of this Realm, great and heavy
Penalties are Inflicted upon all such as shall be found to be spreaders of
false News, or promoters of any Malicious Slanders and Calumnies in their
ordinary and common Discourses, and by a late Statute made in the Thirteenth
year of His Majesty's Reign, Whosoever shall Utter or Publish any words, or
things to Incite and Stir up the People to hatred or dislike of the Person of
His Majesty, or the Established Government, is thereby made incapable of holding
any Office or Employment whatsoever either in Church or State. Notwithstanding
all which Laws and Statutes, there have been of late more bold and Licentious
Discourses then formerly; and men have assumed to themselves a liberty, not
only in Coffee-houses, but in other Places and Meetings, both public and
private, to censure and defame the Proceedings of State, by speaking evil of
things they understand not, and endeavoring to create and nourish an universal
Jealousy and Dissatisfaction in the minds of all His Majesty's good Subjects:
His Majesty considering therefore that Offenses of this nature, cannot proceed
from want or ignorance of Laws to Restrain and punish them, but must of
necessity proceed from the restless Malice of some, whose seditious ends and
aims are already too well known, or from the careless demeanor of others, who
presume too much upon His Majesty's accustomed Clemency and Goodness, Has
thought fit by Advice of His Council, to Publish this His Royal Proclamation;
And does hereby forewarn, and straightly Command all His Loving Subjects, of what
state or condition soever they be, from the highest to the lowest, that they
presume not henceforth by Writing or Speaking, to Utter or Publish any False
News or Reports, or to intermeddle with the Affairs of State and Government, or
with the persons of any His Majesty's Counselors or Ministers, in their
common and ordinary Discourses, as they will answer the contrary at their
utmost perils. And because all bold and irreverent Speeches touching matters of
this high nature are punishable, not only in the Speakers, but in the Hearers
also, unless they do speedily reveal the same unto some of His Majesty's Privy
Council, or some other His Majesty's Judges or Justices of the Peace within the
space of four and twenty hours next after such ^ords spoken. Therefore that all
men may be left without excuse, who shall not hereafter contain them^^elves
within that modest and dutiful Regard which becomes them, His Majesty does
further Declare, That he will proceed with all Severity, against all manner of
persons who shall use any bold or unlawful Speeches of this nature, or be
present at any Coffee-house, or other public or private meeting where such
Speeches are used, without Revealing the same in due time, His Majesty being
resolved to Suppress this unlawful and undutiful kind of Discourse, by a most
Strict and Exemplary Punishment of all such Offenders as shall be hereafter
discovered.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the 12th day of June, in the 24th year of Our
Reign, 1672.
EDINBVRGH, Reprinted in the Year, 1672.


