C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of armsHIS MAJESTY'S TWO GRACIOUS LETTERS, Viz. ONE Sent
to the House of PEERS, by Sir John Greenvile Knight, from Breda. THE OTHER, To
the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of LONDON.
CHARLES R.

RIght Trusty and Right Well-Beloved Cosins, and Right Trusty and Well-Beloved
Cosins, and Trusty and Right Well-Beloved, We Greet you Well: We cannot have a
better reason to promise Our Self an end of Our Common Sufferings and
Calamities, and that Our Own Just Power and Authority, will with Gods Blessing
be Restored to Us, than that We hear You are again acknowledged to have that
Authority and Jurisdiction, which has always belonged to You, by Your Birth,
and the Fundamental Laws of the Land: And We have thought it very fit and safe
for Us, to call to you for your help in composing the confounding Distempers
and Distractions of the Kingdom, in which your Sufferings are next to those We
have undergon Our Self; And therefore you cannot but be the most proper
Counselors for removing those Mischiefs, and for preventing the like for the
future: How great a Trust We repose in you for the Procuring and Establishing a
Blessed Peace and Security for the Kingdom, will appear to you by Our enclosed
Declaration; which Trust, We are most confident You will discharge with that
Justice and Wisdom, that becomes You, and must always be expected from You;
and that upon your Experience, how one Violation succeeds another, when the
known Relations, and Rules of Justice, are once transgressed, You will be as
jealous for the Rights of the Crown, and for the Honor of your King, as for
your Selves: And then you cannot but discharge your Trust with good Success,
and provide for, and establish the Peace, Happiness, and Honor of King, Lords,
and Commons, upon that Foundation which can only support it, and We shall be
all happy in each other: And as the whole Kingdom will bless God for You all,
So We shall hold Our Self obliged in an especial manner to thank You in
particular, according to the Affection You shall express toward Us. We need
the less enlarge to You upon this Subject, because We have likewise writ to
the House of Commons, which We suppose they will Communicate to You: And We
pray God to bless your joint Endeavors for the good of Us all; And so We bid
You very heartily farewell.

Given at Our Court at Breda, this (...) Day of April, 1660. In the Twelfth
Year of Our Reign.
CHARLES R.

TRusty and Wel-beloved, We greet you well. In these great Revolutions which of
late have happened in that Our Kingdom, to the wonder and amazement of all the
World, there is none that we have looked upon with more Comfort, than the so
frequent and public manifestations of their affections to Us in the City of
LONDON, which has exceedingly raised Our Spirits, and which, no doubt, has
proceeded from the Spirit of GOD, and His extraordinary Mercy to the Nation,
which has been encouraged by you, and your good example, to assert that
Government under which it has so many hundred years enjoyed as great felicity
as any Nation in Europe, and to discountenance the imaginations of those, who
would subject our Subjects to a Government they have not yet devised; and to
satisfy the pride and ambition of a few ill men, would introduce the most
Arbitrary and Tyrannical Power that was ever yet heard of: How long we have all
suffered under those and the like devices, all the world takes notice, to the
no small reproach of the English Nation, which we hope is now providing for its
own Security and Redemption, and will be no longer bewitched by those
Inventions: how desirous we are to contribute to the obtaining the Peace and
Happiness of Our Subjects, without further effusion of blood; and how far we
are from desiring to recover what belongs to Us by a War, if it can be
otherwise done, will appear to you by the enclosed DECLARATION, which,
together with this Our LETTER, We have entrusted Our right trusty and
welbeloved Cousin the Lord Viscount Mordant, and Our trusty and welbeloved
Servant, Sir John Greenvile Knight, one of the Gentlemen of Our Bedchamber, to
deliver to you; to the end that you, and all the rest of Our good Subjects of
that Our City of LONDON (to whom We desire it should be published) may know how
far We are from the desire of Revenge, or that the Peace, Happiness, and
Security of the Kingdom should be raised upon any other foundation than the
affection and hearts of Our Subjects, and their own consents: We have not the
least doubt of your just sense of those Our Condescentions, or of your zeal to
advance and promote the same good End, by disposing all men to meet Us with the
same affection and tenderness, in restoring the fundamental Laws to that
Reverence that is due to them, and upon the preservation whereof all our
happiness depends: And you will have no reason to doubt of enjoying your full
share in that happiness, and of the improving it by Our particular affection
to you. It is very natural for all men to do all the good they can for their
native Country, and to advance the honor of it. And as We have that full
affection for the Kingdom in general, so We would not be thought to be without
some extraordinary kindness for Our native City in particular, which We shall
manifest on all occasions, not only by renewing their Charter, and confirming
all those Privileges which they have received from Our Predecessors, but by
adding and granting any new Favors which may advance the Trade, Wealth and
Honor of that Our native City, for which We will be so solicitous, that We
doubt not but that it will in due time receive some Benefit and Advantage in
all those respects, even from Our own observation and experience abroad; and We
are most confident We shall never be disappointed in Our expectation of all
possible service from your affections. And so We bid you farewell.

Given at Our Court at Breda, the (...) day of April, 1660. in the Twelfth year
of Our Reign.
To Our Trusty and Wel-beloved, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of
Our City of LONDON.
At a Common Council, holden the first of May, 1660.
ORdered by this Court, That the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor do acquaint
the Lord Viscount Mordant and Sir John Greenvile (who brought the said LETTER
and DECLARATION) That this Court do return most humble and hearty thanks to his
Majesty for his gracious Condescentions to, and owning this Court and City,
expressed in his Majesty's said LETTER and DECLARATION: And do likewise return
hearty thanks to the said honorable persons that brought the said gracious
Message: And do declare this Courts ready submission to his Majesty's
Government: And that in testimony thereof, they had now taken down the
Commonwealths Arms, and ordered his Majesty's Arms to be set up. And further,
that this Court do beg the favor of the Lord Mordant to return with an Answer
in Writing to his Majesty from this Court. And also, that this Court do intend
very speedily to send Members of their own to wait on his Majesty.

SADLER.

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone-Church, 1660.


