THE SAYINGS Of that Reverend and Great Preacher Mr. S. CHARNOCK, Who departed
this Life on Wednesday the 28 of July, 1680, and was solemnly Interred the 30th
following.
ONE would scarce imagine such an inward nest of wickedness as is in a natural
man; but God has affirmed it: and if the sinner should deny it, his own heart
would give him the lie. Thoughts are then sinful when they have a bad
principle, want a due end, and converse with the object in a wrong manner. The
holiness of God is seen in forbidding sin, his wisdom in permitting sin, his
mercy in pardoning sin, and his justice in punishing sin. Such evils as skip up
from our natural corruption, and sink down again as fish in a river, these are
sins though we consent not to them; because though they are without our will,
they are not against our nature, but spring from an inordinate frame of a
different hue from what God implanted in us. The Idolatry of the mind is when
we dress up a god according to our own humors, humanize him, and ascribe to him
what is grateful to us, though never so base and unworthy of his holiness,
Psalm. 50.21. Thou thought I was such a one as thy self. It Is the frequent
business of men's minds to flutter about things without the bounds of Gods
revelation. Worldly concerns may quarter in our thoughts, but they must not
possess all the room, and thrust Christ into a manger. Some men's fancies are
like a Carriers bag stuffed with a world of Letters, having no dependence one
upon another, some containing business, and others nothing but froth. As the
more delight there is in any holy service, the more precious it is in it self,
and more grateful to God; so the more pleasure there is in any sinful motion,
the more malignity there is in it. It Is very dangerous when the mind does brood
upon a sinful motion, to hatch it up, and invent Methods for performance. Gods
law is suitable to his Sovereignty, as men's Laws are to theirs; must they not
then be as extensive as Gods dominion, and reach even to the privatest closets
of the heart? It Is not for the honor of Gods holiness, righteousness,
goodness, to let the Spirit which bears more flourishing characters of his
Image than the body, range wildly about without a legal curb. Man was created
both with a disposition and ability for holy contemplation of God; the first
glances of his soul were pure, he came every way complete out of the mint of
his infinitely wise and good Creator. Sin is the key that opens the floodgates
of Divine vengeance, and broaches both the upper and nether Cisterns to
overflow the world. Our good thoughts will be our accusers for not observing
them, and our bad thoughts will be inditements against us for complying with
them. The tongue was only an instrument to express what man's heart did think,
and would have been wholly innocent had not his thoughts been first criminal.
There is an infinite variety of conceptions, as the Psalmist speaks of the Sea,
Wherein are all things creeping innumerable both small and great; and a
constant generation of whole shoals of them, that you may as well number the
fish in the Sea, or the atoms in the Sunbeams as recount them. A Hypocrites
religious services are materically good; but poisoned by the imagination
seulking in the heart, that gave birth unto them. Evil thoughts are the
immediate spawn of Original corruption, and therefore partake more of the
strength and nature of it, sucking the breast of that poisonous dam that bred
them. In carnal sins Satan is a tempter, in Mental an actor; therefore in the
one we are conformed to his will, in the other we are transformed unto his
likeness; in outward we evidence more obedience to his Laws, in inward more
affection to his Person. Where there is more enmity to God, there is more of
similitude and love to the Devil; a near approach to the Diabolical nature,
implying a greater distance from the Divine. The Understanding is more
excellent than the Will, both because we know and judge before we will; or ought
to will only so much as the Understanding thinks sit to be willed. God being
the Father of spirits, spiritual wickedness of nourishing evil thoughts is a
cashiering all child-like likeness to him. What a mass of vanity should we find
in our minds if we could bring our thoughts in the space of one day, yea but
one hour to an account, how many foolish thoughts with our wisdom, ignorant
with our knowledge, worldly with our heavenliness, hypocritical with our
Religion, and proud with our humiliation. Were we really and altogether
Christians, would not that which is the chiefest Purity of Christianity be our
pleasure, and would we any more wrong God in our secret hearts, than in the
open streets? He that lets his mind wallow in a cinque of fantastical follies,
robs God of his due, and his Soul of its happiness. We can more easily resist
Temptations without, if we conquer motions within: Thoughts are the Mutiniers
of the soul, which set open the Gates for Satan; he has held a secret
Intelligence with them (so far as he knows them) ever since the fall. Christ
dyed to restore God to his right, and man to his happiness; neither of which
can perfectly be attained, till those be thrown out of the possession of the
heart. A sanctified reason would both discover and shame our natural follies.
As all animal operations, so all the spiritual motions of our heads depend upon
the life of our hearts. As there is a law in our members to bring us into the
Captivity to the law of sin; so there must be a law in our minds to bring our
thoughts to the obedience of Christ. Till the understanding be born of the
Spirit, it will delight in, and think of nothing but things suitable to its
fleshly original; but when it is spiritual, it receives new impressions, new
refinings and motions suitable to the Holy Ghost, of whom it is born. Without
skill in the Scriptures, we shall have as foolish conceits of divine Things, as
ignorant men without the Rules of which they never saw. The Devil had not his
Engines so ready to assault Christ, as Christ from his knowledge had
Scripture-Precepts to oppose him. None have more pleasant thoughts of divine
Things, than new Converts when they first clasp about Christ; partly from the
Novelty of their state, and partly because God puts a new stock into them for
improvement. If you cannot tell the time when you first closed with Christ,
recollect those seasons wherein you have found your affections most fervent,
your thoughts most united, your mind most elevated, and endeavor to gain that
again. It Is difficult to divorce our hearts and thoughts from what appears
lovely and glorious in our minds, whether it be God or the World. He that is
winged with a divine Love to Christ, will have frequent glances and flights
toward him.
LONDON: Printed in the Year 1680.


