Christendom; Or, the Nature of CHRIST's KINGDOM OPENED, And the chiefest
Difficulties in DIVINITY CLEARED: In order to ending the Controversies among
Christian PHILOSOPHERS, SCOOL-MEN, and DIVINES of all Parties.

London, Printed for the Author, 1687.

The PREFACE.
1. THE Kingdom of Christ is not twofold, one as he is God the Son, and the
other as he is Mediator; but it is simply one, as Christ is one, admitting of
just conception, but no division. Because Christ is not Mediator between God
and Men, strictly, as between two Parties, in a worldly and human Sense common
to us and Heathens; but in a heavenly, divine, and transcendent Sense, through
Christian Faith, which Heathens have not. The Manhood of Christ does neither
add to, nor diminish from God: But it is the Organ or Instrument, by which God
the Son, as equal with the Father and the Holy Ghost, does in the fullness of
Time, according to his own eternal Purpose, purchase the Church with his own
Blood; is the Savior of all Men, specially of those that believe, and does
reign and rule over the whole intellectual World for ever, without all change
in God, and without all merit in Angels and Men, antecedently, to the eternal
Purpose of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

2. Angels, Princes, Pastors, and Parents are instrumental in the work of
Redemption, but not so as is the Manhood of Christ: This is principally and
specially instrumental, as being the Manhood of him who is by nature very God.
Christ considered as God, is by Nature, not by Grace, the only begotten Son of
God the Father: Christ considered as Man was by Grace, not by Nature, the Son
of Himself as God equal with the Father and the Holy Ghost, in a special and
wenderful Sense, neither by Creation as Adam and the Angels, nor by Adoption as
the Saints, nor by natural Generation, but by miraculous Conception in the Womb
of a Virgin: And yet he is but one Son of God rightly conceived, as he is but
one Christ. Considered as Man, his God is our God, his Father is our Father,
elect Angels and Men are his Brethren and Fellows; but so, that he as Man
exalted at God's right Hand, in all things has the preeminence, is anointed
with the Oil of Gladness above his Fellows; he is the Firstborn among his
Brethren, and of every Creature; that is, of all created Beings the most
excellent, and next unto God in heavenly Majesty and Glory; Col. 1.15. Romans
8.29. Heb. 1.8, 11. Joh. 20.17.

3. The Man Christ and the Manhood of Christ is God Omniscient, Omnipatent,
Omnipresent, Independent, Infinite, Adorable; yet not as it is Man and Manhood,
but as it is by unsearchable Union that Person who is in different respects
both God and Man. To adore Christ as Man is Idolatry; to adere Christ as God
the Son incarnate equal with the Father and the Holy Ghost is Christian Piety.
In adoring God the Son incarnate, the Word made Flesh, we do indeed adore the
Flesh and Manhood of Christ, and yet not as it is Flesh and Manhood, but as it
is in a wonderful Sense that Person who is God the Son incarnate. As I write
with a white Pen, yet not as it is white, but as it is a Pen: He that is a
Husband baptizeth, yet not as he is a Husband, but as he is a Minister: The
good God does damn the Wicked, yet not as good to them, but severe, yet just.
So we rightly adore the Flesh and Manhood of Christ, yet not as it is Flesh and
Manhood, but as it is God the Son Incarnate. That holy Thing which shall be
born of thee, shall be called the Son of God, Luke 1.35. Heb. 1.6. Mat. 2.11.
Rev. 5.9, to 14. Joh. 14.1.

4. Divine Nature, as Divine, can in no instant be Human: Human Nature, as
Human, can in no instant be Divine. But the Divine Nature as it is in God the
Son, became in a wonderful Sense Human, The Word was made Flesh, Joh. 1.14. All
the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily in Christ, Col. 2.9. And the Human
Nature as it is in Christ, became in a wonderful sense Divine, that Man who is
Equal and Fellow with God, Zech. 13.7. Phil. 2.6. Therefore by St. Augustine,
lib. de Ovib. it is called Divine Humanity, and Human Divinity. Which Saying
learned Sadeel does highly approve, De verit. Human. not. Christi, c. 5. Jesus
increased in Wisdom and Stature, and in Favor with God and Man, Luke 2.52. And
was made perfect through Sufferings, Heb. 2.10. Had he not so increased, be
must always have been an Infant. And yet the Manhood of Christ was in no
instant imperfect and defective. When Newborn, his Manhood had all the
Perfection it mas capable of in that instant, but not all the Perfection
designed for it at twelve years of Age. When twelve years old, he had all the
Perfection he mas capable of in that instant, and so in every Successive
instant unto the time of his Passion. Which being reserved for the last, he did
patiently undergo, and so by Death fulfilled and finished all the
Humiliation-work which God gave him to do on Earth. Joh. 17.4. and 19.30.

5. All true Science is by reducing things to some First, beyond which there is
no further proceeding. Now Christ is the First and the Last in Religion; Rev.
1.8, 11. All the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge are hid in him, Col. 2.3. He
is the Truth, Joh. 14.6. He who holds this one Truth, does inclusively hold all
saving Truth in this one: But he who denies and resists any one Truth plain and
evident to his Conscience, has no saving Truth in him. Every Error is not
Sin; but every Error touching Religion is very Sin against God, and so it must
needs be against the Foundation of Faith and Piety, either directly and
immediately, or remotely and consequentially. He that is an Heretic, does,
against his Conscience, love Error, and rely on it for Life Eternal, and so
his Error is his Idol: And yet the love of it does blind his Conscience, and
extinguish the Light of Christ, so that he cannot savingly discern his Error,
and the Turpitude of it: he is therefore self condemned.

CHAP. I. Of Divine Predestination.
1. WHOM God did foreknow would by his Grace and free Gift in Christ, sincerely
believe, them he did predestinate and fore-ordain to Life Eternal: and whom he
did foreknow would through themselves be ungodly, and so continue, them he did
predestinate and fore-ordain to Damnation Eternal. The Divine Fore-knowledg and
Purpose, according to which God does predestinate Men to Life Eternal, is from
everlasting: but the Divine Predestination, according to that Fore-knowledg and
Purpose, is not from everlasting, but in the instant when God creates and forms
us in our Mothers Womb. Which Predestination lies hid, as a secret, in God's
Bosom, until it show it self in Heavenly Calling and Election. And then does
God elect Men to Salvation, when he gives them Faith in Christ, and thereby
pardons their Sin, and seals them with his holy Spirit, and renders them truly
godly, elect, and precious in his sight, and severs them from among the ungodly
World, as to Life Eternal. 1 Pet. 1.2, 20. Romans 8.29, 30. Acts 13.48. Jude 4.
Prove. 16.4. Gal. 1.15, 16. Jer. 1.5. 2 Pet. 1.10. Ephesians. 1.11.

2. Indeed we are said to be chosen in Christ before the Foundation of the
World, Ephesians. 1.4. But that is, because Election in Christ, is from Eternity
future, and things future are as present to God, who calls those things which
be not, as tho they were; Romans 4.17. What is future, is as real and certain as
what is present, yet as future, it is not in present being, but to come, and
most surely will be. Therefore Election in Christ, is no otherwise from
Eternity, than Faith is: For to be chosen in Christ, is to be in Christ; to be
in Christ is to be a Christian: A Christian without Faith in Christ, is simply
impossible. Therefore no Faith in Christ, no Heavenly Election. But God gives
Faith to Abel and not to Cain, and thereby does difference Abel from Cain, 1
Cor. 4.7. Ephesians. 2.8, 9. Mat. 13.11. And Abel through the same Faith does
renounce and repent of all his Sins, and choose the way of Truth, and sincerely
covenant his Soul to God, and so under God, and by his Grace in Christ through
Faith, Abel is from first to last laudably and rewardably active and
instrumental in his own Regeneration and Perseverance, does save himself, and
does difference himself from Cain, Gal. 6.4. Acts 2.40. 1 Timothy 4.16. Deuteronomy.
30.19. Psalm. 119.30. Luke 10.42. Heb. 11.4.

3. God works Regeneration ever by his Word, because his Word is Truth, and
there cannot be Heavenly Regeneration without Heavenly Truth, as the immortal
Seed thereof: John 17.17. 1 Pet. 1.23. In the same instant, as to time, God
does of naturally unwilling, unholy, and dead in Sin, make us supernaturally
willing, holy, and alive unto Righteousness, by Omnipotent Grace in us
unsearchably, neither contrary to the Intrinsic Nature of the Human Will, nor
dependent on it, but above it, and so the Will is not destroyed, but fanctified
and saved. This Omnipotent Grace in us is a Divine Effect produced by God after
the Counsel of ^^s own Will, which is the same for ever, and can have no new
Act; Ephesians. 1.11. James 1.17. There is in all the godly Divine Omnipotency, like
as there is Divine Nature, and the Life of God; 2 Pet. 1.4. Ephesians. 4.18. I (...)
do all things through Christ which strength^neth me, Phil. 4.13. Omnipotency as
it is in God, is the Divine Effence simply independent, and admits of no
degrees: Omnipotency as it is in us, is the Image of God a divine Effect,
simply dependent, and admits of degrees, but so, that he who has the least
degree, cannot but be a sincere Convert, and truly godly, and yet he is freely
and willingly so. Regeneration is entirely Gods Gift, and entirely our Duty,
and so we do the whole through God's Grace in Christ: for God cannot do our
Duty, or any part of it: and we without his Heavenly Grace in Christ can do
nothing heavenly and supernatural, (...) is Regeneration: Joh. 15.5.

4. God's free Grace in Jesus Christ is the Fountain-cause of Predestination
and Election to Life eternal: but God predestinates no Person to (...) and he
reprobates no Person eternally save for his own Ungodliness in (...) instant
truly repented of, and breeding the never-dying Worm. To be ungodly, is to be
reprobate to every good Work; Tit. 1.16. 2 Cor. 13.5^ Jer. 6.30. As then God
does by his Grace of ungodly make many godly (...) so he does by the same Grace
of reprobate make many elect, and all the Elect in Christ he keeps from final
Apostasy. Christ considered as Man, is himself elect, Isa. 42.1. Christ
considered as God the Son incarnate, equ^^ in respect of his Godhead with the
Father, and the Holy Ghost, Phil. 2. ^^ is the Author of Election.

5. In God there is necessarily Self-kowledg, and Self-knowledg is bo^^ Act and
Object. Therefore no Man is the Object of God's Eternal Presci^nce and Decree.
But God from Eternity does know, love, and delight in himself as purposed in
time to make Adam holy, to permit his Fall, to give him Repentance and Pardon
through Faith, to give him Children^ first Cain, and then Abel; to permit their
being born equally in Originally Sin, and to give Repentance and Salvation to
Abel, and not to Cain. (...) supposed, all these things are from Eternity
future; and Abel through God's Grace will most surely be penitent and saved;
and Cain through himself will most surely be sinful, impenitent, and damned:
and yet they are no Object at all of God's Eternal Prescience and Decree. God
cannot go out of himself for an Object to terminate his Knowledge and Will upon,
because he is simply Independent, and the same for ever. His Omnipotent Word or
Saying, Let this and that be, is the producing of it, without all new Act,
Transition, Motion, and Change in God; Genesis 1.3, 9, 11. Psalm. 148.5.

CHAP. II. Of Perseverance and Certainty of Salvation.
1. ADam being created in perfect Integrity might well love God, though not
sure of his Perseverance. But unto fallen Man, in whose Conscience reigns Guilt
eternal, the holy and Sin-avenging God is not at all lovely in that condition.
Fear and flee from him as his Judge he may, love and draw nigh to him as his
gracious God and reconciled Father in Christ, he cannot, till by Sin-pandoning
Grace in Christ through Faith, his Conscience be set free from Guilt eternal,
and in the room thereof be planted godly hope of Life eternal. Every degree of
this Hope must needs have with it intrinsecally a degree of godly Certainty,
and infallible Assurance of Perseverance and Salvation, because it is Hope in
God, who is Truth it self, and cannot lie. Therefore it is called assurance of
Hope, an Anchor of the Soul, both sure and steadfast; better Hope, by the which
we draw nigh to God: Heb. 6.11, 19. and 7.19. In respect of this better Hope it
is that Christ is said to be the Mediator of a better Covenant; Heb. 8.6.

2. As to Life Temporal, and all things worldly and transitory, uncertainty may
suffice, because true Happiness does not consist therein, and no Man can be
sure of living another hour. But as to Life Eternal, as good never a whit as
never the better, nothing short of divine and heavenly Hope thereof can suffice
to fallen Man. Now if the perseverance of all, in whom is divine and heavenly
Hope in Christ, be not infallibly future, and a thing that will most surely be,
in God's good time, and through his Grace in Christ, then there is no
difference between heavenly and worldly Hope, Hope in God and Hope in Man,
Faith in Christ and Infidelity. Adam in Innocence could have no divine Hope of
his Perseverance, but only perfect Assurance that God would not forsake him, if
he did not first forsake God. There can be no divine Hope of that which is not
infallibly future, and God foresees will never be. But where is divine Hope,
that is, divine evidence that the thing hoped for is infallibly future. Now in
all regenerate Souls there is planted by God divine Hope of their Perseverance
and Salvation; therefore it will most surely be; otherwise God is made the
Author of false and deceivable Hope.

3. God keeps his Saints in this World from final Apostasy by the holy fear of
it, this is at once a sure pledge and principal engine of Perseverance: Jer.
32.40. Ezekiel. 36.27. Romans 11.20. As it is holy Fear, so it differs in kind from
the fear of Devils and Men ungodly, in whom is fear, but no holy Fear. As it is
fear of Apostasy, so it differs in kind from the State of blessed Saints and
Angels in Heaven, in whom is perfect Fear, as Fear is the same with reverence
and transcendent esteem of God, but no fear of Apostasy, no possibility of Sin.

4. David in the instant of his Murder and Adultery was ungodly, and in a state
of Damuation. The reason is, because God's Judgment over all, is by Conscience
as his Agent, in the Breast of Angels and Men universally, and for ever. And
God's Judgment must be so plain, that every Mouth may be stopped, and all may
clearly perceive the Righteousness of God. But if Persons may be in the same
instant both Murderers and Adulterers, and yet Godly and in a state of
Salvation, then cannot every Mouth be stopped, nor can the Conscience of Angels
and Men universally acquit God. There is in the Soul of David invisibly, some
spiritual Lust against the Flesh, such for kind as is in no unregenerate Man; 1 John 3.9. Gal. 5.17. Considered as spiritual, so it is invisibly active for
God, and not idle in the Soul: Considered as Lust, so it is not active, but
lusts to act, and for the present cannot act, by reason of an excess of
contrary Lust, which does overwhelm it, and extinguish all godly Act. God's
gracious purpose in Christ from everlasting concerning David cannot fail, and
therefore in time he gives him Repentance and Pardon of those enormous Crimes,
and so makes advantage thereof to his own Glory, the disgrace of Sin, the
esteem of Holiness, the comfort of the Penitent, and the silencing of the
Impenitent. Thus where Sin abounded, God's Grace much more abounded, and from
everlasting to everlasting God's Mercy is on David, and all other regenerate
Souls; Romans 5.20. Psalm. 103.17.

5. Infallible Certainty as it is in God is the Divine Effence, and admits of
no degrees: as it is in us it is the Image of God, a divine effect, and
admits of degrees; but so, that every degree thereof is truly infallible;
and Certainty not infallible, is a Contradiction, as being the same with
uncertain certainty. So much holy Faith in Christ, so much holy Self-knowledg,
Self-perception, Self-feeling, and Self-intuition: here the same thing is both
Act and Object. As by living we know we live, and by seeing we know we see, so
we believe and know we believe; Joh. 6.69. Faith and Assurance, as also Faith
and Confidence are distinct, yet not asunder: they differ as Cause and Effect:
Now Cause and Effect are mutually related; things related are simul natura
intrinsecally together, and do mutually prove and infer each other; the effect
is eminently in the Cause, and the Cause as such is the measure of the Effect;
Isa. 32.17. Ephesians. 3.12. Heb. 10.22. Regeneration is the Seal of the Spirit, by
which he does prove, evidence, and demonstrate to the Heart and Conscience of
the Man regenerate through Faith, that he is God's Child by Adoption, elect in
Christ, and an Heir of Heaven. This is divine Evidence, and therefore he is
bound to believe it with divine belief. The Holy Ghost, and renewed Conscience
through Faith, do undividedly witness the same thing, yet not in the same
respects: the Holy Ghost does witness the whole as principal and supreme, and
renewed Conscience does witness the whole as by his Grace instrumental and
subordinate: Romans 8.16, 17. and 9.1. 2 Cor. 1.12, 22. Ephesians. 1.13, 14. Doubting
of Salvation may be in a godly Man in such sort as Unbelief may, but no
otherwise. The least degree of holy Faith does sincerely, yet not perfectly
mortify, expel, and war against Unbelief and carnal Doubting and Uncertainty.

CHAP. III. Of the Lord Jesus Christ the Mediator between God and Men.
1. THE Mediatorship of Christ began immediately after Adam's Fall: For then
God the Son as purposed in time to be Man, and as Man to die for Sin, gave
Repentance and Pardon to Adam through Faith, and so founded the New Covenant,
of which himself is the Mediator, principally as he is God the Son,
subserviently as he is Man, according to his own eternal purpose. The godly
before his Incarnation were saved by Faith in Jesus Christ, as purposed to be
Incarnate, and the Godly since are saved by Faith in the same Jesus Christ, as
already Incarnate, according to that Purpose. Thus Jesus Christ is the same
Yesterday, and to Day, and for ever, without Parts and Composition, Heb. 13.8.
For if he consist of Parts, then he is not simply impartial, and then he cannot
judge the World in Righteousness, he must needs approve Murder in David, and
condemn it in Cain: Which is Blasphemy. If he be at all compounded, then he is
not simply Christ: For simple and compounded are Contraries, as Light and
Darkness, Sincerity and Deceit. 2 Cor. 1.12. and 11.3. If he be not simply
Christ, he is a Deceiver.

2. Christ considered as Man, died for all Men, as Men fallen in Adam equally
and alike, and shed as much Blood, and as fincerely and effectually, for Cain
and Judas, as for Abel and Peter, and did all that lay in him as Man, to save
all Mankind without exception, and continues so to do. For he could not be a
perfectly holy Man, without bearing equal and impartial love to all Men, as Men
fallen in Adam, and to all godly Men as Godly. As Man he makes no difference
between one Man and another, farther then they by Holiness or Sin shall
difference themselves. Christ considered as God, could not die, but he who is
God manifest in the Flesh, God the Son incarnate died in respect of his Body,
and purchased the Church with his own Blood, and obtained Faith, Repentance,
Pardon of Sin, Perseverance, and eternal Salvation for Abel, David, and the
rest of the Elect in all Ages: And temporal Grace, Mercy, Privilege, and
Salvation for Cain, Judas, and the rest of that sort; not with design that they
should abuse his Grace, that so he might have color against them, and damn
them: But as unsearchably foreseeing, that he not preventing them with his
heavenly Grace, they would through themselves be graceless, impenitent and
perish: And he whose Thoughts and Ways be far above ours, purposed not to
prevent them. Thus he is the Savior of all Men, specially of them that
believe, 1 Timothy 4.10.

3. Christ considered as God has no Office, but is above Office, yet not
contrary to it. Christ considered as Man has indeed an Office, and but one.
From his Conception to his Birth, thence to his Death, Burial and Resurrection,
thence to his Ascension and Sitting at God's right Hand in Glory, thence to his
coming to judge the World, all this is but one entire office of Christ as Man,
admitting of just Conception but no Division. His Office as Man is to be
subservient to himself as God in the work of Redemption, this one comprizeth
all.

4. Christ as Man, obedient unto Death, is our Pattern and Example, a real
Martyr, and the Prince of Martyrs, he discharged his own Debt and Duty, and not
ours, and evangelically merited for himself, not for us, all that Glory and
Reward which as Man he has for ever at God's right Hand. Christ considered as
God incarnate, is not our Pattern, nor a Martyr, but infinitely above us, he is
our Lord and our God, our Savior and Redeemer, our Ransom and Atonement for
Sin through Faith, our All in all, he merited nothing for himself but all for
us. Without shedding of Blood is no Remission: And therefore Christ as Man died
for Sins, yet not his own but ours, not as deserving his Death but as deserving
our Death; and he as Man, in obedience to God; and out of love to us, died for
us, one Man for all Men, as fallen in Adam, and so became a Propitiation, and
Counterprize for the Sin of the whole World, yet not without Faith: For he that
believes not makes God a Liar, is condemned already, and God's Wrath abides
on him, 1 John 5.10. Joh. 3.18, 36. The obedience of Christ was not two, active
and passive, but simply one as Christ is one. As to Eternity the opposition is
not between active and passive, but between active and idle, passive and being
at ease. Christ as Man, nailed to the Cross, and pierced with a Spear, was
invisibly active for God and our eternal Good, and not idle: And yet in the
fame instant he was visibly passive, in great pain, and not at ease. His Death
was indeed the most eminent proof of his obedience to God, and love to us: But
still it was obedience, and therefore pleasing to God and truly meritorious
because it was so: For no suffering of Man as distinct from obedience can
please God, and profit the Soul, and merit heavenly Reward:

5. Had God not saved fallen Man at all, he had done him no wrong, but then he
had been conscious to himself of going contrary to his own eternal Purpose. For
from Eternity God the Son was purposed to permit the Fall of Man, to be
incamate, and as Man to dye for Sin, and so to enter into Glory, and thus to
save fallen Man by Christ through Faith, and not otherwise. This supposed, God
could not but save fallen Man this only way, and yet he thus saved him most
freely and willingly, and not as constrained and under Law to a Superior. And
the true reason why the Incarnation does not change and compound God, is,
because it is the exact fulfilling of his own eternal Purpose: Which Purpose if
he had not in time fulfilled, then indeed he had been changed and compounded of
Yea and Nay, and had not been himself, Yea, and Amen, the same for ever, 2 Cor.
1.17, 18, 19, 20. Ephesians. 3.9, 10, 11. The work of Christ, as Mediator, is to
reconcile Sinners to God. When this is fully done, and all Sin is for ever
abolished; and God and Men are no longer two divided by Sin, but one in perfect
Love, then shall the Mediatorship of Christ cease and have an end, as being
fully accomplished. As when the Wound is perfectly healed there is no further
need of Plasters. The change is not in Christ, but in us, 1 Cor. 15.24, 25,
26, 27, 28.

CHAP. IV. Of the Nature of God.
1. WE cannot rightly conceive of God without diversity and distinction, and we
may admit of no diversity and distinction repugnant to infinite Unity and
Perfection. Unity and Diversity are well consistent, but not Unity and
Division, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. God is for ever good to those in Heaven, yet just,
but not severe: And he is for ever severe to those in Hell, yet just, but not
good: For the opposition is not between Goodness and Justice, nor between
Severity and Justice, but between Goodness and Severity, Romans 11.22. Therefore
the divine Goodness, as such, is not the divine Severity: Nor the divine
Severity, as such, the divine Goodness. They are most really and not
chymerically, truly and not feignedly, eternally and not temporally, diverse and
distinct; and thus all in God is not God. But then what is Goodness to those in
Heaven through God's abundant Grace in Christ, the same is Severity to those in
Hell through their own Sin: And what is Severity to those in Hell through their
own Sin, the same is Goodness to those in Heaven through God's abundant Grace
in Christ; and thus all in God is God without accident, parts, and composition,
and he is truly all in all: Not as excluding the Creature and subordinate
Causes, but the Creature and subordinate Causes, as such, consist by, and
depend on God, and yet they add nothing to him, they do not make him more wise,
holy, just, good, powerful, perfect, blessed. Of Him, through Him, and to Him
are all things. He is simply perfect, and unto what is simply perfect there can
be no addition. God cannot be beholden to us.

2. God is a pure Act, eternally active, and in no instant idle, and God being
one, the divine Act must needs be one. Creation, Sustentation, Gubernation of
Angels and Men, Incarnation, Redemption, Regeneration, Justification, and the
like, these are neither immanent nor translent Acts of God, but Effects
produced by God after the Counsel of his own Will, which is the same for ever,
and can have no new Act. The things produced by God are numberless, in them is
Order, Succession, Priority and Posteriority, dependence of one thing upon
another. But in God by whom they are unsearchably produced there is no Number,
no Order, no successive Moments and Instants, nothing before and after, no
dependence at all; but unsearchable Unity, Diversity, Eternity, Independency,
Truth, Simplicity, Goodness, Perfection, and Excellency, above Number, Order,
Time, and all that we can conceive, yet not repugnant thereto. Angels and Men
are dependent Beings, and not having Blessedness in themselves, they go out of
themselves by heavenly Self-denial, and seek it in God, in whose good Will and
Pleasure they rest and terminate, as their beginning and end, their all in all,
and so they are happy. But God being simply independent, true, and Truth it
self, cannot deny and go out of himself for any thing that he has a mind to
effect. It is but his Omnipotent Word, let this or that be, and it is when and
how he would have it, without all new Act, Motion Change, and Transition in
God, unsearchably.

3. God is, and was, and is to come, Rev. 1.4, 8. He is truly past, truly
present, and truly to come, and yet the same God, but not in the same respects.
God as past, is neither present nor to come: God as present, is neither past
nor to come: God as to come, is neither past nor present. God is essentially
and yet freely related to all, both Angels and Men, as their Creator, Upholder,
and Governor for ever: this Relation was from Eternity future, and it remains
to Eternity by the free Pleasure of God. Between God and damned Men, as Men,
there is eternal Relation, as between Cause and Effect: Between God and damned
Men, as damned, there is no Relation at all, but perfect and eternal
Contrariety, he is for ever blessed, they are for ever cursed, they do
implacably hate him, and he does implacably hate them. But he does not hate
them as they are Men: For as Men, they are eternally against their will, the
Work and Image of God, who can in no instant hate his own Work and Image, as
such: Against their will God does lord and rule over them, by Conscience, his
Agent in their Bosom, and in them the Glory of his just Vengeance and Severity
for Sin does eternally shine forth, and against their will they fulfill the
divine Law by bearing its utmost Penalty.

4. God, as our Creator, is the way to himself as our Redeemer, our Sanctifier,
our Blessedness and End, our All in all. For unless we were by Creation Men, we
could not be redeemed, holy, and blessed Men. Yet is God no way the Author of
Sin. We must not deny things plain, because we cannot find out to Perfection
things unsearchable; and too wonderful for us, Joh. 6.44. Romans 11.33. Christ,
as Mediator, is the way to himself as God, our Maker and our End, our All in
all. For we being by Sin alienated from God, and Enemies in our Minds by wicked
Works, unless Christ as Mediator, Advocate, and Intercessor shall by his Grace
reconcile us to himself as God, we shall die in our Sins and perish for ever.
Rev. 22.13. Col. 3.11. 2 Cor. 5.19. The Holy Ghost, as Sanctifier, is the way
to himself as God, our Maker and our End, our All in all. For we being by
Nature dead in Sin, and full of Ungodliness and Unrighteousness, unless the
Holy Ghost, as Sanctifier, shall quicken our Souls with Spiritual Life, and by
heavenly Regeneration make us like to himself as God in Righteousness and true
Holiness, we can never enter into his Kingdom. Joh. 3.3, 5.

5. The true God is God the Father not Incarnate, God the Son Incarnate, God
the Holy Ghost not Incarnate, one God, blessed for ever, the Reward and
Rewarder of all Elect Angels and Men for ever, their Blessedness and the Author
of their Blessedness, their All in all: And under God the exalted Manhood of
Christ is Sole Supreme over all both Angels and Men, the Firstborn of every
Creature, Col. 1.15. God, as God, is simply invisible: But God, as manifest in
the Flesh, and the Fountain-cause of all Good to Elect Angels and Men for ever,
is perfectly seen of all in Heaven Face to face, and truly by Faith, yet not
perfectly of all the Saints on Earth. God cannot be seen and known save by his
own Light, and gracious Manifestation of Himself. Now God's first Discovery of
Himself is in and by Creation acco^^^^^ to his own Eternal Purpose in Christ
Jesus. Antecedently to this he is not knowable by Angels, by Men, by Christ
Himself as Man. Ephesians. 3.9, 10, 11. Joh. 1.18. 1 Cor. 13.12. 1 Timothy 3.16. 1 Timothy
6.16.

CHAP. V. Of Adam in Innocence, and the entrance of Sin into the World.
1. GOD created Adam in his own Image, truly holy, and like unto himself, in
heavenly Rectitude: This heavenly Rectitude he lost by his Fall, and it was
renewed in him, in part, by heavenly Regeneration after his Fail, but not
perfectly while on Earth. The state of Adam in Innocence was Supernatural and
not Natural: For God created all Things and consequently Adam by Jesus Christ,
according to the eternal Purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord,
Ephesians. 3.9, 10, 11. This is clea^^^ matter of Faith, and wholly Supernatural: For
of God's eternal purpose in Christ Jesus, the light of Nature says nothing at
all. God only is holy by Nature, that is, essentially holy, like as he only is
by Nature God, Gal. 4.8. Adam was holy not by Nature, but by Grace and heavenly
dependence o^ God. Which-Grace continued with him, 'till he dissiking the
Condition in which God made him, and affecting to be independent Lord of his
own Will, chose rather to be ruled by himself, than by the holy, just, and good
Will of God. And so God did not necessitate his Fall, nor deny him Grace to
stand, nor take his Grace from him: But Adam by wilful eating of the forbidden
Fruit, did expel and put God's Grace from him, and became the Author of his own
Ruin.

2. Adam needed heavenly Grace to keep him from inward lusting after the
forbidden Fruit, but not from outward eating of it. Bare Lust as in it self is
not Sin; but all Lust in Man against the Spirit, and after what the holy, just,
and good God has forbidden, is very Sin before God, tho not before Men, Romans
7.7. In such inordinate Lust the Soul is Principal, and the Body is
Instrumental. The Body by it self cannot lust at all, the Soul as to its
natural substance is the Image of God, and in that respect it must needs be
innocent. But if the Soul be destitute of inward heavenly Grace, it is then
full of ungodly and worldly Lusts invisibly, in respect whereof it is enmity
against God, and the Image of the Devil. Joh. 8.44. Jude 18. Tit. 2.11, 12.
Romans 8.7.

3. The divine Law is holy, just, and good, Romans 7.12. The sum of it is, Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and thy Neighbor as thy Self:
or, A Conscience void of Offance both tomard God and toward Man. The divine Law
considered outwardly, as of old, written in Tables of Stone, and now in the
Bible, is man fold: But considered inwardly, as written in the Heart, so it is
only one as God is one; because it consists by Conscience in each ones Bosom,
and Conscience in each Man can be but one. Take away Conscience, and Man is not
Man but a Brute. The nature of Conscience is to be under God and over Man; as
such it is a Law to it self, Romans 2.14, 15. and the great Engine by which God
does govern the whole intellectual World. Adam, while innocent, was not under
the Law and Covenant of Works. For the Law of Works, as distinct from the Law
of Faith, does not exclude sinful Boasting, Romans 3.27. But there could be no
sinful boasting in Adam while innocent. The Covenant of Works gendreth to
Bondage, Gal. 4.24. But Bondage was not known in the World 'till Sin brought it
in. Adam in Innocence was not a Slave, but a Son, even the Son of God, Luke
3.38. And his Obedience was not servile and from mere Fear, but it was Filial,
and with perfect love to God, as his most good and bountiful Maker, altogether
lovely to such as love and be like unto him in heavenly Innocence, and never
forsaking them 'till first they forsake him. The Law of Works considered as
subservient to Life eternal, is not the Law of Works, but the Law of Faith in
the Hearts of godly Men in Christ Jesus. The Law of Works considered as
repugnant to Life eremal, is not the Law of God; but the Law of Sin and Death
in the Hearts of ungodly Men, Romans 3.27. Heb. 8.10. Romans 8.2.

4. Adam began to be the Figure of Christ, Romans 5.14. the Head of Mankind, and
a public Person, not 'till after his Sin, Repentance, and Pardon, when God
gave him Children, and thereby made him the first Parent, and so a Head and
Root to all his lineal Offspring in a natural way, to his own Children
immediately, to the rest of the World remotely. For look as the first Adam does
by natural Generation communicate human Nature to all his lineal Offspring,
and begets Sons and Daughters in his own Likeness, after his Image, whereby
they differ in kind from Brutes: So the second Adam, Christ Jesus, does by
supernatural Regeneration communicate divine and heavenly Nature to all his
spiritual Offspring, and begets Sons and Daughters like unto God in
Righteousness and true Holiness, whereby they differ in kind from the ungodly
World. The whole Offspring of Adam does justly suffer temporal Punishment for
his first Sin: For in Adam all die, 1 Cor. 15.22. Romans 5.12. Temporal
Punishment is well consistent with eternal Joy. But Punishment eternal no one
can possibly suffer save for his own Sin never truly repented of.

5. God considered as Lawgiver does neither will Sin, nor permit it, but does
simply nill, hate, and forbid it, and does all that in him lies to prevent it,
and the eternal ruin of all both Angels and Men. God considered as above Law,
yet not contrary to it, does innocently uphold Angels and Men in natural Being
while they do of their own accord sin against him: And so he does after a
wonderful and unsearchable manner willingly permit Sin, and he wills his own
Permission of it, but he does not will Sin: For all that God does will, he does
will perfectly, and without all deceit. If God do thus will Sin, then he must
needs love and be Author of it as truly as he is of Holiness. Which is very
Blasphemy.

CHAP. VI. Of Justification.
1. JUstification and Righteousness is either Legal, or Evangelical: Legal is
that in the Consciences of the Damned. So far as when on Earth they did well,
refrained from Sin, spoke Truth, and were useful to human Society; God by
Conscience, his Agent in their Bosom, will for ever justify and acquit them,
and lay nothing to their Charge. But because they were ungodly and never
soundly repented, had in them transcendent Vice, held it fast to the last in
their Hearts, and took it with them into Eternity, therefore the same
Conscience in their Bosom cannot but, against their Will, for ever justify and
acquit God, and filence and condemn themselves. Evangelical Justification and
Righteousness, is that by Faith in the Consciences of the Elect. God, for the
sake of Christ, does by the Gospel, through Faith, freely and fully pardon all
their Sins, acquit and set them free from Guilt eternal, and from all Curse and
Punishment legally due for Sin; and then through the same Faith, does
regenerate and sanctify them, and does inwardly sentence, pronounce, judge, and
esteem them to be what really by his Grace they are, truly penitent, perfectly
pardoned, evangelically just, and worthy of the Kingdom of Heaven for Christ's
sake.

2. In Justification by Faith, God does of unjust make us inwardly just, but
not sinless, so as was Adam before his Fall, or as the Saints now in Heaven
are. But the most holy Man while on Earth, has Sin in him, and sins in all
he does: which Sin according to legal Justice deserves Damnation, but not
according to Justice Evangelical: for it is sincerely repented of, and so it is
not imputed to us, but fully pardoned for Christ's sake: The eternal Penalty is
pardoned, and that being abolished, all other Penalty becomes medicinal and
sanctified, and as sanctified, it is not Penalty, but Privilege and Gain to the
Soul, and as such is truly eligible and desirable by a wise Man: tho as it is
irksom and painful to Nature, so it is not desirable, but patiently to be born.

3. Between Justification and forgiveness of Sin, there is this romarkable
difference. A finless Person may be justified, but a sinless Person cannot be
pardoned: A sinless Person may be falsely accused, and by just Sentence cleared
and acquitted from that false Charge, and so justified. Thus God himself is
justified: but God cannot be pardoned: Psalm. 51.4. Romans 3.4, Luke 7.29, 35. 1 Timothy 3.16. It will for ever remain true, that David once was a Sinner, a
Murderer, an Adulterer: but as now he is in Heaven, he is by Grace for ever
sinless and impeccable, and so is above Pardon, and cannot need it; as the
whole need not the Physician. Justified he may and shall be for ever, and most
solemnly before all at the day of Judgment; but pardoned he cannot be. Sin once
done, cannot by it self be undone; but by Grace Evangelical, giving us
Repentance and Pardon through Faith, it may, and really is undone and unsinned.

4. The Righteousness of God in Christ is, through Faith, really imputed to us,
and inherent in us, and it could not at all be imputed to us, were it not by
Faith inherent in us. In renouncing all our own Righteousness as dung and loss,
that we may have complete and eternal Righteousness, even the Righteousness
which is of God by Faith in Christ, it is manifest that we do not renounce our
very renouncing, and our very Faith in Christ. In order of Nature we are first
acquitted and set free from Guilt eternal through Faith: this is
Gospel-justification. Afterward, yet in the same instant, as to time, and
through the same Faith we are regenerated and sealed with the holy Spirit, we
love God and do good Works: this is Sanctification; Ephesians. 1.13. Thus
Justification by Faith is the rise and spring of Sanctification; Articulus
stantis and cadentis Ecclesiae, they are truly distinct, and yet not asunder
while on Earth.

5. Evangelical Justification may be considered two ways, either as a Gift; or
as a Reward: Considered as a Gift, so it is simply free, and freely given of
God in Christ by the Gospel, and no way merited by us, but we by Faith do
humbly, penitently, fiducially, obediently, thankfully, and steadfastly receive
it, and it becomes ours. And thus from first to last we are justified by Faith
without Works, according to St. Paul. Considered as a Reward, so it is bestowed
upon none but the truly penitent, obedient, regenerate, merciful, lovers of God
and his Saints, and such as by godly Sincerity, and heavenly Righteousness
through Grace, difference themselves from the ungodly and impenitent World: and
all such do evangelically merit Justification before God for Christ's sake. And
thus from first to last we are justified before God by Works, and not by Faith
only, according to St. James. According to legal merit God deals with all the
Devils and Damned, he renders to them according to their Deeds, exacts from
them the last Mite, and shows them no Mercy. According to Evangelical Merit, he
deals with the M^^hood of Christ, and with all elect Angels and Men. This kind
of Merit is the Image of that transcendent Worth and Merit which is in God; the
more we have of it, we are the more like to God, and abound in loving, serving,
and praising God, saying; Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name
be all the Glory: The more we do for thee, the more we are beholden to thee;
for of thine own it is that we give thee. God rewards his own Grace and
Righteousness in his Saints, and renders to them according to their Deeds.

CHAP. VII. Of Satisfaction for Sin.
1. LEgal Satisfaction for Sin, is that of the Devils and Damned, who suffer
eternally of due desert, and thereby make legal complete Satisfaction and
Amends to God for all their own Sins, to the last mite. God considered as
Lawgiver, has no pleasure in the death of the wiched, but that he turn from
his way and live. But if he shall in no instant turn, then God, considered as
the Righteous Judge of all the World, has perfect pleasure in his eternal
Damnation, as adequate legal Compensation and Amends for his Wickedness in no
instant truly turned from. Evangelical Satisfaction for Sin is, that of all the
Elect in Christ by Faith: they through his Grace, with godly Sorrow, unsin and
undo all their Sins, give Glory to God by a face confession of them with grief,
hatred, and shame, execute holy Revenge upon themselves, humbly beg pardon,
freely forgive others, renounce all legal Merit, lay hold upon the Promise of
Eternal Mercy in Christ, become new Men, sincerely obedient to God, and his
Glory in the World. Thus doing they please and satisfy God evangelically, and
render themselves truly worthy in a Gospel-sense of pardon of Sin,
Justification, and Life eternal, as promised by God, and parchased by Christ,
and prepared for them before the Foundation of the World.

2. God can in no instant pardon and save Persons in their Sins without
Heavenly Repentance: and he cannot but pardon and save all those who do in any
instant by his Grace and free Gift in Christ though Faith, sincerely turn from
all their Sins to God, and become new Men. And yet he faveth the Penitent, and
damneth the Impenitent freely and willingly, and not against his Will. Like as
God is necessarily holy, just, and good, yet freely so.

3. Evangelical Repentance, considered as evangelical, is not Punishment, but
Privilege, and the sweetest Mercy a Sinner can possibly partake of, as being
Rep(...) unto Salvation never to be repented of, it is a divine and heavenly
thing, and the Image of God, as he is the perfect hater of all Sin, and the
just and merciful Avenger of it by renewed Conscience, his A^ent in the Breast
of Penitent Souls. Evangelical Repentance, considered as Repeatance, is proper
Punishment, as consisting in penitential Remorse, Shame, Sorrow, Contrition,
Self-loathing, and a sort of Revenge; 2 Cor. 7.11. None of this should have
been, if Sin had not been: and all this is irksom and painful to Nature, and
all pain, in a large sense, is proper Punishment. Therefore Repentance is fitly
called Poenitentia, importing pain, smart and penance for Sin.

4. The Debt which we, as Men, owe to God, is sinless Obedience: The Debt which
we, as Sinners, owe to God, is Heavenly Repentance, and in default thereof,
Eternal Damnation. This Debt Christ neither did, nor could pay: for neither can
a sinless Person repent, nor can he suffer eternally. All the Elect in Christ
through Faith, do in their own Persons pay the Debt of Gospel-Repentance, and
so evangelically punish themselves, prevent eternal Punishment, save God the
labor, and obtain perfect and free Remission for Christ's sake, and
evangelically fulfill the Divine Law: Romans 8.4. But the Impenitent, by holding
fast their Sins, do render them unpardonable, and their case incurable. Where
public Confassion of Sin is necessary by Divine Law, there no Law of Man can
dispense with it. Where it is not necessary by divine Law, there it may not be
exacted, nor Money by way of Commutation: the taking of Money in such case is
unrighteous gain.

5. Christ was made Sin and a Curse for us, he bore our Sins in his own Body
upon the Tree, and God laid upon him the Iniquities of us all: but so, that he
was altogether sinless; God could not hate him, nor be displeased with him, nor
repute him a Sinner, nor impute Sin to him, nor lay upon him more than Corporal
and Temporal Punishment, in order to his own eternal Exaltation and Glory at
God's Right Hand. The Pain endured by him, did differ in kind from the Pain of
damned Men in Hell, and from the Pain of guilty Persons on Earth, and was no
degree thereof. For both these do suffer deservedly for their own Sins; but
Christ being sinless, could not deserve to suffer. Indeed his Persecuters and
Murderers did repute him a Sinner, and imputed grievous Sin to him, and God did
unsearchably permit their Sin, but he did no way will and approve it. The Soul
of Christ was full of sinless Sorrow, and his Body was full of Pain, and yet it
was all but bodily Suffering; his Body being dead, his Suffering was at an end.
The Body by it self cannot suffer at all, cannot feel Pain; the Soul of Christ
being sinless, could not suffer spiritually: but his Soul suffered in and by
his Body, in respect of his Body he was crucified, and died. More than Corporal
and Temporal Punishment needed not: for all the finally impenitent do, against
their will, satisfy for all their own Sins legally: and all the truly penitent
do, through Faith, satisfy God evangelically, and obtain perfect Pardon and
Salvation, as purchased for them through the Corporal and Temporal Suffering of
God the Son incarnate, crucified in respect of his Body.

CHAP. VIII. Of Faith.
1. FAith as opposed to Sight, is the way to Faith as opposed to Deceit. As
Faith is opposed to Sight, so there is no Faith in Heaven, there they see face
to face. As Faith is opposed to Deceit, so there is no perfect Faith but in
Heaven. In Men ungodly is no degree of Heavenly Faith: In all godly Men there
is a degree of it, in some more, in some less, but short of Perfection in all.
God is faithful, and to be so, is to be full of Faith, Truth, Veracity, and
Fidelity, in opposition to Perfidiousness, Unfaithfulness, Deceit, and Lies.
Now all the blessed Saints and Angels are perfectly like to God, as he is
faithful and true, and so must needs have in them perfect Faith, Fidelity, and
Truth. Deuteronomy. 32.20. 2 These. 3.2. Heb. 11.1. 2 Cor. 5.7. Prove. 20.6. 1 Cor.
13.12.

2. As Faith is opposed to Sight, so through it we understand, discern,
apprehend, perceive, embrace, and receive spiritual good things spiritually:
through it we repent of Sin, love, obey, and please God, we receive, come to,
trust in, and rely on Christ, we obtain Pardon, Justification, and right to
Life eternal, we overcome Satan and the World, and walk with God in Holiness,
and Comfort on Earth, till we come to Heaven, where Faith is turned into
Vision, and Hope into Fruition. Faith as thus opposed to Sight, is most truly,
properly, and scripturally reckoned, counted, and imputed to us for
Gospel-righteousness before God, all the while we are militant in this World.

3. Faith in God may be evidenced, showed, declared, proved, and spiritually
demonstrated by heavenly Regeneration and good Works; 1 Cor. 2.4. but it cannot
be defined. For what is defined is finite: but God is infinite, and infinite as
such, cannot be finite. Believe God we may, define him we may not. To define is
to limit, and to limit God is great Sin: Psalm. 78.41. He that has holy Faith
in God, knows better by inward feeling and Self-perception the true nature of
it, than any human Definition can inform him. There cannot be a Definition of
Definition. Either then Faith in God is the Standard of Definition, or
Definition is the Standard of Faith in God. If the former, then Faith in God is
above Definition, more plain than it, and is not reducible to it. If the
latter, then there can be no Faith in God; because he is Infinite, and, as
such, cannot be defined. Exact Definition consists of somewhat general, and
somewhat special: but all in saving Faith, as such, is special and peculiar to
the Elect, and nothing in it common to them with the Reprobate. Temperance,
Justice, Chastity, Faith in the unregenerate Man, as in themselves are proper
Graces and Virtues: but as relied on for Life eternal, without heavenly
Regeneration, they are no otherwise Graces and Virtues, than as a dead Man is a
Man, or an adulterous Wife is a Wife, they are but the Corpse of Graces and
Virtues, and therefore they differ in kind from Temperance, Justice, Chastity,
Faith as in the regenerate Man, and are no degree thereof.

4. Faith is in no Faculty, but it is seated and rooted in the Heart, and
through it we understand, and will spiritual things spiritually. Understanding
and Will in Man are truly distinct, but not distinct Faculties, they are the
Image of God, in whom is unsearchable Unity and Diversity, but no Faculties.
God does willingly understand, and understandingly will, and so does Man. Every
intellectual Act of Man, is the Act of the Soul, or Man, and not of this or
that Faculty. Faith as opposed to Sight, is not an Act, but through it we act
holily: It is not a Work, but through it we work Righteousness: It is not
Obedience, but through it we obey and please God: Heb. 11. Romans 1.5. and 16.26.

5. Look what Reason is to the human Soul, the general Organ and Instrument by
which it does put forth rational and intellectual Acts, differing in kind from
the manner of Brutes: that is, Faith to the regenerate Soul, the general Organ
and Instrument by which it does put forth holy and supernatural Acts, differing
in kind from all the Acts of Men unregenerate, and ungodly as such. Certainty
of Faith is proper Certainty of Sense, yet not of bodily Sense common to us and
Heathens; but of heavenly and spiritual Sense through Christian Belief, which
Heathens have not. Unto true believing Souls God's Word is sweeter than Honey,
and sharper than a two-edged Sword in their Hearts; Psalm. 119.103. Heb. 4.12.
Whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin, Romans 14.23. That is, he whose Heart is not
purified by Faith in Christ, in him Sin reigns, and carnal Dubitation is Lord
in his Soul; and though the thing done by him as in it self be lawful, yet if
he doubt whether it he lawful or not, to him it becomes unlawful, through the
Error of his Conscience not purified by Faith. An erroneous Conscience
considered as erroneous, connot bind; for as erroneous, it is not Conscience,
but the Error and Abuse of it. But considered as Conscience, under God and over
Man, so it does truly bind to all Duty, and against all Sin and Error.
Whatsoever is not of Faith, is of Infidelity, and consequently of Sin.

CHAP. IX. Of Love to God, and Self-love.
1. SIncere Love is to love God, because of his first Love to us, 1 John 4.19.
For this is to love him as indeed he is, our Maker, our Redeeemer, our
Sanctifier, our Reward and Rewarder, our God and Portion for ever, our All in
All, dearer to us than we are or can be to our selves; and to love him under
any other notion, is to love an Idol and not God. Self-love, considered as
repugnant to Life eternal, is self-destroying Vice, and the common Character of
all the ungodly; 2 Timothy 3.1, 2. Self-love, considered as subservient to Life
eternal, is, in a large and true Sense, heavenly Self-denial, and the true Love
of God, as good to our Souls in Christ Jesus eternally: Prove. 9.12. Luke 9.23.

2. Virtue is truly lovely for it self: but then the highest Virtue is to love
and be like unto God; and God is not at all lovely, unless he be essentially,
and yet freely the Rewarder of them that diligently seek him; and no Reward
short of God himself, as enjoyed in eternal Blessedness, can content the holy
seeking Soul. If in this Life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all Men
most miserable. To say, I would love God though there were no Heaven, and I
would hate Sin, though there were no Hell, is in effect to say, I would love
God though he were not at all lovely, and I would hate Sin, though it were not
at all hateful and abominable: Heb. 11.6. 1 Cor. 15.19.

3. The chief End of Man is but one, as God is one. Subordinate Ends indeed are
many, but as subordinate, they are not Ends, but regular means conducing to the
End. The Supreme End of Man is eternal Salvation, or God himself as enjoyed in
eternal Felicity. Eternal Salvation is not an End subordinate to the Glory of
God; but God's Glory is his Will, as fulfilled in the eternal Salvation of all
the Elect by Faith in Christ. God is our Salvation, and our Savior, our
Blessedness, and the Author of our Blessedness. No Man can will his own
Annihilation as a means to God's Glory: for a Man as such is the Image and
Glory of God, and the eternal extinction of God's Glory, cannot be a means to
God's Glory: for that is no means which destroys the End, and is repugnant to
it. Indeed the damned in Hell do will and desire their own Annihilation, but
not as a means to God's Glory: for that is a holy and regular Will and Desire;
but no holy and regular Will can be in the damned. Moses and Paul could not
without Sin, wish to themselves eternal Pain, and more than barely Temporal.
For eternal Pain consists in implacably hating and being hated of God, eternal
Self-tormenting Anguish for Sin, and the never-dying Worm. This no Man in his
right Wits can wish to himself.

4. Man's chief End is not to glorify God, and to enjoy him for ever. This
indeed is Man's Duty, but Duty as such is not the chief End, but eternal
Felicity, as the Reward of Duty. Christ as Man, when on Earth, did perfectly
glorify God, and had Fruition of him in perfect Love, and yet he was not in Joy
and Felicity when in his Agony, and upon the Cross, but in the way to it, and
for the Joy and Felicity set before him as his supreme End, he endured the
Shame and Sorrow of the Cross: Heb. 12.2. Now what is not the supreme End in
one instant, can in no instant be it, because it is the same for ever. Those in
Hell do, against their Will, for ever glorify God, by bearing his just
Vengeance for Sin. We glorifying God through Faith, by sincere Obedience on
Earth, God's Promise is to reward and crown us with eternal Blessedness in
Heaven. And it is this, and this only, which is the chief End and supreme Good
of Man, as comprizing all Good in one, beyond which nothing is desirable.

5. God is not loved at all unless he be loved incomparably. Tho he be good,
better, and best, yet not in a way of strict Comparison, but in a transcendent
Sense, wherein words are to serve things, and not things words. Indeed ungodly
Men are said to love Pleasures more than God. But the meaning thereof is not,
that they love God a little, and Pleasures more: but they love Pleasures with
all their Heart, and God but as subservient. Now God as subservient to Lust and
Pleasure, is not God, but an Idol; and Idolatry is not Love, but ungodly Lust.
As Happiness means Ease, Pleasure, and freedom from Pain, Misery, and
troublesome Want; so all Men naturally desire to be happy. But as Happiness
means beholding God's Face in Righteousness, and being satisfied with his
Likeness; Psalm. 17.15. So it is wholly supernatural, known, and desired of none
in this World, save only the Regenerate through Faith in Christ. Men ungodly
neglect so great Salvation, and say unto God, Depart from us; Heb. 2.3. Job
21.14. The Heaven and Happiness desired by them, is a sensual Paradise, and
perpetual Epicurism: this really is not Heaven and Happiness, but a Lust or
Idol clothed with the name of Heaven and Happiness. The sincere desire of Grace
as such, is not the Grace desired, but it is an infallible proof of a gracious
and godly Man, as being accompanied with sincere Performance and Endeavor, and
is indeed it self holy Reformance before God. There is in God delight to Love;
Deuteronomy. 10.15. and in all blessed Saints and Angels, and there is in all true
Saints on Earth sincere desire to love God perfectly, but no such thing as love
to love: this is not true Love, but adulterous Lust. He that loves to love,
does not love God, but himself. No godly Man dare Sin: For he that dare Sin is
presumptuous, and treads Conscience under Foot. The least degree of true
Godliness, and holy Love to God, does sincerely, yet not perfectly mortify,
hate, expel, and war against all Sin, and desires to be by Grace sinless and
impeccable. A Person may sincerely love God, and yet through error and mistake
say he does not, and may have godly Assurance, and yet complain as if he had
none; Psalm. 77.10. Psalm. 22.10. 1 Cor. 12.15, 16.

CHAP. X. Of the Image of God.
1. CHrist considered as God, is the essential, substantial, and increated
Image and Form of God the Father by Nature, not by Grace. Christ considered as
Man, exalted at God's right Hand, is by Grace, not by Nature, the Image of
Himself, as God Equal with the Father and the Holy Ghost, in a special and
peculiar Sense above all both Angels and Men; and yet he is but one Image of
God rightly conceived, as he is but one Christ. Phil. 2.6. Col. 1.15. Heb. 1.3,
9, 13. The Divine Essence, as it is in God the Father, begets the Divine
Essence as it is in God the Son: Yet will it not hence follow that there are
two Divine Essences, but only that the Divine Essence as it is in God the
Father unbegotten, is not the Divine Essence as it is in God the Son begotten.
Which is certainly true: For Unbegotten and Begotten are eternally diverse and
distinct. This eternal Generation of God the Son is not a Work of God, but it
is the Nature of God the Father, and had been if there had never been Work of
God. God the Father is not Autotheos of and from Himself, and therefore God the
Son is not. God simply is, and cannot but be, and simply to be, is to be God.
Exodus 3.14. The Creature simply is not, but the Creature as such is dependent
on God, and as compared with him it is as Nothing, yea less than Nothing and
Vanity. Isa. 40.17, 18. Sin indeed is absolutely, simply, and eternally of it
self, exceeding sinful. Joh. 8.44. Romans 7.13. But God is not Sin. He is simply
First, and simply First is from none.

2. As to Life Temporal, ungodly Men, as Men, are the Image of God no less than
godly Men. Thence Murder is so great a Sin, because thereby contrary to the Law
and Light of Nature, the Image of God in Man, as to this present Life, is
extinct, a living Man is turned into a dead Corpse, and no(...) dead can be the
Image of the living God, Genesis 9.6. As to Life (...)eavenly Conversation by
Faith, only godly Men and Women, (...) Image of God, and ungodly Persons are
the Image of the Devil. As to Conjugal Society, the Husband is the Image and
Glory of God, and not the Wife, he being her Head, 1 Cor. 11.3, 7. In respect
of natural Generation, Parents are the Image of God, and not Children. In
respect of domestical Rule and Government, Masters are the Image of God, and
not Servants. In respect of earthly Sovereignty, Kings, and supreme Civil
Rulers are the Image of God, and not Subjects. Saints Triumphant, as Triumphant
and by Grace impeccable, are the Image of God, so as Saints Militant are not.
Damned Men, as Men, and intellectual Beings, are against their Will the Image
of God for ever; because they do against their will fulfill God's Law, by
bearing the eternal Penalty thereof, due for their Sin.

3. The Soul is truly a Spiritual Substance, and yet truly material, not to our
bodily Senses outwardly, but to our Faith inwardly. For the Opposition is not
between Spiritual and Material, but between Spiritual and Carnal. 1 Cor. 3.1.
and 9.11. Romans 15.27. Spiritual, Invisible, and Eternal Things are incomparably
and transcendently Material, they are the Matters of God, and of greatest
Consequence and Importance to our Souls through Faith. The Soul is not the Form
of Man, but the Body is the Form of Man, and the Soul is the quickening Life
and Spirit. In beholding a Corpse and dead Man, we behold the Form and
Appearance of Man, but we do not behold the Soul. The Soul is the Image of God,
and therefore it cannot consist in a dead Form. Romans 2.20. 2 Timothy 3.5.

4. Soul and Body are truly distinct as Principal and Instrumental, the inward
and the outward Man, but they are not two essential and compounding Parts of
Man. For Man is the Image of God, who being without Parts and Composition, so
must needs be his Image. As all in God is God, so all in the Image of God is
the Image of God. Every Man as to his natural Substance is simply a Man, and
not a Brute, and therefore he must needs be uncompounded. For to be simply a
Man, and yet compounded, is a Contradiction. Indeed the Body by it self
consists of many Parts: It will not therefore follow that it is only one Part
of Man. For if it be one only, it is not many. Gal. 3.16. As to Life Eternal
the Soul is the Man, not as excluding the Body: but the Welfare of the Body is
bound up in the Eternal Welfare of the Soul. If the Soul be safe, all is safe:
If that be lost, all is lost, and the Man is undone for ever. As to Life
Temporal, the Body is the Man, not as excluding the Soul; but as it is in and
by the Body that Man does visibly live and converse on Earth as a Man and not a
Brute, and the Body being dead, the Man is dead as to this present Life. And
therefore not one Part of Christ, but Christ Himself in respect of his Body was
crucified, dead, buried, and lay in the Grave. Come, see the place where the
Lord lay. Mat. 28.6.

5. Every Artificial Image of Christ as God is an Idol: and every Artificial
Image of Christ as Man, is Superstition; and if adored, then it is Idolatry.
Christ as Man is holy, and Holiness may not be set forth by a dead Image or
Picture. Only holy Men and Women in this World as holy, are the Image of Christ
as he is Man. Romans 8.29. Any other Image of Christ as Man, is a lie, and not
the Image of Christ. Christ is truly a Man, but withal a special Man differing
in kind from all other Men, because he only is by miraculous Conception in the
Womb of a Virgin, He only is the Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World,
He only as Man is exalted at God's right Hand above all both Angels and Men:
They may be set forth by an Artificial Image or Picture, but so may not Christ
as Man. The only true setting forth of Christ as Man, is by the Word and
Sacraments through Faith: because as Man he differs in specie in kind from all
other Men.

CHAP. XI. Of the Church and Commonwealth.
1. THE Holy Catholic Church which we believe, as distinct from the elect
Angels, consists of the whole number of God's Elect in all Ages, not as
exclusive of what is good and commendable in Hypocrites, Heretics, Apostates,
and Heathens, but as liking and loving all that is good and lovely in
whomsoever. This Church began in penitent Adam and Eve, they two were the first
Church of the redeemed. Upon the increase and multiplication of new Converts,
and Souls regenerate, more were added to the Church successively like as when
an Infant is born into the World, there is one more added to the Society of
Mankind, Acts 2.47. The Apostles Commission was not to make a new Church
differing in substance from what had been before, and was in being at the time
of Christ's Ascension, but to preserve that Church which he left on Earth, and
by Apostolical Preaching, and Endeavors, to enlarge and add to it, and so to
make Jew and Gentile one in Christ Jesus. Outward Variations, suited to the
Exegencies of the Church, in its Militant State, do not alter the intrinsecal
Nature, Essence, and Unity of the Church, which is the same for substance in
all Ages. But because Abel is the first who died in Faith, and of whose
Righteousness there is express mention, therefore the Holy Catholic Church is
fitly reckoned from him.

2. The Church and Commonwealth are not two independent Societies, but the
Church, as such, is a holy Commonwealth, simply dependent upon God through
Christian Faith, as to Life eternal: And upon the Prince as sole Supreme, under
God, over all in his Dominions, as to Life Temporal, and Coercive rule by the
Sword. Look as Homo being a Man includes Animal, being a Living Creature: So
the Church includes human Society, as being nothing but Mankind sanctified, by
Faith in Christ. The Power and Authority of Christ, as Man, exalted at God's
right Hand over all, is simply dependent upon God: And therefore all the Power
and Authority of the Church must needs be simply dependent, ministerial, and
subordinate; and whatsoever Church claims to it self Power simply independent,
by that very claim it is proved to be Antichristian, that Man of Sin, and Son
of Perdition, who exalts himself above God, and above the Prince his
Vicegerent on Earth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3, 4.

3. The Church is not two, Universal and Particular, Invisible and Visible; but
the Church is simply one, as God is one; admitting of just Conception, but no
Division. It is one Whole or Universal, as comprizing all the Parts: But one
Whole or Universal, as distinct from all the Parts, is only Notion and Conceit,
as a Man in the Moon, or Castle in the Air, a mere Chimera. We see those Men
and Women who are the Church Militant, but that which makes them the Church
Militant we do not see, but believe. The Church is plain and manifest to those
who believe, as the Sun at Noonday, is to seeing Men: But he who believes
not, makes God a Liar, 1 John 5.10. and God being made a Liar, the Church must
needs be made a Liar too.

4. It will not stand with Christian Faith, Hope, and Love, to live divided in
Heart and Conversation, from any the least Member of Christ and true Christian,
who is evidently and apparently so, so far as Man can judge. We cannot be more
holy than God, more pure then Christ: Whom he receives, we are to receive, or
we cannot expect to be received by him. The Communion of Saints is an Article
of Faith, unalterably fixed by God as to the substance of it, and it consists
in Christian Faith, Hope, and Love: These are to the Church, and every Member
thereof, what the Soul is to the Body. But saving Christian Faith, Hope, and
Love, we are to become all Things to all Men, and bear all Things rather than
rend and divide the Church by nefarious and lewd Schism. Ungodly Christians,
considered as Ungodly, are not Christians, and Members of the Church: But
Ungodly Christians, considered not as Ungodly, but as Christians, are a sort of
Christians and Church Members, and are not mere Heathens and Persons without:
They are of the Church, and yet they are not the Church, Romans 9.6.

5. Loyalty is a Fundamental in Religion, as without which human Society cannot
subsist, and no human Society no Religion. Human Society cannot subsist without
some to Rule and some to be Ruled. If the Ruled may resist and rise in
Rebellion against their lawful Rulers, set over them by God, Mankind is no
longer a Society, but a Rout; and a Foundation is laid for endless War,
Desolation, and Confusion of all Things. The Nature of a Fundamental in
Religion is to expel its Contrary, as Light does Darkness. As then no Man can
in the same Instant be both Godly and Ungodly: So can no Man in the same
Instant be both Loyal and Disloyal. Loyalty is not Loyalty unless it be so out
of Conscience, either Natural and Common, such as may be in Heathens and Men
not Regenerate; or Supernatural and Special, such as is in the Regenerate. He
that is only Loyal out of Self Ends and for Worldly Interest, is not Loyal
before God. Human Law, considered as Human, cannot bind the Conscience: But
considered as subservient to the Divine Law, so it is in a large Sense Divine,
and as Divine, it binds the Conscience: For all that lies in us, we are to live
peaceably with all Men. Yet where the Thing enacted and enjoined is not
intrinsecally necessary to the public Good, there a Man has his choice,
whether to do the thing, or to pay the Penalty. In no case may we resist
Authority Supreme and Subordinate: In no case may we obey Man against God.
Therefore when no way is left, but either we must Suffer, or Sin; we must
patiently and meekly Suffer, and lay down our Lives, rather than resist, or
allow the least Sin.

CHAP. XII. Of Original Sin, the state of Infants, and their Baptism.
1. AS to Life Temporal there are in the Soul Habits distinct from Act, and by
frequent Acts Men get a Habit. But as to Eternity there is no such Distinction:
For the Soul as being a spiritual and immortal Substance, is the Image of God,
and is therefore ever in act invisibly. From the time that it is first formed
in the Womb, it cease not to live a Life differing, in kind, from Brutes; and
while in the Body, is still upon its way to Eternity, and either it is Godly,
and so in the way to Heaven, and invisibly active for God: or it is Ungodly,
and so in the way to Hell, and invisibly active against him.

2. If God shall give unto Adam, after his Fall, Children by natural
Generation, and shall not also give them inward heavenly Grace, and
supernatural Regeneration, it is most certain that inwardly and invisibly they
will be Graceless and Unregenerate: As Graceless and Unregenerate they are
Unholy, dead in Sin, and full of enmity against God, and so dying, it is above
me to prove that they have not in them the never-dying Worm. This Original Sin,
in Infants, is neither from God, nor from Adam, nor from their immediate
Parents; but it is wholly from themselves inwardly and unsearchably, neither by
natural necessity, nor after the similitude of Adam's Transgression, Romans 5.14.
but by legal Necessity. Which is a sort of Necessity innocently and
unsearchably permitted by God, but not willed by him, and is not avoidable by
either Parents or Children, without supernatural Grace in Christ Jesus. Even as
ungodly grown Men, in their Sleep, while their Sleep lasts, are unavoidably
and inexcusably ungodly.

3. The adequate ground of Hope concerning the whole Offspring of Adam, is
Divine Election in Christ Jesus. If we bottom it not entirely upon this, we
must needs bottom it upon Reprobation, there being no middle, or third,
imaginable. Elect and Reprobate, as Godly and Ungodly, divide all the World.
And to bottom Hope of Salvation upon Reprobation, is to destroy Hope. All the
Infants of Godly Parents, both, or one, dying in mere Infancy, we may well
think are elect and saved, as a Part of that holy Catholic Church which
consists of the Elect in all Ages: And of this Baptism, to me, seems to be a
sacred Sign and Seal. 1 Pet. 3.21. Ungodly Christians, as has been said,
considered not as Ungodly, but as Christians, are a sort of Christians and not
mere Heathens. The Infants of such being brought unto us by the Parents, or
some other Christian in their stead, themselves being reasonably let, with
desire to have them baptized, I conceive it is our Duty, as we are Christ's
Ministers, in Obedience to his Command, Mat. 28.19, 20. Well suiting with the
Grounds of Faith, the approved Practice of the Church before Christ's
Incarnation, the Words and Example of Christ touching Infants, Mark. 10.13, 14,
15, 16. and the Practice of the Apostles in baptizing Households, to baptize
there Infants. And if they shall be taken away in mere Infancy by Death, we may
well think that they also are Elect and Saved, and that of such also is the
Kingdom of God. Though the Parents have not Godly Sincerity, yet a sort of
Sincerty they have, and they do really and not dissemblingly desire Baptism for
their Infants, and are truly glad of it. Either some Infants are eternally,
elect and endued with the Holy Ghost savingly, or not. If yea, can any Man
forbid Water, that these should not be baptized, which are eternally elect, and
endued with the Holy Ghost savingly, as well as grown Men? Act. 10.47, 48. If
not, then all Infants are eternally reprobate and damned, the Infant Jesus not
excepted. Isa. 42.1. Luke 1.35.

4. The Contempt of Baptism is damnable in the Contemners: but Infants cannot
contemn it. Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel. 1 Cor.
1.17. The Gospel, that is, Life eternal through Faith in Christ, is simply
necessary for all Persons, in all Places, at all Times, from the Fall of Adam
to the End of the World; But so is not Baptism. If the Person die inwardly holy
and regenerate, as he may, though not baptized, he is undoubtedly saved.

5. If the baptized Infant be not inwardly holy and regenerate (as all are not)
then I conceive it is not in a State of Salvation, it is not set free from
Guilt eternal, yet is its Baptism as ordained of God, and dispensed by his
Minister neither Nullity nor Mockery, but a Divine Bond, Oath, and Covenant
laid upon the Infant to be what all the Offspring of Adam by God's Law
indispensably are bound to be, truly holy, and God's faithful Servant. Either
its Regeneration is future, or it is not. If yea, then Baptism is a sure Pledge,
Seal, and Token that it is future. If not, then the Infant will outlive the
State of Infancy, and will live and die ungodly, and perish; in which Case his
Baptism will be an everlasting Witness against him, it being supposed that his
Conscience was privy to it. Baptism is a Seal of the Covenant of Grace, which
Covenant imports God's Purpose to give Perseverance and Salvation to all the
Regenerate, and to Regenerate such and so many, as he from Eternity foresees
will, by his Grace, and Free-gift, sincerely believe. And yet, while
Unregenerate, they are in a State of Damnation. As to Life Temporal, and Humane
Society on Earth, ungodly Men have Power over their own Will, and Liberty to
act, or not to act, as themselves list, and they can, if they will refrain from
all Sin outwardly, and do all Good outwardly, and be blameless before Men. But
as to Life Eternal, and Heavenly Conversation, they have no Power, they are
dead in Sin, under the Power of Satan, their Power is Impotency, Sin has
Dominion over them, they are not Lords, but Slaves, and lorded over by their
Lusts; and if God shall not prevent them with his Heavenly Grace, it is certain
that they will never deserve it. Therefore the first step to Salvation is holy
Despair thereof by all that we of our selves can do without God's eternal Grace
in Christ. And look what is First in Divinity, that same is Last, even All in
All.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Lord's Supper.
1. LOok as all in God is God without Parts and Composition: So all in the
Lord's Supper is the Lord's Supper. Considered as a Supper, so the whole is
visible, Food for the Belly, eaten and drunk with the Mouth outwardly:
Considered as the Lord's Supper so the whole is invisible, Food for the Soul,
eaten and drunk with the Heart inwardly. There may be the Lord's Supper without
saving Belief: but not without Belief. For he that believes not, makes God a
Liar, and by Consequence the Sacrament a Lie also. 1 John 5.10.

2. There is no Change at all of the Elements by Consecration, but only
Religious Use. If the Religious Use of Things do necessarily infer a Change in
the Things used, then God must needs be changed, and then he is not God. We use
God's Name religiously, and God's Name is God Himself, as named by this or that
Name, Jehovah, Lord, God. I am the Lord, that is my Name. Isa. 42.8. What
Change is by Consecration, is in the Communicants, not at all in the Elements.
Consecration imports in all Godly Communicants, a real Heavenly Change as to
Conversation, Conversion from Sin to God, they are new Creatures, 2 Cor. 5.17.
This heavenly Change they evidence, exercise, and show forth at the Lord's
Table, in religious partaking of the Elements in Remembrance of Christ
crucified. All Change in the Elements by Consecration is simply repugnant to
intellectual Sense in all Men, and is therefore simply incredible.

3. These Words, This is my Body, as understood without Christian Faith, are
false and absurd: But as understood through Christian Faith, they are indeed
mysterious, yet Superlatively plain, true, apt, and proper. The Lord's Supper
is truly a Figure, as is Baptism, 1 Pet. 3.21. yet not a Verbal and Rhetorical
Figure common to Us and Heathens, but a Divine, Celestial, and Mysterious
Figure instituted by Christ, and not understood without Christian Belief, which
Heathens have not. In Points that concern us as Men, in common with all the
World, Christ spoke with the Vulgar, and so as to be understood of very
Heathens. But in Points mysterious and Supernatural, as is the Doctrine of the
Lord's Supper, he spoke above the Vulgar, and so, as not to be understood
aright without Faith, which Heathens have not. Ungodly Communicants, considered
as Ungodly, do not eat Christ's Body, but inwardly contemn and shut their
Hearts against it: And thus their partaking does differ in kind from the inward
partaking of the Godly. But Ungodly Communicants, considered as Communicants,
do with their Mouth outwardly eat the Bread, which is really, and not
chimerically, yet sacramentally and symbolically the Body of Christ, no less
than do Godly Communicants outwardly: And thus their partaking is the same for
kind with the partaking of the Godly. 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

4. Unto worthy Communicants the Lord's Supper is the Communion of the Lord's
Body and Blood, the holy Memorial of his Death, heavenly Nourishment for the
Soul, a sure Pledge, Seal, Sign, and Token of Pardon of Sin, Perseverance, and
Life eternal, and a Divine Engagement to Watchfulness and holy Fear of
Apostasy. No Godly Man does partake unworthily; he may partake not so worthily
as some do, but the least degree of true Godliness does produce a degree of
worthy communicating, differing but in measure and degree from the most Godly
Communicants. Unto unworthy Communicants the Lord's Supper, through their own
Sin, is a Seal of their Damnation, if they die without sound Repentance: And in
the mean time it lays a Divine Bond and Engagement upon them instantly to
repent. If their Repentance, by God's eternal Decree, be future, then the
Lord's Supper is a Divine Sign and Seal that it is future: If their Repentance
be not future, then they will die in their Sins, and perish, and will remember
with eternal Self-tormenting Anguish, in Hell, their partaking without Godly
Sincerity. Those who contend, that Men Unregenerate sin less in not coming,
than in coming to the Lord's Table, do yet expressly grant: But yet they that do
come unworthily and unwarrantably, do find that there, which tends to their
Conversion, and frequently effects it. Mr. B. in his Disputations of Right to
Sacraments, page 31, 32. And they who contend that the Unregenerate sin less in
coming, than in not coming, do yet hold and contend, that the Persons so come
must be adult, baptized, orthodox and not heretical, free from enormous Crimes
and Scandals, before Men. The bare Elements, as distinct from the Word, can
neither convert nor confirm. But the Word, as distinct from the Elements, and
giving being to the whole Sacramental Service, may, through God's Grace, prove
effectual for sound Conversion of the Unconverted, and certainly will be
effectual for building up of the Converted.

5. The Flesh and Manhood of Christ is, under God, the prime instrumental Cause
of Life eternal, to the Godly in all Ages, through Faith: As such, his Flesh is
heavenly Meat, and his Blood is heavenly Drink, and we, through Faith, do
really and not chimerically, spiritually and not corporally eat and drink it.
What is eaten, in that it is eaten, must be really present: For no Man can eat
a thing that is absent. There is Relation between the Manhood of Christ and the
whole intellectual World, as between sole Supreme under God, and Subjects: This
Relation is real and not imaginary, eternal and not temporal: From Eternity it
was future, and it remains to Eternity by the free Pleasure of God. What is
eternal is truly infinite, above all Predicaments, and consequently above Time
and Place, yet not contrary thereto. Things related are simul natura,
intrinsecally together, not in Place outwardly, but in Truth and Reality
inwardly, above both Time and Place. Only this is to be noted, that though the
Manhood of Christ be sole Supreme under God, over all both Angels and Men, as
he is exalted at God's right Hand, yet only elect Angels and Men be his Loyal
and Obedient Subjects. There are, who hold some things necessary to the
Integrity of the Sacrament, but not to its Essence, as breaking the Bread. But
the Scripture has no such distinction, and indeed it is repugnant to the
Nature of God, who is an infinite Essence, and in him is infinite Integrity:
Therefore there cannot possibly be Essence and not Integrity. Therefore
breaking the Bread, is to be reckoned among those things which are not
intrinsecally necessary to the Being and Integrity of the Lord's Supper. As to
which the general rule is, to observe the way and custom of the Church where a
Man shall come and abide. But as to the Cup, no power on Earth may deprive the
People of it.

CHAP. XIV. Of Divine Worship, and Idolatry.
1. THat there is a God, and that he is to be worshipped as God, is indelebly
written in the Heart of every Man; for every Man is either Godly or Ungodly: To
be Godly, is to be a worshipper of God in Spirit and Truth: To be Ungodly, is
to have an inward Sense and Conviction that there is a God, and not to worship
and glorify him as God.

2. The true God, is God the Father not incarnate, God the Son incarnate, God
the Holy Ghost not incarnate; the Savior of all Men, specially of them that
believe: Any other God is an Idol, and not the true God. To worship this true
God, is penitently to confess our Sins, to call upon His Name, and pray unto
him for spiritual and corporal Blessings, to give him Thanks for his Mercies,
to swear by his Name, to vow and covenant our Souls to him, to believe his Holy
Word, to trust in him for Life Eternal, to walk as in his Sight and Presence,
to esteem him incomparably Excellent, to prefer his Favor, Honor, and Glory,
and the doing of his Will, before our Life, and Friends, and Estate, and all
worldly and temporal Things; to have clean Hearts and pure Consciences, and in
all things to make it our chief care and business to please him, and to obtain
eternal Reward and Blessedness, by righteous, sober, and godly Conversation. In
the Worship of God the Soul is Principal, and the Body is Instrumental, and the
same thing is essentially both Act and Object: For there cannot be the right
Worship of God without Self-denial; according to that of the Psalmist Not unto
us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name be all the Glory: For of Him, and
through Him, and to Him are all things, Psalm. 115. 1. Romans 11.36. Now
Self-denial is both Act and Object. Accordingly, in all Idolatry, the Soul is
Principal, and the Body is Instrumental, and the same thing is both Act and
Object: For in every Idolater there is regnant Self-esteem, Self-will,
Self-love, and Self-confidence, repugnant to heavenly Self-denial, and Holy
Trust in God. The Idolater puts trust in his own Heart, that tho he give the
Glory due to God, in Christ only, to another, tho he worship God in and by mere
Creatures, and not in and by Christ only, yet he shall be saved, and God will
accept him: This is Self-delusion and false Trust; and Selfdelusion and
Self-confidence, is both Act and Object.

3. An Idol is nothing in the World, 1 Cor. 8.4. That is, as I conceive, set
aside the inward ungodly Lust, and false Belief, which is in Man's Heart, and
there is no such thing as an Idol, nor can be. Every Creature of God is Good,
Man is a special Creature of God, and therefore must needs be specially Good.
The Goodness of Man consists in the inward Rectitude of his Mind, and hevenly
dependence upon god, and Resignation to his Will, and trust in him for Life
eternal. When contrary-wise, Man refuses to be guided by God, as to Life
eternal, and puts trust in his own Heart, and not in God, for Life eternal,
and loves himself rather than God; now Man comes to have Idols in his Heart,
and commits spiritual Whoredom and Adultery. Some make the Belly their God,
some Idolize Money, some worldly Glory, some Beauty, some Learning, some their
Errors, some Angels and departed Saints, some Images: These are various ways
of Idolatry, but still it is the mind within, as ungodly, which makes the Idol,
and all Idolatry whatsoever is a transcendent Vice, the worship of a false God,
and is repugnant to Holy Belief in God. As God is not two, a material God, and
a formal God: So Idolatry is not two, material and formal, but all Idolatry is
a breach of the first Commandment, and repugnant to godly Sincerity. No Man
does or can in the commission of Idolatry intend to commit it, but really he
does commit it, he does that which by the Divine Law is Idolatry. The
commission of Idolatry, and intention to commit it, differ specifically, and
cannot possibly concur in one and the fame indivisible Act, as one and the same
indivisible Act cannot possibly be two Acts.

4. The substance of Divine Worship is unalterably fixed by God, and all
addition to it, and all diminution from it, is Idolatry, a Deifying of Man's
Understanding and Will, and setting it above the Understanding and Will of God.
But there are many things respecting the outward Mode and Order of God's
Worship, about which the Scripture gives only general Rules, the fitting
whereof to particular Cases, is left to Man's Wisdom and Discretion,
dependently upon God, as Judge of all the World. Touching the substance of God's
Worship, nothing is a Duty but what has a Divine Command, and plain Warrant in
God's Word: Touching Things in themselves indifferent, and variable, nothing is
sinful but what is plainly forbidden by God, what is not forbidden, is of it
self Lawful.

5. Religiously to invocate Angels and departed Saints is very Idolatry: but
bare desiring their Prayers, I conceive, is not Idolatry. Superstition it is,
vain and erroneous Desire it is; but tho all Idolatry be Superstition, yet all
Superstition and vain Desire is not Idolatry: But if Superstition reign, then
it is Idolatry before God, tho not before Men. And then does Superstition and
Error reign, when Persons lay their Salvation on it, and trust in their Error
for Life Eternal. Bare desiring the Prayer of Angels and departed Saints, is
not Prayer and Invocation in the strict sense, and therefore, I conceive, it is
not Idolatry. Tho all Prayer be Desire, yet all Desire is not Prayer in the
strict sense. Bare desiring the Prayer of Angels and departed Saints, does
suppose them to know what indeed they do not know, and so it is erroneous and
vain Desire: but it does not necessarily suppose them to be simply Omniscient,
which only God is. Finally, it is a Point of Faith, and the very sum of the
Bible, that since the Fall of Man, all Religious Approach to God, is to be in
and through Christ only: They which do otherwise, are guilty of flat Idolatry.

CHAP. XV. Of the Scripture.
1. THough heavenly Truth was not put into Writing outwardly till the time of
Moses, yet was it from the beginning, supernaturally written in the Heart of
Adam in Innocence, and being extinguished by his Fall, it was renewed in him in
saving measure by heavenly Regeneration after his Fall, and by this way kept
safe in the inward Records of the Heart, and transmitted unto the time of
Moses. When he by divine Appointment and Inspiration, did first put heavenly
Truth into writing outwardly, this did not alter the intrinsecal nature of it:
For heavenly Truth as written in the Heart, and in the Bible, is but one and
the same Truth diversely written, perfectly in the Bible, truly, but not
perfectly in the Heart of Man since the Fall, and the entrance of Sin into the
World.

2. Whether all the Books of the Old and New Testament, as we reckon them, be
Canonical Scripture; and whether every Word and Sentence therein be exactly
translated, this is not matter of Divine Belief, nor does Salvation lie on it,
so as to damn all that err herein; but it is matter of human Science and
Testimony, as subservient to Divine Belief. Human Science and Testimony,
considered as repugnant to Divine Belief, is not Science and Testimony, but a
Lie: Considered as subservient vient to Divine Belief, so it is in a large
sense truly divine, and as divine it is infallible. And thus the Scripture is
the supreme Judge and adequate Standard in Controversies of Faith. The sum of
the Scripture is, Repentance and Remission of Sins through Faith in Christ,
according to the eternal Purpose of God the Father not incarnate, the Son
incarnate, the Holy Ghost not incarnate: This is al^ saving Evidence in one,
not as exclusive of things subservient, but as supposing and comprizing them.

3. With respect to Life Temporal and Human Converse, Words are not Things, but
signs of Men's inward Thoughts, and the great Arbiter of Speech is Use, quem
penes arbitrium est, and jus and norma loquendi. With respect to Life eternal,
and heavenly Conversation by Faith, Words are Things, and therefore we are
commanded to hold fast the form of sound Words; and Christ says, By thy Words
thou shall be justified, and by thy Words thou shall be condemned. God has set
us a Standard for all our Words, unto which none may add, from which none may
diminish, under pain of Damnation. The great Mystery of Godliness is, The Word
was made Flesh, Joh. 1.14. 1 Timothy 3.16. Rev. 22.18, 19. Mat. 12.37. 2 Timothy
1.13. Indeed, where there is an agreement in Substance, diversity in Speech for
Peace-sake is to be born with. But there can be no agreement in Substance
without the Scripture as the sole supreme Judge, and perfect Standard as to all
things concerning the Glory of God, and the eternal Salvation of the Soul. If
we go from this we shall not know where to fix, a Foundation is laid for
infinite proceeding, and so for Atheism and Confusion of all things.

4. There are who write, that all Words that Man can speak of God, at least,
except Being and Substance, are improper or metaphorical. But certainly this is
a great Error: For tho God be above all our Words and Expressions, yet he is
not above and contrary to Himself, he cannot be the Author of Sin, he is not
God improperly and metaphorically. God is good, and there are good Angels and
Men: both these are true and proper. But in the sense that God is good,
essentially, independently, inderivatively, the Author of all Good, so none is
good but God: Every Creature, as dependent on God, is good, and useful to his
Glory, and the Salvation of his Elect by Christ: But the whole Creation, as
compared with God, is as nothing, it is less than nothing, and Vanity: Isa.
40.17, 18. All Words importing Excellency and Perfection, and no way importing
Imperfection and Impiety, do agree to God simply, incomparably, transcendently,
eternally, infinitely, most truly, really, and properly, and not at all to
Angels and Men, as compared with God. Dat propriae similem translata metaphora
vocem. Things heavenly and eternal may be set forth by worldly and temporal
Similitudes: But so, that things heavenly and eternal are the Standard, Judex
sui and obliqui. Thus Christ's Flesh, as eaten by Faith, is Meat indeed; and
his Blood, as drunk by Faith, is Drink indeed; not metaphorical, rhetorical,
verbal, improper, and imaginary Food; but most real, heavenly, solid,
substantial, divine, transcendent, incomparably excellent, and eternal Food for
the Soul: and all worldly and temporal Food for the Body, as compared with, and
repugnant to it, is not Food at all, but Dung, Loss, and Damnation eternal; but
as subservient to it, it is true and proper Food for the Body, God's good
Creature, and worthy of Thanksgiving.

5. The Fountain-cause of so much doleful Contention among Christians touching
Religion, is, their leaving the Simplicity that is in Christ, and guiding
themselves by that Philosophy and School-Sophistry, which the Scripture calls
vain Deceit; 2 Cor. 11.3. Col. 2.8. Philosophy considered as subservient to
Life Eternal by Faith in Christ, is not Philosophy, but Christianity largely
taken. Philosophy considered as repugnant to Life Eternal by Faith in Christ,
is damnable Impiety, the Mother of Herefy and Division, that Wisdom which is
from beneath, which is earthly, sensual, and devilish. Philosophers, as such,
treat of God^ of Man, of Being, of Truth, of Good, of Unity, of Virtue, of
Nature, of Relation, of what not? not as Christians, but as Philosophers; not
by the Light of Faith in Christ, but by the Light of Nature; which in Points of
Faith is very Darkness. And so the whole Doctrine of Philosophers, as such, is
false, a mere Building without a Foundation: Because Christ is the first and
the last in all true Knowledge, as being God the Son incarnate, and God is All
in All. This Philosophers, as such, be ignorant of, and do not build Science
upon Christ, the sole Foundation of Science by Faith; 1 Cor. 3.11. and so they
err in the Foundation, and all the Science of Philosophers, as such, is false
Science, repugnant to Faith in Christ.

CHAP. XVI. Containing a Confutation of sundry Errors held by too many
Schoolmen, Philosophers, and Divines of all Parties, by which Controversies
are kept up and perpetuated.
Error 1. THE Man Christ is God, in the Concrete; but not the Manhood of
Christ, in the Abstract. Before the Incarnation Christ was simple,
uncompounded, impartial, and but one Nature: After Incarnation he is not
simple, but compounded, and consists of two distinct Natures, as two
essential Parts. Confutation. The Man Christ is indeed God, yet not as he is
Man: And the Manhood of Christ, is that holy thing which was born of the
Blessed Virgin, and is truly called the Son of God, and this Son of God is very
God, the Son incarnate; Luke 1.35. Joh. 1.1, 14, 18. Jesus Christ is the same
yesterday, and to day, and for ever; after Incarnation as before, and before as
after; Heb. 13.8. with this cautious meaning: Before Incarnation he was Jesus
Christ, as from Eternity purposed in time to be incarnate: After Incarnation,
he is the same Jesus Christ as incarnate, according to that Purpose. If he be
at all compounded, then he is not simply Christ, and then he is a Deceiver: For
Simple and Compounded are contraries, as Light and Darkness, Truth and
Falsehood. If Christ consist of Parts, then he is not simply impartial, and then
he cannot judge the World in Righteousness, but must needs approve Murder in
David, and condemn it in Cain; which is Blasphemy. The Manhood of Christ is not
one part, or one half of Christ, but it is Christ himself considered as Man:
And the Godhead of Christ is Christ himself, considered as God, and yet he is
but one Person, but one Christ; and the Nature of Christ, as he is God manifest
in the Flesh, and the Word made Flesh, is but one, admitting of just
Conception, but no Parts and Composition.

Error 2. All things in Nature are reducible to ten Predicaments, of which
Relation is one. Confut. All things in Nature are reducible to one, which one
is God; of whom, and through whom, and to whom are all things, and this God is
our God for ever and ever; Romans 11.36. Psalm. 48.14. Thus Relation is all in
all, as being the Nature of God the Father not incarnate, the Son incarnate,
the Holy Ghost not incarnate, essentially, and yet freely related to all Elect
Angels and Men, as their God and Portion for ever.

Error 3. There are four distinct Causes of Justification, of Satisfaction for
Sin, of the Sacraments, etc. the efficient, the material, the formal, and the
final Cause. Confut. All Cause touching Religion, and Life eternal, is either
principal or supreme, or instrumental and subservient: And the principal and
supreme Cause is superlatively, and transcendently, material, and of greatest
importance to our Faith and eternal Welfare, the Cause of Causes, even all in
all. As to Worldly Science common to us and Heathens, there is matter and form
distinct: But as to Heavenly Science, by Faith (which Heathens have not) there
is no such distinction. For Heavenly Science by Faith, consists not in Form,
but in Power, 2 Timothy 3.5. not in Show and Appearance, but in Truth and Reality,
Romans 2.20. It is one and the same thing which is the beginning and the end, the
first and the last, the efficient and the final Cause, yet not in the same
respects; Romans 11.36. Rev. 22.13.

Error 4. The Will of Man is effentially free, and essentially a Rational
Appetite. Confut. The Will of Man is essentially rational and intellectual^ but
neither essentially free, nor essentially an Appetite. For if it be essentially
free, then there can be no Hell: And if it be essentially an Appetite, then
there can be no Heaven. Damned Men are Men, and in them is perfect intellectual
human Will, as to natural Substance, but no free Will. They cannot be holy and
happy if they would; Luke 16.26. All Freedom and Liberty is either temporal or
eternal: in the Damned is neither, they cannot but implacably hate God, and
will Annihilation rather than eternal Damnation. In the state of perfect
Felicity, there shall be in all blessed Men, perfect rational and intellectual
Will, but no Appetite, no Desire, no Wish, no want of any good thing, but
perfect Satisfaction. Rest, and Pleasure for ever: Psalm. 17.15.

Error 5. The Divine Law is twofold, of Works, and of Faith; or the old and the
new Law. Confut. The Divine Law is but one, as God the Author of it is one,
admitting of just Conception, but no Division. The Law was given by Moses, but
Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, Joh. 1.17. Here the Law and Grace, as
also Moses and Christ are opposed, yet not as contraries, but as diverse, not as
Satan and Christ, but as subservient and supreme. Moses, as God's Minister,
delivers the Law, by which is the knowledge of Sin, and Condemnation due for the
same, to all the natural Offspring of fallen Adam. And thus the Ministry of
Moses, and the Law as distinct from, and relatively opposed to the Grace of the
Gospel in Christ, is a killing Letter, and the Ministration of Death and
Condemnation, by reason of Sin in us; 2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. The Law and
Moses is not Jesus Christ, they cannot purchase for us, and bestow on us
Gospel-repentance, Pardon of Sin, Peace of Conscience, and eternal Redemption:
This is utterly above Moses and the Law, as distinct from Christ, by themselves
to effect. But now Jesus Christ, as distinct from, and relatively opposed to
Moses and the Law, is very God the Son incarnate, the Word made Flesh, Joh.
1.14. and as such, is Mediator; and as Mediator, he does purchase the Church
with his own Blood, and does obtain for, and freely bestow on Abel, Peter, and
the rest of the Elect, heavenly Righteousness, Faith, Repentance, Pardon of
Sin, Perseverance, and eternal Redemption. These are the highest Blessings and
Privileges, in respect whereof Christ, as Mediator, is to be worshipped with
supreme Worship: otherwise he is a mere Man, nothing differing from Moses, and
our whole Faith is a Lie. Thus the Law and the Gospel are distinct, and Faith
in Christ does not abolish, but does establish God's Law: Romans 3.31. Psalm. 19.
and Psalm. 119.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Ministry, and Church Discipline.
1. THere may be a Church where is no Minister or Pastor; but there cannot be a
Church without a just esteem of Pastors and Ministers, and care to have one
where one is wanting. Where two or three are gathered together in Christ's
Name, there is he in the midst of them: And where is Christ the Head, (...)
Saints his Members by Faith, and Invocation, there is a Church both Name and
Thing, tho there be no Pastor or Minister. But those may not be said to be
gathered together in Christ's Name, who disesteem and contemn Pastors and
Ministers.

2. Where Ordination may be had, consistent with Faith and Piety, there it is
to be had, and they who invade the Ministerial Office without it, have no due
Call from God, he never sent them, such Persons do greatly offend against the
Order and Unity of God's Church and chosen People, and are not to be owned and
countenanced in their evil way. Where Ordination cannot be had, consistent with
Faith and Piety, there it is not to be had. There, if a Door be opened for
preaching the Gospel, one not ordained being able for the Work, and faithful,
may preach, baptize, give the Lord's Supper, and do the whole Ministerial
Office, with purpose to have Ordination so soon as with Faith and Piety it can
be had. An open Door is the necessities and willingness of the People, with
protection or connivance of the Magistrate, if possible.

3. In Ordination, God in Christ confers the whole Office as principal and
supreme by his Word: And the Person, or Persons ordaining, confer the whole
Office as instrumental and subordinate. Therefore it is not in the power of Men
to ordain whom, and how they please, because they ordain not as Lords, but as
Stewards, they have no power touching this matter, but what is simply
ministerial, subordinate, and dependent. If therefore. God's Word for substance
do not go along with the Ordination, it is null and void: and the same holds
good as to Suspending, Degrading, Silencing, and Prohibiting of Ministers from
doing the Ministerial Work. Every Minister to be ordained ought to be a
faithful Man, and able to teach others also: 2 Timothy 2.1. For which cause those
unto whom it pertains to ordain and impose Hands, ought to use all possible
Care and Circumspection, and to lay Hands suddenly on none without due
Exploration. He may be a valid and justly authorized Minister, who is not truly
Godly: And yet he that is not truly godly, can have no sound Comfort in his
Ministry, as being in a state of Damnation; his Ministry may profit others, tho
not himself. But yet all Care is to be used that Persons to be ordained be
truly godly, so far as Man can judge, and that also they be able to teach the
People, and by good Doctrine guide Souls in the way to Heaven.

4. No Power on Earth may impose a Minister upon a People against their just
liking: For what is against Justice, is against God. And no People may refuse a
Minister, tho unjustly imposed on them, when they cannot, without general
inconvenience and hazard of the public Peace, remedy themselves: For of two
Evils, the lesser is to be chosen. Provided the imposed Minister be Orthodox
and not Hereti^^^ tolerable and competently able for the Work in some measure.
But Heretical, Schismatical, Idolatrous, and Wolvish Pastors and Ministers the
People are bound to forsake and turn from. Where Ministers Residence is
necessary by Divine Law, there no Law of Man can dispense with it: Where it is
not necessary by Divine Law, there needs no Human Dispensation, and the
exacting of Money in such case is unrighteous Gain. The principal Work of
Ministers, and the substance of so much Church Order and Discipline, as is
incumbent on them as Ministers, to perform and see to, consists in laboring in
the Word and Doctrine, in preaching the Gospel, in giving heed to Doctrine, to
Exhortation, to Reproof, to Admonition and Instruction, publicly, privately,
in season, out of season. Where this is not, the substance of the Ministerial
Work and Discipline is wanting: Where this is all, the rest will easily follow,
so much as is necessary, and what is not necessary is better forborne.

5. The Church is no Church of God, unless she have just respect to time and
place for public Worship: and she is equally no Church before God, if she
prefer time and place, and bare assembling for public Worship, before
Christian Faith, Hope, and Love, and Edification therein. As the Sabbath, so
Time and Place were made for Man, and not Man for them. And therefore the
Church is to meet in one, two, or three, or more places at the same time,
according as it shall be for Edification. And look as it is a good Argument for
Infant Baptism, the Primitive Pattern is baptizing whole Households; and
therefore in baptizing Infants we keep to the Primitive Pattern, Infants being a
necessary part of Households. So I should think it a good Argument against the
Congregationalists: The Primitive Pattern was, that all the Christians in a City
be one Church particular; and therefore, if now every Christian City be one
particular Church, tho the Christians in it are so many as to make a hundred,
or two hundred Congregations at the fame time, the Primitive Pattern is kept;
Act. 14.23. Tit. 1.5. It is not the place which make, the Church, but the
Church makes the place. Every Christian Nation as such, is a Church governed
invisibly by God through Christian Faith, according to the Scripture: and
governed visibly by the Prince as sole Supreme under God, over all in his
Dominions by the Sword. Tho God do make use of Pastors and Ministers in the
guiding and governing of his Church, yet he himself is sole Lord over the
Couscience, and only his Voice is to be heard in the Church, and Pastors and
Ministers have no Authority but what is Temporal, and yet it differs in kind
from the Authority of the Prince and Magistrate. The Church Militant consists
of Mortal Men, and Mortal Men can have no Authority Immortal and Eternal.
Pastors die no less than Princes.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell everlastingly.
1. IF Sin had not been, Death had not been; and yet Death unto Elect Men
through Faith in Christ, is rather Life than Death, as being through God's
Grace, the way and passage to Life Everlasting. They die who die eternally: But
they, who by Death pass into eternal Joy immediately in respect of their Souls,
and whose Bodies rest, and as it were sleep in the Grave till the Morning of
the Resurrection, and then shall awake, and be raised glorious, immortal,
spiritual, like the glorious Body of Christ, may be said rather to live than
die.

2. The Resurrection of the wicked is truly from the Merit and purchase of
Christ, and specially the Resurrection of the Just. The Resurrection, as in it
self, is a Privilege and Blessing: That it proves otherwise to the Wicked, is
from themselves, not from Christ. As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be
made alive, 1 Cor. 15.22.

3. As Heaven is it into which Christ ascended when he left this World, so it
is a proper place created and made by God, distinct from Earth and Hell. As
Heaven means the Saints everlasting Rest, prepared for them from before the
Foundation of the World, so it is not a place but a state of Felicity and Joy
above both Time and Place, and all that Man's Heart can now conceive, yet not
repugnant and contrary to Time and Place: For it is God himself as enjoyed in
eternal Blessedness. Hence it follows, that the Spuls of the Godly by Death, do
all of them pass into eternal Happiness immediately: For eternal Happiness not
being a place but a state, and the Godly by Death passing into Eternity, there
can be no imaginable instant in which they are not with God in eternal
Felicity. Only they do innocently long for the Resurrection, and rejoice in the
sure hope thereof: Psalm. 16.9, 10.11. With respect to the Eye of Sense
outwardly, the Triumphant State of Christ began not till he rose from the Dead,
and it was completed by his Ascension, and fitting at the Right Hand of God in
Glory. With respect to the Eye of Faith inwardly, his Triumphant State began
immediately after his Death; and while his Body hung dead upon the Cross, his
Soul was with God in Triumphant Joy. In Memory of Christ's Resurrection we
rightly observe the Lord's Day, as a Day appointed by God for solemn Religious
Worship, both publicly and privately. The fourth Commandment, considered as
repugnant to Life eternal by Faith in Christ, is mere Judaical Righteousness,
damnable Impiety, and no Command of God: But considered as subservient to Life
eternal by Faith in Christ, so it was typical of Christ's Rest in the Grave,
and as typical by his Resurrection it was to cease and have an end, and in the
room of it comes the Lord's Day, as the joyful Day on which our Lord rose from
the Dead, and ^^th begotten us unto a lively Hope; 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. Thus the
fourth Commandment, by Faith in Christ, is not abolished, but established; Romans
3.31.

4. At the Day of Judgment there shall be a perfect opening of all the Good
that was in the Wicked, and of all the Sin that was in the Righteous: not for
the Shame and Terror of the Righteous, nor for the Honor and Comfort of the
Wicked; but that all may have according to their Deeds, and it may appear to
all, that God did not like and approve Sin in his own, and that he did not
condemn and drink what was good and commendable in the Wicked; that so the
Righteous may for (...) rejoice in God's Praises, and the Mouths of the Wicked
may for ever (...). This perfect opening shall be by Conscience, as God's
(...), in each ones Bosom.

5. Eternal Felicity, considered as (...) of no Degrees: Thus all, both Saints
and Angels in (...), and all in Hell, be equally miserable. For greater (...),
th^n Eternal, there cannot possibly be. Eternal (...), admits of Degrees:
For God, as he is the Righteous (...) the World, cannot but by Conscience, as
his Agent in the (...) and Men, eternally difference, as between the Righteous
and the (...), and between the more Wicked and the less Wicked, so also between
the more and the less abundant in the Love and Service of God, and (...)
according to their Deeds. Thus the Manhood of Christ has a (...) of Glory than
the Angels, and the Angels, who never linned, than the Saints, and eminent
Saints, such as Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs, th^n ordinary and common
Saints. Thus there is perfect Unity, and perfect Diversity, sweetest Harmony
and sweetest Variety, no one has cause to complain, no one has cause to
boast, he that has least has no lack, and he that has most has nothing
over. God is All in All, and Eternity is All in All. Set aside Eternity, and
Heaven and Hell, Holiness and Sin, Angels and Men are mere Dreams and Notions.
God may do with his own what be pleases, but he cannot deny himself, and
overthrow his own Name, Kingdom, and Glory. And therefore he can in no instant
annihilate or eternally torment a holy Man: For so to do is not Power but
Impotency, not Dominion, but Tyranny, and the abuse of it. God's Dominion is by
his Will, and not against it; his Will is essentially, and yet freely holy,
just, and good. But it is repugnant to infinite Holiness, Justice and Goodness,
to annihilate, or eternally to to^^ent a Holy Man.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Way of Peace.
1. TWo Things, as I conceive, do greatly conduce to Unity and Peace among
Christians touching Religion: A clear explication of Gospel Truth, and
forbearing one another in Love. The former I have endeavored in the foregoing
Chapters; and among Persons truly conscientious, a clear explication of the
Truth, is in effect the whole Cure. The latter it is not in my Power to
procure. Yet this one thing well weighed may do much toward it; that Persons
eminently Godly, may ignorantly hold an Opinion, in it self heretical, and
against the Foundation of Faith, and yet not hold it heretically, and so as do
the Ungodly. The reason is, because Heavenly and Fundamental Truth, is not by
way of Syllogism, and Human Argumentation, Major, Minor, and Conclusion, common
to us and Heathens, but by way of Holy Likeness to God, through Christian
Faith, which Heathens have not. He then who holds one Divine Truth with Holy
Belief, is thereby free, not from all Error, but from all reigning Error. No
Error is safe, and yet no mere Man, since the Fall of Adam, is wholly free
from all Error, and every Godly Man is in a safe State, not because of his
Error, but because Heavenly Truth, and not Error, reigns in him.

2. The Apostles for some time were in an Error touching the Nature of
Christ's Kingdom; which Error, as in it self considered, did by consequence
overthrow the Kingdom of Christ, and yet, as it was in them, it was no reigning
Error. Acts 1.6. The Apostle Peter was in an Error, touching the difference
between Jew and Gentile, which Error, considered nakedly, as in it self was
destructive of true Godliness, because it did by consequence infer God to be
partial, unrighteous, and a respecter of Persons: And yet Peter in this instant
was eminently godly. Act. 10.34, 35. There is no such thing in God, as Major
and Minor, Premises and Conclusion, Antecedent and Consequent; because all in
God is God: And therefore there can be no such thing in the Image of God: For
as all in God, is God, so all in the Image of God, is the Image of God.
Therefore no Man is to be counted an Heretic, and damnably Erroneous, barely
because he holds an Opinion in it self Heretical, and by Consequence against
the Foundation of Faith, all the while he does sincerely hate and detest and
disown the Consecouence of his Error, not discerning that it is justly
deducible from it. There is great difference between ignorantly holding an
Error, and bowing to an Idol, or worshipping a false God.

3. If Christian Princes, and Supreme Civil Rulers, in their several Dominions,
would according to their Duty, and as becomes nursing Fathers to the Church,
see with their own Eyes, and upon hearing the Arguments and Allegations on both
sides, wisely and impartially discern, between what is plainly contained in
God's Word, and what is not, but is only School-Sophistry, and vain Philosophy,
corrupting Men's Minds from the simplicity that is in Christ, and serving only
to create Strife, and to make plain things obscure; and would enjoin all sides
to insist upon, and unite in plain and wholesome Truth, evident by its own
intrinsic Light, to the Conscience of each Godly Man, through Faith, and
either to cut off and forbear all further Disputes, or manage them in Love, and
in the Spirit of Meekness, we should soon see an End of Controversies
concerning Religion. In the mean time it concerns us all to get and keep well
grounded Certainty through Faith of our own Salvation, and earnestly to contend
for this Faith. This Certainty is by way of special Revelation: For all Divine
Revelation, since Adam's Fall, is either Principal and Special, or Subservient
and Common. Special and Principal is that, by Faith, in the Hearts of all the
Regenerate in various Degrees, and there is no other Special and Principal
Divine Revelation since Adam's Fall. Ephesians. 1.17. and 4.5. 2 Cor. 4.13. 2 Pet.
1.1.

4. Fundamental Truth is not by way of Number, but by way of holy Likeness to
God, who is simply one, and simply one is above Number, and not reducible to
it. The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are three, truly diverse and
distinct, yet not three by way of Number, Order, and Dependence, common to us
and Heathens, but by way of unsearchable Diversity, not to be understood
savingly without Christian Faith^ which Heathens have not. They who hold, that
the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father, and the Son, do not mean that he
proceeds from them, as from two Firsts: for there cannot possibly be two
Firsts in God; Rev. 22.13. And they who hold, that he proceeds only from the
Father, do yet hold, that he is by Nature very and eternal God, and the Spirit
of the Son, and that the Son does from the Father send the Holy Ghost the
Comforter. This supposed, the Difference seems to be but in Word, and not in
Substance of Matter.

5. It is evident from Job 13.7. Heb. 1.1, 2, 3. and from the Nature of the
thing, that there is the Person of God. For God is an intelligent Being, though
infinitely intelligent and increated, and every intelligent Being must needs be
a Person; Genesis 14.21. Jon. 4.11. Numb. 31.28. Now they who hold, that the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are three distinct Persons, do yet hold
that they are but one God. And if they who hold that as they are but one God,
so they are but one Person, do yet hold that the Person of God the Father,
unbegotten and not incarnate, as such, is not the Person of God the Son,
begotten and incarnate, in my opinion they both hold the same fundamental and
necessary Truth, and do but differ in Word. The common School-Doctrine, that in
the Trinity there is alius and alius, but not aliud and aliud: And in Christ
aliud and aliud, but not alius and alius, I conceive to be an Error. For aliud
and aliud must needs mean either Contrariety or Diversity: If it mean
Contrariety, then it is false that there is Contrariety in Christ: If it mean
Diversity, then it is false, that there is not Diversicy in the Trinity. So the
common distinction of the Works of God within God, and without God, ad intra
and adextra, is certainly an Error. For every Work of God is an effect simply
dependent upon his free Pleasure; Ephesians. 1.11. But no dependence can be in God,
all in God is simply independent. And as there cannot be a Creature without a
Creator, so there cannot possibly be a Work of God without God; Joh. 1.3. And
look as it is said, of his own Will God begat us, Jam. 1.18. So equally it may
be said, of his own Will he made all Things, and themfore not of Nothing: For
God's Will is not nothing, but it is the prime Cause, and the prime Cause is
superlatively material to our Faith.

CHAP. XX. Of Sin, and particularly of the Sin against the Holy Ghost.
1. SIN is the Transgression of the Law, the Wages whereof according to legal
Justice, is eternal Damnation: or, it is the Undoing of Body and Soul for ever
in Hell, if God's Grace in Christ prevent not by giving Repentance and Pardon.
Look as all in God, is God, so all in Sin, is Sin. With respect to human
Judicature, Sin is an Effect, and Man's Will is the true Cause of it: With
respect to Divine Judicature it is no Esfect, and therefore it can have no
Cause, but all that sin transgress without Cause. Psalm. 25.3. Joh. 15.25. As to
human Judicature, Sin is an Accident, a thing that comes to pass in time, and
is distinct from Man's natural Substance, and is truly evitable: As to Divine
Judicature, it is no Accident: For from Eternity it was future, it has
Dominion over the Ungodly, and as never repented of, it abides in the
Conscience for ever, and breeds the never-dying Worm. This cannot be affirmed
of an Accident, quod subjecto inest, and quod potest adesse, vel abesse absque
subjecti Interitu: For nothing eternal, can be accidental. It is one and the
same thing, which is both Sin and Guilt, but not in the same respects. Sin as
pleasant, ungodly Men do naturally love: but as Gu^lt does intrinsecally go
along, with Sin, and gripe their Conscience, and fill them with legal Terror,
so they do naturally hate and flee from it. They love Sin, but not Hell.

2. The Holy Ghost in Scripture is taken two ways, either for God the Holy
Ghost, and so we are baptized in his Name: Or for an Effect produced by him.
Hereof there are two Kinds, principal and subservient: principal is that Divine
and Holy Nature, which God does plant in the Hearts of all the Regenerate, in
the instant of their Pardon and Justification by Faith. Ephesians. 1.13, 14. The Holy
Ghost in this Sense, none of those, now in Hell did at any time partake of.
Considered, as a subservient Effect, so it was eminently poured forth on the
Apostles upon the day of Pentecost, and was common in that first Age of the
Christian Church: It consisted in the Gift of Tongues, of Healing, of casting
out of Devils, and other miraculous Distributions. The Holy Ghost in this
Sense, many never Regenerate might partake of, and afterward totally fall away
and perish eternally. And this, for ought I know, is the meaning of the Holy
Ghost, in that much controverted Scripture, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. compared with Mat.
7.22, 23. and 12.24, to 32. Act. 2. and 8.17. and 10.44, 45, 46. and 19. 2, 3,
4, 5, 6. Luke 10.20. Joh. 7.39.

3. The Sin against the Holy Ghost is therefore simply unpardonable, because
the Person guilty of it is justly forsaken of God, given up to a reprobate
Sense, to final Obduration in Sin, and to strong Delusion to believe a Lie, and
so he cannot but be finally impenitent, and incurably graceless. It seems to be
a Degree of that kind of implacable Enmity against God, and his holy Image,
which is in the Devil himself. The Devils believe and tremble: they cannot but
have an inward Sense and Conviction, that Jesus Christ is the Savior of the
World, and the Judge of all, both quick and dead, and that the Religion
contained in the Bible, and sincerely professed by Abel, Moses, Peter, Paul,
and the rest of the Elect, in all Ages, is the only true Religion. And yet
being eternally forsaken of God, and left to themselves, they have no power
evangelically to repent, they cannot but implacably hate God, and his holy
Image, blaspheme his Truth and pure Religion, and endeavor the utter
Extinction of it, and the eternal Ruin of every Man.

4. I was before a Blasphemer, and a Persocuter, and Injurious. But I obtained
Mercy; because I did it ignorantly, in Unbelief. 1 Timothy 1.13. This implies that
had he done it wilfully, and knowingly, against the inward Belief and
Conviction of his Conscience, his Case had been very perilous. In my Opinion,
the safest and easiest way to understand what is the Sin against the Holy
Ghost, is to make the Devil himself the Standard of it. Though all ungodly
Persons be the Children of the Devil, yet as they are not all Atheists,
Murderers, Adulterers, Sodomites, Perjured, Traitors; so they are not all
guilty of the Sin against the Holy Ghost. They who make Conscience of their
ways, and fear to sin against God, may be sure they have not committed this
unpardonable Sin. They who have been convinced and persuaded of God's true
Religion, and have solemnly covenanted and engaged their Souls to God, in
Christ Jesus, and have professed the way of Truth, if afterward they shall
renounce the true Religion, and blaspheme it, and persecute the sincere
Professour^ of it, and shall suffer themselves to be deluded, so as to believe
Lies contrary to the true Religion, I think the Case of such is very perilous.

5. We are to pray for all Men now living, and that shall live hereafter, but
not for those whom we know to have committed the Sin against the Holy Ghost. 1 John 5.16. For the Rule of Prayer is not God's unsearchable Prescience, what
will be, but God's Law obliging us to love our Neighbor as our selves, and in
Token thereof to pray for him, while there is any Hope. Now of all Ungodly Men,
while in the World, there is huma^ Hope, which is a kind of middle State
between the Godly, in whom is Divine Hope of Salvation, and the Damned in Hell,
and Persons guilty of the Sin against the Holy Ghost, of whom there can be no
Hope at all. As for such as teach that we must pray for all sorts of Men, but
not for all of every sort, pro generibus singulorum, sed non pro singulis
generum, it seems to be vain deceit. Col. 2.8. For bare Generals, as distinct
from all the Individuals and Particulars, is a mere Chimera. Christ, as Man,
prayed for all and in this he is our Pattern. Christ, as God the Son incarnate,
did not pray for all, but did omnipotently intercede for those only whose
Salvation was future, and for none else, so as for them. In this he is not our
Paternbut infinitely above us. Joh. 17.9, 20. Luke 23.34.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 6. line 39. read Counterprice. P. 22. l. 27. r. Exigencies. P. 25. l. 21.
r. these P. 27. l. 39. f. Decree, r. Graece. P. 28. l. 8. r. to. P. 29. l. 2.
r. indelibly. P. 32. l. 2, 1. Index. P. 34. l. 17. r. principal and. P. 37. l.
26. r. which makes.


