Orders to be observed by all Students in the University at the Approach and
during the Continuance of their Majesty's here, upon the utmost penalty of the
Statutes to be inflicted upon the Transgressors, as the disobedience and
insolence of the Offenders shall merit.
WHereas their Majesty's have declared their Gracious Pleasure to Honor this
University with their Royal Presence upon Tuesday next the twenty seventh of
this Month; It is enjoined to all Students,

That they stand orderly to wait upon the Approach of their Majesty's in one
rank or row from Emmanuel College, through the Petti Cury by the south side of
St Mary's Church to the Schools, according to the order of Colleges following;
that is to say, Emmanuel, Sidney, Christ, Jesus, St Mary Magdalen, Corpus
Christi, Pembroke Hall, St Peter's, Queens, Katherine Hall, Clare Hall, Trinity
Hall, Catus, St John's, Trinity and Kings Colleges.

That the Undergraduates be in their Gowns and Caps, and after them the
Batchelors of Arts, according to the same order of Colleges, in their Gowns,
Caps, and Hoods; The Fellow-Commoners in their Gowns; Then the Regents in their
Gowns, Caps, Hoods and Habits; Then the Non Regents and Batchelors of Divinity
in their Gowns, Caps, and Hoods; Then the Doctors of Physic, Law, and Divinity
in their Robes and Caps.

That as their Majesty's pass by, they all kneel down, and say with loud and
audible voices, VIVAT REX, VIVAT REGINA.

That the Deans or Head-Lecturers, according to the Direction of the Masters of
the several Colleges, see that all the Students of those their respective
Colleges keep their places hereby allotted, and stir not out of them till the
whole Train attending their Majesty's be passed by.

That all under the Degree of Masters of Arts, do then repair to their own
Colleges, and be there in readiness to Attend their Majesty's with the Masters
and Fellows of such Colleges as their Majesty's shall be pleased to Honor with
their Presence.

That none be seen in any College or in the Town, but in his Gown and Cap, the
Graduates in their Hoods also; and that all demean themselves with such
modesty, civility and decency as may be to the Honor of the University.

That no Student or Graduate, under the Degree of Master of Arts, enter into St
John's College, except the Students of the same College, and that the Masters of
Arts press not into the Rooms of Entertainment, or stay longer there then they
shall be permitted by the Vice Chancellor.

That at the Congregation the Regents and Non-Regents be present in their Caps,
Hoods, and Habits as the Statute requires.

That they place themselves within the inward part of the Benches, if that will
contein them, if not, in the lower part of the outward, leaving the upper for
such Persons of Quality as may be present.

That both Regents and Non Regents keep their places, that they stand not upon
the Benches or Seats, or look over the Partition of the Houses, or gather
together in Companies, but deport themselves with such Gravity as becomes so
Great and Venerable a Senate, and that August Presence they will then be in,
especially considering that acting contrary to this Injunction will deprive
their Majesty's of what they chiefly propose in coming thither, the sight of
the Customs and Formalities of the Universiy in conferring Degrees.

September. 20. 1681. Humf. Gower, Procan.


