A Prayer to be used on Wednesday November 13. In the Office appointed for that
Day, immediately after the Prayer for the High Court of Parliament (which is to
be read during their Session:) and next before the Prayer of Saint Chrysostom,
both in the Morning, and Evening Service.
By the Kings special Command.
ALmighty God, who have in part discovered the designs, and disappointed the
attempts of those Popish Conspirators, who under the pretense of Religion, and
thy Sacred Name, have conspired our destruction; laboring by the most
unjustifiable methods of Murders, Treasons, and the Assassination of His
Majesty's Sacred Person, to introduce the tyranny of a foreign power, and the
abomination of superstitious worship; and thereby to enslave the souls and
bodies of thy servants, and to extinguish the light of thy Gospel amongst us
and our posterity: We yield thee praise and thanksgiving for this thy mercy to
us; imploring thy grace and favor in the farther discovery of these depths of
Satan, this mystery of iniquity. Send forth thy light and thy truth, and let
them preserve us. Give protection and defense to our Sovereign Lord the King,
bind up his soul in the bundle of life, and let no weapon formed against him
prosper; Clothe all his enemies with shame; but upon Himself and His Posterity
let His Crown ever flourish. To this end, knit together the hearts of all this
People, as the heart of one man, in the defense of their King, their Laws, and
their Religion. Teach them to see in this their day, the things belonging to
their peace, before they are hid from their Eyes; Remove from amo^^ them the
Accursed thing, those personal, and those p(...) guilts, whose cry is gone up
to heaven, and call^ aloud for thy vengeance; And being by true repentance
reconciled to thee our God, let us by Christian Love and Charity be united to
one another: That walking in the paths of thy holy Law which thou have given
us, its Blessing may be continued to us; and we thy people and sheep of thy
pasture may give thee thanks for ever, and show forth thy praise from
generation to generation. Hear us, O God, for thy mercies sake, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen.

