THE CHRISTIANS Daily PRACTICE of PIETY: OR, Holy walking with GOD. AS ALSO,
Scripture Rules to be observed in Buying and Selling. Very Useful for all sorts
of People that desires to make Conscience of their ways here, and to fit
themselves for their great Account hereafter.

Licensed according to Order:

London Printed for J. Deacon, at the Angel in Gilt-spure street, School. And
Reprinted at Edinburgh, by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson,
Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty. School.

THE CHRISTIANS Daily PRACTICE of PIETY.
1. BE sure to get God, and the things of God next thy Heart when thou awakest.
God, the World and Satan with his suggestions knocks to get first in. Open
first to God, if Satan or the World has possession, out them speedily, and let
thy Meditation on God be sweet; spend thy first thoughts on him, and thy
Eternal condition, whose thou shall be at the opening of the Graves, and the
rising of the Dead: think also thou art on Night nearer Heaven or Hell; resolve
to do something toward thy Salvation that day in mortifying some sin, and
getting nearer to Christ.

2. Before thou entertainest the World, get more solemnly to God, lift up thy
heart unto him, first in thanksgiving for the Bed blessing, thy renewed life
and strength, and then pour out thy Soul in supplication to him for his grace
to enable thee in thy duties, to resist the temptations, and to be kept from
the evils of that day, enlarge thy self, as time and place will permit, read
withal some potion of Scripture If thou can.

3. Alter thou have been with God, set a watch upon thy Heart, and keep it
close, that thy Heart (...) not depart too far from God that day, by setting it
over much on the Creatures, and thy Calling, but keep thy mind heavenly, and
near to God, laboring hourly to keep the sweet relish of God upon thy Soul
which thou had in thy morning Contemplation and Duty, lest thy Mind and
Affection cleave to the World, and so thou spend that day without God in the
World.

4. When thy watch is set, then set upon thy lawful Calling with Diligence and
good will, doing every hours Work, as to the Lord, live not out of a Calling,
nor idle in it, exercise as much Care as the weightiness of the work requires;
make Conscience of spending the day well; judge a misspent hour no small sin.

5. When thou art in thy Calling, avoid all just cause of offense to God and
Man, in Word and Deed; do not provoke God to wrath, nor those that dwell near
thee; corrupt not any by thy wanton Carriage; wrong not any by unjust dealing;
be courteous, peaceable, and harmless; do not easily take Offense, but be
patient, long suffering, forgetting, and forgiving, as God for Christ's sake
forgives thee.

6. Set a solemn time apart to pray in, and with thy Family twice in the day
at least, and let those prayer-seasons be when the whole Family can most
conveniently assemble, and suffer none through sickness to be absent: let not
Evening Prayer-season be deferred too late, lest the Body be unable cheerfully
to assist the Soul; and often, through weariness and heaviness, thou loss the
Duty and displease God. In all these Duties be hearty, fervent, faithful and
serious; spend also some of of the day in Meditation of Sin, of Christ, of
Death, Judgment, and the Life to come.

7. Be careful all the day long of thy Discourse, for thou must give an account
of every idle Word, and by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words
thou shall be condemned; let all thy Speeches be serious holy, in-offensive,
and edifying; weigh before hand what honor thy Discourse will bring to God,
what good to thy Friend, what good or hurt to thy own Soul; use not any foolish
jesting, or taunting reproachful Speeches; spend not many words in thy Buying
and Selling, abhore all lies, tales, idle stories, wanton songs, and do not
curse nor swear, or use the name of God vainly: Let the matter of thy discourse
be either on the things of God, or the necessary works of thy Calling: talk not
much of other Men's matters, back-bite none; If thou speak of their Sins, let it
be with Grief, and so avoid the same thy self: if of their Godliness, let it be
to imitate them: Remember God stands by, he hears, and write-down all thou
say.

8. Observe hourly Gods providential dealing with thee or others* If God has
appeared to thee or others, in any eminent mercy, or judge, meant, note that,
and remember to praise, fear, and love him for it; especially observe what sin
he has showed thee, what hints of his love, what hopes of his glory; write
these in a Book, but chiefly in thy Heart, for thy supporting in deserting and
dying times.

9. Have a care all day to the feet of thy Afflections, on what they are set;
they will be apt to settle on the world and sin, and withdraw from God and
Duty, review them continually, ask thy self often what thou love, fear,
desire, where thou art, and on what, and recall thy soul if it be departed
from God.

10. Take heed of letting loose the Reins to unruly Passions; If thou be angry,
sin not, be easy to be entreated, again; let not the Sun go down on thy wrath:
abhor railing, reviling, or stomaching any, in thy patience possess thy Soul.

11. When thou find any temptations arising, be sure to meet the Tempter in
the strength of Christ, with some Scripture commands, promise or threatening,
which suits with the nature of the Temptation to repel it: and let not the
Tempter get too near thee: If he be within thee, thou art like to be soiled:
It Is easier to keep out an Enemy, than to cast him out when he is in;
especially eye the Tempter most, when he sets on thee to entice thee into thy
Constitution Sins.

12. Mark every hour the coming and going of the Spirit, and attend upon its
motions, hear what it says unto thee, and when thou feel'st more than ordinary
of his presence, than examine thy graces, mortify sin, cleave heartily to God,
and delight thy Soul in him; withal, then labor for assurance of his love,
(but omit not thy calling) when thou feel the Spirit depart, let it not go
too far before thou criest after it: O make thy moan to God speedily for its
income again.

13. Labor to add something to every grace each day of thy life, and to take
something from thy sin; build up thy knowledge in faith, love joy, and fear
daily; lay consideration to the root of all thy graces to quicken them, be as
careful of the graces of thy Soul, as of the Children of thy Body, that each
may have its meat in due season; withdraw thy Soul from every Sin, lay the ax
to the root of them, and be cutting about them every hour.

14. Have frequent and hourly recourse to the Blood of Christ by acts of Faith,
for renewed acts of pardon for thy renewed sins, and keep open the floodgates
of Repentance, which must run daily as thou sinnest daily; be persuaded that
thy work is never done till thy Life be done; also be frequently leaning on
Christ, and drawing strength from him, and help in every undertaking, making
him thy All in the point of Accession with the Father, and assistance in all
thy lawful works and duties.

15 If thou fail into the sin of a deep dye, lie not long in it, but apply thy
self to Christ for help; and though thou must go with shame to God by Christ
for forgiveness, yet go speedily and lie at the Throne of Grace, till thou have
got some sense of God's favor, and made up the breach which thy sins made;
till thy strangeness to God by reason of that sin be removed from thy spirit:
when thou art wounded, it is not good to lie long from the Physician.

16. Above all, take heed lest thou fall into a custom of sinning; if one act
or two may stand after Illumination of Grace, do not think too many will;
betimes get out of the way of sinning, the more thou yieldest, the more sad thy
case, and hard thy cure is.

17. Be doing or receiving good in all thy places God shall call thee: if thou
art among thy Superiors in Grace and Knowledge, learn, if among those that are
weaker, teach them; suffer not sin to pass by unreproved, but be a faithful,
yet a wise Monitor of those about thee, and take reproofs thy self kindly.

18. In the Evening of the day perform thy Evening Sacrifice of private and
secret prayer, and praises for thy special graces mercies, and love* tokens
received that day; then give up thy self to God and his protection, kiss his
Son, and let him lie between thy Arms all night, meditate on him in the night
watches, and take thy rest sweetly in the Lord.

Nullus Dies sine linea:

SCRIPTURE RULES To be Observed in Buying and Selling.
Rules concerning Buying Commodities.
1. IF you would not transgress Scripture Rules in Buying: then first, take
heed that you do not discommend those Commodities that are very good, which you
are about to buy, that so you may not bring down the price of the Commodity,
and get it for less than it is worth; there is a known place of Scripture for
this, in Prove. 20.14. It is naught says the buyer; but when he gone his way,
then he boastet^. People in Solomon's time they were wicked, when they came to
the Market to buy any thing, the Buyer he would discommend the Commodity, and
say, it was naught though it were very good and saleable; but when the seller
was gone, then he would boast of what a good pennyworth he had bought, and the
like.

2. Do not make vows and protestations, that you will give no more for a
Commodity than what you have first offered, when afterward you will give more.
This is a very common thing with Tradesmen: You shall have a man come to a
Shop, and cheapen a Commodity, and the Buyer he will say, He will not give a
farthing more, and the seller will say, He will not take a farthing less; and
yet both the Buyer gives more and the Sell^^ takes less: now this is no other
than a palpabl^ and downright Lie.

3. Do not give counterfeit money for those Commodities you buy: This you have
an Example o^ in Abraham, when he was to buy the field in Mack^pelah of Ephron
the Hittite, for a Burying-place in Genesis 23.16. says Abraham I will give thee
fou^ hundred Shekles of Silver, current Money with the Merchant; and therefore
you transgress Scripture Rules, If you know you have brass Money, o^
Counterfeit Gold about you, and yet pay it away for Commodities; you sin in
doing so, though you your self took it for Commodities.

4. Do not give for a Commodities less than in your Conscience you think it is
worth; it is an oppression in buying, when you seek to bring a Commodity under
its due value and worth. Abraham when he was to buy the Cave in Mackpelah of
Ephron, says he, I will give thee the worth of it in Money and so Davi^, when
he was to buy the Threshing-floor of Araunah the Jebusite, 2 Samuel 24.24. says
he, I will buy it of thee at the full value of it.

5. Do not long defer the paying of these Commodities which you have bought,
when thou have by thee wherewithal to pay it. There is an Excellent place for
this in Prove. 3.27, 28. Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it
is in the power of thine hand to give it. Say not unto thy Neighbor, go, and
come again, and tomorrow I will give, when thou have it by thee. This Text is
referred to works of Mercy, but has relation to Buying and Selling, and
Trading in the World. ^f you owe a Man Money for a Commodity, you ^ought to pay
him, and not to let him come day ^ter day for it, and go without it, when you
have (...) by you. 2 Kings 4.7. It is the Badge of a wicked man in Scripture,
not to pay his Debts, in Psalm. 31.20. The wicked borrows and pays not again.

6. Do not engross a Commodity, that is, do not buy all of a Commodity into
your own hands alone, that by that means you may sell the Commodity at your own
price; This is a mere oppression, destructive to a Commonwealth, and to all
Trading: The Scripture condemns this in Prove. 11.6. It is spoken there of
Corn-Mongers, says the Text, He that withholdeth Corn, the People shall cu^se
him; but blessing shall be upon the head of him that sells i^. In Solomon's
time there were Corn-Mongers, that when Corn was cheap, would go and buy up all
the Corn in the Country, and would keep it up and sell none till Corn was very
dear; now says the Text, He that does thus the People shall curse him for it;
but blessing shall be upon the head of him that sells it. Now it is no sin in
it self to engross a Commodity, thereby to sell it the cheaper; but, for a Man
to engross a Commodity merely thereby to advance the price of it, this is such
an oppression, that the People shall curse him for it.

7. Do not in your buying of Commodity take any advantage of the mistake or
oversight of the Seller; as, suppose you should come to a Shop, and buy so many
Yards of Cloth, or the like, and he should give you more than is thy due, o^
take less money of thee than is his due, you should take no advantage of him in
such a Case, but restore it again: for if you take any more from hi^ than you
bought of him it is theft or if you give any less for the Commodity than you
bargained for. It is Their. There is an excellent place for this in Genesis 43 12.
Jacob, when there was a Famine in the Land he sent his Sons down into Egypt to
buy Corn, and Joseph he knowing his Brethren, filled their Sacks with Corn, and
put the Money which they brought for the Corn in the mouth o^ their Sacks
again; and when they came home and found their Money in the mouth of their
Sacks, they told their Father Jacob of it: the^ said he to them, Go back again,
and take double Money in your hand; and the Money that was brought again in the
mouth of your Sacks, carry it again in in your hands, for peradventure it was
an oversight Here was a conscientiousness in Jacob.

8. Do not buy any Commodities on the Lord's Day: It is true, upon urgent
occasions to maintain Life either of Man or Beast, this is lawful, but to buy
any thing that you may well be without till. Monday, in this case you may sin
if you buy any thing on the Lord's Day, in Neh. ^0.13. And Nehemiah entered into
an Oath, and the people with him, that if any of the people of the Land brought
Wa^es, or any Victuals, to sell on the Sabbath day, that they should not buy it
of them. And as the Law did not give them leave to break the Jewish Sabbath, so
neither does the Gospel give us leave to break the Christian Sabbath; and
therefore I cannot see but that is a sin, for men to buy either Wine, or Beer,
or Pepper, or Mustard, or any other trivial thing which they may well be
without) on the Sab^ath Day.

7. Do not in buying a Commodity, work upon ^he necessity of a poor man, that
has need of Money, this is a great sin in Tradsmen; they know that a poor man
wants money, and he must sell ^ff his Ware, or else he cannot buy bread for his
^amily, and therefore he must work upon his necessity, and will not buy the
Commodity of him, ^nless he will sell it cheaper than he can afford it: Now
this is a great Oppression! In the 25th of Levit. 14. If thou buy any thing of
thy Neighbor, ^r sellest any thing to thy Neighbor, thou must not ^se
Oppression. There is an Oppression in buying as ^ell as in selling: It is a
great Oppression for rich ^en to work upon the necessity of a poor Man, ^o make
him sell cheaper than he can afford, or ^se to buy nothing at all of him.

10. Do not buy those things that are not fit to ^e bought and sold: as first.
Do not buy stolen ^oods, they are not fit to be bought: If thou know^st that
the Goods that are to be bought are stol^n Goods, they are not to be bought,
but to be ^estored; the Receiver is as bad as the Thief, so ^e buyer is as bad
as the Thief. Secondly, Do ^or buy Monuments of Idolatry, for they are not ^t
to be bought, as Crosses, Beads, and Images, ^d Crucifixes, and the like.
Thirdly, Do not ^uy Men for Slaves, this the Lord reproves in ^mos 2.16. They
sold the Righteous for Silver, and ^e poor for a pair of Shoes: And so in the
17th of ^e^t Thou shall not steall thy Brother and m^k^ ^erchandize of him. We
should therefore take heed, lest we split our Souls upon any of the Rocks; and
let us labor that among all our b^ings, we buy that which Christ bids us by,
Isaiah 55 1. Ho, every one that chirsteth come y^ unto the waters; and he that
has no money, co^ ye, and buy, come buy wine and milk with money, and without
price.

Rules concerning Selling Commodities.
1. IF you would not transgress Scripture Rul^ in Selling Commodities, then in
the f^ place, do not multiply words in Selling: T^ Scripture affords many
Examples for this, as Genesis 13.15. Abraham, As I told you before, wh^ he was to
buy the Cave of Machpelah of Ephron, told him that it was worth Four hundred
Shekles Silver, and Abraham presently gave him so mu^ Current Money with the
Merchant: And so G^^ himself takes upon him to be a Seller, in Za^^ 11.12. If
you think good, says God, give my price, if not, forbear; multiplicity of Wor^
is needless. In a multitude of words (says S^lomon) there is Sin: Men should
not lav^ and frollick in a Shop.

2, Do not commend and over-praise a Comodity, when you know in your Conscience
the there is a fault in it: This is a vicious carria^ in the Seller, when he
shall use abundance of (...) words to set out a Commodity, when it is (...)
good. As the Buyer should not discommen^ Commodity when it is good, so should
not the Seller over praise and commend a Commodity when it is naught.

3. Do not sell thy Commoditys by false Weights nor by false Measures. Do not
keep a deceitful Balance, or deceitful Measure; This is commanded in Amos
8.5. They make the Ephah small and the Shekel great, and falsify the Balances
by deceit: And so in the 20th. of Prove 20. Diverse Weights, and diverse Measures,
both of them are alike an abomination unto the Lord. Now this is spoken, not
that the Weights and Measures in themselves are an Abomination to the Lord, but
only those Men that do use, and keep and sell by those Weights and Measures;
and therefore the Lord gave a special Law for this, to all that did follow
Trades in Israel in Deuteronomy. 25.14, 15. Says God there, [Thou shall not have in
thy house diverse measures, a great and a small, that is, a great measure to
buy, and a small one to sell by, Thou shall not have in thy bag diverse weights,
a great and small, but thou shall have a perfect and a just Weight, and a
perfect and a just measure shall thou have, that thy days may be long in the
Land which the Lord thy God gives thee: And so in Mic. 6.10. Is there yet,
says God, the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked, and the
scant measure, which is abomination to the Lord.

4. You are to make Conscience in selling a Commodity, not only that you do nor
speak falsely but also that you do not speak in an Equivocating, manner. It is
an Observation that Luther has upon these Words, Let no man defraud his
Brother: Says he. There are many Shop keep that will not lie, but they will
Equivocate ve^ much: You shall have a Tradesman, that sell off a Commodity, he
will get a Partner w^ him, and he shall offer him so much for a Commodity, and
then he will tell the next man the comes for that Commodity, that there was o^
that offered him so much for it but even no^ and then they will say likewise,
It cost me much, when it may be they had other thi^ with it of greater value
and price; and it may they had a great deal of time given them to p^ for it;
whereas the Buyer pays ready Mone^ and many other Equivocating words they u^
which is as bad as lying.

5. In selling a Commodity, do not work up the ignorance and simplicity of the
Man that co^ to buy the Commodity; but if you discern him be unskillful, rather
use him the better, than ^ worse: In Zech 1:9. says God there, In the same d^
also will I punish all those young men that leap i^ the Threshold, which fill
their Masters Ho^ with violence and deceit; And so in 1 These. 4.^ Let no Men,
says the Apostle, go beyond, or fraud his Brother in any matter, for the Lord
is avenger of all such; and so in 2 Pet. 2 3. A^ through covetousness shall
they with feigned w^ make Merchandise of you, whose judgment ling^ not. When
Men shall work upon the Ignor^ of the Buyer, and so advance the price of
Commodity; this is a great sin.

6 Do not imbase a Commodity from its primitive price and goodness, and yet
sell it at the full price as if it were Good, thereby to get the more by it;
This the Scripture condemns in Amos 8.6. They sell the refuse of the Wheat. The
Corn mongers in those times they would pluck out the best of their Wheat, and
yet sell the worst at the full price of the best; now this the Lord condemns:
and so in Isa. 1.21. They mingle wine with water, and dross with silver: The
Scripture condemns this, to imbase a Commodity from its primitive goodness, and
yet to sell it at the full value of the best.

7. Be not among the first that shall raise the price of a Commodity: This I
hinted to you before in Prove. 11.26 He that withholdeth Corn, the people shall
curse him; but blessing shall he upon the head of him that seileth it.

8. Be not so eager in selling of your Commodities, that you cannot content
your selves to sell on the six days of the Week, but you must sell on the
Sabbath Day likewise; Be not like those in Amos 8.5. saying, When will the new
Moo^ be over, that we may sell Corn, and the Sabbath be over, that we may set
forth Wheat? And so in Neh. 13.15. In th^se days says the Prophet, I saw ^n
Judah so^e^^^ a^^ng in W ne presses on the S^bba h* and br ngin^ ln S^caves,
and la^in^ ass s, and all ma ner of Bu^^hens, which they b o ^h^ into Jerusalem
on the Sabbath, and I testified against ^^em in the day wherein they sold
Victual N^w this is against your common sel^^g H^^s^s, and S ops of ^ean
Trades, that sell by retail, that makes nothing of selling small trefling
things on the Sabbath day, but this is a great sin.

9. When you are found out to be deceitful in your dealing, do not justify
your deceit; many men, if you come to them, and tell them tha^ they sell dearer
than their Neighbors, they will tell you that they do not; or if you tell then
that the Commodity is not good which you bough^ of them, they will say, it is
as good as they ca^ afford for the price, and the like; this is condemned in
Ephraim, in Hos. 12.7. Ephraim a Merchant, the balance of deceit are in h^
hand, he loves to oppress, and yet he says I (...) become Rich, and I have
found me out substan^ and in all my labors they shall find no iniqui^ in me,
that is sin: you should not justify yo^ deceit.

10. Do not sell those things that are not sal^ able: As first, do not sell
spiritual things, for the are not saleable; as in Acts 8.20. Simon M^gus, when
he would have bought the gift of (...) Holy Ghost with Money, says Peter to
him, T^ money perish with thee, because thou thoughtest (...) the Gift of God
might be purchased with Money* ^condly, do not sell Monuments of Idolatry,
Crosses, and Beads, and Images, and Crucifix and Conjuring-books, and the like,
they are fit to be sold, as in Acts 19.19. Many also of (...) that used curious
Arts, brought their Books t^ther, and burnt them before all Men, and ^counted
the price of them, and they found i^ be 50000 pieces of Silver: This is spoken
(...) of Conjuring Books; and notwithstanding were of so great a value, they
would not sell whem, but burn them. Thirdly, Do not sell thy self as Ahab did,
to work wickedness; for you are not your own, but Gods, and therefore you must
glorify God in your Bodies and in your Sou^s, which are God's. Fourthly, you
must not sell stolen Goods. Fifthly, You must not sell those things that are for
no other use. but for to commit sin in the using of them. As for to sell stuff
to paint Harlot's Faces, is a sin, because it is for no other use, but to
commit Sin in the using of it.

FINIS.
A Morning Prayer to be used in Families.
WE praise thee, O God, for thy many precious benefits bestowed on us, for the
Creation of the World, and for the Redemption of Mankind by the Lord Jesus:
thou did safe^^ take us from the womb, and haste ever since car^^ for us,
thou have of thy sweet mercy caused us (...) be born within thy Church, where
we have be^^ early given to thee in Baptism. Thou have affor^ed us the means of
Grace, and called us to (...) hope of Glory.

But, O most merciful Father, we poor a^^ miserable sinners, conceived in sin
and brou^^ forth into iniquity, have gone astray from the^ we have not cared to
know thee, and to do (...) will. but have done our own wills, and follow our
foolish and sinful inclinations: and do therefore deserve thy wrath and curs^.

O Lord; have mercy upon us, turn us (...) thee, and grant us true Repentance
and forgiveness of all our sins, for Jesus sake: let it henceforth be our
chiefest care to please thee, and s^ thy Kingdom and Righteousness: work in us
a (...) Faith, and a lively Hope, and a frequent Ch^^^ty: make us Humble, M^ek,
Patient, Sober, Just, Kind and Loving to all Men, Submiss^^^ and Obedient to
them that are over us: and well Content and Thankful in every condition of
Life: Grant that we may daily grow in Knowledge, Loving, Fearing and Obeying
thee: Creat in us clean Hearts, O God, and renew right Spirits within us.

O Lord, send thy Gospel through the World pour out plentifully the Spirit of
Truth, Hollnes^ and Peace on all thy People. Bless this Church and Kingdom,
preserve our King and Queen, and all the Royal Family; Guide our Judges and
Magistrates, sanctify and assist the Ministers of the Gospel: Visit all that
are in Trouble, and sanctify their affliction unto them: be gracious to all
our Kindred, Friends and Neighbors, bless and forgive all our Enemies.

We thank thee, O Lord, for thy care of us this night, watch over us this day,
and Make us mindful that we are always in thy fight, that we may be in thy fear
all the day long: bless us also, O God, in all our lawful employments, and
establish thy work in our hands, and grant that through the whole course of our
Life we may be Holy and Harmless in all manner of Life and Conversation, than
when this short and frail Life is at an End, we may be partakers of everlasting
life through the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord, in whose Name and Words we
pray, Our Father, etc.

An Evening Prayer for Families.
MOst gracious God, what shall we render to thee for thy many and great
benefits bestowed on us? Though we have been unthankful and undutiful servants
to thee our Lord and Master; Thou have continued thy care and kindness for us
ever since me were born, and have preserved us this day: let us never forget
thy goodness, but grant that thereby we may be led to Repentance and Amendment
of Life. Preserve us from every thing that is displeasing to thee. O Lord, keep
us from cursing, swearing and lying from pride, stubborness and idleness: work
in us an utter dislike of all uncleanness, gluttony, and drunkenness of malice
and envy, of strife and contention, of deceit and covetousness: Give u^ grace
to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and
godly in this present world. Cause us to understand and consider the Laws and
Life of Jesus, that we may d^ his will, and follow his steps. Let never the
cares of this life, nor the love of riches, nor ev^ company, nor the corrupt
customs of the world withdraw us from the obedience of thy Laws; ^^ strengthen
and establish us by thy holy Spirit that we may live and die thy faithful
Servants.

O Lord send thy Gospel through the Worl^ pour out plentifully the spirit of
truth, holin^ and Peace on all thy people. Bless this Church and Kingdom,
preserve our King and Queen, and all the Royal Family; guide our Judges and
Magistrates, sanctify and assist the Ministers of the Gospel, visit all that
are in trouble, and sanctify their afflictions unto them: be gracious to all
our Kindred, Friends and Neighbors: bless and forgive all our Enemies. O Lord,
be merciful to us, forgive us the sins of this day, watch over us this night,
and keep us ever mindful that we must shortly die, and that we may without
delay turn to thee, and pass the time of our sojourning here in fear. Good
Lord, hear us, and grant these our desires, and what else thou knows to be
needful for us, and that for the merits of Jesus Christ, in whose Name and
Words we pray, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Grace to be said before Meat.
O Lord, be merciful to us, and pardon our sins: sanctify these thy good
benefits, that we by the sober and thankful use of them, may be enabled for thy
service, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. Amen.

Thanksgiving after Meat.
WE thank and praise thee, O Lord, the giver of all good, who have at this time
fed our Bodies: stir up in us a greater care for our Souls: and grant that our
short lives which are so carefully sustained by thy bounty, may be spent in
doing thy will. Lead us safely through this vain and sinful World, in which we
are pilgrims and Strangers, and bring us into everlasting rest, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

THe Contents of this Book is desired to be practiced by all good Christians.

By yours R. Alleine.


