A COMFORTING Farewel-Word, TO THE LORDS Trembling-Hearted People, AT THE
Removal of the Cloud of his Glory from the Sanctuary, applied as a present
Cordial, against their heart saintings.

Act. 14. 22. We must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God.

Zach. 14. 7. It shall come to pass that at the evening time it shall be light.

Zach. 8. 6 -- If it be marvelous in the eyes of this People in these Days,
should it be also marvelous in mine eye says the Lord of Hosts?

Printed in the Year, 1664.

TO THE READER.
WHen the Children of Israel departed out of Egypt, they met with many sad
difficulties in their way, before they entered into the land of Canaan; they
had the Red Sea before them, the Armies of the Egyptians behind, and Rocks upon
every hand, thus they were in very evil case, and when the Lord had manifested
his power and goodness, in pathing a way for them on the face of the deeps, so
that his Redeemed did walk through as upon dry land, even then, their troubles
were not ended, for their faith had great trials in the Wilderness, where they
wandered forty years; sometimes fleeing before her enemies; sometimes wanting
Water, sometimes hungry, sometimes sting'd with Serpents; yea, and that after
they were at the very border of the land of Promise; so that they met with many
afflicting dispensations in their way, yea and at last there is a raging
Jordan, when they are at the very entry into that Land wherein they were to
rest: And its very clear that Egypt was a Figure of that spiritual bondage
wherein we are by nature under the oppression of the great Pharaoh Satan and
sin, whereunto even the Elect are servants before Conversion; and the place
whereunto they went, viz. Canaan, which was a type of Heaven, whereunto
Believers do go, and wherein they are to rest; and therefore by the long
wearisome journey through the wast bowling Wilderness, and the many difficulties
wherewith they did meet in their march to Canaan, must shadow forth these many
sad and afflicting dispensations and disappointments wherewith Believers are
exercise, from the day of their conversion from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan unto God, till the day of their passing from the miseries of
time, and entering into that glorious and blessed Rest, that waits for the
people of God, Heb. 4. whereof Canaan was but a figure: And as tossed Israel
attained to that rest through the goodness of God, sending the pillar of the
cloud to direct them by day, and the pillar of fire to lead them in the dark
night, and inclining them to follow the same; so also shall Believers come to
that blessed Rest through the goodness of our God, who sends these two
precious pillars of his word and providence, (between which there is so sweet a
concord, and so pleasant a harmony) to direct our way; Canaan is before us,
therefore we ought not to be weary, though we be sometimes walking in the deep
and miry Clay, the rest that is before us will sufficiently make up all our
losses and pains in walking thither, therefore let us not give way to sinkings
of beart, which may occasion wearying in the way, its good taking a view of the
land that is afar off, that so by looking beyond the things that are seen being
temporal unto the things that are not seen, being spiritual and eternal, we may
esteem our afflictions light and of short continuance, being delighted with the
forehand conceptions of that far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory,
and may be encouraged thereby to endure unto the end and be saved, and surely
there is good ground so to do, seeing that there can no sader dispensation
befall the Church, then that which the cloud of witnesses have traveled through,
Heb. 11. and we are commanded to walk by the foot steps of the flock in days
of tribulation and astonishment, and it is most safe for us so to do, and to
make our blessed Lord Jesus our hiding place from the wind, storm, rain and
tempest, Isa. 32. 2. for he has a real fellow feeling and simpathy with his
people, and has learned from his own bitter sufferings to succor them that
are tempted, Heb. 2. 18. and also there is some comfortable dispensations also
wherewith the Lord refreshes weary Israel, there is a path through the Red Sea;
there is a brazen Serpent to cure the stings of the fiery Serpent in the Desert;
there is an Elim as well as a Marah, Numb. 33. 9. where are twelve fountains of
Water, and threescore and ten Palm Trees, where weary Israel may be refreshed,
the Lord deals not with his people as if they were briers and thorns ranked
in his way, Isa. 27. 4. but as with his Vineyard, Verse. 8. contending in
measure there, for removeing corrupt buddings forth; staying his North wind in
the day of his East wind, some breathings he gives his people, some fair
blinks after tempestuous storms; so much the Scripture allows his people to
look for; and that which follows does tend somewhat to the encouragement of
the Lords people to look for his goodness, as to this in the land of the
living. Times and seasons are known to our God, and we are only to look to his
word as our rule, and to admit of no comfort nor comforter but is according
unto this unerring rule, viz. the Scriptures. This Sermon going abroad through
many hands, cannot be expected to be so full as it has been at the first, yet
nothing is rendered here, but what was then delivered; there may also be found
diverse Erratas, and possibly some Tautologies which may be easily helped if the
Author shall upon notice, or sight hereof be persuaded to revise it himself, in
the mean time, let the Discreet Reader amend, or heartily pass over what he
finds not so distinct, nor sounding so well as in another case might be
expected; Farewell.

A Comforting Farewell Word to the Lords Trembling Hearted People, at the
removal of the Cloud of his Glory from the Sanctuary, as a present Cordial
against their Heart-faintings.
Text JOHN. 16. 22. But I will see you again, and your Heart shall rejoice.
OF all the people that are in the World, the people of the Lord (who have
dedicated and given away themselves to him) have most, yea and only reasons to
be joyful in their blessed King, and there are none that have solid ground of
consolation, but they alone; for albeit they have their times of heaviness,
when need requires, they, and only they, have also that which may hear up their
spirits under the heavy pressures of such sad and bitter Dispensations; and
howbeit their lot may be to fit low for a time, and with the Church, Lamen. 1.
13. to interline this melancholious meditation among the rest of their sad
Complaints; From above has he sent a fire into my bones, and it prevails
against them; The yoke of my transgressions is bound by his hand; they are
wreathed, and come up upon my neck; he has made my strength to fail, the Lord
has delivered me into their hands, from whom I am not able to rise up! Yea
although Zion should be made to spread forth her hands, Ver. 17. and say, Now
have I none to comfort me, for the Lord has commanded concerning his people,
that their enemies should be round about them; Yet even then have they reason
to rejoice in the Lord; yea, howbeit that also be enrolled amongst their bitter
Lamentations, which the Church has, Lament. 2. 5. and Ver. 7, 8. where
sorrowful Zion bemoaneth thus; The Lord has increased in the Daughters of
Judah mourning and lamentation, and has violently taken away his Tabernacle,
and made his Sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion, for he has cast off his Altar,
and abhorred his Sanctuary; Yea, and howbeit she concludes Ver. 8. That the
Lord has purposed in his heart, to destroy the wall, or, defense of the
Daughter of Zion, having covered her with a cloud in his anger, Ver. 2. Which
may cause pain in her inward parts, making her cry out as one that is far spent
in a deadly Consumption; Mine eyes fail with tears, my bones are troubled, my
liver is powered out upon the Earth, for the destruction of the Daughter of my
people: Yea though she be necessitated, Chap. 5. 9. to seek her bread with the
peril of her life, because of the sword of the wilderness; And the Women and
Maids are ravished in the Cities of Judah, Which is not one of the smallest
miseries accompanying a lot of persecution; Yea howbeit Her Princes be hanged
up by the hands of her Enemies, Chap. 5. 12. (So that it would seem that all
hope were gone) yet among all these anxious perplexities, she may conclude,
Chap. 3. 24. The Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore will I hope in
him; For it is good that a man (even in such a sad perplexed condition) both
hope, trust, and quietly wait for the salvation of his God; For though he be a
little angry, and therefore causes grief, Ver. 31, 32. Yet will he have
compassion according to the muititude of his mercies. It is fabled of a kind of
Sea Creatures, that when the weather is fair, they weep, because that after a
blink there will be a storm; but rejoice when it is tempestuous, because that
after such sour blasts, there will be a fair day: I shall not say what truth is
in this Fable, yet it has a good morality to the people of God; For howbeit
they may have a whole night of weeping, (though manifold afflictions) yet joy
comes to them in the morning; And howbeit they may carry out the precious seed
of their supplications mourningly, yet shall they return rejoicing, bearing the
precious sheaves of the return of their supplications with them. So that they
have reason, when among the most tempestuous and tossing waves of manifold
tribulations, to rejoice; and have most solid ground of gladness of heart, even
when their affliction is most bitter. We need no further proof of this, than
the words which now we have read unto you. The Disciples of Christ were in most
sad afflictions, and had great sorrow of heart; and no wonder; for their dear
Lord was to be taken from them, and slain; yet even in that non-such condition
of sorrow, did the Lord propose this ground of encouragement to them. What
sadder and more bitter case could they be in than this? their dear Master was
to be murdered and slain, and the hour was very near, which heightened their
sorrow and bitterness; yet the Lord does encourage them against that nonsuch
affliction; Ye now therefore have sorrow, but I will see you again, and your
heart shall rejoice.

I shall give you a short hint of the meaning of the words, and so draw forth
the particulars therein contained, whence we shall draw some points of Doctrine.

Explication. Ye now therefore have sorrow. This therefore has a particular
reference to what he had spoken concerning his approaching sufferings and
departure; but especially they are to be referred to verse. 22. where he sets
down their condition by way of similitude, taken from the sore pains of a woman
in Travail, when her hour is come, she has then more sorrow and bitterness
than formerly, because the hour of her Pains and sore Labor is come; and this
is your condition. I have told you that I am now shortly to suffer, and that
this night I am to be taken from you, and because this is the time wherein we
must part, (my Caption and Death being near) therefore now ye have great
sorrow. Yet be not too Sore cast down, and Disconsolate, for,

I will see you again: neither the Cross, the Grave, the Tombstone laid upon
me, the Guards and Bands of men, nor your Scattering and Banishment shall keep
us at distance, we will meet again, for I Will rise from the Dead, and we shall
see one another, which shall bring great matter of joy unto you; your Heart
shall rejoice, your (now) discouraged hearts shall then dance and leap for joy
within you, When I shall see you again; your heart shall beat within you for
joy and gladness when you shall see so unlike and so unprobable a Resurrection,
these discouraged fainting hearts of yours, shall then be swallowed up, and
filled with exceeding great, surprising, overcoming, and uncredible joy. Now
for the division of the words, you see that the whole verse contains, first the
sad case of Christ's Disciples, because that now the hour was come wherein he
was to be taken from them; in this phrase, Ye now therefore have sorrow.
Secondly, there is the Encouragement Christ gives them against their
Heart-fainting, and sorrow of Soul, viz. the assurance of his return unto them,
and the great joy of heart they then should have, all which joy ye have in this
phrase -- But I will see you again, and your Heart shall rejoye.

We had occasion the last Lords day in another Congregation in this City, to
speak somewhat from the first part of the verse, and entered also to speak upon
the encouragement given to them by Christ; and we shall not at present speak of
any thing which we then touched, save in so far as may lead us to that which
we are now to speak unto you; and this being your present condition (with all
the sorrowful people of God) we shall touch the same a little at present.

The first thing we noted was from Christ's distinct up-taking of their case,
comparing it with verse 5, 6. where they were so damped with sorrow that they
could not inquire where he was going, yet both there and here, he did take up
their case distinctly, whence we observed.

1. Obs. That Jesus Christ is more distinct in taking up the perplexed
condition of his discouraged people, than they themselves can be. And this we
noted, for the encouragement of such of the Lords people, as are oftentimes so
filled with perplexities, that they neither know where to find themselves, nor
can make their sad condition known unto others.

2. Obs. Secondly, We noted from the ground of their sorrow, which was Christ's
departure, That sometimes the Lord Jesus Christ may leave and depart from his
people, as to the sensible enjoyment of him.

3. Obs. Thirdly, From the impression of sorrow was in their hearts at Christ's
departure, we observed, That there is nothing so bitter to the spirits of the
Lords people, as his withdrawment; Their hearts were filled with sorrow. All
these Particulars were spoken unto at some considerable length.

And then, from the cause of the increase of their sorrow, which was the near
approach of his departure (the hour was now come, and therefore they were
filled with sorrow) we observed, 4ly.

4. Obs. That the nearer the hour of Christ's departure approaches, the hearts
of his friends are the more filled with sorrow and bitterness.

This we cleared from the frame and disposition of the Apostles, their hearts
were filled with sorrow, as you see verse 5. because that now the hour was come
that he was to be taken away from them. From this point (when we had cleared it
at length) we took occasion to reprove three sorts of people, making it
applicable to our present condition.

And first, from the point we reproved those that are never troubled for any
alterations can come upon the matters of God, although such things fall out as
prognosticate Christ's departure, yet are never moved, but will tell you, its
all one whether Presbyterianism or Prelacie prevail, provided we be still
Protestants; and if changes and alterations come to a greater height, they
will not trouble themselves for that neither, but will tell you, it is all one
whether Prelacie or Popery prevail, provided we be still Christians; are not
Papists Christians? surely the Disciples of the Lord were not such, their heart
was filled with more sorrow as they saw the evidences of his going away. Ye see
to what this Region has turned already, and therefore you that are indifferent
people, when a shaking comes on the house of God (apprehending no danger,
although these things prognosticate Christ's departure) the point tells you that
you have reasons to doubt whether you have any interest or part in the rich
loading which is in Christ's ship of Gospel Ordinances amongst us, the nearer
the time be of Christ's departure, the more are the hearts of his people filled
with sorrow.

Secondly we reproved those from the point, who though they pretend some
interest in the rich loading of Christ's Ship, and that their treasure is
therein, yet their hearts are not touched with the dreadful evidences of
Christ's departure; they never change their cheer, nor keep a rioband off their
apparel for all the sad evidences that are amongst us of Christ's departure, and
going away, but are as proud, and as soon stirred up now to passion and anger,
and are as vain as when there was not so dreadful signs of his approaching
departure; surely the point reproves such.

The third sort reproveable from this point, were those that are not only
indifferent for all that is come on the work and people of God, as the
evidences of Christ's departure; but also are debauching and drinking away their
Spirits, not remembering the afflictions of Joseph: the Lords people are not
such, their hearts are sorrowful when they see Christ departing.

The next use here was of Encouragement to these who are now mourning for all
the afflictions of Joseph, they are in their duty, and shall rejoice with
Jerusalem, when the Lord shall put on the beautiful garments of joy and praise
upon her again.

Then we came to the second part of the Text, which is the Encouragement he
gives them for holding up their fainting and discouraged hearts that were
filled with sorrow, because of his approaching departure, in these words; But I
will see you again, and your Heart shall rejoice, etc.

Wherein first we noted his scope and aim, which was, to have their fainting
Hearts comforted, for which cause he applied this precious Cordial. 2. There is
the Cordial it self, viz. the assured, and not to be doubted promise of his
return. 3. The time when he did apply this Cordial, viz. when they were to meet
with the Storm, and before they entered into the heat of the Furnace, which
Cordial, or Encouragement, is drawn from that which afterward they were to
receive, which was a joyous outgate. 4. There is the blessed consequence and
effect of this in this phrase, and your Heart shall rejoice. Lastly, there is
the firmness and stability of their consolation and joy they would have at his
return; Your joy shall no man take from you, though they clip the wings of your
joy now, yet shall they not get it done at that day.

From the first of these we observed,

5. Obs. That whatsoever be the Perplexities of his peoples Spirits at his
withdrawment, yet is it his desire that they be comforted; this is his aim,
while he tells them he will see them again; and lastly we left at this note
from the Encouragement it self.

6. Obs That no Storm can be so permanent or tempestuous, as that it can be
able to keep the Lord and his people asunder, he will see them again; this
point we cleared from diverse considerations, that in spite of the most swelling
and tempestuous blasts, he will see or visit his people again; from this point we
drew first an use of reproof.

1. Use. To all those who when the Church is low, turn their back upon her, as
if Christ and She would never meet again; they evidence much Faithlessness who
do so.

2. Use. Secondly, we deduced from the point an use of Encouragement unto the
people of God, applying it to the present distress now upon the Church: Christ
is now going away, but if any would inquire what of the night, the answer is,
as our night approaches, so also the morning; Christ will see us again that
dwell in Scotland.

These things we thought fit to name, this being your hour of sorrow, because
of Christ's approaching departure: But we shall dwell no longer at present upon
what we then spoke, but shall now come to that which we have further from the
Lord to say unto you at present.

And so now we come to another Doctrine from this Encouragement the Lord gives
his Disciples, Ye have sorrow now because the hour is come, but I give this
unto you, to hold up your hearts against your present discouragement, I will
see you again, Whence observe,

Obs. 1. That the assurance of Christ's return, is the only Cordial against the
heart-faintings of the sorrowful Souls of his people at his departure. You see
this point clear from the words, his Disciples hearts were filled with sorrow,
and they had good reason so to be, they were to want their dear Master, who
went ay between them and the storm, and he gave them this, as the most choice
and only sufficient Cordial, against their heart-faintings, I will see on
again, I am now to be taken away from you, I am within a little to be offered
up, and my departure is at hand, (for Judas, that false hearted seeming friend,
is gone away from me, and has renounced his Ministry, as if he had been doing
wrong all the time that he was following my Call and Order; and whereas he went
from me alone, having no company (but my curse, and an evil conscience in his
bosom) he is returning again with companies and troops at his back guarding
him. But he is never a hair the honester man for all that he has gotten to back
him, for he has betrayed me unto them, and has told them that he will profess
kindness and friendship to me, till he get the black intent of his heart
accomplished, yet he has given them secret advice to hold me fast, that I
never wen out of their gripes again) and your hearts are sorrowful because ye
see the time draws near, and your hour is come; but I give unto you (my
fainting friends) this choice Cordial, as sufficient to revive and hold up your
discouraged hearts, I will see you again. I shall propose some Considerations
to make the truth of this Point appear: And,

Cons. 1. First, It will be clear if you consider the ground and cause of their
sorrow: for what was it that they were sorrowful, but becase he was going away?
And the thing did most imbitter their spirits (as to this) was the near
approach thereof, the hour was come wherein he was to be taken away from them;
and if this had not been, they had not had this sorrow of heart; for where
there is no cause, there can ^oll^^ (...) effect: therefore Christ's going (...)
only cause of their sorrow; his return again behoved to be most, yea
sufficiently encouraging, and so the assurance thereof the choicest Cordial
against the heart-faintings of sorrowful souls at his departure.

Cons. 2. Secondly, It will be clear also, if we consider, That his return
evidenceth his being pacified toward his people. Ye know that his going away
speaks out much anger, and the most tender hearts of his people are most
sensible thereof, and that it is not without great provocation he goes away,
and are deeply affected therewith; and so must look upon his return as the
clearest evidence of his being pacified toward them, and that his anger is
turned away; and what can be so refreshing as that? And therefore is there not
ground to say, That the assurance of Christ's return is the choicest and only
Cordial against the heart-faintings of sorrowful Souls at his departure?

Cons. 3. Thirdly, The hope the people of God have of being freed of many great
miseries, and trusted with many choice blessings, when he returns, will clear
this, Hosea 9. 12. Yea and woe also unto them when I depart from them. He had
spoken of many other miseries, but he adds this as a non-such and completing
misery; Yea woe also unto them when I depart from them. And so it may be turned
over again (at his return) yea and all blessings unto them when I return unto
them: and therefore in this respect the assurance of his return must be a
sufficient Cordial against the heart-faintings of the sorrowful souls of his
people at his withdrawment and going away.

Use 1. The first use here (as of Trial, so also) is of Reproof to these who
take not this choice and only Cordial now when Christ is going away: O what
make ye your Cordial? ye see the assurance of Christ's return is the only and
choice Cordial; therefore is this thy Cordial now, when the time of our Lords
withdrawment is at hand, and the hour of his departure draws near? whatever
you make your Cordial, yet well I know, that the thing which holds up and
revives the sainting hearts of his people, is the assurance of his return and
seeing us again.

But more particularly I would speak to two or three Cordials which some take
unto themselves at such a time as this, which are none of Christ's, but will
prove poisonous Pills in the end.

The first poisoning Cordial we name, is Self-quiet and preservation; there are
some who if they get preservation to themselves, it gives them Peace, and if
they get any gainful place, it gives them yet more peace, and quiets them,
notwithstanding their seeing Gods matters go wrong; O! is this thy Cordial?
though thou see the desolation of Zion, and think her wronged, yet
satisfiest and comfort'st thy heart with thy Preferment or Self-preservation? O
how deadful a Cordial is that, and how poisoning a Pill will it prove!

The second Cordial is Self-hiding; there are some, who if they can couch down
and hide themselves, sitting in silence, when God calls for a testimony at
their hand, when all are Apostatizing from him: O how bitter a Pill will that
prove in the end? and how well might that word be applied to such, which the
Lord spoke to another purpose, Micah 2. 10. Arise ye and depart? This shall not
be your rest, it shall cast you out.

The third woeful Cordial that is very full of Poison, is Tippling and Drinking;
there are some who acknowledge that Christ is getting wrong, and they have some
sort of heartlesness thereat, and yet draw not their encouragement from the
assurance of Christ's returning, visiting, and seeing us again, but go into the
Inn to their 4 hours, and there drink up their hearts to a cheerful frame. I am
not speaking here of those abominable and miserable wretches, who at their
carrousing at the afflictions of Joseph, will drink over the ruin and
destruction of the work and people of God in a cup of Wine; dreadful shall the
doom and condemnation of these be from the Lord, their Judgment sleeps not, and
therefore we will not deal with them, but leave them to be taken severe course
with to purpose, by the Lord, and to surfeit themselves on their carnal
delights, we leave them we say to the dreadful Majesty of God, to take them in
his own hand, with this certificate, that it shall be a wonder if ever the
world see their repentance, for their doom is set down Isa. 22. where you see
from the 9th v. They had broken down and builded up (at their pleasure for
strengthening themselves) without respect to the maker thereof, but they would
not hear of their duty to God, for ver. 12. When the Lord God of hosts called
for fasting and weeping, to baldness and clothing with sackcloth, then behold
joy and gladness, killing of oxen, slaying of sheep, eating of flesh and
drinking of Wine: but see with what contempt of Gods command in the mouth of
his servants, did they thus glut themselves with sensuality; Let us eat and
drink for to morrow we shall die; the Prophets tell us we should fast and weep,
what? should we fast and weep now, when we have made our selves strong, and no
arm can hurt us? when should we feast and rejoice if not now? does the Prophet
say that we shall die to morrow? then let us hold a hearty house to day, Let us
eat and drink for to morrow we shall die: and as their sin was desperate, so
also was their Judgment for their contempr; for the Prophet adds, It was
revealed in mine ears by the Lord of Hosts, Surely (or if I be to be trusted
who am the unchangeable God) this iniquity (that is so presumptuously
committed) shall not be purged from ye till ye die; and so he subscribes their
sentence, Thus says the Lord God of hosts. So I say, there is ground to
affirm, that it shall be a wonder if ever the world shall see your repentance,
(if there be any such here) and so we leave you to the great and dreadful God,
to take you in his own hand, to take order with you to purpose. But the persons
I am speaking against here, are your 4 hour Professors, who would expect some
part of comfort with the Church of God, when she shall see you again, when he
shall visit Jacob's tents, and have mercy upon his dwelling places: and yet
take all their up-chearing at the Wine or Alehouse, and seek not this precious
Cordial, the assurance of Christ's return, to hold up their hearts. Oh, oh, is
it a time for you to do so? if there be any such here, I say unto you, believe
it the storm shall lay you by, and you shall not be invited to rejoice with
Jerusalem when Christ shall see her again, and shall give her the fresh sweet
milk of pure Ordinances again; for only they that mourn with her are invited to
rejoice with her, and they that (So) love her, will the Lord invite to suck
(out of the breasts of pure Gospel Ordinances) the sweet milk of
Gospel-consolations, wherewith he feeds and nourishes his children when he
sees them again; and no part of that Joy shall be unto you, but ye shall grow
worse and worse, for those that profit not by a trial, they shall grow worse,
as Paul says, 2 Timothy 3. 13. Evil men (as well as seducers) shall wax worse and
worse; therefore all of you try your selves what Cordials you take, for the
people of the Lords choicest Cordial against their present heart-faintings, now
at Christ's departure, is the assurance of his return.

Obj. 1.
But I know some will be ready to object at this, and to say, there is no
ground to think Christ is going away, and therefore what needs such pressing us
to this only Cordial? why may we not take our other encouragements?

Ans. I shall say first in answer to this objection, I wish there were no
ground to fear that Christ will go away: but I must also say, what heart can he
have to stay amongst us, and not retire himself (for a time) out of our sight?
And is not his glory already gone to the tops of the Mountains? howbeit we also
hope that some of his dear children get afar-off-look of him from thence.

But I shall speak to four things that may speak out his going away, and that
he can have no heart to stay amongst us.

Evidence 1. The first evidence of his approaching departure is, the many
Proclamations of his mind as to this, he has sent forth his faithful
Ministers, proclaming this upon the mountain of his visible Church, they did
foresee this stroke, and lifted up their voice and cried: and yet
notwithstanding their giving such allarms of the Lords departure (especially
since the dreadful stroke at Dunbar) O how small has the success been? for
though indeed many have been converted since that time, in mercy to their
souls, yet O how little reviving has been upon the hearts of Professors? few
have been stirred up to more seriousness notwithstanding all these allarms. It
does not affright the hearts of many that Christ is going away, they think if
he will go away, who can hold him? and if he will not stay, who can help it?
he will take his own will, and so their moan is ended: and O how sad is it that
they will neither take hold of him to keep him, nor will they put on a mourning
robe for him, and is there not ground then to fear his going away, seeing so
few care for his abiding? and what heart can he have to stay amongst us?

Evid. 2. The second Evidence of his going away is, our treacherous dealing
with him, and our unfaithfulness to him, for, as a Wife treacherously departs
from her Husband, so have we departed from him; and have altogether lost our
credit at his hand, for neither Word, nor Write, nor Oath, nor Covenant will
bind us. And when he can neither believe the word that we speak, nor the oath
we swear, what expectation can he have of us, that we will be servants unto
him? we did swear away our selves (to be a holy people unto him) in our
Covenant, and have we not broken our Covenant? and so said (upon the matter)
that we will not be a holy people, and so have lost all credit at his hand, and
what heart can he have to stay amongst us? and is there not ground to fear his
going away when he cannot believe the word that we speak, nor the oath that we
swear?

Evid. 3. The third evidence that we shall name that may give us sad ground of
fear that he will go away, is the tolleration of ungodliness and all sort of
wickedness in the Land; and we need go no farther than this the Mother City of
our Nation, which sends forth a dark smoke and cloud of profanity through all
the Land. These abominations take their beginning here, and do overspread and
defile the whole Land. Our heart has been like to bleed, when we have been
sitting in some Lodging Houses by the wayside (as the Lord called us to be on
our way) in some parts of the Land, where we heard numbers of Travelers, as
they returned from Edinburgh singing over the most profane and ungodly Songs
that could be devised, tending only to the stirring up of corruption in all
unregenerate and unmortified hearts who heard the same; and one of them saying
to another, This is the most common or chiefest Song that is now in fashion in
Edinburgh, for, almost, there is no other Song to be heard in the Streets. This
is a known truth, and would not such abominable things, make Christians ears
abhor to hear them, or a sanctified mind to record the same in memory, if
necessity did not require, for reproving such unfruitful works of darkness? Ye
know that this is no secret, for have not most of your own ears heard these
profane Songs, on your Streets Nightly and Daily, which is yet tolerated unto
this day, and never curbed or punished by these that are in Authority; which
speaks out great indifferency and want of zeal for our dear Lord Jesus Christ?
And O is it not sad to see our Mother City, wherein righteousness did dwell,
become such a Mother of prophanity and ungodliness? And may not all this give
us too ground to fear that our dear Lord Jesus is like to go away and leave
us? And beside this, there has been many other dreadful abominations committed
(by night and day) which would make Christian ears abhor to hear, or tongues
relate. O but this is not all, will you but hear a little farther, and we will
tell you of a greater abomination than this, though little minded or laid to
heart by many? and that is the turning over of this holy Book into
Stage Plays! What is the holy Bible but the Eternal Gods Love-letter to his
Church, wherein his mind is written? Yet is it turned over into Stage Plays:
For will you but walk down to the Nether-Bow, and you shall there almost every
night see some part thereof turned over into a Stage Play; is not this a horrid
blasphemy? Yet this is not done in a corner, they openly avow the same; for
while they stand at the Close-head, calling in Passengers, they proclaim their
wickedness, saying, Walk in Gentlemen, walk in, and you shall see a choice
piece of Art, and what is this choice piece of Art? You shall see Adam and Eve,
Cain and Abel, all walking in a lively manner, to see how they were created
naked, and then deceived by the Serpent, and how Cain slew Abel: Oh, Oh, was it
not this began all our miseries and woes, did not this begin all our sorrow and
lamentation, and shall this be turned over into a Stage Play, and sport, to
make people laugh and be merry? O that some would cause plead for their Mother,
that that order, might be taken with such abominations. These things we could
not but mention, being so abominable in the sight of God. And may not this say,
that he can have little heart to stay amongst us, seeing we give so little
esteem of his blessed Word, that you see there is ground to fear his departure
and going away from amongst us?

Evid. 4. The fourth evidence of the Lords departure (which we shall name) is
the corrupting of his Worship, and overturning the comely order of his House in
a violent way; the setting up a few vain selfseeking men over the Inheritance
of the Lord; who have (on the matter) renounced their Ministers, as not of God;
And if such men be fit for ruling the house of God, let the Bible and unbiassed
people of God be Judge of the matter. This way was never blessed of God in our
land formerly, as to the conversion of souls; and much less is it to be now
expected that he will bless the same. O how unbeseeming a title would Paul have
thought it for him, if any had come to him and called him, your Lordship, or,
your Lordships grace! and how would he have abhorred himself, if he had seen
Prelates Mytre upon his own head, and their syd robe upon him, and some bearing
up his tail! no ground in the Bible for this; yet it is done. (let this
neither he looked upon as matter of Laughter to strangers, nor of affrightment
to friends, being necessity constrains us to speak of these things unto you.)
Now may not all this give sad ground of fear, that the Lord will go away and
leave us, seeing such abominations are set up amongst us?

Use 2. Now we would (in the next place) desire you that are the people of God
to encourage your selves in him: ye see (as we have cleared) That the assurance
of Christ's return, is the choice and only sufficient cordial against the heart
faintings of the sorrowful souls of his people at his departure: O therefore
make use of this Cordial against the present distress and faintings of your
heart in this hour of affliction, because of Christ's departure; this is your
present condition, your hearts are sorrowful because your dear Lord is now
shortly to be taken from you; but let this hold up your hearts, He will see us
again; therefore we say make use of this Cordial, for you that are his people
have no less to hold up your fainting discoveraged hearts then his Disciples
got, and that is the assurance of his return; he will visit our land, and so
see us again.

Object. But some of the Lords affrighted trembling-hearted people will here
object, alas that is the great thing in question; and ye have spoken so much of
his going away, that we can hardly think he will return to us again, and
besides all, he has not tied himself to any particular Church, and therefore
no particular Church can apply this promise to themselves, and so, what ground
has Scotland to apply this promise as a present cordial?

Use 2. Though we have spoken much of his going, yet we have not said that he
will not come again; and we spoke to somethings the last day, for making it
appear that he will come again.

As first, our faithful Reformers Mr. Welsh, Mr. Wishart, Mr. Knox, Mr.
Hamilton, etc. others asserted that how be it Christ shall be crucified in
Scotland, yet glorious shall his Resurrection be; and may we not make use of
this as a cordial against our present heart-faintings?

2. There are very many precious young men Students of Divinity whom the Lord
has fitted as polished shafts for the work of the Gospel, and of whom he has
never as yet made use therein; and shall we think that he will now lay them by,
and not employ them in his service having been at great pains to fit them for
the same.

3. A faithful service of our Lord Jesus Christ who had this testimony, that he
feared God, did lately amongst us before many thousand witnesses at his death
openly declare his confidence as to this, That how be it our cloud may be long
and dark, yet the Lord shall shine once more with the glorious light of his
Gospel upon these Lands, and shall we think that the Lord would have suffered
his faithful servant to have brought himself under the imputation of a deceived
Prophet at his death, being in so great a strait for him, if he had not had a
mind to fulfill his servants word in seeing us again?

And we say now unto you, that the Lord had never more precious people in
Scotland, then he has now, (though there be many hypocrites,) neither has
ever had so many faithful Ministers in a suffering time for serving in the work
of the Gospel as now he has, though there be also many that are unfaithful;
and we must think he will not lay them altogether byas useless, but rather that
he has work for them; and therefore we may take this as a ground of
encouragement to confirm our hope of his seeing us again.

Object. 2:
But the Lord did cast of the seven Churches of Asia when in a very flourishing
condition, and did never visit them again with the Gospel; and why then may he
not also go away from us, and never return nor see us again.

Ans. There were never such a formal marriage contract passed betwixt God and
the seven Churches of Asia, in their most flourishing condition, as heath
passed between God and Scotland; the Lord did formally and openly marry our
Land unto himself, in the marriage contract of our Covenant. Scotland has this
privilege beyond all the Nations or Churches in the World except the Jews
only; our Land is long ago a married land unto the Lord, and so there being a
standing marriage contract between God and our Land in our Covenant, we most
conclude that how be it he go away, yet he will see us again,

Object. 3.
But here it is, objected, our Covenant was not so clear a marriage contract,
for we heard no audible voice from Heaven at the making of it, as Abraham heard
at the making the Covenant with him, (for his seed) and therefore seeing we
heard no voice, how shall we know whether he gave his consent unto, or sealed
and subscribed the same.

Ans. We answer how be it audible voices be ceased, yet must we conclude that
God speaks as really now from Heaven as he did then, otherwise the Church were
in a worse condition now, then under the Law, which cannot be granted;
therefore if he made it appear by his word and his providence; we most conclude
that he did really subscribe that marriage contract; and this we shall labor
to make appear unto you.

First, that he gave his consent unto, and subscribed our Covenant as the
marriage contract between him and our Land, will appear from the frame of great
tenderness was upon the spirits of his people at the making of it, they were
marrying away themselves unto him, to be a holy people, and he did set home a
lively frame of tenderness of spirit upon them (which is well known to these
did see it) as a part of his sealand subscription to the marriage contract, and
therefore we may conclude that he did own it as the marriage contract, and
therefore that our Land is married unto him.

Secondly, his subscriping of the Covenant as the marriage contract between him
and our Land, will appear from his after carriage to his Church, in that he did
attend the same with blessed effects suitable to a standing marmarriage
relatfon; for when our Fathers had married away our Land unto him, he did begin
to extend his husbandly care toward his Church therein, and to do the duties
becoming such a married husband; for after the subscribing the marriage
contract with our Land, he took up house therein, and began to beget Children
by his new married Church, for holding up his family in our Land, for it is
known that there were never so many converted and born again, as were after the
making of that Covenant and Marriage contract, and have we not ground to take
this, as his subscription to the Marriage contract, and his formal marrying our
Land therein? and may not this assure us that he will see us again; seeing our
Land is so formally and clearly married unto him, therefore make use of this
your cordial against your heart-faintings.

Object. 4.
But some affrighted heart will object and say, our Land has rent the Marriage
contract between God and us, and therefore we are no more a Married Land,
having given up with God, and therefore have no ground (...) encourage our
selves from the hope of his ^^^ing us again.

Ans. In answer to this, we altogether deny it to be in the power of any now to
disanull or make of none effect that Marriage contract; for it is with our
Land, as with the bond servants after the year of Jubilee or release; ye know
that the bond servant under the Law, had his choice to stay with, or go away
from his Master when the years of jubilee came; but if the servant (having in
his choice to go or stay) did say I desire to serve my Master, for I am well
with him, therefore I will not go away from him, then he was brought unto the
door post, and his ear was nailed thereunto, after which time, he had never
liberty thereafter to go away from his Master, but behoved to serve him for
ever; and if he did run away, then his Master (having a more lasting right in
him then formerly) might pursue after him and bring him back again. So is it
with our Land, our Fathers served God a while, then the year of the Covenant
was as the year of Jubilee, for then it was put in our Lands choice to Covenant
with (and marry themselves unto) God, or not do it; and because our Fathers
found that it was good serving him, therefore they would not go away from him,
nor continue free as they were, but entered into Covenant with him, to be his
servants (...) ever, which was the nailing of our Lands (...) to the Lords
post, and wherein we were tied to him for ever: So that how be it our Land
should go away from him, yet now has a mutual Covenant right in us, and may
follow and bring us back again unto him. And his subscribing of the Covenant,
as its everlasting, answers all other doubts of mind, for our Fathers did not
only Covenant and marry themselves away unto God, but also and mainlie as the
representative of his Church in Scotland, for it was an everlasting Covenant,
never to be forgotten; but that our Land should remain a married Land for ever,
and that from Generation to Generation, he should have a Church and people
therein, to serve him; and God did subscribe this Marriage contract as
everlasting; for in evidence of his subscribing that marriage contract both, as
to the matter, and duration thereof, he did take up house in our Land, and did
begin to extend his Husbandly care toward his Church, in providing for her,
and begeting Children by her which cleares that he did not only, subscribe the
Covenant, but also as it is everlasting. So that it is not in the power of any
now to make void or disanull that contract when so perfected. Neither have the
Lords people who are chiefly interested given their consent to the riveing of
the Marriage contract between God and our Land, it is against their heart, and
how ridiculous a thing would it be thought by a husband, is his wifes friends
who had formerly given their consent unto, and subscribed the Marriage
contract) if they would come, after that he has taken up house with her,
continued with her in a married state, and begotten Children by her (I say) if
they would come and rive their double of the contract, and say they would not
have marriage to stand, would he stand to that? would he satisfy their desire,
and put away his wife (who desires not to leave him) and scatter his family
again, even after she has brought forth children to him? surely not; he would
rather cover her faults, as being more concerned in her, than her friends are,
and would keep house with her: and such indeed is the case betwixt God and
Scotland, God has taken up house with his Church in our Land, and therefore he
will not satisfy her former friends desire, in putting away his married wife,
which is indeed the thing they aim at, for, though they say it is with
something in the contract they are dissatisfied (as not drawn up according to
their mind) yet indeed it is with the marriage that they are displeased, for
their butt holiness whereunto the marriage contract obliges, and so the
renting off their double of the contract whereunto formerly they gave their
consent, will not make him give up with our Land, and scatter his family again.

Likewise it will be clear from the second Psalm, That the Lord will not give
up with Scotland, for there you will find the present case of our Land clearly
set down; for, there is plotting against the Lord and his anointed; and it is
not with the Heathens only, that the Lord is expostulating, but also he is
reproving a people who have formerly professed service to him, and that have
been under bonds and ties unto him; for they say, Let us break their bands
asunder, and cast their cords away from us; now if they had been Heathens, then
had they been under no bonds to him as they were; yea, the phrase is very
emphatick, and very significant, for they say, their bands, implying, that they
would esteem Gods bands to be nothing else but the bands and cords of men that
hurt them, therefore they say, their bands, whereas they should say, his bands.
And then the Lord begins to plead Christ's right, and shows, that it is not by
way of set tack for so many years, that Christ should have these lands, but in
possession are they given unto him; for he says, Ask of me, and I shall give
thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth
for thy possession: Now it is concluded by all, that Scotland is the uttermost
part, and corner of the world, and therefore it was given to Christ, and that
not for a set time of let, but as a sure, and everlasting possession; so our
Land being given to Christ, and that as an inheritance and possession, (whereof
the second Psalm and 8. verse is his standing Charter in the Bible) we must not
think that he will quit his possession, but will keep his right and
inheritance, and therefore, we declare our Land a married Land unto the Lord,
and a sure and on given unto Christ; and therefore, there being a standing
evidence and charter for his inheritance and possession, and a standing
marriage contract, and the marriage relation continuing betwixt him and our
Land, he will not put away his married Church; no storm shall take his
possession from him, nor be able to keep him away from his married Church, but
in spite of all impediments he shall see us again. Smile O Heavens at this, and
be Joyful O Earth let all things break forth into singing before him! rejoice
greatly in the Lord, O our souls, and let all that is within us bless his holy
name, let the redeemed of the Lord be joyful in their King, who has married
our Land unto himself, and given unto us (thereby) sufficient ground for
assurance of this, that he will certainly, and without all doubt, See us again.

So we come unto another Doctrine from the words, which is, from the time when
he did thus comfort his Disciples, viz. before they entered into the heat of the
fernace. Whence observe,

Obs. 2. That before the Lord enters his people into a hot furnace of
affliction, he uses to send them a comfortable word for encouraging their
hearts in order to thoron-bearing, and a blessed out-gate. We see it clear in
the words, ere they meet with the heat of the furnace, he tellls, he will see
them again, and their hearts shall rejoice: this is clear also from diverse
other Scriptures, before the Church go into captivity, he tells them, that at
the end of 70 years they should teturn again, and before his honest Prophet met
with persecution, from enemies, he told him, that he had made him an iron
pillar and brazen walls against them, Jer. 2. 18. therefore though they would
fight against him, yet they should not prevail against him. It was also the
practice of the Apostles, to comfort the people of God, 1 Pet. 4. 2. Think it
not strange concerning the fiery trial, which is only to try, not to destroy
you. Jam. chap. 1. 2. My brethren, count it all joy, when you fall into diverse
tentations. viz. in suffering, for they would get no hurt thereby, and fear,
none of these things shall come upon thee, says the Lord to his people, Rev.
2. for though the Devil cast some of you into prison (yet afterward it shall
be well with thee) be faithful therefore to the death, and I shall give thee a
crown of life; there is a sad trial coming, Isa. 3. 10. but he sends a
comforting word to his people, Say ye to the righteous, it shall be well with
him. Daniel 12. a sad storm, etc. a time of trouble, such as they never saw
since a nation, and yet tells them, at that none such ill time deliverance
shall come, and blessed shall they be that shall see the complete delivery. So
you see the point clear, viz. That the Lord uses to comfort his people e're he
enter them into a hot furnace of affliction, or persecution for his name. Many
reasons might be given, why the Lord does thus comfort his people e're they
enter into a hot furnace for his sake; but we shall not touch them here, but
shall bring them in with some of the uses for the saving of time.

Use 1. This lets us see what the blessed and tender disposition of Christ's
heart is, who, before he enter his people in the heat of a furnace, will give
them something to refresh, and bear up their hearts while in it.

Use 2. Secondly, it lets us see, that it is the duty of Ministers of the
Gospel (even of all that bear his name before his people) to comfort them when
they are like to meet with a stormy trial for his sake, they should imitate
their Lord and his Apostles, who comforted the Church in a day of trial, in the
hope of a gracious out-gate. Therefore let us exhort so many of you as are
here, whom the Lord calls to speak from his word unto his people, not only
Ministers, who have this great work lying on them, but also young men, (who
must be faithful in the little, if so we may call it) labor to imitate your
blessed Master in this; see you a dark cloud coming upon the Church and people
of God? O then comfort them against the present distress; tell them that they
shall get a blessed out-gate, and that there shall be a blessed light after the
present darkness. And I shall give you a few reasons by way of motive, for
encouraging you to comfort the people of God, to whom he sends you to speak in
his name.

1. Motive. First, comfort the people of God, for it is your duty, upon any
hazard whatsoever. Isa. 3. 1^. Say ye to the righteous, it shall be well with
him, etc. I command you speak comfortably to them, though it should cost you
never so dear; and may not this persuade you to it, seeing it is his command?
therefore set about it.

2 Motive. You run a great hazard if you comfort them not, Ezekiel. 3. 17. Thou
shall hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me, when I say to
the wicked thou shall die, say thou so: (and surely speaking freely against the
wicked, makes much for the strengthening of the godly) It may cost you dear,
your life may be in hazard for speaking freely against them, and to comfort the
godly. But if you do it not, their blood will I require at your hand.

3 Mot. Comfort the people of God against the storm, and you shall imitate your
blessed Master who comforted his Disciples when going away, with this, I will
see you again.

4 Mot. If you do not comfort the people of God e're they enter in the furnace,
it will be more difficult to get comfort born in upon them when their hearts
are down, and they in the heat and bitterness of their affliction; their
present sorrow will not let them admit of comfort. Christ knew this well, for
he says, let these sayings sink down into your hearts, ground your comfort
well now, else ye will be very incapable of hearing comfort, when I am taken
from you and slain. And in the Text he comforted them, because he knew they
would not hear of comfort in the furnace: and may not this stir you up to this
duty of comforting the Lords people now, e're they enter the furnace: that it
will be a hard work to get them comforted when in the hot furnace of affliction.

5 Mot. Comfort the people of God e're they enter to the heat of the furnace;
for ye know not if ye shall be near unto them when they shall have most need of
comfort from you: if a persecution for Christ did send away faithful Ministers
and their people into one shlp, when banished, or to thrust them into one
prison together, ye might suspend your comforting them till you were sent into
banishment or prison together: but the nature of a persecution for Christ is,
to smite the shepherd, and to scatter the flock: he is either thrust into
prison, or banished out of the land, or out of the world; and the flock is
scattered, so that he cannot have opportunity to speak comfortably unto them:
and what trouble may he have in that case, if he hear of any thing falling
wrong in them? if they faint in the furnance, his heart must challenge him for
not comforting and strengthening them when he had opportunity. And may not this
encourage you to your duty? O therefore to your work while you have opportunity.

6 Mot. O comfort the people of God, and strengthen them for the storm, and ye
shall have great peace when taken from them. Christ had this to say, John 17.
that he had given them his fathers word. And this was Paul's great
encouragement, in his last discourse at Miletus, Acts 20. 26. that he had told
them the whole counsel of God, and so was free from the blood of all men. O how
great an encouragement is this, when a godly Minister is thrust from his
charge, or is a dying, if he can say, now I am put away from my work, but
blessed be God, I never withheld any thing from them, might tend to their
encouragement or edification. There is not one sentence in my mind that ever I
refused to speak, nor is there one text of Scripture in my mind that the Lord
bid me to preach from unto them, tending to their instruction or encouragement,
that ever I refused to preach from, upon the greatest hazard, and therefore I
have no more ado; for my work is ended with my opportunity; as I am to have no
more liberty to labor among them, so also I have no more work to do, I
labored while I had opportunity, and so now my work and opportunity are ended
at once: O how great peace may this give! and may not this encourage you to
comfort the people of God e're they enter the heat of the Furnace.

7. Mot. There shall not a hair of your head perish for your faithfulness; they
are all numbered, and your time is in Gods hand, Rev. 11. the two Witnesses
cannot be killed, nor put from their work till they have finished their
Testitmony and prophesied unto the end of the days appointed them of God: ye
can neither be slain nor put from your work as long as, blasteth, though all
the World should oppose you; therefore with all peace and safety you may go
about your work of comforting the Godly, as being in his blessed hand who can
preserve his people though amongst the midst of adversaries therefore encourage
the people of God, for this your sure preservation while he has work for you is
undoubted.

Use 3. Is it so that the Lord Jesus uses to send a word of comfort to his
people e're he enter them into the furnace for his name, then they should
embrace the same good word that is sent unto them, though it be far off: I say
they should make use of the expectation of future comforts, for their present
distress. You see Christ give, his people a promise, the sweetness of which
they were not to enjoy till after the storm, yet he wills them to draw
encouragement from it for bearing up their fainting and discouraged hearts; It
was also David's practicn, Psalm. 27. I had fainted, unless I had believed to see
the goodness of the Lord, in the land of the living. It was but a far of look
of comfort my faith got, all that I could come at was the hope of seeing his
goodness in the land of the Living, once e're I should go off this World; yet
though it was far of, I was glad to grip to it, I durst not put it away, but
laid hold on it, and so encouraged my self by it, against my present faintings
of heart: Therefore we say unto you that are here, you see this is your duty to
comfort your selves in the expectation of future consolation, yea it is for
this very end that Christ's sends it: O therefore make it practical, when God
sends a word of consolation unto you, close with it for your comfort; it is
your duty so to do especially when it it is conveyed to you with danger and
hazard, and so I shall say no more unto you, but leave it on you, for you will
have enough to do with all your comfort (far off, or near) to you when ye meet
with the storm, therefore let not a word fall to the ground when he sends it
for yout comfort. I come to the last, note which is the blessed effect should
flow unto them upon his return, which is joy of heart, I will see you again,
and your heart shall rejoice.

Obs. That the time of our Lord Jesus return, after snell and stormy blasts, is
the most joyful and dancing days of his people. This we find clear from many
Scriptures, when this glorious Sun shines after a dark Eclipse in the
Firmament of his Church, all the Sons and Daughters of Zion are made to
rejoice, and no wonder for she has many bruises, and he comes with healing
under her Wings: And in the text, ye have now sorrow, but I will see you again,
and your hearts shall rejoice. We shall give you some Scripture considerations
to clear the point a little further, passing by what we said formerly as to
their seeing him pacified when he returns; whereas his going away
prognosticates anger, and as to their being freed of much misery for his going
away, is the most cronning misery, Woe also unto them when I depart from them,
Hos. and so it may be turned over, yea, and all blessings unto them when I
return unto them, which must make them as joyful days, but further the point
will be clear if ye consider.

Cons. 1. Consider first her geting on her new apparel, Zion has her mourning
garments in mourning days when she lies in the dust; O but when the Lord
returns again unto her, she gets on Garments of Gladness: shake thy self from
the dust O Zion, and put on thy beautiful Garments O Jerusalem, Isa. 52. 1, 2.
and therefore seeing she gets on brave Apparel, must she not be made very glad,
and so have not reason in this respect to say that the time of Christ's return
after such blasts, is the joyous days of his people.

Cons. 2. Oftentimes Zion gets the intimation of her pardon ere she come out of
the Furnace. Isa. 40. 2. Tell her that her iniquities are pardoned. And
therefore in this respect the time of Christ's returning must be the most joyous
days to his people.

Cons. 3. Zious stoutest enemies (who ranted her down in the days of her
affliction) are made to submit themselves to her, when the Lord sees her again.
Isai. 60. 14. The Sons also of them that afflicted thee shall come bending unto
thee, and all they that despised thee shall bow themselves down at the soles of
thy feet, and shall call thee, the City of the Lord, the Zion of the holy oue
of Israel. Though they repreached you in the day of your low condition, yet
they shall be forced to acknowledge you to be my people, when they shall see my
goodness to you at my seeing you again; must not that be very comfortable to
the people of God, when they see those who formerly in their affliction
domineered over them, treading on their necks, coming and submitting themselves
unto them, and confessing them (whom formerly they persecuted) to be the Lords
people, and so there is ground in this respect to say, that the time of the
Lords returning, after cold and stormy blasts, is the joyous and dancing days
of his people.

Cons. 4. Consider 4. when the Lord returns for delivering his people, he both
surprise them with unexpected deliverance, and also makes much of his glory
appear. 126 Psalm. When the Lord brought back our captivity, we were like them
that dream, we were so amazed with such an unexpected deliverance, that we were
like folks speaking in their sleep for joy; then was our mouth filled with
laughter, and so our dancing days began, Psalm. 102. 16. When the Lord builds
up Zion, he appears in his glory, he makes the bright rays of his glory
glance upon his Church, making it evident that he regards the prayer of the
destitute, which formerly he seemed to despise (howbeit he did not so indeed)
and so sets their hearts a dancing again.

Consider 5. Zion has then her spring time of flourishing; and hears his
most sweet voice, and is invited to communion with him, of whom she could not
get a blink formerly, Cant. 2. 10. Arise my love, my fair one, and come away,
for the winter is past, wrath and anger is now departed, the rain is over and
gone; thy stormy days are by thy hand; and the flowers appear on the earth,
and the time of the singing of birds is come. Heartless Zion must now have her
Songs again, for the winter is over, the fig tree puts forth her young figs,
and the vines with their tender grapes give a good smell; there is a brave
spring time of all Zions graces, and the sweet smelling of her ointments, when
the Lord (of whom she had been deserted) sees her again: and so have we not
reason in all these respects to say, that the time of the Lords returning, is
the joyous and dancing days of his people. But while we are speaking of the
joyous, dancing, and merry days the people of God have when he sees them
again, we would give you advertisement, that the point whereupon we are, is a
large and noble dish of the glorious marriage feast of the Gospel, and
therefore before we go any further to make application hereof, we do, in the
name, and by the authority of our dreadful Lord and Master Jesus Christ,
excommunicate and debar from this blessed part of the Gospel feast, first,
all those that have been active in carrying on our de^^ctions from God, and his
way, that they take ^ut upon them to meddle with this joy the people of God
shall have at his return, being strangers to all the toil his people are put
unto, in laboring to keep their garments clean. Secondly, we do excommunicate
from this blessed part of the Gospel feast, all casters off of the yoke of God
in the holy band of our Covenant. Thirdly, all those that have not
heart-sympathy with Zion in this day of her low condition: fourthly, We do
excommunicate and debarr from this part of the Gospel Feast all those in whose
heart it is at present to do any thing to the hightening of the affliction of
any of the people of God, in relation to his new controverted but glorious work
in this present distress, whether by false accusation of them, or false witness
bearing against them; surely such shall not taste of this blessed part of the
marriage supper and Gospel feast. fifthly, All those who are not willing to
adventure their whole Estate, I and, Life and Geir, in the same broken Ship
with Zion, to die and live, sink and swim with her in all her afflictions, and
all such as upon the greatest hazards, will not (as they are called in their
stations) do all way tend to her instruction and encouragement. And lastly we
excommunicate and debar from this noble dish of the Gospel feast, (viz. the joy
the Lords people have at his return) all such as willingly (without remorse or
endeavor to amend) are wallowing in the same sins wherein they did lie before
the Lord began to smite us; especi-O you four hours professers, who think ye
love Zion, and do approve the things that are best, yet are not leaving off
your four hour-companions; be it known to all of you whom we have named, it is
not for your sakes that our Lord Jesus will see or visit us again, wherefore we
say unto all of you, keep your hands from off the precious bread, which is
appointed for the mourning and heavy hearted sons and daughters of Zion; for
only they share with Zion in her consolations, when the Lords sees her again;
who, so loved her, and mourned for her, in her low condition, and without the
Wedding garment of repentance for these evils, and a forsakeing of them,
together with a heart and practical sympathy with Zion in this her distress,
you shall never taste of this choice part of the Marriage supper, and Gospel
feast, wherewith the fainting and trembling discouraged hearts of the people of
God shall be cheared up and revived, when he sees us again; but we desire not
altogether to leave you here, and therefore we say if ye will be so wise for
yout selves, as to join your selves to Zion, and from a principle of heart
honesty, take a share of a suffering lot with her, you shall be very welcome,
and upon these terms we heartily invite you to come and partake of these
dainties; otherwise you cannot be admitted; for none can rejoice with the
people of God, but they who mourn with them, none can land with them upon the
shore of consolation with them save they who set their face to the stormy and
tempestuous waves, swimming thorough the deep floods of persecution and
affliction with them: But upon the other hand we do in the blessed name, and
authority of our Lord Jesus Christ, heartily invite you to this blessed Feast
of joy, who are the fainting and sad hearted people of God; we are not speaking
to you of the great consolation wherewith your souls shall be satisfied, when
our Lord sees us again; draw near therefore O ye discouraged sons and daughters
of Zion, eat of this fat, and drink of this sweet, for only to you does this
blessed feast belong, and unto you and you only is the word of this consolation
sent; O rejoice in the hope of what dancing days you shall have, when Christ
sees us again, which joy shall then wreath a necessity of gladness of heart
upon you, as a Chain about your neck; draw near therefore with all humble
boldness, and cheerful confidence unto this feast of joy; Eat O friends, drink
abundantly O beloved, feed largely, eat and drink for the time to come, and
journey that is before you.

Now for further application, may not all we have said make it appear that the
people of God as to their state are a most blessed people? and may not all we
have said be sufficient for engaging the hearts of you that are as yet
strangers to the first dancings of a glorious work upon your hearts, to come
and join your selves to Zion, to take a life and death with the people of God,
seeing they have that which may bear them up in the d^^^est afflictions, and
most tempestuous fl^^^ wherein they may be tossed?

But (that we may draw to a close) we would now speak a word unto you the
people of God, as to your present duty from all we have said, ye see we have
cleared this good ground to hope that our Lord will see you again, and that ye
shall have very joyful and dancing days when that shall be, for your hearts
shall rejoice; O therefore blessed hearts, be comforted (in him) in the hope
and sure expectation of this precious day; let us in the hope hereof resolve
cheerfully to set about those duties suitable to us in order to his seeing us
again, let us resolve to be faithful unto him in his absence; let us resolve in
the strength of him to bide by his precious truths and interests, let us keep
our selves free from touching the unclean thing, for this will hasten his
seeing us again, let us do all things that tend to the good of his cause, that
the cause of our Lord Jesus may win the day, though we should fall in the field
of suffering; guard against all pollutions of his Ordinances; keep close by the
covenant whereof ye need not be ashamed, for it binds you to nothing, but
holiness toward God, and Loyalty toward your Prince, and so is the most clear
^e^eanly and sure Oath of Allegiance under Heaven; yea, (...) the Marriage
contract between God and (...) Land, so ye need think no shame of any thing in
it, but may cast up your face before all the World, owning and avowing it
before Heaven and Earth, Angels and Men; in a word let us set our face as flint
against the storm, resolving upon the greatest of hazards in the Lords strength
not to yield to any thing not agreeable to the word of God, when matters are
violently carried on against Jesus Christ, his interests and people, it is the
duty of all the faithful seed to set their face as flint against the storm, and
not to yield in a foot to any thing pressed upon them contrary to his word. Now
1. here is your work, be faithful unto him, bide by the truths of him, who
endured the Cross for you; defile not your selves with abominations pressed upon
you. 2. The simpathy and fellow feeling of our great high Priest, who is
touched with the feelings of all our trials, together with the precious
promises is your expense and charges, whereupon you are to spend on your way.
3. Christ's seeing you again, together with the joyful and danceing days ye
shall then have, is your encouragement; O therefore up with your fainting and
discouraged hearts, for nothing shall keep him away from you! he will see you
again, and your heart shall rejoice! sometimes he has even returned to these
places where they had formerly sought to slay him; What (said his Disciples)
will thou go up to Jerusalem, know thou not that not long ago the Jews
sought to stone thee, Joh. 11. 8. Yet he went, and so will he return again to
us, he will give us a gracious visit, and our hearts shall rejoice, but many
others shall look very blank at that day when he sees us again; but your heart
shall revive at that day: O therefore comfort your fainting hearts in the hope
of it, that ye may go cheerfully through the present distress, committing the
keeping of your souls unto him, in the way of duty and well doing, as into the
hands of a faithful Creator, who will make a glorious account of all that is
committed unto him. Now we have told you that our Land is a married land, and
that therefore he will see us again, and we call God to record upon our souls
that he laid a necessity of speaking this unto you, and that under no less
hazard then of being rejected of him, never to be countenanced in his work
again, but to be made a weathered spectacle of his displeasure, for
disobedience, durst we forbear to say these things unto you, and we are sure it
is from the Lord unto you. And receiving his tender hearted Christian friends
trembling, which he supposing might be for fear of his danger he speaks these
words, What ayleth you, O faithful friends in the Lord Jesus Christ? and why
does your faces look pale? are ye afraid of the approaching storm, O may not
this quiet your hearts that he will carry you well through, will see you again,
and cause your hearts rejoice. Why then are ye disconsolate, are ye afraid to
lose a friend for Christ and his cause? O may not this satisfy your hearts as
to this, that it is not lost which Christ gets, it falls in a friends hand.
Secondly, We say unto you that there is protection and security in our God, in
the most tempestuous and stormy day; Isai. 26. 2. We have a strong City (what
is the City there? it is Gods salvation) salvation will God appoint for walls
and bulwarks. where ye may see that when the Lords people have no outward
protection, neither walls nor bulwarks, then the Lords Salvation is walls and
bulwarks for their protection and shelter, so that he can shelter them as
within strong holds, even (...) they are amongst the greatest of snares: and so
may not this quiet your hearts that the Lord can protect your friends though in
the midst of trouble; and you have this to make up all your losses, -- our Lord
Jesus will see you again: we leave you with the same soul comforting promise in
your bosom, that howbeit now you have sorrow, because your hour is come yet he
shall certainly and without all doubt see you again, and your heart shall
rejoice, and shall add no more ^ but unto him that is able to persuade your
Hearts of this, That he will see you again; and who can manifest the same in
your joyful experience we desire to give Praise. The end of the first Sermon.

FINIS

