EDINBURGH, June 19. 1690.
THe General Meeting of the Ministers and Elders of this Church, finding that
the Commissioner His Grace, and the Honorable Estates of Parliament, by their
Act the 13 of June 1690. have Indicted a solemn Fast to be kept on ^^e 24 of
June instant, on this side the River Tay, and on the 1. of July thereafter, ^n
the other side of the said River; and they being sensible how much it is their
^uty, and the duty of the rest of the Ministers and People of this Church,
religi^usly to observe the said Fast on the foresaids days respectively, and
particularly, for ^^e Causes therein specified. Therefore we do recommend the
strict observance of it ^^cordingly, and that it may be the more religiously
observed, and through the ^ercy of God, prove the more effectual for His
Majesty's preservation and success in is present undertaking, it is necessary
that Ministers excite themselves and the peo^^e to the exercise of Repentance
for their own sins, and the Lands; and particu^^rly for the great ignorance of
God, Profanity and gross Abominations abounding ^^ong all Ranks and Stations,
the slighting of Jesus Christ, the Gospel Ordinances ^^d Ministry, profanation
of the Lords Day, neglect of Family Worship and Secret ^rayer, the neglect of
the duties of Righteousness and Mercy, the great and gene^^l defection from the
Truth, and ways of God, over the belly of great Light, Mer^^es and Judgments,
and our most solemn engagements to God; Earthly-minded^ess, Self-seeking,
Scandalous Divisions, and other the like evils; as also, for our ^^sensibleness
of, and ingratitude for, the manifold mercies bestowed on this Church and
Kingdom; and in special, in giving us the light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ; and in delivering us in former times, and now signally at this time,
from Popery, ^relacy, and Slavery; that being humbled for our sins, we may
obtain Reconci^^ation with God, and Pardon through Faith in the Blood of
Christ, and may have ^^cess with confidence to put up our Supplications to God,
for our King and Queen, ^he Commissioner his Grace, our Parliament, Council,
and Forces by Sea and Land, and for the Lord's carrying on the happily begun
Restoration of this Church, and ^^r his sending out of faithful Ministers, and
blessing of the Gospel, and for his gra^^ous presence in the Meetings of this
Church; and for that end, that he would dis^over and defeat the Plots and
Attempts against His Majesty and His Government, and would be pleased to send
seasonable Weather, for bringing forward the Fruits ^f the Ground, and that a
Spirit of Reformation and Repentance being poured out ^n all of us, Religion
and Righteousness, Peace and Prosperity under the shining of ^is Countenance,
may yet flourish in our Land.

Extracted by John Spalding Cls.
Edinburgh, June 19. 1690.
THEIR Majesty's High-Commissioner, and the Lords of Privy Counsel,
Considering, that through the neglect of Posts, or Others, the Proclamations of
Parliament indicting a Solemn and Public Fast, to be observed in ^ll the
Churches and Meeting Houses within the Kingdom, upon the days therein
^entioned, may not be sent timously to the Ministers hands, and the Observation
^f so Religious a duty being the Universal Concern of this Kingdom. Therefor
they hereby Appoint, that in case the day of the Fast have not been Obser^ed
upon the particular days mentioned in the said Proclamation, that the
Ministers, and all within their respective Congregations, shall keep the
famine, upon the Tus^ay next thereafter.

Extracted by GILB. ELIOT Cls. Sti. Con.

