TO THE READER.
COURTEOUS READER,
IN my Youth-hood I was employed in Clerkship under, and received some
Mathematical Knowledge from Mr. John Mar, one of the Clerks of the Kitchen to
His Present MAJESTY, when PRINCE of WALES, the said Mr. Mar being very Eminent
for his Mathematical Knowledge, some testimony whereof may be evinced, from
those excellent Dyals, wherewith the Gardens of our Late SOVEREIGN were adorned.

Our Intestine Miseries increasing, I lost that Employment, and went Seven
Years to Sea, most part of it in an English Merchant-man, become a Man of War
in the Venetian Service against the Turks, in which having leisure, I applied
part of my Studies to Mathematics and Merchants-Accompts, and upon my Return
fell to the Practice thereof, and afterward professed Writing,
Merchants-Accompts, and some Parts of the Mathematics; and having drawn up
some Books of Accounts, and diverse loose Questions, for the Instruction of my
Scholars, in the Years 1652 I committed them to the Press, under the Name of An
Introduction to Merchants-Accompts; they were again Reprinted in the Year
1664/5, without alteration; and in 1666, the Fire consumed the greatest part of
the Impression: The Stationer has since often urged me to alter and enlarge
the same for another Edition, presuming, that I that have been much and lately
concerned in great and Public Accounts, and have studied and been employed in
the Affairs of Public Trade and Plantations, might alter the same to good
advantage, and perchance others may be of the same mind; but I concur not,
finding that my said long Experience has not at all advanced my Knowledge in
good Methods of Accounts, though I confess I understand the nature and
Intrigues of bad ones much better than I did. Whereupon I have consented, and
advised the Stationer to Reprint the same with the Addition of two more
Accounts than were formerly extant, and was the more willing to do it at this
time for this Reason, namely:

That I might take the opportunity of acquainting those who are, or may be
concerned, That I spend part of my time in Stating Merchants-Accompts,
Ship-Accompts, or any Controversal Intricate Accounts, (concerning which, as
some have, so more may become Suits in Chancery or Equity, commenced or
depending;) and in Computing of Interest, the Variation or Forbearance of
Leases, Mortgages, and Annuities; and am to be heard of at Mr. Robert Horn's
the Stationer, at the South-Entrance of the Royal Exchange, for whom this Book
was Printed.

And now as to the ensuing Work, I have this to say, That when I first Composed
it, I observed a want of such Questions, that might not tire out the patience
of the Reader or Student, there being none but Journals and Leidgers of other
Authors in Print, seeming to some like a Labyrinth of a more than sufficient
length, and the which, when traced through, might possibly leave the Reader
unskilful in these shorter Questions; some whereof have had their rise from
real Affairs, which have happened much of the same kind. And now if the Reader
be still unexperienced, and desirous to reap some benefit thereby, let me
advise him to write out the Journals of some of these Accounts, omitting the
Relative Numbers in the Margin, of the which see Section the seventh following,
and are not to be made till the Parcel is entirely Posted, which that he may be
enabled to do, he may use the ensuing Directions; but if this be thought too
laborious, he may prick and examine over the said Questions, the Account it self
gives Instruction for Ballancing, the Balance of each Account, being Entered
out of the Leidger at the end of the Journal Parcels.

Diverse Accomptants have made the Business of Simple and Compound Interest, and
Annuities, the Subject of their Discourses: And I think it not improper to tell
the Reader, that in 1664 I published a Paper, consisting of a quarter of a
Sheet, and fitted for a Letter-Case, Entitled, The Doctrine of Decimal
Arithmetic, Simple Interest, etc. as also of Compound Interest, and Annuities,
generally performed for any time of Payment or Rate of Interest, by help of any
particular Table of the forbearance of One Pound Principal.

The which having been censured by some that understood it not, I think it not
amiss, a little better to inform them, That the Table therein used, is a Table
of Compound Interest, at 6 per Centum per Annum, for some Days, as well as (it
is usual) for some Years, the which to the said, or any other Ratio, may be
raised by several Methods, without any Extractions of Roots, or Aid of
Logarithms; yea any Logarithm in the Canon may be easily computed thereby, and
the Converse; also any Number of Mean Proportionals found between two Extremes
given.

The which Table and Precepts, removing the necessity of using a large Table of
Logarithms, or of those multitudes of Tables, fitted for the several kinds of
Annuity Problems, at several Rates of Interest, and several Terms of Payment,
having been of constant and singular use to my self, and believing it will be
of no less to others, I intend (God willing) to Reprint, to be fitted as
before, to be a Vade-mecum in a Letter-Case, though with a larger Table, (which
will remove some Operations hitherto necessary, to supply the want thereof) and
besides an Explication thereof apart, illustrated with variety of Examples: And
hope also hereafter to have some time to alter, amend, and Reprint other
Treatises of my own, as my Book of Quadrants and Dyalling, but most especially
my Treatise of Navigation, Entitled, The Mariners Plain Scale new plained; the
rather, in regard His present Majesty, to His Immortal Praise, has been
pleased to settle a Maintenance for Forty Hospital Boys, and for a Learned
Lecturer to teach them Navigation; on the Advancement whereof, the Splendour of
the Government, and the Trade and Safety of this Nation does so much depend,
that any that love their Country cannot but be zealous for, as particularly is,

Thy Friend and Well-wisher, JOHN COLLINS.

DIRECTIONS TO Post or Transport the JOVRNAL into the LEIDGER.
I. For the Words of Expression.

1. WHere you have many Debitors and one Creditor, proceed in order as they
come; but where you have one Debtor and many Creditors, it is best (in my
opinion) to Post all the Creditors first, and the Debtor last; in regard, by
this means, the Figures of Reference are first Entered into the Journal.

2. Immediately after the word To, which is always used on the Debtor side,
must follow the Name of that Account that is discharged; the word By is always
used on the Creditor side, and after it follows the Name of the Account that is
charged.

3. All Accounts of Wares, Voyages, Commodities, ought to be Posted at large in
all the Particulars, with a Column ruled in the middle therein, to express the
Number, Weight, or Measure of the Commodity; by help whereof the Number and
Quality of the Goods unsold may be known.

4. Upon the Account of Wares, it is best to express the Weight and Price, and
on the Buyer or Sellers Account the time and manner of payment, if room permit:
And here Note, That it is unusual to use above one Line in a Parcel in the
Leidger. And now though Wares or Commodities are Posted at large, yet there is
no such necessity, that other Accounts be the like.

II. For the Manner.

5. Discover by the Alphabet where that Account stands in the Leidger you are
to charge, or if the Account be not yet Entered, frame an Account in a spare
room, Entering the Title in a fair Italian Hand, and in the Calendar the Folio
where that Account stands; then in the outermost verge Enter the Year, and in
the first ruled space the Page of the Journal where that Parcel stands, in the
next the Month, afterward the Day, then the Words of the Parcel, and in the
next ruled Column the Page of the Leidger where that Parcel stands Creditor, or
if many Creditors, before the Column Figures expressing where those Accounts
stand, and finally the Sum so charged; thus is the Debtor Parcel Entered: The
like in several Accounts for many Debitors, when you have but one Creditor.

6. Turn to the Folio in the Leidger, where that Parcel is to be discharged or
made Creditor, and there Entering as before the Year, Page of the Journal,
Month, Day, Words of the Parcel, Page or Pages of the Leidger where Entered
Debtor, and finally the Sum; thus is the Creditor Parcel entirely Entered: The
like for many Creditor Parcels in several Accounts, when you have but one
Debtor.

7. Lastly, In the Journal draw a Line between the Terms Dr / Cr, above the
said Line Enter the Page of the Leidger where that or those Parcels stand
charged or made Debtor, and under the Line the Page or Pages where the said
Parcel or Parcels are discharged or made Creditor: Observing by the way, that
every Parcel is charged and discharged for the same Sum, either in gross, or at
length.

(...)
