The Consequences of Tolerating GOLD and SILVER to be exported out of this
Kingdom, discovered; and the Manner how the Coin of this Nation has been
Destroyed; and likewise how the French King may reasonably be supposed to have
Supplies of Lion-Dollars to furnish the Turks withal to carry on the Wars
against the German Emperor.
IN the Fifteenth of King Charles the Second, an Act was made, Entitled Trade
Encouraged; wherein, amongst other things, a Clause is inserted as follows:

Forasmuch as several considerable and advantageous Trades cannot be
conveniently driven and carried on without the Species of Money and Bullion,
and that it is found by experience, that they are carried in greatest
abundance, as to a Common Market, to such places as give free Liberty for
exporting the same; and the better to keep in and increase the Current Coin of
this Kingdom, be it enacted, and it is hereby enacted, That, from and after the
day therein mentioned, it shall and may be Lawful for all Persons to export out
of any part in England or Wales, or out of the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, all
sorts of Foreign Coin or Bullion of Gold or Silver, first making entry thereof
respectively, without paying any Custom or Fee for the same.

It is most certainly true, that of all the Laws that ever were made in
England, that are now extant, none ever countenanced such a Liberty as this;
but on the contrary, did strictly prohibit the Exportation, not only of Bullion
in general, but also Foreign Coins, and all Vessels of Gold and Silver
whatsoever, upon the Penalties either of Fellons, Forfeitures or Imprisonments.

It was by the endeavors of some Members of the East India Company, assisted
by some eminent Bankers, that this Liberty was obtained; and the Custom-House
Books do attest, That they have made very great use of it: for this Liberty has
created such a way of Trading betwixt the East India Company and some Bankers,
as tends directly to the Impoverishing this Nation, and to Enrich themselves.
Of all the Considerable Sums of Moneys that have been yearly coined since the
Restoration, very little remains; nor will it ever be otherwise, so long as the
Bankers have Melting-places in their Cellars, and liberty to export it when
Melted as Foreign Bullion. It is for very good Reasons believed by many who
Trade in Silver and Gold, that in those Times when the Mint was employed, that
great part of the Moneys then Coined, by Culling it and Melting the heaviest
and sending it to the Mint again, much of it was Coined two or three times
over, and which has likewise been customary, and of as bad consequence, to
raise the Price of Silver at the times of Exportation Three half pence or Two
pence per Ounce above the value at the Mint, thereby to encourage the Melting
down the Milled and Heavy Money into the form of Foreign Bullion, the more
conveniently to export it.

And although this has been a practice of as long continuance as the liberty
of Exportation, it never became so sensible a Grievance as since this present
War with France: In all the quantities of Silver that have been imported for
some Years past, Their Majesty's Mint is no ways concerned, nor can it be
expected so long as the Jews and some others will give Five Shillings and Four
Pence per Ounce for Sterling Silver, or upward, by the Essay here, to send it
to their Correspondents in Holland, and can have returns made by Bills to
receive Five Shillings and Seven Pence, or Five Shillings and Eight Pence for
it here in England, as has been acknowledged by some Persons much concerned in
this way of Trade.

There must be a dark kind of Mystery in this business, which, being well
understood, might direct us to a proper Remedy; but if it be inquired into, one
will pretend the Change is very low, and that must pass for a Pretense; another
will pretend the Exigencies of the Wars, and that is the best Account that he
can give of it. But to speak the truth, the sending of such great quantities of
Silver into Holland is attended with such extraordinary Profit to themselves,
and Prejudice to the Public, that those who are concerned in it, are desirous
to keep it from being understood by any but themselves; and perhaps many of
them do not well know to what uses the Silver they send there is employed: If
we inquire of those Gentlemen that have traveled this last Campaign into
Holland and Flanders, they will tell us, That our Crown-Pieces are not worth so
much in Holland as they go for here, in common Payment, which is seemingly a
Contradiction: but herein lies the Mystery; The Jews in Holland have the
liberty granted them to Coin what Silver they do Import as Merchandice, into
Lion Dollars, which are properly the King of Denmark's Coin, though they do not
Coin them for to send into his Countries, but to supply the Turks, as also the
French King, who is much concerned to keep up the Alliance that is betwixt him
and the Grand Turk. The Profits in Coining Lion Dollars for this Occasion is so
considerable, that some Gentlemen, if we may believe them, who have been much
concerned in sending Silver into Holland, would have given our King 20000 l.
per Annum, to have had the Liberty of Coining them here in England; which
unfolds the Mystery of the Jews in Holland, giving Five Shillings and Seven
Pence, or Five Shillings and Eight Pence per Ounce, for what Silver they Import
from hence, when at the same time our Crown pieces will not yield more in
Holland for common Uses, than what they go for in Payments here in England. It
is observable from the Bills of Entry, that our Turkey Company did formerly send
out considerable Quantities of Dollars and Pieces of Eight in their Way of
Trade; and likewise that our East India Company did send out vast Quantities
both of Bullion and Foreign Coins, which if now they should require the like,
would find it a very difficult Matter to be supplied, if some Expedient be not
found out to hinder the Treasure of this Nation from being Exported by the Jews
and others, for the Use and Purposes aforesaid. It appears by the Bills of
Entry, That from the Twenty-fourth of May 1689, to this present time, there
has been exported into Holland, Bullion or melted Silver 2315615 Ounces,
Pieces of Eight and Dollars in Number 481357, by which means the Current Coin
of this Kingdom is much Destroyed, and the Subjects Impoverished, and the
French King enabled to supply the Turks with Lion-Dollars, which pass for
Current Moneys in those Countries, the better to maintain War against the
German Emperor.

Having discovered in General, the Ill Consequences of Exporting Silver and
Gold, it may necessarily follow, that some useful Observations be made from the
Statute, on which the Liberty of Exportation is grounded.

First, It is observable from the said Statute, that the Reasons for granting
such a Liberty, was. That some Considerable and Advantageous Trades might
better be driven and carried on; which Trades do appear by the Books of Entry
at the Custom-House, to be the East India and Turkey Trades; but the liberty of
Exportation extending to all Persons, has given Opportunity to the Jews in
Holland, to Employ their Factors here, to buy up all the Silver they can for
their Use. Whereas, had the Liberty of Exportation been restrained to the
Trades beforementioned, it might reasonably be believed, that our Milled Money
had at this Time been much more plentiful; and the French King, for want of
Lion-Dollars, incapacitated to keep up the Alliance betwixt him and the Turks.

Secondly, We may likewise observe, that by this Liberty it was expected, the
Current Coin of this Kingdom should have been kept in and increased; but the
Effects being found by Experience to the Contrary, the Cause must be wholly
Attributed to the Exporters, and those who supply them with Silver and Gold to
export. (They) as has been customary at the times of Exportations, and is
observed in the General raising the Price of Bullion, Three Halfpence or Two
Pence per Ounce above the value at the Mint, thereby to encourage the melting
down the heavy Moneys for them to export. For preventing Abuses of the like
Nature, it would (with submission) be much for the Interest of this Kingdom, if
the Liberty of exporting any Bullion once melted or wrought in England were
totally prohibited, and a Duty laid upon all Foreign Coins and Foreign Bullion,
that should hereafter be exported. By this means the Mint would be employed,
and the Coin preserved, and the exporting the many Factories of this Kingdom
encouraged, and the Considerable Trades beforementioned no ways deprived of
the Liberty of exporting such Silver as is properly Foreign.

Thirdly, In the last Place we shall observe what Effects the Lightning our
Coin will have (that being proposed by some Men, who have had a large share in
the Exporting of Bullion) as the most effectual Remedy for preventing the
Abuses herein discovered: Supposing then that our Crown Pieces be for the
future Coined a Penny in each Piece lighter than formerly, which is Twelve
Pence in the Pound Weight Troy. If the Profits hereby do accrue to the Party
that brings Silver to the Mint to be Coined, the Effects then will be this; The
Price of Silver will be raised from Five Shillings and Two Pence at the Mint,
to Five Shillings and Three Pence. But then, if the East India Company to
Export it in their Way of Trade, or the Jews to Export it into Holland for to
Coin Lion-Dollars, will give Five Shillings and Five Pence or Five Shillings
and Six Pence per Ounce, which they will certainly do, so long as they have the
Liberty to Export it when melted: There will then be the same Encouragement for
melting the Coin as is now: But if in lightning our Coin this Method be taken,
that the Profits thereby shall accrue to Their Majesty's, it will then have
very good Effects in preventing those great Abuses of Culling the Moneys after
it is Coined, and melting the heaviest to be Coined a Second or some a Third
Time; which, as is believed, has been practiced ever since the Liberty of
Exportation was granted.

FINIS.

