Concerning the Interloquitor in the Action of Reduction upon Minority and
Lesion, at the instance of the Duke and Duchess of Monmouth, against the Earl
of Tweedale and his Lady.
PResident Stairs having then great Power and Influence in the Judicatory, was
so devoted to the Duke and Duchess of Monmouth, that both he and his Son Sir
John, were Commissioners in ordering and managing Their Estate here; And the
said Sir John, was their Advocate in that Process.

The Lord Melvil presuming upon that Interest, and the intimate Friendship he
had with the President, and having the managing of that Estate, the Friends of
the Name and Family being laid aside, to endear himself and his Service as more
concerned for their Interest than all the Friends Curators, and Commissioners,
and Lawyers; and His late Majesty Himself, who had interveened in the
transaction with Tweedale and his Lady, both as Arbiter; And there after as
Party and Garrantee, and taken burden that it should not be questioned upon
pretense of Minority: He did after they were of perfect Age, advise that the
same should be questioned by a Process of Reduction at her instance upon the
reason of Minority and Norm Lesion, and did insist in the same, until one
Interloquitor was obtained, which was in effect a sentence as to the most
material points, being in Jure and Relevancie. So that there needs no probation
of the same.

Reductions of transactions so solemn, are so unfavourable, that if the
persuers after they are of Age, do ratify the same, either expressly or tacitly
by making use thereof, or doing any Act that may import the least homologation
and acquiessing thereunto, they are so concluded, that the Allegiance of
homologation, is relevant and eleids any Process of Reduction; and yet
Alleadgiance of homologation founded upon the Duke and Duchess their giving
Warrant after they were of perfect Age, to their Commissioners, to call for the
Money due by Tweedale upon the said transaction, and another homologation
founded upon an Alleadgiance proponed by the Duke and Duchess, their
Advocates, in a Process betwext them and a third Person upon the right of
Hassindean, given to them by Tweedale upon the said transaction, were both
repelled. The first, upon pretense that nothing had followed upon the same. And
the Second, because the Duke and Duchess recovered no benefit upon the said
Alleadgiance, which pretenses were most frifulous, seeing Law does not consider
whether any thing follow upon such homologations, or whether any benefit was
recovered thereupon, but whether homologations did follow upon the transactions
questioned, and persuites and defenses founded upon transactions in Law, are
pregnant ratification the same, Et qui accepit agit.

By the said Interloquitor, it is found, that Francis Earl of Buccleugh being
named by his Father, Walter Earl of Buccleugh, Executor and Universal
Intromettor, without any mention of a Legacy left to him, was nevertheless
Universal Legator as to the Deeds part, upon pretense that the Defunct did
appoint the Tutors to apply the readiest of the Earl's Goods, Geire, and Rents,
for satisfying his Debts; by which Article of the Interloquitor, the half of
the Lady Tweedale's Interest, and share of her Fathers Exequetrie is cut off
without any Warrant or Ground in Law, seeing Universal Legacies in prejudice of
Children, and nearest of Kin are always, and ought to be in clear and in direct
and formal words, viz. That a Person should be named Universal Legator, or that
the Defunct should expressly leave in Legacy to him his part, or in such like
words; Whereas the said Earl Walter, who was in that quality, that in making
his Testament, he could not want the advice of Lawyers and Writers, that knew
the form and conception of Testaments, and Univeral Legacies, did name his Son
his Executor and Universal Intrometor, without leaving to him any Legacy,
either particular, or Universal: And the said Clause anent his Goods, and
applying the Rents to the use aforesaid, is only an Order and Direction to the
Tutors, to manage so his Estate, that the Rents should be applied in manner
aforesaid; and that they should be comptable yearly, to that purpose.

By the said Interloquiter, there is a great part of the Lady Tweedale Her
Claim and Share in her Fathers Exequetrie cut off, in so far as it is found
that Annual rent is not due, for the Sums contained in a Decree obtained
immediately after; And in pursuance of the said Transaction, at the instance of
the Lady Tweedale against the Duke and Duchess; Albeit, the said Sums being
due to the said Lady, as Executrix to David Her Brother, it was found most
justly by the said Decree. Upon a full debate in Foro, that Annual rent was
due for the same, until the death of David, in Anno 1648. In respect the said
Sums; David being Pupil and Minor, was not only pecuni^ Pupillaris, but was in
the hands of the said Earl Francis and his Tutors, and applied by them for
payment of the said Earls Debts and Annual rents; and he having that use and
benefit of David's Money Annual rent, was therefore due not as usura but as
interesse, because nemo debit locupletare cumaliena jactura; And it was a
favor to the Duke and Duchess, that Annual rent was only decerned until the
time aforesaid, and not until the Date of the said Decree in Anno 1667. And
there after until payment, seeing Annual rent being once due and current; and
the same reason continuing, viz. that they had the use and benefit of the Money
belonging to David, and the Countess, in his Right Annualrent continued to be
due, and could not sist until payment.

There was due to Lady Mary Scott, one of the Bairnes and nearest of Kin to the
said Walter Earl of Buccleugh, her part of his Exequetrie and movable Estate,
but she being deceased before the Lady Tweedale was Married, her part aforesaid
fell and belonged equally to the Lady Tweedale, and David her Brother, who did
survive the Lady Tweedale her Marriage; and the Lady Tweedale having by her
contract of Marriage, discharged and renounced that which might have faslen to
her by decease of the said Lady Mary, and the said David having thereafter
deceased, that which fell to him of the said Lady Mary her part, did by his
death accrue and belong to the said Lady Tweedale; and albeit the subject of
all dispositions and renunciations of what may fall to any Person by the
decease of another, is limited and understood to be that which had fallen to
them at the time of their renouncing and disponing the same, seeing what, after
such rights does fall to them, was not existing, and is non ens, and not
cogitatum in the time of such renunciations: And what is given to them for the
said rights, is only given proportionably and with respect, and in
contemplation of their present Right; and not of that which did not then belong
to them, not so much as in spe or appearance but to another; and for the reason
aforesaid, it was found by Decree abovementioned in Foro, that the Lady
Tweedales renunciation of that which may fall to her by Decease of the Lady
Mary, could not be extended to that which she had not at the time of the
Contract of Marriage of the Lady Marys part, and which did thereafter, fall and
accrue to her by the supervenient death of the said David; yet it was found by
the said Interloquitor, that the Lady Tweedale, her discharge and renunciation
in her contract of Marriage, does seclude her from any part of Lady Mary her
Means.

The aforesaid debate mentioned in the Sections, immediately preceding,
concerning the said Universal Legacy in favors of Francis Earl of Buccleugh,
and Annual rent of the Sums due to the Lady Tweedale and Lady Mary, her part
that fell where after her Contract of Marriage and Renunciation being in
apicibus juris, and agitat, and decided by the aforesaid Decree in Foro, in
favors of the Earl of Tweedale and his Lady; Nevertheless, the Alleadgiance
proponed by them, and founded unanswerably upon the said Decree, was repelled
by the aforesaid Interloquitor, and the Duke and Duchess reponed against the
same, upon these pretenses, mentioned in the Interloquitor, viz. First, that
the said Decree was passed in order to the said Transaction betwixt the Duke
and Duchess, and Tweedale and his Lady. And Secondly, That it was during their
Minority; Whereas, to the said first pretense, seeing that it was not pretended
that it was given unjustly, the passing of it in order to the said Transaction,
should have rather been a motive for sustaining the same as unquestionable, in
respect it is the ordinary and the great security of the People, and the
Interest of Minors, that Transactions and Bargains may be made with them, when
there is a necessity to sell or dispose of their Lands or Goods, or to Transact
for avoiding inextricable Pleas; and therefore besides their Tutors, and
Curators of their Parents, of their own choice, the Law provides for obviating
all suspicions of Fraud and Lesion, that such Transactions and Bargains
concerning them, should be Authorized by Decreets of the Ordinary Judges, and
ex Religione and authoritate Judicis; it is presumed; presumptione juris, that
Transactions Authorized by Decreets, are without any Lesion, and just, and for
the advantage of Minors, and ought to be unquestionable, otherwise, that
severity (both to Minors and others, who contracteth with them de rebus minorum
sine Decreto, non alienandis introduced by the Common Law, and the custom of
this and other Nations) should be altogether ineffectual and to no purpose.

The pretense of Minority for reponing the Duke and Duchess to their defenses
against the said Decree; and in special, anent the points aforesaid is most
frivoulous and unwarrantable, in respect they could not be reponed to any
defenses, but such as were omitted for them: whereas their defenses, as to the
said particulars, was not omitted, but vigorously and fully proponed and
argued, and the Judges Sentence following upon a full debate, cannot be said to
be any deed or omission of Minors through the frailty of their age, being the
deed and decision of the supreme Judge, which is presumed to be, and ought ever
to be just, whatever the quality or age of the Persons concerned, or Pleading
before them be: And there can be nothing more derogatory to the Honor and
Justice of Courts then that their decisions in Jure, which are ever eidem,
should be unjust against Minors; and super iisdem deductis, there should be
contrary decisions upon no other pretense, but that they were Minors when the
former was given.

It is found by the said Interloquitor, that His Majesty's interposition in the
said Transactions can have no effect if it should appear by the event of that
Process, that the matter was not sufficiently represented to His Majesty, which
appears to be very strange and unwarrantable, both as to the form and matter,
seeing the question whether His Majesty's Interposition should be effectual or
not, was not then, nor could be under debate, unless there had been a reduction
intented in behalf of His Majesty, for reducing the late King His Obligement,
whereby he became Garrantee, and took burden, and was obliged that the Duke and
Duchess should ratify at their perfect Age, which by the said Interloquitor,
is exten^^d to be but ^ne Interposition, though it be a most clear and pregnant
Obligement; And the King in the said Process, wherein the said Interloquitor is
given, is not Party either as Persuer or Defender, and intimation is only made
to his Advocate of the said Process, which is of course, and ought to have been
done in Law and Form by Tweedale and his Lady: And as to the matter if the said
discharge and Obligement, had been questioned by a Libelled Summons, and
Reduction in behalf of His Majesty upon that pretense, that the time of the
said Transaction, the matter was not sufficiently representing to His Majesty;
the Lord and Lady Tweedale, would have had a most relevant defense to elide the
same, viz. that His Majesty being Major and Sciens, and prudent did take burden
for the Minors, and did oblige himself in manner aforesaid; and should have
considered then, whether the matter was sufficiently represented, and if he did
not, it was not Tweedale nor his Ladies fault, nor could be a ground of
Reduction of the Kings Obligement; but the mistake in the said Interloquitor
was, that it was not considered that there was a great difference betwixt His
Majesty's acting in His Royal capacity, and giving Grants and Gifts to His
Subjects, and His Majesty's acting as privatus and cuilibet in Contracts and
Transactions, and as a Party, and obliged for performance of the same; seeing
Royal Favors and Grants may be, and are often elicited by suggestion and
mis-representation, by subreption or obreption, which is never thought to be
incident to Transactions or Obligements, which are the result of Treaty and
Debate, and great deliberation: And as a private Person could not without
absurdity, pretend to be free of a Transaction or Obligement to Warrant the
same, upon so frivulous a pretense, that the matter was not fully represented;
much less the Transactions and Obligements of Princes can be questioned upon
the same, seeing above all others in Their Transactions, Bone Fides, and
Justice and Honor is said to Exuberat. And it is not conceived that upon the
event of a Process so long after it can appear that the matter was not fully
represented, the time of the said Transaction in respect whatever the Issue of
the Process be, in Jure it cannot be known by the same what was represented,
the said Transaction that being in Fact: And it cannot be thought Tweedale and
his Lady would not fully represent the matter as to themselves, and their own
Interest; and if what did concern the adverse Party, was not represented for
them by their Commissioners, Curators, and Lawyers, it cannot be imputed to
Tweedale or his Lady, or enervate the said Transaction and the Kings
Obligement: But it is not to be presumed the Integrity and Ability of so many
Persons of Quality, that was concerned in the said Transaction in behalf of the
Duke and Duchess, being considered that the matter was not fully represented
for them; and it appears by the said Decree, at the Instance of Tweedale and
his Lady; so soon after and in pursuance of the said Transaction, that all the
said grounds and subtilities whereupon the said Interloquitor proceeds, was
then fully represented.

From the Premises and what is represented in the other Paper, given in for
Tweedale and his Lady, it evidently appears that with great patience and
diligence, they have been at great trouble and charge to defend against so long
and tedious a Process, that nothing has been omitted, that could be said or
done in the same; and the Duke and Duchess being conscious that Tweedale and
his Lady had gotten so hard a measure, and being content to remit a very
considerable part of what Tweedale would have been forced to pay upon the
aforesaid Interloquitor and decree, that would have followed upon it; The Earl
of Tweedale and his Lady by their accepting the said ease, and granting a Bond
for a far less Sum, has done nothing in prejudice of the said Transaction; and
by the contrary, if they had not accepted of the Terms aforesaid, it might have
been obtruded to them, that they had prejudged both themselves and the King.
And therefore it is humbly desired, and expected from His Majesty's Justice and
Goodness, that a course may, and will be taken for their Relief conform to the
said Transaction, and His late Majesty's Obligement.


