Bishop COZENS's ARGUMENT, PROVING, THAT Adultery works a Dissolution of the
Marriage.
Being the Substance of several of Bishop COZENS his Speeches in the House of
Lords, upon the Debate of the Lord ROSS'S Case. Taken from Original Papers writ
in the Bishop's own Hand.
THE Question is indefinitely to be spoken of, Whether a Man being divorced
from his Wife, who has committed Adultery, and is convicted of it, may Marry
himself to another Wife or no, during the Life of her which is divorced.

The place in St. Matthew the 5th, repeated again St. Matthew the 19th, has
preat Perspecuity: If it be not lawful for any Man to put away his Wife, and
Marry again, except it be in the Case of Fornication, (for the displacing the
Words, by putting the Exception before the Marriage, cannot alter the Sense)
then a contrario, it must of necessity follow, That if the Wife be put away
for Fornication, the Husband by the Tenor of Christ's Words is left free to
Marry again; which Freedom is not allowed the Adultress her self, nor to any
Man else that shall Marry her.

St. Mark and S. Luke have been opposed to S. Matthew; and it has been said,
that Christ's words in S. Matthew did not properly belong to Christ's
Disciples, or the Christian Church, as the words in S. Mark and S. Luke, which
are absolute, do; which is a saying that neither I, nor, I think, no body else
ever heard of before: For Christ's Sermon in the Mount was spo'ken to his
Disciples, and especially belonged to Christians.

It Is clear they are spoken to his Disciples; for he says to them, that they
are the Salt of the Earth, and the Light of the World; and that they are
blessed, when they suffer persecution for his Name's sake; which no Man will
say, or apply to the Jews.

It Is true, that in the 19th Chapter of S. Matthew, Christ answers the Scribes
and Pharisees, who came to tempt him with their Question, Whether it was lawful
for a man to put away his Wife for any cause, as they said Moses had permitted
them to do. But the Answer that Christ gave them. That it was not lawful, but
only in the case of Adultery, for men to put away their Wives, and to marry
another, was a Rule which concerned all Christians to observe for ever after;
and for that reason was recorded by S. Matthew.

The words in S. Mark and S. Luke, are not to be taken absolutely, but to be
supplied and understood by his words in S. Matthew; as in many other Cases is
clear; viz. the Thief upon the Cross, Baptism in the Name of the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, etc. whereof many Instances may be brought, as the destruction
of Ninivol, etc.

But for Christ's words, the Exception confirms the Rule, and infers a
Concession, that in the Case of Fornication, the putting away one Wife. and
Marrying another, is allowed. It is alike with diverse other his Exceptions,
which are sound in Scripture: For brevity, I will instance in this one (viz.)
Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish: Upon which Text, if I or any
Bishop else were to Preach, I believe we should not discharge our Duty, unless
we should tell the People, That if by the Grace of God they did repent, they
should not perish.

The Exception here, (...) nisi, unless, is parallel with the 1 Kings 3.18.
None were in the house, except we twain they Two therefore were, others were
not.

Such Exceptions proceeding from natural Equity, are tacitly implied in Laws,
tho pronounced in general Terms.

But as to the Exception here, the Words are not capable of any other Sense
than as I have observed; for except that Restraint be referred to Marrying
again, the Sense would run thus, Whosoever puts away his Wife commits Adultery;
which stands not with Truth or Reason; since it is not the Dismission that is
Adulterous, but the Marriage of another. It is, therefore, the plain drift of
our Savior to teach the Pharisee. that the Marriage of a Second Wife after a
Dismission of a Former, upon any other cause, except for fornication, is no
less than Adultery; thereby inferring, That upon a Just Dismission for
Fornication, a second Marriage cannot be branded with Adultery.

Besides, the Pharisee's Question [Is it lawful for a man to put away his Wife
for every cause] was not without a plain implication of Liberty to Marry
another; which our Savior well knowing, gives a full Answer, as well to what
he meant, as what he said; which had not been perfectly satisfactory, if he had
only determined that one part concerning Dismission, and not the other
concerning Marriage; which Clause, if Two Evangelists express not, yet it must
be fetch^d necessarily from the Third; since it is a sure and irrefragable
Rule, That all Four Evangelists make up one perfect Gospel.

The Rhemists and College of Doway urge for the Popish Doctrine, Romans 7.2. The
woman which has an husband, is bound by the law to her husband as long as he
lives. But

1. This place is to be Expounded by Christ's Words. 2. St. Paul has no
occasion here to speak of Divorce, but of Marriage whole and sound, as it
stands by God's Ordinance. 3. He speaks of a Woman who is under an Husband; so
is not she that is divorced from him. 4. St. Paul uses this to his purpose of
the Law being dead, to which we are not bound.
Nor is their Doctrine more favored by 1 Cor. 7.10. Let not the woman depart;
as being in her Choice whether she would depart or not: But in the Case of
Fornication, she was to depart, or rather be put away, whether she would or not.

The Bond of the Marriage is to be en^^ired into, what improperly is. Being a
Conjugal Promise Solemnly made between a Man and his Wife, That each of them
will live together according to God's Holy Ordinance, notwithstanding Poverty
or Infirmity, or such other things as may happen during their Lives. Separation
from Bed and Board, which is part of their Promise so to live together, does
plainly break that part of the Bond whereby they are tied to live together both
as to Bed and Board: The distinction betwixt Bed and Board and the Bond, is
new, never mentioned in the Scripture, and unknown in the Ancient Church,
devised only by ^he Canonists and the Schoolmen in the Latin Church (for the
Greek Church knows it not) to serve the Pope's turn the better, till he got it
established in the Council of Trent; at which time, and never before, he laid
his Anathema upon all them that were of another Mind; forbidding all Men to
Marry and not to make any use of Christ's Concession.

Bed and Board, or Cohabitation, belong to the Essence and Substance of
Matrimony; which made Erasmus and Bishop Hall say, That the distinction of
those two from the Bond, is merely Chimerical, and Fancy.

The promise of Constancy and mutual Forbearance, if it hinders Divorce as to
the B^nd, hinders it also as to Bed and Board; beause the same Bed, and the
same Table were promised in the Marriage Contract; but the Promise does not
extend even to Tolerating Adultery, or Malicious Disertion; which, according to
God's Ordinance, Dissolves the Marriage.

Our Savior speaks of Divorces Instituted by the Mosaical Law; but they were
no other than Divorces from the Bond.

The Form of the Bill of Divorce, among the Jews was this, Be Expelled from me,
and free for any Body else To give the Bill of Divorce, is from the Hebrew Root
(...), which is to break, or cut off the Marriage. With this agree the Ancient
Canons, Councils, and Fathers of the Church.

Council, N^^caesar. and Elib. forbid the retaining an Adulterous Wife. Council.
Eliber. Aurelian. and Arelatens. give Liberty, in such Case to Marry again.
Clement's Constitution, Tertullian, St. Basil in his Canons, approved by a
General Council are for Marrying again. Council Venet. If they Marry in any
other Case than Fornication, they are to be Excommunicated, and not otherwise.
Council Wormat. gives Liberty to the Innocent Party to Marry after a Divorce.
Council Lateran. gives leave for the Innocent Party after a Year to Marry again.

Council. Lateran. If any one take another Wife while a Suit is depending, and
afterward there be a Divorce between him and the First, he may remain with the
Second.

Lacta^tius, S. Hierom and Epiphanius, are for allowance of Marriage after
Divorce. Chrysostom, Him. 19. 1 Cor. 7. says, That the Marriage is dissolved by
Adultery; and that the Husband, after he has put her away, is no longer her
Husband.

Theophylact on the 16th. of St. Luke, says, That St. Luke must be interpreted
by S. Matthew. S. Hillary is for marrying again, as Dr. Fulk says upon S.
Matthew the V. The Eastern Bishops, in the Council of Florence, are for
marrying again. Justin Martyr speaks of a Christian Woman's giving a bill of
Divorce to a Dissolute Husband, without finding any fault with it.

St. Ambrese says, a Man may Marry again, if he put away an Adulterous Wife;
Theodoret said of a Wife who violated the Laws of Marriage: Therefore our Lord
requires the Bond or Tie of Marriage to be dissolved.

All the Greek Church to this day allow it. Erasmus, Cajetan, and other
Papists: The Civil Law, and the Laws of the Emperor, are clear for it: And the
Constitutions of our own Church of England, in the time of H. 8. E. 6. and
Queen Eliz.

The Practice of the English Church: In the Stat. 1 Jac. c. 11. against second
Marriages, Divorces are excepted; and in Canon 107. it is provided they shall
not Marry again; but it is not said such Marriages are void, only the Caution
is forfeited: Neither does the Canon speak of such Separations, wherein the the
Bond it self is broken, as it is by Fornication.

Even the Canon Law allows Marrying again, in case a Woman seek her Husband's
Life: and in case of a Bondwoman. Gratian says, in the Case of Adultery Lawful
Marriages ought not to be denied. In the Case of an Incurable Leprosy, it was
the Advice of S. Gregory to Austin the Monk, That he that could not contain,
should rather Marry. Bellermin owns that the Bond of the Marriage of Infidels
is dissolvable; but the Marriage of the Faithful, and of Infidels, is of the
some nature; And Justinian, a Jesuit, confesses, that it is simply lawful for
the Innocent Party to Marry again. And the Roman Doctors allow a dissolution of
the Bond of Marriage, if the Parties should, after consumation, transfer
themselves into a Friery or Nunnery.

The Canons which in the case of Adultery prohibit Marrying in the Life time of
the guilty Person, are contrary to Two Acts of Parliament made 25 H. 8. and 3
and 4 E. 6. wherein no Canons are allowed that be any way repugnant to the Laws
of God, Ref. Leg. Eccles. Tir. de Adulteriis and Divortiis.
or the Scripture, the King's Prerogative Royal, and the Statutes of this Land.
32 Persons were to review the Canon Law, in which Review, drawn up by
Archbishop Cranmer, the Innocent Person i^ permitted to Marry again, according
to Christ's Law and Concession.

We have Examples of such Marriages in H. 4. of France, H. 8. of England, Lord
Mountjoy, Lord Rich, Bishop Thornborough, and diverse others. And it is
observable, That in the Case of the Marquess of Northampton, 5 E. 6. who had
been divorced for his Lady's Adultery, and Married another before any Act of
Parliament made concerning it, an Act which passed afterward (only two
Spiritual, and two Temporal Lords dissenting) declares he had been at liberty
by the Laws of God to Marry, and did Lawfully Marry another; Where the Act
manifestly supposes, that whatever had obtained for Law till that time, was
void, as being contrary to God's Law.

The most considerable Men of the Reformed Churches both at home and abroad,
are of this Opinion: Grotius quotes Tertullian, in whose time it was Lawful for
the Innocent Party to Marry.

Lancelot Inst. Jur. Can, acknowledges that Divorce is a dissolution of the
Marriage.

Seldom, who is not likely to contradict the Laws of this Kingdom, maintains,
That Marriage after Divorce is to be allowed: And in that particular, Dr.
Hammond does not contradict him, but is clearly for it.

The Opinion of Am^sius deserves to be set down at large: Marriage, says he,
cannot be dissolved by Men at their pleasure; and for that reason, as it is
considered simply and absolutely, it is rightly said to be indissolvable;
because Marriage is not only a Civil, but a Divine Conjunction; and is also of
that nature, that it cannot be dissolved without detriment to either Party, Yet
it is not so indissolvable, but it may be dissolved for a Cause which God
approves as just; for the Indissolvability was not in: s^^^^ted for a
Punishment, but for the Comfort of Innocent Persons; and it admits an
Exception, wherein God ceases to conjoyn. By Adultery two are made not to
remain one Flesh: hence it is, that a Contagious Disease is not a Cause of
dissolving Marriage. By Adultery the very Essence of the Contract is directly
violated; but the Contract ceasing, the Bond depending on the Contract
necessarily ceases. It is against all reason, that all Matrimonial Duties
should be for ever taken away, yet the Bond or Obligation to those Duties
should continue. The words of our Lord, Matthew. 5.32. and 19.9. have no
distinction or limitation of the putting away, but simply and absolutely
approve of putting away; therefore they approve of a putting away, not partial,
or to a particular purpose, from Bed and Board, but Total.

None are against the R^f^rmed Divines, but Dr. Howson, Mr. Bunny, and Dr.
Prideaux.

Dr. Howson was a professed Adversary to Dr. Raynolds who was a great
Maintainer of the Church of England against all the Points of Popery, and
particularly in this.

Dr. Tailor, Bishop Hell, Dr. F^lk, are for Second Marriages; no Authors
against them but the Council of Trent, and those of the Church of Rome; whose
Credit is only saved by those of our Church who agree with them.

Upon the difference of Explication between S. Ambrose, Origin, and S. Austin,
a new kind of Divorce has been thought of from Bed and Board; but this Divorce,
or Name of a Divorce, was unknown to the Jews and Ancient Christians.

I said so much before, at the First and Second reading of this Bill, that I
was in good hopes to have had no further occasion, given me of answering any
Objections against it now; but seeing diverse new Arguments have been studied
and framed against it since that time, I shall now endeavor to satisfy and
clear them all.

1. The First Argument against it, is, That the Separation from Bed and Board
does not dissolve the Bond of Marriage. To which I must Reply, as I did before,
That this is a distinction without a difference; newly invented by the
Canonists and School men, and never heard of either in the Old or New
Testament, nor in the times of the Ancient Fathers, who accounted the
Separation from Bed and Board, to be the Dissolution of the Bond it self.

2. That first Institution of Marriage, that they may be one Flesh, is by
Adultery dissolved, when the Adultress makes herself one Flesh with another
Man; and thereby dissolves the first Bond of her Marriage.

3. The Objection, that if the Bond be dissolved, and afterward, if the Man or
Woman be reconciled, they must be Married over again, is no necessary
Consequence, no more than it is in a Person baptized, who may break his
Covenant, and renounce his Baptism; and yet upon true Repentance be received
into God's Favor by virtue of the first Covenant, without any new Baptism.
Suppose a Witch, who they say makes a Compact with the Devil, to renounce her
Baptism; should afterward, by the Grace of God, seriously and truly Repent her
self of the Wickedness; I do not believe that any body would take upon him to
Baptize her again: and if a Priest should renounce his Orders, and turn Turk,
and yet afterward repent him, and return into the Church: he need not be
Re-ordained a second time. The Case will be the same in Marriage.

4. I said heretofore, That the Roman Doctors allowed this Dissolution of the
Bond, when the Man and Wife, even after the Consumation of Marriage, would
transfer themselves into a Friary, or a Nunnery: but because it has been since
doubted, that no Authority can be showed for this particular, I shall here show
it out of the old Constitutions of the Church of England.

And in the Case of Religion, Prove. Will. Lindewode, sive Constable. ng. fol. 94.
Ver: null. latenus Separentur.
that is the true understanding, that to wit, either of them betaking
themselves to Religion before Carnal Knowledge, the Bond of the Marriage be
dissolved: but it both enter into Religion, and make solemn Profession, then
such Marriage is dissolved, even as to the Bond.

5. It has also been said, that if the Bill pass, it will pass against the
Church of England: which I confess, I do not understand: For the Church of
England is within the Kingdom of England; and if the Laws of this Kingdom be
for the Bill and have declared it by the Assent of the King, Lords, and
Commons, as in the Case of the Marquis of Northampton, was heretofore declared
in the time of King Edward the 6th. That by the Laws of God the Innocent Party
was at liberty to Marry again; Certainly the Spiritual Lords, as well as the
Temporal and Commons, are bound to admit it: and I know not why they should be
called the Church of England, that join with the Council of Trent, and plead so
much to uphold it; rather than others that join with all the Reformed Churches,
and plead against that Canon of the Church of Rome, which has laid an Anathema
upon us, if we do not agree with them.

As to the supposed Inconveniences that will follow upon Marrying again.

1. More Inconveniences will follow if they be forbidden to Marry again. 2. The
Father would be in an uncertainty of the Children, if he should retain the
Adulteress. 3. There would be danger of Poisoning, or killing one another, if
no Second Marriage were allowed. 4. Where the Parties should consent to new
Marriages for their own Lusts, the Magistrates have Power to overruled such
Practices. 5. If they be kept altogether by Divorce from Marrying, it would
occasion the Innocent Party to Sin.
THE Duke of Norfolk's Case: WITH REASONS for Passing his BILL.
IF want either of Precedent for a Parliamentary Divorce, before going through
the tedious and ineffectual Methods of Doctors Commons, or of Demonstration of
Fact. have hitherto deprived the Duke of Norfolk of that Relief against his
Wives Adultery, which the Divine Law allows; The late Statute made in the like
Case and the Coming in of Two, who while the Duke's former Bill was depending,
had been sent away to prevent that Discovery which they now make: cannot but be
thought to remove all Objections against an Act of Parliament, not only for the
benefit of the Duke, but of the Public; as a means to preserve the Inheritance
of so great an Office, and Honors to Persons of the true Religion.

And since Bishop Cozens his Argument in the Lord Ross's Case has made it
Evident, That those Canons which govern the Spiritual Court in this matter, are
but the remains of Popery; nothing can be now requisite to satifie the most
scrupulous of the Reformed Religion, but to set the Duke's Proofs of his Lady's
Adultery in a true Light

The Reputation which the Duchess had maintained, of Wit and Discretion made
it difficult for many to believe, that she could be surprised in the very Act
of Adultery, as had been formerly proved. And though then it appeared, that one
Henry Keemer lived with the Duchess, while she went by a feigned Name at an
House hired for her at Fox-Hall, by Sr John Germain's Brother: and that Nicola,
who then lived with Sir John, used to receive Wood sent from the Duchess to Sir
John's house by the Cockpit; the withdrawing of Nicola, and carrying with him
the Dutch Maid, equally Entrusted with the secret on Sir John's side left no
Evidence of their Constant Conversation, but Keemer since dead, and Susannah
Barrington, who had the like Trust from the Duchess

Keemer, though very unwillingly, some years since confessed his living with
the Duchess at Fox-hall, where he pretended she was obliged to conceal her
self for Debt, and what share Susannah had in the secret was unknovn, till
Nicola appeared: Nicola coming into England sometime since in Ex^ectation of a
Service, expressed his readiness to discover what he knew, and to Endeavor to
bring with him the Dutch Maid.

She proves, That for two Months the first Summer after the King came for
England, Sir John German and the Duchess lived together as Man and Wife and
were seen in Bed together by her, Mr. Bryan, and his Wife, Sir John's Sister:
and that Nicholas Hauseur, Eleanor Vaness Exam. 22. Feb. 1699.
Sir John's Valet de Chamber, used to be assisting to him; as the Dutchess's
Woman, Susannah Barrington, was to her, at going to Bed, and rising.

She proves the like Conversation at Fox-hall, and the Dutchess's House at the
Millbank, till the Duke's first Bill for a Divorce was depending; within which
time Nicholas Hauseur. by Sir John's Order, carried her away, and Susannah
Barrington, with intention of going for Holland, to prevent their being
Examined to what they knew; but the wind proving contrary, they could not go
till the Bill was rejected; and then Sir John fetched back Susannah, who was
most useful to the Duchess; but Hauseur went for Holland with Ellen.

He confirms Ellen's Evidence in every particular; and besides the Persons
mentioned by Ellen as privy to Sir John's lying with the Duchess, names Sir
John's Brother Daniel. Nicholas having been found very trusty, his Master sent
for him to return to his Service; Nicholas Hauseur.
and gave him the opportunity of proving the Continuance of the same Adulterous
Conversation at several Times and Places, from the Summer 1692. to the 26th. of
April 1696 He swears he had after his return to Sir John's Service, seen them
in Bed together at Sir John's House, at the Cockpit and at the Dutchess's
Houses at Mil^bank, and where she now lives; and used to be let into the
Dutchess's Apartment by Susannah Barrington, or Keemer Nor can any Man who
shall read the ample Testimonials given Mr. Hauseur by Sir John; by the last of
which it appears that he served him faithfully as his Steward, reasonable
question Hauseur's Credit.

Another who had been advanced by Sir John from his Footman to Mr. Hauseur's
place, William Bayl^. and from thence to a good Office in the Excise, very
unwillingly confirmed the Testimony of Hauser and the Dutch Maid, not only as
to the time of their going from the Service of Sir John and the Duchess, but
though being no Foreigner, he could not so easily be sent away to prevent
discovery, and therefore was not let so far into the secret as Hauseur and the
Dutch Maid; yet he swears the Duchess used to come masked to his Master's
House, that he has gone with him as far as the Horseferry toward her House at
the Mill-bank; that then his Master sometimes ^tay out all Night, and the next
morning he has carri^d Linen and Clothes for his Master to Keemer's House, or
Keemer has fetched them from him: And this he proves to have been since the
rejecting the former Bill, and about Five Years since, when he was succeeded by
Hauseur, as before he had succeeded Hauseur

Two other Foreigners, La Fountain, who had lived with Sir John. and was Served
with Summons at the Dutchess's House at Dra^ton; and Hugonee, who ran away from
the Lord Haversham's since Summons was taken out against him; seem to have had
the same Trust that Hauseur had: for both declared. That nothing should oblige
them to betray their Master's Secrets: One said, No Court could dispense with
his Oath of Secrecy: and ^oth declared they would immediately go beyond Sea.
Summons have been taken out for Mr. Brian and his Wife, and Sir John German's
Brother (who are, or lately were in Town) to confess or deny what Nichola and
Ellen appeal to them for: and it cannot be imagined that Sir John should choose
theHonour of being thought to have to do with a Duchess, before the Clearing
her and himself from the Imputation, by bringing his Relations to disprove the
Charge, if what is sworn to be within their knowledge is false.

And if Sir John's Vanity should prevail with him, at least it is to be
presumed, that his Relations would be more just to him and the Lady, than to
suffer any thing to pass against them, which they could with Truth and Justice
prevent.

But since none of them appear, the World will believe their absenting more
than a thousand Witnesses, in confirmation of what Mr. Hauseur, Ellen and
Bailey, have sworn. Whose Evidence not only stands untouched by any thing
offered by the Dutchess's Witnesses, but is plainly confirmed by them in the
principal parts.

This being the nature of the proofs, it is observable,

1. That there never yet was any Case of this kind, where the Evidence was not
liable to greater Objections than can be made to this.

Though in the latest Case of this kind, there was full Conviction of the
Ladies having Children while she lived separate from her Husband; and the
presumption was very violent whose the Children were; yet this was but
presumption, and that was weakened by the presumption in Law that they were the
Husbands; especially since there was no direct proof of the Lover's ever lying
with her.

2. Tho in that case, by reason of the interval of Parliament, and fear of the
deaths of Witnesses, a Suit was begun in Doctors Commons, 'twas taken from
thence while the Suit was depending; therefore that was rather an Objection
against procceding in Parliament than an Argument for it.

3 In that Case, several Witnesses were examined at the Bars of both Houses,
who had not been examined at Doctors Commons, nor any notice given of their
Names before their Examination.

4. It appears by that Case, and the present, that the Examinations in
Parliament are more solemn and certain than those of the Spiritual Court; which
depend too much upon the Honesty of the Register, or his Deputy.

5. Before that Case, Parliaments have either broken through the Rules which
bind the Spiritual Court, as in the Case of the Duke of Norfolk, 1 Eliz n. 31.
1 Eliz. where the Parliament ratified a Marriage, as lawful according to God's
Law; tho protracted and let, by reason of certain Decrees and Canons of the
Popes Law; or else have dissolved a Marriage where there had been no
application to Doctors Commons, as in the Case of Mrs. Wharton, 2. and 3. W. M.
who has been married to Mr. Cambel; and yet there had been no Examination of
Witnesses, but what had been before the two Houses.

So long before, in the Case of Sir Ralph Sadler, upon proof before the two
Houses that the Lady Sadlers former Husband had deserted her and disappeared
for Four Years before she Married Sir Ralph, 37. H 8:
the Parliament Legitimated her Children by Sir Ralph.

WHereas some Object against the Passing the Bill, as if it would countenance a
Jurisdiction in the House of Lords to examine to such matters, in the first
Instance or Originally; the Objection would be the same if it had begun, as it
might, in the House of Commons; but in truth would be of equal force against
most private and several public Acts, occasioned by the examination of
Witnesses, or Notoriety of Fact.

Since therefore the Duke has so long, and so often in vain endeavored to be
freed from a Lady, publicly famed and proved to have lived with Sir John
Germain, as his Wife; the Duke's former disappointments cannot but be powerful
Arguments for his speedy obtaining that Justice which the Spiritual Court
cannot give him; their Power reaching no further than to that liberty of living
as she list; some years since settled by Articles: But as none of less Art and
Oratory than her Counsel could have turned this into a License to commit
Adultery, if she List, or a Pardon afterward; had there not been evidence of
her Acting according to such Construction, the Duke would have hoped she had
repented of the former Injuries he had received from her; but now hopes she
shall not longer continue to bear the Name of his Wife, and put him in danger
of being succeeded by Sir John Germain's Issue, or deprive him of the
expectation of leaving his Honors, Offices, and Estate, to a Protestant Heir.

BY Virtue of an Order, Obtained from His Grace the Duke of Norfolk, Earl
Marshal of England: Jeremiah Wilkins, is hereby Authorized to Print, and
Publish His Case, and that no other do presume to Print, or Publish the same.

By His Grace the Duke of Norfolk 's Special Command.

London, Printed by Jer. Wilkins, near Fleet Street, 1700.


