THE CONSTANCY, Of the People called Quakers, In their Testimony against
POPERY, sincerely Asserted, in Opposition to a Perverss Lybel, falsely Styled, A
Looking-Glass for the QVAKERS, (in Two Collumns) Fallaciously Mis-representing
them: Humbly Offered to Public and Impartial View.
THE Title bespeaks the injurious Design and Attempt of the Obscure Author,
Unjustly and Maliciously to Expose the People called Quakers, either as
Inconsistent with their Profession against Popery; or as uncertain Temporizers,
and no real Protestants, (which is a Slanderous Insinuation) for says he, The
first Collumn is what they formerly Published against Papists; and the other
Collumn is what they Published on their behalf, when uppermost. Wherein it is
observable, that he renders all the words he has Cited in both his Collumns, to
be what the Quakers have Published, concluding his Pamphlet, to be Only the
Quakers own Words, without any Observations or Remarks; Which is apparrently
False, as well as Scandalous; a great part of his Collections being none of the
Quakers Words, Language or Books, but some other Nameless Pamplets, which the
Libeller unjustly fathereth upon the People called Quakers.

It Is true, he Quotes William Penn, Page 4. in his second Collumn against
Papists and Popes, and their Persecutions, etc. and not on Papists behalf,
whereby he has given the Lie to his Title Page. And we doubt not, but by the
Grace of God William Penn will sincerely keep to his Testimony against Popery
and Persecution. However, he be Unjustly Represented to the contrary by false
Repotts, Prejudice or Envy: To his own vindication, in Answer to the Letter
directed to Mr Penn, we Refer the Unprejudiced Reader for further satisfaction.
And we cannot see how William Penn, or others of our Friends Writing against
Persecution, both among Papists and others, and for Liberty of Conscience
toward God, can with any Color of Reason be construed, Papists behalf, as
Papists; there being nothing more contrary or repugnant to Popery it self, or
the design thereof, then the free Enjoyment of a real Liberty of Conscience in
matters of Religion and Worship, which Popery it self allows not Dissenters,
tho we cannot therefore think it Christian to Retaliate upon Papists, by
rendering Evil for Evil, to destroy them only for their Consciences in
Religious matters; thus none would be served.

What persuasive Arguments for Moderation have been written to Protestants in
general, or to the Church of England in particular, against Corporal or
pecuniary Punishments for Religious Dissent, or for Repeal of Distructive Penal
Laws in that Case, (some whereof being even against dissenting Protestants) all
conscientious Dissenters, even Protestants themselves; were and are of the same
mind, it being most natural for Persons when under Oppression, to desire their
Burdens may be wholly removed, (and blessed be God that some legal Restraint
is put to those Laws) a thing so highly commendable in the Civil Government:)
And we see no cause of Retraction in this Case, no more then for commending the
Moderation of a Popish Prince, in granting Liberty of Conscience to Dissenters,
when like to have been Destroyed and Devoured by Persecutors; yet the same
justice of distinguishing between the more moderate sort of Papists, and the
Cruel, we have always allowed the Moderate Church of England People from the
Persecutors therein. And what if the Quakers have Exclaimed against the Papists
former Persecutions in Queen Mary's days, but Commended their Moderation in
King James the Seconds days: Or that the Quakers have condemned their Cruelties
to the poor Protestants in France, etc. but acknowledged their late Lenity in
England; it follows not that the Quakers are double-minded, but the contrary.
That they are of a single mind, still against Persecution, and for Moderation
and Charity. This is the true nature and state of our Case, otherwise Abused.

Popish Reservations, as to Tests, is employed, and the Blood and Cruelty that
has attended Popery; and in his second Collumn, an Express Test against Popery
cited, and both fathered upon the Quakers; How then can the Second be what the
Quakers have published on Papists behalf, as his Title pretends? What Credit
can such silly, contradictory confused Stuff be of, with any Person of common
Sense? Nunc vide, audi, judica, (as his Terms are) How the Lybeller has acted
the part of both Knave and Fool in Print, or like some Malicious Shatter-Head
Apostate, to bring an Innocent People under Reproach and Contempt, by
fallacious Abuses, and notorious self Contradictions.

But they have prayed for the late King in their Addresses, and wished him
well; and what then? So have a great many of the Church of England, in far more
high and flourishing Expressions and Rhetoric in their Addresses to (and
Prayers for) the Late King? And have they not also frequently prayed for him in
their Lyturgy too? Are they all therefore favorers of Popery, or of Papists as
such? At this rate who may escape the reproachful Pens of such Libellizing
Incendiaries? How shall the Doctrine or Practice even of the holy Apostles and
Primitive Christians go free? viz. to Pray for all men, even for Kings, and all
in Authority, that under them they might live a peaceable and quiet Life, in
all Godliness and Honesty, and God knows we have aimed at no other. And this
Christian Conversation toward Authority, etc. we hope in God ever to own, and
stand by in the same Christian Spirit. Having also in our Address to King James
2. dated 6th of June (so called) 1688. Plainly declared, viz. That we hope by
God's Grace to let the World see we can honestly and heartily appear for
Liberty of Conscience, and be Inviolably true to our own Religion, whatever the
Folly or Madness of some men on that account may suggest to the contrary, etc.
Where Is now the double-mindedness? May not this bespeak to the World our
Sincerity, and answer and confute the Folly and Envy of our Adversary? As to
some Advice, Reasons or Arguings, cited about Repeal of Tests, etc. p. 5. 6, 7,
8. he has not produced his Authors, nor of diverse other things cast upon the
People called Quakers; and we know not who they are; thus cloudy and abmiguous
is he in his the Remonstrance (he mentions) to the Parliament after the Death
of Sir Edmonbury Godfrey, to be the Quakers Remonstrance. We possitively deny
that 'twas theirs, as the Libeller says 'twas. It neither resembles the Quakers
in Matter nor Style in many things. Where did ever the People called Quakers
thus dictate to the Government, or use such warlike Language as this, viz. Let
every Protestant Family be well armed, etc. Let there be an Act with a strict
Penalty, etc. That it shall be Treason for any Papist to entertain any Priest,
Jesuit, or Seminary in their House? With much more of like nature unjustly cast
upon the harmless, Quakers, as their words. And if our Adversary durst show
himself, and were particularly questioned about every nameless Pamphlet he has
quoted as ours, we are persuaded he would be hard put to it for proof.

To conclude, our Sentiments, real Sense and Clearness in these matters from
Popery, (unjustly insinuated against us) may be summed up thus, viz.

First, Our plain and ample Testimonies and Judgments given against Popery,
Idolatry and Superstitions, Persecutions and Cruelties, clears us not only from
Popery, but from being of any Party with them, as Papists, and those
Testimonies we stand by.

Secondly, Our Testifying against Persecution, both in the Church of Rome, and
as we have deeply suffered under it, from many of the Church of England
(especially of the Clergy) is Evidence that we impartially and sincerely disown
Popery, and the Spirit of it, for Persecution is no better then Popery
wherever it is; and it can be no variation from our Testimony, to speak more
favorably of the Moderate sort in both Churches, then of the Ridgged and
Persecuting in either, we must still own the Good in all sorts, and disown the
Bad wherever it is.

Thirdly, Those Churches or Societies, who profess Reformation from Popery, and
yet justly chargable with the Sin of Persecution (which is Popery) against
Dissenters from them, are the more guilty in the sight of God, because of their
Insincerity in such their pretenses to Reformation.

Fourthly, Our Request to the late King for Release of near One thousand five
hundred of our poor Afflicted Friends, out of Goals and strait Confinements;
and his delivering them, and us, and ours from the Spoilers, the Mercinary and
Merciless Informers, and other Persecutors and Spoilers; and our Returns of
thankfulness, when Granted and Effected, tho by a Popish Prince, no ways
Entitles us to Popery; nor have we cause to be ashamed of such Applications, or
Gratefulness. We were Thankful to God and the King then for the Good we
actually received, and hope we shall never be ungrateful now; and therefore we
are not justly chargable with Double-mindedness, as the Li^eller has
Insinuated, falsely applying James 4.8, 9, 10. to the Quakers. Blessed be God
who has preserved us the same still in our Integrity and Sincerity toward
him; and in our Innocence, Peaceable Conversation, Love and Good Will toward
all men, high and low, Kings, Rulers and People, and the more Good any of them
do us, the more they naturally Oblige us, etc.

London, the 30th of the ^d Month, called May 1689. Written in behalf of the
Peaceable People of God called, Quakers, by some of them.

THE END.

