THE CONFESSION, PROFESSION And CONVERSION Of an Honorable and Most Worthy
Young GENTLEWOMAN, who was Wonderfully Zealous in the Roman Religion for a long
time.

Rev. 17. verse 3. and 4. So he carried me away in the spirit into the
wilderness: and I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet-colored Beast, full of names
of blasphemy, having seven heads, and ten horns.

verse. 4. And the woman was arrayed in purple, and scarlet color, and decked
with gold and precious stone and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand, full
of the abominations and filthiness of her furnication.

London, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, Anno DOM. 1684.

The Confession, Profession, and Conversion of an Honourrble and most Worthy
Young Gentlewoman, who was Wonderful Zealous in the Roman Religion for a long
time.
I Have changed no good thing which ever I had before, but rather that which I
had in appearance before, I Labored to have it in truth, Now I believe still
the Articles of the Creed, I take the Ten Commandments for the Rule of my
Belief, and the Lords Prayer for the rule of my Prayer: I believe that I and
others are miserable Sinners in our selves; I believe to be saved by the death
of Jesus Christ, and no other way: I believe that true faith must bring forth
the Fruit of Repentance and Ammendiment of Life and that every faithful Person,
must study to good works, and to grow in the Love of GOD, and of their
Neighbors, or else their Faith is but dead and counterfeit, and will do them
no good, I believe the Scriptures of Old and New Testament, to be the Word of
GOD, and whatsoever I find agreeable thereto, I keep it still, and purposes by
GODS Grace to keep it while I live.

The Change which I have made neithe^ I nor any Creature in the World has made
it in me: First, I strove against that thing all that I could, till the LORD
let me know that Himself was dealing with me, and now that the LORD has made
this Work in me from the beginning, albeit I could never mark it till of late,
all my time, I had a Love unto the Truth; and an earnest Desire to know how I
should serve God, as they (who has known me from my B^i^^ Age) may remember:
According to my knowledge I preased to do that which I thought would please
GOD. I desired above all things to be Upright. I durst not for my Life follow
that Course which I thought was wrong, but aimed to make Conscience of my
ways, according to my weak knowledge, as I ever had a special Love to all them
to whom I was bound in Nature, and yet has, and that more steadfastly now
settled then ever: So also I ever liked well of them who loved God, and lived
well whatever Profession they were of, and so I purpose to do still being
assured that he will show Mercy to all them who desires to please Him, and in
his own time will make his will manifest to all them who desires to know it.

This now I know well was the beginning of the Lords work with me; The love
that I had to GODS service, and the desire I had to be saved, made me piece and
piece to sea^ch out the gr^onds of Religion, which I now Profess, and when
other means failed me, I set my self by reading of Books to come to the
knowledge thereof, this was counted Curiosity in me, and because I found my
self bound to take pains, to know how my Soul should be saved, I choosed rather
to be unjustly called Curious nor to be in effect ignorant, and carless of my
own Salvation: And I could not see, neither can I see yet what any should care
for to know rather then the grounds of their own Salvation, and I could not see
any better choose therefore I held on and wearied not: Yea it became my
Pleasure above all things in the Earth to know and to do that whereby I might
be be furthered unto Heaven, So that I could have been content, (if GOD had
thought it fit) to have renounced all the Honor and the Pleasure of the World
for time and occasion to use all the means, which I thought then might have
brought me to Heaven, and had purposes and designs in my Mind; Which the GOD
of Heaven hindered in Mercy, to my good, because he saw they did not serve for
that end, as now I am persuaded:) But when I got the understanding of the
Grounds ^^ Religion, which I professed, which eve^ my Teachers counted
sufficient, I could find no true Comfort, that either I or an^ like me could
find either in Life or Death ^ For all my Life I might not seek assuranc^ of my
Sa^vation, for that was usually calle^ Protestants Presumption; whereas the
Apostl^ enjoyneth us to make our Calling and Elect^on sure, and give all
diligence thereto, 2 Pete^ 1. 10.

And at my death I could see nothing bu^ Purgatory, a fire as hot as Hell, as
great to^ment in it (as they said to me) as i^ Hell, there they made me true
any Sou^ should go to wine out again, I wist no^ when: This held me in a secret
Fear continually; Yea, Hell it self I saw not how ^ should escap, if I behoved
to come so nea^ hand to it, and wondered then, and wonders yet, how any man
that looks for Pu^gatory at their death, can either have Tru^ Peace in their
Mind, or Comfort and Peac^ in their Heart in this World: I am sur^ they must
either take it for a Fiction, as ^ is, or else forget themselves when they a^^
Cheerful, yet for all this I continued sti^ in the obedience of their
injunctions, an^ kept them as Carefully as they had ^en GOD 'S own
Commandments, ^ the mean time I would gladly ^d a Reason for that which I did,
and ^d a Warrant to assure me, that GOD ^ould be pleased by my so doing, but I
^uld find nothing but Men's words for all. ^hen I was resolved by them that gave
out ^emselves for Teachers, that either I beloved to rest content to Believe as
the Kirk ^lieved, or else I would get no other Satis^ction: I thought upon this
from time ^ time, at last I saw there was no sure ^round to lean upon, except I
would have ^ntented my self, that the Clergy had ^nowledge, albeit I had none
that they un^erstood what they Believed, albeit I knew ^ot; That they saw
albeit I was Blind, ^at they knew the way to Heaven albeit I ^new not sure
whither I was going to Heaven ^r to Hell, or yet to Purgatory, when I fol^wed
their directions, but this Blind obedience ^ight well please them, yet could
never ^ive me contentment: Yet I preceived ^urder that to Believe as the Kirk
Believed and ^o do as they directed, without any further Warrant could yield me
no Quiet Peace, ^xcept they could show me, that GOD would be as well pleased
with my Obedience to the Pope and his Clergies command, as ^^ CHRIST and his
Apostles command, a^ would never quarrel the one more nor the other at the Day
of Judgment, all the^ questiones riseing in my Mind, and the slight
Satisfaction I got, when I asked the^ put me (I must confess) into man thoughts
of Heart; yet for all this so precise was I, that I did keep me from to reading
of Protestant books, neither would I e^^ hear any such thing, nor yet en^ into
conference in matters of controversy w^ any of them, especially their Ministers
^ long as I could: And when I save no ou^ gate, many a time was I forced to lay
as^^ my Beads and my Books, and took me ^ to Pray to GOD himself, as I could,
for CHRIST sake to help me, and to have Mercy ^ me, and to Teach me, how to do
^ Will; from time to time, more and m^ doubts arose in my Mind, about sund^
points of my profession, but I strove again them, not to let them enter; Being
loa^ to change my Religion as long as I cou^ stick by it, ever so far resisting
that I wou^ never suffer the Truth to have pla^ with me, so long as I could
hold it ou^ The LORD forgive me, for I did it ignoran^ly.

Notwithstanding of my Unthankfulness to GOD, it pleased his Goodness so to
bear in his Light; and his Truth upon me, that I was forced so to acknowledge
the Truth and Leave the Error, wherefore I may well Touch some, I cannot tell
them all.

First, I resolved never neither to believe Priest nor Minister: but so far as
I understood their Warrant out of GODS word; if any thing could please GOD; I
thought it should be Obedience to his own Direction: He might well quarrel Men's
doctrines, that held not his word for their warrant, he would never quarrel his
own word, then I resolved to read Rheimes new Testament, and the Protestants
old Testament, till they set out one of their Expositions, for I knew well GOD
would not be angry that I should read his word, since all that is written in
it pertains to my Soul, as well as other Folks: I found it the pleasantest
and sweetest book that ever I read in my life. Where there was one hard place,
there was twenty plain and easier to be understood; I loved their cause the
worse that held me from reading of it so long, I thought it was an ill token in
them that they loved not the Scriptures, for if they had loved them they could
not have spoken of them as they did, sayi^ they are not perfect, they are not
clear ^ plain, but obscure and ambignous and D^gerous to be read, and will
breed heresies a^ errors in them that read them, which cannot but skarr all
that believe them ^ read the LORDS word.

I know well they are in the wrong ^ CHRIST and his Apostles who speak so ^
their writtings. They made me believ^ the Pope, and the Roman Kirk, could no^
err, but I preceived that that behoved ^ be wrong; it is a proud Word for sin^^
flesh to say, for the Apostle Peter was as goo^ a Man as any Pope that ever
was, and better, yet he erred and might have erred further if GOD had not
preserved him; since they leave the Scriptures, and go to Traditions they
cannot but err, I though^ seeing they did speak of the Scripture a^ they did,
they both could and did err.

Reading the Rhemes New Testament I found that young Children might read, and
did read the Scriptures and that the Scripture could instruct a man to make a
man perfect in that which concerns his Salvation, and that a man might be
instructed to every good work by them, this I found contrare to that I was made
understand before I fell, an other day upon the 1 of John. the 1 Chap. at the
hinder end thereof, and the beginning of the second, There I saw there was no
necessity of confessing of Sins to the Priest because that by confession to
GOD, who is Faithful to cleanse me from all sin, Men must get forgiveness; and
again no Advocat but Christ, when we fall in sin? And again, if any say they
have no sin, they seduce themselves, and the truth of GOD is not in them, I
thought this was a sore word against them, who say, they can fulfill the Law
and live without sin, (and do more nor GOD commands) by works of
Supererogation, as for the exception of mortal and venial sins, a light or
hasty word behoved to be one of that sort, and I find in the 5 of Matthew. in the
same place which they allege for their venial sins be greater then other, yet
any sin brings us under a curse, if God would deal in justice with us.

I lost conceits of their Legends, and lives of their Saints, wherein I found
some abhorrable lies, namely in the Life of St Katherine of Sienna, where they
allege, she laid too her mouth to Christ's side, and drank her Sacrament, and
there he interchanged hearts with her, taking out her heart and putting his own
in place thereof, and that he came down from Heaven, and brought his Mother
with St Peter and St. Paul and wedded ber with a Ring, which Ri^^ remained
still on her finger. I lost conceit ^^ their form of prayer, and their often
repeating over and over again the same words while their Beeds were ended and
of their Invocation of Saints and Angels whereof their Books of controversy
gave me no sure warrant, and I perceived that all the devotion they learned me
stood in Words and Ceremonies, which now I am assured GOD cares not for, and I
began to pray to God alone, and CHRIST JESUS, for any thing I stood in need of.
I perceived that they gave more Virtue to the last five Canonized Saints then
to Christ Jesus, and all his Apostles, for drawing a Soul out of Purgatory so
that I could not but suspect all their Meddells and and Relics, and Agnus
Dei, and thought it safest for me not to put trust in any of these Triffles,
neither Crucifixes nor Crosses, which my fingers would not fold to.

From that time I saw no Warrants but their own sayings, but to trust only in
the Living God that made me, and kept me, and so piece and piece the Lord took
my heart and affection from all things, that I found no warrant for in Gods
Word: And the more I read the Rhemes New Testament, I loved things that were
good the better, and the error the worse. In special, one place affrayed me, 1 Timothy 4. Where the forbidding of Marriage and Meats is made the mark of false
Teachers, and of them that have the doctrine of devils. I did read the
Annotations, where they told me of old Heretics, who had that fault, but that
satisfied me not when I saw that same fault among rhemselves whatever colors
they put upon it, for all their Doubts and Questions howsoever I disliked many
things, and was assured they were wrong in sundry, things yet I never renounced
them, till I found my self mistaken in the matter of the Sacrament, the manner
was this Reading the 7. 8. and 9. Chapters to the Heb. I found Cbap. 7. verse.
27* That Christ had no necessity daily to offer Hosts for the sins of the
People for that he did once in offering up of bimself; And again, verse 23, 24,
25. That the Priests under the Law were many, because by death they were
hindered to continue, but Christ has an everlasting Priesthood whereby he is
able to save all them for ever, that go by himself to GOD, always living to
make Intercession for us: And again, Chap. 9. v. 24, 25. I found that Christ
was entered into Heaven to appear now before GOD for us, not that he should
offer Himself up often; For then it behoved him to have often suffered, since
the beginning of the World; But now once in the end of the world has he
appeared to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself, and as it is appointed*
for men once to dye, and after that to judgment, so Christ was once offered to
bear the sins of Men, and unto them that look for Him, shall he appear* the
second time, without sin unto Salvation. How is this, thought I with my self, I
perceived if this Scripture be true, no man can offer Christ but himself. There
cannot be a Priest to offer Christ but himself, because, He is still living to
make intercession for us.

CHRIST cannot be often offered but Once, neither is there any need, Because by
once offering he has taken away the sins of all; Yea it is made as impossible
to be offered ofter then once, as to suffer ofter then once, yea the Apostles
will not have ofter offering himself then once from his suffering to his second
Comeing. Ou^ of all doubt (thought I) the Apostles have never said the Mass,
neither yet have known any that ever said it; and yet I knew well they had the
LORDS Supper. Then well I thought if CHRIST be not offered in his Bodily
Substance in the Mass there cannot be Transubstantiation in the Mass; my
Teachers called me curious, but did give me no Answer to this, only they said
to me, that it was a Dangerous thing for my Salvation to deny the holy
Sacrifice of the Mass, because (said they) that Sacrifice ^ook away the Sins of
the People as well dead as living; I told them, that I had read ^he contrare in
the word of GOD that is in ^he 9 Heb. Where it is said, in the 22. Verse, That
there was no Remission of Sins without shedding of blood, and in the Sa^rifice
of the Mass, there is no Bloody Sa^rifice, therefore I told them; that who ^ver
Bel^eved them were wrong, and not ^ell instructed by the word of GOD, which ^as
ay my special Defense against them all. They gave me no other resolution, but
^ssured me, I would turn Heretic, and that I understood not what I read.

Another place put me in as great doubt again, 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4. There it is
said, that the Fathers in the wilderness did eat the same Spiritual meat, and
drink the same Spiritual Rock, for they drank the same Spiritual Rock, that
followed them, and the Rock was Christ. Then I reasoned this way with my self;
they made me believe, that Christ could not be eaten and drunken in the
Sacrament as the Protestants do Spiritually by Faith; but behoved to be eaten
as the Roman Kirk eats his very flesh and drinks his blood, taken in at the
mouth Substantially: This place (thought I) will prove for the Protestants, and
against the Roman Kirk, for when the People were (...) the Wilderness, Christ
was not Incarna^^ and long after, how could they then (...) him (and drink his
blood before he took, (...) Flesh and Blood except as the Protestants say*

Again I thought how is this that (...) Rock is called Christ, I did read the
Anotations I found nothing but it was a Figure.

If I took it Literally as the Roman K^^^ does take it, then the Rock was
changed in^^ Christ's substance, which could not be, for (...) was not yet
Incarnat, and if it were taken (...) a Figure, then I thought the Protesta^^^
would have the better in the matter of t^^ Sacrament, for they might well say,
as (...) Rock is called Christ, so is the bread called (...) body; and as they
drank of Christ when th^^ drank of the Rock so may they well say, th^^ drank of
his blood, when they drank (...) his Cup, which is the Sacrament of his bloo^
these doubts about the Sacrament affected ^^ so, that I could not choose but
send for Minister, (let any man judge if it was (...) time) I reasoned with him
for transubstantiation out of the words of the LORD Supper and out of John 6.
He answer my doubts, and directed me by prayer (...) the assistance of GOD for
Satisfaction, a^sureing that I would not get solid rest in that matter, till
the LORD made his word livly and decided the question.

Within few days the LORD made the Man's word good, and made the Scriptures
forcible and clear in the points which I doubted of and gave me such
contentment, such assurance of his love, and of the true Religion, that all the
earth would not have bred me such joy and solid peace.

Since that time I have found the true comfort of Religion beyond any thing
that I can utter, I have now gotten the true comfort, and assurance in some
measure, which I was long seeking. I have found the true ground to rest upon,
GODS own Truth made livilie, I am free now (I thank GOD) from the fire of
Purgatory I scorn that Fiction. Now with a glad heart I am assured that the
LORD is Righteous, who will not exact twice payment of one debt, CHRIST'S
passion, and the Believers torment in a fire as hot as hell. The LORD is
bountiful, who having provided a sufficient cantion for us that we might
escape Torment, he cannot of his Goodness cut short the Cautioner to take
amends of us and satisfy his wrath on us. The LORD is holy who cannot forgive
our sins and punish them too? For I know well, what ^^ forgiveth he punishes
not, and what he p^nisheth, he forgiveth not, which is the common order of
Equity. The LORD is Loving, who out of his love gave his So^ to die for us his
enemies, and cannot take pleasure to burn his Children after death for faults
already pardoned, as Purgatory Fiction makes them to do; A man will think
shame to forgive a fault, and then t^ punish it; And you know that which a man
thinks shame of is no honor to GOD. The LORD help them who live in fear of
this wicked Fiction: If the Pope and his Glergie keep the World in this fea^
for the love they have to large Legacies; they have their own Judge to answer
unto; GOD be praised who has delivered me out of their errors. I renounce
them trusting in GOD never to taste them as I have done, I know their errors
over well, to love them again, I have found over great Mercy in the knowledge
of the truth to turn back again Now I wish in my Soul that all honest hearted
Catholics as they call themselves, knew but the differences as well as I have
felt them, I would put no doubt but every honest Man and Woman who love the
truth, would forsake the Pope and follow the Word of GOD and CHRIST JESUS who
shines therein; To whom be glory for his goodness to me, for ever Amen.

1 Pet. 3. 15. Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you
reason of the hope that is in you.

Romans 8. 24. For as many as are led by the spirit of God they are the Sons of
God. verse. 16. The same Spirit bears witness with our Spirit that we are the
Children of God. 17. If we be children, we are also heirs, even the Heirs of
God, and Heirs annexed with Christ if so be that we suffer with him, that we
may be Glorified with him.

2 Cor. 13. 5: Know ye not your ownselves, how that Jesus Christ is in you,
except ye be Reprobates.

1 Cor. 2. 12. We have received the Spirit which is of God, that we might know
the things that are given to us of God, be says not to hope for them but to
know them.

And in John 4. 13. Hereby know we that we dwell in him and he in us, because
he has given us of his Spirit.

And Cap. 5. 19. We know that we are of God, and the whole World lies in
wickedness.

Now he that has the true knowledge that he has this Spirit he may be assured
that he has the Son of God, and so in Christ, and thus out of condemnation, as
the Apostle says in the 1 v. of the cap. There is no condemnation for them
that are in Christ Jesus: Yea, but all the doubt is, how shall we be assured
that we have this Spirit which will and may be easily discerned by walking in
the Spirit, and by savouring the things of the Spirit.

FINIS.

