Copy of two Holograph Letters under the deceast Viscount of Stormonts Hand,
which (besides several others) prove, that the Rights acquired by the said
Viscount on the Estate of Annandale Murray, were in Trust for the behove of Sir
Robert Murray alias Creichton,
Sir, London, June 19, 1666.
MY Brother William can inform you, That I have present use for some Papers of
the Earl of Annandals, (which are in the Lady Carlips possession) and hitherto
I would not suffer those I entrusted to search these papers, unless you were
present; And therefore I shall most earnestly entreat, you may be pleased to
favor me so much, as to throw away one Hour with my Brother William and Mr.
Allan, for making search of these papers, which I shall acknowledge a most
singular Obligation, and shall endeavor a Requital: By my Brother John, (who
came here Yesternight) I had a very satisfactory Letter from Sir Robert Murray,
who expresses a great deal of Readiness and Dutifulness to sign that
Ratification, (which he sent to you in order to your Advice) I did indeed
declare to him my Resolutions of not moving in his Commissions, until that be
done; And therefore I hope Sir Robert Sinclair and you will return it me back
with their Advice to him for signing of it, which is neither Illative to me of
a greater Right, nor prejudicial to himself: Besides, I wish he would satisfy
the Sums I really paid for these Apprysings, which I purchased at his Desire,
and I should most cheerfully state him in my Condition: I do press solely upon
Sir Roberts Account, as retarding his Business, and besides I am loath to
appear to undo that Structure, which I have been (not without Success)
endeavoring to rear up; My Brother William will acquaint you with an Addition
which I desired to be made to it; I did never state a Difference betwixt Sir
Roberts Interest and my own, and I hope both Sir Robert Sinclair and you will
acknowledge the same, you being eye Witness of my Carriage this last Winter,
when Brouchtons Remission was presented in Exchequer; I shall leave all to your
Consideration, and shall say no more, but that I am,

Sir, Your most Affectionat Friend to serve you, Sic Subscribitur, Stormet,

Directed on the Back, For Mr. Robert Dickson Advocate. These.

Sir, London, September 25. 1666.
YEsternight I received yours, dated (...) which is all I have had from you
since my Brother John came here; And tho I shall not offer any more to press
you to sign that Ratification I sent you, leaving it Arbitrary to your self, to
do or not do as you shall think fittest, yet (besides that) it seems you
absolutely distrust me, (which I wish you had expressed sooner) I shall, I
suppose, satisfy these Reasons you adduce, which seem not to me to have that
weight you lay upon them; For in the Contract of Wadset past betwixt us, you
have therein ratified Sir George Mouats Apprysing, both as it stands, and as to
its preference, which enervats that Hundred Thousand Pounds Bond as to that:
And all I now desire is, ye do the like as to the rest of the Apprysings I
purchased; And tho his be included in that paper, yet the Letter of Reversion I
granted will free you from importing double payment of one and the same Sum;
And, in that very Contract, you will find the Warrandice the very same which is
in the paper I sent you; Sir, I must tell you freely, that it seems you are now
Jealous of this which is merely designed for my own Safety, being engaged in a
Business full of Intricacies, to which you gave the first Rise; For (besides
that it was yout Desire, as I can make appear by your Letters) I was
constrained to purchase these Apprysings, for defending the Wadser I had from
you, which, if pulled from me, would have imported a considerable prejudice
upon your self, and yet Pitscoties are insisting against me; I shall not offer
to relat to you what, besides all this, you owe me, as notour to your self, and
I presume you will not say, that I ever declined any thing conducive to your
Interest; And I ever designed, that my Brother John should have prosecute the
Suit upon my Charges, (which is considerable, I presume, the property being
yours) but seeing you are not pleased to do it, I shall not offer to create you
any more Trouble upon this, only I am sorry you force me to that which I never
designed: I intend (God willing) this next Week for Scotland, andyet to
demonstrate to the World my unwillingness to relinquish you, if you shall be
pleased to send over to my Brother John that paper signed as I sent it you, he
shall wait upon you for prosecuting of our Interest, otherways you will be
pleased to pardon me for taking another Course; And besides, I do ingenuously
declare to you, I never did nor does design any thing to your prejudice, and I
wish you meet with as little from others, in whom you seem to repose a greater
Trust, I am,

Sir, Your most obliged Cousin and Servant, Sic Subscribitur, Stormet.

Directed on the Back, For Sir Robert Murray of Cockpool. These.


