A COPY OF A Marriage-Certificate Of the PEOPLE called QUAKERS.
Importing the Method used among them: HUMBLY PRESENTED To the Members of
Parliament, to manifest the said Peoples Christian Care, and Righteous
Proceedings, not admitting Clandestine or Unwarrantable Marriages amongst them.
And therefore they Humbly Request that their Marriages may not be rendered
Clandestine or Illegal, nor they or their Children exposed to Suffering on that
Account.
A. B. Glass-Grinder in Southwark, Son of C. D. of Gilford in Surrey Scrivener
deceased, and E. F. of Little Britain, Daughter of G. H. in the Minories
Shoemaker deceased: Having declared their Intentions of taking each other in
Marriage before several public Meetings of the People of God called Quakers in
London, according to the good Order used amongst them: whose Proceeding
therein, after a deliberate Consideration thereof, were approved by the said
Meetings, they appearing clear of all others, and having Consent of Parties and
Relations concerned. Now these are to Certify. All whom it may ^^^^^^n That
for the full accomplishing of their said Intentions, this 17th. day of
September in the Year, according to the English Account, One Thousand Six
Hundred Eighty and Five, They the said A. B. and E. F. appeared in a public
Assembly of the aforesaid People, and others, met together for that end and
purpose in their public Meeting Place at Bull and Mouth London, and (according
to the Example of the Holy Men of God recorded in the Scriptnres of Truth) in a
solemn manner, he the said A. B. taking the said E. F. by the Hand, did openly
declare as follows. Friends, in the fear of the Lord, and in the presence of
yon his People, I take this my Friend E. F. to be my Wife, promising by the
assistance of God, to be to her a faithful and loving Husband, till it please
the Lord to separate us by death, [or to the same effect.]

And then and there in the said Assembly, the said E. F. did in like manner
declare as follows: Friends, in the fear of the Lord, and in the presence of
you his People, I take this my Friend A. B. to be my Husband, promising to be
to him a faithful, obedient and loving Wife, till death separate us, [or to the
same, effect.]

And the said A. B. and E. F. as a further Confirmation thereof, did then and
there to these Presents set their Hands; And we whose Names are hereunto
subscribed, being present, amongst others, at the solemnizing of their said
Marriage and Subscription, in manner aforesaid, as Witnesses thereunto, have
also to these Presents subscribed our Names, the Day and Year above-written.

Witnesses Names.
John Wright, Joseph With, Thomas Burdett, Richard Poplet, Richard Needham,
William Knight, George Whitehead, Thomas Zachary, Hercey Wilson, Edward Brush,
Thomas Tidmarch, Thomas Pistor, Thomas Wright, Thomas West, John Griffin,
Thomas Arrowsmith, John Blatman, Benjamin Goddard, William Holland, Moses West,
Abraham Dugdale, Richard Richardson, John Hubbord, Clement Hurst, Allice
Beatman, Mary Goodman, Elizabeth Lord, Mary Tidmarch, Martha Bingham, Elizabeth
Pendleton, Ann West, Cath. Becker, Elizabeth Austin, Frances Kilbey, Ann
Wright, Sarah Dry, Philippa Clark,
The Persons Name Married,
A. Br(...) E. F.

