THE Mournful VVidow, OR, A full and true RELATION OF THE APARITION IN Baldwins
Garden BEING An Account of the Walking-Spirit OF Mr. THOMAS COOK, Sometime A
Stone-Cutter in Baldwin's- Gardens, Deceased.

As it was taken from the Widow of the said Mr. Cook; and several other
Persons (some of which were Divines of the Church of England) that were Eye and
Ear-VVitnesses of the prodigious Appearances, and Actions of the Deceased Mr.
Cook.

^ublished at the Request of some Relations, and particular Friends; to
prevent, if possible, the false Reports, that have been, or may be
industriously spread by Ignorant or Prejudiced Persons.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

Printed by J. W. near the Green Dragon tavern in Fleet Street, 1690.

The Mournful Widow: Or, a Full and True Relation of the Aparition in Baldwin's
Gardens.
IT has been the opinion of some people, as well Divines as as others, that
there are no such things as Spirits, Apparations, Demons Visible and the like;
but that all the affrightments of Men and Women proceeding from the supposed
sight of the aforesaid Objects, are no more or other than the pure effects of
prejudiced fancy, weakness of Heart, etc. It is the design therefore of this
paper, to convince the incredulity of these Atheistically principlied persons,
(as I may justly call them) (since they are opposite to express Scripture, and
tried Experience) by an instance of this nature which is so far from being
seigned or false, that there can be some scores of eye and ear-witnesses to be
produced, who will upon any occasion attest the reality of this subsequent
Relation, and all this too not to be enqu red after, or left in doubt by
distance of place, or other difficulties, since the Circumstances and thing it
self may be proved in this very City; and though the modest gravity, and
indeed, sorrow of the Wife and Relations of the Deceased (whom we will
presently name) has put a stop to any particular publication of the ensuing
passages, yet since she has by malicious Tongues been censured as contributing,
if not causing the Melancholy Dissatisfactions of her Husband aforesaid, she
cannot be displeased in hearing her own Vindication, and exposing the plain
matter of fact according to the truth declared by several of her own Family, as
well as confirmed by her sorrowful self: Which is as follows. Thomas Cook by
Trade a Stone-cutter, living between Grays-Inn-Lane and Leather-Lane, had lived
with hi^ Wife Elizabeth Cook for many years, during which time he ha^ (being
in himself of a surly nature) many bickering proceeding chiefly from his ill
Husbandry, he indeed working pr^b^^^d himself, but would upon the receipt of
his Money, t^^^ little or no care of his Family; So that his two Children a^^
Wife had wholly their own Subsistence from the Wives o^^ Industry, who was by
Trade a Body's-Maker, while he wou^^ be drinking out his daily gettings, and
indeed, not without shrewd Suspicion of keeping bad Women company: However,
nothing of such moment (as can be possibly gathered from any of his Family) in
the whole time they lived together, h^^^ned, as to make any Impression or
Dissatisfaction more th^^ ordinary, indeed he had by his lavish Expenses,
brough^ himself to such Inconveniences, that occasioned him during t^^ whole
term of their living together, to be Arrested thir^^ times, and he as often
experimented the pious fondness of h^^ Wife, in being every time relieved and
ransomed by her peculiar Charge and Industry: So that the Malicious and base
Scandals raised by ignorant People, or prejudiced Heads, are who^ly confuted
and evinced, some of which pretend that Jealou^^ caused his Melancholy, and
that he should suspect the fidelit^ of his good Wife, whose Honesty and Virtue
has been in (...) her Neighborhood, both approved and applauded; others i^pute
the disturbance of his Spirit, to his having left sever^^ Sums of Money hid and
concealed; but this from the ver^ meanest of his Circumstances in the World is
invalied; and (...) speak truth, neither his Wife, nor any of his Family ca^
give the least probable reason for this Disturbance he puts them too, except it
be, that his Heart being so hardened by the Allurements, Instigation and
Temptation of the Devil, that though on his sick Bed, (which most commonly
renders the Consciences and Actions of evil-Livers in visible and mournful
Characters) he could not heartily set himself to such a sincere Sorrow, Grief
and Repentance for his Sins, as was requisite, or that the Subtilty of the
Devil made them so black and numerous before him, that he wholly despaired of
God Almigh^^ infinite Mercy, and the effectual Mediation and Merits of his only
Son our most Blessed Savior, and so left the World in a sort of Grudging and
Grief, as may very pr^^^^^ly (...) proved from several Expressions that dropped
from him during his Sickness, especially toward the latter end: For his good
Wife during his Sickness, (which lasted a whole week and no more, and began
with a sort of troublesome Hickup,) his good Wife I say, being willing and
ready to take care for the future welfare of his Soul, as well as for the
present ease and amendment of his Body; would frequently kneel down and pray
heartily by him, at some of which times, he would show himself very devour, and
bear a part in her pious Ejaculations, as once he cried out to her after she
had been zealously praying: Ah! Dear Wife, doubtless the good and great God
will have respect to the fervend Sincerity of thy Prayers; and I and my Family
shall fare the better for them, at another time he was wholly desperate, and in
a great agony Exclaimed: Ah! it is too late, too late, you and I my Dear, you and
I have a greater Account than this to reckon for, thus would he vary, and turn
between Hope and Despair; and to ^he last, expressed himself as Doubtful and
Fearful, that he should not obtain God Almighty's Mercy and Forgiveness of ^is
Sins, and in that Condition died about the sixth or seventh ^ay after his first
Ill-ness: And now the Disconsolate Widow ^aving Discharged a good Conscience in
a strict care, and Du^iful Attendance of her Husband living, was thinking of a
Modest and Decent Disposal of his Corpse now Dead, and ac^ordingly had him
Interred with all the Circumstances usual and proper; but to her great
Amazement, was scarce well re^urnd from his Buryal to her own House, when there
was ^eard a great clattering noise as the falling of Pewter or Shelves, ^o that
the VVidow thinking the VVine-Vessel and other things ^y the carelessness of
the Maid was fallen down, was just upon chiding, till upon a Search, they found
all things in their ^ight order, to their great Astonishment: The fourth night
al^er his Burial about M^dnight, they heard a great tumbling ^f Stones, and
pecking as if some body had been at work in ^he Shop; But that which made the
VVidow believe it, a Demon or Spirit was the insensible moving a Stone from
one place to another, as he used often when alive, also she would hear the very
noise of cutting of Stones under her Bed, and sometimes would perceive the Bed
while she was lying in it, hoisted up in a strange manner. About a week after
his Buryal, the Maid who lay in a little Room by her Mistress, perceived her
Feet of a sudden to be pressed down, as if some heavy burden had been thrown
down upon her, and the next Morning her Feet were seen very sore, swelled, and
Black, and her self extremely Affrighted.

Another time, the Nurse, that sat up with the Widow, went into the little Room
to wash her Hands, the Maid being in Bed, who lay as in a Trance, her Eyes
being open, and fixed upon one place, all in a Sweat, her Hair standing up, at
which the Nurse in a great Fright left the Room, and shutting the Door,
immediately heard something Jump, as it were, heavily from the Feet of the
Maids Bed, and walk along the Room; then the Nurse took Heart, and went to the
Door and harkned, and she perceived something move up to the Door, and leaned
it self in a posture of harkening too. By this time the Maid was come to her
self, and called to the Nurse, who after some time came, to whom she told wha^
Misery she had suffered; and Asked, If she had not heard a sa^ Groaning all the
Night? As also, That her Master came so nea^ her, that her Breath was almost
stopped. Before Nurse could ge^ back, it was got under the Widows Bed; who
calling for he^ Prayer Book, and recommending her self to the Great God
Protection, s^e boldly called out, in the Name of the Father Son, and Holy
Ghost, What ar^ Thou that thus do troutle us. And what would Thou have?
whereupon it flung open the Curtains furiously, and giving a great Stamp, went
down in to the Shop, and was there heard Pecking, as when Alive on the Stones.
Five or Six Gentlemen being desirous to b^ satisfied of the truth and meaning
of this Apparition; some being of Opinion, there was no such thing; coming
thith^^ merrily together, one of them belonging to Gray's-Inn, of sudden Cries
out, in a Fright, Here he is; at which the other ^miling, as if he had Jeasted
on purpose to scare them, he se^^ously told them, and pointed to him, drawing
the Curtains of the Bed, which they all heard, but saw not. He also said, He
was in Black Clothes, with a Musling-Nckcloth tied ^ith a Black Ribbon, and was
at the Beds-feet, and inclining ^o a posture of Kneeling; but as soon as the
Gentleman arose from his Seat, it vanished, and began its usual Frolic of
Pecking Stones. Sometimes while the Nurse and the Widow ^ave lain together, it
has lifted up the Bed, so that they have ^een in danger of falling out. One
time in his own real shape (...) appeared to a Stone-Cutter, his old
Acquaintance, and with ^bundance of Threats and Menaces, charged him to repay
the ^ixteen Shillings he had received of his Wife for his Grave^tone. Another
time, about Twelve of the Clock at Night, ^e appeared to the Watch who were
going by his House. Another time, the Widow and her Family sitting up till near
One of the Clock, and frequently falling to Prayers, of a ^udden they perceived
the Candle burn Blew, and presently ^eard a great Knocking, the usual warning
that he gives of ^is Approach, and being worn out with tedious Watching, she
^ell into a gentle Slumber, when the Young Woman that lay ^ith her fell a
Crying, Oh Mistress, your Pillow is on Fire; at which she waked, and felt one
side of her Head very sore, as ^f it had been scorched or bruised; and looking
out on the ^loor by her Mistresses side, She saw a Fire rising up like a
Pil^ar, and more than the compass of a Peck; then the Widow Cried out, Avoid
Satan, my Trust is in God; and strait the Fire went to the other side of the
Bed and vanished; and presently after, they could see the full proportion of the
Deceased in ^his Crape-Burial-Dress, and crossing the Room, disappeared. Two
Young Men that lie in the same House, Saw one Night ^he full shape and
proportion of a Man lying all along by their Bed s^de, and falling Zealously to
their Prayers, he starts up, and with ^n Angry Frown leaves them: Another time,
the same Two Young Men going out late one Night, it being very Dark, they were
scarce got out of the Gate, But a great Light aro^^ a sudden, and moving
toward them, they could perceive somet^^^^ as it were a Dog coming up to them;
and presently it took some of Monstrous Shape, which they could not
distinguish, and prese^^^^ whirling by them it vanished, and left them in great
Terror a^^ Darkness again. Three Young Women sitting up with t^^ VVidow,
about Eleven of the Clock there was a great Blo^ given in the little Room,
where the Maid used to lie, and Noise as of some Body walking too and fro, and
then th^^ all counted several distinct Knocks, to the Number of Twenty. One of
the Women that sat nigh that Room Door, b^ing Curious to Peep, was thrown by
an insensible force out (...) her Chair; and it seemed to her, as if it had
been some stron^ Blast of VVind. At Seven of the Clock, by the same invis^ble
force, the same Young Woman was terribly shaken i^ her Chair. Last Sunday
Night Two other Watchmen coming along by the House, called at the Hole in the
Wall to Drink, and seeing a Man stand hard by, went up to him and Asking who he
was, he st^ait disappeared. These an^ many other prodigious Disturbances of the
like nature do almost happen every Day and Night in the House of the sai^ Cook,
lately Deceased, to the wonderful Astonishment of a^^ that hear it, and Terror
of those poor VVretches that have seen and felt many of them And because the
Truth of every Circumstance here related may be justly Vindicated, any Person
that desires farther satisfaction, may receive it fully from the Mouths of
Hundreds in Baldwin's-Gardens, or from the VVidow of the said Cook, who with
her whole Family have sadly Experimented the Reality of this Relation.

FINIS.

