A LETTER FROM Mr. DONALD CARGILL to his PAROCH Of the Baronny KIRK in GLASGOW.
March the 27th 1681.
I Am Debtor to all, but specially to you but how to requite my Obligations I
know not, to return all is impossible, to return nothing is great ingratitude,
ye know what kind my return must be; I have desired and do desire your well
being, and walking in ^he Truth, without a further look to yours, be humble
always, thankful for what ye have received: and still Thrifting after more; for
his fullness is Infinite, and your wants is wonderful great, and it cannot be
^ight with us where our needs are not right ^n our Eye, and Christ in our
Heart. And ^et none think it sufficient to be right in one thing if he be not
labourng to be Right in all, it was if I mistake nor, the fault of our
Professors that syded with the times and work of Reformation, Communicating of
these common g^^ that followed it, made them start, and sli^^ into their
Profession; GOD did indeed s^^ shine upon these times, is things that (...)
warmed Hearts, when it did not melt them and he also gave these common gifts of
the Spirit, (as to Saul) without that immorta^^ seed, that only makes durable.
And thos^ were the things together with the mistake (to say no worse) of
Minister that gav^ those names and places, wherewith they were poffed up, and
authorized; These present defections and this with what will follow (for al^ is
not yet done, and seen) shall more fully discover this defect, and take away
both tha^ Spirit and Name, and leave them poorli^^ standing (O! that the
Writing of this might make some of them prevent it) having nothing for all but
maintaining a Cause, that i^^ neither Right Liberty, nor true Religion Nor
whereof I hope ere all be done, the^ shall be no rule. I do not speak this of
then all, for there are some of them, who not onli^^ were in Christ before me,
but also before these times, and was otherwise wrought upon, and these are
neither so fully nor ((...) hope) shall be so firmlie there, they having the
imortal seed, the saving Graces of the Spirit in them, that does either keep
from falls, or surely and quickly recover them again, there being there a
real difference, we ought to acknowledge it in our compassion tenderness and
affection, and withal Pray, that they may be made to see what and whom they
have relinguished: O! that God would open Men's Eyes, that they may see how
little good, and how much evil it has wrought, I pray how little it has done
for the freedom, and enlargement of the Kingdom of Christ, and how much for
confirming. Its thraldom and confyning, its enlargement, neither do I see that
it makes for the gaining of Souls into God for their adherance, who is not
religions will go no further with them, nor they come to their own desires,
which together to provide for their own private safety, gain, and a name of
Nonconformists, and on the other hand what evil has it wrought? They themselves
when come to themselves, and sober, will see that it has not increased, the
Treasure of God in themselves, but has begotten an evil affection, and raised
passion against these whom I think themselves esteemed Godly, because they
labored to waken Consciences, and return them to a rightness, and mind them of
their Vows to God, and because they stand in the way of gratifyng a sinful
power, of saving Life on any terms, securing their quiet, and shunning the
Cross of Christ, who is calling all at this time to take it up: And under a
greater damnage nor what is, or can be secured by these ways, or they can
compence* And it is just with God, and I fear, it shall fall out that these
People shall never be severed from these Ministers, nor they from these Me^
till they lead one another to Judgment, and this shall far exceed the
benefits, that has been gotten; and as it has begotten an evil eye toward
their own, so it has abated zeal, and conciliated a favor toward these that
are enemies of God and all Righteousness. And has so ensnared and all^enated
the Land f^o^ God, and him from it, that he will n^ more shine on it, till
these sins be purged and these Persons removed, either by th^^ providence and
judgments of God, or justic^ and zeal for Men: But as he has give^ you to be
right in one, so study to be righ^ in all, and let not your Hearts be taken u^
with nothing to the Prejudice of the who^^ of Religion: It is true it is a
great one, bu^ there is a greater than it, without which nothing can be rightly
done by you nor accep^ed with by him, and withal let them see that have as
great a Heart hatred of Secret and private Sins as of public evils; for Satan
may Sometimes Foyl you in both; Keep livelie and in Sight of him, and so ye
shall see best, Taste Best, Savor best: By this ye shall only be able to quit
Your selves Rightly, and let the World see, though ye be necessitate to be more
hea^d in this at this time, yet that ye are walking in all other things
according to his Commands, and are tender of every one of them in their turn,
and that ye are not making this a Cloak for other Sins, neither think that it
Discharges us of all or any one of the other duties of Religion, but on the
contrair that we are the more obliged to holieness both in regard of the Cause
that we are to adorn, and in regard of the Opposers, who when they find
themselvees behind in Reason, studies to find our something in our
Conversation, to hold us out to the World as Men destitute of holiness; and so
such as truth cannot be expected to be found with: As also, to set up such
Spotted Creatures, destitute of wisdom and knowledge to compare themselves with
and to raise in themselves, that which is high enough already; That under that
their greatness, they may shred themselves from the checks of Conscience, and
the challenges of Non-performed Vows which runs the Quite contrary way to what
they are doing. But let us look well to our selves, and the more we are right
in these public things the more Satan will Assault, and seek to foyl in other
things; for tho he be an Enemy to all that has any thing of the fear of GOD
or form of Godliness: Yet he exercises most against persons (when and where he
is permitted, more or less, as they are against his Kingdom (and its
Dimmishing,) and for the exaltment and enlargment of the Kingdom of GOD; So
that ye shall have him more emminentlie against you nor you Oposites eve^ these
of them which may be has a greater measure of personal holieness: For I will
not say but there may be true Godlieness which is much, I do not say too much;
for that cannot be if we neglect not the other a^^ Home, and within; and with
these will all lukewarm professors Join, in regard of their design and desire,
is the same, tho upon fa^^ different Accounts; for both desires Libertie^ and
Quite the one, that he may exercise Religion, and the other for other ends; For
this in the truly godly is not an Affection newly begotten by fear of the
Cross, as in the other much less is it from any deffect of Judgment, if they
would extend, and exercise their mind to the Contemplation of these things. But
I must say that this their way that are truly godly may seem to be great, and
sometimes to my self, has seemed greatest, yet is not so great as it seems,
being Defective in a manner (a Zeal to) he Expounded Kingdom and public Glory
of GOD and Good of Mankind, and suffers Satan to sit beside God and his Kingdom
to be Triumphant and free, and Gods to be Beggarlie and Enslaved, and so in a
manner he gives a Cessation of Arms where there is such a yielding to his
interest and instruments that are acted by him, and follows him: and for others
of your Opposites that has less of Religion and takes upon them more of this
Combat, he has less quarrel with them, if any more at all, but what he bears to
all Mankind; And so they have a greater Cessation from him as to his
Temptations. I do not say from the Temptations of their own Corruptions, for
that works naturally: So always, tho not always alike, but he works
rationallie, and upon design; so that he is so far from troubling with other
things, that he enables them with gifts for agenting that Cause and Virulence
to Convince all that Oppose it, and suffers them to retain their formality in
worshipping, for adorning it, and deluding themselves in the Point of
Regeneration, True Religion and Righteousness. And I may Truly say, that there
may be more True Godlieness, in one against whom Satan exercises his full
malice; and is permitted sometimes to puddle, nor in the fairness of a Thousand
such who wants the broken heart and Regeneration; And this I fear will be found
to be the Case of these Combatants that are alwise in Arms upon its, and no
other account: Let them then that are Studying Righteousness in all things and
seeking the enlarging and exalting of Christ's Kingdom, and the overthrowing of
Satan's expect the increasing of Devils and multiplying of Temptations, for
procuring of your foyll and fall, O! Fear, Trust, Watch, Pray for your selves
and one another, knowing that ye have all the same Conflict, Temptations, and
Weakness of the flesh, and have the more fervent Love among your selves, seeing
you are now Fewer, and have all Your things Common; Your Griefs, Your
Temptations: Your Mercies your Joys, your Substance, your Goods so far as it
shall be needful, for it is like the time is every near that will make all
alike in these things, I fear many are Buying, Building, and Gathering, for our
Enemies: We know not ere it he long, but Forraigners may be holding in one side
and Intestine Enemies the other; and the Sea all: and then our Gentiles and
others that saw nothing to their Lairdships, and Estates find them to be
nothing, and the greatest and the Richest, so put to it, that if they escape,
shall not be able to carry away Clothes, so much as to cover them from the
cold, nor Money so much as to Buy them Bread, if they find it where they come to
be bought, and then this will be the Price of our evil Consciences, when
nothing will be left but Sin and Sorrow (for if any thing shall remain as we
pray and hope there will) a revive after all these Vastations and Overrunning
of Judgments, it shall be that poor and hated party who sought his glory, and
labored for a good Conscience above all other things; For if the Lord give any
of these things again to any of us, it will be to those that shall sincerly
study to have them his, and shall not give them up to Men to Judge them after
the Lusts: For the present, I have comfort in nothing, but that I think I see
his abode in the Land; And it is a thing so wonderful, that I can hardly get it
believed after there has been so great indignities done to him by the multitude
great and mean, and such, and Unfaithfulness in his Rights, misregarded as
Indifferencies shown in his Matters, with atchieve to have and hold them that
are not only perejudicial to his Reigning, but utter overthrowers of his
Kingdom, inconsistent with his Cohabitation with us; Yet, I say, I think I see
his Abode and Glory beyond all these Judgments though we should come short of
this, yet if we be his we shall fall in a better. And O! How good is it to die,
having these Desires, and to leave behind us the Mould of such a Fabric to our
Successors: And it seems the Lord is making a far off Preparation for Building,
by removing of the old rotten Stuff of the Former House, and though we cannot see
at present where the matter for the New shall come, yet it shall be surely
furnished in its time, and it shall be said with great Admiration, I was -- and
who both. -- If any of us shall come to these things, we may have this
Advantage, that throw Age or Grace, or both, we shall be past the relish of any
thing but what is Divine, and this very thing as it may help now to make our
End right, so it shall help them to make our Enjoyments pure and sweet: But the
Cloud betwixt this and it is dreadful. And O! that I knew how to Warn, Counsel,
Confirm and Comfort you, yet it is in his Hand, who is Infinitely more tender,
and I leave it to him, but prepare for Death, and that which to some is worse,
and think not that Rightness in these debated Matters will do it, tho I
esteemed much of that, and cannot but say if it be single and extensive, that
it looks like a Spark of true Grace; yet think it not sufficient without
Repentance, for the many sinful steps we have stepped throw Fear, Corruptions
and Temptations, and come also by waiting on them (who are now gone from us, to
have had them up with us. Beside all these, there must be a constant Dependence
upon, and employing of God throw Christ for keeping a Perseverance; and that
further ye flee from these Men that are standing stated Enemies to GOD the
better; and I am mistaken if the LORD be not calling all Beasts to come from
the Shadow, and all Fowls out of the Branches of that Tree that is to be cut
down, and these that have sled thereto first, but especial lie last shall find
it. So this their doing in regard of Sin, shall be like Jehoshaphats
Association with Ahab, and in regard of its Fortunateness, or rather
Unfortunateness, like the Visit of Ahaziahs Brethren to Jehoram, who was cut
off by Jehu, and I fear that Ministers and others that has concurred with them
shall not be the least part of the Fuel of this Burning, and these of them that
shall Survive, shall be to consume the Eyes, and grieve the Hearts of the
Relatives; And sure they will want much, as the Comfort that that Word would
have yielded, ye are they that have continued with me in my Temptations. But
stand off from the Enemies of the LORD, and think it much if ye be kept free
of their Injuri^s and be Submissive and content tho injured: but seek none of
their Favors; for they are Snares, neither accept of them if they give them as
their Favors, and not as your own Right; For these that want them shall have
but a short Time to bemoan their Loss, and these that gets them but a short
while to rejoice in their Enjoyments; For he is lifting up an Ensign to the
Nations from afar, and hissing to them from the Ends of the Earth; [And behold
they shall come with speed swiftly, Isa. 5.26.] It shall indeed come suddenly,
and when it comes it will give them no offer of Parlie, Occasions if tampering
or agreement upon any Conditions; For he that sends it, intends nothing but
Punishment and Sweeping, and he knows they have such changeable Minds, and
lacks Consciences, that would agree upon any Interest for their own Safety,
but nothing will do it but Lives, Lands, and Religion, which to them is least
of all. When ye see the Beginnings of these Things, if near God, and if not; it
is like ye will be Involved in the common State: Take heed what he suggests and
offers for Safety, and let him that thinks himself most engaged to a bide, flee
first; For flee, and judge we must till the Vengeance be poured forth, and then
shall be seen another Cause ( beside the owning of that cursed Interest, and
that sinful Defection, which GOD denied Success to Bothwel, that it was not
Mercy to Victors, or Favor to the Land, or Vnjustness of the Quarrel, if it
had been rightly stated, as some would have had it) but in Judgment as those
that opposed it, and to those that mistated it, that he might deliver them up
to more hardened Hearts, and Cruel Hands to be punished, and for Chastisement to
those who continued to appear for a mistated Quarrel, and in the one Providence
shall expone another. We have seen the hazard, let us no more own their
Interest, nor make further Conjunction with them, no not for Defense, though
National and Religious Obligations seem toty us: For all that seems to engage
us to their help is but a Temptation; for if they should be able to retain any
thing, they would retain it neither for GOD nor us; and we should but establish
them to expose GOD and oppose us; And if we shall essay to help them, we shall
fall in their Wrath; And I know not any Duty this Day we owe them but Prayers
as for the Enemies of GOD, and to execute Judgment on them if we had Power: and
because that has not been do^ (...) he will cause some from elsewhere upon our
Charges to do it. I do not give you here long Arguments to Debate with
Exposites, because I judge ye should leave that and them to Annotations of
Providence, -- pouring out of the Spirit of Judgment, as they shall be found
Friends or Enemies. -- As for our Agreement with our real Friends that are on
the other fide, if they would return from the evil of their way, few Words
would do it, where Hearts are not at an Enmity; but if not, trouble not your
selves about it; For the Time will not be long.

Peace be with you. AMEN. DO CARGILL.
As for your Collections; the Poor are yours as well as others; and ye ought to
see to them, either by your selves or others; But as for your Contribution to
Ministers, I see not how ye can do it, more than ye can hear them. Peace be
with you all.


DO. CARGILL.

FINIS.

