CALEDONIA.
THE DECLARATION of the COUNCIL Constituted by the Indian and African Company
of Scotland; for the Government and Direction of their Colonies, and
Settlements in the Indies.
THE said Company pursuant to the Powers and Immunities Granted unto them, by
His Majesty of Great Britain, our Sovereign Lord, with Advice and Consent of
His Parliament of Scotland: having Granted and Conceded unto us and our
Successors in the Government for all times hereafter, full Power to equip, set
out, freight, and navigate, our own or hired Ships, in Warlike, or other
manner, from any ports or places in Amity, or not in Hostility with Majesty; to
any Lands, Islands, Countries, or places in Asia, Africa or America: and there
^^ant Colonies, build Cities, Towns or Forts in or upon the Places not
Inhabited, or in or upon other place by consent of the Natives or Inhabitants
thereof, and not possessed by any European So^gn, Potentate, Prince, or State;
and to provide and furnish the aforesaid Places, Cities, Towns, ^^^ts, with
Magazines, Ordinance, Arms, Weapons, Ammunition and Stores of War; and by force
(...) ^^ms to defend the same Trade, Navigation, Colonies, Cities, Towns,
Forts, Plantations, and Effects whatsoever; and likewise to make Reprizals, and
to seek and take reparation of Damage by Sea or by Land: and to make and
conclude Treaties of Peace, and Commerce with the Sove^^^^^ Princes, Estates,
Rulers, Governors, or Proprietors of the aforesaid Lands, Islands, Countries,
(...) ^^^ces in Asia, Africa or America.

(...) reserving to themselves Five Per Cent. or one Twentieth part: of the
Lands, Mines, Minerals, (...) Stones of Value, precious Woods, and Fishings:
have further Conceded and Granted unto us, ^^^^te and absolute right and
property in and to all such Lands, Islands, Colonies, Cities, Towns, and
Plantations, as we shall come to, establish, or possess in manner aforesaid; as
also to all man^^^^ Treasures, Wealth, Riches, Profits, Mines, Minerals and
Fishings, with the whole product and (...) thereof, as well Under as above the
Ground, as well in Rivers and Seas, as in the Lands ^^^^^^nto belonging; or for
or by reason of the same in any sort; together with the right of Go^^^^ent and
Admiralty thereof; as likewise that all manner of Persons who shall settle to
Inhabit, or ^^^^ in any such Plantations, Colonies, Cities, Towns, Factories,
or places shall be, and be reput^^ Natives of the Kingdom of Scotland; and
generally the said Company have Communicated unto (...) ^ight to all the
Powers, Properties and Privileges Granted unto them by Act of Parliament;
^^^erwise howsoever, with Power to Grant and delegate the same; and to permit
and allow such (...) Trade, Commerce, and Navigation unto the Plantations,
Colonies, Cities, Towns, and places (...) possession, as we shall judge fit and
convenient.

(...) the Chief Captains and Supreme Leaders of the People of Darien, in
compliance with former ^^^^ments, having now in most kind and obliging manner,
received us into their Friendship and ^^^^ty, with Promise and Contract to
assist and join in defense thereof against such as shall be their (...) Enemies
in any time to come. Which, besides its being one of the most Healthful, Rich,
and (...) Countries upon Earth, has the advantage of being a Narrow ISTHMUS,
Seated in the ^^^^h of the World, between the two vast Oceans, which renders it
more convenient than any other (...) ^^ing the common Storehouse of the
Insearchable and Immense Treasures of the Spacious South (...) ^he door of
Commerce to China and Japan, and the Emporium and Staple for the Trade of (...)
^^dies.

(...) now by Virtue of the beforementioned Powers to us given, We do here
Settle, and in the (...) of GOD Establish Our Selves, and in Honor, and for
the Memory of that most Ancient and ^^^^ed Name of our Mother Kingdom, We do,
and will from henceforward call this Country by,(...) ^ame of Caledonia: and
our selves, Successors, and Associats, by the Name of Caledonians.

(...) suitable to the Weight and Greatness of the Trust reposed, and the
valuable Opportunity now (...) hands; being firmly resolved to communicate and
dispose thereof in the most just and equal (...) for Increasing the Dominions
and Subjects of the King Our Sovereign Lord, the Honor and (...) of our
Country, as well as the benefit and advantage of those who now are, or may
hereafter (...) ^^^cerned with us: We do hereby Publish and Declare, That all
manner of Persons of what Nation (...) ^^^ple soever, shall from hence-forward
be equally free and alike capable of the said Properties, ^^^^ges, Protections,
Immunities, and Rights of Government Granted unto us; and the Merchants, (...)
^^^chants ships of all Nations; may freely come to, and Trade with us; without
being liable in their ^^^^s, Goods or Effects, to any manner of Capture,
Confiscation, Seizure, Forfeiture, Attachment, (...) Restraint or Prohibition,
for or by reason of any Embargo, breach of the Peace, Letters of Mark,
^^^rizals, Declaration of War with any Foreign Prince, Potentate or State; or
upon any other ^^^^tor pretense whatsoever.

(...) we do hereby not only Grant, and Concede, and Declare a general and
equal freedom of Govern^^^^ ^^d Trade to those of all Nations, who shall
hereafter be of, or concerned with us; but also a full ^^^^e Liberty of
Conscience in matter of Religion, so as the same be not understood, to allow,
con^^^^ or indulge the Blaspheming of Gods Holy Name, or any of his Divine
Attributes; or of the ^^^owing or Profaning the Sabbath Day.

(...) finally, as the best and surest means to render any Government
successful, durable and happy; it (...) by the help of Almighty God) be ever
our constant and chiefest care; that all our further Consti^^^^^ Laws and
Or^^^ances, be consonant and agreeable to the Holy Scripture, Right Reason, and
(...) ^^^^mples of the wisest and justest Nations; that from the Truth and
Righteousness thereof we may (...) for, and expect the Blessings of Prosperity
and Increase.

E^^^^burgh, December 28, 1699. By Order of the Council, HUGH ROSS Secretary

(...) Reprinted at Glasgow, by Robert Sanders, One of His Majesty's Printers,
1699.


