COPY OF AN ACT Presented to the Parliament, BY THE MERCHANTS.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, taking into his Consideration, That by an Act past in this
present Parliament, Entitled Act for Encouraging of Foreign Trade, His
Majesty, for the Improvement thereof, did, with Advice and Consent of the
Estates of Parliament, Statute and Declare, That Merchants, more or fewer may
Contract, and enter into such Societies and Companies, for carrying on a Trade,
as to any Subject of Goods or Merchandise, to whatsoever Kingdoms, Countries or
Parts of the World, not being in War with his Majesty, where Trade is in use to
be or may be followed, and particularly beside the Kingdoms and Countries of
EUROPE, to the East and West Indies, the Straits, and to trade in the
Mediterranian, or upon the Coast of Africa, or in the Northern Parts or else
where as above: which Societies and Companies, being Contracted and Entered
into, upon the Terms, and in the usual manner, as such Companies are set up,
and in use in other Parts, consistent always with the Laws of this Kingdom, His
Majesty, with Consent foresaid, did allow and approve giving and granting to
them, and each of them, all Powers, Rights and Privileges, as to their
Persons, Rules and Orders, that by the Laws are given to Companies, allowed to
be Erected for Manufactories; And his Majesty, for their greater Encouragement
did promise to give to these Companies, and each of them, his Letters Patent
under the Great Seal, Confirming the whole foresaid Powers and Privileges,
with what other Encouragements His Majesty should judge needful, as the
foresaid Act of Parliament at more length bears

And His Majesty understanding, That several Persons, as well Foreigners as
Natives of this Kingdom, are willing to engage themselves, with great sums of
Money, in an American, African, and Indian Trade, to be exercised in, and from
this Kingdom, if enabled and encouraged thereinto by the Concessions, Powers
and Privileges needful and usual in such Cases.

Therefore, and in pursuance of the foresaid Act of Parliament, His Majesty,
with Advice and Consent of the said Estates of Parliament, Do hereby make and
Constitute (...) with such others as shall join with them within the space of
(...) after the date hereof, and all other whom the foresaid Persons, or Major
part of them being assembled, shall admit and join into these their joint Stock
and Trade, to be one Body Incorporat, and a free Corporation, with perpetual
Succession, by the Name of, The Company of Scotland, Trading to Africa and the
Indies.

With Power to the said Company, to have a common Seal, and to alter and renew
the same at their pleasure: As also to plead and sue, and be sued, and to
purchase, acquire, possess and enjoy Lordships, Lands, Tenements, or other
Estate, real or personal, of whatsoever Nature or Quality; And to dispose upon,
and alienat the same, or any part thereof at their pleasure, and that by
Transferrs and Assigments, made and entered in their Books and Records, without
any other formality of Law: Providing always, that the foresaid Transferrs and
Conveyances; as to Lands and other real Estate, (when made of these only, and a
part) be perfeited according to the Laws of the Kingdom anent the Conveyance of
Lands and Real Rights.

With Power likewise to the foresaid Company, by Subscriptions or otherwise, as
they shall see meet, to raise a joint Stock or Capital Fond of such a sum or
sums of Money, and under and subject unto such Rules, Conditions, and
Qualifications as by the foresaid Persons or Company, and Major Part of them
when assembled, shall be limited and appointed to begin, carry on, and support
their intended Trade and Navigation, and what ever may contribute to the
Advancement thereof.

And it is hereby Declared, That the said joint Stock or Capital Fond, or any
Estate, Real or Personal, Ships, Goods, or other Effects off, or belonging to
the said Company shall not be liable unto any manner of Confiscation, Seizure,
Forefeiture, Attachment, Arreast or Restraint, for and by Reason of any
Embargo, Breach of the Peace, Letters of Mark or Reprizeal, Declaration of War
with any Foreign Prince, Potentate or State, or upon any other Account or
Pretense whatsoever, but shall only be transferrable, assignable or alienable,
in such way and manner, and in such Parts and Proportions, and under such
Restrictions, Rules and Conditions as the said Company shall by Writing in, and
upon their Books, Records and Registers direct and appoint, and these
Transferrs and Assignments only, and no other shall convoy the Right and
Property, in, and to the said joint Stock, and Capital Fond, and Effects
thereof above mentioned, or any part of the same, excepting always as is above
excepted; And that the Creditors of any particular Member of the Company, may
by their Real Diligence affect the share of the Profit, falling and pertaining
to the Debtor, without having any farther Right or Power of the Debitors Part
and Interest in the Stock, or Capital Fond, otherways than is above appointed,
and the Books, Records, and Registers of the said Company, or Authentic
Abstracts or Extracts out of the same, are hereby declared to be good and
sufficient for Evidence in all Courts of Judicature, and elsewhere.

And His Majesty with Advice foresaid, farther Statutes and Declares, that the
said (...) and others to be joined with, assumed by them in manner
abovementioned, and their Successors, or major part of them Assembled in the
said Company, shall and may in all time-coming by the plurality of Votes,
Agree, Make, Constitute and Ordain all such other Rules, Ordinances and
Constitutions, as may be needful for the better Government and Improvement of
their Joint Stock, or Capital Fond, in all matters and things relating
thereunto; To which Rules, Orders and Constitutions, the same being consistent
mith, and no ways contrary to the Laws of the Kingdom, all persons belonging to
the said Company, as well Directors as Members thereof, Governors or other
Officers Civil or Military, or others whatsoever shall be subject, and thereby
concluded.

And the said Company is hereby empowered to equipp, fit, set out, fraught and
Navigat their own, or hired Ships in such manner as they shall think fit; and
that notwithstanding the Act of Parliament 1661, Entitled, Act for
encourageing Shipping and Navigation, wherewith His Majesty with Consent
foresaid, Dispenses in favors of the said Company, and that from any of the
parts or places of this Kingdom, or from any other parts or places in Amity, or
not in Hostility with His Majesty, in Warlike or other manner; to any Lands,
Islands, Countries or places in Asia, Africa or America: and there to Plant
Colonies, Build Cities, Towns or Forts, in or upon the places not Inhabited, or
in or upon any other place by consent of the Natives and Inhabitants, and not
possessed by any European, Sovereign, Potentat Prince or State; and to provide
and furnish the foresaid Places, Cities, Towns or Forts, with Magazines,
Ordnances, Arms, Weapons, Ammunition and Stores of War: and by Force of Arms to
defend their Trade and Navigation, Colonies, Cities, Towns, Forts and
Plantations, and other there Effects whatsoever. As also to make Reprisals, and
to seek and take Reparation of Damnage, done by Sea or by Land, and to make and
conclude Treaties of Peace, and Commerce with the Sovereigns, Princes, Estates,
Rulers, Governors or Proprietars of the aforesaid Lands, Islands, Countries or
Places in Asia* Africa or America.

And His Majesty with Consent foresaid, does further Statut and Ordain, that
none of the Leidges of this Kingdom, shall or may Trade, or Navigat to any
Lands, Islands, Countries, or Places in Asia, Africa or America, for and during
the space of twenty one Years, to be accounted from the passing of this present
Act, without License and Permission in Writing from the the said Company:
Certifying all such as shall do in the contrary hereof, that they shall Forfeit
and Amit the third part of the Ship or Ships, and of the Cargoe or Cargoes
therein employed, or the Value thereof; whereof the one half to His Majesty as
Escheat, and the other half to the use and benefit of the said Company:
excepting always, and without Prejudice to any of the Subjects of this Kingdom,
to Trade and Navigat to any part of America, where the Colonies, Plantations or
Possessions of the said Company shall not be settled.

And it is further hereby Enacted, that the said Company shall have the Free and
absolute Right and Property, only Releving and Holding of His Majesty and His
Successors in Sovereignty, for the only Acknowledgement of their Allegiance in
and to all such Lands, Islands, Colonies, Cities, Towns, Forts and Plantations
that they shall come to Establish, or Possess in manner foresaid. As also, to
all manner of Treasures, Wealths, Riches, Profits, Mines, Minerals, Fishings,
with the whole Product and Benefit thereof, as well under as above the Ground,
and as well in Rivers and Seas, as in the Lands thereto belonging: or from or
by reason of the same in any sort, together with the Right of the Government
and Admirality thereof. And that the said Company may by Virtue hereof, Grant
and Delegat such Rights, Properties, Powers and Immunities, and permit and
allow such sort of Trade, Commerce and Navigation unto their Plantations,
Colonies, Cities, Towns or Places of their Possession, as the said Company from
time to time shall judge meet and convenient.

With power to them, to Impose and Exact such Customs and other Duties upon,
and from themselves and others Trading with, and coming to the said
Plantations, Cities, Towns and Places, and Ports and Harbors thereof. as the
Company shall think needful for the Maintenance and other public Uses of the
same. Holding always, and to hold the whole Premises of His Majesty, and His
Successors Kings of Scotland, as Sovereigns thereof. And paying only for the
same, their Acknowledgement and Allegiance for all other Duty, Claim or Demand
whatsoever.

With power and liberty to the said Company, to Treat for, and to procure and
purchase such Rights, Liberties, Privileges, Exemptions and other Grants, as
may be convenient for Supporting, Promoting and Enlarging their Trade and
Navigation, from any Foreign Potentat or Prince whatsoever, in Amity with His
Majesty. For which, the General Treaties of Peace and Commerce, betwixt His
Majesty and such Potentates, Princes or States, shall serve for sufficient
Security, Warrant and Authority: and if contrary to the said Rights, Lights,
Liberties, Privileges, Exemptions, Grants or Agreements; any of the Ships,
Goods, Merchandise, Persons, or other Effects whatsoever belonging to the said
Company, shall be stopped, detained, Imbazelled, or away taken, or in any sort
prejudged or damnified, His Majesty promises to Interpose His Authority, to
have Restitution, Reparation, and Satisfaction made for the Damage done, and
that upon the public Charge which His Majesty shall cause Deburse and lay out
for that Effect.

And further, it is hereby Statute, That all Ships, Vessels, Merchandise, Goods
and other Effects whatsoever belonging to the said Company, shall be free of
all manners of Restraints or Prohibitions, and of all Customs, Taxes, Cesses,
Supplies, or other Duties imposed, or to be imposed by Act of Parliament, or
otherwise, for and during the said space of twenty and one Years, excepting
always the whole Duties of Tobacco and Sugar, that are not of the Growth of the
Plantations of the said Company.

And farther, It is hereby Enacted, that the said Company by Commission under
their Common Seal or other ways as they shall appoint, may make and constitute
all and every their Directors, Governors, Commanders in Chief, and other
Officers Civil or Military by Sea or by Land; As likewise, that the said
Company may Inlist, Inroll, Hire and Retain all such Persons Subjects of this
Kingdom, or others whatsoever as shall be willing and consent to enter into
their Service or Pay, providing always that they uplift or Levy none within
this Kingdom to be Soldiers, without Leave and Warrant first obtained from His
Majesty, or the Lords of His Privy Council, over which, Directors, Governors,
Commanders in Chief, and other Officers Civil and Military, and others
whatsoever in their Service and Pay, the Company shall have the Power, Command,
and Disposition both by Sea and Land.

And it is farther Statute, that no Officer Civil or Military, or other person
whatsoever within this Kingdom, shall impress, Intertain, Stop or Detain any of
the Members, Officers, Servants, or others whatsoever of, or belonging to the
said Company; And in case the said Company their Officers or Agents shall find
or understand any of the Members, Officers, Servants, or others foresaids to be
Impressed, Stopped or Detained, they are hereby Authorized and allowed to took
hold off, and release the foresaid Person impressed or stopped in any part of this
Kingdom, either by Land or Water, and all Magistrates and others His Majesty's
Officers, Civil and Military, and all others, are hereby required in their
respective Stations, to be aiding and assisting to the said Company, unde the
pain of being liable to all the Loss, Damage and Detriment of the said Company,
by reason of the foresaid persons their neglect.

And farther, that the said Company, whole Members, Officers, Servants, or
others belonging thereto, shall be free both in their Persons, Estate and Goods
employed in the said Stock and Trade, from all manner of Taxes, Cesses,
Supplies, Excises, Quartering of Soldiers Transient or Local, or Leveying of
Soldiers, or other Imposition whatsoever, and that for and during the space of
(...) years.

And lastly, all persons concerned or to be concerned in this Company, are
hereby declared to be free Denizons of this Kingdom, and that they withal that
shall settle to inhabit, or be born in any of the foresaids Plantations,
Collonies, Cities, Towns, Factories, and other places that shall be purchased
and possessed by the said Company, shall be repute as Natives of this Kingdom,
and have the Privilege thereof.

And generally without prejudice of the Specialities foresaid, His Majesty
with Consent foresaid, Gives and Grants to the said Company, all Powers, Rights
and Privileges as to their Persons, Rules, Orders, Estates, Goods and Effects
whatsoever, that by the Laws are given to Companies, allowed to be Erected for
Manufactories, or that are usually given in any other Civil Kingdom or
Commonwealth, to any Company there Erected for Trade and Commerce.

And for the better Establishment and greater Solemnity of this Act and gift in
favors of the said Company; His Majesty does farther Ordain Letters patent to
be expede hereupon, containing the whole Premises under the Great Seal of this
Kingdom; For doing whereof per saltum, their presents shall be a sufficient
Warrant both to the Director and the Chancellor or Keeper of the Great Seal, as
use is in the like Cases.


