Unto His Grace the Duke of Argile Her Majesty's High Commissioner, and the
Right Honorable the Estates of Parliament. THE PETITION OF John Corss Writer
in Edinburgh.
Humbly Shows,
THat the deceast Andrew Martine Writer in Edinburg'h, from the great respect
he bore to his Native Country, and particularly for Preservation of the Ancient
Records thereof, having in the year of GOD 1650 (at which time he had the care
of the Records of the privy Seal) absconded himself with them in the Highlands
of this Kingdom, where he preserved them from the Enemy, with a great deal of
Expenses and Fatigue, there being upwards of 100 large Folios, and that for the
space of Ten years at least, to the hazard of his Life, and irrecoverable ruin
of his Family: And the said Books being some time ago fallen in your
Petitioners hand through the Death of the said Andrew Martin, and of his Son,
whom your Petitioner was necessitat to supply, in advancing considerable Sums
to him on the Faith of these Books; and conceiving they may be of public Use;
especially seeing they contain the Records of Charters, Precepts, Gifts of
Teinds, Presentations to Kirks and Benefices in the several Provostries,
Priories and Prebendries, from the Year of GOD 1499, to to the Year of GOD
1650, together with their Minut Books, during all that time, exactly
corresponding; as also a Record containing the Taxation upon the Clergy of
Scotland for sending their Delegats to the Council of Trent, and other old
Taxations. Your Petitioner also humbly conceives, that these Records are of the
more Use and Value; because the Records of the Chancery, and other Records
suffered much when they were transported to England, and much more by the
Misfortune that befell them at Sea in their return.

May it therefore please your Grace and Lordships, to order the foresaids
Records to be put into public Custody, and to appoint your Petitioner such a
Reward for the Expenses and great Pains that has been bestowed in preserving
these Records, as your Grace and Lordships in your great Goodness and Bounty
shall think fit.

And your Petitioner shall ever Pray, etc.

