COMMISSION OF JUSTICIARY For Securing the Peace of the Highlands.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To all and sundry to whose knowledge these presents shall come, Greeting:
Forasmuch as, We for punishing and repressing of Thifts, Depredations,
Robberies, Sornings and the like Crimes and Disorders within the Bounds of the
Highlands, and for the better settling of Justice, Peace and good Order there,
and in all the neighboring Bounds, specially within the Shires of Cathenes,
Sutherland, Ross, Inverness, Cromartie, Nairn, Elgine, Bamff, Aberdeen,
Kincardine, Forfar, Perth, Stirling, Dumbartoun, Argile, Tarbat, Bute; and
others adjacent: Which Shires are to be divided into three Districts, in manner
after-mentioned, have thought fit, by virtue of Our Prerogative Royal, to grant
the Commission of Justiciary following, to the persons after-named, to whom
also the Earl of Argile and others having heretable Rights of Justiciary, are
to grant their Commissions at least to so many of them who are willing to act
by virtue of the same, and that for the whole Bounds within their said
respective heretable Justiciaries, in the terms of the several Acts of Our
current Parliament, relating to the Justiciary-Court in the Highlands; And
which Commissions are to contain all the necessary and usual Powers, that the
said Commissioners being of Consent fully empowered, may Act and proceed more
effectually for punishing and repressing the Crimes abovementioned. Therefore
We do hereby grant full Power, Authority, and Commission, express Bidding and
Charge to Our Justice-General, Justice-Clerk, and Lords Commissioners of
Justiciary, John Earl of Tullibardine Our principal Secretary of State,
Archibald Earl of Argile, the Earl of Mar, the Earl of Sutherland, the Earl of
Finlater, the Earl of Buchan, the Earl of Strathmore, the Earl of Kintore, the
Viscount of Tarbat, the Lord Strathnaver, Lord James Murray, the Lord
Glenurchy, the Lord Saltoun, the Lord Rae, the Lord Ruthven, the Lord Duffus,
Sir James Ogilvie Principal Secretary of State, the Master of Forbes, Sir James
Scougill of Whitehill, Sir Patrick Ogilvie of Boyne, Ludovick Grant of that
Ilk, William Dunbar of Durn, Alexander Ogilvie of Forglen, John Ogilvie of
Kempeairn, Alexander Hay of Ardenbath elder, Nicolas Dumbar of Castlefield,
(...) Grant of Belnatoun elder, Mr. Francis Grant of Belnatoun younger,
Alexander Leslie of Kininvie, Sir Thomas Burnet of Leyes, Sir George Sinclair
of Clyth, William Dumbar of Hempries, Mr. John Campbel Commissar of Caithness,
Sir Adam Gordon of Dalfolly, Mr. John Gordon of Carrell, (...) Dumbar of
Sydery, David Ross of Balnagowan, (...) Monro of Fowlis, Hugh Monro of Tennush,
Sir Alexander Mackenzie of Cowl, Sir Donald Bain of Tulloch, George Monro of
New-more, Mr. Simon Mackenzie of Tarradell, (...) Mackintosh of that Ilk,
Duncan Forbes of Colloden, Alexander Chisholm of (...) George Cuthbert of
Castle-hill, Mr. David Polson of Kinmyles, Mr. Alexander Ross of Clava, (...)
Robertson of Inches (...) Campbel of Calder younger, James Frazer of Relict
(...) Frazer of Balnamain, David Broddy of Lethem, David Cuthbert
Sheriff-Depute of Nairn, (...) Broddy of that Ilk, George Broddy of Aslisk,
Ludovick Dumbar of Grange, Robert Dumbar of Dumfaill, (...) Innes younger of
that Ilk, William Duff of Dipple, James Grant of Galloway, John Grant of
Clay-furrs, (...) Grant of Arntilly, Alexander Duff of Braco, Sir James
Abercrombie of Birkenbog, John Anderson of Westertoun, Alexander Duff of
Drummuir, Charles Gordon of Glengarrick, Sir John Forbes of Craigievar, Arthur
Forbes younger of Eicht, (...) Leslie of Kincraigie Sir James Gordon of
Lesmore, Archibald Forbes of Lickliehead, Arthur Forbes of Auchintoul, Sir
Robert Gordon of Gordonstoun, Thomas Hay of Balhousie, Lieutenant Colonel John
Areskin, Sir William Stirling of Airdoch, Sir Thomas Murray of Glendoick, James
Hepburn of Menstrie, Adam Drummond of Meggins, Robert Stuart of Ardvorleich
elder, Stuart of Ardvorleich younger, James Ramsay of Bamff, Mr. Leonard
Robertson of Straloch, (...) Mercer of Clavadge, James Menzies of Culdair, John
Cunninghame of Baldalloch, (...) Cunninghame younger of Buquhan, William
Stirling of Harbertshire, Alexander Monro of Bearcrofts, Sir Humphry Colquhoune
of Luss, John Mckfarland of Erchor younger, Patrick Murray of Dullery, John
Blair of Corbs, James Herron of Callie, Alexander Robertson of Fascally,
Captain James Menzies Tutor to the Lord of Weymes. Menzies of Sluan, Lachlane
Mackintosh Tutor of Dalmungo, Craigie of Dumbarnie younger, Cree (...) Provost
of Perth, Colin Campbel of Lochland, James Drummond of Comry, Mr. William
Murray of Arbeny, (...) Campbel of Balgersho elder, Alexander Robertson of
Craig Baillie of Perth, Sir Colin Campbel of Ardkindlas, Sir Duncan Campbel of
Auchinbreck, Sir John Campbel of Carrick, Archibald Campbel of Inneraul,
Alexander Campbel of Balcardine, Alexander Campbel of Lochnell, Donald Campbel
Baillie of Mackairn, Alexander Campbel of Kilmartoun, George Campbel of
Craignes younger, (...) Cameron of Glendechry, Sir John Hill Governor of
Fort-William, and Lieutenant-Collonel Forbes, or the Deputy Governor thereof,
conjunctly and severally, to pursue, Follow, take and apprehend Imprison, and
present to Justice all persons within the following Shires, of Caitness,
Southerland, Ross, Inverness, Cromartie, Nairn, Elgine, Bamff, Aberdeen,
Kincardine, Forfar, Perth, Stirling, Dumbritan. Argile, Tarbat, Bute, and
others Adjacent, Guilty or Suspected to be guilty of Thift, Resett of Thift,
Robries, Depredations, Sornings, Thigging, exacting of Black-mail or any other
Oppressions, Bangesteries, masterful or minacing Exactions, communing with
intercommuned Persons, Man-slaughters, Murders, harboring or Resetting of
Outlaws, the transgressors of the Law concerning the Clan Gregor, hounding-out
or Ratihabiting Thiefs, Robbers, Sorners, and others guilty of the foresaid
Crimes, and securing the Peace of the High-lands, and encouragement of Virtue,
and learning and settling Industry amongst them And in case any Persons within
the bounds foresaid cannot be apprehended and presented to Justice, We hereby
give Warrant to the said Commissioners or any one or two of them to issue
forth Precepts, direct to Sheriffs, Officers, Stewarts, Baillzies, Mayors, or
Constables, to charge them to compear at the first Justice-court before the
said Commissioners, or any five of them who are hereby declared to be a
Quorum, And where there is not already a sufficient number of Sheriff-Officers
and other Officers with Power to the said Commissioners, or any two of them to
appoint Officials within the several Paroches of the said Bounds, which
Officials are to have the same Power, given to Constables by the Act of
Parliament 1661, And who are to give an account on all occasions to the next
adjacent Commissioners, and to cite before them all Persons within the said
Bounds, Malae famae, and suspected of Thift, corrospondents with Theives or of
any of the Crimes abovementioned, that they may be secured and tried by an
Assize and be either purged by an Assize or punished, and farther if need
require to find sufficient Caution, and to declare that a Citation to be used
at the Mercat Cross of the head Burgh of the Shire where the have most
frequently haunted, against the said Thieves, their Resetters and others guilty
of the Crimes foresaid, who have no dwelling-houses to compear-before the said
Commissioners, shall be als sufficient as if they were personally Charged in
respect of the uncertainty of their Residence and difficulty of access to them,
and where they have Places of Residence they are to be Cited personally or at
their dwelling places, if there be tutus accessus and if not at the head Burgh
of the Shire where they dwell, with Power to the said Commissioners or any
Quorum of them, at their several meettings, to make choice of their own
President to continue only for that meeting and to fence and hold Courts of
Justice, and to creat Fiscals Sergeants, Dempsters and all other members of
Court, as also to regulate the pryces and correct the abuses of their Clerks or
deprive them in case of malversations, as likeways with power to the said
Commissioners or any Quorum of them to cite witnesses, to call persons to pass
upon Inquest, out of any six Paroches adjacent to the place where they hold
their Courts; Absent witnesses and Assizers to un-law, and americat, the
un-laws and americaments to uplift and exact to be applied by the said
Commissioners, for defraying some part of the Expenses, and the Fees of the
other members of Court; And in the said Court to call the said persons, either
cited or imprisoned as guilty, or suspected to be guilty of the foresaid
Crimes, or any of them; and to declare such as are absent Fugitives from the
Laws, and to issue forth their precepts for denouncing them Rebels. and putting
them to the Horn. and to intercommun according to Law, and the practice in such
cases and ordaining all their Moveable goods to be Escheat, and in brought for
Our use for their contempt and disobedience, and such as shall compear and be
brought before them as prisoners to put them to trial, and the knowledge of an
Assize, and according as they shall be found Innocent or Guilty, that they cause
Justice be done upon them, conform to the Laws and practice of the Kingdom;
provideing always that when any Landed-man is cited or brought before the said
Commissioners, as guilty or suspected to be guilty of Thift, or the resett of
Thift, if he compear and be put to the knowledge of an inquest, the said
Commissioners or such of them as shall happen to sit for the time shall before
pronouncing of Sentence condemnatory either as to Life or Limb, be obliedged to
report the state of the process to the Lords of Our Privy Council, that they
may give such directions therein as they shall think fit, but if they compear
not and be declared Fugitives that their-moveables be intrometted with and
Escheated as other Fugitives, And we do hereby give Power and warrant to the
said respective Commissioners to intromett with, uplift and receive, the said
Escheat goods of such as shall be convict, or declared Fugitives in manner
foresaid, to be applied for Defraying any part of the expenses of the said
Commissioners, and members of Court in the Execution of this Commission, with
Power to them to nominat and appoint Collectors of the same. And for rendering
the Decreets and Sentences of the said Commissioners more firm and effectual
to the obtainers thereof, and for their further encouragement, to administer
Justice to Our good Subjects, and to secure the peace of the Country, within
their respective bounds; It is Our express Will and Pleasure, and we strictly
require and Command the Decreets, Acts, and Sentences, to be pronounced by them
in manner foresaid, to be put in all due and lawful Execution, Prohibiting
hereby and discharging the Lords of Our Privy Council, Lords of Session,, and
Lords of Justiciary, to pass any Bills of Advocation upon any ground or
pretense whatsoever; As also prohibiting and discharging the said Lords of
Privy Council and of Session, and Justiciary, to Pass any Bills of Suspension
or to grant any Sists of Procedure, and Execution of the said Decreets or
Sentences upon any ground or pretense whatsoever, unless the said Suspension or
Sist of execution be first cognosced, or granted by a Quorum of the Council
Signeing the same, and if notwithstanding the Suspension or sist, the Decree
be sustained, and the Letters found orderly proceeded, the Suspender shall also
be decerned at least in a third part more than the Sums charged for, with what
more the Lords of Privy Council shall Judge reasonable to the Charger for his
Expenses and Damnage, and for the more effectual rootting out, of all Thifts
and Roberies, We do allow and approve, that at their first meeting or any other
Meeting or Meetings they shall judge convenient; They Summond before them all
Heretors, Liferenters, Wodsetters, present Possessors of any Lands or Estate
within the Highlands of the foresaid Shires, and exact from them true lists of
all men above twelve years of Age that live upon their Lands, whom upon
Citation they are to present when called, for whom they are to give Bond and
Caution conform to the Acts of Parliament: And that these for whom no Security
can be had may be disposed of by the Commissioners or their Quorum aforesaid,
so as they may be no more a trouble to the Peace of the Country, and if any of
the said Heretors and others abovementioned appear not or refuse to give Bond
and Caution and lists or give up untrue ones, then and in that case We ordain
that either they be proceeded against as absents, or as Harbourers and
Resetters of Thieves and outlaws and We hereby appoint the first general
Metting of the said Commissioners to be at Eorfar upon the first Thursday of
June next to come, And there to hold Court, Adjourn and appoint new dyets as
they shall find expedient; And to the effect their Meetings may be the more
Exact and better calculat for the dispatch of business; But] without derogation
of the power given to the said Commissioners to adjourne their Meetings as
they shall think fit, We hereby appoint on of the Commissioners above to be
Conveener of the rest in each district, when any occasion falls out which
requires their Meetings before the day to which they were adjourned, according
to the Division after-mentioned, viz. For the North District including the
Shires of Caitness, Sutherland, Ross, Inverness, Cromarty, Nairn, Elgine,
Bamff, Aberdeen, and Kincardine, The Earl of Finlater, and in his absence the
Lord of Grant, And for the middle district, including the Shires of Forfar,
Perth, Stirling, and Dumbartoun; The Earl of Tullibardine, and in his absence
the Lord Ruthven. And for the West district including the Shires of Argyle,
Tarbat, and Bute, The Earl of Argyle, and in his absence Mr. John Campbel
Sheriff-Deput of Argile; Which Conveeners are to appoint the most convenient
times and places for the rest of the Commissioners, or at least a Quorum of
them to meet at: Hereby also requiring such as are so called to give attendance
and not to be absent unless upon relevant Grounds, and whereof they are to
certify the Conveeners under the pain of losing their Share of the trust and
authority, hereby committed unto them, And sicklike nominates and appoints the
foresaid Conveeners or major part of them to be Conveeners, for calling
together the general Meeting of the Commissioners of the whole Districts, once
or twice a year, or oftener as they shall think necessary at such Times and
Places as they shall think most proper and convenient, allowing also that
notwithstanding of the Division hereby made in particular Districts, That all
persons named in this Commission have Right and Power to act as Commissioners
and and sit in any justice Court holden by virtue hereof, as weel without the
District where they live as within the same, as also with Power to the said
Commissioners or any of them in case of Convocations, or open Depredations, to
call and require Our Leidges to their assistance, and give Warrant to pursue
all Fugitives within the said Shires, for apprehending them and presenting them
to Justice, as also to require all Sheriffs, Stewarts, Baillies of Royallities,
Regalities and Baronies, to be aiding and assisting to them therein as they
shall be required be the said Commissioners or any one of them for apprehending
Fugitives and recovering goods, taken by Heirships or Depredations, wherein
they are not to fail as they shall be answerable upon their Duties and Offices,
and the said Sheriffs and other Judges ordinary are ordained not only to give
concurrence and aid to the said Commissioners as they shall be required, But
also to afford them Prison-houses in Burghs, and Court-houses for keeping their
Meetings, and upon all occasions the said Sheriffs and Magistrates of Burghs
Royal are hereby ordained to receive any Prisoners, sent to them by the said
Commissioners or any one of them, with a mittimus under their hand for that
effect, and keep and detain them in sure Prison, until they be brought unto a
legal trial, or dismissed by order of a Quorum of the said Commissioners in
write And if it should happen that the Fugitives do escape out of all the
foresaid Shires, in that case they are to acquaint the Judges ordinary of the
Shires to which they have resorted, who are hereby ordered to apprehend them or
failzing thereof to pursue them out of their Jurisdiction; And to the effect
that such Transgressors may be notourly known: The Commissioners who shall
declare any Fugitives, shall make Intimation of their Names and Designations to
the Clerks of Our Privy Council, that the same may be Printed and published to
the Sheriffs of the next adjacent Shires to the place where such a Court is
holden, and the Sheriffs are to cause intimat the same at the Paroch Churches
within their respective jurisdictions, that no person presume to reset supply
or harbor them; And We hereby appoint that the Clerks of the respective
Courts, shall give account to the Clerks of Privy Council what Persons are
condemned, and what Persons are declared Fugitives, and that twice in the year,
once in the Month of May, and once in the Month of September. that the Lords of
Privy Council may know the Condition of these Shires, and what diligence the
said Commissioners use in the prosecution of the said Commission; and further
for defraying the Commissioners Charges we allow them to decerne for and to add
a tenth part to each Lybel and Decree pronunced by them, which Tenth-Part is
to be paid to the said Commissioners by the said Defenders if they succumbe
in the Cause, and by the pursuers in case the Defender be assoilzied, And We
hereby require the Commanders of our Forces, and Governor of Inverlochie and
Commandants of particular Garrisons or any other Officers of our Forces, to give
parties of Horse and Foot, from time to time to attend the said Courts as they
shall be advertised by the Commissioners that are to hold them, As also, the
said Governor or any other Officer of the said Forces, are hereby required to
give concurrance at Poyndings, and to convey the said Goods so poynded out of
Danger and Deforcement and that without any reward: As also, to apprehend and
seize any person or Persons contained in lists, to be given in to them by the
said Commissioners. And likeways, We do hereby appoint Colonel John Hill and
Leutennant Colonel Forbes his Deputy Governor at Inverlochie, and failzing of
them, the persons succeeding to them in the said Charges, to be Members of
this present Commission, allowing the said Governor to discharge the duty of a
Conveener, if need be: And for making distinction betwixt peaceable and honest
Men, and Thieves and Broken persons, no person living within any part of the
Highlands of the said Shires, are to bring any Cows, Horse, or other Bestial to
(...) a Testificat of a Landed-man in Write, bearing the Number of the Beasts,
and Name and Place of Residence of the Drover, and attesting that they are
leelly come, under the pain of Seizure and Confiscation thereof as stolen
Goods, and if some such Testificat should be granted, and afterward it should
be found that any of the said Beasts should be stolen, the Landed-man Attester
shall be liable as if he were guilty in so far as shall be extended to
Restitution and Damage, and what the Law provides without any favor, and
Masters and Magistrates who have power of Mercats, and Clerks thereof, are
hereby discharged to permit any Beasts to be Sold or Bought at any Mercats,
till the Seller deliver unto him his said Certificat; With Certification that
the Magistrates, Master or Clerk, shall be liable for any Beasts so sold, and
whereof the Clerk keeps not the Certificat aforesaid, as if they were Airt and
Part of the Theft themselves, in so far as extends to Restitution as said is:
And its hereby Declared, that it shall not be lawful to any person in the
Highlands, to travel with Arms from the ordinar place of their Residence,
without a pass or Certificat from the Sheriff or his Deputs, or from a Justice
of Peace, or any of the said Commissioners, or Ministers within the Bounds of
the Place from which he is to travel, bearing the occasion thereof which is to
have a particular Date, and to continue only for that Journey, with Power to
the said Commissioners, or any of them or any having their warrant to seize
upon, apprehend and imprison all such persons wanting passes as a foresaid as
Thieves, Sorners and Vagabounds; till they find Caution for their good
behavior, and answer to any accusation that can be brought against them. And
it is likeways hereby declared that this Our Commission shall be no ways
prejudicial to the Right and Jurisdiction of any Sheriffs, Stewarts and Bailies
of Royeallities, and Lords and Baillies of Regalities, who all and ilk an of
them may proceed notwithstanding thereof, against Persons guilty of thift, and
the receipt of of Thift, and other Crimes aforesaid in the same way and manner
as they were formerly in use to do conform to the Laws if they be the first
attachers and shall prevent the said Commissioners in diligence. And further,
if it shall be found needful by the Persons already named in this Commission,
that any others be added unto them for their assistance, We do hereby empower,
the Lords of Our Privy Council, upon application made to them by a Quorum of
the Commissioners of any of the three Districts, to ad to this present
Nomination, such person or persons as the said Court Commissioners of the said
District: And this Our Commission is to continue and endure to the last day of
December 1699 years, unless the same shall be Revocked or Recalled by Us before
that time; In Testimony whereof, Our Great Seal is hereto appended.

Given at Our Court at Kensingtoun the Thirty day of March 1697, and of Our
Reign the Eight Year.
GOD save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1697.


