THE LAWYERS Looking-glass: OR, A clear Discovery of the Dangerous Snares,
wherewith the Practicers of Law endeavor to entangle Your Highness, and to
make you the Patron of their Injustice, and Oppression, and so to lead you as
the blind Ship Money Judges led the late blind King into a Ditch; Which God
forbid.

TOGETHER, With some seasonable preparatives to remedy this great evil: For
the glory of GOD, Your Highnesses Honor, and the Peace and Welfare of these
Nations: AND, All Gods People both Ministers of the Gospel, and Members of the
Army, and others; specially in and about the Cities of London, and Westminster,
are earnestly desired (as they will answer it at the great day of Account) to
speak words in season, and otherwise use their best endeavors to strengthen
the hands of Your Highness and Council in carrying on the Work of the Lord
against the Mighty.

LONDON, Printed for Jeffery Corbet. Febr. 20. 1655.

The Lawyers Looking-glass.
May it please your Highness,
THe Spirit says; Do justly, love mercy, loose the bands of wickedness, undo
the heavy burdens, let the oppressed go free, and break every yoke. And, Let
judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream. And, Execute
ye judgment, and righteousness, and deliver the spoiled out of the hands of
their oppressors. And, To do justice and judgment, is more acceptable to the
Lord then sacrifice. And, Justice exalts a Nation, and the work of Justice
shall be Peace: Mic. 6.8. Isa. 58.6. Amos 5.24. Ierem. 22.3. Prove. 14.34. Isa.
32.17. And, Any Cause for Debt, or other Civil difference, may be speedily
heard, and determined in weekly Courts of Equity in the several Counties, and
cost the people little or nothing, according to the practice in the Court of
Requests, London, which sits twice a week in Guild Hall, by virtue of a good
Law made in the 3d. year of King James, and the 15th. chapter; and according to
the late practice in every County in Ireland, where the Justices of Peace did
by Commission hear, and determine thousands of Causes, and put the people to
little or no charge; the Defendant being warned to appear by strict Summons,
without any chargeable, disgraceful, or vexatious Arrests or imprisonment, and
both parties having liberty to plead their own Causes. But the practisers of
Law turn Justice and Judgment into Gall and Wormwood, and extort vast treasures
from the people, by delay and obstruction of justice. And it is most clear,
That the various sorts of Writs, Sheriffs fees, Bailiffs fees, Bail fees,
Attorneys fees, Solicitors fees, Prothonotaries fees, Secondaries fees,
Registers fees, Clerks fees, Lawyers fees, Gaolers fees, with multitude of such
like, are merely chargeable, impertinent, and vexatious inventions to delay
justice, and dishonor God, and pick the peoples pockets: And those proceedings
differ no more from absolute Robbery, then Hypocrisy does from open
Profaneness; for Thieves take men's money by several ways of stealing and the
practisers of Law by exacting their wages of unrighteousness And that which is
worst of all, they endeavor to make your Highnes^ the Patron of all their
fraudulent devices, as the Ordinance for alteration of Names, and Forms does
witness.

2. The Spirit says, He that stops his ears at the cry of the poor, he
shall cry, and shall not be heard. And, Woe unto them that decree unrighteous
Decrees, to turn aside the Needy from Judgment, and take away the Right from
the poor of my people, that Widows may be their prey, and that they may rob
the Fatherless. And, As a roaring Lion, and a raging Bear, so is a wicked Ruler
over the poor people: Pro. 21.13. Isa. 10.1, 2. Prove. 28.15. And the practisers
of Law have the cries of your poor oppressed people continually in their ears
yet are they like the deaf Adder, and commonly make a prey of the Widow and
Fatherless: and many Causes have depended in the Courts at Westminster, some
10. some 20. years, some more, some less, by the Lawyers purposed delays of
justice, for their own sinister ends, to the utter undoing of the oppressed
people. Moreover, the multitude of unrighteous Decrees, Judgments, Orders,
Rules, and other proceedings upon Record in the Courts at Westminster, will
clearly demonstrate, That the practisers of Law are in combination to obstruct
Justice, and oppress the oppressed with cunning pretenses of Law and Equity;
and that which is worst of all, they surprise and induce your Highness to be at
above 20000 l. a year charge, in maintaining them to be like Lions, and Bears,
to rend and tear your poor people in pieces.

3. The Spirit says, Hatred, variance, wrath, and strife are damnable sins:
and, The love of money is the root of all evil: and, The getting of treasure
with a lying tongue, is a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek death:
and, Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord: and, He that tells lies shall
not tarry in my sight: Gal. 5.20. 1 Timothy 6.10. Prove. 21.6. Prove. 12.22. Psalm.
101, 7. Nevertheless, the practisers of Law, for love of money, do encourage
the people to persevere in the damnable sins of hatred, variance, wrath, and
strife; and they are accustomed to toss lies to and fro for filthy lucre sake,
and to call good evil, and evil good; and their custom in telling lies, speaks
them in no capacity to tarry in your sight: But they ought rather to be an
abomination to your Highness, as they are to the Holy One of Israel.

4. The Spirit says, Thou shall provide out of all the people, able men, such
as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness, and let them judge the people
at all seasons: and, Judges, and Officers shall thou make thee, and they shall
judge the people with righteous Judgment, and shall take no reward: and, The
robbery of the wicked shall destroy them, for they refuse to do judgment: and,
Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also
do well that are accustomed to do evil. Exodus 18.21, 22. Deuteronomy. 16.18, 19. Pro.
21.7. Ier. 13.23. And the foregoing particulars intimate, that the Spirit
levels at such persons, as Judges, and other practisers of Law, under the
notion of wicked, refusing to do judgment; and, that their various sorts of
Fees, and other Law charges, are Robery in the Spirits account; and, that
through their custom in such Robbery and refusing to do judgment, they are in
no capacity to do good, much less are they capable of being Judges, or other
public Officers.

5. The Spirit says, One Achan brought the fierce wrath of the Lord upon
Israel: and, One Haman had well nigh confounded Ahasuerus and his 127
Provinces: and, God abhors solemn Fasts, and other transactions, and counts
them but tything Mint and Cummin, where judgment and righteousness is
neglected: and, Because sentence upon an evil work is not executed speedily,
therefore the hearts of the sons of men are fully set in them to do evil. Ios.
7.19. Esth. 389. Isa. 1.11, to 18. Amos 5.21. Mat. 23.23. Luke 11.43. Eccles.
8.11. And woeful experience witnesses, that the practisers of Law have from
age to age been the Achans, and Hamans of this Land, and confounded the Powers
who are fallen before your Highness; and now endeavor to surprise and induce
you, to use that Power to obstruct, which God has given you to expedite,
Justice: and because they go unquestioned and unpunished, therefore their
hearts are fully set in them to do evil. Upon which account, they surprised
your Highness and Council, during your multiplicity of other public affairs,
so as to admit of no Exception against any man that was elected for the last
Parliament; they knowing well, that their incapacity of being Members would
otherwise have been laid open, in regard your Highness's righteous Principles,
expressed in the Instrument, declare, That none but men fearing God, and of
good conversation, should be Members of Parliament; and their constant practice
in delaying and obstructing justice, and turning it to gall and wormwood, and
making a prey of the widows and fatherless, and rending and tearing the poor
people in pieces, and tossing lies to and fro out of mere covetousness, which
is Idolatry, and the like, do witness. That they are so far from fearing God,
that they cast his commands behind their backs, and say by their actions, Who
is the Lord that we should obey him? And that which is worst of all, As the
Shipmoney Judges, and other Lawyers, and their accomplices, were the grand
Incendiaries of the late bloody Wars, and confounded the late King, some going
away with him, and others staying in the long Parliament to play the Kings
Game, whereby they poisoned that Parliaments Councels, and at last confounded
them; even so, the practisers of Law and their accomplices made parties to
confound your Highness in the last Parliament: And those practisers of Law that
pretended most to be your friends, sat 5 months, and made not one good Law to
cause Justice and Judgment to run down like a mighty stream, to reconcile this
divided and discontented people, and confirm your Highness's establishment in
righteousness.

6. The Spirit says, Money answers all things: and, Our blessed Savior
wrought a miracle for want of money, to pay Tribute to the Supreme Magistrate:
and, Soldiers be content with your wages. Eccles. 10.19. Mat. 17.27. Luke
3.14. Nevertheless, the practisers of Law, and their accomplices (to discontent
your Soldiers, and keep your Highness in want of money, and open the mouths of
publick-faith persons, and others to exclaim against you) have many months
obstructed a Commission for Discoveries, whereby above 200000 l. might have
been brought into your Highness's Treasury before this time without the least
trouble to your Highness or Council. And though a sufficient Commission was
drawn up many weeks since, with great deliberation, and good advice; yet that
Commission is obstructed in some Lawyers hands to this day. Mean while,
contrivances have been had to confer that power upon Lawyers, who have not time
to do the work, or others who have no will to the work, or upon so few, as no
good can be expected from them; when as many persons, whose names are related
in the Reasons following, are ready to serve your Highness gratis, rather then
this good work should fail. Moreover, the delay already has lost your Highness
above 100000 l. by the death of Concealers or Discoverers, or Witnesses; and
many hundred thousand pounds more is in danger to be lost; and hundreds of
people, who have debts justly due from the Commonwealth by Public faith, and
otherwise, are some of them gone already, and others ready to go with sorrow to
their Graves, through want of satisfaction, to the great dishonor of God, and
your Highness, and the Commonwealth.

7. The Spirit says, Take all opportunities for doing good. And, Abstain from
all appearance of evil. And, Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness. And with hold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the
power of thy hand to do it. And, Woe to that man by whom the offense comes.
And, Neglect to strengthen the hands of the poor and needy, was one of the sins
of Sodom, which cried to heaven for vengeance: Gal. 6.10. Heb. 13.16. 1 These.
5.22. Prove. 3.27. Matthew. 18.7. Ezekiel. 16.49. Genesis 18.20. But the practicers of
Law, do commonly justify the wicked, and condemn the innocent, both which are
an abomination to the Lord. Yea, they take all opportunities to justify the
wicked for a reward, and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him.
And that which is worst of all, they take advantage from the multiplicity of
your Highnesses Public affairs, and surprise, and induce your Highness to
withhold good from your oppressed people, in neglecting to strengthen their
hands, by appointing Commissioners to deliver them from their oppressors. And
thus a great offense comes by the practicers of Law, and they wilfully incur
that dreadful woe, to uphold their gainful trade of sin. For many persons are
ready and willing to sit daily, and serve your Highness and their Country
gratis, to hear and redress the complaints of oppressed people, against whom
Justice has been obstructed in the Courts of Common Law, and Equity, and other
places. But the practicers of Law, knowing well that such Commissioners would
soon lay open their mystery of Iniquity, designedly say, your Highness must not
exercise the Legislative power. Notwithstanding they know, That the safety of
the people is the supreme Law: And that, Necessity brings a privilege with it.
And that your Highness has bound your self by Oath, to cause Justice, and Law
to be equally administered. And to make Laws and Ordinances for the Peace and
welfare of the People, until order shall be taken in Parliament concerning the
same, as by the 30. Article in the Instrument appears. And this clearly
intimates. That where Parliaments, and inferior Magistrates fail, your
Highness stands bound by your Oath to supply; and the last Parliament met, and
made not one good Law for the Peace, and welfare of the People: whereby it is
apparently a duty still incumbent upon your Highness.

May it therefore please your Highness, to Commissionate all the Field Officers
and Captains of your Army, to be Justices of Peace in every County where they
are ordered to quarter, and to empower them, and the rest of the Justices, to
keep weekly Courts of Equity in the most convenient place in every County; to
hear and determine all civil differences, according to Equity, and good
Conscience. And to call to their assistance one or two of the ablest Lawyers
near them, for advice in difficult cases. Please likewise to grant the foresaid
Commission for discoveries, and seriously consider the reasons following, in
order thereunto. Please further to empower some persons of integrity, to hear
and redress all obstructions of Justice. And by so doing, God will be greatly
glorified, your Highness highly honored, and acquitted from much trouble and
clamor; and the oppressed will be set free, and vast Treasures brought into
your Exchequer: Besides, the complainings in our streets would cease, and your
Government be sweetened with acts of Justice and Mercy. In order whereunto, I
humbly beseech your Highness to recollect, and seriously lay to heart, the
various cross Providence you have met withal since you was Protector: That
your forces fled and fell before a shadow; And that not only your open enemies
have conspired under Oath of secrecy to destroy you, but those who were your
faithful friends all along the Wars, have been, and are still at variance with
you. And that, The Spirit says, when a man's ways please the Lord, he makes
even his Enemies to be at peace with him. And, When the Host goes forth, then
keep thee from every evil work. And, Have no fellow ship with the unfruitful
works of darkness. I humbly beseech your Highness further to consider, That
holy Moses did not leave a hoof in bondage; and holy Joshua brought Achan to
public justice the same day he was discovered. And, Holy Job searched out the
Cause he knew not. And, Holy David made haste, and delayed not to keep Gods
Commandments. And, That Saul lost his Kingdom, and the late King his, by
delaying such obedience. And that, He that does righteousness is righteous. And
that, The Scribes and Pharisees said, but did not. And that, Your Highness
declared in April 1653. That no oppression or wrong should be done the people:
And that, If you should do the least dishonor to the name of God, it would be
your confusion, and a stain to the whole profession of Godliness. And lastly, I
humbly beseech your Highness to consider; That your breath is in your
nosthrils, and that you have many talents to improve, and that this night your
soul may be taken from you, and that you must appear before Christ's tribunal to
give an Account of your Stewardship. And, that all your Honors and earthly
enjoyments are but vanity, and will be bitterness in the end., unless God give
you wisdom from above, to let your light shine that men may glorify God on
sight of your good works of judgment and righteousness. Now the Lord make you
wise unto salvation, and guide your spirit to redeem the time, and not to know
a wicked person, nor suffer any worker of deceit to dwell in your House, nor a
Liar to tarry in your sight. In pursuance whereof, your Highness shall not want
the daily prayers, and constant endeavors of

Your Highnesses faithful Servant, JEFFERY CORBET.

Reasons moving that your Highness would appoint twelve men at the least, who
are of known courage, fearing God and hating coveteonsness; to be Commissioners
in the intended Commission for Discoveries of concealed Estates.
1 WE the Subscribers, do hereby engage to produce, and prosecute such
discoveries, as will bring in above sixty thousand pounds into the public
treasury within six months upon the appointment of such Commissioners. 2 The
Commonwealth has already lost above 100000. l. by the death of Concealers, or
Discoverers, or Witnesses, as Colonel Copley, and others can give an account:
and there is great danger that much more will be lost, unless such a number of
Commissioners be speedily empowered, for prevention of that great mischief. 3
Your Highness is in great want of money for managing your Public Affairs, and
many of your faithful friends are ready to perish for want of their just debts
from the Commonwealth: and there is no better way to supply both, then by
bringing in the vast Treasures that are concealed. 4 Twelve such Commissioners
may divide themselves, and keep three or four Courts a day, and so dispa^ch
more business in three months, then a single Court can do in a whole year. 5
The delatory proceedings which must needs be in a single Court, upon the
multitude of Discoveries ready to be made, will give the Delinquents an
opportunity to make friends and parties to obstruct Justice as formerly, by
bribery, etc. as Captain Castle and others can give an account, and also
Your Highnesses most humble and faithful Servants: JEFFERY CORBET. EDWARD
PIT.

1. Jan. 1655. We humbly conceive, That Col. John Mill, Major Beak, Lieut. Col.
John Fenton, Major George Withers, Capt. Edw. Worger, and Samuel Richardson,
are persons fitly qualified: And therefore pray that they may be joined in the
Commission intended for the foresaid Discoveries.

The foregoing Reasons were presented to a Member of the Council, the day above
mentioned; as a seasonable New years gift, for your Highness and Council.



FINIS.

