Lisarda; OR, THE TRAVELS OF Love and Jealousy. A NOVEL. In Two Parts.

By H. C. Gent.

Licensed, Sept. 30th 1690.

Rob. Midgley.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Knight, at the Pope's Head in the Lower-Walk of the
New-Exchange, 1690.

TO THE Honorable James Levinston, Esquire
SIR,
IT is so Customary a thing, the Dedications of Books to Persons of Quality;
Especially, where the Author has received any Obligations, that I might have
been thought singular, had I not found some Person, to whom Obligations had
required an Acknowledgment; and whose Judgment and Approbation might have been
sufficient to Countenance my Book. That, Sir, I hope will excuse my Presumption
of Introducing Lisarda to you; A Lady, who though Virtuous to a Superlative,
yet Unfortunate, till the Consummation of her Marriage with Don Ricardo, and
the greater Happiness of attaining the Honor to be Presented to you, fearful
least her Misfortunes might follow her here into England, and that many might
blame that here, for want of knowing the Customs of Spain, which there is not
thought a fault, no not a venial one: She fears our Ladies might be offended
with so much forwardness in Spanish Women, which for want of a Spanish
Confinement, they are not Guilty of themselves: These thoughts are what
troubled her, till now that I assured her, You were too Courteous to refuse
your Patronage to a Lady. But while she is thus happy in your Protection, give
me leave to assure you, That I am, Most Entirely,

Sir, Your Devoted Friend, and humble Servant, H. COX.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Have offered you this Book without the Commands of any Person of Quality, or
the urgent desires of any Friend, only for my own Pleasure, and perhaps a
little for my Profit; besides, I think it a pleasant thing, though I shall not
impose this Opinion on any one, nor think my self obliged to him who favors
it; do but buy it, and let the Bookseller take your money; then Curse it, Damn
it, and the Author, throw it away, or what you please. Nor have I omitted my
Name for fear of the Critics, who I desire to have no more mercy on the Book,
when once bought, than they have of their own unpitied Souls, who likely they
may damn, by way of affirming the poor ignorant Author for a Blockhead, a
Dunce, and Fool, with a long Et caetera of their ironical Titles; a thing that
he will but smile to hear, so that his Expectations are but answered, and the
Book sells: And though likely you may be one of this ungrateful Gang; yet
however, I will speak so much, and for the better understanding of it as I
think convenient; partly to satisfy you in some particulars, but more for my
own satisfaction: I must tell you, the Scene being in Spain, I have been feign
to give them Foreign Characters, although the Haughtiness of the Spanish
humor, and their aptness to be Jealous, is a daily Discourse here in England.
Yet least you should think my Don Ricardo and the rest, to deviate in good
manners and sense, when they show those inseparable qualities to the Spaniard,
when they speak so much in their own Praise; I must advertise you, that Custom
permits that there, which would be very ridiculous here; nor would I have you
wonder at the forwardness of my Ladies, for they being deprived of that Liberty
our English have, they make use of the Occasion, and always are very forward in
their Courtship; they without difficulty, will meet the Man they like,
halfway; and it is not altogether uncommon there, for them to tell a Man at
first sight they are in love with him; and now I think I have said enough,
except I should further tell you, that as you use me now, so shall I treat with
you hereafter; either by writing more, if you Damn this, to vex you and please
my self, or not writing: I know not why nor wherefore, but as the fancy takes
me.

God b'y' heartily.
Lisarda; OR, THE TRAVELS OF Love and Jealousy.
CLara Lisarda, a Lady but of sixteen years of Age, Beautiful, Discreet, and
one that had sixteen thousand Dollars for a Portion; was born in Andaluzia, of
Illustrious Parents: Now the Possessors of Youth and Riches we know are never
homely, especially the latter is so attractive a Virtue, that that it self is
capable to gild all Imperfections; so that you need not question the number of
Pretenders to this Lady, being every way well qualified; but however, amidst
the throng of her Adorers, there was not one could reasonably think himself in
a higher place of her regard than another; she was civil to them all, nor was
there any one of them, that ever pretended to her, but hoped with the rest;
however she carried her self with such indifference, that none could complain,
nor envy another; yet with all young Women she very much desired the happy
hour, that might perfect her frame, and satisfy a certain desire of something
nature did dictate to her, for which end a thousand hovering thoughts
advertised her, she was born, and that without this (she knew not what) she
should never be happy: a thousand wishes and desires, Curiosity it self urging
her to haste the experiment of Joys, spoke to be so great, that the most
copious Language is too scanty to express. She many times would alone, at that
instant, when each little Fiber of her Soul shot forth, warmed by that vernal
Sun that still invites those of her tender years to newborn Appetites,
discreetly reason in the following manner.

Who is it can penetrate the heart and thoughts of Man, being so various, that
the dispositions of most are changed as often as they change their Company; and
yet as uncertain as their humors are, so certain is it my years require me to
accept of one for a Husband? What shall I do then? shall I plunge my self into
life-lasting Miseries to gratify my wishes, and please my Parents?

Two things there are to invite Pretenders, my Person, or my Estate; My Person,
No. It is not that; for I know many in this City, if not more Noble, yet far
beyond me in Perfections; and because they are poor, Lovers are not only
wanting, but even those that in jest should offer Marriage. Why then, if it is
my Portion does these wonders, I find it hard to marry a Man who wooes not me
but my Estate; and yet could I bear with this, (for Ambition is so grown into
the World, that there must be a new Creation to find disinteress'd men:) who
can assure their selves of their manners, where there are so many Cheats. In
the time of wooing the most vicious appears a Saint, and detests all Vice: with
what protestations does the inconstant at that time avouch his Constancy? and
how assured of his Mistress's Virtue is the Gallant, when many times
afterward, he proves murderously troublesome with his Jealousy; and all, how
false soever, call Heaven to witness the sincerity of their Love: O! how they
Adore, Admire, Esteem, with many other such like terms, till they have got
their aim. His Friend styles him virtuous, good, etc. His Relations will say
that for him, He is good natured, and given to no remarkable Vice; another as a
gallant young Gentleman; Nay the Maid, the young Ladies Confident, has had the
itching of her Palms answered, to give her good word, and all this to her cost,
who takes him for better and for worse; and gives her hand and heart to an
Enemy, who either impairs the Estate by Gaming, or proves very ill humored, or
what is worse, grows weary of the Person that adores him; so opposite are the
humors of many Men to reason, that they never love less than when they are
most beloved: thus it is with us poor Women, who filled with hopes of continued
unspeakable Joys, many times throw our selves into continued and unexpressible
Miseries. Suffer it not, O Heavens! Desire it not, O Parents! For rather will I
end this Life by a draught of Poison, or Poniard, than marry, without making,
not only for Months, but for Years, a sufficient Enquiry into the Manners of
him who is to be my Husband.

Thus reasoned our discreet young Lady, and thus resolved not to marry; yet
least she should err in her Election, or rather because Love was but just
conceived in her Maiden Breast, and had not yet strength capable of any more
than directing that little Affection (she thought Friendship) to Ricardo
Antonio, a Gentleman so well accomplished, and of so great Parts, that in the
judgment of the whole City, he was only worthy to be Lisarda's Husband, and she
only deserving to be his Bride. At this time the City was obliged to Feasts, in
that to show their Joy for the Union between the two Crowns of France and
Spain; Exchanging the two Beautiful Princesses Isabel and Juana, that with the
tie of affinity their Friendship might be lasting. The Feasts were so much the
richer, forasmuch as all the Rival-Servants of our Lady, with Emulation, set
themselves forth, without regard of Expenses; so that for many days were great
Bonefires, Balls, Masks, and to end this Solemnity, there were prepared twelve
Bulls of the largest size; this is a sport that the Spaniard extremely delights
in. Ricardo on the last day of the Bulls was resolved to show his Activity, and
to that intent, in the Morning, when the numerous throngs of People surrounded
the Lists, appeared well mounted, with a Spear in his hand, applauded by all
except Lisarda, who was concerned to see him running into so imminent danger.
'Twas now Love was resolved to dally no longer, and took this occasion to make
Lisarda know, that even she with all her Charms, could not withstand his
Pleasure; for now, though she knew not why she should be more concerned for
Ricardo than for the rest of his Competitors; but willing to deceive her self
(a frailty common to humane nature) she fansied it only a tender Friendship.
She was so grieved and uneasy, that she became restless. A terrible Bull was
let loose into the Lists, when, according to Custom, the People gave a shout,
which so angered the haughty Animal, that casting his fiery Eyes on Fulgencio,
Ricardo he ran at him with such fury, that striking his Pointed Horns in his
Horse, he tossed Horse and Man in the Air. At the sight of this Lisarda
sounded, and was feign to be carried home.

Every one was concerned at this Tragical Mischance, but especially Ricardo,
who, enraged to see no one run to the assistance of this Gentleman, who though
he was his Rival, Generosity urged to endanger his own Life to rescue his;
therefore throwing his Spear, it went so strongly from the hand of the Caster,
that it traversed the Body of the Beast; who now more furious than before, ran
with a full Career at Ricardo, but he nimbly drawing his Sword, and opportunely
lifting his hand as he went to gore the Horse, gave so strong a blow, that he
clove his Scull, and left him at the Horses Feet, confessing that the strongest
must surrender to the Fortunate; at this the whole Neighboring Fields Echoed
with the loud shouts of the gladded People, while Ricardo lighting from his
Horse, looked up to the Window where Lisarda sat; but his Servants telling him
that they saw her carried away in a swound when the Bull so fiercely attacqued
Fulgencio, he concluded he was the Chosen from among the Crowd of her Adorers,
and running to help him up, taking him by the Arm, said, Sir, Your fall to you
is like that of Saul, for it has made known your Election; and so retired
extremely discontented to his Lodging: where we'll leave him complaining of his
hard Fate, and return to Lisarda, who as soon as she had recovered from her
swound, was acquainted how bravely Ricardo had rescued Fulgencio, and killed
the Bull; and withal, that he intended to Encounter a second in the Afternoon;
this perplexed her extremely, and resolving, that rather one should guess at her
Love, than thousands know it, by the evident demonstrations of her weakness,
she resolved to write to him, and retiring from Company, she set Pen to Paper
to the following purpose.

To Ricardo Antonio.
A Certain Friend of yours, who has been this two years persuaded you loved
her, and one who has a greater esteem for your Life than your self, since you
venture it so rashly, that she cannot look on without pity, has desired me to
beg you would do her the pleasure to day, to see the Feast, and not be an Actor in
them. If your Gallantry are the endeavors to gain her, know she is already
yours; but if it is with design to please any other Lady, know that you are
ungrateful: Your disobedience will undeceive her; this I desire of you for the
love she bears you, which is not a little, since the danger you was in this
Morning has cost her much grief and trouble; this she desires, advertising you
withal, if she is now denied, she will take her leave of ever asking any favor
of you in all her life.

Clara Lisarda.


When this Letter came to Ricardo by a continued thought of what had past, he
had arrived almost to the height of despair, Cursing himself, and the hour he
first saw Lisarda, and as the Servant knocked at the Door, he had just drawn a
Poniard, with intention to have ended his Life, but hearing some body at the
door, he stopped and listened, knowing the Servants Voice, himself ran, and the
Servant delivered into his own hand the Letter, which he retired to read
bidding the Servant wait an Answer. A thousand thoughts pestered him, he knew
not what to make of the Letter; the Directions he knew to be Lisarda's writing,
but never having received, nor heard she had ever writ to any of her Lovers
before, he conjectured it was to discard him: since she had made her choice of
Fulgencio, least she might give him Ombrage, or cause Jealousy, by entertaining
still her old Suitors, she had writ to them all to forbear their vain
Endeavors. This now past for granted, and he was resolved not to open the
Letter, least it might draw Effeminate tears into his Eyes, therefore retaking
his Poniard, he said, Come welcome steel, thy sharpness is much easier to be
endured, than to see the happiness of my Rival; End my Misery; and as he was
going to strike, says he, No. Though thy Charms has made me miserable to that
degree, that to avoid that succeeding Chain of Miseries that must needs follow,
I will end my life. Yet in my last hour such is my Constancy, I will kiss thy
Name, paying my last devoir to the sign of my cruel Sentence, submitting --
More he would have said, but having opened the Letter to kiss the name, he
could not so confine his sight but he read these last words, If she is denied,
she will take her leave of ever asking any Favor of you in all her Life: he
pondered on them, but not being able to understand them, Curiosity lead him to
read the rest, the better to understand the meaning of that line, but each word
and syllable did not only change his Melancholy, but added to the first so many
transports of Joy, that he was not able to contain himself, but running to the
Entry where the Servant was waiting, with a rich Diamond, and some gold, he
paid the Bearer, desiring her to stay but a moment longer, till he could write,
which by reason of his excess of Joy he was not so well able to do, wanting
that sedateness required, but as it was, here I give you the Copy.

To Lisarda.
IF the endangering my Person will occasion any uneasiness in you, for that
same favor I would hazard it a thousand times: but not to anger you (your
Friend I mean) from this moment I desist from my intent, and thank your loving
pity; this Complement, though I know not if I hit right, in calling of it pity,
for excuse me to go into the Lists, that there I might see those sparkling
Eyes, is a blessing I with much difficulty receed. But I had forgot, your Woman
stays, and I stay, she for an Answer, and I that this might come to your hands,
and that you may not take leave of asking me, but begin to command me as your
Spouse (I was going to say), but as your Slave I mean.

Ricardo Antonio.


This Letter was extremely plea^ing to Lisarda; but, O Heavens! who can express
the transports and ecstasies it caused in Ricardo; now the Feast was really a
pastime to her, while to him 'twas tedious, he thinking he should never soon
enough breath his thanks with gentle whispers in her tender Ears; in short, he
was even mad with content, for the excess of all Passions is a real madness.
The hour being come to return to the Feasts, he went, and by good luck was
invited by Fulgencio to sit in his Window, which was next to that where Lisarda
sat; it is impossible to tell you the agreeable meetings of their Eyes, who, if
by chance she glanced any other way, as if so much precious time was lost, with
eager have they returned to their beloved object. Fulgencio at first minded the
Game, but having turned three or four times to ask his Friend his Opinion of
such and such haps, he still found him looking toward Lisarda; this made him
take notice of them, and then, to his great Confusion, he saw the reciprocal
kindness between them; at this he was in so great a Passion, that with much
difficulty could he contain himself within the compass of Discretion, Envy,
Jealousy, Anger, and a thousand other Passions tore his Breast; in short, he
found them prevailing over his Reason, and least by seeing more it should be
overpowered, and that not being a fit place for a quarrel or disturbance, he
slunk away without saying any thing, however all the time of the Feast our
Lovers were too busy to perceive it; minding nothing but what each one thought
most charming in his Object: How unwilling were they to be going when the Feast
was ended? and though they saw nothing of it, nor were at all delighted at
that, yet were they extremely sorry it ended so soon; but at last, with much
regret, they parted; it not being the Custom in Spain, that of offering ones
Service to wait on a Lady home; and it is a great favor if he is permitted to
see her, though in Company with her Father or Mother.

Ricardo being at home, and his head filled with nothing but thoughts of his
Happiness, he bethought himself of a young Woman he had long kept, and
considering if Lisarda should hear of it, it might be his ruin in her good
thoughts, and a let to his Marriage with her, which now he thought sure; for so
it is in that Country, the discovery of the Woman's love seldom precedes a whole
Week to their Marriage; therefore the Person he had not visited but kept since
his love to Lisarda, out of mere honor, he went to see her now with intention
to rid her out of the Town, and in some distant place give her an allowance
sufficient to maintain her, but no sooner he entered the door, but she with a
thousand reproaches, upbraided him with his unkindness; and it is common with
these sort of Women to think, if a Man keeps them a while, that he is from that
time tied to them, and they may domineer; especially Donna Clara, for so was
her Name, being of a good Family, but debaucht by one that left her, who now to
shun the indignation of her Kindred, was feign to make a Trade and Livelihood
of that way. She first began by the mere force of Love, through the unkindness
of her Parents, who would not consent to the match. She really loved Ricardo,
and her Love urged her to be the severer, nor would she hear him speak, but
threatened to tear Lisarda to pieces; this urged Ricardo to think of another
course, so that saying nothing, he went straight to the Corregidors, or
Governor of the Town who was his Kinsman, and one that really loved him, to
him he told the whole affair, and desired his assistance to get rid of her,
which he promised; then they agreed, that the ensuing night, about eleven a
Clock, the Corrigidor should come with a Coach and Guards, and with a feigned
Warrant seize her, and send her in a Coach to Madrid, where the Guards should
leave her. Just as Ricardo came out of the House he met Fulgencio, who taking
what he had said in the Lists, lifting him from the ground as a Jeer, having
seen so reciprocal a kindness between the Lovers, at the Feast, through Madness
and Jealousy, had been seeking him to fight him, and therefore now took the
opportunity to tell him, without why or wherefore, That he must fight him.
Ricardo told him he could not then, but on the Morrow at twelve at Night, he
would be at such a House, and his Whistle should be a sufficient token to know
who staid for him, and then he would satisfy his desires; on these Promises
they parted: No sooner was he come home to his own House, but found a Letter to
this purpose.

To Ricardo.
SInce not only by your Letter, but by your behavior at the Feasts, I must
needs conjecture, you think that it is my self that loves you, I would see what
it is you would do to deserve that love; therefore my Father and Mother being out of
Town, in the Morning I Would be glad to hear your Proposals.

Lisarda.


Ricardo received this with much joy, and read it several times; such delight
he took in it, kissing the Name, and a thousand times squeezing it to his
heart; he admired the freedom and easiness of the style: in short, such was the
ecstasie that rest nor sleep he could not, but lay meditating all Night on the
Charming Mistress of his Heart: how often did he wish 'twas day, and when 'twas
day wish it were a decent hour to wait on Lisarda, feign would go, but still
was afraid it was too early; a thousand turns he made about the room, and
through the eagerness of thought walked so fast, one would have thought it had
been for a wager; then would he stop to tell the Clock, and stamp and fume to
hear it strike too few. In short, surely no Lover was ever in a greater Agony;
at last he heard nine strike, when with eagerness he called to his Servant to
follow him, and away he went. When he came there, Lisarda perhaps with as much
impatience was expecting him, so that he was Conducted to her Chamber. Their
Eyes at the sight of each other declared the joy of their hearts; what passed
further in matter of Courtship, I will leave every one to guess. And only tell
you this, The time was agreed on for the Marriage.

But who would think it, that amidst of all this happiness, Fortune, whose
delight seems to be baffling our surest hopes, should so suddenly Eclipse the
Amorous Flame of our two Lovers, and that not for a while, but put them in a
condition of never performing the Articles agreed between them. Amidst all the
sweet Discourses and pleasing words, Ricardo bethought himself of his
troublesome Mistress, and impatient least it should be discovered; he took his
leave of the Virtuous Lisarda, not without giving her hopes of seeing him again
that day; he goes directly to his Servants House, where he kept Clara
Euphegenia, that being her Name; he came with a very pleasing Countenance,
telling her, that what he said or did yesterday, was only to try how she loved
him; this he did that she might not suspect him for what should follow; he
dined with her, and staid with her till near four of the Clock, in which time
he showed so much love, and Caressed her so handsomely, that she could not
doubt but he was sincere; he went to the Corregidors to see if all things were
ready against the hour appointed; from thence he went to Fulgencio Ricardo's
House, thinking to answer his Challenge then, because he thought at Night he
might be too busy, but not finding him within, he went to pass a part of the
Evening in the Fields; a Servant of Lisarda's saw him, and told her Mistress,
that she saw Ricardo Antonio going to walk in such a place; it being duskish,
and her Father and Mother not at home, she took a Servant with her, thinking to
meet him; as she was going out, Fulgencio Ricardo was in a House hard by, and
saw her, and follows her; going into the Fields she passed by the House where
her Lover Ricardo Antonio entered, and heard him say to the Servant who opened
the door, Don't shut, for I shall be going again. She staid before the door a
while, at last she bid the Maid ask a Neighbor, who was owner of that House;
the honest Man told the Maid, that 'twas a Servant of Don Ricardo Antonio's who
owed the House, but he believed the Master had most sport in it; this being told
to Clara Lisarda, she was curious to know what sport that might be, and bidding
her Maid wait, she went in, but being in the first room, the door of the second
stood half open, from whence our Lady heard these words; Ah, my Dear Clara,
Don't imagine or think, that I can be false to thee; It is to have little
Confidence in thine own Charms; Knowing this Voice to be Ricardo's, she
carefully looked through the opening of the door, and saw her Lover lying on
Clara's Lap: O, Ye just Powers! said she to her self, Is this possible! Could
silly, easy Lisarda have believed it, had not her Eyes and Ears been Witnesses
of his Ingratitude: Hear she stopped hearing Ricardo speaking thus: My Dear
Clara, I don't deny, that for my Friends satisfaction I gave out, and pretended
to love Lisarda, but that was, that I might with secrecy give a full soope to
my wishes, and thy Dear Embraces. What is Lisarda comparable to thee, but as a
false Glass to a Diamond. Here Lisarda, not having Patience, rusht into the
Room. How much astonished our Cavallero was, I leave it to the Reader to
imagine, while she spoke thus.

Beautiful Lady, I cannot deny, the Pain, Grief and Trouble, with which I come
into your Presence, for though I would I should have a thousand Accusers, my
Voice, my Affections, my Color, my Pain, my troubled Words would discover the
Cheat; but be not troubled at my coming, for I assure you, I have no design, if
I could, which would be impossible, he being withheld by your all-powerful
Charms, to rob you of the Gallant, who so justly enjoys your good will, that
you ought to love him for his many good Parts, I mean as to his Body, for as to
the rest, Heaven never framed a Man so false, so ungrateful a Creature, that
you may pardon me this rudeness, and not believe his Vows and Protestations.
Hear me if it will not be troublesome to you; Then taking a Seat, with more
Tears than Words, and more Sighs than Tears, her Heart ready to burst, turning
to Ricardo, she said, Think not, Ungrateful Man, that these Complaints should
be heard by you, were they not ushered by force: I am torn with Jealousy and
Rage, and my Heart would burst if I did not speak. Here Ricardo heard his
Signal, and finding Lisarda to be in too great earnest for him to hope, and
fearful least Clara, in his absence, might offend her, he shut Clara in the
next Room, and hoping to have complied with his honor and return, or rather
not know what he did, nor thinking what he was to do, he went down to
Fulgencio, whom he would have put off for an hour or two, but Fulgencio told
him, he had had enough of Lisarda's Company, and if he would not go to a more
convenient place, he would give him an occasion to draw there; Ricardo seeing
himself thus pressed went with him, where we must leave them afighting, and
return to our two Ladies, who while they were discoursing through the Door,
hearing a noise below, Lisarda, for fear of being known, Veiled her self, when
immediately the Corregidor came up, and seeing her took her for Dona Clara, and
delivered her to the Guards, who put her into the Coach, and carried her
toward Madrid. In the mean while Clara, with her Maid, made their escape out
of a Window; and as she was going she knew not where, Fulgencio meeting her
supposed her to be Lisarda, and accosted her in this manner. Madam, Might I be
never so happy in any other Woman, I would not exchange the Hell wherein you
have put me, not for that happiness: And she mistaking him for Antonio,
Answered, Then 'twas a great Hell to you to hear my Rival Rage to night. Alas
Antonio, I thought you could not have been in pain while you possessed my heart;
at least you have often told me so: He perceiving she mistook him for the other
was overjoyed, not knowing he himself was mistaken, but on the contrary, by his
having seen her in the street go into Antonio's; her discourse of having seen
him that night, and his seeing Antonio go in just before her, had not any
scruple, but really thought it was the Person he took her for; and since she
took him for his Rival, not being able to worst Antonio by the Sword, he
thought now to revenge himself by a trick, and so proceeded. Well, Madam, said
he, Since we love sincerely, let me beg of you, before you go further, to give
me the assurance, you will be ever mine: How shall I do that, replied Clara? Why,
Madam, for several urgent reasons, for your advantage as well as mine, we may
be married now, and keep it private till -- Here cutting off his words, not
having power to contain her self for Joy, said, Ay, my Antonio, I Consent, You
know I can refuse you nothing. So presently they went to a Priest, who was at
Fulgencio's Devotion, or rather was devoted to the gold he expected, who
married them by the light of one single Lamp that hung in the Church, so that
neither perceived their mistake. Now was Fulgencio in his highest Orb of bliss,
and wrapped in the delicious thoughts of having sufficiently revenged himself of
Ricardo, who though in the Duel had disarmed him, yet Honor had obliged him to
restore his Sword, but he being possessed of his Mistress, thought himself
obliged by honor to keep her; and having gratified the Priest, he told her,
she should not go home that night, but lodge with him; to which she as easily
consented, as to the Marriage: What covered extremely the mistake was, as in
all Foreign Countries, having two Names, Fulgencio could answer by that of
Ricardo, and designedly did so, Clara was the first Name of Lisarda's as well
as hers, whom we call by that Name; but now to leave them going, and to return
to Ricardo, who was got to his Servants House, not dreaming of what had
happened, nor indeed reflecting on his own Error by locking Clara up. So that
the Corregidor, (had he not found Lisarda whom he mistook for her) could not
have accomplished the design, though now 'twas undesignedly that he had not
don't, but committed a gross error. Ricardo no sooner entered the House, but he
inquired for his offended Lisarda, to whom the Servant told the mistake; but
how shall I describe the Fury, the Madness rather, that seized him at this
News; now had he need of all his Prudence to govern himself in this misfortune:
He inquired for Clara, they told him she was also gone; he ordered his Horse
presently to be Sadled, and mounting thereon, he went to the Corregidor's
House, told him the mistake, but desired in all haste to have Orders to bring
her back, which he had no sooner received, but Posted after the Coach in all
haste; he had not gotten above three Leagues from the Town, before he had sight
of a Coach, to which he rid up, Crying out, Stay, it is a mistake, and I have
Orders from the Corregidor; still he perceived the Coach to drive on faster; he
knew not what it should be that occasioned them to drive from him; but in a
little while he overtook them, Commanding the Coach to stop, off flew a Pistol,
Ricardo lets fly again, and here begins a Fight, for both their Pistols being
discharged, Fulgencio called to him, and told him, if he would dismount he would try if
Fortune would continue her favors to him, with this our noble Cavallero
dismounted, and Fulgencio stepped out of the Coach; but Ricardo, a Man of great
Dexterity, a second time disarmed his Adversary, and being no less Generous
than Valiant, returned him his Sword, and when he came to examine the business,
it was the discovery of a double deceit: First instead of Lisarda, whom both
thought was in the Coach, they found Clara Ricardo's late Mistress, and to
Fulgencio's great perplexity, his now Wife; he no sooner knew who 'twas but he
would have disowned her, but in vain, for he had told Ricardo in his
Capitulation, that on condition he would Promise not to meddle with a Lady in
the Coach, who he had that Night Married, he would surrender, but without that
Promise, Disarmed as he was, the Dispute should continue, and assuring him it
was no Person sent by Command of the Corregidor, and consequently not the
Person he sought for; Ricardo had granted his Request, delivered him his Sword,
and went to wish the Lady Joy; when, Gods! what a surprise was it to him to see
Clara; had he been capable to have received any Pleasure amidst that throng of
Vexations, undoubtedly this would have been a great one to see himself so well
rid of so troublesome a Mistress; but being two contraries they are never at
once to be found in one Breast. Ricardo after he had wished her Joy, took his
leave, telling Ricardo, he had best make the best on it, and so bid him farewell;
riding away as fast as possible he could to overtake Lisarda, which after two
hours riding he did, but such was his Love, such was his Grief, and the sense
of his offense, that not able to speak, Floods of Tears ran down from his Eyes;
at last he made shift to tell the Officers that were with her, that he had
Orders from the Corregidor to bring that Lady back to Town; and delivering the
Paper to them, she told him, that they would turn after they got to the next House,
that they might have light to read by; Lisarda was extremely pleased to see
that the mistake was likely to give her no further trouble; and as soon as they
came to a House they wak't the People, and got light; finding they were to
return with the Lady, they told Ricardo, that if he pleased he might step in
the Coach, and one of them would take care of his Horse, which he accepted of,
being very well pleased with the offer; feign would he have spoke and excused
himself with the fair Lisarda, but Grief so oppressed his Mind, and fear, being
conscious of some guilt, deprived him of the Power. In the mean while Lisarda
knew not what to make of these unhappy Occurrences of that Night, and was as
desirous to know, could her haughty Soul have permitted her to ask, of one she
thought so great an Offender against her; but nor one, nor the other, said any
thing of the matter. While they both sat thus silent, of a sudden six Men,
three at each door of the Coach (having sent as many before to stop it) Present
their Pistols in the Coach, swearing, if they would not deliver the Lady,
they would Pistol every Man: although Ricardo could not think to be Victor, having
none but himself, and one of the Guards, the the other that mounted Ricardo's
Horse, having at the sight of so numerous an Enemy rid away, yet he drew his
Pistols, taking one in each hand, gave them no other reply, but shot; their
Horses unruly, and themselves startled at so unexpected a thing, besides the
flashes having for a while deprived them all of sight, and the shot three of
their Lives, Ricardo made shift to get out of the Coach, saying to Lisarda,
Madam, I am far from being sorry for this occasion, of showing how tenderly I
love you; if I live I hope to clear my self of what things have happened to
night; but if it is my fortune to be killed, let me beg you to entertain a
Charitable Opinion for me: Then taking the advantage of the unruliness of their
Horses which had thrown one, whom Ricardo that moment dispatched, he fiercely
ran at the other two; in the mean while he heard the Coach go on, and looking
back, he received a Pistol through his Body, which laid him on the ground,
while his Enemies rid after the Coach; he feign would have followed, but his
strength was so much diminisht by the loss of blood, that he was not able to
rise; and at that time of Night, being some distance from any Town, there was
no hopes of getting help till the Morning; but still his weak sight followed
the Coach, and his anxious Mind kept Company with the object of his Vows: O
Gods, said he, what is it I must endure these few moments I have to live; how
do my wild thoughts torture my languishing Soul: Did but Lisarda know the
truth, Did she but conceive my intentions that have caused all these
Misfortunes, I might perhaps die with some Pleasure, to know she did not think
me that ungrateful false Man. O Lisarda, Lisarda, had fortune but favored me,
how might we have been, nay how happy should I esteem my self in these few
agonizing minutes. Could I but hear from thy Dear Mouth one kind word to thy
unfortunate Ri -- Here his Speech failed him, and his Breath seemed spent,
remaining in the Field without motion. It happened the discharging so many
Pistol shot, had given an alarm to two or three Houses not far distant, and
though the Cowardly Bores dared not to come till they heard no more shot, yet
thinking now they might satisfy their Curiosity, since they had heard the
Coach drive, and Men galloping after; it began now to grow a little lightsome,
the Day drawing near, when these Clowns came where the Corpse of five Men lay
besmeared with gore; they began to consider with themselves what was best to be
done, they had a mind to the Plunder, but feared some ones coming on the rode
might deprive them of staying to take their Booty; therefore one seeing his Son
Jack driving a Cart to the Field, called to him, and laying the Bodies in the
Cart, drove home, where they fell to ransacking the Corpse of the dead Men; but
while the rest were busy about the other four, one went to handle Ricardo, and
stirring and turning him to pluck of his Cloths, he not being quite dead, but
only in a swound, it recovered him, and while the Fellow was about to pluck of
his Breeches, he felt so sensible a Box on the Ear, that it stunned him; this
frightened some of the Clowns so, that they ran away, while another more hardy
and wicked, up with a stick, and laid Ricardo such a blow on the Head, that
down he fell; but now see the Guards of the Corregidor enter, and seize upon
all in the House; for some Houses nearer the Town, having acquainted the
Corregidor of what they had heard, he sent these Guards to inquire into the
business, and finding the place where they lay with some fresh blood, they
followed the tracts of the Cart-Wheel, that began in that place, this lead them
to the House; they bound the Bores, and laying the Corpse in the same Cart that
brought them, (which they knew by its being bloody) tying the Bores to the
Carts-Tail, and so began to drive on; when of a sudden, Ricardo a second time
began to recover. He was strangely surpised when his faint Eyes beheld himself
with those Corpse in the Cart; with much ado he made shift to speak, when one of
the Guards hearing knew his Voice, though almost as much altered by faintness,
as his Face by dust and gore. They presently took Handkerchiefs, and tied up
his Wounds. When they came to Town, they put him in a Coach to be carried to
his House; and the Bores were carried before the Corregidor, who committed them
to Gaol. Many people flock about the Cart, where one knew his Fathers Body,
another her Husbands; in short, they all found Friends to mourn for them and
bury them; but innumerable were the imprecations laid on the Bores; the whole
Town was so enraged, that as they were going to Gaol, would have tore them to
pieces, the severest Death to be imagined threatened them; the Corregidor being
enraged at the usage of his Cosen Ricardo, and the people at the usage of
their Friends; so that the poor Bores were loaded with Irons, and laid in a
Dungeon; where we'll leave them biting their Nails, and Cursing their
Misfortunes like distracted Men.

The End of the first Part.
Lisarda: OR, THE TRAVELS OF Love and Jealousy.

PART II.

TO THE READER.
NOW do not I know whether with truth I should begin with Gentle, Courteous, or
Kind Reader; for perhaps you deserve none of these Epithets; examine your
Conscience, and if you find your self clear from having abused either Book or
Author, send me but word of it, and I have left sufficient to have any of those
to begin with: But if you had rather show your Wit, and exercise your Talent in
Criticism; perhaps I shall give you subject enough to work on in this second
Part, so that you would really be at a loss, if you have spent all your
Satirical Phrases on the first, and prodigally thrown away the last Jear your
Mistress sent you on an odd expression she found you had preferred from the
Academy of Complements to your Heroic Love Epistle; and for a further
advancement made it the ridiculed Interpreter of your Incomprehensible
thoughts; your Lovely Caelia, Aminta, or what other fine Romantic Names you
have bestowed on the sweet Lady. I protest, Sir, if so, you must change your
Company, and there wait a fit occasion to put it off a second time: Or else
continue saying every now and then, with a bonne Grace, But Damn me, Madam, if
it ben't very silly. This will do; for without doubt, Sir, the Ladies will
credit you; and the unknown Author has but lost his labor, in thinking to
forestall you, and be satirical first; he will bemoan the loss of so much pains;
and ten to one the next Novel he writes, you will read in the Preface that he
has either hanged or drowned himself to put the thoughts of it out of his mind.

Lisarda: OR, THE TRAVELS OF Love and Jealousy.
PART II.
THE Corregidor daily visited Ricardo Antonio, who though his Wounds were by
the diligence of Skilful Surgeons almost healed, yet none understanding his
continued Distemper, nor the means to heal his Heart, he was of a brisk Gallant
Man, become extremely the Contrary; full of thought, and often discoursing and
muttering to himself, that the Corregidor extremely feared Madness might be the
Consequence of his restless Mind; and therefore by all means endeavored to
recreate him; but this augmented his uneasiness, by adding to his grief such
things as he shunned; therefore being wholly Cured of his Wounds, he resolved
by travel, thinking Lisarda lost, to get rid of his Cordial, though troublesome
Friends; and to this purpose, he, with all privacy, got things in a readiness,
and in the duskish of the Evening rid out of Town, and in short time arrived at
Barcelona, and finding an opportunity to Embarque, aboard the Galleys of the
Great Duke of Tuscany, who were upon their return; before he Embarked, by
Letters he acquainted his Friends of his health, and taking Bills of Exchange
for Rome, he set forward.

He acquainted the Captain of the Gally who he was, who treated him with all
the Respect due to a Person of his Merit, and ordered his Lodging in the great
Cabin; where he endeavored to divert himself with the Lecture of some Books
he had bought to that purpose at Barcelona; there was also lodged another
Gentleman near Ricardo, whose Pensiveness and Melancholy, occasioned Ricardo to
take notice of him, and made him desirous to know the cause of his Sadness;
sometimes he was seen to lift up his Eyes to Heaven, at other times was heard
to sigh and Curse his adverse Fortune. One night after the many that Ricardo
had heard this Gentleman sigh and groan, when others were blessed with repose,
and only they two lay a-wake, (for with the grieved there is no pleasing
slumbers, nor rest, but such as Nature by force extorts from their Melancholy
hours) Ricardo said to him, Truly Sir, though you are a stranger to me, the
trouble I perceive you lie under has extremely disturbed me; for it is not a
small Portion of Pity that should be bestowed on so worthy a Gentleman under
Affliction, which truly if I could any way remedy, I would willingly adventure
my Life to obtain your quiet; and in traveling many times are knit the
strictest bonds of Friendship: Pardon me, (my own Condition somewhat resembling
yours, in that I also am under very uneasy Circumstances) if I desire that we
may for the time to come, be paired in the happy number of Friends; and
therefore hoping your bounty will not refuse my desire, I am willing to relate
to you my Misfortunes, which I believe, if they are not greater, they may equal
yours; hoping also that you will pay me in the same Coin.

Extremely pleased was the Melancholy Gentleman, with the courteous offers of
Ricardo, who desired not to wonder that he of himself should relate a
misfortune, that ought to be for his honor kept private from all the World,
but his Civilities had such influence over him, that he had not Power to refuse
him any thing; besides he thought the stillness of the night required a
Companion to Discourse with to pass away those tedious hours; so that Ricardo
began, and related the whole story of his Misfortunes; and having ended, the
Gentleman confessed his Misfortunes were great, but those he should relate were
far exceeding his, in as much as he had not only lost a Mistress that he loved,
but a Wife, whom he admired above all Worldly things; and his Honor, a thing
that ought to be dearer than Life: And it was thus.

The History of Don Enrique Thomas.
MY Name is Enrique Thomas de Guanches Fernandez Ysugo, my Country Barcelona,
the Metropolitan of the noble Principality of Cattalonna, my Quality of the
Most Illustrious in that State; my Estate, though not of the largest, yet
enough; and my Age thirty four Years: There dwelt in the very next House to my
Fathers, a young Lady, whom I loved as I grew in sense and years, beginning
from my Childhood: I mistake, I should say adored; for it is more than love, not
to be said to live out of her sight. Our Parents were intimate Friends, and so
our Acquaintance and Intimacy was the less noted by the Neighbors, or
scandalized by the Envious. I will not tire you with the account of my
Endeavors to please and gain that amiable Creature, that would be to tire you,
as also refresh my Mind, and make me suffer a second Martyrdom; but in short,
I Will say no Art, no Industry, no Zeal, can ever second mine to Donna Estefania,
for so is she named, who by her Ingratitude has caused my Misery; It will be
enough to say we were both Children, our Loves great, her Beauty vast, and her
behavior at that time exceeding Modest, very Witty, and consequently well
discoursed; our opportunity did not a little increase our Flames, for with the
leave of our Parents, we at any time might see each other; and indeed seldom
was it we were a sunder; by which our Parents perceiving our desires, confirmed
their Friendship by affinity, Marrying us both very young; who yet for all
that, in our desires had been long wedded. Whoever say that Marriage gluts, and
consequently impairs Love, certainly must be such dull Souls, who more like
Brutes than Men, are but satisfying their sensual Appetite, while I Am sure all
refined Spirits, who by the continual Enjoyment, have daily the Experiments of
the Wit, the Modesty, the Love, the pleasing Behavior, affording daily fresh
supplies to edge his Appetite, though her Beauty should diminish, and though I
cannot pretend to more than just a reasonable Man, yet like another Columbus,
after many years of Enjoyment (when I thought it was impossible to love more, I
found new Worlds, and daily fresh Delights, unknown to me the day before; ten
Years did complete my Joys with her, for as Heaven envied my Happiness, and
malicious Hell resolved to obstruct it, after these years where Joys and
Blessings crowded to me, by the vastness, (I had been happier, had my love been
less.) Our Estates joining together was so great, that her desire could not
reach my Liberality, the Ostentation being conformable to our Riches, that we
never so much appeared Lover and Mistress, as when we were Man and Wife, but
who would think it, Don Ricardo, that with all these visible signs of Love, (I
am ashamed to say it) that Estefania should offend my Honor, that she should
defile my Bed, rejoicing in a Strangers Arms; at least in desire if not in
deed; and who would think, that I being whom I am, should live to own it, and
that grief for the loss of my Honor should not deprive me of Life: I will not,
my Dear Friend, nor will my Honor permit me to speak ill of that Sex, since we
owe our Births to them, with the dangers of their own lives; but laying these
natural Obligations aside, and to speak how firm they ought to be, and how
constant: tell me what trust can a Man put in that Sex, or who can sleep secure
of their Treasons, since Estefania could be false? But to tell the story of my
Misfortune, Heaven having given me a Son, no less Beautiful than Witty, and
having seen him brought up with all the Accomplishments his Age was capable of;
and since I could not leave him a larger Estate, I was desirous to better it by
a Title to some Habit; and advised with my Wife, who said so much, and seemed
so eagerly to regret my absence for the time required to procure it at Court,
that I even repented my self of the thought; but considering it did import us,
and above all, that I earnestly desired it, with much ado she gave me leave for
fifteen days; for as she knew not the Court, she thought that enough to gain my
pretensions: In short, I left Barcelona, and in a short space arrived at
Madrid, and ordered my affairs so happily, that Fortune seemed desirous to
return me into Estefania's Arms; for the King understanding the desert and
services of my Fathers to the Crown, shortened the dispatch: Every Letter I
received from Estefania, was filled with Complaints of my absence, and Prayers
for my quick return; and I with the same desires, leaving my dispatches to the
care of a Servant, made all possible haste to reach Barcelona within the limits
of the time given me; and taking Post, such was my diligence, that had not a
Tempest of Rain, Thunder, and Lightning hindered, I had entered Barcelona on
the third day after my setting out of Madrid; but this sudden change of the
Weather, from a fine clear Day to a very stormy Evening, obliged me to put into
an Inn but two Leagues distant from my abode; where while I was resting my
self, and ordering something for Supper, there came in a Gentleman, who by his
Mein and Garb, I guest to be of Quality; but he was so wet, that I was obliged,
although I did not know him, to offer him my Servants to undress him and help
to dry his Clothes; and told him, if he pleased to accompany me at my Table, I
should esteem the Favor, and that he might also lodge with me: Don Federico
thankt me (for so was his Name;) and after Supper, we passed an hour or two in
relating Stories and several other Matters: In which discourse he showed much
Judgment, speaking excellent Sense, and withal very cheerful and witty. It
being time now to betake our selves to our Lodging, we went into our Chamber,
where while my Servant was undressing me, he said; Sir, you expected a
pleasanter Nights Lodging than what you will find here, the Storm having deprived
you of my Ladies Company: Federico answered also, vexed at his ill luck, That
Misfortune reaches both of us, for I also thought to have had the Embraces of
an Angelical Creature; that though it may be vainglorious for me to say it,
loves me, and is indeed in my mind the finest Woman in Barcelona; when, instead
of that, I found my self in a Storm that drove me into this House, where were
it not for Don Enrique's Courtesy in admitting me into his Company, had fared
much worse.

The Night is such, said I, (not dreaming of my Misfortune) that it would have
been a Misfortune to the Lady, had you got thither; for I fear you are not in
the best Condition to Content her. If it were not her Beauty, said the
inadvertiz'd Gentleman, her Name is -- unfortunate: The Servants took no notice
of our Discourse, and so unwilling to dive further into the Matter before them,
I staid till we were in Bed, and they had locked the Doors and were gone; but
no sooner did I see our selves alone, but with as impertinent a Curiosity, as
malicious, and designedly to know the Lady's Name, I told him, I thought no
Name in Spain unfortunate, because they are Names of Saints that are always
given in Spain. To this he answered, That ever since in Castile there was a
Lady named Estefania, who was killed by her Husband, without ever offending
him, only by the deceit of a Servant, That it was a vulgar Attribute of the
Estefania's to be unfortunate. According to this your Lady is called Estefania
said I, a little altered: And he answered, Having told you the Story first, it
would be a folly to think to hide her Name now: So craving leave to sleep, he
turned himself, and left me not altogether free from a villainous suspicion of
being Horned: But however, when I represented to my self all the Letters of
Estefania's Desire of my Return, her continual Love to me, her modest
Behavior, etc. I thought it a madness to think her false, whom I supposed as
pure as Vestal Virgins, except in the Obligation of Matrimony, and so persuaded
my self in the City there might be others of the Name. It was hardly Day when I
gave Federico the Goodmorrow, asking him if he would rise to go into the City,
that we might be there before Noon; and because he told me, that his Affairs
required him to stay till Night, and so I might go alone, and that afterward
he would enquire for me: But to tell you the Truth, my Desire was to be
satisfied in my Mind, and to know who this Estefania was that he Gallanted; so
that I told him, that I would stay also and go along with him. He attributed
this to Courtesy and Affection, which indeed was Doubt and Jealousy. We
returned to the same Discourse that we had before, and I offered my Service to
him, if there were any Danger in the Achievement of his Love. He thankt me,
and told me there was no Danger, for though I have several Nights been within
the House, yet I have not seen the Street, nor outward Walls, nor could I find
the House, though I endeavored it, such has been the Care and Secrecy of the
Owner. It Is very strange said I, for you seem to contradict your self; How
could you so often be in a House without seeing the Street? Well, that I may
not seem a Cheat to you, I Will tell you, said he, and let you see the cunning
Contrivances of the Sex when they would carry on an Intrigue. I was one
Afternoon in the great Street buying a piece of Silk, and there came a Lady
Veiled to buy some Ribboning, and though now well covered with her Veil, yet at
her first entrance into the Shop, she was not so much covered, but I saw a a
Glimpse of the most charming Creature I ever beheld: I came to her with the
Courtesy men of my Quality should, desiring her to take what she had a mind
to, without any other Interest, than to accept on it; She turned to her Servant,
as 'twas, laughing at my Proffer, or wondering at my Liberality, being unusual:
I discoursed with her awhile, and at last she came to tell me, that my Person
pleased her, and that not through lightness, but a certain secret Inclination
obliged her to love me, from the very time she first saw me; for as Fowls have
no Sex, so I think it not strange for a Woman to love at first any more than a
Man; but she obliged me not to follow her, telling me, she was a Woman of more
Obligations than I could imagine; but that if I desired to see her again, she
would expect me in a Walk called La Marina, naming me the Day and Hour I should
meet her. I really thought this, added he, but a Trick to get rid of me, till
the Day and Hour that I was appointed, I saw her coming thither in a Coach, and
stepping forth, that we might be more free and solitary, we took a Boat and
went up the River; She acquainting me with her Love, telling me she wished she
were in a Condition to dispose of her self, and I thanking her for those vast
Favors, promised to love none other but her self: Thus did we several Days
continue our Interviews, but one Afternoon that I found her in more than her
ordinary loving Humor, I laid hold on the Opportunity, desirous to know her
Quality. I prayed her, since I was confident her Ingenuity could not be wanting
to find a means of our seeing one another without giving her the trouble of
coming out of her House; at first she made some Difficulty, but Love, according
to the Latin Phrase, Overcomes all things, made her at last agree to it, but on
condition I should behave my self with great Care of her Reputation, with all
Secrecy, and not be Inquisitive farther than she would let me know her
Pleasure. These Articles, with several others to the same purpose, agreed on
between us, we parted, but not for long, for the next Day I was to go to her
House in the manner she should propose. Accordingly the next Day at the Marina
Walk I expected her Orders. I had not been there long, before I saw two men
bringing a Chair, in green Liveries, who bad me enter, and then closing all
things well about me that I could not see, they had no sooner seated me and
opened the Chair, but I found my self in a fine large Room very well furnished,
hung with Arras, the Andirons Plate, Escritores and Cabinets of curious worked
Olive, inlaid with Ivory and Ebbony, and very fine Pictures: I had but just
turned round to see this Room, when the beauteous Lady came to me, into whose
House I often entered thus, being still carried out in the same manner; once my
Curiosity, contrary to my Promise urged me, seeing one of the Chair-men in the
Street that used to carry me, to ask whose Livery that was? and they told me,
that it belonged to Donna Estefania de Arcosty fuentes, by which I have
supposed that to be the Name of the charming Creature I love.

Here Federico put an end to his Story, and I remained confirmed in the Opinion
of my Disgrace, and yet I had some Place to doubt it, because all he had said
was Ambiguous, and might serve for some other unfortunate; but such delight he
took in the relation of it, that he told so many Circumstances and signs of the
House, as of the Beds, Cabinets, Hangings, and particularizing some Pieces of
rare Paintings, of which I have many, (being a great Admirer of them) of the
Hands of all the most famous Artists, by which I was assured my House was the
abused; and therefore dissembling the Matter as much as I could, because about
Four in the Afternoon we mounted our Horses, and began our Journey toward the
Town, he still telling what Pleasures he hoped, and as it were each Word
stabbed me to the Heart, for so does every Injury done to my Honor reach the
tenderest part about me; but I when I saw my self on the Road, was not so
careful of any thing as to watch a convenient time, if not to Cure, at least to
Revenge my Honor by his Death: Therefore I ordered my Servants to make haste
before us to tell my infamous Wife of my coming: At the crossing of a very
thick Wood, where for many Years the Branches of the Trees hid the Roots from
the heat of the Sun, I drew my Sword and gave him so strong a thrust through
the Breast, that without speaking he fell on the Ground, where lighting from my
Horse I gave him many Blows, that in a short time I put him past offending me,
or defending himself; he begged me not to kill him, but to give him time to
confess, not knowing me, nor for why I used him so cruelly: I then thinking it
would be too much Rigor, not to spare him so much time, since in it though his
Body was beyond the Art of Surgery to heal, his Soul might be cured; I left
him alive; for one thing it is to revenge my Honor as a Gentleman, and another
thing to be a Christian; as I was offended, and in so nice a point, I thought I
ought to have ended him; but as a Catholic I held back my Arm, that he might
save his Soul; for to hinder a dying man of Confession, is to out-brave Impiety
it self, and follow the Offender into Hell with my Revenge, and without doubt
it hardens the Heart of God against such a one, when he shall demand Mercy:
therefore hearing Horses at a distance, that I might not be discovered, I
mounted and rode away, and as I rid I considered what was to be done
hence-forward, and considering with my self that to kill my Wife, would be to
publish the Infamy as done, which was but just conceived in Thought, and by
that our Family would lose its ancient Luster, I thought it a better Revenge to
deprive her of my sight for ever; and with this Resolution in a short time I
overtook my Servants, to whom I said, that on a Discourse of nothing we had had
some few words, and that his Opiniatism had afronted me by his using some
uncivil Language, on which we fought, and in which Fight I had killed him, so
that I would not have it known in Barcelona that I had left Madrid, but in
disguise enter the Town, and so Embark for Italy, or some foreign Country; and
hearing of these Galleys, I addressed my self to the Captain of this Gally, who
has been very civil to me; but amidst all the Civilities he has shown, there
is none I esteem more than having placed you so near me: But now see, continued
he, if any Misfortune can be greater than mine, that loving (for I must own
still I adore her) my Wife, I am forced never to see her more; while every one
thinks perhaps, there being so many High-way-men here abouts, that I am fallen
into some such hands, and murdered: Ah! I would to God it were so, or that it
had been a common Soul to have born this Affront, that had not the loss of his
Honor so imprinted in his Soul; that yet sometimes a Thought of Revenge will
break through the Walls of Love, and makes me sometimes wish I had served my
Wife, as I did Federico.

With Reason did Ricardo admire the strange Story Enrique told, which began
their Acquaintance, and continued, so that being Arrived at Naples they
resolved not to part, but to Travel together: And having seen all the
Curiosities of that stately City, they past by Civita Vecchia to Rome, where
Ricardo took Money for his Journey upon his Bills of Exchange, and when they
had kissed the Pope's Feet, and seen those innumerable things worthy of Remark
in this famous City, they departed, with intention to go to Loretta, and visit
that House, where so many thousands daily come out of Devotion; but as they
were going into the Church, he was stopped by a Man on his Knees, who cried out,
Forgive me, Sir, whatever I have offended you in; I am heartily sorry, and
must own it is only in your vast Generosity and known Goodness I trust. This
startled Ricardo, but Reflecting, he remembered Don Fulgentio Antonio's Voice,
and bidding him Rise, he told him he would freely forgive him, and so walking into
the Church, where after they had done their Devotions, and satisfied their
Curiosity, they Retired to their Lodgings, and while Dinner was getting ready,
Ricardo desired Fulgentio to Relate to him the Occasion of his Travels, and as
far as might be known, the cause of his visiting this Place of Devotion; which
he consented to do, on his Promise that all past Actions should be forgot; and
thus began:

The History of Don Fulgentio Antonio.
MY Pretensions to Donna Clara Lisarda you are sufficiently acquainted with;
how earnestly I loved, it is hardly possible in my Opinion to Comprehend; this
has been the Cause of all my Misfortunes which happened, as follows:

After my mistake was discovered when I met you on the Road, such a Raging
Madness possessed my Soul, that had it not been Envy and a desire of Revenge, I
had certainly ended my Life by laying violent hands on my self, where there lay
no fault; for your too great Generosity as it made me appear a Villain, so my
Villainy made it appear the more resplendent amidst all my rash Actions, by
which any other man, less good than your self, so often as Fortune favored you
with the Opportunity, would have made use of your Victory; (so far was you from
deserving any blame) that you never so much as offered to satisfy a Revenge
that might have grown in any other Breast.

After I found that instead of Lisarda I had married Clara, finding by what you
said, and Clara, that you went in search of Lisarda, I presently drove to a
Village of mine, where with the Offers of a Reward I got eight of my Servants
to wait your Return, giving Clara a thousand sweet words lest she might
obstruct my Design. I left her in the Village while we, well Mounted and Armed,
waited your Return on the Road, where you know how we rid away with the Coach:
I hoping by this to confirm her in the Belief of your Infidelity; and if not to
get my own Ends at least, to dispose her never to make you happy While we were
on the way I used my Rhetoric, with all the Vows and Protestations imaginable,
after my endeavors of dissuading her from you; then I told her that now 'twas
in my power whither I Would carry her, and how I Would dispose of her; and therefore
she had better comply than venture the Displeasure of a choleric Man: But all
this produced nothing but Scorn and Slights from her, telling me no Man should
ever have her, except Ricardo, who, however the Misfortune happened that Night,
she was sensible he loved her, and was one deserving her love. I told her you
were killed in the Skirmish. With that a Flood of Tears dropped from her Eyes; O
ye Powers said she! Then is Ricardo dead, and dare thou Villain, who has
been the cause, appear before me? go, know I loath Thee, and that now I Will die
a Maid, and ever bemoan the loss of that brave Man. But then is he dead, said
she, and the Cause so near me yet lives! Snatching my Dagger from my side, gave
me a Wound in my Breast, that had certainly killed me had her Arm had but a
little more strength: At last, when I saw nothing could prevail, and that in
her Company I endangered my Life, I bethought my self of carrying her to a
Country House I had, where I would keep her some time, to see if I possibly
could gain her by all the Endeavors that Love and Kindness could invent; which
I did, and resolving not to stay with her, but to absent my self awhile, giving
strict Orders to my Servants not to let her escape, but withal, to let her have
all she could demand. I returned to Clara, who daily so endeavored to make me
love her; and considering I was married, and that I had best to make my Life as
easy as I could: In two Months time seeing no hope of prevailing on Lasarda,
Clara had so far gained me, that I really felt Motions of the greatest
Tenderness for her; and as they say, Love begets Love, so was it with me; I
left plying Lisarda with Letters, and began to forget her, and to have my
Thoughts wholly taken up by Clara: So that at last I took Coach and went to
visit Lisarda; and having heard that after you was healed, you went to Travel,
told her what I knew, which so Rejoiced her, that she easily pardoned me for
all things past, and so ordering a Coach, I had her conveyed to Town, where she
remains in her Fathers House. With what Pleasure Ricardo heard all this, is not
to be expressed, but it was plainly seen by his change of Countenance, for now
he had recovered a certain Gaiety and Briskness common to him before his
Misfortune: But Dinner coming up stopped the Procedure of Fulgentio's relation.
Don Enrique all the while at Dinner perceived such Alacrity in Don Ricardo's
Looks, and observing the many Questions he asked Don Fulgentio of Lisarda's
Health, etc. that he easily perceived the Pleasure he took in hearing of her,
and so began her Health, for which Don Ricardo thanked him; but no sooner was
Dinner ended, but Fulgentio was desired to continue his Relation; which was
thus:

After I had got Lisarda's Pardon, and heard she was safe at her Fathers, my
Love increased so much toward Clara, that I don't know whether I could have
thought my self happier with any one. She sent to her Relations, who were
overjoyed at her good Fortune, in getting a Husband after her miscarriage, and
one of my Quality; they made her an indifferent Portion: But as I loved her, so
did I grow jealous of her, remembering she had been faulty, and having one Night
stayed out, the next Morning a Servant told me he had seen a Man enter into my
House, that was but just gone before my coming, who with all their Privacy in
bringing him in and out, could not escape his Eyes: I without any further
assurance, thought it must be Clara that was faulty, and there-withal going to
her, though she lay asleep, waked her with a thousand Reproaches, upbraiding
her with her former Life; and maugre all the Assurances and Protestations she
made, to such a height my Choler grew, that I struck her, she all the while
with Tears and pitying avouching her Innocence, desiring me to make further
enquiry ere I proceeded so rashly to accuse her; but I was deaf to all she
said, and insensible with Rage, still continuing my ill usage: At last putting
on her Night Gown, she came near a Table where a Penknife lay, and taking it
up, gave her self several Stabs, and then said; Sir, I own I never was worthy
of you, I own my Faults with which you upbraid me, but these being the last
words which I shall speak, be satisfied I am innocent as to what you now accuse
me. Just as she was repeating these words, in came the Maid that waited on her
in her Chamber, and seeing the Tragedy of her Mistress, and having heard at the
Door part of our Discourse, she cried, O, Sir! what have you done? 'Twas I
brought in the Man last Night, who is my Husband, though my Marriage was
unknown till now. Hearing this, I had no Patience; I sent for Surgeons, and in
the mean time we endeavored to tie up her Wounds: A thousand times I asked her
Pardon; to which she answered, Alas! Sir, I forgive you, but it is too late for
Remedy, I find my fleeting Soul departing from my Body; but with much ease I
die, since you are satisfied, and love me still; Then drawing me by my and, she
brought my lips to hers, and immediately died. This is the Misfortune has
brought me hither, to make Atonement for all my Sins, of which I hope God will
accept.

No sooner had he ended this Relation, but Ricardo begged of Enrique to
accompany him to Andaluzia, where he might be safe in his House from the search
the Law made after him, which he consented to; so leaving the penitent
Fulgentio to finish his Romery, they in all haste Rid toward Florence, and
Arriving at Leghorn, opportunely found a Ship bound for Barcelona; they went
Aboard, and having a fair Wind, in little time Arrived at their wished for
Haven; but Enrique not willing to land at Barcelona for fear of being known,
they were set ashore at Monserrate, a place where crowds of all sorts of People
flock to pay their Devotions to an Image, by whom they suppose many Miracles
wrought, called, Our Lady of Monserrate; but no sooner were they come into the
Inn, and a little rested their selves, but leaning out of the Window, Enrique
saw a Litter stop at the Door of the Inn where they lodged, six Servants
attending it, and as the Master, a Gentleman very fine; but no sooner had he
seen two Ladies step out of the Litter, but Ricardo observed he changed his
Color, and remained Confused, Melancholy and Thoughtful; and Reflecting on
this, asked him, What was the matter? When he answered in a great Passion; Sir,
What shall I say? Or, what can sufficiently express my Misfortune; if I see
come out of that Litter the infamous base Estefania, with my Enemy Don
Federico. Ricardo prayed him to consider and be advised, to do nothing rashly:
These things, says he, ought to be governed with Prudence, otherwise consider
what Scandal your Passion may bring upon your Family. Therefore says he, Let
me advertize you to be quiet, and not to disturb your self; be satisfied you
have a Friend by your side, who to satisfy the least Scruple of your Honor,
would lose many Lives. With this he came a little to himself. The place being
but small, and the People many that flock thither, they could not get
Accommodations in the House. Ricardo locking Enrique in a Room, desired he
might have the management of this Affair, lest he in his Passion might do what
with Reason he might Repent hereafter; and then going down to the Litter, he
desired they would be pleased to accept of his Quarters, till the Servants
might find some more Commodious; which Offer they kindly accepted of, and Don
Ricardo brought them into a Dining Room that joined to that Enrique was locked
in; of which Enrique was presently advertized: so that harkening at the
Keyhole, he heard the following Discourse. Ricardo after some Complements
past, craved the Honor that they would let that Chance be the beginning of an
Acquaintance and Friendship between them, which he should highly value: They
answered him, The greatest Pleasure and Satisfaction would be theirs; and then
enquired where he was going, and from whence he came. To the first he answered,
He was going to Andaluzia: And to the second, That he came from Italy, and that
only for the sake of two Years Traveling, and Diverting himself. Hardly had
Donna Estefania heard him name Italy, but turning to her Sister, and Federico,
said, To the best of my remembrance, it is there-abouts, though each Day has
seemed an Eternity, that my dear Don Enrique has been wanting, and according
to what I have heard traveled that same way. So many are the Spaniards in that
Country, replied Ricardo, and so many I have been there acquainted with, that
it is strange I have not met with him. His Name is Don Enrique, said Donna
Estefania, with Tears trickling down her Cheeks. Ricardo having this Occasion,
told her, He knew him very well, and that he had been his Companion many Miles;
and the Reason, as he told me, that he stayed at Milain, was a Business of
Honor that Banished him from his Country, and without hopes of Return. Donna
Estefania hearing this, could not longer bear with her excessive Grief; so that
giving a great Sigh, she would have spoke, but Federico desiring her to be
Patient, craved her leave to tell the Story, as the best Witness of the
Misfortune.

The Haps and Rencounter of this World are sometimes no less strange than
difficult to Penetrate: and that you may give notice to her Friend Don Enrique,
how much to his own and his Ladies Disquiet he is deceived, as also of my
Innocence, Sir, I must first acquaint you that Valladoled is the Place where I
first breathed, and having been affronted there in such a manner, that I was
Obliged in defense of my Honor, having an Opportunity to write my Displeasure
in his Face, and marking him for one of a forwarder Tongue than Courage, my
Friends fearing the Consequence, his Quality and Interest being Great, they
sent me to Barcelona, to avoid those Troubles that might follow; where after
Hunting, one Evening, by a Storm I was forced to put into a House upon the
Road, and discoursing of what is most common to young Men; Love I mean, (to a
Gentleman, who by the Tokens I gave of him, we know to be Don Enrique;) I
chanced to tell the Story of my Amors with a Lady, whose Name I did not know,
nor could I describe any more than the inside of the House, her Care having
been such, that I was carried in and out in a Chair close on every side, when
ever I was honored to see her at her Dwelling. This Lady Donna Angela, the
Sister of Donna Estefania is the Person whom Donna Estefania had invited to
stay with her, during the Absence of her Husband, and that directed by her
Stars, and not my Deserts, loved me: But one Day seeing one of the Chair-men, I
asked a Neighbor whose Livery that was, and telling me it was Donna
Estefania's, I supposed that to be the Name of the Person that I loved, and
naming her so to Don Enrique; this occasioned all our Misfortune, for he as we
were the next day Riding hither, drew, etc.

Here Don Enrique not having any longer Patience, but overjoyed to hear his
Wife was innocent; as Ricardo was a-going to surprise them by opening the Door,
and giving Donna Estefania a sight of what she so much loved, burst it open
with his Foot, and running to his Wife, Embraced her, begging Pardon for his
Suspicion and Jealousy; then turning to Federico, begged his also: And thus
was their Melancholy turned into the greatest Ecstasie of Joy; then Donna
Estefania told him that he must wish Joy to her Sister and Don Federico, who
were Man and Wife; which he did, being very well pleased with the Match: Then
Supper was brought up, and having supped, Enrique enquired further of the
Story, and Federico told him, that he wounded him extremely, but by the
Assistance of some Shepherds he was brought to Town, but lay under the
Surgeon's hands three Months; and the thing coming to be known who was the
Author of that Deed, it was talked about the Town as if Donna Estefania had
dishonored you, which made us make an end the sooner of our Courtship and
marry; and then having the liberty to tell the Story, we cleared both you and
your Lady, and the Town were satisfied. Having ended their Discourse, Ricardo
told Enrique, That though he lost the Satisfaction of having his Company on the
Road, yet he hoped he might have the Honor of their coming to his Nuptials;
and though he could not expect them to go immediately, yet, said he, It may be
an agreeable Divertizement for them to go as far into the Country as his Abode,
where though he could promise them no great Entertainment, yet they should be
heartily Welcome, and he thought the Company of that loving Pair would
extremely Grace his Marriage, which he hoped would be shortly Celebrated: Then
Donna Angela desired to know if she might be acquainted with his Mistresses
Name, which he told her was Lisarda; O then, Sir, says she, you may safely
depend on your Marriage, for by her Name I guess yours to be Don Ricardo
Antonio, the only Person she has told me should be her Husband; for about
three Months ago I came acquainted with her here, she having vowed the Romery
for your Prosperity; we became so intimately acquainted lodging in the same
Inn together, that she told me the whole Story of your Loves. After this
Ricardo made a Complement to Federico of his Bed for himself and his Lady, and
Enrique with his Lady betook themselves to his own; and Ricardo getting not
quite so fitting a Lodging for a Lady, retired contentedly to it, and in the
Morning early getting up, got his Horse in a readiness; when his Friends were
just beginning to stir, he took leave of them, with their Promise to follow
him, and sets forward for Andaluzia.

Love has Wings, and never did he accomplish a Journey in so short a time. It
was about 11 at Night when he entered the Town, and perceiving some Gentlemen at
the Door of Donna Clara Lisarda's House, tuning their Instruments, by which he
knew they had a mind to Divert some Lady; he at a distance alighted off his
Horse, desirous, if it was possible, to know who these were, serenading, as he
thought, his Mistress: Therefore by chance finding the next Door open, he
entered as if it were his own house, and so putting himself behind the Door,
unperceived by them, he heard their Song and Music, which was no sooner ended,
but he heard the Lady shut her Window; the Company took leave of one another,
and one who seemed to be the Master of this Treat, mounted a Horseback: Don
Ricardo, though tired with a long Journey, and very desirous to see Don Pedro
de Vargas the Corregidor, yet more desirous to see his supposed Rival, he
mounted his Horse with intention to follow him; but of a sudden he saw himself
surrounded with six men, who asked him, Whether he would part with his Money or
his Life; Ricardo more angered at their hindering his Design, than their
Audacity, gave no other Reply, but shot and killed one of them, the rest set
upon him, but he defended himself so well, till his supposed Rival, not yet got
so far off, but that he heard the Noise they made, was returned, by which the
Rogues forgot the thoughts of Booty, and endeavored to save their Lives by
running: And Don Ricardo thus freed, turning to thank the Gentleman, knew him
for his Cousin Don Pedro the Corregidor. Great were their Joy, for seeing each
other, throwing themselves about one another Neck, and embracing. They were no
sooner got home, but they went to Bed, for at Don Pedro's desire, he stayed
there, it being late; but Don Ricardo had his Thoughts so busily employed on
Lisarda, that gave him leave but just to satisfy Nature with Sleep; awaking
early in the Morning, he presently was for going to visit, or at least write to
Lisarda; still entertaining himself with the Hopes of her Constancy; although
now and then the Serenade he had heard, and at her House, would interrupt him
in the most pleasing Thoughts; and his hearing the Window shut, made him
conceive that the Serenaded Person was not displeased with the Complement; but
then again, other Reasons and other Thoughts dissuaded him from his Jealousy.
Don Pedro's desire to enjoy his Cousins Company awhile, made him early to give
him a Visit; but coming to his Chamber, and finding him already dressed, he said,
giving him the Good Morrow, you are as early Dressed, as if you Divined the
Happiness you shall have to Day, of enjoying the Company of your Mistress, who
without doubt, to your great Joy, I Will tell you, loves with an unparalleled
Constancy; but withal I must tell you, you are not the only happy Man, for I
also, who by visiting Lisarda, to excuse first the Mistake, and next to
Persuade her to a Liking of you, her Cousin Donna Maria several times happening
to be there, Glanced such Flames from her Eyes, that she fired my Soul, and I
am become her Adorer; who I had just serenaded as I met with you. Don Ricardo
asked then where she dwelt; who told him, That since their House was burnt, they
laid in the same House with Donna Lisarda; but because it is something early, I
will tell you an Adventure which will entertain us till it may be time for us
to Visit the Ladies.

The History of the Loves of Don Roderigo and Don Pedro, to Donna Maria.
AFter your Departure, dear Cousin, which being so privately, we were extremely
troubled, lest your melancholy Thoughts might have made you Injure your self,
and not knowing what was become of you, the whole Town was so Concerned, they
cried out for Revenge on the Villains who we supposed had misused you, and
killed those that were brought home with you; but finding no Evidence against
them, but their own Confessions, was, That they at the Noise coming out of
their Houses found the Murderers gone, and you all on the Ground, who they
supposed Dead; that they would have taken your Clothes and Money, and to that
end carried you to their House; besides receiving a Letter from Don Fulgentio,
brought by the fair Lisarda, that discharged them of the Murder. I was going to
pass Sentence on them for a years Imprisonment, when Donna Maria, whose Vassals
they were, begged, or rather commanded their Freedom. 'Twas first here I began
to Admire; but afterward, as I have told you, Visiting Donna Lisarda, and
seeing her there, I began to Adore those extraordinary Perfections and
Accomplishments I found in her: Here began I to know the Happiness of Loving,
and being Beloved; for both her Parents and she liked me, my Quality and Estate
being both very great: But, Sir, Crosses are things inseparable from Love, and
I must also have my share; I had Don Roderigo Vasques for my Rival, a Man whose
Tongue stands him in much stead, since without ever drawing his Sword, no Duel,
no gallant Actions are performed, but he makes himself the Owner, and draws all
the Reputation of them to himself, and that with such Cunning and Subtilty,
that long time he had undeservingly the Name of a Hero. My Courage
sufficiently known in many famous Exploits for the Service of the King, All
Governors of Towns in Spain carry a Wand in token of their Office.
and that has gained me this Honorable Verge, was Eclipsed by this false
Light; and Donna Maria, a Woman of an Heroic Spirit, seemed at the same time
the Match was making between us, to lend him her Ear readier than to any other;
such was his Cunning and his Art in deceiving and inventing new Deceits, that I
was almost afraid he would Cheat me of my Mistress: But one Day, it happened
well for me, (since no further harm was done.) We were standing and discoursing
some other Gentleman, when news was brought us Donna Maria's house was in a
Flame; we all ran to the Assistance of that Family: But Gods! What Terror was
it for me to see Donna Maria in the Balcony, (the House being surrounded by the
Fire,) begging Aid to help her from perishing; eagerly I ran through the Flame,
and getting up Stairs, luckily found a Bar of Iron, with which I broke a Hole
through the Wall; then snatching her up in my Arms, I carried her through that
Hole, which the Fire had not yet reached, and gave her into her Father's Arms.
The Fright, the Noise, and Fear they were in, would not permit them to take
notice of me; and I remembering her Woman was left behind, went to venture a
second time, but met Roderigo bringing her through the same Hole, who fearful
of the Flames, had got a Ladder, by which he got into the Balcony to help off
Donna Maria's Woman; and seeing that my help was no further needed, went away
about my Occasions, not to be troublesome at such a busy time. But Don
Roderigo carried the Woman where her Lady was, and just come to her self, for
the Smoke and Fright put her into a Swoon, in which Condition I took her,
carried her to her Father, and left her: She seeing him doing that good Office
to her Woman, supposed it was him that had done the same for her; and truly
with the Noise and Fright, her Friends took not so much Notice as to be able to
do me Justice; so that in Recompense of his saving her Life, (as she supposed)
She with her Friends Vowed to be his; He with a feigned Modesty, said, That he
truly had done nothing for their Service, at least, it was so little, as did
not deserve Thanks from her Mouth, much less so great a Blessing as Her self;
but it was too great a Good to be refused, and that he now trusted to her Word.

The next Day it was all about the Town that Don Roderigo had ventured through
the Fire, and rescued Donna Maria: This was every bodies story which did not a
little vex me. I affirmed the Action to be mine, and that he ly'd who said the
contrary. Don Roderigo said, Yes it was I did it; but that with such a false
Smile, such a feigned Dissimulation, and with such Equivocating words, that he
owned the Action more in his Denial than I in all my Affirmatives; but what did
comfort me, was, I had a Witness in my Pocket, that though it was Inanimate,
with Donna Maria I was sure would confute my Rival. Sir, it was a Ring I took
off her Finger as I carried her out of the Fire; and therefore to do my self
Justice, I went to give her Father a Visit, who now were all in Donna Lisarda's
House; and desiring to see Donna Maria, and telling her the Truth, the Ring
gave it Credit, with the Promise to me she had given to Roderigo; the story now
was turned, and it was made known throughout the Town, how falsely Don Roderigo
claimed the Honor of that Action; so that through shame he was fain to leave
the Town, and retire to a Seat he has in the Country where he still continues.

Having thus ended his Story, Don Ricardo being desirous to see his Lisarda,
they went together, but the Joy Lisarda had at the sight of Ricardo, cannot be
expressed, no more than his at the sight of her. But to be short with you, and to
make an end; both his Marriage with Lisarda, and his Cousins with Donna Maria
were concluded, and to be Celebrated both the Sunday following; On the Day
before the Marriage, Don Enrique and Don Federico, with their Ladies Arrived,
so that they had a full House, great Entertainment, and a long continued Feast
for Joy, and living very lovingly and happily all the Days of their Lives.

FINIS.
ERRATA
PAge 5. l. 24. leave out yet, p. 10. l. 17. leave out know, l. 14. for I, read
she, l. 24. leave out this she desires, p. 26. l. 16. r. knowing, p. 28. l. 22.
r. she said, p. 29. l. 25, 26. leave out going, p. 33. l. 3, 4. r. Fulgentio,
ibid. r. he would do well, etc. p. 34. l. 20. r. presented, p. 36. l. 5, 6. r. how
happy, etc. p. 43. l. 7, r. I have left sufficient space, etc. p. 48. l. 23. r.
who desired him, etc. p. 56. l. 16. r. I had fared, p. 58. l. 16. r. and so I
might go, etc. p. 60. l. 16. r. Souls, p. 63. l. 8, 9. r. Arcos, p. 67. l. 17.
r. in it, p. 81. l. 13. r. to his friend.


