THE CRIMES AND TREASONS OF ARCHIBALD JOHNSTON, Lord WARISTON.

One of the Grandees of the SCOTCH REBELS And President of the late Committee
of SAFETY under LAMBERT Now condemned, and to be executed at Edinburgh
Wednesday July 22.

Raro antecedentem scelestum
Deseruit pede poena claudo.
Horat. London, Printed for T. R. 1663.

THE CRIMES and TREASONS OF ARCHIBALD JOHNSTON, Lord Wariston, etc.
THe Deserved Fate of this Disloyal and perfidious Politicians, which has such
an aspect upon the late Usurpation, and the justice and happiness of these
Times, does so well deserve a Memorial, though in a summary and short account,
(and that for the Honor also of his Country, which does hereby expiate the
remaining guilt of that Religious and pious Rebellion, begun and fostred by the
rest of this man's Accomplices) that it is a requisite duty to the public to
particularize the practices of this puny Matchiavil, during our late and
horrible Confusions; following the method and traces of divine Vengeance, that
has singled him so remarkably out, and delivered him tot the Laws, that the
world may know, and fear, and tremble, at the unevitable and righteous
recompense of wicked men.

Of all persons, who according to Scripture phrase, may be said to have Sold
themselves to work wickedness; there is none but two in the 3 Kingdoms that
can be compared to him: and those were Bradshaw and Cook, who set a price on
their Villainy, and had their reward, and are gone without perplexing our
Charity, to their own places; This Lord Wariston was one of the same Robe, an
Eminent Lawyer in this Kingdom, and preferred by the Committee of Estates, At
the instance and presentment of the Kirk, during the late Interregnum, to be
the Custos or Magister Rotutorum, or Lord Roguster or Keeper of the Rolls:
having given specious proofs of his zealous fondness to the Presbyterian most
Rigid and Severest Discipline.

He was a great Confident and Privado likewise of the Marquess of Argyles,
under whose clientele and Patronage, he listed himself, and proffered and
performed his most officious services to that man's designs; he being the
Chieftain and sole supreme Head of those, who ran-counter to the interest of
the King in this Nation; and which is not to be omitted, a most violent Enemy
of the glorious and immortal Marquess of Montrosse; Nor did he fail of any
obsequious insinuations and endearments thereby to carve himself a part in those
his projected spoils of Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, and the Crown it self.

But Providence altering the management of the Government in this Kingdom, and
taking it from a cunning by devolving it to a violent Usurpation; the Kirk and
Committee of Estates, with the General Assembly, being altogether abolished by
the English conquest, which justly punished their most Tyrannical insolence
upon the Conscience and Estates of their fellow Subjects, by bringing upon
their heads an Evil adaequate to their Crimes and Treasons; (for what was
formerly infflicted upon the Jews, who made their Argument of Venient Romani,
the Romans will come, a pretense to their Murder of the Messiah; was anew
Executed upon these Scots, who having made the Venient Ritus Anglicani, the
Rites of the Church of England will come in among us and destroy the Kirk, a
pretense and mask to the Rebellion against the Kings Authority, were now
retaliated and punished with the victorious Arms (Venient exercitus Anglicani)
of the new founded English Commonwealth, which these very men had helped to
raise to this formidable greatness.) I say when this grand mutation was
brought about, then did Wariston consult and look out for a better and surer
interest, where he might bestow his perfidious endeavors, with the greatest
profit and advantage.

For whereas he had mancipated himself to Argile, and linkt himself in a manner
to him by most scelerate and strange combinations, he now estranged himself
from him; but suffering him to continue the most notable and greatest of the
Kirks party he set up for himself here, with these Grandees of England mounting
in Degree and Trust above his former Master, as Mr. Thurloe did to St. John's,
and became afterward there, Olivers Scotch Secretary of State, and continued
in it all along to the very time of the Restitution; and therefore to discover
all his villainy, it will be necessary to deduce him in a brief History, through
the following times.

He appeared a main stickler first with that party, who opposed the agreement
with the King at Bredah, and would have had his Majesty tied and obliged to
more undutiful and disloyal Conditions (though those were unparalleld) before
his return into that Kingdom, in 1650. (like some of our States men in 1659.
upon a more happy and grand Revolution:) and when that could not be hindered,
the more numerous party of the Parliament proving so honest, as to come to the
intended conclusion of that affair; yet did he and his faction so oppose the
power of the Kirk to the Kings Authority, and to cry it up as supreme, to such
a diminution of Majesty, that the King was no more then a mere shadow of their
brightness and greatness, nor could exercise any part of the Royal Dignity
without their approbation and allowance.

And to this tenor of deportment did the Faction continue, even after the
English Army were advanced into Scotland, by which means such misunderstandings
and divisions were arisen among the Nobility, and fomented by Cromwell, that
there was little hopes of escaping that ruin which soon after ensued. This
very fellow and some few more, such as Col. Ker, and Straughan, Sir John
Cheisly, and some Ministers, styled the Western Remonstrants, running out into
such treasonable Declaratory Expressions, that they would not own the Kings
Quarrel and Interest, and that it was the cause of all the Evil and Troubles
that at present afflicted the Nation, and that the King had been called in
without confession and satisfaction, and the like saucy Dictates, and
Penance-Injunctions of this worse then Roman Kirk.

To this treasonable sense, to avoid a defection of such a considerable
strength, who would by no means admit of other way, nor would join with the
Loyal party at any rate, an Answer was sent to Cromwell by way of a
Declaration; and thereupon ensued their lamentable and just defeat at Dunbar,
which notwithstanding that it did clearly indigitate and point at this their
undutifulnesse, yet did this same party continue in the same impious practices,
even to the conspiring the seizure of the King, (who upon some such obscure
intimation, did for a while withdraw himself out of their Clutches) and
betraying and delivering him, as they had done his Blessed Father, into the
hands of the English, for another rounder sum of money, which Treason they
would have veiled still by the Covenant, to their interpretation whereof the
King must be submitted. And in this damnable Intrigue, this Lord Warrieston
had a principal hand, as by his succeeding actions plainly appeared.

For Edinburgh Castle being surrendered to Cromwell by his fellow Traitor
Dundasse the Governor thereof, who had Articled for the Transportation and
secure conveyance of all the Records and writings belonging to the Kingdom)
which were deposited there) to Sterling, or some other place in the Kings
possession, which were contrary to the said Articles detained for a while, with
some other precious Goods and Movables; Warrieston, as it was belonging to his
office, was sent to Edinburgh to dispute the matter, and to gain and recover
the said Rolls.

This advantage of nearer converse with Cromwell proffering it self, when as
before it was very dangerous, he omitted net to prosecute; for being with a
safe conduct admitted into that City, in stead of contesting for his
Sovereignty, and his Countries right; he underhand agreed with those Money
Masters, to do them what service he could in facilitating their war, which
being like to prove cold and frosty work in that Northern clymate, did sadden
their premature thoughts, and over credulous and hasty hopes of a full and
plenary Conquest of that Nation.

In the mean time the Western Remonstrants growing more Malapart, several of
them were called to answer their bold and impudent Contumelies of the Kings
Authority, and that under pain of Excommunication by the better taught Kirk;
and among those this Gentleman the^ practicing the civil jugle at Edinburgh,
with some others of that Tribe was summoned, but upon some consideration, while
the whole cabat of this traiterous faction should be better and more fully
elucidated, and the writings if possibly, as the earnest and gloze of his
Treason recovered; he was respited a while: but according to expectation, the
said writings being come to Sterling, he with Abernethy, the Lord Swinton and
the rest before mentioned, were soon after declared Excommunicates, and
reserved for the future justice of the Laws.

But Warieston escaped that by the wonderful and successful progress of the
English Armies (in whose quarters he resolved after a suddden short appearance
at Sterling, to communicate his practices with his Gang, and learn the Kings
Councels from them, to continue for the future) whose invasion he seemed to
quarrel from Christian grounds, and to desire an amicable debate according to
the Scriptures and the Covenant, professing with great shows of devotion his
renuntiation of the Kings Interest, for which all these Evils, he said, had
befallen them. By which means he kept and intended to foment the former
divisions according to the instructions of his Treason by Cromwell, in that
Nation.

The consequence of which scelerate practice, being reduced by a near conquest
to a lesser and particular design, which was to keep the Scots now subdued in
perpetual discords and misunderstandings, on a religious, as formerly on a
civil account; Warreston was the only fit man resolved on to prosecute the
Cabel, and to hold sides with the Remonstrants, who had annulled by their
assumed pretended Authority, all that the Kirk had done and ratified in their
conclusion with the King at Bredah; and by the same magisterial power, Fasts
and Humiliations upon that Treasonable occasion were thereby enjoined; and this
promoted on purpose to make easy work for the English Usurpers, who by this
though partial renunciation of the King by the Scots themselves in that quality
as the supreme power, had the less work to do toward their total abolition of
it, in which this Conspirator was mainly instrumental in all the changes and
vicissitudes afterward.

In the year 1652. the Juncto at Westminster having made in a manner a total
Conquest of Scotland, by their Commissioners deputed on that behalf, proceeded
to the Union of that with this Kingdom, which having been a frustraneous
enterprise in the Reign of King James, and proving but a mere politic notion
and speculation was now in a kind effected. By which means they intended to
assure that Kingdom by the specious shows of liberty, now made a Commonwealth,
from ever returning to its ancient Regal and Legal Government. Against this
Warreston, with all the Remonstrants, who liked not their total devestiture of
power, directly opposed themselves; but Warreston as employed by our States to
dive into the secrets of all that party which he seemed to Head, and to reveal
all the Machinations, as well theirs or others which might be intended to the
recovery of his Country from the slavery they suffered from those Usurpers.

That same Union being at last accomplished by Oliver, no man was more re^dy to
comply with the constitution of it, to that purpose getting himself returned a
Member for the Parliament of the Three Commonwealths, as the establishment then
was; Thirty being allotted respectively for Scotland and Ireland; and in these
Assemblies and Conventions, which were very frequent in these times, he was
sure to make one of the chief for his Nation, where he learned the knack of
catering for himself, by complying with the most destructive Councels and
Designs of the prevailing party, therewith insinuating into their familiarity
and confidence, by most vile Parasitical officers and demerencies of their
respects and notice of him; insomuch that he grasped most of the important
transactions of the Scotch affairs here, which he prostituted to the will of
the Usurper, into his own management, and disposal.

But the greatest remarque of these his wicked Acts here, was manifestin the
broyl betwixt Lambert and the Rump, wherein he was so great a Favorite of that
Commander, that upon the erection of his Commit of Safety, this man was made
President thereof pro tempore, which place he discharged chiefly in serving
himself, and the pleasure and will of that Dictator: but the story of his
fawning and most abject sordidnesse herein, is so largely described in a Play
called the Rump, that there needs not any additional brand infamous note from
this Bead roll of his impieties.

All that shall be said further of him on that account, is, that his Devices to
make insurrections and new Troubles in Scotland by his laboring the
Remonstrants and that party to a defection from General Monck then advancing
against Lambert, were such rank and pestilent Treasons, that the discovery of
them showed the desperate wickedness of his Heart, and made the Noble General
be his remembrancer for his due reward, to the Rump, in his speech to them at
Westminster; but that, providence was pleased to reserve to a juster hand, and
more due infliction afterward; that his original and principal guilt against
the King might finally be punished and a^enged by his Royal Justice.

Which hoping to avoid, he secretly fled out of Scotland (whether he sneaked
from his greatness at Westminster) over into France, hoping to find shelter in
that populous Kingdom; being pursued with a Proclamation and an Act of
Attainder and Confiscation, together with the abovementioned Col. Dundass and
others, and Condemned for his most notorious and evident Treasons.

There he lurked a while till his just destiny discovered him to some of his
own Nation, who made inquest after him, (an account whereof has been already
given) and sent him with a guard over to Dover, whence he was conveyed to the
Tower by His Majesty's Order, and not long after shipped for Edinburgh in one
of the Kings Frigots in order to his Execution. At his Arrival he was committed
prisoner to Edinburgh Castle, where the low spirited wretch kept such a Howling
and Whining Lamentation, affrighted with the monstrous shame of his crimes, or
Fear of Death, that he looked almost like a Changeling, by which means his
Friends (of whom he has very few) and Relations procured a short respit for
his Life, that he might be the fitter for his death.

Upon his appearance at the Bar of the Parliament, and demanded what he had to
say for himself why the sentence should not be excuted; he in a miserable
strange posture fell a denying any intention of evil to the King, and that over
and over again to the trouble and Din of the Judges and Hearers; then he
desired a Copy of his sentence, which was likewise denied him, as derogating
from the Authority of the Parliament, whose wisdom and justice would not
admit any debate of it, and so he was commanded to prepare a final answer to
the point of Execution, which yet remained to be done; and which will assuredly
overtake him, to the magnifying the Divine Justice, and the expiation of those
many pollutions this man's iniquity brought upon this Land, and to the Terror
of all evil Doers, and such pernicious obstinate Traitors for the time to come.

FINIS.

