AT THE RED BALL ON CORK-HILL, There is to be Sold, by JOHN CRIGHTON
Perriwigmaker,
THE Rich Balsamum Apoplecticum which is made in Florence and some other parts
of Italy; by anointing the Temples, Nostrils and the Roof of the Mouth it has
recovered many out of an Apoplexy to admiration.

By anointing the Temples and Nostrils it gives present Ease to the violent
Pains in the Head: likewise very effectual against all Swimming and Dizziness
of the Head; and very rare in suppressing all Vapou^s and Fumes from the Head
occasioned by hard Drinking. All which has been experienced by many to their
great satisfaction.

By anointing the Nostrils only, it is very rare against the Infection of the
Small Pox, Spotted-Feaver and the Plague; and defends the Head and Stomach from
all thick and unwholsom Air, which is often times the first cause of all those
Distempers. It revives the Senses; and is a great Comforter of the Brain.

By anointing the Navel only, It gives present Ease to the Griping of the Guts;
and is very rare in destroying Worms in young and old; which is very convenient
for Children and others which can take nothing inwardly.

And very pleasant to carry in the Pocket, in regard of its Noble and
Odoriferous Scent.

For Eighteen Pence a Box.

Nulla Notitia ut Experientia.

To prevent its being Counterfeited, it will be Sold only at the place
abovesaid.

There is likewise sold all sorts of extraordinary good Chockolett and
Chockolett-Almonds, at Five Shillings the Pound: There is also very good Tee to
be sold: All sorts of right Spanish Snuff; and all sorts of Essences and
Perfumes at reasonable Rates.

There is also sold the Queen of Hungaries Water.

All sorts of good Spirit Varnish at Six shillings the Quart.

All sorts of the best New Tunes and their Parts, at Two pence a Part for
Violins, Flutes or Flagellets.

There is likewise to be had an incomparable Water to remedy Baldness, or to
make Hair grow, never before made public; and now exposed to Sale. It is
almost infallible in bringing Hair on any bald place on the Heads of Men or
Women: It is wonderful in making Hair stay on that is falling, and good to
preserve Hair from splitting at the ends, and it clears the Head from all
Scruff and Dandrith, which is a great hindrance to the Growth of Hair, and
causes the Hair to grow to a knobby and unnatural Root; by reason of which the
Head is never free from Itching, till these knobby Hairs are plucked out; and
the plucking of them is the great reason of Gray Hairs in Young people. It
allays all Heat and Itchings in the Head. The using of it is very pleasant: It
is not only good for causing Hair to grow; but gives present Ease to the
violent Pains of the Head, and Toothache.

It is sealed up in Ounce-Bottles, with printed Directions how to use it, for
Three Shillings a Bottle.

There you may also have extraordinary good Gray Powder, with very good Combs
proper for the Head.


