Some Queries touching EXCOMMUNICATION Published by the People of GOD, (termed
in derision Quakers) to be considered by all the Bishops and Synods of this
Nation, or any others that may be concerned in such Proceedings against them.
But most especially, by the present Bishop and Synod of Aberdeen.
I. Quer. Seeing ye allege ye have your Power or Authority to Excommunicate
from GOD, and from Christ; How, and after what manner have ye it, mediately, or
immediately? If immediately, how can that be, seeing ye affirm that immediate
calls are ceased generally since the Apostles days? and seeing ye blame us for
pretending to an immediate call, because as you think, immediate calls are
ceased? Again, you say men may be lawfully called and authorized to Preach, and
do all Ministerial Offices, who are but Natural and unconverted men, and have
no inward acquaintance and fellowship with God; and such men ye allow them to
excommunicate whom ye think to deserve such a censure, and you say they have
authority so to do, and yet you cannot say they have an immediate call from God
thereunto?

If mediately, then tell us what is the first Original and rise of this mediate
call, and what are all the middle-steps, or midses betwixt the first and the
last? for either the first rise and original must be the Apostles, who were
immediately called, or some since the Apostles days, about the beginning of
the Reformation that were immediately called, for all mediate calls must at
last resolve in an immediate call, otherwise there would be an infinite
progress which is absurd? If ye deduce the rise of your mediate call from those
who were immediately called, about the time of the first Reformation, then ye
must grant that the first Reformers were immediately called, as the Apostles
and Evangelists were, which contradicts your common Principle, that immediate
calls are generally ceased since the Apostles days. Again, if the first
Reformers were immediately called, they were also immediately gifted and
furnished, what to say, and to preach, and to write; for all that ever had the
one, had the other, as you may read in the Scripture: And if they were
immediately gifted and furnished, then they were immediately inspired; and
consequently what they spoke and wrote by the same, was by the infallible
Spirit of Truth, and of the same Authority with the Words and Writings of the
Apostles and Prophets, which is contrare to another common Principle of yours,
that all writings since the Apostles days are but Humane, and not Divine, nor
Divinely inspired; for if divinely inspired, they should be equal to Scripture,
and deserve to be bound up in the Canon which you will not acknowledge.

But if you deduce your mediate call from the Apostles who lived about 1600.
years ago; then I ask by what Church or Church Officers is this your mediate
call descended unto you from the Apostles, whether by the Church of Rome, and
her Bishops and Popes, yea, or nay? Or by what other Church or Church Officers?
And if the Church of Rome and her Bishops (unto which only in a visible
succession ye can have any color to lay claim) then I ask, has not the
Church of Rome and her Bishops degenerat since the Apostles days? Have not ye
your selves (called Protestant-Ministers and Preachers) often Preached and
Printed it, That the Church of Rome for these many hundreds of years (to wit,
the visible Church) has been an Apostate Church, and her Bishops Apostates
from the true Faith delivered unto the Apostles? And did ye not deny her to be
a true Church? and on that account, did not your Predecessors the first
Reformers separate from her? And did not the Church of Rome and her Popes
excommunicate your Predecessors? and such of them who once had her call, she
degraded them, and took it away from them? And to this day she denies you, and
excommunicateth you all every year, so that ye are all above an hundred times
excommunicated by her. Now are ye not ashamed to derive your call from her, who
is an harlot, and the mother of harlots, as your selves have called her, and
from Babylon, and from the Synagogue of Satan, as ye have also called her? And
are ye not ashamed to derive your call from the Pope of Rome whom ye have often
called Antichrist? and some of the Popes of Rome by whom your mediat call is
descended unto you, were Witches and Necromancers, as Hildebrand, who was also
a vile Murderer; and one of them is reported to be a Woman, and vile Harlot,
that bear a Child in the time of her Procession; and this the Protestants have
objected against the Papists very often: and yet these are the persons whom ye
derive your mediate call from, to excommunicate us, from Witches, from
Necromancers, from a Whore both Spiritually and Carnally, from Babylon, from
the Synagogue of Satan, and from Antichrist himself! A strange thing that
Antichrist should have a just and true Power and Authority to make and call
Ministers of Christ, and yet more strange, that these whom Antichrist has
excommunicated above an hundred times, should from him claim their Power as
from their lawful Predecessor to excommunicate others!

Answer these plain Questions plainly and clearly, and call not this Railing,
for it is not railing to speak the Truth, not to seek to find out and discover
the Truth. And seeing your call is mediate from the Apostles, must it not be a
visible call? (for a mediate invisible call is a contradiction) and if it be a
visible call, must ye not visibly in a visible way by visible Successors from
the very Apostles derive it unto your own time, who have transmitted it visibly
by Ordination, and laying on of hands, as the manner of your mediate call is?

Now, that the Protestants, and even the Presbyterians derive their call to the
Ministry mediately from the Church of Rome (notwithstanding her Apostacy)
because some through ignorance may deny it, let them read James Durham in his
exposition on the Revelation, see his twenty third and 24th. Digressions.

II. Quer. WHat is the nature of your Excommunication, is it a cutting us off
really and totally from all the Spiritual union and communion with God, and
them who are truly and really the people of God, where ever they are
throughout the World? Or is it not a real cutting off, and a real separating us
from them, only pretended and seeming, for one these two it must needs be
(seeing there is no midst betwixt them) now if it be but pretended and seeming
it is false and vain; neither have we nor any other cause to lay weight upon it.

If it be a real cutting us off and separating us from Spiritual union with God
and his People, then ye must needs have a knowledge of us, that we, are none of
us, in the least measure of the number of Gods People, and that none of us have
the least measure of true Faith, true love to God, true holiness and piety? and
how know ye that none of us have the least measure of those things? Have ye an
infallible discerning (of the inward states of others) to know whether we be in
the state of Grace yea or nay? If yea, how say ye, that an infallible
discerning of the inward states of others is ceased; seeing that belongs to
immediate Revelation, which you say is ceased generally since the Apostles
days? If nay, then having no infallible knowledge of our inward states, the
best that you have is but conjectural, and in opinion; and therefore ye cannot
do what ye do in this matter against us, in Faith, and with clearness, but with
doubting? and seeing he that doubts is damned, as the Apostle said; how can
your sentence of damnation against us bear weight, which proceed from you, who,
because of your doubting are damned your selves?

III. Quer. WHat are the particular grounds and reasons of your excommunicating
us, are errors of life and conversation, or errors of judgment; we suppose
ye will not allege the first; seeing our life and conversation whom ye have
excommunicated, and are purposing to excommunicate, is at least as good as your
own, and manifestly better than thousands of your own Church Members, whom for
all their lying, swearing, cursing, defrauding, drinking drunk, and other
abominations among them, ye continually bless and curse not.

If they be errors of Judgment, then we also ask further, do all errors of
Judgment deserve that the persons (simply for their judgment) holding them,
ought to be excommunicate, which is contrary to your own way among your selves;
for some among your selves differ one from another in matters of Judgment in
diverse things, as some of you think that Episcopacy is Jure Divino, others
think, it is but an Humane Invention, and limb of the Antichristian Hierarchy,
some of you think, that set forms of Prayer ought to be used in the worship of
God, others thnk it Popish and Superstitious; some of you think, ye should sing
that called the Doxologie, and stand up to it, though sitting at the rest of
the Psalm, others condemn it as superstitious and will worship; some think they
should kneel in receiving the Sacrament, (as they call it) others think
kneeling Idolatry; some think they should be uncovered all the while they are
in the Steeple-house, if it be consecrated, others think it Superstition; some
think the Magistrate may be resisted, and they may rise up in Arms against
him, to carry on a Reformation; which bad doctrine they have learned from their
Grandfather the Pope: others do justly condemn that principle. And besides
diverse of the Protestants hold, that Christ has died for all men, Others hold
the contrary, that He has not died for all, but some. Again diverse hold, that
the keeping of the first day of the week for a Sabbath, is of Divine
appointment; others, such as Calvin, and many with him, both abroad and at home
deny it. Some say, that we are justified not only by the outward righteousness
of Christ imputed to us; but also, by inward righteousness, as many of the
Episcopal party in England, and some in Scotland; and many other differences of
Judgment are amongst them, who yet do not excommunicate one another, but hold
it their duty to bear with one another. It is not therefore one or diverse
errors, or differences in Judgment, or in relation to Worship, that are
ground of Excommunication, but such as are Blasphemous, or fundamental errors,
such as overturne the very foundation of Christianity, and Christian Religion.
Now before ye excommunicate us, ye should take pains to inform your selves, if
we whom ye are about to excommunicate do hold such fundamental errors, for we
know not that we hold any principle, which ye your selves call a fundamental
error. Indeed some of you have alleged that Quakers in England hold
blasphemous and fundamental errors, but they have not proved it out of their
own words and writings; and if it were so, that is not sufficient for you to
proceed against us, unless ye discover that we particularly, whom ye are about
to Excommunicate, do hold such blasphemous and fundamental errors; for every
one is to be judged according to his own Faith.

Therefore let us have a fair and free hearing and communing betwixt you and
us, for we are most willing that ye try us to the uttermost of your ability,
which ye as yet have not done, but taken things upon trust, and believed lies
and mis-informations against us: and unless ye do this, ye lay your selves open
to the just censure of all, that you have not proceeded orderly with us, nor
given us Gospel Order; for if ye think ye are our Judges in these things, ye
should give us a hearing freely, and fully before your Presbytries; or if we
appeal from your Presbytries, ye should give us a hearing freely, and fully
before your Synods, and highest Church Judicatories, such as they are.

And as for us though we own you not as our Judges, yet we are most willing
that ye try us, and ye cannot in any color of reason deny us these public
opportunities of Conference, and laboring to clear our selves, which even the
Papists have given unto Protestants, and which the Protestants in reason
demanded of them, and which the Sinod of Dort gave unto the Armenians and
Remonstrants before they passed sentence against them.

IV. Quer. WHy have ye changed the form of the words of Excommunication, set
down in the Scripture, which is, to deliver up unto Satan for the destruction
of the flesh, 1 Cor. 5.5. And seeing ye think it so essential to adhere to the
words of Scripture, when ye Sprinkle, and when ye give the Sacrament of the
Body and Blood of Christ, as ye judge it; why do ye not adhere to them when ye
excommunicate? And as for your new form of excommunication, to deliver up unto
the righteous judgment of God: who has taught you these words? And seeing they
are not expressly Scripture words, (nor indeed pertinent to be words of
excommunication, for they may be properly applied unto them, who are not
excommunicated, nor to be excommunicated: Yea David, an eminent Saint prayed,
that the Lord would judge him; and said Peter, judgment must begin at the
house of God) what sort of words are they, whether Divine, or given by Divine
Inspiration? If not, then they are but the words of a man, and therefore they
can have no weight nor authority with them against us.

Some further Queries from Isaiah 66.5. Hear the Word of the Lord, ye that
tremble at his Word, your Brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my
Names sake, said, let the Lord be glorified; but he shall appear to your gleoy,
and they shall be ashamed.
V. Quer. WHether these who are said to tremble at the Word of the Lord, may
not be termed Quakers, in the dialect of Mockers, as well as these called
Quakers now termed so by their opposers, for their trembling at the Power,
Presence and Fear of the living God? seeing

Quaking and Trembling are both one upon the matter.

VI. Quer. IF it has not been generally the lot of all the Faithful followers
of the Lord, and witnesses of his Truth in all Ages to be hated and persecuted,
by those who upon some account were esteemed brethren; so Isaac by Ishmael, and
Jacob by Esau, and Joseph by his Brethren, according to the word of the
Apostles, Gal. 4.29. But as then he that was born after the flesh, persecuted
him that was born after the Spirit, even so it is now; see John 16.2. They
shall cast you out of the Synagogue, etc.

VII. Quer. WHether this hatred and persecution has ever wanted a specious
pretext of zeal, for the Name of the Lord, and that God may be glorified? as
hear Isaiah 66.5. Your brethren that hated you, and cast you out for my Names
sake, said, let the Lord be glorified.

VIII. Quer. IS it not duty for Preachers and People seriously to consider and
weigh in the light of the Lord what they are doing, when they go about such
acts? or are countenancing such discipline, seeing these things are so clearly
foretold in the place now cited, and that Christ warned his Disciples, John
16.2. that they should put them out of the synagogues, etc. lest otherwise they
may be under this same mistakes with these persecutors here prophesied of.

IX. Quer. IF mere mistakes or malicious mis-representations from Preachers, as
by G. M. his sermon, in the 9th. month, 1666. falsely chargeing the People of
the Lord with Heresies; blasphemies and errors will be a sufficient excuse in
the day of the Lords Judgment for the peoples accession to, or countenancing
such acts of discipline, when the charge and calumnies were never made out? And
the sufferers denied the benefit of the Printing-press, to clear their
innocence. Yea, people frighted away from the occasions of true information;
that so what Preachers speaks of us from Pulpits may be believed implicitly;
and thereby people prepared (as of old) to prefer Barrabas to Christ, deceivers
and murderers to the God of truth; seeing the Jews had as much to say for the
authority of the Scribes and Pharisees, and Highpriests, and the respect they
carried to their persons and doctrine, as people have to say for many of their
teachers in this day?

X. Quer. WHither it be not a non-sensical and ridiculous Act to Excommunicate
these who have rejected their communion of Bread and Wine already? and is all
one with the Popes practice, when he excommunicates a Protestant Prince; who
out of conviction of the Popes unjust usurpations, had rejected and renounced
all his pretended authority? were it not that thereby he aims to give occasion
to his implicit and malicious followers, to trouble and molest him in his
lawful dominions, whereby his pride, revenge, and dispight does more appear,
then any true zeal to the Catholic Church, (as he calls it) though falsely
pretended, the caice being all one upon the matter, comparatis comparandis,
comparing things to be compared?

XI. Quer. IF the promise to these Quakers, and the threatening to their
Edomitish brethren be to be believved (as most certain it is) being written,
Isaiah 66.5. That God shall appear to the joy of the one, and the other shall
be ashamed? May not this damp the malice, hatred, and dispight of the enemy,
and make the Sufferers rejoice in the Faith of that joy, promised by their
Faithful God? and to vilipend, and esteem that Thunderclap (as they would have
it thought) to be of no more value than a Popes-Bull, intimated by an
Antichristian Priest, or as a Balaams charm; Seeing God has beheld no iniquity
in Jacob, neither seen perverseness in Israel: Wherefore, Surely there is no
enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any divination against Israel,
Numb. 23.21, 23. seeing he esteems all our sufferings to be for his Names sake,
what ever others may think to the contrary.

We desire you to answer these Questions plainly, and distinctly, which we
judge you are bound in all reason to do, before ye can with any color of
reason proceed any further against us in that matter: But if ye refuse or
decline to answer them, we will look upon our selves as obliged in conscience
to take a further opportunity yet more to discover you in your unchristian and
unreasonable proceedings.

These where delivered to the late Bishop of Aberdeen, in his own hand, at the
Synod-house door (access being stopped) be John Cowie, and Thomas Milne, as he
was coming out, 1674.

After which, the said Bishop put a stop to such proceedings, dureing his
lifetime, being one of the most sober and moderate among them. And now this
present Bishop, his successor, and his Clergy being intending a new
procedure, with their sentences of Excommunication, (so called) against the
people of the Lord; we have published these Queries both for them and others of
their National-Church-Officers, (as they are called) to consider and answer:
which we judge they are holden to do in reason before their procedure, as they
would be esteemed just or equal in their dealings by the World. And they are
now proposed not out of any regard to their sentence, or for seeking any delay
thereof, out of any fear we have of it, but only for clearing the Truth, and
out of Compassion to them; lest they be found fighters against God and his
people.

THE END.

