The Happy Sinner: OR, The Penitent Malefactor.

BEING The Prayers and Last Words of one Richard Cromwell (some Time a Soldier
and Chyrurgion in the Late D. of Monmouth's Army, and since of Their Present
Majesty's) who was Executed at Leichfield for Murder, on the 3d. day of July,
1691. Wherein are not only contained his Prayers, (drawn up by his own hand,
which (with a little Variation) may fitly be used by most Christian People) but
also his Last Speech, which is a very Pious and Godly Exhortation to all
Christian People, to forsake Sin and Wickedness, and to turn to GOD, before He
overtake them with His Just Judgments for their Wickedness.

AND ALSO, His LEGACY to his County, of Choice, Physical, and Chyrurgical
Receipts, viz.

I. A Balsome for Wounds, Bruises, Pains, Aches, Stiches, and Sprains. II. A
very Extraordinary Receipt for the Worms. III. Two several Receipts for that
Tormenting Distemper, the Wind Colic. IV. A Cure for all Colds or C^^ghs, New
or Old. V. A Purge for the Head, which Cures ^^ost Pains, and helps the
Eyesight. VI. A General Purge, c^rrying off all Phlegm, Choler, Melancholy,
from a^l parts of the Body ^hereby Curing or preventing many Diseases. VII. A
most Excellent Plaster for all Pain^.
And Lastly, Directions to make Two ^^veral Waters for the Eyes, with the Last
of which he Cured a Boy in Leichfield that had been Blind Three Years.

TOGETHER, With a Strange and Wonderful Account of Three Ravens Flying against
the Walls of his Chamber, which he esteemed as sent by God to give him Notice
of his Approaching Death.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

London, Printed for R. Clavell, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Church Yard, and
are to be Sold by Mich. Johnson, Bookseller in Leichfield, 1691.

A PRAYER Applied to my Present State and Condition, being Condemned to Dye the
23d. of April.
VOuchsafe O thou God of all Mercy and Compassion, to look with Pity upon the
most woeful Case of a poor Wretch, ready by the Sword of Justice to be cut off,
as unworthy to live amonst Men, and like also, without thy speedy Favor, to be
shut out of Heaven, and to have my part in the second Death. Truth it is O
Lord, that all this, though it be grievous, yet it is no more than my desert;
and touching that bodily Death, whereto I am adjudged, I must confess it to be
thy Mercy and Goodness toward me, that I have been found out by the eye of the
Magistrate, and stopped by the Power of Authority, from going on in further
Evil: I beseech thee that my death may be both a Chastisement to me, and an
Advertisement to others, to contain themselves within the Bonds of true
Obedience; but now concerning my Soul, which is now e're long to appear before
the Tribunal Seat of thy great Majesty, I humbly pray thee to be merciful
thereunto: I cannot but acknowledge, that if thou give me my due Recompense, I
must be thrust into that dreadful place of infinite and eternal Torment, which
thou have prepared for the Wicked, the Burning whereof is Fire and much Wood,
and thy Breath like a River of Brimstone does kindle, neither see I in my self,
or in any Creature, any means or possibility to escape; fearful unto me has
been the Face of an Earthly Judge, and the Sentence of Death to be inflicted
upon this my House of Clay, has made my Heart to quake, What then will become
of me when I shall be Arraigned before thee, at whose rebuking the very
Foundations of the Earth are discovered, and before whom, no man living can be
justified? Thou, O Lord, know all mine Iniquities, they are sealed up with
thee as in a bag, they are all noted in thy Registers; although I have many
times sought for the covering of my evil ways, to hide my self in the darkness
of the Night, supposing that no Eye should see me, yet thou have still
compassed my Paths, and been accustomed to all my ways; there has not been a
Thought in my Heart, or a Word in my Tongue, but thou have wholly known it;
often have I said in my heart, God will not regard, he has forgotten, he
hides away his face, and will never see, I shall never be moved, nor be in
danger; thy Word I never delighted to hear, I hated Knowledge, I would none of
thy Counsel, I sought to dam up the Mouth of my Conscience that it might not
Check me; when my Friends admonished me, I hated and scorned their Reproof,
then it was a pastime to me to do naughtily, Wickedness was sweet in my Mouth,
and would not be persuaded to forsake it; justly therefore, O Lord have thou
overtaken me, and made me eat the Fruit of my own way, bringing me to be a
Spectacle of the World, to dye as one of the Fools of the People, yet, O
gracious God, there is Mercy with thee, and that thou art very ready to
forgive, be favorable, I entreat thee to me a most unworthy Sinner: Manasses
being put in Fetters, and bound in Chains, prayed unto thee, and humbled
himself greatly before thee in his Tribulation, and thou wast entreated of him;
the Woman of Canaan, whom thou termedst to be no better than a Dog, yet thou
did afford her some Crumbs of Mercy, and did cause it to be unto her as she
desired; the Thief at his Execution confessed his sins, and prayed to be
remembered in thy Kingdom, and thou did promise him an Entrance into Paradise:
O Lord, Are not these things written for my Learning, that I, through the
Comfort of these Examples might have hope? Has thy Word spoken it in vain,
That at what time soever a Sinner sigheth unto thee, thou will put all his
Wickedness from before thee? Shall I think that thou will call me, being laden
with my Sins, to come unto thee, and when I come, will not accept me? Make me I
pray thee, to see the depth of my Sins my self; And grant also, that those
which see my End, and know mine evil ways, may have some Evidence of my
Repentance, and may learn of me to beware of the deceitfulness of Sin; Enable
me to look with the Eye of my Faith upon my Crucified Savior, casting my self
wholly upon him; and desiring by him to be hidden from thy Wrath, give me some
Taste of thy Love, and some inward and secret Pledge of thy being reconciled to
me for his sake; strengthen me against the fear of Death, that albeit I have
every way just Cause to tremble at it, it being both the desert of my Offenses
to men, and the Wages of my Sins against thee, yet having some Assurance in my
Soul, that the sting thereof is plucked out, I may embrace it in my Bosom, and
entertain it as an end appointed for my Misery, and as a Means to bring me unto
Happiness: Thus, O Lord, with fullness of my desire, out of the bottom of this
Misery and Shame which I am fallen into, to fly unto thy Mercy, and to be
shrouded under the shadow of thy Grace, I Commend my self, my Soul, and my Body
into thy hands, praying thee not to cast him which has no Hope but only in
thee, and that alone in and by Jesus Christ, my only Lord and Savior. Amen,
Amen.

Isaiah 53, Ver. 3.
O My beloved Savior, wast thou despised and rejected of men, and shall I not
learn to despise and reject my self, that I may be like to thee, approved to
thee, and received by thee; wast thou a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with
grief, who knew no sin, and shall I who came into the world with sin, look
to go out of the world without sorrow; did thou so patiently bear the griefs,
and carry the sorrows that were due for my sins, and shall not I patiently bear
the griefs, and carry the sorrows that are due for mine own sins; how could I
have sorrows, if I had not sins, and why should I not have patience, now I must
have sorrows; wast thou stricken and smitten of God and afflicted, who wast his
only begotten, and most dearly Beloved Son, and shall I look to escape the
Scourge who heretofore have been his Enemy, and still am his undutifull and
unworthy servant!

His Speech to the People at his Execution.
Good People;
IT would much comfort my afflicted soul, if at this my last farewell to the
world; I could say any thing, that may be for the benefit, as to instructions
for Sobriety, Holiness, Justice, and Charity. You have them so plentiful poured
out upon you, by the Reverend Dean and Ministers of this place, that have most
Christianly assisted me in my afflictions, that it will be your condemnation
not to observe, and Obey them; and your impieties under such plentiful means
of Holiness, will be utterly inexcusable: As for my own sins, were I to live
ever so long, I could not sufficiently confess, and Lament for them. But I hope
the pardon has this day been sealed unto me in the Holy Sacrament, which I
have received; as to the Crime for which I suffer, I here declare in the
presence of God, before whom I am instantly to appear, that I am so far
innocent as not to have given him the wound, of which it is said he dyed on:
Nay I can farther add, in the presence of God, that I had no design to kill
him, or any other person whatsoever; I did not so much as see, or touch him;
and consider these are the Words of a dying Man, I cannot in Charity Omit to
put those in mind of their uncharitableness, who so far thirsted after my blood
as to hinder means used to save it; and who by Unchristian informations have
prevented that Gracious Mercy, which otherwise I might have obtained. This
mercy they have obstructed, as I hear say, not only uncharitably but unjustly,
by laying the most wicked falsehood to my charge, That is, that I should
threaten, If I got my pardon, to be the death of Mr. Wright, or his Wife. I
call God to witness, that this wickedness was never in my thoughts, and I pray
God forgive them who have raised this false report: Another unmerciful slander
which some have Thrown upon Me, and that since my condemnation, I have been
guilty of Uncleaness with Women. I do not come hither to justify my life, God
knows, it has been too wicked. But I bless God since I was a prisoner and
condemned, I have had an abhorrence of all such wickedness: God forgive them,
God forgive them, and grant them True Repentance for what they have done: Lord
lay not my Blood, nor their hindering of the means used to save it, to their
charge.

But that which has given me no small Trouble, is, that I hear the Reverend,
and good Dean Dr. Addison, who has been so careful of my soul, and willing to
save my life, has been misrepresented above, for so doing, by those whom
nothing could satisfy but my death; I am now going to appear before that God,
before whom you must also shortly appear, and as I desire forgiveness at his
hands, so I humbly forgive all.

God bless their present Majesty's, and preserve the Church of England, with
the Reverend Dean, and Ministers of this place, and all who have been
Charitable to me, with all others: And so I humbly beg Gods pardon for all my
sins, for the sake of Christ; in whose name, I recommend my Soul to his Mercy.

I beseech all the world to forgive me, in whatsoever I have offended them,
whether by thought, word, or deed: I do from the bottom of my heart forgive all
those who have any way injured me: And lastly, I beseech you all, good people,
to pray for me to the last Moment of my Life. Lord Jesus receive my Spirit.

How far this unhappy Man was guilty of the Crime he dyed for, is too late to
dispute: It Is indeed certain, a Man was Killed, but whether by this person, or
the Switz's his companion, is now the query, since this that Suffered, denied
it to the last; it may serve to inform those who are strangers to the thing,
into whose hands this small book may come, that the matter appeared so on
Trial, that the jury found cause to acquit the Forraigner, and bring this
person in guilty, but as in most cases of this Nature different men have
different Sentiments, so there were some (and of good quality too) who so far
concerned themselves on his behalf as to endeavor his Reprieve, which had they
not thought him an Object deserving Pity, and his case a little hard, we may
reasonably conclude they would not have appeared therein.

It may not be improper to add, and the rather, because it is a thing much
talked of here where the thing was done, that though the prisoner had about six
days notice to prepare for his death, yet because there had been such means
used for His Reprieve, he was not wholly without hopes of life, till the day
before, when he being upon his Knees in his Chamber, three Ravens light upon
the prison, and after making a very great noise there, they took wing again,
but immediately returning, they flew with great violence against the walls of
the Room where he was, and there being a little hole or window, against which
place this person was Kneeling, one of the Ravens hanging on the wall by her
Claws put in her head thereat, and with so much feirceness, that it was
thought, had the hole been big enough, she would have flown in at him. This at
first a little frighted him, but afterward considering, that that God that had
made all creatures, had still the command over them, and remembering that the
Raven is esteemed by most persons, a kind of foreteller of death, he really
accounted them so to himself, and looked upon them as Messengers sent by
Providence to take off his hopes of life, and warn him of his approaching end.
So he esteemed them as sent by God, and from that time laid by all Hopes of a
Reprieve. This was not only told by himself, but will be attested by several
persons that saw them.

These following Receipts were left by him, as a Legacy to the whole County.
A Balsome for Wounds. Elemni Ammonia^um, of each half an Ounce, Oil of
Hypericon, and of Roses Amphaline, and of Turpentine, of each of them one Ounce
and an half, of Myrrh and Mastick in Powder, of each three quarters of an
Ounce; Boil them together for half an hour, then strain it into a Pot: It Is
excellent in all Wounds of what sort soever, Bruises, Pains, Aches, Stiches,
and Sprains.

For the Worms.

For the Wind Colic.

For Colds.

A Purge for the Head, which Cures the Headache, and takes away Rheum from the
Eyes, and is good in all Pains whatsoever. Aqua Mirabilis one Ounce; Mix them,
and take it fasting, drinking warm Gruel as it works. Note, This is a full dose
for a strong Man or Woman.

Pills generally Purging all Humors, as Phlegm, Choler, Melancho^y, from all
Parts of the Body, thereby Curing many Diseases. Pill. Corliae the greater
Composition, Pill. Aloephanginae, and Extract of Rudius, of each one Scruple,
Chemical Oil of Nutmegs, one drop; Make them into six Pills, and take three at
Night going to bed, and three the next Morning.

Water for Sore Eyes.

A most excellent Plaster for all Pains in the Limbs, Sciatica, and Cold Gout;
it draws out Thorns or Splinters gotten into the Flesh, under the Nails, Cures
Whitlces and Andcoms, etc. Galbanum, and Ammoniacum, of each one Ounce, Cypress
Turpentine three Ounces, Myrrh and Mastick of each one Ounce and half, Deers
Suet two Ounces, Saffron in powder, half an Ounce; Boil all to the Thickness of
a Plaster to spread on Leather.

Another for the Wind Colic. Hungaries Water, which when put together in a
Bottle, and shaked, drink at Night going to Bed, and in the morning, three
spoonfuls, is an Excellent Cure.

Another for Sore-Eyes. Lichfield that had been Blind three Years.

Advertisement.
ALL these Ingredients mentioned, are to be had at the Apothecaries, except the
Queen of Hungaries Water, which is Sold by Mich. Johnson Bookseller in
Leichfield.


