His Excellencies Order, to the several Colonels of the Army, concerning
provision of Quarter, Diet, Physic and Attendance for the sick Soldiers of
their several Regiments.
WHereas I am informed, that for want of putting things into order, the sick
Soldiers in your Regiment are not provided for, neither can be ministered unto
by the Physicians of the Army, for the recovery of them out of their several
Diseases and Sicknesses: and forasmuch as it is necessary for the ends
aforesaid, and for the equal and certain distribution of Medicines for their
recovery, I have thought fit, and do hereby require, that you take care, that
the sick Soldiers of your Regiments, be from time to time put into warm and
good Quarters, and that you appoint one Officer of your Regiment, together with
a Surgeon or Chirurgions Mate, and such other affistance as shall be thought
necessary; and that you give the said Officer particular Instructions in
writing, and authority to furnish the said sick persons so quartered as
aforesaid, with warm and fitting Diet, suitable to their respective Diseases,
such as the Physicians of the Army shall direct, and may be procured in this
and the adjacent parts; and that such women and keepers of the said sick
persons, be hired to attend and help the said sick persons, and provide their
Diet, as are necessary. And you are further required to cause the pay belonging
unto the said sick Soldiers out of their respective Companies to be delivered
to the said Officer, or such as he shall appoint, for the providing Diet and
other necessaries for the relief of the said sick Soldiers: And if it shall
fall out, that the said Pay will not sufficiently provide for the necessities
and other occasions, as aforesaid, upon Certiffcate of the same under your hand
made to my Self or the Major General, you shall have warrant for money to make
a necessary supply for the ends aforesaid: And of any provisions that are in
the Stores of the Army, upon certificate under your hand of the want thereof,
your Officer aforesaid, or any other assigned by him, shall receive from time
to time of the keepers of the Stores, a supply proportionable to the number of
the sick Soldiers of your Regiment: And your Surgeon or Chirurgions Mate
aforesaid, shall receive from the Apothecaries to the Army, a supply of such
Medicaments in their custody, to the use of the Army, as by the Physicians of
the Army shall be judged proper and proportionable for the said sick Soldiers.

Given under my hand the seventh day of October, 1650. O. CROMWELL.

Advice for Prevention and Cure of the FLUX.
FOR preservation of Soldiers from the Flux now prevalent in the Army, because
it is contagious, and the Disease communicated by infection from the ill Sent
of the Sick, where many are together, as also in respect of the common cause of
ill Diet, by bad Waters, and other drink they drink, and cold lodgings* care
must be had to sever the Sick from the Whole.

Those who can have Ale or Beer, may for prevention, mix some Rice with the
Corn they brew withal, though but in a small quantity, and hang either
beatings of Iron as they are had from the Smiths Forge, or other old Iron, or
gadds of new Steel in a bag, or any way in the middle of the Vessel, a small
quantity will serve diverse Gallons, or else to quench some Iron or gads of
Steel (of which there are some twelve dozen sent) in the drink before the
drinking of it immediately: And so for Water when Ale or Beer is not to be had,
and the drinking of Water first boiled with Rice is a good preservative. And
because cold lodging, or the lodging of the common Soldiers on the ground
cannot be well prevented, to such more especially a red strong Water (which is
sent) the quantity of one spoonful mixed with their Drink, Ale or Water, I
shall recommend from experience in former Camps, which also in some few drops,
with a spoonful of broken or powdered Biscuit, is a good Breakfast, or a good
Collation in the night for a Sentinel or Perdue, to preserve himself from
cold, hunger, and danger of the Flux. And by way of prevention, there would be
great care had of Biscuit, which even at Sea oftentimes by ill stowage and
neglect in lying too close, and receiving moisture, does beget a dry moulding
on the superficies of it, which if not wiped off and well cleansed, does cause
by its offense to the bowels oftentimes great Fluxes: and to check that ill
quality of the Biscuit, as also of ill Air and bad Water, the use of Garlic
moderatly taken, is of much force, either boiled in Milk when it may be had, or
in Ale or Water, or roasted, or in small quantity raw. And where any Water can
be had from a Spring where any Chalk is, that is the best Water to avoid this
Disease, as also to make Medicines of for the Cure: In relation whereunto,
there are some few Remedies sent, and such as rightly made use of, may be
effectual: As first there is Conserve of Sloes, of which some small quantity
may be mixed with all the Water, (where other drink is not to be had) warm or
cold, even upon a march, strayned out by pouring of the thin from thick, after
it has been well shaken together, even in a hat, where there is no cleaner nor
better Vessel, and this may as often be used as thirst calls for moisture:
this Conserve may also be eaten in the substance to the quantity of a walnut,
twice, or thrice, or oftener in a day.

Secondly, Rice powder (so written upon, and having some other small mixture
with it) may either be taken alone, a spoonful or two at once, twice or thrice
a day, or with any other food, or with Beer, Ale, or Water, and especially with
Milk and Water when that can be had.

Thirdly, for the Flux, now frequent in the Army, I recommend this familiar
Remedy, experimented in like Epidemicall Fluxes; Take of the shavings of new
Deal board one handful, one spoonful of whole Cinnamon, of dry Balm (when it
can be had, of which some store is sent) a quarter of a handful; boil these in
an Ale quart, or some what more, of good Water, (with Milk when it may be had)
to a pint; of this make three several draughts at 4. or 6. hours distance.

Fourthly, Take 3. or 4. spoonfulls of the red Water abovementioned, in Ale or
Milk, or Water, or alone, if the Sick be not much distempered with heat, once
in 8. or 12. hours, for three or four times only.

Fifthly, and more especially for those who are very weak and distempered, and
want rest, there is sent a Cordial Electuary (one pot containing eight doses)
to take one dose or eight part at night going to bed, and to wash it down with
a little Water boiled, or at least strayned with the powder of Rice flower
abovementioned, and this for two or three nights together, if need require, and
in case of extremity.

And these are such Remedies inwardly taken, as may be for common Soldiers
where ever they fall sick, or stand well to preserve them in their march or cure
them.

Outwardly, if any Crabbs or wild Apples come in their way, many Cobwebs which
Scotland does afford, and the powder of such Tobacco pipes as have been most
used, Chalk mixed together with a little bruised Garlic, all of these, or as
many as may be had, mixed with some of the red Water (twice formerly mentioned)
or heat at fire, or cold, if fire be wanting, and applied to the belly, is a
good remedy, with which also some of the powder written upon The astringent
powder may be mixed, adding the whites of Eggs when they can be had.

To sit over the fume of Ginger is very useful, and where there is very often
and great provocation to stool, use the Red Water to moisten the fundament, and
put up a cloth wet in it as a Suppositorie.

Where Mutton may be had, and the loosnesse has long continued, Take the
kidney of a Mutton, fat and all, cut it small, boil it with a little Cinnamon in
a pottle of Water to a quart, drink of this strained at the least twice a day.
This also where it can be made may be used before the Disease has so long
continued, and adding a crust of Biscuit, or some Rice, may be taken in stead of
other broth, adding a few corns of white Pepper.

Advice concerning Diet in Fluxes and Fevers.
FOR the sick of the Flux, let four parts of Wheat, and one part of Rice if it
may be had, be boiled in such a proportion of Water, as, after the Wheat is
become very soft, even to a Gelley, may make it of the consistence of ordinary
Grewell: Then take Nutmegs and Cinamome, of each two parts, of Cloves one part;
let them be beaten and mixed together; and at the end of the boiling, as
aforesaid, put in, and stir together so much of these Spices, as may be tasted
or give a relish; and no more: Put in also at the same time, to every Gallon,
half a pint of red Wine, with two ounces of Sugar dissolved in it.

The like may be made of powdered Biscuit; or of Bread thin sliced, boiled in
Water to the consistence of the former, and seasoned with Spice, red Wine and
Sugar, in proportion aforesaid.

Of these Dyets may be given a Porrenger full to a man, two or three times a
day, or oftener, as the Stomach does require or bear it.

Eggs, when they may be had, are very good Diet in this Case, whereof also
sometimes may be given one at a time raw, beaten in a Porrenger, and mixed with
a spoonful of red Wine, a little Nutmeg and Sugar.

Those who have stronger stomachs to bear it, may take fat Mutton broth, with
store of knuckles, and broken bones, as also Kidneys with the Suet boiled in
it: and they may be allowed to eat the meat, if they have appetite thereto.

For variety likewise; Puddings of Wheat flower or meal, with Suet, and the
Spices aforesaid, well boiled or baked: as also flower or meal of Wheat, boiled
up to a good confistence with Milk or Water, and a little Spice (care being had
by continual stirring, to prevent burning to) which may be eaten with a little
good Butter, if it be to be had; may be allowed those of stronger stomachs and
appetites,

It would be also of great advantage, if all Beer given in this Disease were
first boiled with whole Biscuit, and Nutmegs thin cut, of each one to a Gallon,
which may after be drunk cold: and the Biscuit so boiled and soaked till it be
tender, is a good nourishment in this case, disposing the less to thirst.

For those that have higher Fevers with their Fluxes, the Spice may be omitted
in the Dyets before prescribed, and it may do well to take Barley prepared, in
stead of Wheat, either alone, or rather with Rice (if it may be had) in the
proportion aforesaid.

The Drink in this case, may be Water boiled with whole Biscuit, adding of red
Wine half a pint or somewhat more to every Gallon, and the Biscuit, after
soaking, may also be eaten.

For such as have Fevers without Fluxes, Barley Grewell well boiled in a great
quantity of Water, to to the ordinary consistence, and seasoned with white or
Claret Wine and Sugar (taking to every Gallon, half a pint of the Wine, and
about two ounces of the Sugar) would be a good Diet: as also Oat-meal Grewell
sometimes for variety.

For Drink in extreme heat and thirst, Barley water, with a little Sugar (about
two ounces to a Gallon at least) and so much spirit of Vitriol, or Vinegar for
want thereof, as may give a pleasant tartness, would be very proper and
advantageous.

FINIS.

