PROPOSALS FOR Printing the TRANSLATION of a LATIN MANUSCRIPT, written by Judge
CRAIG, one of the Judges of Scotland, in the Reign of King James VI. before his
Accession to the Throne of England. ENTITLED De HOMINIS: OR, A Dispute against
those who maintain, That Scotland is a Fee or Feu-liege of England, and that
the King of Scots owes Homage to the King of England upon that Account.
THE Manuscript abovementioned, bearing date March 6. 1602. is supposed to
have been by some unfair Methods taken out of some Public Library, if not from
the Archives of Scotland, it being Writ with more than ordinary Care and
Curiosity. By the Margin of the same Page, it appears to have sometime belonged
to the Great General, Sir Thomas Fairfax, his Name being writ upon it with his
own Hand, and a Line or two importing that it was presented to him by
Christopher Irwin, Chyrurgion, March 20. 1656/7. the Registers of Scotland
being about that time seized and dispersed by Oliver. The Opinion which that
Great Person had of its Consideration and Weight, appears by a Note upon one of
the blank Pages, signed with his own Hand, desiring Sir John Goodrick to return
it after a full perusal. And there are also several Notes relating to the
Subject Matter, writ by the said General upon diverse of the Margins. The
Manuscript would seem to have been preserved by a special Providence, and
generously communicated to the Publishers by a very Worthy Gentleman of
Yorkshire, whose Name, if it be allowed, shall be inserted in the Preface, or
Title Page, that the Public may know to whom it is they are so much obliged.

The Parts, Quality, and Public Station of the Author, who is very well known
to the Learned in the Law, by his Book, de Feudis, etc. are sufficient to
recommend it to any Man that ever heard of his Fame. The Subject Matter is
such, as will doubtless render it highly Valuable to all Scots-men; and the
great Variety of Learning, both in History and Law, which is discovered
throughout the whole, will no doubt render it acceptable to all Ingenious and
Curious Men of the Three Kingdoms: And therefore that the Public may enjoy the
benefit of such a Valuable Piece,

It is proposed, To Print the same in English, upon the same Paper, and in the
same Character with these Proposals, in Octavo, at 4 s. per Book in Quires, the
Book being to consist of about Thirty Sheets in Print. And for the
Encouragement of Subscribers, those who Subscribe for Six, shall have a Seventh
gratis. Those who will be pleased to encourage the Publishing of such a Curious
Book, which is indeed a Critic upon most of the Common Historians, are desired
to pay in half the Subscription-money to Mr. Bell and Mr. Luntly, at the Pestle
and Mortar in Chancery Lane, where they shall have Receipts as usual: And those
in Scotland are desired to pay theirs to Mr. Alexander Henderson, Bookseller in
the Lucken-booth at Edinburgh; and upon payment of the other half, the Books
shall be delivered, God willing, about the 25th of December next, or sooner, if
it meet with due Encouragement.

The CONTENTS are,
Chap. 1. CONCERNING the Occasion of this Writing, and the Assertors of the
Homage Chap. 2. The Definition and form of Homage. Chap. 3. At what time Homage
had its first rise in the World. Chap. 4. At what time Monarchy began in that
part of Britain which was a Roman Province. Chap. 5. That the English have no
certain History before the Conquest, except what was Writ by the Roman
Historians, and Gildas, or Bid. Chap. 6. That all the Witnesses adduced to
prove this Homage, are suspected. Chap. 7. That this Homage is inconsistent
with the Feudal Law. Chap. 8. That neither Brutus, Ebrancus, Clotenus,
Mulmutius, or Dunwallo, did ever exact, or know any thing of this Superiority.
Chap. 9. Of Fergus the First King of Scots, Carlus King of the Britains, and
other British Kings, till the Arrival of Caesar. Chap. 10. What the Condition
of the Scots was, and their Society with the Britans after the Arrival of ^.
Julius Caesar, and the Romans in Britain. Chap. 11. Of the Departure of the
Romans from Britain, and how the whole was subject to the Scots and Picts.
Chap. 12. Of Arthur, whether he subdued Scotland, and exacted Homage from the
King of Scots, Chap. 13. Of Malgo, and other Kings of the British Line, whether
they could pretend to any Homage. Chap. 14. Of the Saxon Monarchy, and its
duration, and whether ever Scotland belonged to the King of England. Chap. 15.
The true delineation and description of the Saxon Monarchy. Chap. 16. Whether
Cadvan, Ethelfred, Oswald, Osuin, or Osbright, did demand this Homage. Chap.
17. Of Ethelwolf, Alured, and Edward, Kings of England. Chap. 18. Of Athelstan,
who was the first that received Homage from the King of Scots for Cumberland
and Westmerland. Chap. 19. Of Edmund, Eldred, and Edgar, Saxon Kings, whether
they pretended to any Superiority over Scotland. Chap. 20. Of Ethelred, Edmund
Ironside, Canutus, and Edward, Kings of England, whether they ever pretended to
any Right over Scotland. Chap. 21. That no probable nor likely reason can be
brought to prove that Homage was performed for Scotland during the Saxon
Monarchy. Chap. 22. Of William the Conqueror, whether he pretended any other
Right to the Crown of England, than that of War. Chap. 23. Of the Conqueror,
and his Sons Rufus and Henry Kings of England, and whether Homage was performed
to them for the Kingdom of Scotland. Chap. 24. Of Henry II. and by what Arts he
endeavored to Establish the Homage to himself and his Heirs, and concerning
the true form of this Homage. Chap. 25. The Clergy of Scotland not subject in
Spirituals to any English Archbishop. Chap. 26. Of Richard and John Kings of
England, and what was the form of the Homage performed to them. Chap. 27. Of
Henry III. and whether there was any Homage performed to him. Chap. 28. By what
Methods Edward I. sought to obtain the Sovereignty of Scotland. Chap. 29.
Whether or not the Sentence was Just which Edward I. gave for Baliol against
Bruce. Chap. 30. Whether a Sovereign Prince can make himself and his Subjects
Vassals to another, and how by the practice of Edward I. this Superiority was
entirely destroyed. Chap. 31. A sharp Epistle of Pope Boniface the 8th. to King
Edward, concerning the Injustice of his War against the Scots, and the said
King Edward's Apology. Chap. 32. Of the various Success in this War against the
Scots, and how at last the English were thrown out of Scotland. Chap. 33. Of
Edward II. and III. and Henry IV. and whether they received any Homage from
Scotland. Chap. 34. A Brief and Summary Conclusion of the whole Dispute, and
some new and strong Arguments against this Commentitious Homage.

