Several LETTERS; Containing the AMORS OF 1. The Unfortunate Duchess; Or, The
Lucky Gamester. 2. Love after Enjoyment; Or, Fatal Constancy. 3. The unhappy
Mistake; Or, The Fate of crossed Loves.


Written by Mr. D. Cr -- rd, Gent.

Quod si tantus amor menti, si tanta Cupido est, Accipe, quae peragenda prius,
latet arbore opaca. Virg. Aenei. Lib. 6. LONDON, Printed for Job Austin in
Fleet Street, and sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster, 1700.

THE PREFACE.
NOvels of late have been so ill writ, and Consequently so little esteemed,
that it is reasonably to be supposed a Bookseller has not such another drug in
his Shop. I was too weak to attempt the recovery of their lost honor, and
therefore chose a new method of my own.

This may appear something odd to the Reader, because it insinuates as much as
if I had said, I writ Novels in Substance, but altered the Form. I confess I
design to leave him in the dark; and he may suppose the stories so many real
truths, or so many little Romances as his fancy or judgment shall guide him.

If it be objected, that I feigned Nations, which is a thing rarely or never
practiced. I answer, if I make people bring them to good or bad ends, and keep
their Lives and Honors in my own hands; by the same Authority I can easily
create a Country to settle them in. If the Amors be real, I ought in good
manners to lay the Scenes in a new World, because it is to be supposed I
designed them not for

-- Monumenta Veneris Nefandae. And to be particular as to the Kingdoms, were
the true way to discover those concerned.

The Adventures of the Unfortunate Duchess are but few, not that the Subject
could afford no more, but because I had not much time to employ that way.
Besides my Printer o're-took me e're 'twas well begun, and hurried me to a
speedy close. Daria's are indeed too long, but I hope the Reader will not think
it so. I Have shown Entheon good Natured, and upon all emergencies truly
Generous, and if I have made him too easy, attribute the cause to his excess
of Love, and Eriphile's irresistless Charms. The first confined his resentment,
and the latter disarmed his fury. The Dutchess's Conduct is not to be
justified, but you will find I scarce designed any of my Lovers for exact
patterns of Chastity and Honor. These romantic ways of Writing and Loving are
equally tedious, and very rarely credited. If sometimes I mention every
Circumstance of an Action, or the Joys of an happy Night, it is only to make the
story appear more probable, and to Cozen the Reader into a firmer belief of
what may in it self be fiction.

Love after Enjoyment, etc. can hardly be thought a Misnomer, since Adrastus in
all his words and Actions speaks an excessive tenderness and passion for
Timandra, nor did she ever show less for him. That in his absence she married
the Duke of Minoya, can hardly be reputed a breach of Love, since for her
excuse she reasonably alleges, the World was too busy with her Name, and
'twas high time to salve her reputation, lest the remedy had afterward come
too late, or it may be not at all. The story of Olmechine is in my opinion very
Natural, she Loved him, yet was Virtuous, and forgot that passion she had for
him when Avilon (who first had sought her Heart) returned. What concerns the
Earl of Rucana, may at first sight seem too nice to gain the Reputation of a
Truth; but the Reader will hardly find any thing in it, that is not very
probable, and in all points practicable.

In the Unhappy Mistake it may perhaps be thought that I have been guilty of
one my self, in crowding so many People into so short a story. Xensa and
Mangroa might have both been Widowers, and Bonzeda had lost nothing had I
robbed him of a sister. But I Am confident 'twill appear otherwise to any Man
that deliberately weighs the Plott, nor will he find it any difficulty to
remember every Man's business, Pretentions and Interest throughout the whole.
Delia's Adventures may indeed be too long. But you will find by the end of her
own and Sirena's story, that I was sensible of my error e're 'twas fully
committed. I had wasted too much Paper; and was forced to kill more People in
one Leaf, than I designed at first in two. Yet after all, Martius and Artaxus
fell not without Circumstances, that largely entitled their deaths to
probability and truth. As for Ericis, I was forced to use her ill, lest
Treachery had escaped unpunished. And Manderina's end might very well be
occasioned by her griefs, if you consider her loss.

Thus much I thought no less than necessary, in defense of particulars, and as
for general faults, I presume they may all be comprehended under this one. The
passions are not painted with the height of Modesty. If there is any thing that
appears smutty I Am confident a Lady can hardly own she knows it to be so,
unless at the same time she confess her own guilt, and lewd inclinations. For
to the truly Virtuous it is so well covered, it will hardly show it self.
Besides, to express any thing of that Nature nicely, methinks requires more of
Art, and neat choice of words, than a passion truly modest, and if well done,
is in some measure pardonable; but that is what I would not be thought to
defend, even though I were truly guilty.

I Have nothing to say in relation to my style or way of expressing my self, I
writ them for my own pleasure and improvement in the English Language, and by
consequence strove not to be too nice or elaborate, yet to shun that trouble,
you will find I Have borrowed nothing from others to indulge my wants.

The Reader will find an excess of grief or joy expressed with measure, the
better to move the passion, and as for what is purely narrative, I have used a
natural way free from force or Affectation.

The worst of Critics pretend to some Generosity, and spare dead Authors. In
reason they ought to show the same goodness to a stranger, especially when he
is absent; if they do, then I shall be safe, and this little Posthumus may stay
behind, and live without its Father to protect and defend it.

D. Cr -- rd

THE Unfortunate Duchess; OR, THE LUCKY GAMESTER.

Written by Mr. D. Cr -- rd, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Job Austin in Fleet Street, and sold by the Booksellers of
London and Westminster, 1700.

THE Unfortunate Duchess, etc.
To the Divine Albisinda.
Madam,
WHEN I first had the honor of your acquaintance, amongst those numberless
Qualities that rendered you so amiable, and your Conversation so charming and
easy; I found that esteem you had for Plays and Novels, to be none of the
least considerable. It speaks a tender Soul, and a large Portion of wit. To
pity a feigned Hero is commendable, because it is a sure Argument, that
Compassion would not be wanting to a real one. And to delight in those things,
which have a certain Air or Passion well represented in them, shows that the
fancy of the Reader, is little or nothing inferior to that of the Writer; for
we can take no more pleasure in that which we understand not, than in those
things which we understand too well. To remove the weight of a few lazy
Minutes, I send you the famed amor of a Lady, whom a long Scene of Gallantry
has at last rendered obnoxious to the Laws of her Country. Her misfortunes make
her too well known, and though she is at present the Theme of her own Nation, I
am confident the story has not yet reached yours. I Am no such Stranger to your
Modesty, as not to foresee, that an exact account of some Circumstances would
seem culpable; and therefore shall not give you just grounds for anger, where
my aim is to divert: Yet that I may not omit those things without which the
Story would be too imperfect; I beg a greater liberty than is perhaps truly
adequate to the narrow rules of a precise modesty. I Am too unfortunate if you
think my Nature loads me beyond those bounds; and I hope if any thing of that
kind escape unpolished, or without a necessary Cover, you will attribute it to
some other cause, or at least suspend your Judgment, till you see the Author,
and permit him to answer for himself. To excuse all other faults, remember I
love too much to Write well, and that when I Would fix my thoughts upon this
Subject, I Am surprised to find my Soul rides Post to you, and leaves me robbed
of Fancy or Design.

IN Clusa (the Metropolis of the wealthy Kingdom of Armenis, which is composed
of the greatest half of the Island Sindaton) there lived a Beauty, whom Fortune
and Nature had jointly blessed with all those Graces that procure Adorers, yet
render the possessor not altogether happy. No Man could see her and preserve
his liberty, and therefore no Man could think himself secure in the possession;
yet all the Youth of the Nation sighed for her, and those whom Fortune had not
blessed with Wealth, gazed on the happy exalted Fair, and had those thoughts for
her, which we bear to distant Heaven, when yet we cannot paint the glorious
Fabric, or hope to reach the Blessing. Her Father (the Earl of Cisala) loved
her more than Honor; he blessed the Gods for this mighty gift, and with pride
saw himself the Master of a thousand Hearts, by being the envied disposer of
the Lovely Eriphile. The traveling God, in all his race, never saw a form like
hers beneath him; Love threw his Arrows through the yielding Air, or shot at
random to consume the trifles, her Eyes too fast supply the wilful loss, and
strike even those who never before had bowed. She seemed the unknown Agent of
the all-conquering Jove; for though she had the softness of a pitying Goddess,
and the languishing looks of a yielding Virgin, yet her frowns outstretch'd
thunder, and shook the very State of powerful Love. Believe me, Albisinda, the
only way to express her Charms and Wit, were to to say she copied you; and had
she proved as nicely Virtuous, she had been indeed another Miracle. But Beauty
too often proves fatal to the owner, and a handsome Face an Enemy to Honor.
All men admire the truly Charming, and continued Assaults must needs shake the
besieged, or force them at least to Articles.

Amongst the numerous Youth of Armenis, none could yet pretend to merit the
happiness of her esteem, and the Young Lovers had no relief from pains, but
when they remembered, that time must advance one to the Heaven they aim at, and
knew not but indulgent Providence had designed the Bliss for them.

While thus she reigned, absolute in the Hearts of a thousand noble Subjects,
the Great Duke of Entheon arrived from his Travels. Him too she Conquered, but
paid her Liberty as a price for the glorious Victory. He is the first Subject
of his Country, yet Master of a Soul that infinitely surmounts his Birth or
Quality. He has the Courage of a Man in despair, yet attended with the Caution
and diffidency of a Coward, or one who values Life. Like Heaven slow to Anger,
but if it concerns his Fame, sudden in the Execution, and quicker than
Lightning. The liberality of a mighty Prince, and the careful management of a
private Subject, are equally his. He has the Religion of the good and wise,
without the Biggotry of the superstitious and ignorant: Looks like a Crowned
Head, yet more affable than the meanest Courtier, and values the honor of his
Native Country beyond his private interest, or his dearer Life. Admired by all
men but himself, and envied by none but Villains, who damn those Virtues in
others, to which themselves can never attain. He speaks most Languages, and is
conversant in the History of most Nations. In short, Madam, it is generally said
of him, that his Birth and breeding, make him truly the first Gentleman in the
World. Sindalon thought her self enriched beyond her Neighboring Countries,
and the happy Inhabitants of Armenis, looked on this miraculous Youth, as their
Genius or Guardian Angel. Every Man became his Votary, and those who had spent
most of their Years abroad, felt yet those little qualms, and disturbances of
Mind when they approached him, which bashful Strangers know in shining Courts,
when eyed by Godlike Monarchs. The fairest Ladies in Clusa sighed for him, the
King doated upon him, and all the World blessed him. Cisala amongst the rest,
failed not to show that esteem he had for him; and the Duke, who greedily had
heard his Daughter's Beauty universally proclaimed, forgot not to embrace his
Friendship, he longed to see the Original, which his Fancy, at second hand,
began to form even beyond what it was, or Nature e're could make, and already
believed that in all his Travels he had seen nothing comparable to the Fair
Eriphile. The Earl's Country House was situated on the fertile Banks of that
famous River which supsupplies Clusa with daily Necessaries, and as it
peaceably glides along washes the Walls of its Monarch's Garden. Thither the
noble Youth went to confirm the loss of his Liberty, which already he had half
resigned. Cisala received him with that respect, his merit every where exacted,
without regard to Quality, and now thought he had found a Husband worthy of his
Daughter; yet doubtful of his wished success he acquainted the Fair One with
the arrival of his Noble Guest. 'Twas impossible to live in Armenis, and not to
have heard of him; she understood the meaning of this Advertisement, and
carefully dressed her self to the best advantage, an Art very commendable in
Ladies, and in which those of her Nation are particularly skilled. The Earl
diverted him some time with the Rarities of his House, and showed him several
pieces of exquisite painting, done by the greatest Masters of the Age. Entheon
felt a certain unexpressible disquiet, when he viewed a well-done Landscape, and
wanted something which these Scenes suggested to his fancy, yet could harldly
consult his Judgment to find what 'twas he sighed for. At last they resolved to
take a turn in the Garden; where the Earl meeting with some Friends that had
come to see him that Evening, was obliged to beg the Duke's Pardon, and
promised to wait upon him in a very few Minutes. Entheon now left alone, and
about to pursue his walk, was suddenly arrested by a Song that charmed his
Soul, and tied up all his thoughts. He wondered that he had not heard this
Godlike Music, but fancied the Charm was just begun, or not heard to
perfection, because of his past discourse with the Earl. He stood sometime
immovable, yet impatient to see her that sung so like an Angel; he resolved to
lose one part of his present happiness for the purchase of a greater, and,
guided by the Heavenly Voice, with eager steps he reached at last the Grove.
His Curiosity (though great) did not too far extend it self; his passion never
o're-rul'd his Judgment, and this juncture he managed with the discretion of
old Age: For tho he could have entered, as if chance not design had led him,
yet he chose rather to keep himself undiscovered, and to be blessed unknown. But
^hen he advanced, and softly had pressed down those small boughs that obstructed
his sight, how much was he surprised! to paint his thoughts, were a labor fit
for a Muse at her full Strength! let this suffice, he saw Eriphile, and grew
divinely mad. Mortality was forgot, and he remained in that ecstasy, which if
expressed would seem wholly irreligious, to any Man but a transported Lover. The
Fair One lay in a careless Posture, extended on the yielding Grass. Her Foot
and half the Leg were obvious to his sight, and the scanty Bliss prompted his
lingering Soul to Paint the Beauties yet unseen, even beyond the Original, or
what Nature when she used her utmost Art could form. He cursed his Fortune that
showed no more, or else exposed too much, and feared that a shape so far beyond
what his eager thoughts had created, should be attended with the alloy of a
homely Face; still waiting with the impatiency of a Man half blessed, till some
kind accident should increase the pleasure. She, who dreamt not of a prying
Lover, proves kind without design, and taking her favorite Maid by the Hand
(with an accent that gave a perfect harmony to all her words) suddenly cried,
my Dear Daria (for that was her Name) I Have unluckily lost one of my Garters.
The Duke had no time to weigh his coming Fortune, and consequently lost part of
the blessing, for the charming Eriphile had no sooner said so, than he could
see the Pettycoat gently removed. The pleasure of a longing stranger, when the
furling Curtain shows a gilded Scene, and warlike Music Charms the unsteady
thoughts, sickens the Mind and thrills the kindled blood, but never yet gave a
Joy confused like his. His transports were such (which some will think next
door to impossibility) that even Nature was hushed, the Soul alone employed, and
Plato's way of loving was here practiced to Perfection. Yet it is probable that
had the old Philosopher himself seen so much, he had quit the Argument, and
given the Body a conquest over the Soul. The amorous Duke, blessed too much, was
unable to contain himself, and after he had at once surveyed the tempting
Object, and her more bewitching Face, suddenly cried, Oh Heavens! Can so much
Beauty ever give her self up to the embraces of a Mortal? Sure it is
anticipating Heaven to lie panting in her Arms. -- 'Twas well the Fair One
started from the Ground, the Lover else had prejudged the Duke, and his
raptures had spoke his Judgment not the same he possessed the preceding minute.
But a violent Love seldom knows any bounds, and when powerful Beauty suddenly
assaults the Heart, Reason is often dislodged, or at least gives way, and then
it is pardonable if a Man rave. However he begged a thousand Pardons for his Sin
of ignorance, and told her, that though he thought himself infinitely blessed by
this Encounter; yet he could have wished it had happened at a time when she was
less disposed to Solitude: And offered to retire, that by his speedy absence
she might retrieve a part of that silent pleasure she had lost, though not before
he had assured her, that if his Curiosity had led him to the Grove, he paid the
Forfeiture of his Liberty, as a punishment for his offense. The bewitching
Maid, not knowing he had seen so much, was pleased with the accident; their
mutual surprise added to the Beauties of both, and she found by her forced
silence, that the Duke was already more than indifferent to her. Yet ashamed of
this new weakness, she strove suddenly to recollect her self, and confusedly
told him, she presumed he was the Duke of Entheon; that her Father and the
whole World spoke advantagiously of him, and she could not think her self
unfortunate in the Conversation of a Man so universally esteemed. But that if
he paid too great a price for that which enriched her, she would be so generous
as not to urge him to so much bounty, notwithstanding of those advantages she
might reap by it. This was indeed an obliging Compliment, but the fair Eriphile
already loved him, and already knew it. She had too much wit therefore to lose
so favorable an opportunity of engaging a Man, for whom the greatest Beauty in
the Island would have dispensed with the out-gaurds of Modesty, or rather the
superfluous niceties imposed by Custom not Reason upon those of her Sex. On the
other hand the Duke thought himself in Heaven. His excess of Joy almost denied
him the use of his Reason, and if ever he was non-plus'd, let me suppose this
the time. However from what she said, he guest his stay could not be altogether
unseasonable. And after he had wittily acknowledged the Honor she did him, was
about to begin Encomiums on her Beauty, when the Earl arrived and made the
Number four. He told the young Lover, he was glad to find his absence supplied
by the Conversation of a young Lady, in whom if he found any thing agreeable he
was doubly Fortunate. This too was a handsome beginning, and the Duke (who had
too noble a Soul not to be amorous) that moment renounced his Liberty, which
was repaid with hers. To have seen this lovely Pair, would have kindled flames
in others, when icy Age had banished native Heat. The Earl himself cursed gray
Hairs, grieved he was born so soon; and to be again capable of loving, and fit
to be beloved, would have renounced the World's Empire, and that experience
which his Years had brought him. Entheon's looks spoke the agreeable disorders
of his Mind, and the charming Mistress of his Heart had so much of a
languishing softness, and new born Love in her Eyes, they reached his very
Soul, and hurried him into ecstasy. The calm Evening added infinitely to their
Pleasure, nor did they think of parting till the falling Dew obliged them to it.

The Duke was already divided from himself, his thoughts were wholly employed
on the Adventures of that Day, and he was surprised to find himself in Clusa,
when he had hardly dreamt of his being on the Road. To inform you how he spent
the Night, were a needless labor, if you have been in Love, you can easily
form his Pains, his Hopes, his Fears, and the strange emotions of his Soul; and
if you have not, you would hardly credit the Recital; as for the beauteous
Eriphile, Albisinda, I leave her to your unerring Judgment, doubtless you can
Divine her Thoughts, and if you never was a Prisoner to resistless Love, yet
your fancy can easily paint her faint Joys, distant Cares, frequent Doubts, and
disordered Thoughts.

Next Morning the Duke was at Court, e're the King had quit his Bed, and waited
the Earl's arrival, with the impatiency of a young Lover. When he came, Entheon
upon the first occasion told him how happy he was in being a Father; and
smiling (said he) Cisala, sure you need no more to make you Master of all your
fellow Creatures, than to show them what a Treasure you can dispose of. The
Earl, who could never enough esteem a Man of his Merit, was much pleased with
this piece of Raillery (for so he would term it) and told him, the World was
indeed pleased to commend his Daughter's Beauty, and that he was heartily
sensible of the Honor he did him, in heightning her Character. For his good
Opinion must needs be much to the advantage of a young Lady, since no Man
refused to pay homage to his Judgment and Choice in every thing else: From this
minute let me date their Friendship. The Earl was no where to be found, but
with the Duke; and Entheon must be sued to by Cisala. The Lover thought Clusa
no other than a Desert, or if a Ball at Court sometimes obliged his Mistress to
wait upon the Queen, he judged himself in another World. He found a livelier
Air in every Man's Face, and the transports of his elevated Soul were such,
that with difficulty he abstained from giving public Testimonies of his inward
satisfaction. The happy Eriphile eyed him with concern, thankt the gods for the
blessing of his Love, and knew no real Cares, but when she dreamt she did not
please enough. The Duke became the Object of her serious Wishes, and he never
petitioned Heaven without a Clause for her. Thus some Months were consumed,
Love was an equal Friend to both, and mutual hopes increased their growing
flames. Each of them feared the loss of the other, and the Duke having obtained
the Earl's consent, Hymen could not be wanting in his. In a word, they were
married.

I hope, Albisinda, you will excuse me, if for the first Night I draw the
Curtain, and hide her Maiden blushes, when the hasty Youth took her in his
Arms, trembled with the apprehension of his coming Joy, spoke in soft whispers,
yet scarce knew what he said, and the beating of his Heart expressed the
eagerness of his Soul. When breathless on her panting Breasts he lay, strove to
be again blessed, and again sunk beneath the weight of the excessive Pleasure; or
better to express it, when Love (too prodigally kind) gave him Heaven by the
bulk, without a strength of Mind adapted to the Blessing. To paint the Joys of
both were too much, let this suffice, They loved, and were married with consent
of Friends. The Days now seemed Hours, or rather lesser Scenes of happiness
than the more welcome Night; and in the morning (though divided) each of them
thought they yet felt the fast embraces of the other, and could hardly think
themselves unlockt; so vigorously had the remembrance of the Soul's past Joys
imprinted it self upon the consenting active Body. But this fair Weather was
not of perpetual Duration, a Cloud hovered in the Air, thickened on a sudden,
and in time eclipsed the shining happiness of both.

Fidelia, a Lady whose Wit and Humor had made her (from a mean Station) the
exalted Mistress of a kind Monarch, had come (as usually she did once a Day) to
see the young Duchess. They were both addicted to gaming (a Diversion,
Albisinda, rarely known to the Ladies of your Country) and having played some
time at Cards, they resolved to visit the Centura, (with us called a
Playhouse) where desiring to pass Incognito, they dressed for the purpose, and a
little after the Play was begun, they appeared in the side Boxes. Their Clothes
and Air drew the Eyes of a full Audience, and the Actors themselves were so
much surprised, they scarce remembered one Cue of twenty, and were obliged to
the care of the Prompter for every Sentence they spoke, who himself had been
incapable of rendering that timely Service, if his Seat had fronted either the
Stage or Pit. The most daring of the Beaus advanced, and though they judged them
of Quality, yet since they were Maskt, they thought that, without being guilty
of ill manners, they might attacque them. Amongst those the Duke showed himself
none of the least forward, and Fidelia (who was freer than the more modest
Eriphile) was the one he assaulted; she failed not to entertain him kindly, and
the Duchess (who would not baulk the Adventure so oddly begun) took up with
the first that offered himself. He was a handsome Youth, and knew how to address
a Lady as well as any Man in the World. The Duchess was very well pleased with
his Wit and Conversation, she already loved this invisible way of intriguing,
and thought it within a degree of goddessship to be prayed to unseen. The Duke
(who was young and naturally amorous) spent the hours very agreeably, and
formed a Beauty to himself like that of his famed Eriphile, yet proposed only
this satisfaction to himself, that to see her robbed of modesty would serve to
endear that which himself possessed, with constant Virtue joined.

When the Curtain was dropped, the Duchess eyed Fidelia, as if wholly ignorant
what to do; she had relied on her; and she (who was all Gaiety and Mirth, and
knew well enough how to come off) gave the Duke her Hand, and having seated
themselves in the Coach, drove to some noted Tavern not far off. When they
entered the Room, the Duke humbly begged the Lady would unmask, Erinthus (for
that was his Name who waited upon the Duchess) did the same, and both their
unknown Mistresses were almost forced to cry out in their own defense, or choose
to undergo a quick discovery; but our Gallants perceiving they were obstinate,
were at last fatisfied with their Fortunes. 'Twas an odd freak on both sides,
and enough to move any Man's smiles, had he seen how earnestly they talked,
swore, praised and loved what yet they had not seen. The Duke was charmed with
the wit of his unknown Mistress, and Eriphile felt those emotions which she
never had known, but when she first saw the godlike Entheon. At last they
betook themselves to Cards, where (at Pickquet) Erinthus won fifty Pieces from
the Duchess; she readily paid him, and this confirmed him in what he almost
before believed, that she was of Quality. This put him upon his guard, inspired
him with care to please; he assumed a new Air, and showed so much it seems of
Gallantry, that the yielding Eriphile was perfectly charmed.

The Clock at last (having struck twelve) sounded a Retreat, and they began to
think of their respective concerns. The Lovers begged they would allow them the
Honor of waiting upon them to their Lodgings; 'twas readily granted, and the
Coach being called, 'twas as readily put in Execution. The Duchess had given
the Coachman private Orders to drive to her House, and the Duke, whose mind
was much employed, never examined the place till he found himself in his own
Bed chamber. As he was about to express his surprise, Eriphile and Fidelia
unmaskt. Erinthus first begged Pardon for his rude mistake, and Entheon, (after
he had roused his disordered Judgment) smiled, and asked the Duchess if what he
had done, gave her any cause to suspect his Faith, and hoped Fidelia's Wit
excused him for spending so much time in her Company, when he had thought his
Wife at home. Eriphile smiled too, and faintly answered, if Fidelia please she
can easily Charm, for Wit and Beauty joined can never assault a generous Heart
in vain. The Duke was surprised with this cold return, and it is certain the
lovely Duchess never had used him so before; she was not now Jealous, nor had
she any Reason to fear the loss. But Erinthus already appeared too Charming,
and truth is, it seems he had something about him very taking, and singularly
agreeable, for he had before that time atack'd a Lady of the same Rank, and had
not failed of the success desired.

You may wonder perhaps, Albisinda, why I am not more particular in my
Character of this Man; but to satisfy some part of your Curiosity, know, he
owes his Birth to Burgoa, a Commonwealth raised by Trade, their industry, and
the easiness of their prouder Neighbors, to a height unlookt for, surmounting
in Wealth those very States or Kingdoms, from whom some Years ago they kneeling
begged Protection. Love and Gallantry are Strangers to the Nation, many of
their Souls are as Phlegmatic as their Bodies, and most of them look like
Machines or rather walking Tuns. His Parents were forced to pursue a mean
employment to purchase a livelihood, and the now fortunate Lover, when young,
left his Country in a Post suitable to his Quality and Education. But having
learnt in Armenis (what was by no means to be found at home) something of a
better Air, and the easy smooth way of speaking peculiar to the Language of
that more Polite Nation, he quickly found Preferment. They are naturally kind
enough to Strangers, and the advantages of his Person (which Nature it seems
designed not for a Burgoan) conduced not a little to his good Fortune. That he
was a lucky Gamester may appear from this, that in a very short time he
purchased an Estate, and became a Companion to those of the best Quality in
Sindalon. Entheon used gaming as a wise Man ought to do, that is, for his
Pleasure; he always played without Heat, lost Cheerfully, and rarely laid down
too much to be disposed of by Fortune, remembering always how much of madness it
showed, to put that to a hazard which before was his own.

This accidental meeting already mentioned, gained him the Honor of the Duke's
acquaintance; you may believe then, Albisinda, that for the future he was no
stranger to his House; they spent whole Days together, and Night her self could
sometimes hardly part them. Eriphile was always pleased when he was present,
and languish'd for his absence. It Is true, her Virtue was yet strong, and she
struggled with the growing Passion, hid her griefs with Art, and in her Eyes
expressed an easier Soul. When she played, her thoughts even then were hardly
fixed on Game, nor could she truly grudge the fortunate Erinthus a double
Victory.

The Youth already observed his coming happiness, and by his industry to
please, advanced that Heaven he wished for. It Is impossible, when alone to
express her pains, she saw how much she loved, and from her yielding Heart
could judge her Honor lost. Entheon still was kind, she knew his Merit, and
fain would yet be just; but powerful Love, with double force assails, and
scatters virtue's Charms that stop his way. Nor can he walk with Judgment who
was always Blind. -- Oh Albisinda! that this charming Fair, at last betrayed
her Marriage Vows, is not be disputed. But to say, she fell without a noble
Contest, were too much. No Woman e're knew more, or was Mistress of better
Inclinations, she was sensible of her Error, even when she drew the Guilt upon
her; and in his Arms (although she loved) could have wished her Soul fled to
save her sinking Honor. The World has more than common Charity for the fair
Eriphile, and some People scruple not to affirm, she yielded e're she knew she
had done so. The Story, Albisinda, is in this place known to all, and (even by
those who pretend to an exact knowledge in the state of Affairs relating
relating to this amor) for a truth believed. And it runs thus,

The Duke it seems had long professed a more than common tenderness for the
lovely Daria, a Maid generously educated, and of a noble Spirit, to her
Mistress just, nor to her self unkind. No allurements could prevail, no present
found acceptance, and the weakness of her Nature was always supported by the
strength of her Virtue. But the Duke growing at last importunate, and
obstinately kind, she found it too hard to preserve Honor and his Friendship
too. In this pressing juncture she resolved to abandon the Family, and after
she had with Tears in her Eyes told the Duchess, that an affair of Consequence
required her absence, humbly begged she would make her happy in her Consent.

Her Mistress was too sensible of her Merit, to lose her without Reluctance,
and said to her, that if she was any way disobliged she should have immediate
satisfaction; nor would she give her Consent, unless she were first acquainted
with those Reasons that moved her departure. Daria wept, and on her Knees
conjured her not to urge, what if betrayed would give her Pains unknown. This
instead of satisfying, increased the Duchess Curiosity, and she was at last
obliged to disclose the whole.

Poor Eriphile was Thunderstruck with the unwelcome Relation. Her Heart it is
true already was unfix'd, and she had those thoughts for Erinthus, which spoke
him too much Master of her Soul. Yet she loved the nobler Entheon, or at least
esteemed him so much, that she could not even in thought consent to lose him.
In this afflicting affair her Wit or Invention at last offered this relief,
which she proposed as the only means to confirm the Duke her own, and preserve
her Daria too. The Maid was seemingly to yield, to make an assignation, and
that done she was to leave what followed to Eriphele's Care and Management.
This was as soon performed as projected, for the faithful Maid (whose Beauties
were bettered by her new Griefs) was that Day more strongly assaulted than
ever, and she could do no less than make an Appointment. Two in the Morning was
the hour agreed upon, and you may easily believe Entheon thought it an Age till
Night. In the Afternoon Erinthus came to see him, of whose Company he was at
that time more than ever desirous. To Cards they went, where the pleasures of
Love were for a while forgot, and Game and Wine the business of both.

In the mean time, the Duchess (willing to enjoy what was for her Maid
designed) took possession of Daria's Bed, and with much impatiency waited the
Duke's coming. The hour at last appeared, but Entheon (whither indisposed by
drinking, sudden conscientious qualms, or sitting up beyond his usual hour, I
know not) felt no great inclination to the Combat. This freak, Albisinda, is
indeed unanswerable, especially if you weigh the Conduct of this great Man; but
it is confidently affirmed that he acquainted Erinthus with the Intrigue. Told
him, he found himself at that time unfit for the Field, and that if he pleased,
he might supply his Place. The forunate Youth was ravished with the kind offer,
and told the Duke, that since he was only to fight for the first Blood, he was
proud of the service enjoined him* In short, Entheon conducted him to the
Chamber door, which stood open on purpose for himself, and there left him.

The Youth found the Bed in the dark, and I suppose (without the help of a
Candle) found the Duchess too. She received him, as she would have done her
Husband, and if she found him richer in his Love, she attributed the Cause to
liberal Fancy, that formed her new, and of a stale Wife made a tender young
Mistress. How e're it was, they remained not long in the state of Ignorance,
and each of them wondered why the other was silent; for though Erinthus would
pass for Entheon, and Eriphile would for a time be Daria, yet the first Joys
and transports fled, she began to distinguish the Lover from the Husband, and
trembling said, My dear Entheon, why have you used me thus? I have been Daria,
and under that Name much happier than my own. Even when she spoke she doubted
the truth, and used these words, only to be confirmed in her Opinion. The Lover
was ravished, the place on a sudden was converted into a new Heaven, and he
only grieved, that much of his past Happiness was lost, by being so long
ignorant of the value of that treasure he had possessed. New Love, new Wishes,
rouse him up to Life, and e're he spoke he would be blessed again. Eriphile
'twixt fear and hope again received him, and even in his Arms could hardly know
whether she wished him Entheon or not.

At last the fortunate Youth confessed himself, told her that Chance and the
Duke's kindness had made him happy, but she alone could keep him in that state.
That he had long adored her, and bountiful love had now repaid his pains; that
his happiness should be concealed from all the World, and her Honor was now as
secure, as if in Entheon's Arms she fainting lay. A Crime when first committed
is of greatest weight, and frequent repetitions render those things familiar
and seemingly innocent, which we at first viewed with reluctance and horror,
for a small sin past without grief, speaks us in a fair way toward a greater.
The Duchess it is true loved, and by his Voice knew the happy Man: But then she
remembered the loss of her honor, saw how far she had fallen, and trembled when
she looked back upon the frightful Precipice. She called to mind the Duke's
past Love, those thoughts she had for him, when first he sound her lying in the
Grove, and knew his merit nothing yet diminished. This my dear Albisinda gave
the Fair One some pains, for though her Nature had given consent, her Soul was
yet Virtuous; and had Erinthus seen those Tears she shed, all thoughts of Joy
had vanished from his Breast, grief had disarmed his eager wishes, and
impotency by pity brought, had supplied the place of vigorous Love. But,
Albisinda, 'twas in the dark, the Curtains drawn, they were alone, both loved
and both forgot their Cares; you may easily believe he had his share; for though
he was a Burgoan that is, a Man whose Conscience would never baulk his
business, if attended with pleasure or profit, yet he had some faint
remembrance of that injustice he did to a Man, who had forgot his mean Birth,
made him a Companion and sharer in his pleasures, and had (or at least thought
so) bestowed that Prize upon him, (in the seeeming possession of Daria) which
he himself had sought for many Months. In a word, all complaints were hushed;
the Duchess forgot what once she was, what yet she ought to have been, and
owned her Love was stronger than her Virtue.

When the Youth retired, her Cares again increased, she grieved a loss she
could not then retrieve, and wept and wished the business still undone. These
indeed were the first motions of her primitive Soul; but Love again brought it
to a modern Constitution, she considered how securely she had enjoyed the Man
she loved, and flattered her self with the thoughts of being really innocent,
because the World yet thought her so, and believed the manner in which it
happened extenuated the Crime. In the mean time, the Duke had waited the return
of his Friend, (if now I may call him so) and smiling asked, how happy he had
been. Erinthus gave him a thousand thanks for that Testimony he had received of
his Friendship, but told the Adventure with so much indifferency, that Entheon
could hardly grudge that favor he had bestowed upon him. When he went to Bed,
he was yet insensible of his loss, Eriphile was all lovely, and that Crime
against his Love he had almost committed, endeared the Object of his wishes
more, than all her wonted Charms, or native goodness. He found her melancholy
greater than usual, and grieved that she was not so kind as she used to be,
earnestly asked the cause, and to comfort her, swore, that he had that Noble
Love for her, which our first Father bore to his lovely Eve, e're Hell
debauched her. She gave him feigned returns, alleged she was indisposed,
begged his Pardon for her seeming indifferency, and faintly said, she did
belive he Loved her. The kind Duke was satisfied, and in a few Minutes the
Cares of both were swallowed up in sleep.

This account, Albisinda, is by some rejected, and your busy Medlers, or
News-pimps, who pretend to know every thing, confidently affirm, that Erinthus
had won so much from her at Cards, she was necessarily obliged to pay the Sum
with a favor that might have been the price of Empire.

Next day he came to wait upon the injured Duke (or rather the kind Duchess)
and forgot not to improve every opportunity to the Advanvantage of his Love. In
a little time he became too happy, or at least too often so; and if the
generous Entheon had in the least suspected the Fair Eriphile's weakness, or
his Friendship, their guilt had been too obvious. His Noble Confidence made him
too secure, till an Adventure that hapened some time after, taught them more
caution, and him more of Jealousy.

The Duke it seems was obliged to attend the King, who then kept his Court
twenty Miles from Clusa. The Duchess knew of it the preceding Night, and had
therefore ordered every thing necessary for the reception of her Lover. Her
Husband took Coach about Eight next Morning, and Erinthus was to wait upon her
Grace at three in the Afternoon. She thought every hour had borrowed from
Eternity, and grieved she had delayed her happiness so long. She sighing lay
upon the yielding Bed, and under the Modish covert of a sudden indisposition,
occasioned by a Cold she never had felt, avoided the unseasonable Visits of her
troublesome Friends. Daria was alone privy to the intrigue, and though she had
all that respect for the Duchess, which her Duty in the strictest sense could
exact from her; yet she grieved to find her Virtue so much weakened, and wished
her innocent as when first she knew her. Eriphile had the goodness to excuse
her self as handsomely as she could, Painted her Lover dressed with all his
graces about him, and showed the power of subtle Love, in words that spoke her
knowing in the Mystery. Poor Daria sighed as if she had felt those pains of
which her Mistress spoke, and by her looks confessed her inward griefs. The
Duchess carefully observed her frequent change of color, and the flushing of
her disordered Blood, and asked, if Love had ever led her Captive. The tender
Maid blushed, and by her silence confessed the truth of what her Mistress had
often much suspected. She charged her upon her allegiance, as she would
preserve her esteem, and make her think she loved her, she would relate the
whole and by the story of her Love divert her melancholy, till the arrival of
the fortunate Erinthus. Daria excused her self from the performance as well as
she could; but seeing 'twas not acceepted, she sighed, was some minutes silent,
and addressing her self to the Duchess, began as follows.

YOU know, Madam, I was born in Scarronida, your sister Nation and of the same
Religion with your selves, a hardy Warlike People, yet no Strangers to Love,
and though we lie North from Armenis, and by our bounds make up the half of the
Island, yet we seem nearer the Torrid Zone than you. My Father was a Gentleman
very much esteemed, and though his Fortune did not prefer him to that height his
Soul always aimed at, yet his humor and agreeable Conversation, made him the
darling of his greater Neighbors, and he matched with an ancient Family rich
in Friends, and every way truly preferable to his own. I was the first and last
pledge of their Loves, and was ever doated upon by those who saw me, for that
resemblance I had of the Fair Julietta, (for that was my Mother's name) and
Aristeon (my kind Father) esteemed his Young Daughter even beyond Life or
Empire. He sought Wealth only to bless me in a Noble Marriage, and with secret
Pride already eyed my growing Beaury. Our Neighbor in the Country, the great
Dion, who (though a private Gentleman) can for the service of his Prince muster
an Army of his own Vassals and Dependants, to the number of some thousands, had
a Son whom all the World esteemed, whom many Beauties sighed for, and none
attackt with success. I was then in the sixteenth Year of my Age, and though I
had often seen him and heard him praised, yet my Heart had never submitted to
his Charms.

That Friendship which was between my Father and his, drew them often together,
and the generous Dion has sometimes spent whole Weeks at our House. It hapened
once, that while he rode a Hunting, and eager in the Chase, his Horse fell down
a sloping Bank, and bruised his hardy Rider. Aristeon was much concerned for
this Misfortune, and immediately sent for his Son. The handsome Youth came to
our House with Tears in his Eyes, and mourned over his Aged Father, with the
tenderness of a weeping. Mother, that grieved the loss of her darling infant.
There was so much of the Man mixed with a Woman's softness in his pains, that I
could not choose but observe it. I was insensibly pleased with every word he
spoke, and sighing wished I had had a Brother like him. His Cares for the old
Man brought mine, and I could have wept for Dion, more earnestly than when
first he got his Wounds. The Young Odmar (for so he was called) took notice of
my Cares, and from my Tenderness and Compassion, argued the easiness of my
Soul. I shall not, Madam, praise my own Beauty; but he has afterward told me,
that the softness I then showed, reached his Heart, and from small griefs wound
him to Pity, and though he had no cause much to sorrow for me, yet my pains to
him showed double, and from Compassion drew him up to Love.

I was one evening walking in the Garden, disordered in my thoughts, and
examining my self to find if that uneasiness I knew proceeded from my Love to
Odmar. But as I began the scrutiny, he entered, who alone could confirm the
truth of what I feared. I trembled as he approached, wished him gone, yet loved
to see him stay, and scarce could tell what thoughts possessed my Heart. The
Lovely Youth soon apologiz'd for intruding upon my Retirement, and you may
easily imagine how readily I forgave him.

There was a pleasant River at the back of the Garden-wall, and beyond that a
spacious Green, where feeding Flocks attend the Shepherd*s call, forget their
present wants, and listen to the loved Music of his tuneful Pipe. There
laboring Swains when toils outstrip the Day, Dance with the Maids they Love,
and cheat those pains by cruel labor brought. The Gardener it seems had by
chance left the Backdoor open, and there being a Tarrass walk upon the top of
the Bank, we resolved from thence to view the open Fields. The Water murmured
beneath us, and the little Fishes wantoned in the Streams. The seting Sun looked
back on that vast trackt he had left behind him, grieved to lose that prospect
once he had, and as he stooped beneath the veil of Night, roused up himself
with eagerness, and by a flash of new born Light, would gild the distant
Mountains. Just so a Lover when he quits the Shore, with trouble views the
Mistress of his Vows, longs to be nigh, yet still he slides away, and when he is
almost banished from her sight, he stands aloft and glads her from afar, and by
his gestures shows he fain would stay. In a word, Madam, the place and the
Company very much charmed me, and I felt that painful joy at my Heart, which
speaks us sick with Love. Amongst other things, I asked Odmar, if his Father's
pains were yet abated, if he hoped a speedy recovery, and told him, that though I
was proud of his Company, yet I could not choose but grieve the occasion that
brought us so often together. Madam, replied he) I cannot be so happy in this
World, as when I am in Aristeon 's House, and yet I think it fatal to me, for
as the Father's pains decrease, the Sons are still augmented, and those
torments that oppressed the old Man's body, are doubly charged upon the young
Man's Soul. I blushed as he spoke, and so many crowding thoughts filled my
Breast, I was unable from the confused heap to produce one to serve the present
exigency. My unseasonable silence showed I understood his Language too well,
and had before thought of (nay it may be wished for) what I heard.

Odmar read his good Fortune in my Eyes, and (willing to make use of the lucky
Minute) threw himself at my Feet, conjured me to remember that his Life and
Fortune depended on what I was about to say, that one kind word gave him
Heaven, and my anger made him the unhappiest of Men. That 'twas impossible for
him to live without me, and he would forfeit every thing he held dear on Earth, for
the greater blessing of my Love. -- His fears, Madam, were vain, I esteemed him
too much to give him more of Pain, and replied in Terms that spoke him not
indifferent to my Soul. Had your Grace seen his looks, when he found me so
calm, in spite of all your Modesty you would have doated on him, and I dare say
'twas impossible for Woman to have used him otherwise than I did.

Dion at last recovered, and I must say, though I wished him well, I grieved his
Health restored, 'cause by his absence I was robbed of Odmar. Our parting yet
presents it self to my view, and I see the lovely Youth drowned in Melancholy,
ashamed of his weakness, yet weeping as he spoke. His House was but three Miles
from ours. I bid him remember that Convenience, and proposed an Enterview at
least once a Week. The Youth (who was o rejoy'd to find me so kind, and
indulgent to his flame) was almost dumb with ecstasy, and swore he never could
Merit any part of that Goodness I had shown; and that his Life was not of worth
enough to repay my stock of Love.

When he was gone, methought I yet saw him, heard him, felt his soft kisses,
and gazed upon the Phantom. My tender Heart could hardly bear the burden of a
long Weeks absence. A thousand times I traced the Tarrass walk, and if from
afar I espied ought that resembl'd Humane Kind, I longed and wished it him.
Odmar shared in every thought, and my Father's House looked runious, dead and
decayed, since the departure of the sprightly Youth. I remembered every word he
spoke, when first he swore he Loved, and cur'st the hour that took him from my
Sight. I blush not, Madam, to say, no Woman ever loved like Daria, and no Man
e're merited more than Odmar.

To avoid Discovery, I was to meet him a Mile from our House, the River already
mentioned which run by the Garden, chalked out my way, and I went along upon
the dewy Banks, and shaded from the Sun by spreading Oaks. When we met 'was
impossible for either of us to express our Joys: We gazed, sighed, and
embraced, as if our Souls had joined; grieved that time flew too fast, and
wished the Minutes Years. What e're he said was welcome to my mind, and though I
listened to his Voice, with all the pleasure of a ravished Maid, yet I often
broke the thread of his Discourse, by asking a thousand little kind yet
insignificant Questions, because like him I Would show how much I loved. Thus have
we spent a few short hours, then grieved and parted, though never before we had
fixed the Day for our next Enterview. At this time we railed at Fortune and our
Stars, and mourned we could not meet to stay for ever. But had we known the
coming ill, we'd then have judged our selves truly happy.

My Father it seems had often missed me, and found by constant Observation that
I was absent twice every Week, and always at the same hours. He knew not at
first what to think of this adventure, he dreamt not of Odmar, and wondered
much that I should walk abroad alone. It Is true he had taken notice of my
Melancholy, though ignorant of the Cause, and was now afraid that I began to
humor that weakness of the mind, which so often proves fatal to the Beauty and
the Judgment of its Slave, knowing that while we humble the mind too far, we
sink the body quite. But then again considering my Years, my few Cares (unless
I loved) his and my Mother's kindness to me, he could hardly Credit that
thought; to rid himself therefore of his doubts, he resolved to watch me
narrowly for the future, and in person make a true and wished discovery of the
hidden secret.

The early Day drove on the yielding Night, and as the latter fled, the first
in view appeared, proud of the Conquest, and growing in his strength. The
happier gods lay stretched upon their Beds, and loath to rise, raised up their
aweful Heads, looked down, and shuffl'd by the thicker Clouds, to see if busy
mortals yet were stirring, but viewing the dark and solitary Globe, they
shrinkt again beneath the covert of the Night half fled, and closed up the Gape
of Heaven to wait the arrival of the marching Day. In a word, Madam, 'twas very
early in the morning when I arose, and took that road which led me to my Love.
My Father followed me so close, that unseen he posted himself behind a Bush,
hard by that shade where gentle Odmar lay. When I appeared, the Youth arose and
caught me in his Arms. Oh welcome to my Breast, (he cried) my beauteous
generous Daria! What Love can repay this favor, or what words express my
boundless Joy. When all the World sleeps, we two are awake, and kind Daria robs
her self of rest to ease her Odmar from the pains of absence. Aristeon who saw
how familiarly he embraced me, and distinctly heard every word he spoke, was
strangely surprised, and wished himself in the other World, that he might be
insensible of that affront he already thought done him in this; and doubted not
but I was born for his ruin, and the disgrace of his Family. He was a Man,
Madam, rigorously good, and loved me very tenderly; from this you may easily
imagine the troubles of his Mind, and with what difficulty he contained
himself. While Odmar spoke, I had felt a sudden trembling at my Heart, newborn
fears oppressed my easy Soul, and I was sick with the apprehension of some
coming danger, yet could not foresee how, or from whence the dreaded ill should
come The young Man was sensibly afflicted with the unlookt for change, threw
himself at my Feet, and sighing cried. O my Daria whence this new coldness to
the Man that Loves you! You have been kind, I have been more happy and -- A
risteon no longer doubting what before he much had feared, with fury in his
looks eppear'd. He continued some time silent, his passion denying him the
liberty of speaking, or it may be he waited till his heat abated, and his
judgment should take place. My surprise, Madam, is not to be painted in words,
and kind Odmar grieved and looked on me. My Father looked steadfastly upon me,
and taking me by the Hand, which eagerly he graspt, he calmly but resolv'dly
said, Well, well, Daria, you have undone your self, and banished ease from me.
My misfortune comes from that side from whence I least expected any unkindness,
and Odmar wrongs that Man, that would have laid down his Life for his or Dion's
service. Ah! Why did he ask? or why did you consent? Iv'e no comfort now, but
that the tender Julietta is yet ignorant of her Daughter's weakness. My Lover
was so amazed, he knew not what to say. But falling on his Knees he embraced
those of Aristeon, and at last swore by all the Powers above, he never yet
designed him any harm, and that his Daughter was Virtuous even to a fault. But
if innocent Love, or chaste mutual flames were crimes, he owned we both were
guilty, and deserved his anger. Daria's Birth (continued he) is in nothing
inferior to Odmar's; and if my Fortune surmounts hers, her Virtue turns the
scale, and with her Beauty joined, weighs more than Dion's Wealth, or all the
glorious riches of the Indies. My Father with Tears in his Eyes raised him from
the ground, and again taking me by the Hand, Come, come, Daria, (said he) these
are fine Baits to catch Fools and ignorant easy Maids withal. Odmar, for your
Father's sake I cease to resent this injury as I ought, though you have hurt me
in the most tender part. She has been kind, you have been happy: But neither of
you shall be so again, and now you part for ever. This said, he turned his face
and mine away, and cursed the hour brought Odmar to our House* To have seen the
afflicted Lover, (for I would look back) would have baffled all the Precepts of
Philosophy, and turned the strongest Reason and most fortified Judgment into
downright madness. My Soul was in a perfect frenzy, and I could have railed
against Heaven and Nature, and damned that wanton slippery minute that gave me
first a being.

When we came home, I retired to my Chamber. To tell you my thoughts, Madam,
were to undertake an employment that yet would distract me. I considered my
loss, my indiscreet management, my poor Father's grief, and by his concern and
Love for me, soon found, that I ought not to have done any thing of that
consequence without his knowledge and consent. I remembered his Tears, his
silence by the way (for he had not spoke one word to me upon the Road) the
words my Lover uttered, which might give him just grounds to suspect my
frailty. But most of all I remembered my afflicted Odmar; methought I yet saw
him speaking to my Father, yet eying me, and scarce Master of his Judgment, so
much for me he feared.

My Mother wondered she had not seen me all that day, and enquiring for me of
Aristeon, she was told I kept my Chamber, that he had spoke some things to me,
which though not harsh in themselves, yet had brought my Tears; and desired her
to assure me, that he was again pleased, and pardoned what could not be
recalled, if for the future I forbore to offend in that kind. Julietta desired
he would impart the cause of this little quarrel, and told him, she was afraid he
had been unjust to me, because she knew I dreaded to displease him. Besides,
she was confident my Nature led me not to any thing, that in the least looked
like disobedience. My Father said he knew 'twas so, and that he was sorry for
what he had said. You see, Madam, he had the tenderness of a Kind Parent, and
the goodness of a Just Husband. He already forgot (as much as possible) what he
had heard and seen; my Tears had melted him, and after he had seriously
examined Odmar's words, the hopes of finding me truly innocent yet cheered his
Soul, and by quick degrees had raised him up to better, kinder thoughts. To
Julietta he was just in the concealment of what had brought her too many fears;
and to show the goodness of his humor, from my infancy I observed, that he had
the tenderness of a Young Lover for her, studied to please, as if he yet
courted her esteem; she was a Mistress and a Wife, and never grieved without a
constant sharer.

When she came to see me, she found my declining Head supported by my Arm, I
was half asleep, my sorrows having wearied out my active thoughts, and burdened
yielding Nature; unwilling to awake me, she was about to retire, when her hasty
steps prevented all her cares, and roused me till I started from my Lethargy. I
doubted not but that Aristeon had fully informed her of what had past, and
throwing my self at her feet, conjured her to believe me innocent, swore I
never had yielded even in thought; that the generous kind Odmar had a better
opinion of my Virtue, than to think of, or propose a thing that would have
given me cause eternally to hate him. That I was faulty in nothing but in
concealing a Secret of that weight from my Father and her. But that I should
atone for that Crime by my future Conduct.

Julietta was much startled with what she heard, but being of a ready Wit,
easily concealed her past ignorance, and pleasantly asked me why Aristeon was
incensed against Odmar? If you concealed it (added she) where was the Crime?
Come, tell me all again, for I Am afraid your Father was biased by his Passion
when he informed me of the Adventure. -- You may believe, Madam, I failed not
to obey, and thereupon gave her a true account of every thing that concerned my
Love, and that discovery Aristeon had made. While I told the Story I could
observe strange changes and alterations in her looks. By turns, she eyed me
with concern, anger, fear, joy, and grief. However the relation once ended, she
threw her Arms about my Neck, wept with the sudden transport of indulgent
thoughts, and assured me she had feared much my weakness, 'cause I yet was
Young. But that now all her fears were vanished, and she believed me Virtuous.
That Aristeon had concealed from her what had happened that day, yet had sent her
to inform me, that he forgave me all. This, Madam, gave me a double joy, and I
could hardly forbear laughing when I considered my past thoughts, my fears, and
that ugly face my dejected fancy had given to my Fortune, and now saw that
which I had industriously formed to increase my own pain, in half a minute
vanished. I thanked Julietta for her tenderness and that good opinion she had
of me, and just as I spoke Aristeon entered. He had left me in Tears, and the
fondness of his Nature made him impatient till in some measure he had restored
my peace of mind. Daria (said he) you see I Am a kind Father, and though you have
offended, I come to sue for Pardon, and am pleased to confess I wronged you
Come my Dear, for the future let us have no cause for just complaints from
either side, and let m^ hope that you truly deserve that good opinion ^ have of
you. My Mother said she would answer in my behalf, for though I had been weak, yet
she wa^ persuaded Odmar had a greater respect for him than to attempt the
dishonouring of his Daughter. Ha! (cried Aristeon) then my Julietta you have
found the occasion of our quarrel? Ye^ (replied she) and am sorry you made a
Secret o^ what all the World may know, without prejudice^ to her Honor or that
of our House. Aristeon said, that at first his fears were it may be too great,
but now his mind was at rest, and I could only keep him so by my solemn promise
before Julietta, never to see Odmar or to Love him more. This, Madam, was a
hard proof of my Obedience, and at first I was very much surprised with the
proposal. But suddenly remembering that 'twas no mortal sin if I should see my
Lover afterward; I gave the proof of allegiance desired, and engaged never to
converse with him again, unless one or both of them were present.

Thus, Madam, the storm I so much feared blew over, my sin of Love was forgot,
and I absolved for a performance of the penance enjoined me. How far I played
the Penitent, you may easily judge by what followed in a very few days.

Dion came to our House (as he used to do) attended by two or three Servants.
Methought I had a more than common interest in them, and could hardly forbear
testifying so much to his very Slaves. I eyed them with a passion that is not
easily to be expressed, for I cannot positively say that I hoped for any thing
from them, and yet my mind gave me, that Odmar had (it might be) spoke to some
of them, and if he had not written to me, at least commanded them to observe my
Eyes, and afterward inform him if there they saw any signs of Languishment or
Sorrow for his absence. In each of their Faces (for from my Window I could see
them playing in the Court,) methought I read my own misfortune, remembered that
next night they would be with Odmar, yet were insensible of he happiness, and
almost died with grief, when I thought the Dear Youth had not sent me any Mark
of his continued Love.

In this dejected humor I retired; left the old People together, and in the
Garden sought for ease where first I lost it. Rigd, (for that was the Name of
one of the Servants) followed at a distance, and taking an Alley which crossed
that in which I walked, he met me as if chance had led him. You may believe,
Madam, I was pleasantly enough surprised when he gave me a Letter, and smiling
told me, his Young Master had been Post to himself, if Dion had not prevented
him. When I received it, I scarce knew what to say; and I must confess I had
not Art enough to hide my inward Joy. Having opened it, I found these words:

My Daria,
Would to Heaven you knew the troubles of my anxious Breast, and all those
pains that rack my burdened Soul. Oh Daria! If Aristeon's frowns have banished
Odmar from your Heart, I Am the most wretched of Human Kind. Think! Think my
Dear! of some means to procure me that happiness I once possessed. To see thee,
and to hear thee speak, gives those Joys that even a Lover cannot half express.
I Am mad 'twixt grief and Love; I would write more, but -- Oh remember that
during this absence I am thy unhappy.

Odmar.


How much I loved, and how this Letter was received, may appear from my Answer.
Which was to this purpose, if my memory serves me.

My Odmar,
IF you Love like me, I can easily paint your troubles and all those pains that
rack you; and to convince you that no power can banish Odmar from his Daria 's
thoughts, I Will see you and speak to you, though obliged to the contrary by a
solemn Promise. To morrow's Night then (at Nine of the Clock) come to the
Backdoor of the Garden, on that side next the Fields, and in the new Lodge
you will find your longing

Daria.


The Lodge much resembl'd a Pavilion, 'twas stored with Books and Pictures, and
from the Window one might see three Rivers join into one Body; and falling from
a mighty precipice in view, you would thought they shak'd the very Floor on which
you stood. The bubling and hollow noise of the greater stream provoked your
Melancholy, and fed the Lamp of Love. I had of late much frequented that place,
I kept the Key my self, and could not think of one more convenient for this
stolen enterview. 'Twas there I writ my Letter undiscovered, and there resolved
to meet my welcome Lover; my Father alone used to possess it, it is true; but on
the other hand I remembered, that I had not seen him there for twelve long
Months past. In a word, Madam, I thought the place very secure, and already
wished the Night gone, that stood like a heavy Age between me and my happiness.
Methought I already saw the transported Youth begging at my Feet, melting my
Heart, and conquering as he spoke. I dreamt of nothing but Odmar, or if I
awaked I scarce knew that I did so, for the lovely Image was so strongly
imprinted, I knew not if my Judgment or my active Fancy formed him.

When Day appeared, the morning moved so faintly, you would thought the lingering
Night had dared him to the Combat, and vowed the sole possession of the Skies.
I quit my Bed so early, that from my Chamber Window I could not descry any
thing awake but my self, a dead silence reigned in every part, and not one
watchful Bird yet welcomed in the light, the yielding Grass lay covered over
with Dew, and the nodding Trees spoke Nature in a Slumber. To any but a
Lovesick Maid, this had been no other than a melancholy Scene, and I must own
that even to my self it appeared no less. But from that melancholy my pleasure
grew; Love in absence is naturally dejected and languishing, and I firmly
believe (at least I think I felt it so) that when we are alone, and sad, the
Fancy is stronger than when our Reason drives our Passions from our Breasts,
and hardens the Soul, which Love or Grief before had melted down and made
pliant for any impressions.

While thus I stood and thought of Odmar and the coming Night, I could see,
(though with some difficulty a Man on Horseback). I waited impatiently till he
approached, (for those who Love much hope ease from every thing) and at last
knew him to be Dion and Odmar's Servant. After I had asked concerning his
Master's health, and told him that I Would awake some of the Servants to let him
in, I stole gently down Stairs my self, and (changing my Voice to a sharper
Key) desired to know if he had business with my Master? (meaning my Father)
Riga (for 'twas he, and knew me not) answered no. He begged pardon for that
disturbance he gave the Family, and said, he had lost yesterday some Papers of
consequence, and was sure he had dropped them in our House, and to his best
knowledge the last time he had them was in Daria's Chamber, when he waited upon
his Master. This increased my hopes, and I firmly believed 'twas a Plot of
Odmar's, and willing to be speedily resolved, I asked him (by way of a whisper)
if he had not a Letter for my young Mistress. No, (said he in a seeming
Passion) from whom should it come? Why (replied I) she writ to Odmar yesterday,
and from him expected an Answer. Did she! (cried he) I know nothing of the
matter, I came out early in search of my Paper, and am obliged by seven of the
Clock to attend Dion, because this Day he goes a Hunting with some of his
Neighbors. But pray (added he in another tone) Sweet heart, if it is possible
let me into Daria's Chamber, for there I Am persuaded I shall find my Papers. I
was vexed, and knew not what to make of this Adventure. If my Father had seen
me I had been undone. The fellow told me he had no Letter for me, yet wanted to
be in my Room, and spoke the story of his Papers with so much gravity and
earnestness, that I could hardly doubt the truth of what he said. Unwilling
nevertheless to betray my own weakness, I still personated the Maid, and
faintly told him that he might come softly up Stairs, and stay at the Door till
I had received her Orders. He followed, and when I entered my Chamber I was
even sick with grief, I wondered much that Odmar had not written to me, and
thought, if he eagerly had longed to see me, he had slipped no opportunity of
telling me so, and of returning those thanks my too obliging Letter well
deserved. However I was yet unwilling to condemn him, and to divert that pain
the thoughts of his unkindness brought me. I run immediately to the Door, where
I had almost forgot the poor Servant; and Night being wholly fled, he could
perceive by my morning Gown who it was then admitted him, and after a low Bow
presented me with a Letter from Odmar. I Have lost no Papers, Madam, (said he)
but you see I Have presumed to bring one, and from a Man who would renounce a
year of that term of life allotted him by Destiny, to see you as securely now
as I do. Riga's good conduct and obliging Complement so prevailed upon my
fluttering gladed Heart, that I could not for my life delay that. Reward he
deserved till I opened the Letter. The faithful Servant thankt me for my
bounty, desired me speedily to read what he had brought me, and assured me I
should ever find him constant to his young Master's interest, though I had not
tied him to it by my Liberality. The words, Madam, If I remember well were
these.

My Generous Daria,
I am Blessed beyond my hopes, or what the most ambitious e're could wish. Oh!
every minute shows a painful hour till that marked out for my happiness arrive.
I Will see thee by Heaven, though all the Elements at once opposed me, let the gods
be passive and nothing shall stop my way. I Will for ever remember Nine, for that
hour my Daria chose to bless her Odmar, shall for the future be set apart for
Love and Wine. Oppress me with heavy Cares all Day, I Will shake off the burden
when that lucky minute comes, remember the Happiness it now brings me, and even
while the Clock strikes I Will dote upon the very sound.

Odmar.


I considered this Letter as the effect of his Love, and the very product of
his real Thoughts, and knew by his style and freedom he had remembered 'twas in
safe Hands, and would be with secrecy enough conveyed to mine. However, lest
the Servant's stay should have rendered his Errand liable to suspicion I durst
not write, and only bid him tell his Master. I was pleased with what he had
sent me, but could give no immediate return, unless he hazarded a disapointment
at Night, as undoubtedly 'twould come to pass, if I should be suspected in the
morning, of holding any correspondence with my kind Odmar. The Servant
withdrew, and I could see him mount his Horse er'e any in the Family were awake.

You may wonder, Madam, when you consider my reserved way of living, and
coldness of Temper, how I was then so kind, and perhaps you may quarrel my
fondness too, and that expression my kind Odmar! But if your Grace consider my
Years, and that my inclinations were Virtuous, methinks 'twill not appear
strange or faulty; for in honest exalted Love there can be no Crime, and what
e're we say of obliging and tender, is certainly pardonable, if we do it as we
ought, which in the first place is to consider if we are truly beloved, the
merit and conduct of our Lovers, and most of all to do it privately and with
caution; for even Crimes themselves (when we confess the truth) if done in
secret, give not half that trouble to the mind, which public Trifles bring. I
read the Letter a thousand times, and in that employment consumed the tedious
Day. When the hour approached I felt those little pains to which I had been a
stranger, or at least had not before that time thought of; I feared that if the
Youth came too soon, my Father or some of the Servants might see him in the
Fields, and if I should go to the Lodge before the hour prefixed, I should be
mist and searched for. These thoughts made me very uneasy. However the danger
I feared from the last Accident was the least, and I ventured down into the
Garden. I had no sooner opened the Door, than I found my hasty Lover muffled in
his Cloak. The kind Youth caught me in his Arms. Oh my Daria! (cried he) I Am
lost in ecstasy! Pardon me if I cannot express my thoughts, to Heaven and you I
owe so much, that I must still confess my self a Bankrupt. O thou dear darling
of my Soul, forgive me if I have no more this goodness to repay, but life and
constant Love. He was so welcome to my Breast, Madam, that I could say no more
than, Oh my Odmar! What I wanted in words I supplied in looks, and I dare say
the happy young Man was pleased with all he saw.

When we went into the Lodge I locked the Door behind me; you see Odmar, (said
I) how much I Love, and the good opinion I have of you. Madam, (replied he)
that is a Complement I know not how to answer; for I Am afraid you would think me
faulty, if I said your Honor were secure and you were safe, because to mention
that were to call my nobler Love in question. No Odmar, (said I) I would be
very unhappy if I could in thought dispute the innocence of your Love or Mine;
but I Am sorry that when I see you, I must be guilty of a breach of Promise. Ha,
(cried he) is Aristeon then so much an Enemy to my Love! It seems he doubts not
your Virtue but my Treachery. But Daria he is unjust to me, for rather than
wrong thee, I Would forfeit Life, Estate, or any thing yet dearer, nay by Heaven
I Would rather banish all my hopes of being Beloved, never see thee more, and be
for ever damned to absence from my greatest Blessing. -- Yet Daria (for thou
art all goodness) think of a way to redress this mighty ill, secure thy self,
and ease thy Father of his fears, and if you Love, tie your self for ever mine.
Oh my Daria! refuse me not that Heaven I ask, our Parents soon will be
reconciled, I shall yet (if possible) increase my stock of Love, thou shall be
more fond, and all that see us shall confess us truly happy.

Madam, I hope you will own 'twas hard for a young Maid, that loved well to
keep a Medium 'twixt her Fears and Joys. His Fortune was infinitely beyond
mine, he knew his Father would be incensed, and might perhaps from a kind
Parent become a cruel Enemy; all the World was sensible of his Merit, nor could
he himself be ignorant, that 'twas in his power to wed a greater Beauty and a
larger fortune. When these thoughts fled, my sudden Cares took place, and I
already saw him unfortunate and forsaken by his Friends, 'cause he was just to
me. I saw his frowns in poverty, and an hourly decay in his Love; and methought
I already heard the poor changed Odmar whispering in my Ear, I had been great,
had I but loved thee less. This last thought stopped the hasty flight of my fond
new fledged Soul, and it was not in my power to give an answer to what the
Youth had said. My unusual silence equally moved his wonder and his fear, when
throwing himself at my feet, Daria (said he) why do you use me thus? Oh
remember it is Odmar speaks, it is the Man that Loves you, one that can never be
happy without you, and thinks the Gods have not a gift to bestow upon their
first Favorite amongst Mortals, like that I ask of you. Who can resist a
kneeling Lover, Madam? I raised him in my Arms, and fondly, yet confusedly told
him, His Love and Honor made me wholly his, and I would be eternally ruled by
him. For now I gave my all into his hands. To tell you his Joy and the kind
words he uttered, were to renew the sense of my misfortunes. No man e're said
more, no Woman e're believed more, or gave kinder yet more innocent returns,
and no two Lovers e're confided more in one another, or were happier than we.
When we had said all we could, we unwillingly were silent, and gazed upon one
another, then began afresh, praised, loved, doated, sighed and languish'd. This
happy Scene had banished all my Cares, I found my Odmar Just, and sought no
other Blessing.

At last my discreet Lover kindly told me 'twas past twelve, conjured me to
forgive him, because slipery Time had run away when he had seen his thoughts
employed. I was heartily vexed that I had managed so ill; I saw how
inconvenient 'twas for Odmar to travel at an hour so unseasonable, and yet knew
my self necessarily obliged to leave him. In this disorder of thoughts I heard
a noise in the Garden, and stealing softly to the Window, I could discern my
Father with one or two Servants, enquiring earnestly of one another if they had
yet seen me. I trembled when I heard my name pronounced, and my Lover was
almost mad with grief because he saw me so. At last they came to the Door,
where they knocked aloud, and receiving no answer, concluded I was in some
other place, either dangerously ill with a sudden fit of sickness, or by some
other accident unknown. My Father, to be better satisfied, commanded them to
break open the Door, because he said I might be there, yet fast asleep. But the
Servants assuring him that 'twas impossible, considering the noise they had
made; he was at last diverted from his resolution. My Lover while this was
acting, stood with his Sword in his hand ready to receive him, swore he had
been once tamely robbed of me, but would be so no more; that he would not
attempt Aristeon's Life, but would secure my Peace, and carry me off in spite
of all his followers; and I verily believe had my Father entered, I would have
trusted to Odmar's generosity, and fled with him. As they went off, I heard
Aristeon cry, Oh Heavens! Restore my Daughter, or take back that wretched Life
you gave me. These words wounded my very Soul; and I had almost cried Your
Daria is not lost. However seeing his search was to no purpose, he retired to
his House, and there with my weeping Mother, waited the arrival of a new day.

In the mean time 'twas so dark (and being naturally timorous) I durst not go
thorrow the Garden alone, nor could I take Odmar with me, lest I had met
Aristeon or some of the Servants by the way. My Lover saw my troubles, knew
they were upon his account, and bore an equal share; I stifled my grief as well
as I could, that I might lessen his, and with a calm brow asked him what was my
best course. I bid him at once consult my Honor and my safety. And he, who
never entertained a thought against either, said he would be advised by me. But
if I relied upon his Opinion or Judgment, I should stay in the Lodge all night,
he would stay by me, and guard me while I slept. In the morning he would retire as
early as I pleased. And that I could hardly satisfy Aristeon concerning my
Conduct, if I should go home at that hour of the Night. Odmar's Voice was to
me, Madam, no less than an Oracle, and I knew him so good and just, I scrupled
not to grant him any thing he asked. My silence showed I was resolved to stay;
and the glad Youth scarce knew how to thank me for my goodness, and that
opinion I had of his, and swore he would not betray so much innocence to gain
the first Beauty under Heaven, and the greatest Empire on Earth: Having thus
spent an hour or two, Odmar begged I Would go to Bed (for there was always one in
the Room in which my Father often lay) that sleep was necessary for the
preservation of my Health, which was dearer to him than his own Life, and
assured me he would awake me e're the Sun arose. I was much concerned at the
Proposition, and with some passion asked him if he thought my Love had banished
native modesty, or if he had advised me to stay with a design to attempt my
Honor. The kind Youth fell upon his Knees, and clasping mine, Swore by all the
Gods he never meant me ill; Daria's welfare and that of his Soul were equally
his care, and if I denied him that assurance of my Love he begged, he would
believe himself yet unhappy after all I had done for him. Why Daria, said he,
is Odmar a Common Lover? Is he not thy Husband? Let me hope our Hearts are
Joined, and sure a few trifling Ceremonies serve not to confirm the tie before
Heaven but our fellow Creatures, whose unbounded Passions must be limited and
restrained by Laws. To the Virtuous and good no force is needful, and I shall
be just to thee, as I would expect mercy from the powers in Heaven when my last
hour approaches. -- O! Madam, it is needless to say any more, I Loved even to
distraction, nor did he merit less. I yielded, and hid my blushes in his
Breast; he was blessed, nor could I think my self unhappy. That sleep he had at
first proposed was to both denied, nay was not wished or looked for; we
consumed the hours in each others Arms, and Jove sat wishing, when he viewed
our Joys.

When the unfortunate Sun appeared, and lovely Odmar rose, what agonies did my
poor Soul know! He embraced me tenderly, but without one kind word leapt from
the disordered Bed. I already feared I had shown too much of fondness, and that
the Joys of that Night had cloyed the appetite of his easy Soul. When he was
dressed, he came again to the Bed's side, took me in his Arms, sighed, and
asked me when he should be blessed again? With Tears in my eyes I told him I
was his, and that now my happiness depended upon his pleasure. To morrow's
night then (said he) let me find my Daria here, doubt not my Love or honor;
kissed me again, and so quit the Room. Oh! Madam, if you knew those cares
oppressed me when he was gone. I remembered how eloquent he had been before I
yielded, and now saw he had not one kind word to spare. His sighs increased my
fears, and I had nothing to comfort me in this new affliction, but that last
kiss he gave me, which, notwithstanding of his silence, methought did yet
express a constant tender flame.

When I opened the Door, I traced his footsteps on the Dew, and almost sunk
with the fresh remembrance of what had past. Go (said I) Odmar go, and if thou
art not so Honorable as I have judged thee, I know how to be revenged; my
Death shall atone for my guilt, and thou shall mourn the loss of her that
loved thee. As I spoke, I cast my Eyes that way the Youth had gone, and saw my
Father coming. I trembled so much as he approached, that my fears indeed were
enough to betray the secret. Ha! Daria (cried he) is this the reward of a
Father's care? Have I loved you to be the more easily betrayed by you, and is
your Virtue and Honor fled beyond Redemption! my passion is not master of my
Judgment, and I forbear to use you as I ought to do, though I Have traced Odmar,
and saw him on the other side of the River. But take this for my positive
resolution, never see me more; since you obeyed not the instruction of a kind
Father, I shall, nay I have forgot that ever I had a Daughter. I had spent the
night in pleasure, and the morning in Tears, so that I had not time to feign a
story to divert his Anger. I threw my self therefore at his feet, and sunk with
grief, could hardly bid him think I yet was Virtuous. Yes, yes, Daria (replied
he) you are Virtuous! I can read in your Eyes no signs of last nights Revels!
But come (continued he, and taking me by the hand) let us see the Scene where
the dishonor of my House was acted. When he came to the Bed, Oh, Madam, I
blush to tell, that the marks of Virgin Loves confessed that weakness which I
strove to hide. My Father was Thunderstruck with what he saw, and running out
of the Room, I could hear him at some distance cry, Oh my lost Daria! I Am sure,
Madam, you will confess it is impossible to paint that grief I then felt; I fell
into a swoon upon the Bed, and there lay some hours e're I recovered my senses.
When my Judgment returned, I felt a new return of all my pains too, I was ready
to end all my griefs by one dire Blow, and I Am firmly persuaded, if any
instrument of Death had been nigh, I had not now lived to mourn the loss of
Odmar. However amidst all my sorrows I remembered that Appointment he had made
the succeeding night, and though I doubted much his Constancy, I resolved to wait
the event. Till that time should come I knew not whither to betake my self, I
could not fly to a Friend's House, because then my shame would be notorious,
and durst not venture to show my self at home, when Aristeon had sworn he never
would own me; e're I could come to a resolution, my afflicted Mother entered
the Lodge. Well Daria, (said she) I come not to reproach you with a Crime that
cannot now be mended, but to tell you that no Arguments can yet reconcile you
to your Father. He denies your admittance to his House. This indiscreet way of
Loving, has sown that reproach upon our Family, (for can you think Odmar will
wed a Fortune so mean as yours!) which no time shall be able to Root out. In a
word, Aristeon is mad with Grief, and you may guess at mine. However, come
along with me, and stay in your Chamber without his knowledge, for my Tears may
yet persuade him to forgive this fault of Love and Youth. I was not able to
give any answer to this tenderness of Julietta's, my grief was visible in my
Face, and sufficiently pleaded my excuse. I obeyed then, and when I was left
alone in my Room, in a few minutes my condition was the same it had been a
little before my Mother had come to me; and when the troubles of my mind again
allowed me the use of my senses, I read my Odmar's Letters a thousand times,
but found not half that pleasure in 'em I had known before. At Night Julietta
came again to see me, told me my Father's sorrow was nothing yet abated, and
that he was resolved not lose Dion's Friendship, bid me make use of my Reason,
and shun immoderate Grief, and so left me to my self. I spent the Night without
sleep, and the next Morning yet increased my fears, for now the hour
approached, in which I was again to see my Odmar, from whom alone I hoped and
wished relief. To be short, Madam, Night at last arrived, but not my Lover. How
I longed and waited for him in that Lodge, where I had been once so happy, no
Tongue can utter; I staid there all Night, and, though in the dark and alone,
void of my wonted fears, and only wept my own folly, and the young Man's unkind
absence.

In the Morning I found a Paper lying upon the Bed, I knew it to be Odmar's,
and wondered that my Father had not seen it the other Day. You must know,
Madam, (for so I understood afterward) 'twas written by a Friend of his, to
whom I have since that time been much indebted. Having opened it with
impatiency, I found these words.

Accursed be those who Marriage vows began,
'Twas a mere trick to bubble easy Man.
An holy Cheat, a promised Heaven never found,
Cozens the Traveller like enchanted Ground.
Which when he seeks to tread he never can find,
Flies quick away, and leaves no marks behind.
Some doting Coxcomb may with pleasure Wed,
And with some lovely Female share his Bed;
Who Will sigh and clasp him in her treacherous Arms,
And feed his Letchery with a thousand Charms;
Weep when he is sick, and feign a real Grief,
Offer her Blood, nay Soul for his relief.
The blind old Ass believes, and mourning lies,
Views the dear Jilt, with sorrow in his Eyes,
Gives her a Jointure and a Cully dies;
While she (poor thing) to ease her anxious Breast,
E're he is half cold admits an abler Guest.
His brawny Foot-man's Master of the Spoil,
And swims in Gold he gains with midnight Toil.
The Roman Knight by all was praised, when he
Despised a Gulf to let his Country see
He Would plunge himself to set his Neighbors free.
To me no Love like that shall e're be known,
I Will know no other Interest but my own.
Fond Maids may think I Will Wed, but I Will enjoy,
Promise and never perform, since for a Toy
None but a Fool would's Liberty destroy.
When Heaven would punish Sins and anger show;
It joins two Beggars, and it leaves them so.
Each cries for help, which neither can afford,
This blames his Wife, and that her needy Lord,
While Sir Loyn shunning noise forsakes the board.
Some yielding Nymph --
You see by this broken line, Madam, the piece was not perfected, however,
there was enough to move my grief and wonder; I was now fully persuaded Odmar
was unjust, and even when I believed him so, wondered that a Man, who looked so
like a god, could in his Nature be the worst of Villains. I knew he was a Poet
for his own pleasure, and found by what I had read, he had spoke his
Sentiments, not half his Art or Wit. I saw my Fortune painted in each line, and
now (though never before) I wished I had not seen him. I found my ruin
ineyitable, for since Odmar was unkind, I had no more to lose. I had too
convincing a proof of my ill Fortune, when I considered he had written to me in
the Morning, when he was to see me that Night, and could not reasonably have
expected a Letter from him; and that now when he had given me the
disapointment, he had not been at the pains to excuse himself, or say that yet
he loved me.

This, Madam, is a tedious way of telling the story of my Love. But I can do no
less than acquaint you with my Griefs, because the remembrance of these things
fill my Soul, and yet deny a room to any other thought. To be short then as
possibly I can, I resolved speedily to abandon the World, and retire to a
Nunnery a few Miles distant from Odmar's House. I had two young Cousins there,
whom Love had made Religious, and I resolved to spend my Days like them. I went
privately to my Chamber, and took from thence every thing of Value and of
little Bulk, read my Lover's kind Letters, and afterward burnt them; with my
Eyes took a long farewell of every thing in the House, and, drowned in Tears, I
left it.

I had not walked far, when my Grief and Trouble made me know, I was too weak
for a Journey of five long Miles on Foot. Half faint beneath a shady Tree I
lay, and viewed the watchful Shepherds driving out their Flocks, and wantoning
even in Rags. I compared their happiness with mine, and often wished I had been
born like them, to moderate Wants, or to an humbler Fortune, blessed with Peace
and Innocence. I mourned all my Misfortunes at once, but most of all I grieved
the loss of Odmar's Letters; for I found even then when I suffered so much for
him, 'twas not in my Power to hate him.

While thus I lay, I could see at some distance two Men on Horse back; 'twas
yet so very early in the Morning, I could hardly think them less than Robbers.
My fears suggested a thousand things to me, I remembered I was a Woman helpless
and alone; and yet, Madam, by that great Power I swear that gave me first a
Being, I wished them Murderers, Ravishers, or any thing that was Cruel. Life
was become a perfect burden to me, and I was resolved some way or other to be
relieved from the weight. As they approached, I stepped into the Road, and
exposed, as if I had done it by Chance, any thing of value about me to tempt
the vicious Wretches, then by resistance prompt them on to fury. This conduct I
confess was a greater Crime than any I had yet committed, but your Grace will
consider that Despair has no acquaintance with Reason, and I did it with a
settled design to advance my ruin. When they came close up to me, Oh Heavens!
what art can express my surprise, for I had almost fainted with excess of Joy!
In the depth of my misery, and sunk beneath my self, my kind, just Odmar came
to raise me up. Oh Daria! (cried he, alighting from his Horse) Whither art thou
going? Why do I read in thy Face so many signs of past grief? Did you suspect
me? Oh! by Heavens! I Am mad with Joy! For whatever has brought thy Tears, I
find thy Sorrows to thy Beauties add. When I could speak, Oh Odmar! (said I) do
I owe this happiness to Chance or You? No, (replied he suddenly) to your self
only, if you had been less Fair, or less Kind, I had been less Constant; and
now I know you Love me, we shall both be happy. But I have nothing, my Dear,
(continued he) to repay that Joy you give me, a heart excepted, which Heaven
designed but for it self and you; for I have acquainted Dion with my Love, but
he (though otherwise kind) is inexorable, and swears if I persist he never shall
see me more. The hopes nevertheless of obtaining his consent kept me from my
Daria yesterday, but could not do so to day. Ah! Odmar, (cried I) The gods were
passive, and you might have come. But I am ruined, my Father has banished me
from his House, and our stolen happiness is -- No, (said he, interrupting me,
and with all the tenderness imaginable) if my Love can repay the loss of
Aristeon's smiles, my Daria is not ruined. Here (continued he, and turning to
his Friend) this is my Wife; You can confirm our Vows already made, and as you
tender my Life obey. To be brief, Madam, Odmar was singular in his Love and
Virtues. We were that day married, (for his Friend was a Priest, whom the kind
Youth had brought on purpose) blessed with safe possession, and both Exiles,
cause we loved too well.

We retired to a Gentleman's House, who was Odmar's Relation and mine too. He
writ often to his Father, but the old Man was deaf to all entreaties. Mine
would not lose Dion's Friendship, though he pardoned me in his Heart; and my
Mother alone was kind to us both, and sent me frequent Letters in return of
mine. We went seldom abroad, we were welcome to our kind Friend, we loved more
passionately than ever, and scarce one Night past without a recital of our
first night's Joys, our mutual Fears that followed, his longings, my Pains, and
those thoughts we entertained for one another, when first old Dion languish'd
in our House. Thus, Madam, we lived two Years, and I can confidently affirm,
that to the last hour we had those little Cares to please, true Love, and
constant fondness for each other, we knew that Night I yielded in the Lodge. At
last this happy Scene vanished, and though the story grates my Soul, and awakes
my slumbering Griefs, yet, Madam, for your satisfaction take it thus.

Our King (the good Othredus) unfortunate in his Councils, though of himself Just
and Merciful even to a fault, was at last by Knaves betrayed, and by his
Friends abandoned. In this extremity he fled, and (seeking protection from his
neighboring Monarch) left the Government to the management of others.
Scarronida was so fond of their new Government, that he was judged a Traitor to
his Country, who enterrain'd but favorable thoughts for his native injured
Lord. The Eastern part of the Nation, nevertheless betook themselves to Arms,
and though they were but a handful of Men, (the number of their Enemies
considered) boldly kept the Field, and bid Defiance to the new crowned Head.
Dion was one in this Loyal Army, and finding he was incapable of enduring those
fatigues inherent to his Post, he sent at last for Odmar. My Father fought as
he did, and whether or not he persuaded the old Man to reassume his good Nature
upon this occasion, I cannot positively affirm. My kind Husband showed me the
Letter he had received, and asked my advice concerning that Answer he designed,
when at the same time he knew I had that respect for his Judgment, which fond
little Children bear to that of a tender Mother. In a word, though the old Man
had freely pardoned him, yet he would not obey, till first he had secured his
Daria, and therefore let him know, that though he was kind, yet his Son was still
unfortunate, unless he were doubly so to me; and, as a mark of his unfeigned
Reconciliation, settled one half of his Estate upon me, if 'twere my Fortune to
survive so good a Husband. Dion readily agreed to this, and assured him he
deserved more than he had to bestow upon him, since his constancy to me
sufficiently excused his primitive disobedience upon the score of Love. I
firmly believe our hospitable Friend Tameran, (for that was his Name) alone
grieved our better Fortune. He was an old Bachelor and an hater of Women, and
the Author of those lines which Odmar had Copied, and by chance dropped in the
Lodge, yet he confessed that in spite of his humor he found a certain
pleasure, when he saw our mutual fondness, and happy way of living, and often
swore if he could find a Woman like me, and himself could Love like Odmar, he would
be no more an Enemy to Marriage. When we came to Dion's House, we were received
with all that respect and assurances of his affection we could desire, and
Aristeon wept for Joy to see his Daughter blessed

'Twas never my chance to be every way Happy, and Odmar's absence lessened or
quite removed the sense of my present Fortune. The Loyal Army lay but a few
Miles from Dion's House, so that I heard from him every Day, and by the gods I
swear, Madam, I read the Letters with the same Joy, I knew when faithful Riga
gave me that one I mentioned under a pretense of seeking Papers which he never
had lost. Heaven never saw two such Lovers, and when the new King's Army came
into the bosom of our Country, I felt a thousand deadly Fears for the constant
sharer of my Joys.

In a few Days they came to a pitched Battle, where the General of the old
King's Forces lost his Life, though he gained the Victory. He conquered, and
Death o'recame the Conqueror: Odmar flew to my Arms, the danger once I feared
was now past, and security made us doubly blessed. He stayed a Month, which as
an hour appeared, and the new King having mustered new Troops, he left me to
seek new Hazards: The Armies again met, but Fortune had fled with the General,
and we (if I may properly say I was on Odmar's side) lost the Day, and all that
Honor we had gained before. My Husband however was safe, and I asked no more;
our remaining Troops were by degrees cut off, and in a short time no Man
appeared in Arms but Dion and his Followers. Unable to keep the Field he
retired to a little Town, which yet owned no power superior to his own. This he
fortified and stored with Provisions, such as the harrass'd Country could
afford. In the mean time the successful Monarch, wearied with the Civil War,
and willing to secure with seeming mercy what with Blood he had purchased,
offered to every Man that would lay down his Arms the benefit of a Kariph, with
you call an Act of Indemnity. Dion, who wisely saw he could be no longer
serviceable to his Prince by an obstinate resistance, laid hold of this
opportunity, and made his Peace with Honor. In short, our Gates were opened,
we relied upon the Conquerour's Promise, admitted his Troops, and made 'em
bosom Friends. Now it was, I thought my self beyond the reach of Fortune's
frowns, and almost elevated above the power of Fate. Dion and Aristeon found
themselves blessed beyond what e're they hoped, and never saw us without Joy
and Wonder. Oh Heavens! how innocently we lived, and loved as when first we
swore we did so. Poor Odmar thought of nothing but his Daria, and I never
dreamt of any thing but him. We descried new Beauties in one another every Day,
longed and wished like Bride and Bridgroom, gazed, embraced, and knew no pains,
but when in each others Arms we sighed and feared we had not loved alike. --
Now, Madam, pardon my Tears, for when I have told you all, you will own my griefs
are just.

One Night as awake I lay, I heard my Odmar groaning in his Sleep. 'Twas the
first time he ever had done so, and I was much amazed; but more, when suddenly
raising himself up, he cried, Oh spare my Daria 's, and I Will give you mine. Ha
my Dear! (cried I) Whither does your fancy wander? Why thus afear'd when
there is no danger nigh. The kind Youth roused from his Sleep, caught me in his
Arms, kissed me with transport, sighed, and would have slept again, had not I
pressed his hand in mine, and conjured him to tell me why he had pronounced my
Name. Ah! Daria, (said he) I can yet hardly think I have thee in my Arms, so
much I feared thee lost. I dreamt (and oh methinks 'twas a very lively dream)
that Tameran our kind Friend, who entertained us when unfortunate, pulled aside
the Curtain, and with looks that spoke him filled with dire revenge, threatened
thy life and mine, for Crimes he feared that I had done, but meant not to
reveal. You take me for a Friend, (said he) but you shall find a Foe, where
least you dreamt of one; I trust not the Man who once offends, for though he begs
my pardon afterward, yet I consider that as the effect of my power and his
necessity, not Love or real Friendship. This said, methought he struck his
Dagger to my Heart, and swore you too should bleed. 'Twas that my Dear,
(continued he) which broke the Chain of Sleep, and set my Tongue at liberty.
When Odmar spoke, I felt the same pain as if it had not been a dream; but that
which sunk me most, was that this same Night I had seen old Dion expiring on
his Bed, and ghastly in his Wounds. To increase my fears, my Windows stood all
open, and between me and the Skies I saw the Heads and Limbs of murdered
Friends, heard the shrieks of tortured Souls that wandered in the Air, and
howling Ghosts to snowy shrowds confined. I shrunk, and graspt my Odmar in my
Arms, and e're I spoke I Would view the Scene again; but as I was about to tell my
fears to my Dear kind Youth, I heard a dreadful noise upon the Stairs. The
Chamber Door was immediately forced open, and Ruffians masked in Armor
straight rushed in: My fears would not let me cry. But the more daring Odmar
leapt from the Bed, and with his Sword received them. Oh Heavens! this godlike
Man did all a mortal could, but covered over with Wounds at last he fell. Oh
base Villains! Oh Daria! Daria! he cried, and in that moment died. The
senseless Clay their utmost sury felt, and they stabbed Odmar, after Odmar fled.
I saw't, Madam, (and oh that I lived to see so much) yet found that 'twas not
in my power to speak, for my Soul (affrighted with the horrid sight) retired
and left me destitute of sense. This alone saved my Life, for the cruel
murderers when they saw me motionless on the Floor, and drenched in my
Husband's Blood, believed me dead, e're they forsook the Room. When I recovered
my Soul half fled, I knew not what to think, I was in a perfect frenzy, and
would have thought all a Dream still, if I had not found the wounded Body by
me, nay even then I scarce could think my self awake; for when I examined my
life past, in all my search I saw not one massy Sin that could have pulled this
cruel stroke from Heaven, nor could I think that the just gods had used me so,
when I had studied never to offend. The bloody Executioners had carried their
dark Lanthorns with them, and I, to be convinced of my own unhappiness,
(undrest as I was) run into the other Room to tell old Dion that his Son was
lost, and Daria just grown Mad; for, Madam, I must confess I really was so. Oh!
what words or art can paint my pains, and the horrors of that Night! The
Father was murdered e're the Son was cold, and Aristeon shared in Odmar's fate,
he and my Mother were both butchered; and (if so Heaven had pleased) would
Daria too had died, for not one of Dion's Relations escaped but my self. You
may wonder, Madam, that e're a Man was found to Execute so barbarous a
Commission, for you must know (though it is very strange) the new Statesmen
fearing, that (if the exiled Prince should at any time attempt the recovery of
his own) Dion would prove a dangerous Subject, they thought it sitting by this
cruel method to prevent that ill they feared. My just griefs robbed me of the
use of my Reason, and 'twas my Fortune not to feel the weight of my own unhappy
Fate, (for oh, Madam, I had lost the best of Men) but during the time of my
short intervals. A neighboring old Gentlewoman of Julietta's acquaintance took
a particular care of me, and after fifteen long Months I was again my self. But
though blessed with my Reason, I was still oppressed with Grief, and therefore
without acquainting any body, (nay my benefactor her self was kept a stranger
to it) I quit the Scene where all my ills were acted, and came in Tears to
Armenis. My Fortune preferred me to your Graces esteem, to whom I confess I am
more indebted than all my coming services can e're repay. I Have told you a story
I have long concealed, and, Madam, you may believe the Widow of Odmar would
not so far betray her Honor, as to conceal any part of the truth, or add any
thing that was not so.

Here, my Albisinda, the lovely unfortunate Daria ended her Story, and the
tender hearted Duchess wept for Odmar's death, begged her pardon if she had
not used her conform to her Quality and Merit, and assured her, that for the
future she would make it her Study to teach her to forget her Misfortunes.
Eriphile was always good, and she was at this time so much concerned for the
death of so kind a Man, that she told Daria she could dwell eternally upon the
Story, and there settle her thoughts, if the sad remembrance and frequent
repetition did not renew the Tears of one who had so just cause to Mourn: As
she spoke Erinthus entered. The Duchess received the fortunate Youth with all
the tenderness of a conquered Beauty, told him the Duke was gone to Court, and
kind Love had allotted the few minutes of his absence for the happiness of
both. Poor Daria blushed and withdrew, and the Lovers, now left to themselves,
let loose their wishes, and surfeited in pleasure. But as they lay in each
others Arms, their Souls upon the Wing, and feared, by coveting too fast,
desire should be lost, the injured Duke arrived; pardon me, Albisinda, if I
omit not the particulars of this Adventure. Their mutual Joys had banished
usual Fears, and he knocked at the Chamber Door e're they had thought him nigh.
Erinthus nimbly started from the Bed, and sensible of his own danger, and the
Crime he had committed, half dressed, leapt from the Chamber-Window into the
Garden, and with the hazard of his Neck made his escape. Entheon saw him, and,
in a height of sudden passion, fired a Pistol after him, but without the wished
success. It Is easy to guess in what a posture he found the lovely Duchess,
half dead with fear, and unable to hide, what even to Entheon she should have
never exposed though in her state of Innocence: Besides, to evince her guilt, and
that she had been actually happy in another Arms, the lucky Youth when from
the Bed he leapt, had left the usual Marks of Love behind him. This indeed, the
Duke had not the misfortune to see, for one of the Maids, who was privy to the
Amor, entered the Chamber with him, and hid the base remains of interrupted
Love.

Eriphile at once blushed and wept, she saw 'twas impossible to deny what had
past between her and Erinthus, and did not so much as offer to extenuate the
Crime. Entheon knew his Honor betrayed, his constant Love repaid with
Treachery, and grieved that e're he went to Cisala's House. Then again
remembering her Blushes, when first he saw her in the Garden, her Love which at
that time was real, and all those tender words she uttered in his Arms, since
she became a Wife, he grew almost mad, and the thoughts of losing so much
sweetness racked his very Soul: Again he eyed the weeping Fair, and again
stormed and grieved. He cursed the hour brought Erinthus to his House, and saw
that if he revenged this great affront, he could gain no honor by it, the
Quality of the offender considered. Besides Eriphile was always dear to him,
and now (though false to the last degree) as lovely as ever she had been. The
powerful Charms of a weeping Beauty can never be truly painted. To have seen
the Duchess at this time was to be eternally hers, and when she looked upon
her injured Lord, she showed a certain softness, of force enough to enslave at
once the Judgment and the Soul. You may believe then, Albisinda, the generous
Entheon was not insensible when he beheld her. He sat sometime speechless, and
thinking on his loss, then suddenly starting up, he threw himself upon the Bed,
took her in his Arms, and kissed away her fears. Ah, Eriphile! (cried he) how I
loved you, Heaven and you can tell! How my constancy has been rewarded, I Am
ashamed to speak! But oh! why Erinthus is preferred to Entheon, you alone can
say! Was your Honor (now inseparably tied to mine) a Triffle, and Marriage
Vows a whim of Priesthood? No, no, Eriphile, the World will take notice of the
first, and Heaven I fear can scarce neglect the latter. But I, by all that is
good, forgive you. Let not my disgrace and your weakness be the Table discourse
of a whole Nation: Let all that is past be hushed up in eternal Silence, and for
the future to Entheon and to your self be just. Sure, Albisinda, you will confess
'twas a double Sin to offend so good a Husband. The tender Eriphile for that
time was truly sensible of this, and, drowned in Tears, (though yet in Bed) threw
her self upon her Knees, graspt Entheon's Hand, and, weeping, swore by all the
Powers above, and by that just Heaven she had too much offended, she grieved
what she had done, and for the future would prove her self the most obedient
humble Wife that ever yet was known; adding, his excess of Goodness and
Generosity increased the weight of her Guilt; she saw with sorrow, how far she
had erred, and assured him that no temptation should e're again persuade her to
forget how much she owed to Entheon or her self. The kind Duke forgave her all,
raised her up, took her again to his Arms, and told her he grieved nothing
more, than that Erinthus, proud of so great a Conquest, might betray the
Secret; to prevent which, 'twas fitting he should bleed, for the security of
hers and his own Honor. The lovely Eriphile, though she truly repented the wrong
she had done her Husband, yet found too soon she had not wholly banished her
Lover from her Breast. She eyed the Duke with concern, and reading in his Face
the signs of close revenge, she fell a second time upon her Knees, conjured him
to believe that she was heartily sensible of that fault she had committed, but
could not think the death of Erinthus, the most proper method to secure his
Honor; begged as he tendered her Life, he would lay aside that thought, and, as he
had already promised, pardon all that was done. The Duke could deny her
nothing; and sure, Albisinda, his easiness that way was very pardonable; for
had she stood before that surly old Cynicks Diogenes, he would not have used her
with that freedom he expressed to the World's great Conqueror, he would willingly
have quit his Book, and gazed upon her, or at least have sought no other light
but what her eyes could give. Oh, Albisinda! some People may blame him for an
excess of good Nature, upon this and other Emergencies that concerned Eriphile.
But then, believe me, their Hearts are of a different Mould from that of this
Noble Man, and they never saw Eriphile, or were capable of any tenderness, that
think they could have resented the ill she had done; especially when she
kneeled and begged forgiveness. In a word, my Albisinda, Entheon granted every
thing, she promised any thing, he believed all, she seemed sensible of all, and
both were happy in a new Agreement.

I Am afraid Albisinda, (for I frankly confess my want of Art or Power to move
the Passions) that by this time you wish my Letter finished. But the story
affords no great number of Adventures, and that of Daria, having wasted more
than half my time, you will find me generous in spite of my self, because
necessarily obliged to relieve you from the trouble. I shall then, Madam, (like
our famous Teachers) only beg one minutes patience, and venture to take two.

The Duke though he had loved much, and believed much, yet could not choose but
fear more. He remembered that Eriphile was a Woman, that Erinthus was young and
handsome, that he was new, and already in possession of her Favors. These
considerations taught him to observe her Conduct narrowly, he consulted her
very looks, and though his Judgment always mastered his Passions, yet sometimes
he could not choose but think, he read his own dishonor painted in her Eyes. On
the other hand the Duchess feared to offend, because she could not reasonably
expect to find him always merciful. Erinthus grieved the loss of his happiness,
but more Eriphile's cares, and knew not that the Duke had signed her pardon,
and sealed it with his Love. Unwilling nevertheless to lose that happiness he
had enjoyed, by the help of powerful Guinea, he conveyed the following
Billet-deux to the longing Duchess.

Madam,
I know not how to write, or how to express my thoughs; I am ignorant upon what
terms you stand with the Duke, and oppressed with sorrow for what happened. I
am safe, but if Eriphile Loves not, more unfortunate than if that Bullet
designed for my ruin, had lodged within my Heart. From all my pains I rely upon
you for ease, and till I see you, Madam, believe me your unhappy

Erinthus.


The Duchess (though once half resolved to forget him) was o're-joy'd to know
him safe, and in spite of all her Resolutions found she loved him more than
ever. When she retired to her Closet to consult her Judgment what to do, e're
she was aware, she writ him this Answer.

Erinthus,
DAnger adds to Pleasure, and Fears endear the Blessing when enjoyed. Meet me
in your Coach to morrow's Night, precisely at eight, in the King's walk beyond
the Garden.

E -- e.


The happy young Man received it, and failed not to obey. When the hour came,
he appeared upon the place with all the longings of a Lover; as yet he saw not
one Woman there, and was almost assured of a disappointment, when a lovely
Youth approached his Chariot. Erinthus believed him sent from the Duchess, and
bid the Coachman stop, and you may think him happily surprised, when he found
the handsome Youth was no other than the Duchess of Entheon. The Duke shortly
after, by chance, drove the same way, and as he past, Eriphile gave him a low
Bow, as other strangers did. You may assure your self, they stayed not long in
the Walk, there were greater sweets to be found in a Bedchamber than in the
open Fields, and they forgot all those hazards they had lately past. At ten
they parted, and the Duchess got home with all that ease and security she
desired. Her two faithful Maids stood at the Gate to receive her, and as she
entered informed her that Entheon was at home, that he had inquired after her,
but that they had told him she was indisposed, and begged his Grace's pardon.
Had Fortune continued this kindness, all had been well; but, Albisinda, you will
confess 'twas hard, that e're she had fairly entered the Room, and ready to
undress, the impatient Duke knocked at the Door. Eriphile (with a Voice
seemingly faint) asked who it was, and knowing too soon that 'twas the Duke, you
may easily think she was startled with the sudden apprehension of her danger.
But not so confused as to neglect her own safety, she told his Grace, she was
so very ill, she could not yet come to the Door without difficulty. Entheon,
who loved her to distraction, feared that her indisposition might indeed be
dangerous, and, unable to live one minute from her sight, gently forced it
open, and found her in the same dress in which she had blessed her Lover; her
Wig and Sword lay obvious on the Table, and not one sign of indisposition
appeared. The great Entheon became dumb with sorrow, and the charming Eriphile
knew not what to say for her self. At last, the Duke broke silence, and calmly,
but with trouble, told her, That if she was not really sick, she ought to have
been so, seeing his Honor had again been stabbed, and hers was truly dead. This
generous Man, Albisinda, said no more; he loved her even yet, and grieved her
weakness. He eyed her a while, and in spite of all his Courage his Heart
melted. But willing to hide his softness, he feigned another Passion, showed
anger in his looks, and yet in Tears withdrew. When he was gone, Eriphile threw
her self upon the Bed, wept her own Misfortune, and wished she could yet be
sensible of Entheon's merit; and when with pain she viewed him noble, as when
first he saw her, Erinthus leapt between her and the lovely form, and she could
think of nothing else but him. In the mean time the Duke sent for the Earl of
Cisala, and acquainted him with all that past since that Night she and Fidelia
went to the Playhouse. The old Man was infinitely surprised with what he
heard, and thankt him for that moderation he had shown, in an affair where so
many provoking causes were given, and told him, that Eriphile's Education had
never taught her to dishonor his House, and again blessed him for not exposing
to the World the disgrace of his seduced Daughter. Eriphile yet lay upon the
Bed, and was perfectly mad with grief, when she saw her Husband and her Father
enter. She was too in that dress which betrayed the Secret; and, weeping as she
rose to receive them. Ah my Lord, (said she to Cisala) I own my guilt, load me
not with reproaches, but rob me of my Life, for I deserve not to live; since
I Have dishonored you, and wronged so good a Husband, Oh Entheon! (continued
she) I cannot ask forgiveness, you have been too kind, and I too ungrateful, yet
e're I dye let me receive your Pardon. Whether she truly repented or not,
Albisinda, is not to be doubted; for she never saw Entheon, but she loved him.
But when he and Erinthus were both absent, her Heart inclined to the latter,
and owned him much the happier Man. But, Madam, why should I detain you longer
upon this Adventure, since I Have already promised a speedy Conclusion. In a word
then, the Duke loved too well, and she was too charming. Her new dress gave her
a thousand Graces, exposed the tenderness and delicacy of her shape, and showed
so much of softness in her Air, 'twas enough to have charmed the most
insensible of Human Kind, for even when in the Grove she lay, and showed by
chance what else had been concealed, her Limbs appeared not to the vanquished
Youth, with half those Beauties which he now discovered. Cisala too interceded
for her, and 'twas morally impossible for the Duke not to be reconciled to so
fair an offender.

Things being thus settled, they lived for some time in a seeming Union. How far
their Hearts were engaged in this peace I shall not offer to determine, but by
what has followed it appears, the Duchess kept not to Articles on her side.
Erinthus it seems had too many Charms to be with ease forgot, and even in
Entheon's Arms she sighed and wished for him. The Duke some Months after was
obliged to go into the Country, where he stayed a considerable time. He trusted
much to Eriphile's Promises, and (confident of her future conduct) left her
with that ease and peace of mind, which happy Husbands know, of virtuous Wives
possessed. In his absence 'twas impossible for Eriphile to be constant to her
Vows, Erinthus attacqu'd her with Letters, and all the Arts of a cunning Lover,
knowing that where a Woman once has yielded, it is rarely found she can deny
again. In a word, the Lover was again happy, and the witty fair Eriphile again
was faulty. The continued absence of Entheon gave them all that security they
could desire, and frequent meetings made the Crime at last so obvious, that all
the World took notice on it. Every Servant in the House knew it, and though they
loved the Duchess, yet hated the happy Lover. He often stayed all Night; and
it is known that two of the Maids at a certain time peeping throw the Keyhole
saw them in Bed together, the Curtain at foot being open, and next morning
could perceive the marks of impious Love, and signs of Honor lost. Nay the
Intrigue grew so notorious, that Erinthus's Friends inquired for him no where
but at the Duke of Entheon's; and Fidelia, one day before many witnesses, by
way of raillery, asked Eriphile, if Erinthus was not in her Closet? We shall see
him (said she laughing) appear by and by like a fatigued Traveller. There was
one thing too, which evidently demonstrated that familiarity between the Fair
One and this fortunate Youth. One of her Maids coming accidentally into the
Room, found the charming Duchess in a Posture that visibly betrayed past or
intended Crimes; for she was sitting upon the Bed, where the happy Lover was
allowed those freedoms which fire the weary Soul, and give new flames, that
when increased expire. It Is impossible to find me an Anchorite so frozen or
devout, that could have seen the half of all those Charms, without a passion
not to be expressed; his Hands graspther naked Limbs, she wantoned, wished and
sighed, and showed so much of pleasure in her Eyes, his very Soul grew giddy
with the Joy. The Duchess (and not without just cause) was heartily displeased
with that discovery the Maid had made, and in a passion, to which she was much
a stranger, desired Erinthus would for this impudence kick her down Stairs; but
it is to be presumed she said him that labor by her speedy absence.

At last the unwelcome Duke came from the Country, and having those in the
Family who watched the behavior of his Wife, he was soon informed how faulty
she had been. However he concealed his resentment as much as possible, took her
as kindly to his Arms as ever, and only waited for an ocular proof of her
infidelity, e're he should attempt to right himself. Eriphile believed him
ignorant of all, and without a blush received him. This added to his inward
Fury, and I may almost believe, (so much he hated dissimulation and treachery)
that had she again confessed the truth, and again begged pardon, he had loved
again. But Fortune was never her Friend, and she never yet was guilty of any
thing, but what was by some ^ccident or other unluckily betrayed. Doubtless,
Albisinda, there are Ladies in Clusa who have done ^s much as ever she did, who
yet pass for Virtu^us, and would faint (at least be thought to do so) when they
heard but the name of dishonest Love mentioned before a Witness.

The Duke one evening returning from Court, and almost entering Clusa, he found
his Coach suddenly stopped by the over turning of an Hack^ey, which crossed that
Road in which he was. The voice of a Lady, frighted with her fall, required
Entheon's assistance; and, leaping from his Chariot, you will not find it easy
to paint his surprise, when he saw Eriphile and her Lover ari^ing from the
Ground! The surprised Youth, unwilling to run the hazard of the Duke's Fury,
whom he had too visibly injured, abandoned the place, and between running and
walking soon vanished from his sight. The wise Husband was pleased he fled,
knowing 'twas beneath himself to resent the Villainy. He weighed his Birth and
Eriphile's repeated guilt, and now resolved upon a way of revenge proper to her
Crimes, he stepped again into his Chariot, and without speaking one word to the
mortified Duchess, ordered the Coachman to drive immediately home. Poor
Eriphile was almost mad with grief, she could not expect kinder usage from the
Duke, nor could she blame Erinthus for what he did; though if she had not loved
too much, she had not forgot that he went off and left her in the hands of an
incensed Husband. In the mean time the Coach was again fitted up, and she came
to Clusa with more sorrow than e're she had known before; she durst not trust
her self with the Duke after what had past, nor could she think of being truly
welcome to her Father. To relieve her from these anxieties, as she entered the
Port, Erinthus (who had waited with impatiency) showed himself; she was glad to
see him, and the Coach door boing opened, she received him with all that
tenderness of which a Woman is capable. To be short, Albisinda, they went off
together, and Eriphile now secure in her Lover's House, forgot her fears, her
Honor and her Husband. She remembered not now how much she was esteemed when
Virtuous, and scarce could think her broken Vows a Crime. Entheon in the mean
time sought to redress his Honor, and before the Regala (with us called a
Spiritual Court) sued for a Divorce. The Duchess, though unfortunate in her
amor, had nevertheless managed it so well, that he found it impossible to cast
her; and though 'twas known that she was guilty of the Crime laid to her Charge,
yet it could not at that time be proved; and she enjoyed her Lover and her
Fortune. The Duke's and her dishonor was now the public Theme of every
discourse in Clusa, all Men were sorry for her, and no Man condemned his
discreet Conduct. But, Albisinda, her confidence of her own safety advanced her
Misfortune. Entheon was too great a Man to be always abused, and having at last
removed his Suit, the powerful Segdarin (or Senate) did him Justice, and she is
at this time the Divorced Eriphile, once the happy Duchess of Entheon. Some
People may allege, that the Duke was too formal in his Resentment, and that he
ought to have punished Erinthus as the Crime deserved; that is to say,
Albisinda, shot him when he found him in his way to Clusa, or at least after
his disappointment in the first Trial. But it is certain Entheon chose the
better way; 'twas known to every Man that he wanted not Courage, and in in his
Youth he has even run beyond Seas, on purpose nobly to resent affronts to
others done, who were not truly capable of doing Justice to themselves or him,
whose Honor suffered in their Persons.

You see, Albisinda, (because I would not rob you of all patience) l've come to
a conclusion so speedily, that I have almost cramped the Story: But you are the
Woman whom by no means I would offend, and though I writ with pleasure, yet I
deny my self a continuation of that happiness, rather than be too troublesome.
Oh, Albisinda! if you knew my thoughts or inclinations, you (...) pardon
whatever has escaped me in my Letter. If you have found any thing in i^ too
Natural, that is, Albisinda, not truly nice enough, believe 'twas a force upon
me to please others. But if I have offended you, I buy their Friendship at a
price too dear. How cruel you have been, Madam, I cease to mention now, but I
presume this way of writing was not prohibited that fatal Night in which you
told me I was ever to expect your Friendship, and the happiness of being the
first Man in your Esteem, but could not hope for Love. Albisinda, I could trace
the Story even to that place where first we met, and where two Fools (who alone
it seems are fortunate) were happy, and had that Heaven they sought, by juggling
Quacks allowed. I could show my innocence, or at least excuse whatever I did by
putting you in mind of my Years. But, by my hopes of better Fortune, I know not
yet what 'twas that moved your anger, and I rely upon your goodness only for a
pardon: I could for ever think on the innocent Pleasures of that day in which
you mentioned the Story in Pharamond, your obliging Compliment, and that
discovery of my flame which immediately followed the Encouragement -- The
remembrance of these things make me truly Melancholy, and I am forced to end.
Oh, Albisinda! I Will say no more then; but, if you can, remember the Man who has
often subscribed himself,

Marcomire.

FINIS.
LOVE AFTER ENJOYMENT; OR, FATAL CONSTANCY.

Written by Mr. D. Cr -- rd, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Job Austin in Fleet Street, and sold by the Booksellers of
London and Westminster, 1700.

LOVE after ENJOYMENT, etc.
Timandra to the Charming Sirena.
Madam,
THE few Accidents afforded in the History of my Life, (or rather my Love) are
such as modesty sometimes forbids me the recital; and assure your self, that
were it not I had a more than common esteem of her who lays this Command upon
me, I should no doubt conceal a great part of what I design to write. But the
promise you have made me of a return in the same kind prevails most upon me;
this I am easily induced to confess, because you know me naturally curious in
Affairs of Love, and I Am persuaded the number of your Adorers has rendered you
the Mistress of a great many Adventures. I am not accustomed to write Letters
of this length, and therefore I cannot hope to avoid Tautologies, nor can I
produce the story in due form; because, in the first place my Judgment may be
often disordered with the Remembrance of Pleasures past; in the second, my
memory cannot answer the design of an Historian, nor a Man of Monsieur
Scuddery's Employment. My Style will be purely natural, and every thing
delivered in the same dress, and with as little of Art, as if you had the Story
immediately from my Mouth without Premeditation.

MY Father (Marquess of Huayna) died in the fourth year of my Age, I remember
some things of his Burial, but nothing else that concerned him. He left me all
the Estate he had, having none but my self to succeed him. I shall pass over in
silence my Education, and whatever Accidents might happen in our Family, and
tell you that I was in a very few years taken notice of, by all the Young
Gentlemen in the City of Capac, where I then resided; and whether it was the
effect of that small Beauty I possess, or the largeness of my Fortune, I shall
not determine. But, before I had reached my twelfth Year, I could see several
sigh for me; I was yet so very Young, that I scarce believed any such Passion
as Love had been incident to Mortals. I had never felt it my self, and
consequently laughed at all those who told me they could Die for me.

I lived at ease, and only felt those Cares,
Which wait on Mortals in their younger Years.
I viewed securely men in Tempests tossed,
Saw unconcerned the busy Mortals lost.
Laughed at the Hurricane, and scorned all care,
Shrink'd up in quiet, cause I was not there.
Ah happy time! (if then our Bliss we knew)
When from a-far the distant World we view:
We dwell with lovely Innocence and Joy,
Nor feel those Passions which our ease Destroy.
Know no dissembling Arts, nor dream of Love,
To which in Riper Age so soon we move.
But, ah! this Charming Scene posts quick away,
And a long Night succeeds the short-lived Day.
Unlook't for ills our rolling Years pursue,
Ages of Pain, our hours of Pleasure few,
And still old troubles giving way to new.
He who first found out the way to please me, was one whom Nature meant for the
undoing of our Sex. To see him, and not to love him, were things inconsistent.
He was second Son to the Earl of Rucana, his eldest Brother being then abroad,
(and not having for some years acquainted his Relations with the place of his
abode,) the young Adrastus (for that is his Name) was looked upon by all the
Ladies in Town, as the sole Heir of so ancient a Family; he was Handsome to a
wonder, of good Shapes, did every thing with a singular Grace, was mighty
Complaisant, and knew perfectly how to please the greatest Critics in matter
of Gallantry. He had easy access to our House; his Father was something
related to my Mother, and being a Widdower had made some advances in Courtship
to her, the better to introduce his Son whom he designed for me; upon this
small Relation the young Adrastus pretended a more than common Interest in our
Family. He very often came to see me, and would sometimes stay the best part of
the Day.; my Mother was pleased to see him desirous of my Company, she was
perfectly in Love with the Father, and forgot nothing that conduced to the
happiness of his Son; the old Man assuring her 'twas the greatest Mark she
could give him of her Affection; she commended the young Lover upon all
occasions, whose bewitching behavior was enough to move the most insensible. I
seemed to hear her however with indifferency, and often gave her those Answers
that suited nothing with my real thoughts. This made her often despair of
making me sensible for a Man she designed her Son at any rate, and therefore at
last persuaded the then innocent Adrastus (who hitherto had never spoke of Love
to me) to try his Fortune himself. He often observed me very cold toward him,
(though it proceeded from nothing but that tenderness I had for him, because I
was afraid he might perceive it) and fears much how to set about it; he doubts
a perpetual Banishment might ensue upon a Discovery of this Nature: And this he
argued from my precedent seeming Aversion, while he yet remained in a state of
Friendship, and often let slip those opportunities which made for his
Advantage. This vexed me sensibly, and I could have wished him less fearful
(for I knew he loved) or my self more indifferent. However, being hourly in my
Company, he was at last inspired with more Courage; and one day as we were in a
Balcony, that hung over the Garden Wall, I chanced to Commend a row of Cypress
Trees (then next our view) as the most pleasant, because of a Grove at one end
full of curious Springs and some Artificial Waterworks; he laid hold of this,
though he had neglected better occasions, and looking confusedly upon me, Madam,
(said he) I have often observed your choice of this Walk, which methinks is the
most solitary in the Garden; those I hated a few Months ago, but of late the
most retired places best fit my humor, and I could wish your Inclinations to
'em had the same cause with that of mine. Here he stopped, and I believe equally
feared my taking notice of what he had said, and my neglecting on it. I soon
perceived his aim, and willing to make him believe I did not. I know not (said
I, looking coldly upon him) what may be the cause of your Melancholy, nor have
I hitherto observed that change in your Humor you mention. No Madam, (cried
he, interrupting me, and with a brisker Air) had it been my Happiness to be
taken notice of by you, amongst the common Herd of men, you had e're now seen
that change which all the World takes notice of. The truth is, he had grown
something more reserved of late, and carried in his Countenance the Marks of a
violent Flame, this I acknowledged in part to him, but willing to Convert it to
raillery, Adrastus, (said I smiling) I hope your Melancholy proceeds not from
the absence of your elder Brother, whom all men conclude long since in the
other World; if it does, methinks you are too tender, to mourn a loss that
brings so great a profit. Madam, (said he, with a look that pierced my Heart)
my sullen Humor has another Original; had you been less fair, I still had been
happy, half of those Beauties you possess, are sufficient to impose Chains on a
Heart more stubborn than mine. In a word, Madam, I Am your Lover, I must for
ever be so, I die for you, and nothing but a return can create my Happiness.
Here he ended, with a look so amorous and submissive, 'twas enough to have
Charmed even Niobe: Nevertheless I feigned a mighty displeasure at the freedom
he had assumed; he saw me frown, and was just ready to speak in his own behalf,
when the old Earl and my Mother entered the Room, he presently withdrew a
considerable distance from me, with that confusion in his Face which his Father
easily observed; however the old Man seemed to take no notice on it, yet he soon
engaged me to take a walk in the Garden, and taking my Mother by the Hand, left
me for his Son. Adrastus had so much of Love in his Eyes, that for my soul I
could not be angry with him, yet gave him my Hand without any signs of my being
appeased; while we walked, I could observe the disorder in which he was, a
sudden Paleness overspread his Face, next moment a Ruddy Blush betrayed his
quick surprise, unusual beating seized his trembling Heart, and methought I
felt that eager melting tenderness in every touch, as if his trembling Hand had
reached my fireing Soul; he feared I might lay hold of the least opportunity to
reproach him, and therefore kep't as nigh the old Earl as possibly he could; he
was not so much in Love with my Mother, but that he could easily perceive his
Son's Behavior, be gave him a look that showed his sentiments; and then
choosing another Walk left us. Adrastus much repented his Temerity in the
discovery of his Flame, because he feared I should never more admit his Visits;
but seeing what was past could not be recalled, he resolved to make the best
on it. Madam said he (as soon as they were gone) I doubt not but that you are
incensed at the Declaration I have made you, but if that can atone for the Sin
I have committed, believe that nothing but invincible Necessity could force me
to transgress those Bounds I have so long prescribed my self. I have adored you
since I first saw you, even to Idolatry, and the Suppression of my Flame so
long, has only served to make it burn with more violence. -- Having thus said,
he consulted my Eyes for his future Destiny, and I was willing to arm them with
more Fury than my Inclination could well permit. It Is impossible to hold out
against those we love; I had long admired him in secret, and often wished for
what I was then about to destroy; I read Passion in his looks, I Am straight
disarmed, then all my Counterfeit anger in a moment leaves me; and 'twas with
difficulty I could hide my real Sentiments. As soon as my Soul was settled,
Sir, (said I) I cannot choose but wonder at what you have told me; for if you had
loved more, you had not presumed so much, but I Am willing to forget what is
past, if for the future you avoid the like Error: How these words dropped from
me, I know not; I Loved it is true, but at the same time I swear I was ashamed
of my own weakness, I cast down my Eyes, and was just ready to lessen those
hopes I had given, by words of a harsher Nature; when he, o're-joy'd at his
unlocked for success, threw himself at my feet; he grasped my knees with the
eagerness of departing Souls, thank't me a thousand times for that new Life I
had given him, and said so much that 'twas impossible to doubt him. I was nor
much displeased at what I saw, or heard, I had scarce the Power of speaking
left me, and with a faint Voice bid him moderate his Joy, he knew not how soon
it might be at an end; he presently r^se with that Satisfaction in his Eyes,
which none but Lovers can enjoy, and taking a cross Alley which led to that
where the Earl was, we soon reached 'em, and so continued together till the
Night Air Commanded us to withdraw; and then we parted, both pleased with what
had happened.

THE next Day he came to see me, I could see a newborn Joy in all his looks,
and I fancy he read very little of anger in mine. I repented heartily of that
silence I half enjoined him, often imagining with my self what moving words
he would utter, were the liberty of speaking granted; he easily perceived part of
that esteem I bore him, and therefore ventured to whisper in my Ears a thousand
moving things natural to a passionate Lover, young and eloquent; I hearkened to
all those Vows he made, with an inward Satisfaction, that sometimes displayed
it self in my Eyes; he came often to see me, protested a violent Love for me,
and seldom left me without some new Addition to his hopes.

THINGS stood in this posture, when Huascar (his elder Brother) came home. The
old Earl was beyond expression over joy'd at the sight of a Son he had so long
mourned as Dead, and I Am persuaded Adrastus was not so much discontented for
the loss of that Estate he was robbed of, as at the thoughts of my esteeming him
the less; he instantly acquainted me with it, by a Note he privately conveyed
to my Hands, and though it was the first he ever sent me, I cannot say I was
angry at the freedom. If I remember well, 'twas to this purpose.

Madam,
I Have presumed without liberty to give you this Billerdeux, my Brother is
come home, and a thousand fear possess me, I put on your Chains without any
thoughts of your Fortune, and I hope you will not lessen that esteem you have
hitherto had of me, for the loss of mine; I die with Impatiency to wait on you;
pity me, for till then I think of nothing but of you, or of a dangerous Rival
newly arrived.

Adrastus.


I was not sorry to see him afraid of losing that which I was willing no other
should possess; I loved, and found nothing about him in all my search, that
told me he did not deserve it; and in this thought I returned him an answer to
this effect.

Sir,
THE fears that possess you are groundless, Interest has no share in my Love;
see me as soon as possible, and till then be uneasy for nothing but my
absence.

Timandra.


After I had writ it, I was a thousand times resolved to commit it to the
Flames; the words were the real Sentiments of my Heart, and I was ashamed to
own 'em so tender: But when I remembered him for whom 'twas meant, I could not
choose but think it well; ^ loved him, and was willing to oblige him. I fancied
to my self the young Lover, with all his Charms about him, in that ecstasy so
obliging a Letter would undoubtedly give. He failed not to come that Night,
though at an hour almost unseasonable. I was glad to see so many signs of a real
Love, as his fears then discovered, and we parted not, till he had given me all
the assurances imaginable of a tender and constant Passion, and I in Exchange
had promised the entire possession of my Heart: Never were Days spent with
greater Pleasure, and in this state of Happiness and Innocence, we contiu'd for
a considerable time, each Day producing new Joys, and a continued Scene of
Love. But Fortune had betrayed her Nature, had she been longer our Friend. -- I
had gone out one Evening in my Chariot with a couple of Horses, to take the Air
in a pleasant Field, about half a Mile from the Town, I had no Footmen with me,
and was attended only by my Maid Zibelline; the Sun was almost set when I could
perceive some Gentlemen coming into that Road in which I was, but unwilling to
be seen, I ordered the Coachman to choose another, this instead of answering my
design led me to them, several of them past by me, paying only those respects
they thought due to a Woman of my Rank, but he who came last, and that by his
Presence and Furniture seemed to exceed the others in Quality, stopped within
twenty Paces of my Coach; I soon perceived it, and at first judged he might be
of my Acquaintance, when I came up to him he turned his Horse the same way I
drove, and looking earnestly upon me, Madam (said he) what strange accidents
attend us Mortals, I went out free in the Morning, persu'd the Chase all Day,
and in the Evening am become a Prisoner to an unknown Conqueror. I was about to
have returned a speedy answer, that would have suited nothing with his Quality,
when I could perceive by the Star on his Cloak 'twas the Duke of Minoya; he is a
very handsome young Man, Fair, and of a middle Stature, but one that Loves every
where, the greatest Prince in our Country, and of no small Authority; I only
smiled at what he said, but he insisted on the Subject, swore he loved, and
that till now he never had seen a Woman truly Charming. The Coach still drove
on, and he still rode by it, with his Eyes fixed on mine. When I arrived at the
City Gates I begged be'd leave me, but in vain; I fretted much at the unlucky
accident, I desired not to be known to him, and prudently remembered how much
it endangered my Reputation, to entertain for a Lover, a Man who had deceived
the greatest Ladies of our Country, often obtaining the last Favors from them
without any returns. But he would not be persuaded, and I was at last forced to
tell him who I was: This knowledge added a little to that respect he paid me,
but was much the same as if he had accompanied me home, for there were few in
Capac who could not inform him where the Marquess of Hayana's Daughter lived.
He came next Day and paid me a visit, presuming either upon his Birth, or his
young acquaintance, and perhaps upon both. I was but indifferent Campany for a
Man of his business, my stock of Love was already spent, and the Handsomest
Youth in Capac would have found me Bankrupt in all things but my Pity. He was
not a whit daunted at this Reception how-e're unlook't for, his former
successes encouraging him to hope the like in this. About this time the Earl of
Rucana died of an Apoplexy, leaving his eldest Son to rejoice in the Possession
of a great Estate* and my Mother to mourn the loss of one she looked upon as
her Husband. This for some time kept away the young Adrastus, but could not
hinder the Duke from his daily visits. My Mother knew very well of it, and
easily believes my Beauty and Fortune sufficient to advance me to so honorable
a Match; and having lost all hopes of Possessing the Father, she remembers the
Son no more, and imploys her Interest for this new and potent Lover only. In
the mean time I thought of nothing but Adrastus, he always writ to me, and
decency no sooner permitted than he came to see me. I told him nothing of the
Duke's visits, I loved him too well to give him the knowledge of that which
would have made him the most uneasy Man alive, and he parted from me with his
usual Satisfaction; our affairs did not long continue in this State, Adrastus
having dropped a Letter of mine, which he had received privately while in the
Room with his Brother, laid the Scene for most of my misfortunes that followed;
as soon as he could lay hold of opportunity he went into the Garden, there to
read what he had newly received; but after a tedious search, he at last
concludes it lost. The Earl had taken it up, but Adrastus, who was very well
acquainted with his Humor, knew 'twas impossible to make him own the Fact, and
therefore came instantly to inform me of the accident; though I was sorry my
Letter had reached Rucana's Hands, yet I could not choose but smile at that
concern Adrastus showed for the loss; the more he was vexed methought he spoke
the more of Love. Adrastus (said I, to ease him of his Fears) let not what has
happened trouble you, your Brother has never yet seen me, nor when he does will
he find me in a Humor to his Advantage. My Lover thereupon went away
satisfied, though not before I had charged him not to acquaint the Earl with his
loss, nor to see me that Day or the next. I commanded, and he searched no
further into the Cause of his Banishment. Rucana, who in the mean time had read
my Letter, found it to this purpose.

I Design this Night to take the Air, accompanied only by my Maid Zibelline, at
the back of the Lake Cacique, you may come attended by your Page.

Timandra.


He had no sooner read my Name, than he knew from whom it came, he had heard me
often commended for my Beauty, and found by my Style that his Brother was as
happy as a Lover could be made by a kind Mistress, and thereupon resolves to
supply his place, and personate the happy Man. I suspected what use he might
make of my Letter, and had therefore dressed one of my Maids in a suit of those
Clothes I often wore, with Orders to my Maid Zibelline to pay her the same
Respect she did to my self; they were both instructed how to behave themselves
upon every accident; and the Counterfeit Timandra had seen the Earl, was truly
handsome, and every way qualified for that part she was to perform. I had chosen
a convenient place in the Field where I might see and not be seen, and had not
waited long before I saw Rucana approach my Coach, his Impatiency would not
permit him to wait the approach of Night, not doubting but if I was as amiable
as People spoke me, his Birth and Fortune were sufficient to mount him on his
Brother's Ruins. I was beyond belief pleased at what I saw, he made more
account of my Maid than perhaps he had done of my self, he swore a thousand
times he loved her, while she answered coldly to all he said, adding that as
yet she did not believe any such Passion had got footing in the World, and that
for her part she could never be sensible of any such Flame for the Handsomest
Man in the World: No, Madam! (cried the Earl interrupting her, and pulling out
my Letter) I presume you writ this obliging Billet to the happy Adrastus, and I
see no Reason why he ought to be preferred to an elder Brother, to whom he is
in all things inferior. Casmia (for that was the Maid's Name,) answered she had
seen Adrastus, and that she thought him infinitely beyond him who styled
himself his Brother, but that she never felt a Flame for him, nor did her Soul
distinguish him from other men, and that the Letter he spoke of was none of
hers; of this she gave him what assurances Oaths could give; he could not choose
but believe a Woman who swore so unfeignedly, and at last concludes his Brother
Courted a Timandra, but not that one he spoke to; this thought gave him in a
moment store of hopes, then addressing himself to his Mistress with a
submissive tone, Madam, (said he) I beg a thousand pardons for that unjust
opinion I had conceived, your Beauty made me easily believe you the same my
Brother adored; but since it is not so, let me hope my happiness the greater,
because you are not prepossest in Favors of another; if it be my misfortune to
be less in your esteem than the young Adrastus, I hope time and my ensuing
Services may raise me some steps beyond him. Casmia caught Occasion by the
foretop, and laying her indifferency aside, tells him that Fame spoke
sufficiently on the Earl of Rucana's behalf, that he was a Servant the
handsomest Lady in Capac might be proud of, and that though she found her Heart
nothing inclinable to Love, yet if time should show his Passion the same he now
swore it was, he might perhaps overcome that indifferency, which every Man had
hitherto met with from her. The Earl o'rejoy'd at this sudden change, made a
thousand Protestations of inviolable Fidelity, swore that his Heart was never
before engaged, and that it should for ever wear the Chains of the fair
Timandra, who alone was Mistress of those Charms that could make it a Prisoner.
The Coach was so nigh me, that I could hear every word distinctly, and you may
assure your self, Madam, I was sensibly pleased to see the Comedy Acted, in
which my Maid performed her part to my wish. The Earl was proud of his
imaginary success, and (she not forbidding him that happiness) kissed her hand
a thousand times with the greatest transport imaginable, protesting he thought
himself the happiest of men. While he continued in this ecstasy, I could see a
Gentleman attended by one Servant steal softly toward my Coach, listen some
minutes, and then retire, where he placed himself behind Tree, unknown to any
but my self; I could have wished the Conference had ended sooner, the invisible
Gentleman saw whose hand the Earl kissed, and doubtless concluded it mine, by
the Livery of my Coach; and was the more Confirmed when he heard Zibelline's
Voice, with which he was well acquainted. I was persuaded it could be no other
than the young Adrastus, drawn thither by his Jealousy, and whom I resolved to
punish next Morning for his Disobedience. But I soon perceived my Error; for
the Earl had no sooner left my Maid (who ordered the Coachman to drive
immediately home) than I could see the Gentleman leap suddenly from behind the
tree, and meet Rucana almost in the same place where the Coach had left him.
Sir (cried he) I have been a witness of your happiness. Timandra prefers you to
all men living. And though I have long adored her with a Passion infinitely
beyond what you are capable of, yet I could never find those returns You are my
happy Rival, and it now remains we should decide with our Swords, which is he
who best deserves those Favors blind Love throws upon you, without respect to
merit. -- I presently called to mind whose Voice it was, and found it to be the
Duke of Minoya's, I was ready to run in between 'em to prevent that quarrel I
already saw commenced; but then I considered how far I endangered my
Reputation, should it be known I was in the Fields with two such men as Rucana
and Minoya, at so unseasonable an hour. However they took but little time for
deliberation; for the Earl, without examining with whom he fought; used his
utmost Art and Strength to Chastise the insolence of an Enemy, who had so
boldly assaulted him. In a little time (to my infinite amazement) I saw the
Duke fall, while his Servant (who fought with the Earl's) meeting with worse
fortune, tumbled down dead at the feet of his Master.

Rucana put up his Sword, and immediately departed the Field: He had received
no wounds, nor was his Page's fortune less; so that when he came home, Adrastus
saw no signs about him of that Tragedy he had been acting. I remained almost
motionless with fear, I repented a thousand times the folly I had committed, I
wished I had never Written to Adrastus, and was even ready to dye with grief
when Zibelline arrived; I concealed my trouble as much as possible, and she
having the Key of the Back door that gave us entry to the Garden, we soon
reached the House undiscovered by any. I concluded Minoya a dead Man, and
therefore used no care for his preservation. I recommended secrecy to
Zibelline and Casmia, as to the Enterview with the Earl; but did not mention
the Combat, because they knew nothing of it. In the morning Adrastus came to
see me, and told me the Duke of Minoya was desperately wounded, his Servant
killed, and both found in the Field; that it was not known with whom he fought,
but that his Servants gathered from some of his words, he had received his
Wounds for a Mistress of considerable quality. I was glad at what Adrastus told
me; because I found the Duke had not only concealed my name, but was likewise
ignorant of him he deemed his Rival. Thus we spent part of the morning in
reflecting upon the Accident; and that ended, the charming Youth began to
enquire into the cause of his Banishment: I would not tell him why I had used
him so, and he departed very melancholy. When he was gone, I began to grieve
for him, remembering the pains this harsh usage would bring him: I straight
could feel them all my own, and consulting my love, not Reason I sent for him
back again; he soon returned, and found my humor much altered to his
advantage. He was infinitely o'rejoy'd, and protested that when he went out of
my Chamber, he thought to have died with the thoughts of my Indifferency: He
went home he knew not how, and that when my message came to him he turned
Sceptick, and doubted much if he was awake: This he spoke with an Air so
passionate, he perfectly charmed me, I loved and was beloved; we were alone,
and I could not forbear to testify my Joy, Love wantoned in my eyes, and eager
wishes o'rerul'd my nodding Virtue. He well knew what 'twas to be inflamed: He
told me a thousand endearing things, and printed kisses at each word he spoke.
We were sitting upon the Beds side, it was yet early in the morning, and I had
nothing upon me but a loose Nightgown, and one Petticoat of a thin Silk. The
amorous young Man commended every thing about me; my Limbs I must confess shone
through the transparent Cloth, and fed his fancy with a thousand Charms: He
claspt me gently in his trembling Arms, faulter'd in his Speech, and swore he
died for me; that it was impossible to endure the violent separation from a
Heaven in view, and that now he must be blessed or for ever wretched; that he
feared his Brother's pretenses, and nothing could secure him but a flame equal
to that of his own. It Is needless, Madam, to tell you more. I loved him, and
could deny him nothing. Desire grew wild, fears (the cursed allays of Love)
fled: I dreamed of Joys and pleasures yet unknown, my loosned Soul seemed just
upon the wing, and I at last lay yielding, melting, trembling in his Arms; his
Soul sat hovering over his Balmy Lips, Love darted from his Eyes, and all the
Charms of that young God were in him. Oh! kind Heaven! let me ever remember all
those tender Vows he made while he lay panting and breathless by my side, and
blushed at what was past; then strove to bring the hasty Joy again. Thus he
obtained that favor, which never bestowed in Youth, is frozen up by Icy Age,
and lies unregarded, till we are rendered incapable of those Blessings men
would give, and Women can receive. We gave mutual assurances of perpetual
fidelity, and parted both of us satisfied of others Love.

Some Trees seem pleasant, when they first set out,
We give them Stays lest Winds should shake the Root.
But in few days they shoot their boughs so far,
That all the Herbs beneath them withered are:
That ground which gave them Life they now destroy;
Stand proudly up, and in the conquest joy.
So Love at first all gay, all soft appears,
And next day changed to jealousies and fears:
It Is like wild fires, afar shows happiness,
But if approached grows in a moment less.
A Pleasure it is before it is fully known,
And that once over it is insipid grown;
It cheats the distant eye, and seems a Bliss,
But if it is caught we hate the by past wish.
Then wonder why with so much pain we sought
A thing, which more allay than joy has brought.
For that which shined unto the Lovesick eye,
Now shows all Rust, all homely, when it is nigh.
These thoughts did not then possess me, though I found the truth of them too
late, and 'twas when my misfortunes gave me melancholy hours, that my Muse sung
so gravely.

The Earl came privately, and paid his Respects to the supposed Timandra; he
concluded himself happy from what the Duke told him, and courted with a brisker
Air than was natural to him; I had ordered Casmia still to deceive him. He was
of a close temper, trusted no Man with what was by himself reputed worthy of
Secrecy; and when he saw his Mistress, he came without Attendants. About this
time Adrastus, who loved not the Earl's melancholy humor, left his house, and
chose Lodgings for himself, which chanced to be very nigh those of the Duke of
Minoya's, and therefore often paid him a visit during his sickness. Adrastus
was of an obliging temper; and so far gained the Duke's esteem, that he could
never be easy when without him. While he, to repay this kindness, was seldom
absent, but when his Love to me required it. We lived very happy, and Adrastus
had nothing to fear or complain of: He possessed all that Love and Beauty could
bestow, without the prospect of a coming ill. Sometimes he would tell me he
heard of his Brother's visits to me; but I assured him I had never seen him,
and soon calmed those storms his growing Jealousies had raised.

One day when he came to wait upon the Duke, he found him worse than he had
been for some days, and judging it the effect of something more than his
wounds, begged he would impart the cause. Minoya, after he had Commanded his
Servants to quit the Room; my Dear Adrastus (said he) those wounds you see are
nothing, if compared with the Torments of my Soul, I Love the Young Marchioness
of Huyana, I saw her that night I came to Capac, and have wore her Chains ever
since, whose weight is nothing yet diminished; tho I Have seen others happy, even
then when she strove to persuade me she never had nor could love any Man.
Adrastus was surpiz'd at what he heard, and if the Duke had in the least
suspected him, he would have read in his face-how much he was interested in the
Story. He durst scarce desire him to finish what he had begun, so much he
feared to be acquainted with the Infidelity of her he loved. But the other to
save him that labor proceeded, and in few words told him all that concerned
the Encounter he had that Evening he received his Wounds. Adrastus soon
believed 'twas his Brother, he remembered 'twas the same day in which he had
lost my Letter, calls to mind the absence I enjoined him; and at last concludes
me guilty. When men once become Masters by Enjoyment, Mole-Hills appear
Mountains, and that which before could render them happy, now they look upon as
a thing useless and injurious to their repose; they think Women should from
that moment abandon all Appetites but those they entertain for them. And like
wretched Misers grasp at all, then sigh when they can hold no more, and murmur
because another may enjoy what they alone would possess. The Jealous Adrastus
hides his pain as much as possible from the Duke, and tells him that she whom
he adored was truly the handsomest Woman in Capac, and one who would in time
regard the Services of a Prince, who merited the esteem of all Mankind; that he
had several times seen me when his Father was alive, and that he should not
fail to do him some good Offices upon the small acquaintance he had, did not a
very urgent business command his absence for some time. The Duke gave him a
thousand thanks for his kind offer, and in the mean time, though he was sorry for
his departure, wished him a good Journey. Adrastus went to his Lodgings,
possessed with Love, Anger, Jealousy, and Despair; thus passion o're-rul'd his
Judgment, and in that weakness he sent me this Letter.

Madam,
I AM amazed to find in the fair Timandra a Woman regardless of her Vows and
Honor, I leave you with sorrow, and cannot longer stay in a place where I see a
Woman I have so constantly loved, possessed by one that could never pretend to
so great a happiness by his Services, whatever bis Birth might be to his
advantage; I will not offer to trouble you with a tedious recital how your
Infidelity came to my knowledge, let it suffice that (to my infinite sorrow) I
know too much, either for your Honor, or my own Satisfaction*

Adrastus.


I was at first all fury, I termed him the most ungrateful of men, my passion
suggested a thousand things to me, I was sorry for the Happiness I had given,
and heartily wished my Love had been more moderate. But Love that seldom loses
possession in an honest Heart, reassumes his Empire, and represents the
mistaken Lover Sorrowful, and Passionate; Jealous by a seeming guilt, and
desperate at his own loss. I considered his Letter partially, and thought there
was still so much of Love in every line, that it shone through all those Clouds
his Jealousy and Anger had contracted, and began in earnest to mourn his loss;
grief took place of former Joys, and I have wept sometimes whole Nights, and
cursed those Stars that forced me to love a Man I had so many reasons to pursue
with my hatred. My Mother wondered what might work this sudden alteration in
my humor; and imagined my grief arose from the Duke of Minoya's misfortune,
and doubted not but that I loved him; for by the help of my Maid Zibelline,
Adrastus was seldom seen come or go from my House, so that she neither
suspected him nor the Earl, who was still very cautious in his visits. I was
willing (the better to conceal my misfortune) to let things appear the same she
took them for, and in the mean time forgot not to use those ways that promised
any likelihood of recalling the Object of all my wishes.

One Night while I sat all alone in my Chamber, I could hear soft whispers at
the Door; my Curiosity was augmented when I thought, it resembled the Earl of
Rucana's Voice; when I had looked through the Keyhole, I found I had not
judged amiss. He was looking very earnestly upon his supposed Timandra; while
she on the other hand seemed not to curb his hopes, for he could easily read a
fire in her Eyes equal to his own. However she begged that this Night he would
abreviate his discourse; adding, she was afraid her Mother might find him in
the House. He answered, that he could not leave her so soon, her Mother was
then a-bed, and that all she urged for his departure, was not of force
sufficient to make him delay the possession of a Bliss he had so long promised
to himself. In the end she was overcome, and suffered her self to be led along
the Gallery, and down a pair of back Stairs into the Garden, where they entered
a Chamber in which I often lay when the Season was excessively hot: My Mother's
Apartment was very nigh to it, and had a Balcony from her dining Room exactly
opposite to the Chamber Door. I wanted to see the Earl's manner of Courtship,
and longed to know upon what terms he stood with his Timandra: (My grief for
the absence of my Lover having long kept me from the knowledge of what I had
formerly used for my diversion) And therefore I laid all Considerations of
danger aside, and stole privately after them. They seated themselves at first
familiarly upon the Bed, and I could soon perceive more between 'em than a nice
Virtue could well allow. I was heartily displeased at what Casmia did, and though
the Earl was a close minded Man, I was afraid Stones and Bushes might have Ears
to disclose the intrigue. I wished he had known whom he loved, and was just
about to show him his error, when they arose, and went softly to that part of
the Garden where she ordinarily admitted him. I entered the Room immediately;
but good Gods! how much was I amazed, when I saw my Mother had got there before
me; having entered at the same Door from which they went out: She was
passionate even to madness, and though I knew my self innocent, yet I had scarce
the power to tell her so; she told me the Bed bespoke some amorous dalliance;
that she had seen me enter, and thereupon drawing the Curtains aside, she took
up the Earl's Pocket Book, which he unfortunately had dropped. I was a mazed at
the accident, and presently saw my Letter to Adrastus taken out of it Daughter
said she, (looking furiously upon me) are these the effects of that care I have
had of you? Is this the Journey Adrastus has undertaken? Never see me more, you
have abandoned Virtue, you have ruined your Fortune, and, in a Word, are become
the scorn of your Sex This said, she flung immediately out at the Back door,
which stood half open, not doubting but that Adrastus was gone that way; she
found Casmia returning, and concluded I had sent her to show him the way. The
Maid was infinitely surprised at so unexpected a meeting, and falling upon her
knees, first begs a thousand Pardons, and then tells the whole truth of the
matter. This serves her not in any stead, my Mother assures her self I Am
guilty, and believes that this story had been handsomely contrived to be made
use of upon the first discovery, and so instantly thrust her out of Doors, to
find new Lodgings, and a new Mistress. When she came back to me, she found me
drowned in Tears, though they proceeded more from the loss of Adrastus, than from
my new misfortune, she soon told me how she had served my Confident, (as she
called her); adding (seeing me about to speak) that I should not endeavor to
justify my self, because my guilt was too obvious to those of the least
judgment, and so left me to my soliloquies.

I was not ignorant of my Mother's humor, and therefore (being awaked from
that surprise into which her presence had cast me) without further reflections
on the matter, went to Bed. There it was that I began narrowly to search into
my own Circumstances, and found that though I was innocent of what was then laid
to my Charge, yet my Conduct had been such as deserved reproof. I saw no hopes
of Adrastus his return, and feared the Earl might boast of an imaginary
Conquest, to those who would apprehend it real: These and a thousand such
thoughts possessed me; when as Day began to break, I could hear some body knock
gently at my Door. I soon quitted my Bed, and having opened it (for melancholy
had so seized me, I never examined who it was, nor did I remember the want of
my Nightgown). A Gentleman caught me in his Arms, my Charming Fair (cried he
in a transport, and forcing a kiss from me) how often have I wished for this
happy minute. He said no more, his sighs, short breathings, and eager embraces
served to convince me how much he wanted that happiness he now thought himself
almost Master of. However I was just ready to cry out, when my fears on a
sudden interposed, and opportunely told me, that by so doing I should confirm
my Mother in her suspicions; in this thought I forced my self from his Arms,
and leaped into the Bed. He followed with the trembling steps of a burning
Lover, and was beginning to undress, when I (with more moderation than the
accident could well allow) told him that the calmness with which I received him
proceeded more from a tenderness of my own Reputation, than Compliance to his
passion, otherwise he might soon have felt the effects of that rudeness of
which no discreet Person would be guilty. He soon knew by my voice that it was
not his beloved Timandra (for 'twas the Earl) and so without the least Apology
withdrew.

This Accident augmented my grief; a thousand times did I wish I had never been
guilty of that fatal interview at the Lake, it lost me the Man I loved, and who
(notwithstanding of his ingratitude) was still dear to me as Life it self: it
had brought the Duke's Wounds, and the Earl's addresses to my Maid, which now I
found more dangerous than if they had been to my self. In the Morning I told
Zibelline what had happened, who immediately found out that Relief I so much
wished.

She presently sent for Casmia, and after we had deliberately weighed the
business, there was a Billet-deux privately conveyed to the Earl, in which he
was bid come at Night, and at the usual hour. He failed not in his Obedience,
and the time was no sooner come, than I could hear him upon the Stairs. His
Mistress presently gave him admittance, and played that part I had enjoined her
to the Life. Madam, I Am so much yours that I will not offer to conceal the least
of my thoughts, however faulty you may find them; I must confess, I then wished
he had loved the real Timandra. His Words were very tender, Love bask'd and
wantoned in his Eyes, and I could hear him say all those things we take for
indubitable signs of a violent and tender flame. But no longer to detain you on
this Subject, know, that next Morning they were Married. I had so ordered it
(lest a quick discovery might be inconvenient) that they should for some time
Lodge in my own Appartment, which in a little time produced a very odd
Adventure. And 'twas thus.

My Maid Zibelline lay next door to my Chamber (which the Earl then possessed,
though privately) and had a Lover unknown to me, who it seems adored his Goddess
in the dark, is the Ancients did Bacchus in the night. The unknown happy-Lover,
that night after the Marriage, came to perform his ordinary Devotions, and
being a stranger to the House, without the help of Lights stumbl'd into that of
the Earl's. Casmia (or rather the Countess of Rucana) you may be sure was kept
awake with the hopes of a coming Bliss; but dreamed of nothing more than her
Husband. While he (who was accustomed to silence) leaped into the Bed without
many words. In the mean time the Earl, who laid never been in his new Room
(that morning in which he caught me naked excepted) fairly dropped into that of
Zibelline's, and so to Bed. Thus posted, the four Lovers spent the Night happy
in their ignorance. The Earl had upon him all the fervor and heat of a young
Bridegroom, and the other all the Pleasures of a stolen Bliss. But Day
approaching, Zibelline desired her Lover (or rather Rucana) to quit the Bed. He
who was now married, and consequently secure of his Mistress's favors, began
already to play the Husband; that is, lose all respect and good manners; swore
he would not, nor could he then leave so many Joys unfinished, of that number
he had promised to himself, without a torment equal to that of Death: And that
no Circumstances whatsoever were of force enough to rob a Husband of his Wife,
that Formalities were now of no use, and she might frankly own her Marriage to
all the World. The Maid was beyond expression surprised at what she heard, and
presently understood who it was that spoke, and whom he meant; but being of a
prompt and ready Wit, counterfeited the voice of the Countess, and, after some
few Embraces and kind Arguments, at last prevailed. Zibelline's Lover, who
remembered with what hazard he stole his favors, made no delays, and came out
of the Chamber just as the Earl was passing by the Door, and stumbling upon
him, concludes himself betrayed, and the Reputation of his Mistress in evident
danger. But endeavoring to make his escape, he was forced to tumble Rucana
down stairs, to clear his passage. The Earl no sooner came to himself, than he
as soon ascended, but by degrees, not as he went down; and persuading himself
that he who had thus served him, was some favorite of his Wife's, enters her
Room in a fury, much akin to a real madness. She, who was surprised to see him
return so soon, very kindly asked what was the matter? adding, that just now he
had left her, without the happiness of a word at parting; and that the whole
Night was spent in silence, at which she could not choose but wonder, since it
argued that his Lordship's Love did not suit with his past Protestations. Ha
(cried he) did I leave you without words? No, Madam, you urged my departure
frequently. And now it is I understand why you did so. Your Lover came too
soon, and I staid too long, either for his Happiness or my own. My Mother (whom
the Earl's fall had awaked) with a Candle in her hand, just as he pronounced
the last words, entered, crying out, Heavens! where was her Daughter? The Earl,
raving answered, here! And I Am sorry, Madam, you looked no better to her
Education, since I am destined to be the unhappy Man, that must undergo that
punishment your neglect deserved. She viewed him seriously, and knowing who it
was, asked him what he meant, and if he was awake? if so, what had brought him
to her House at an hour so unseasonable? He bids her enquire of her Daughter,
and points to the Bed. She told him he still dreamed, and that she could easily
distinguish her Daughter from one of her Maids: But withal asked the trembling
and affrighted Casmia, how she came there, and if she remembered what had past
the preceding Night? And thereupon (giving way to her passion) pulls the poor
Countess by the Hair from the Bed, where she had lain silent, and half dead
with fear. The Earl (though overwhelmed with Jealousy) could not see his Wife so
ill used, and therefore relieved her from the paw of the Lyoness. In the mean
time, Zibelline had awaked me, and (dissembling her knowledge of the cause)
told me the House was all in an uproar: I soon got up, and entered the Room
just as Rucana had relieved the distressed fair one. My Mother, as soon as she
saw me; asked if I was a stranger to the cause of all this confusion, and if I
held a Correspondence with the Earl, equal to that I did with Adrastus. I told
her I had never seen Rucana; but was informed, he had endeavored to debauch
one of my Maids; I hoped she did not doubt my Virtue, and that my Conduct had
been such, as became hers and the Marquess of Huyana's Daughter. The Earl (who
had hearkened with wonder and amazement) soon found how he had been imposed
upon; and was at first confounded, and oppressed with shame and anger: But then
growing calm, and eying his Wife, who lay drowned in tears with all her Beautys
open to his view; his fury fled, Love pleads in her behalf, and a thousand
tender thoughts possessed his Soul. He beheld a Woman whom he long had loved;
half naked, weeping, prostrate at his feet, and all her Sexes best bewitching
Charms about her. Tears dropped from his Eyes, and all the pains of love and
sorrow jointly pressed his Heart. Then raising gently the afflicted fair one, he
begged a thousand pardons for his indiscreet management, swore he should never
repent the happy mistake; kissed away her Tears, and sighed at every word.
After some minutes thus spent; he made an Apology to my Mother, for that
disturbances he had occasioned in the Family; then taking the Countess by the
hand, led her down stairs, calls a Coach, (for 'twas now daylight) and drives
home, pleased because he loved.

My Mother was glad to find me innocent, and her self doubly deceived; and by
her Joy in some measure atton'd for the harsh usage I had received from her the
foregoing Night. Zibelline was pleased with her own good success; and I thought
my self fortunate, in seeing a business I dreaded brought to a happy exit. Thus
we all went to Bed again, well satisfied with what had hapen'd, and each of us
big with the hopes of Fortune's continued smiles.

Next Day I was informed the Duke had quit his Room, and was able to take a
turn in the Garden. The Earl's Marriage was soon known, and as it happens in
such cases, he was laughed at by the Wits, pitied by the Honest-hearted, and
commended by the Judicious, for that Moderation he had shown in so provoking a
juncture; and I was by all concluded privy to the intrigue. Minoya showed his
Sentiments in his Eyes, where the inward Satisfaction this accident gave him
visibly appeared: His flame is augmented with his hopes, and the removal of a
Rival he thinks a step to his Happiness. These pleasant thoughts Contribute
much to his speedy Recovery, he imagined I was not prepossessed to his
prejudice, and easily believed he had fought for my Maid.

In a few days he came to see me, and I having in some measure laid aside the
thoughts of my ungrateful Lover, received him more kindly than I had done
before his long absence. This inflamed him more; my Mother seconded every word
he spoke, and 'twas impossible to hold out against two such powerful
Assailants. Yet Young Adrastus took his place by turns; and though the passion I
had for him seemed sometimes dead, yet (from what thought I know not) it (like
Lamps just extinguished) greedily caught hold of light, and in a moment,
turned into a flame.

Thus divided, (after I had seen the Duke languishing for me three whole
Months) I at last consented to Marry him: He was ravished at the wished for
grant; and tasted all those Joys successful Love imparts to Youth impatient of
delays. On the other hand, I saw the fatal hour approach with pain, and could
not think of being for ever his, while Adstrastus was in Being, though absent and
unkind; but not knowing how to recall that promise I had given, (and the Town
already too busy with my Name,) I was forced to confirm it by a Marriage Vow.

The Duke (now happy in the possession of her he adored) went seldom abroad; he
was uneasy but when in my Company, and all his actions centered in his Love.
One Evening he told me, (Laughing) with what concern he had seen the Earl of
Rucana's happiness, that Night he fought him, and wondered much how that
Marriage came to pass, asked if the Countess was handsome, and applauded her
mamagement. I gave her those praises her Beauty deserved; and wished him
reconciled to Rucana, because his constant Love, after so great a
disappointment, spoke him a Man truly noble, of a great Soul, fixed and steady
in his resolutions; generous, good natured, and of honest Principles. And the
truth is, so great a change was never known, as that which Love and Marriage
had wrought on this Man; his Soul seemed new-moulded, and imprinted with all
the marks of Virtue, Honor, and Nobility. Whatever I spoke was a Law, and if I
had but the least inclination to any thing, 'twas immediately performed; so
that my Husband next day, waited for nothing more than an opportunity of
speaking with the Earl, but finding none, at last went to his House. Rucana
received him, and embraced his friendship with all the Sincerity which Man can
be Master of, when he pays his Devotions to Heaven. They discoursed long of
things indifferent, and at last came to the Subject of their quarrel; where the
kind Huband spoke so advantagiously of his Wife, that he charmed the Duke into
an ecstasy. She who had not forgot what once she was, kept a modest humility in
all her actions, looked sweet and langushing, and made it her only study how to
please the Lord of all her wishes. With this bewitching state she entered the
Room, where Minoya paid her those respects due to the Countess of Rucana, and
the Wife of his Friend; from the Earl's discourse, he had formed a lovely Idea
of this hppy fair one, and was pleasantly surprised, to see how far the sweet
Original out-did that Picture he had newly drawn. He intended at first no more
than a short visit; but the Earl's kindness, and the Charms of his Wife, made
him forget that Resolution. When he came home, his wonted joys flag'd, his
appetite seemed pal'd, he looked uneasy, as if some sudden illness had seized
him; thought much, spoke little, and the torments of his Soul (after many
endeavors to hide them) were at last conspicuous. I was sensibly grieved at
this new misfortune, though I yet knew not what it was; I used all the moving
Arts of Honest Love to Charm him into mirth, and wrestled even with vritue how
to please.

He still continues all Ice; restless in his thoughts, divided from himself,
forgetting all his former Vows and me. He went every day to Rucana's, returned
more cold, and all the World at last took notice of it. I knew my self Young
and Handsome, fitted by Nature to inflame desire; and was all madness, at the
thoughts of losing an Heart I had begun to value in earnest; but that which
most sensibly displeased me was, to find my self abandoned for one that had
been my Servant, and whom (by my own folly) I had advanced to all Happiness she
then possessed.

Things were thus, when my Melancholy and the calm Evening (the Duke being then
at Rucana's) invited me to a walk in the Garden. There it was I began to
remember my joys past, the Cypress Trees brought the fugitive Adrastus to my
view, with all his Charms about him, and represented the Duke the most
ungrateful of men; Revenge spoke Peace to my Soul, and a thousand different
resolutions (the effects of my restless mind) possessed me, and next moment
were destroyed by that same power which gave them first a Being. Thus my Heart
at last beat it self to rest; and while I lay upon a Mossy Bank, and all my
sorrows chained in peaceful slumbers; I dreamed (nay, methought it was no
dream, such strong impressions the blessed Vision made) my absent Lover sighing
by me lay, all drowned in sorrow for his loss, wept, then wished me false, so I
but loved him now. I waked, but 'twas to see what my Eyes had often longed for.
The lovely Youth threw himself at my feet, gazed, and sighed, and labored with
his pain. My sorrow equaled his, and though I often had wished the wanderer back,
the cruel thought of being his no more dashed all my Joys, and turned them into
Tears. Thus on each other for a while we gazed, breathed short, and trembled
while we strove to speak. At last his Courage bore away his grief, and loosened
by degrees, that soft bewitching Tongue, whose Eloquence so often had undone
me; and said, Can you be mine no more? Can you be cruel to a repenting Sinner,
who for pardon sues, and damn me to a new Hell of absence, more lasting than
the first? Is Adrastus quite forgot? And must the Duke possess a Heaven alone?
Ah! (cried I! when my Tears would give me leave to speak) I Love and fear my
own weakness; but as you tender my future Happiness, ask no more than a
Virtuous Wife should give. Has the Duchess of Minoya nothing of Timandra in
her, (replied he, interrupting me) and can you resolve to see me dye? I begged
with Tears he would urge his Love no more; and at last, promising to meet him there
next Evening, we parted.

When the Duke came home, I found his humor the same it had been for some
Months preceding. However, I did not lay his indifferency in that balance it
formerly held; my Love grew lighter, and that esteem I had for him, became
hourly less. Next Evening Adrastus came, and I failed not to meet him; his Soul
seemed more at rest, but his Love the same. After some serious discourse, I
asked him how he had spent the time of his absence, and if no new Beauty had
razed me from his memory. The lovely Penitent could deny me nothing; and began
the Relation immediately: Which, Madam, you may take as follows, because it is
occasioned by the story of my Love.

AFter I had Written that Letter, (where Passion ruled, and my Judgment or
Gratitude were not consulted) I took Horse that Evening, and began my journey
to Chira, (the Metropolis of Naitrant) where I have staid ever since my
departure. I was a stranger to the City, and the first Bill I read, there I
took up my Lodgings. I lived sometime in the House unknown, and went very
seldom abroad; my grief for so great a loss hourly employing my thoughts. But
one day going to take the Air upon the River at the back of the City, I
encountered some Young Ladies that walked upon the Banks, and asked, if they
designed to trust themselves to the water? Women there, though Virtuous and
Honest, yet are not shie, and being well bred, know how to oblige strangers,
and preserve their Honor. They accepted the Complement; and having got Music
on board, we spent the day, and some part of the Evening very pleasantly; and
at last began the stories of our Loves, where I related mine (but concealed
your Name and Quality) with as much pain, as if we had but newly parted; this
moved the pity of all the Ladies, and she who was the fairest of them (and whom
we could not persuade to a relation of her Adventures) wept; and sighing, said,
I deserved better fortune. Thus we consumed the time, and I proffered to see
them to their Lodgings, but was denied the Honor, though not before they had
assured me that I might frequently see them, where we had met that Forenoon.

I found something that night at my Heart more than usual, and though my own
misfortunes lay heavy upon me, I was afflicted for those Tears I had forced the
fair one to shed, and could have almost wished my self in Love with her: Her
tenderness spoke good Nature, and her generous pity showed a noble Soul. Your
seeming infidelity urged me to forget my Vows, and my griefs bid me seek relief
from some kinder she. Then after a tedious contest, I was all Love, all
Repentance, and every corner of my Soul was full of thee; Timandra, was the
Object of my waking thoughts, and the last guide that led me to my rest; all
Night I Would dream of her, and in the Morning mourn, because I could dream no more.

Next day however, I went to renew my acquaintance with my last days walk, I
moved without design, yet wanted to see them; I feared, and wished, and wanted
I knew not what; I fled from my self, I asked not whither; and when I most
resolved to shake off my sorrows, and seek for Happiness in a new Love, I Have
found a pleasure in my present pain, and doated on my griefs for the sake of
her who brought them. But the fair ones no sooner arrived, than all my cares
were hushed, sorrow slept, and no Melancholy thought disturbed my dawning
Heaven. I could look on my new acquaintance with an' air wholly changed, and
observed that the fairest often fixed her Eyes on mine; and when she spoke,
Love and Modesty shared all her words between them. But time (which to
unthinking Lovers still seems short) flew quick away, and Night with all her
gloomy shades approaching, the Ladies retired to their respective Lodgings.

The tenderhearted fair one, after some small refusals, at last permits me to
wait upon her to hers. My thoughts were so pleasantly employed, I never
examined the way she chose, and was surprised to see her stop at mine. I begged
she would allow me the Happiness of waiting upon her to hers, and she told me, I
had already done so. Thus we parted, and I entered some time after, without
acquainting her that I lodged in the same House. A few minutes after, my Heart
seemed entirely hers, and when it had for a while enjoyed it self with the
thoughts of a new Beauty, and judged the Conquest past, its first Mistress
would return, recall the wanderer, and force him to obedience; and the fair
Timandra still possessed a Heart, in spite of its owner.

We often met, and the Charming Olmechine, (for that was the name of this kind
fair one) at last let me know she loved. But did it with all the modesty of her
Sex, showed a strong and nice Virtue, with a powerful Love; paleness o'respread
her Face, trembling dwelt upon her Lips, her Eyes were fixed upon the ground,
and her Words were moving, but her Beauty more. 'Twas then, that Love showed
himself a capricious Deity; for the Maid no sooner had attacked my Heart, than
'twas entirely yours. I had Eyes no more for her, and my inclinations being
wholly changed, I received the tender address with more indifferency, than good
breeding or gratitude could well allow. However, when I had recollected my
self, I gave her all that Satisfaction she could justly expect from a heart she
knew wholly prepossest, and now firmly fortified against a change, I see her
home at Night, and inform her, that I lodged in the same House, she blushed at
the unexpected adventure, and though she loved, was sorry to know a Man under the
same Roof with her self, that was conscious to her weakness. Next day I dined
with her, where I made my acquaintance with her Aunt; and whom I found to be
the Mistress of the Family. The old Gentlewoman entertained me very kindly, and
commended my shape, mien, and garb, with all the gallantry, of which one at
twenty is capable; and I returned her Complements with that careless gravity,
to which my griefs permitted me not to be a stranger. At night she came to my
Room; and under the notion of asking, if things were in that order I wished
them, spent some hours in my Company. I could observe, while she stayed, that
nothing pleased her so much, as when the Subject was Love: The Blood sparkled
through her buff Cheeks, and Love lay burning in her deadned Eyes. Next day I
found her painted and dressed, with that gallantry that only fitted Brides of
fifteen, and I was a second time obliged to accept of a splendid Entertainment
from her. Thus she continued kind, and every day gave me new grounds of
suspecting the old Letcher inflamed. While the Aunt made daily advances, the
lovely Niece saw me but seldom; and when she did, 'twas with all the
bashfulness of a guilty young sinner, whose Virtue had newly been seduced. I
paid her all those respects she deserved, and gave my Pity when I had no more.
She Would sigh, look pale, and gently hang her head; then leave me sad, because I
could not love. Attabalippa, (for that was the Aunt's name) in time became a
perfect plague, she haunts me like a Ghost, my Will and Actions seem the guide
of hers, and she does nothing, in which her hopes to please me has not a share.
This made me look out for new Lodgings, and I was ready to depart, when my
Servant Curacas came and told me, the fair Olmechine lay dangerously ill of a
Fever; at this a sudden tenderness seized me, Pity and fears lodged in my
Breast, and a thousand Torments racked me till I saw her. I soon got
admittance, and (having seated my self by her upon the Bed) inquired
passionately after her health; the Charming Innocent wept, and sighed, then
looking upon me with Eyes all Languishing, answered, I am -- At this a new
flood of Tears broke forth, and all the Charms of Beauty in distress assault my
Heart, and moved a pity equal even to Love. Then taking hold of her fair hand,
that lay above the Clothes, I kissed it with all the Transports newborn flames
could give; conjured her to speak, I longed to share her griefs; and almost
wished my self the Cause, to have the Power of giving some relief. Thus while I
mourned over her, possessed with all the tenderness of dying Mothers, for their
weeping infants, I could see her Lips (like Roses plucked) grow pale, her Heart
beat thick, and night o'respread her Eyes, her Soul half fled, and she at last
lay fainting in my Arms. This adds to my sorrow, and laboring 'twixt grief and
Love, I gently raised her drooping Head, and strove to kiss her back again to
Life; my sighs ecchoed in her ears, and my groans awaked her from this little
death. She looked upon me with all the Symptoms of a Lovesick Maid, and
blushed to find her self lying in my Bosom, with half her Beauties open; then
faintly struggling, threw her self down upon the Bed. Ah! Sir, (said she) for
Heavens sake, think me Virtuous, though you have found me weak; tenderness for your
loss first begot my Love, then use it as the darling Child of that generous
passion, and not the effect of a mind unfix'd; pardon the excess of a flame so
pure, and give me pity, if you cannot Love. I answered these obliging words
with all the sweetness which her Charms inspired, and if a flame equal to that
of hers did not then possess me, I told her, my Gratitude and her Beauty would
assist me, and my Heart should quickly bid adieu to its old Mistress, to
entertain one whose merit justly claimed a better. This eased the Maid, and I
left her more sound in mind and better than I found her. Attabalippa met me
just as I came out, and forced me with her back into the Room. Olmechine
blushed at the unexpected Happiness, and was scarce able to look upon her Aunt,
because her Lover looked and was so nigh. She was glad to see her Niece altered
to the better; and going to the other end of the Room, viewed her self in a
large Glass, opposite to the Bed, and asked me, smiling, how I liked her dress?
Then told me, how such a one had loved her, that a Lord had died for her, and
that most of the Youth in Chira still sighed for her, and wondered where that
Beauty lay which charmed them. I answered her dotage very modestly, and
Olmechine, (whose Fever was now abated) took particular notice of all that
past; was ashamed of her weakness, and sensibly touched to find a Rival where
she least looked for one. In the mean time, the old Gentlewoman, who had forgot
something below Stairs, quitted the Room, after she had desired me to wait upon
her Niece, and divert her melancholy thoughts till she returned. I looked upon
the fair one, with an Air that spoke me pleased with the opportunity and
employment; and she, with a Charming Voice, told me, she was not the only
Conquest I had made; and though she feared some ill Consequences from her Aunt's
passion, yet she had the satisfaction of seeing Age inflamed, and looked upon it
as some excuse for hers. I confessed I had been long sensible of that esteem
her Aunt had for me, but that it had never met with any Encouragement; that
since her Charms had been able to drive Amazonta (for so I had always called
you) from my Heart, they were sufficient guards against the fond assaults of an
old Woman, whom I esteemed only, because of that Relation she had to her I
loved. The fair one, sighing, answered all I said with so much modesty, she
looked like innocence her self, and told me, her past misfortunes yielded to
her present Happiness, that all her losses doubly were repaid, and she no more
complained of cruel fortune. Her Face and Breeding spoke her Quality beyond her
present Circumstances; and seeing she was able to speak without prejudice to
her health, I gently pressed she would let me know who it was had taken the happy
Conqueror Captive, and if my Love was able to repay the least part of her by
past Sufferings. She, all goodness, and full of love, after a few Tears, began.
Here Adrastus stopped, and waited my consent to the Relation of Olmechine's
story; which, Madam, for your divertisement, I likewise send you; and if my
Letter be of too great length, impute it to my Obedience, and the desire I have
to serve you.

MY Father was a Man well known in Naitrant, by the Title of Manco, an Earldom
which was long possessed by a noble series of his famous Ancestors, handed down
to him with additional Honors, which their Kings according to their Merits had
bestowed. In his Youth he discovered a thousand signs of that extravagancy
which possessed him in his Elder Year's. At Masks he still appeared with all
the gallantry of Youth, dressed profusely, but danced well, had ^ pleasant
Countenance, but a large stock of Ill Nature, a refined Wit employed to ignoble
uses; quarreled with all men, and seemed a bubble to each Rook he knew. His
Father (whom Heaven had blessed with no more Children) grieved to see that Son,
from whom his Age had hoped so many Blessings, the cause of endless fears. And
to reclaim him from his wildness, thought Marriage the best expedient. Almado,
his Friend and Neighbor, (a Man equal to himself in Birth and Fortune, the
Father of two Daughters) had often proposed an Alliance with his Family; and of
this he now resolves to accept. The Match is immediately agreed upon between
them, and my Father Accompanies the old Earl to Almado's House, where he saw
the Charming Arathea (for that was my Mother's name) and seeing Loved. She,
whom Fame had acquainted with his Nature, and her Father with his business, had
that grief upon her Soul the accident might justly give. This languishment adds
to her Beauty, and to his Flame. Almado, who was of a generous temper, was
sorry to see his Daughter averse to what he thought conduced so much to her
welfare, and tells her all the Advantages that attend so great a match, that
the Love my Father had for her would settle his roving thoughts, and stay his
Soul at home. Her Beauty would doubtless reclaim him. That Marriage wrought
such changes, was evident from every day's experience; and that Youth in that
state, were obliged to reckon themselves amongst the number of men, and as such
to live; that a lovely Woman had more Eloquence than a grave Philosopher, and
Love to Vir^^^ joined, more power than Vice with all her Man about her. The
Daughter naturally Pio^^ knew what she owed to her Parents, and show'^
Obedience by a quick consent. The old Ea^^ was overjoyed at his good success;
blessed h^^ Friend, and the happy hour which gave hi^ Daughter Birth. Their
hopes were equal, an^ their thoughts flew high, and every hour of added life
was looked upon as Ciphers joined to the numbers of their Blessings. But this
pleasant Scene, was not of long duration; for the Brave Almado, had the
misfortune, to be accused by Villains, (Enemies to Virtue) of some designs
against his Prince, and was forced to seek for safety in another Nation, where
he shortly after died. Old Manco grieved for the misfortune of his Friend; but
more to see his Eldest Daughter ill used by his own Son, and the other exposed
a prey to Contempt and Poverty, because her Father's Fortune answered for his
seeming guilt, and paid for Crimes not his. But as if Heaven had designed my
Mother for the longest sufferer, the Earl (after he had settled a small part of
his Estate upon her Sister Attabalippa) died, and left the disconsolate
Arathea, to mourn a loss which Fortune never attempted to repay.

Manco soon forgot the loss of a Father, whom he had always looked upon as an
allay to all his Pleasures; and now being entirely Master of himself and
Fortune, he aims at Vice in all her pomp, keeps an Army of Footmen, plays
incessantly at Cards with every Sharper, and pays a double price for every
pleasure. While thus he lived, I came into the World, and though, he looked upon
my Mothers Charms and Virtue, as things not worthy of his serious thoughts, yet
upon this occasion there was nothing wanting that Money, mastered by a lavish
mind, could bring, and the poor Countess mourned in state, to see her Infant
born to cruel wants. Sometime after it, he sold one half of his Fortune, to
appease the rageing hunger of some gaping Creditors; the remaining part could
not long supply his Disbursements, and he at last reduced it all to nothing. My
Mother wearied out with this long Scene of misery, in a short time sunk beneath
the burden of her misfortunes, and smiling plunged into the other World; while
I, whom Heaven preserved to sport it self withal, was taken care of by her
Sister, upon whom the Earl (as I have already told you) had settled a small
part of his Estate. She was not of Arathea's temper, Gallantry seemed the
business of her life, and though she was always Virtuous, yet her Conduct seldom
made her thought such, for innocence it self, is not sufficient for a Woman,
unless she also study to appear so; because the World, which only views the
outside of affairs, seldom offers to give its Judgment of things as they really
are, but as they seem to be. I had reached the twelfth Year of my Age, when
Manco ashamed of what was past, and terrified with the prospect of future
disgrace and contempt, (the Companions of Poverty by madness brought) abandoned
his House and Relations, and threw himself naked upon the World, in the quality
of one of her beggared Sons, possessed of nothing, but what in time she might
bestow upon him for tedious Years of toyls, and hated labor. What few friends
his poverty had left him, were sorry for the accident, but none strove to give
relief; and upon second thoughts; inwardly rejoiced to see the poor spendthrift
gone, though they knew not whither. My few Years did not protect me from a due
feeling of these Misfortunes; and that Beauty, which already began to display
it self in my Face, now droopt and languish'd e're its day had dawned, and
darkness strugled with the glimm ring Light.

My Aunt still made a considerable figure in the World, and strove to maintain
some part of the Grandeur of her Family, upon that small Estate Manco had given
her; and I was by those, ignorant of our Circumstances, reputed a Woman of no
small Fortune. This gave me the trouble of some Lovers, amongst whom were the
Lord Avilon's two Sons, men of infinite parts; the Eldest was tall, of good
Shapes, had an incomparable Air, danced well, and sung to a wonder, but
addicted to Anger and Jealousy, passions of sufficient force to oppress a
large stock of Virtues. The Younger was all good Nature, of a prompt and
piercing Wit, Eloquent beyond expression, had the softness of a Woman in his
Voice, and all the Courage of that mighty Ceature Man in his Soul. I was
equally beloved by both, each strove to gain a Heart insensible of their
merits, and though the youngest had a great share in my esteem, yet neither of
them possessed my Love. Thus for a while they Courted, the present still
speaking to the Advanvantage of the absent, till Duverr (for that was the name
of the Eldest) overcome by his ^ealousie, quarreled with his Brother, (the
Handsome Sevilus) by whom (after a few thrusts) he was killed, in a field
adjoining to our House. The Young unfortunate Conqueror, kissed the wounded
Clay wept over him some Hours, and then (consulting his own safety) fled. His
Father used all his interest at Court, to obtain a pardon for his only Son; and
Canador our present Sovereign (all Mercy) grants it soon as asked. But he never
returning, it was useless, and the afflicted old Man (now concluding both his
Children lost) in a few Years died, having left his Estate to the next
Heir-Male, if his absent Son returned not.

I could not longer live in the Country, where I was looked upon as the cause
of so many mischiefs. My Aunt, whose fortune now began to ebb, was persuaded by
necessity, and we came to Chira, where unknown we have lived these five Years
without a change of Fortune; nor have we yet heard what became of my poor
unfortunate Father, or the young Sevilus, now (if alive) Lord Avilon. The Court
and foreign Trade renders the City very populous, and private Families reside
in it unregarded. Thus you see Sir, (continued the afflicted Fair) how
misfortunes have pursued me from my Infancy, and I have now added sensibly to
their number, by that weakness of which you have found me guilty.

Here she ended, and the story wrought that Impression, which the affliction of
the fair Sex does on generous Souls. I was all pity, all tenderness, all
sorrow; and each of these were swallowed up in Love. I wished her all the
Happiness the loveliest of her Kind e're possessed; swore my constant Love
should atone for part of her past ills, clasped her gently in my Arms, laid
her all languishing to my Breast, and whispered comfort to the kind afflicted.
She (whom Love had not robbed of Modesty (reproved me mildly for the rudeness,
and said, she feared I doubted much her Virtue, when I thus presumed upon her
Love. I answered this with words that sufficiently spoke it the effect of my
passion and my grief, for a thought that differed so much from my real
intentions or sentiments; Madam, (cried I) believe me I love, that I think you
Virtuous, that I lament your past sufferings, and shall be ever yours. The Aunt
jealous of her Niece's Charms, made all the dispatch she could of any affairs
that kept her from me, and entered just as I pronounced the last words. At
first she stood amazed at what she saw, but (willing to conceal that concern
she had for the discovery) turned it into Raillery, and smiling asked her
Niece, if she stood in need of a Love-Physician, to complete the Cure of her
Fever. Olmechine only smiled; and I, who was obliged to answer for both the
offenders, told Attabalippa, that I shared in her Niece's sickness; that my
Heart was naturally tender, that Women's pains (if fair) were all my own; and
that I was glad of her arrival, and thereupon showed a Picture, (done by the
best Master of the World, which I vallu'd at a hundred Guineas.) This, Madam,
(said I) the fair Olmechine at first view admired, but when I begged she would
accept the small Complement, it was answered, you better deserved it, and I
swore it should be ever hers. At this you appeared, as if kind fortune had sent
you to decide the difference. The old Gentlewoman was pleased to find things no
worse, and decided in my favors; while the Charming Niece had Joys equal to
hers, in seeing how much I feared, and what caution I used for the concealment
of my flame; for Cares are always Natural signs of growing love, and our
endeavors to hide any thing, a mark of that value put upon it.

In a short time the fair one was perfectly recovered, and Attabalippa would
often call me an able Physician, and attribute the cure to my Conversation. But
at last growing jealous to a degree of madness, she denied her that Happiness,
and watched her with as many Eyes as Argus e're had open, when he looked to the
Rival Cow, at the command of the jealous Goddess. While I was absent from this
fond tender Beauty, my Heart would struggle 'twixt the old and new, recall to
view my first and latter Vows, show Olmechine in all her sweetness, and
Timandra with her Honor abandoned for my sake, then I would immediately be all
yours; when with your Rival I loved her, when absent I forgot her; and still as
the moving Object fled from my sight, the flame she had kindled burnt no
longer, but served to add to that I had for another. The Aunt stormed and
loved, saw me frequently, and had always the marks of Anger, Jealousy, and
Love evident in her Countenance, and forgot not to tell me, she took notice of
that inclination the fond young Girl had for me, (meaning her Niece) and was
sorry to see how much I contributed to the increase of her passion. I denied
all, and certainly had left Chira to be rid of so many tortures, if the
Compassion I had for Olmechine's sufferings had not commanded my stay. At Night
Curacas told me she had met him upon the Stairs, and desired to see me next
Morning at the Rivers side. I failed not to be there, and had not waited long
when she arrived. We spent the first part of our time upon the Water; where we
discoursed our Loves anew, laughed at the old Aunt, pitied her weakness, and
pleased our selves with the hopes of coming Happiness. But the day growing
hotter, we forsook the inconstant Element for one more fixed, and chose to walk
beneath some Trees which grew upon the Bank; Olmechine on a sudden stopped, and
offered to retire, because the King was upon the place; and I, who had never
yet seen this Prince, was now resolved to lay hold of the opportunity. But as I
was about to tell her so, the mighty Canador appeared, of whom Fame speaks so
many wonders. He discoursed familiarly with any Man that approached him, looked
all Majesty and Courage, yet had Mercy painted in his Face. We stood sometime
to see what Courtiers were with him, when to the wonder of all, a young Man
(with his Hair cut above his Ears, imprisoned (you would thought so at least) in
his Coat; his shoes and every thing about him bespeaking his Employment, and
his Gloves thrown beneath his Armpit) approached. He asked some Persons of
Quality which was the King, and having found him, bluntly demanded if he was
Canador the Sovereign of Naitrant; who smiling answered he was. The Seaman
immediately pulls a Letter out of his Pocket, and presents it with that grace
inherent to men of his profession. The King asked from whom it came? And he
confidently replied, from my Companion honest Villacus, a Man who has done your
Majesty great service at Sea these Seven Years past. He came on shore some
Months ago, and after he had spent his Money with pleasure, as with toil he
gained it, was forced by Necessity to reimburse with the first opportunity, and
so had the misfortune in a Civil way to borrow some pounds upon the Road from a
Gentleman, for which he is now detained Prisoner in the Caroula, and may
shortly pay too much interest for the Money, if your Majesty does not discharge
the Sum, and relieve him speedily. The King was pleased to open the Letter;
which we afterward understood to be to this purpose.

Kind Sir,
MY Friend Pallamos (the bearer hereof,) can tell you who I am, and what I have
done for you these seven Years. If you will not believe him, you may ask the
question of Benizor our Admiral and your good Friend. I I had the misfortune to
be taken up for a small business, which I don't desire to hear of again,
because I have heard too much on it already. I was tried and Condemned, and
unless you look out very sharp you may come to lose a very good Subject; for I
am to be hanged to morrow or next day at farthest. And do you see, Sir, I would
have you Remember this in time, for the hours stay for no man, and the Gallows
is ready for any man; and look ye I cannot endure the thoughts of hanging.

Sir, Your Friend to serve you, Villacus.


Canador taken with the Adventure, laughed heartily, and turning to Benizor, who
then walked with him, asked if he knew any such? who replied he did, that they
were two merry Fellows, had served in his own Ship, and were extraordinary
Seamen. While the King discoursed the Admiral, I could see the Young Tarr fix
his Eyes upon Olmechine; she blushed and trembled, and he showed no fewer marks
of surprise in his Countenance; when approaching, Madam, (said he) may I ask
where the fair Olmechine lives, and what place of this City is blessed with so
sweet a Guest? This he spoke with an Air that belied his habit; and she unable
to answer, only sighed. In the mean time the King asked for him, and bid him
acquaint his Comrade with his success, adding, his Pardon should be sent him in
the Evening. He, who again appeared a Seaman, bowed to his Prince after avery
odd manner, and tossing up his Hat (after a few Prayers for the King, and a
languishing look to the fair Olmechine) run off, and left the Company beyond
thought pleased with the Novelty of the address. The fair confused one soon
quit the place, and as we walked homewards, I could observe her drowned in
melancholy, that her Soul was o'reburden'd, and she was ready to sink between
two very different passions, Grief and Love. I asked the cause with all the
tenderness of which a Man can be capable; and she answered me in the same
Language she had done the lovely Seaman.

Next Morning I paid a visit to the old Woman, she was glad to see me, but the
lovely Niece (no more what she had been) Sickned as I entered. The Aunt
observed it, and Remembering how she had been indisposed that Night, attributed
the cause to Love, and played upon the Subject. In the mean time one of the
Servants entered, and whispering something to Attabalippa, the dejected
Olmechine told me in a moving accent; that the misfortunes of others now
pressed her Heart, and new pains had seized her easy Soul; that time would
show me how weak she was, and I would scorn her for her past kindness. This
discouse amazed me, and I was about to tell her so, when her Aunt cried bring
them in; the Door was immediately opened, and I could see two handsome Gentlemen
enter. Olmechine trembled, looked pale, sighed, and in a moment fainted. The
Aunt ran with open Arms, not knowing which of them to embrace first; and cried,
Oh Manco! Oh Avilon! The Father and the Lover equally strove to assist the
Fainting fair; and each regardless of Attabalippa's kindness flew like
lightning to embrace the Lovely Niece. Both raise her up, both weep, and
jointly press her Lips. The Charming innocent lifted up her Eyes, blessed
Heaven, then sighed, and fainted over again. At this, the Lover floods of Tears
let fall, cursed his own folly, raved because he had shown too much o^
Happiness at once, and had not brought h^^ Heaven by just degrees The Father
was possessed with all the tenderness of an afflicted Parent. He gazed upon her,
stood motionless, and in groans spoke all his griefs. The Aunt was divided
between hopes and fears, and my endeavors for her recovery, gave way to those
of her first Lover. At last she spoke and Charmed them into ecstasy. Not smiles
of newborn Infants ever were so welcome to tender Mothers, after all their
pains as the first word she uttered. After some minutes thus spent, they at
last seated themselves and asked a thousand questions of each others Fortunes.
Olmechine pressed Avilon to tell her if he was the Man who had addressed the
King the preceding day, for a Pardon to his Friend. Manco smiled, and desired
the Lover to satisfy her Curiosity. At this I offered to retire, but 'twas
begged I Would stay. In the mean time the Young Lord began, and told her how he had
met with her Father at Sea, that they had both served together in one Ship,
that a few weeks after they came to Chira, they went into the Country to
enquire after her, where by the way the Earl was apprehended for a Robbery,
because he had some resemblance of the Author, and being Condemned, they had
made use of that Stratagem to obtain a Pardon, without discovering his Quality.
That when he had left the King, he waited at the end of the Avenue and dogged
her home; and that as soon as her Father was at liberty, and they had provided
themselves in handsome Clothes, they came to wait upon her. The fair one wept
at the story of their hardships, thanked the Gods that had restored her Parent
to her, and kneeling asked his Blessing. The Earl, with all that gravity in his
Face which Age and misfortunes commonly imprint told her that Heaven had now
repaid all his sufferings, that he saw the Errors of his Youth, and was sorry
he had been the Cause of all her past miseries. Then taking Avilon by the hand;
here my dear Olmechine (cried he) receive the Companion of my toyls and
absence, my good and bad Fortunes, look upon him as the preserver of your
Father's Life, Honor, and Estate; and the Man whom kind Heaven designs you for
your Husband. At this she blushed, and the happy young Lover throwing himself
at her feet, conjured her to remember his past sufferings, his continued
Constancy, and all his Vows. The fair one fixed her Eyes upon mine, and with
Tears answered all he said.

In the Morning she sent for me, and after a thousand blushes and faint sighs,
asked me if I could see her Married to another. I loved her when present, and
was scarce able to answer, but upon second thoughts told her, I could see her
possessed by Avilon, because his services best deserved her, and that to
purchase happiness for her, I could forego my own; I showed the handsome Young
Lover in his best shapes, and forgot not to put her in mind of those
obligations she lay under to him. She confessed his worth, but doubtcd still
the truth of what I said, and asked me blushing if I spoke my thoughts? I swore
I did; that as Compassion first begot her Love, so it had done mine; and the
cause once removed, the Effect naturally ceased, that I could mourn her
misfortunes no longer, when I saw her happily Married to a Man who loved so
well; that she should ever have the greatest share in my esteem, and in my
Heart take place next to Amazonta; and that for my self, I hoped time should
procure me that happiness, which the thoughts of seeing her honorably matched
had already begun. I could read contentment in her Eyes, and she might easily
have found as much in mine. When I left her, I began more seriously to reflect
on what had past; and by my hopes of future Happiness I swear, in all my
search, I found not one thought that was not for this Marriage; and was
confirmed in my opinien, when informed that Avilon had bostow'd upon the
repenting Manco the profits of his Estate, which he had not enjoyed since his
Father's Decease, it amounted to a considerable Sum, and wi^h i^ he was able to
relieve that half of his (...) which he had not sold, and that which
^^^^balippa possessed became likewise his by her Death. This, Madam, I say
confirmed me much in my Resolution of seeing her Married to another. But your
fair Idea which still haunted me, confirmed me more, and finished what was
begun, my imperfect thoughts settled there and all my wishes centered in
Timandra.

The day following they were Married, Avilon (...) Mistress of all his Vows,
for whom, he had endured Seven Years of tedious Exile; she a Lover who had
restored her Father to his Fortune and Honor. Manco saw his Daughter Married
to the best of men, and her self the most Charming and Obedient Nature e're had
framed, looks on his inclinations past, compares them with the present, and
finds how far he had mistaken the Road to Happiness, thanks Heaven for all
those hardships he had known, because they served to show the value of his
present Fortunes. Attabalippa was o'rejoy'd at the return of her
Brother-in-Law, and the loss of a Rival, in the Marriage of her Niece, and I
had all at that pleasure love and absence would permit. Thus we were all happy,
and a few days after began our Journey to the Country. At Olmechine's desire, I
made one in this happy Company, and I could observe how blessed the fair one was;
contentment and Love sat smiling on her Brow; and Venus, when she for the Apple
strove, exposing all her graces to the Youth, was a homely Beauty, rugged and
deformed, matched with this lovely Nymph. Joys sparkled in her Eyes, and the
calmness of her Soul and Mind displayed it self in all her words. But if by
chance, she fixed her Eyes on mine, thoughts of that weakness she had lately
shown, disturbed her Peace, and fanned expiring Fires; or if at any time they
spoke of constant Loves, she would sigh, and blush, then faintly look on me. When
we had rid two days Journey, I met upon the Road an Inhabitant of Capac, of
whom asking several questions, and at last concerning you, I was surpised to
hear him say, you will laugh when I Have told you how the Earl of Rucana Married
her. The words like Lightning struck me to the Heart, my Blood was chilled, and
froze within my Veins, and I had scarce the Courage to bid him tell me all: At
last he did it. But good Gods! you only know what passions swelled my loaded
Breast! Grief, Shame, and Repentance first took place; then Joys followed, not
to be changed for those the Gods possess Eternal springs and sweets seem now in
view, the thoughts of former pleasures are no more, all past and present
vanished, (like Birds of Night at the approaching Sun) at the coming of a new
Heaven. Timandra was innocent, all Lovely, all Virtue, and though I found too
late how faulty I had been, yet to my comfort, I still remembered the Nature of
the offended Fair; knew her all Mercy, and blessed kind Heaven and her. Olmechine
no more appeared the same, her Eyes looked dead, her Beauties fled, and all the
footing which her Charm's had gained, for Years of sighs, within my faithful
Breast, was in one moment by Timandra won. I acquainted the happy Fair with my
good fortune, and told her my Amazonta still was just, that her Maid had
borrowed her name, and was already Married. The kind she shared in my Joys, bid
me post to Happiness which I often had wished, and had so well deserved. Mounted
on Wings of Love I hither came; stole into Capac with all the privacy and
inward Joy of Misers, who at dead of Night go to view their hoarded Treasure;
and found Zibelline at the Garden Door, when asking for the Object of my
desires, I was informed the Duke was possessed of all, and I for ever damned, and
excluded that Heaven your Mercy had tempted me to hope. I entered, found you
sleeping, sighed over you, till my trembling Soul prompted, by the Heav'n-like
outside, strove to abandon my Body, and possess it self of yours; and while
thus I labored you awaked, and by your griefs you taught me what to hope.

Here Adrastus ended; and, Madam, I could wish you would spare me the shame and
trouble of Writing what followed. Yet had the Trojan looked but half so fair,
the Tyrian Queen was happy even in flames; for to live without him, had brought
new pains each moment of her life, and all her Years had been consumed in
sorrow; or had he when at Sea so lovely been, the Queen of Heaven had laid her
Anger by and smiled upon him, Winds had for ever been in Chains tied up, and
muttered for new vent within their Cells. While she above in contemplation
wrapped, had seen the Waves plowed up by Trojan Ships, and kept his men from
danger for his sake; Jove's Bed for ever now had nauseous grown, and she would have
left the joys and sweets of Heaven for the Embraces of the Godlike mortal;
she would envied Dido, and her place supplied, and had by flames extinguished
rageing fires. Virtue and Marriage Vows had fled before the happy Conqueror,
and Cynthia her self, with all her coldness and indifferency about her, had
smiled, if this young Man had seen her in the Water, naked she would stood and
gazed upon his Eyes, and caught by Love, forgot to seek Revenge, then in the
heat of wild desire, exposed to view what happy streams had hid, to tempt the
Youth into an equal flame. Wonder not then, Madam, if I confess my weakness,
and tell you, that I yelided, that he possessed what was another right, and
weighed the Blessing in the Sca^^^ (...) Love.

That night he went to the Earl's (who yet knew nothing of his being in Capac)
'twas there he found the Duke, and was by both received with that joy natural
to a kind Brother, and a constant friend. I had complained of Minoya's
unkindness, and he forgot not that Night to observe his behavior, and found
the Countess showed no compliance to his Passion, but what good Manners and his
Quality command^ from her. When he came to see me next morning, my Husband fond
of his Company wou^^ not live without him, and he accepted of an Ap^partment in
our House.

You may condemn me, Madam, perhaps because I did not oppose this, and shunned
(...) Man that made me betray my Honor, and (...) Marriage Vows. But I must
plead the force (...) his Love, and my weakness for an excuse; (...) I hope you
are no stranger to the force of t^^ Young Deity; for had Apollo, with all his
cu^^^^ locks that wantoned in the Wind, and all (...) Charms his Music e're
had wrought, been h^^^ so taking, half so gay, the lovely Virgin never had fled
before him; the Gods had laughed when she for pity cried, and all the Goddesses
had envied her Happiness, her Heart so long could not have flinty proved, she would
turned, and looked, then loved, and yielded.

Adrastus thus happily posted, enjoyed his Mistress and the friendship of her
Husband, and beneath that shade the Serpent lodged, that stung his Honor when
he seemed secure; in the mean time he goes often to Rucana's, and assaults his
Wife with all the Arts of Love; but she (too modest, and fortified with a
stronger Virtue than I was ever Mistress of,) withstood this growing Malady,
and hoped to cure him e're her Husband took notice on it.

In the Evening Adrastus came into my Room, and there spent some hours; our
security made us careless, and our repeated Joys had lulled our wearied Souls
almost into a Lethargy. I was sitting in a Chair hard by him, and my Head
rested in his Bosom; the young Lover would sigh, and eagerly press my hand,
look languishing upon me, and tell how much he loved, then wonder how the Duke
became so blind, and aw not Charms of force enough to move a frozen Hermit,
drag him from his Religious Cell into the World again, make him lose what forty
Years of cruel penance gained, ^^d pull him back from Heaven when almost
^^ter'd.

As he pronounced the last words, the Duke came into the Room, he looked
furiously upon me, his Eyes plainly speaking his thoughts, and going to the
other end of the Chamber, seated himself in a Chair opposite to me. Adrastus
was confounded at the Accident, and only grieved for me. Then rising up, he
embraced his friend, asked the cause of his sudden melancholy, from whence his
frowns, and swore his Wife was Virtuous even in thought. Minoya gave him small
encouragement to plead for me or himself, and would have forced himself from
his Arms, when Adrastus (after he had given me a sign to retire) threw himself
upon his knees, and (to save my Reputation or at least my griefs) swore by that
friendship which he had always professed toward him, Timandra was innocent,
that 'twas true, she had laid open her sufferings to him, in hopes he might
prevail with her Husband to abandon that passion he had for the Countess of
Rucana, and that he could do no less than speak passionately, and with
tenderness, to ease her present griefs. The Duke, whether it was because he saw
his Love to his Sister-in-Law taken notice of, or if he really believed what
was said, I will not determine; but after a short pause he seemed on a sudden
pleased, and begged a thousand pardons, for that unjust opinion he had
conceived of his Friendship and my Virtue. Then taking Adrastus by the hand
(after they had embraced) he led him into the Room where I was. I had thrown my
self upon the Bed all drowned in Tears; in this condition he found me, and
falling down by me, he claspt me in his Arms, kissed me, and smiled, Ah my dear
Timandra! (cried he) Pardon the first Crime o^ this Nature I e're committed,
and accept of an unfeigned Repentance. By all the powers in Heaven I love thee
to distraction, and would not again be doubtful of thy Virtue, to be Monarch of
the Universe, cursed be the thought, and may Love and Peace be ever strangers
to my House, when e're I think the Just Timandra false. Adrastus who saw with
what tenderness he spoke, how good his Nature, and how great his Love, almost
repented what he had done in prejudice to his Honor, and abhorred his own
Treachery. But then looking on me, these Virtuous qualms forsook him. Sorrow
mixed with Jealousy took place; he saw the Woman whom he first had loved, now
kissed and ruffled in another Arms, and she by Vows to base compliance tied.
This shook his Nature, made his Soul unfix'd, and almost turned his passion
into madness. So mighty Jove from distant Heaven looked down, and saw Alcmena
whom helong had loved, now pressed and folded in a Mortal's Arms, a while with
Love and Jealousy he burns, and to himself he mutters sweet Revenge, swears by
his God head, when Amphitrion's fled, he will lay his Thunder and his Scepter by,
descend, and in the dull Phlegmatic Husband's place, lay both a burning Lover
and a God.

For some days after the Duke forbore his visits to Rucana (or rather to his
Wife) and Adrastus and I could both of us have wished him oftener abroad, we
began to fear that absence might lessen that flame he had for the Countess, and
that which (before the return of my Lover) was my greatest torment, now became
my blessing; and nothing possessed my Mind more, than the doubts I had, of
being eternally denied the Happiness of entertaining the fond young Man. These
fears did not last long, but gave the way to new ones built upon better
grounds; for the Duke went as frequently abroad as ever he had done, but then
he stayed not long, or if he did, 'twas when my Lover was with him, who grieved
for this violent separation, and had no comfort but what stolen looks bestowed.
One Evening while the Duke sat by me, he dext'rously conveyed a short
Billet-deux into my Pocket, some minutes after I read it, and found it to this
purpose.

Madam,
TO morrow the Duke designs to hunt the Stag in the Park at Assapan, whither I
design seemingly to wait upon him, but with the first opportunity to lose him,
and return to Capac; doubt not the success, for I shall be happy if Timandra
Loves.

Adrastus.


Minoya according to his Resolution went, and I doubted not but that the Earl
of Assapan would detain him till Night, if not longer. He was a Man of a great
Estate but of mean Extraction, possessed every thing that makes an accomplished
Gentleman; was a Batchelour, seldom given to extravagancy, loved Hunting, and
fitted the Duke's humor exactly.

I had waited but a few hours when Adrastus came; the danger added to the
wished for Bliss, and I like the constant Hero, took the bold Leander in my
Arms, wiped his cares from him, laughed at Honor, and possessed my Love. While
thus we lay in fast embraces twined, dreamt of no Danger but of present Joys;
my faithful Zibelline came running in, half dead with fear, and almost out of
breath, Madam, (she cried) the Duke! The Duke! Prepare, -- now save -- your
Lover -- and -- your ruined Honor. -- Adrastus (careless of himself) starts
up, unsheaths his Sword, and points it to his Breast. This! This! (said he)
shall find an entrance here, and pierce my panting, loving, tender Heart, when
I abandon the too kind Timandra; the Duke shall bleed, and she shall still be
safe; if now he come this Steel shall give him welcome. Trembling I caught my
Lover in my Arms, bid him remember all his former Vows; when sighing at my feet
inflamed he lay, by all our hopes of Happiness, I swore Minoya's death should
bring Timandra's too. The Lover now no more of Courage knew; his Love for me a
thousand fears begets, and plunged in grief, all motionless he lies, thinking
on me, but not my present danger. Then on a sudden leaping from this Trance, he
cried, Speak! Speak! I Am yours, command me where you please. Zibelline half
recovered from her fright, within my Closet hid the hot young Man, my Husband
entering just as he was gone. My careless posture as in bed I lay, deludes his
fancy with the hopes of Bliss; and my Maid (who saw a fire in his Blood, and
how he sighed, and faintly spoke my name) retired, and left me in his loathsome
Arms. Adrastus heard with sorrow all that past, yet pleased to know how faintly
I embraced, each sigh I gave, he thought it meant for him, and all my actions
spoke the joy unwelcome. So Proserpina when by Pluto caught received the Person
of the ravishing God, with all those fears which tender Virgins know, and all
the loathings of a lovely Maid, who had been blessed with better sweeter loves;
but at the last, comforts her self with this; that as she was to Hell and Pluto
tied, for half the Year to share unequal pleasures; the other half was to be
spent in Heaven.

When the Duke was gone the Lover straight appeared, grief pressed his Brow,
and anger glowed in his Cheeks. So Mars, when taken in another's Bed, stormed
when he saw the Gods look laughing on; but more when Vulcan stood before his
Eyes, and Venus blushing for her Lover lay. My dalliances with the Duke had
added to my Beauty, Blood sparkled in my Face, and the marks of past loves
shined in my Eyes. So in the Morning watery Suns appear, and speak that rains
were either past or coming. Adrastus smiled to see the Danger fled, thanked me,
and swore he never should forget those fears and hazards I had lately known, to
give him Heaven and Happiness in love. Then falling on his knees he kissed my
Hand, and stole from that low step of Bliss unto the last, we renewed those
Joys we had not finished, and which my Husband had almost lost us by his sudden
arrival; nor did we part till we had sufficiently repaid the injury he had
done.

Some days hereafter, Adrastus told me he had newly come from the Earl of
Rucana, that he was Jealous of the Duke, because of some words he had
accidentally let fall, and of his frequent visits; that he swore revenge, and
raged like Hercules in his Poisoned Shirt, or the unfortunate Bajazet in his
Iron Cage. This gave me a thousand fears; I knew Rucana brave, loved much, a
Man that would not always be imposed upon, and had taught the Duke once already
what to expect from him. I must confess I loved Adrastus much, but withal could
not choose but fear for a man who was my Husband, and who still doated on me
when in my Company, maugre all those Charms his new Mistress possessed. I
charged Adrastus to run and seek him, and prevent (if possible) his visit to
the Countess that Night. The Lover flew to obey me, and I rested impatient of
his stay, longing to know the success of our project. In the mean time my
Husband had gone to Rucana's, where after some words had past between them, (of
which few were Witness) they went into the Garden to begin that Tragedy which I
so much feared; for Minoya, after he had received three Wounds, run the Earl
through the Body, and left him dead upon the place; that done, he leapt over the
Garden wall, and coming hastily through the Streets with his Cloak muffled about
him, in the dark and without Attendants, he was met by Adrastus, who seeing he
came from his Brother's stepped close up to him, and suddenly cried Your Grace
has been last with Rucana. The Duke terrified with his guilt, dreamt of nothing
less than his friend; and judging him who asked the question privy to what had
past, drew his Sword, and at the first thrust run him into the Arm. Adrastus
surprised with this return, concluded the Duke had a design upon his Life, and
in his own defense used all the Arts of a good Swordsman, and left my Husband's
Soul taking its flight from that passage he had given it in his left Breast.
The noise of Swords had drawn a considerable number of People together, and
several had seen the Duke the first aggressor, so that none offered to seize
him. He came straight to me with his all bloody in his hand, and throwing
himself at my feet; he fixed his Eyes upon me, set the point to his Breast, and
cried, Here I must receive my doom for that Crime I have unwillingly committed;
if Timandra acquit me, I am able to defend my innocence before the Gods
themselves, but if she do not, then Adrastus falls to appease the angry Ghost
of his Friend. I knew not what to think, the Duke, the Earl run equally in my
Mind; his Clothes and Sword besprinkled both with Blood, taught me to fear the
worst; and I could hardly say, speak on, is the Duke my Husband well? He all
sorrow started up, stared wildly upon me, and cried Minoya was no more; at this
I fainted, and when I came to my self again, I found the lovely Murderer at my
feet weeping and begging hard for Mercy; he showed me his innocence, swore he
would love me to death, though extended on the Rack and all his joints
dissever'd; that if I remembered him as the Author of my Husband's death, he would
own it to the World a base treacherous Murder, and throw away a Life that was
not worth his keeping since undervalu'd by me: Then asked me if I could see
that Neck stretched out under the hands of a common Executioner, that I had so
often embraced in my longing Arms, or his Body hung in Chains like the loathed
Carcass of some wild Ruffian or base Malefactor, exposed to contempt, and be
the Object of each raskals mirth; conjured me to remember all our Joys past,
his present Grief, and constant Love. Then raising himself up again, he laid
hold of his Sword, cursed his Stars, his Fortune, and Himself; Swore he would end
his Life that moment, pointed it to his Bosom, then ^ook'd again on me, threw
it from him, fell at my feet, groaned and melted into a Woman's weakness, and
faintly murmured, can I leave Timandra? No! No! I cannot, that were to lose
Heaven and Life too. In the mean time the Officers came with a Warrant to
apprehend him. I heard the noise upon the Stairs, and desired him (but in vain)
to provide for his safety. When they entered he arose and told them if they
wanted the Man had killed Minoya he was ready to answer for him. Then looking
back on me, he asked me if he should preserve his Life, or if he was
indifferent to me, if the last, he knew what to do, for he could never resolve
to Live, unless Timandra Loved him, and seeing I did not answer, come (said he
to the Officers) let us go where Justice calls for us, 'twixt grief and Love I
faintly looked after him, and bid him remember that I never was cruel.

When he was gone, I began to know some respite of my sorrows, and in that
state could consider the nature of the Accident, and my own Circumstances. I
remembered the Duke's Love when I married him, his good Nature and fond
Compliance with every thing I desired. Then called to view Adrastus, saw him my
first Lover, Constant to a wonder, that had concealed those favors from the
World which I had bestowed upon him, had killed his Friend in his own defense,
full of Repentance, but more of Love; despising his Life for my Love, and
setting that value upon things, just as he found I esteemed them. Then I was
all fear for him, I saw the Duke's Friends already his Enemies, and knew how
Justice might be wrested. But still my cares give place to flattering Hope; I
remembered we were now both single, that Heaven seemed to have ordained us for
one another, because of that Sympathy between our Hearts and Natures, and
dreamt already of a Heaven to come; for fear is but the prospect of a future
ill, which pained we view and yet might shun with ease, cause when our thoughts
on Phantoms are employed, Giants are made, which the next moment annihilates.

While thus I strove to delude and cozen my self, it was told me the Earl of
Rucana was found dead in his own Garden, that some People had seen the Murderer
make his escape over the Wall, and had pursued him so close, they saw him
assault the Gentleman by whom he was killed, and punished for that Blood he had
so lately shed. I was heartily sorry for the Accident, and equally grieved the
loss of that good unfortunate Man and his fair Countess, who felt double
torments, because she knew (though innocent) her self the cause of this great
mischief. But then to allay my sorrow, I looked on Adrastus as Earl of Rucana,
and imagined Heaven had wrought that unlooked for Happiness, because it
designed to give me joy in full; scorned a scanty Bliss weighed out by Drams
and Scruples, and threw upon me what my ambition scarce durst hope for.

The Duke's Relations came frequently to see me, and to condole with me that
loss, which upon second thoughts I scarce esteemed one. I could have wished
them less kind, or at least less formal; and 'twas a hard task for me to
dissemble my real thoughts, and feign a sorrow equal to my loss. But harder
when they pressed me to inform them if any words or actions proceeded the Duke's
death, from which they could infer premeditated Murder, and construed all
Adrastus e're had done to serve their purpose; and I had it (by some of my best
Friends) privately told me, that they suspected me conscious to the design,
because I had always shown a more than common esteem for the Murderer. This
most of all afflicted me, not that I feared any present danger from their
Malice, but because I looked upon it as an impediment to that Marriage I had
already promised my self with Adrastus, and considered how evidently I ruined
my Honor and Reputation, if I took to my Bed the Man who had killed my
Husband, and whom too many judged the wilful Author of his death, to promote
and secure his own Happiness.

While I was thus distracted between the distant prospect of future Happiness
and present Cares; Zibelline told me that Curacas had something of Consequence
to impart to me. I longed to know what was become of his Master, if he bore his
confinement patiently, and if he still loved me. The faithful Servant answered
me with sighs, and delivered me that Letter which confirmed all my fears. The
words were these, if I remember.

THis day I come to my Trial, and am already assured that Banishment is my
doom. It Is impossible to find me guilty of Minoya 's death, but (to satisfy
that number of Enemies this accident has brought me) I am charged with Crimes
of another Nature. I live for Timandra, and in whatever corner of the world I
spend my days, there I shall find happiness if she prove constant. Let me find
her alone to night, for I have no doubt of obtaining immediate liberty, in
order to a longer and worse Imprisonment, made so by its distance from the
Obect of all my wishes.

Adrastus.


This Letter gave me all the sorrow imaginable, I had lost my Husband, and was
then convinced I should lose my Lover too. I knew part of what the World
thought of me, and found I should be left to mourn my Misfortunes by my self.
My Mother was dead several Months before that time, and whether she suspected
the frailty of my Virtue or not, I am not positive, but there wanted not those
who said she did, and that it made too deep an impression upon her Heart, and
conduced to her speedier Journey into the other World.

At Night the mourning Lover came, I received him with that sorrow which our
mutual Misfortunes had taught me; and he unable to speak, embraced my knees,
wept, and looked upon me. Thus for a while we continued dumb, and experienced
the Truth of that Maxim, that Wounds are deepest and most dangerous that Bleed
inwards. But at last this Lethargy which often attends immoderate grief, was by
degrees weakened, and the lovely Youth could faintly pronounce these words. Can
the merciful Timandra be my Enemy? Can she consent to my Banishment from Capac?
And shall I be blessed with her presence but three short days? (for no more have
my Judges allowed me) And must the remainder of my Life be spent in absence, a
Hell sufficient for the Punishment of Parricide? Nay broken Vows or inconstant
Love, a Crime yet greater, and known only amongst Infidels. I shared all his
pains, and after I had asked him if he had stolen with privacy enough to my
House; I caught him in my Arms, kissed him, and spoke all that my tender Heart
could dictate to give him ease. He still urged his Constancy and Love, his
present misery and prospect of a greater, conjured me to be yet more kind, and
since he could not permit me to go along with him into a strange Country, begged
I Would consent to Marry him and tie my self for ever his: Time, his innocence, and
his Friends might have his Sentence repealed, and he doubted not if I loved him
now, of being more happy in his own Country, than ever he had yet been. He set
before me a full Enjoyment of that Heaven in Love which hitherto we had only
tasted; that his Innocence was evident to every Man, whose opinion was not
prejudicated, that none would condemn me, but those who envied my Charms and
Happiness; that Honor at best was but a Chimera invented to please giddy
fools, and persuade them into a belief of their own worth, merit, and judgment,
e're the pleasures of Love were fully known; and preached up by Women in Years,
to keep younger ones from sharing the Blessing. That nothing was more
Honorable (if I worshipped that shadow) than a constant passion. It spoke us
fixed in our Choice, and by consequence of a good Judgment, that enabled us at
first to make that Choice of which we had never repented. That we were born to
love, that without it we were mere pieces of moving Earth, dull Phlegmatic
lumps, fit only for the Conversation, or at least the Company of Brute Beasts,
that it could never be known, (meaning my Marriage) that he knew how to value
my Beauty, and, that even when old Age seized me I would be still the same to
him; he would call my first Embraces back to view, remember what I then was, and
again think me the same, for though he graspt me cold and withered in his Arms,
he would delude himself with the fancy or Idea of my Youth, imagination should
supply what Years had lost, and I should be still the Charming, Gay, the Young,
beloved Timandra. In short, Madam, I was again overcome by this invincible
Lover; and though Minoya had been buried not above eight weeks, I gave my hand
and with it my Heart to this Young graceful Man, though not before we had bribed
a jolly Priest with a handful of Pistols to a silence equal with that of the
Grave, and I had obtained my Husband's promise not to depart the Kingdom, but
to live privately with me till Fortune should be as much his friend as Love had
been. We spent the Night with that pleasure known only to happy Lovers; some
fears and cares we had which served to give it taste, but none sufficient to
destroy the Blessing.

In the Morning he waited upon his Friends, who all sincerely grieved his
Misfortune, and he seemingly prepared every thing for his sudden departure.
Three days thus spent, he took a solemn farewell of them all without sorrow,
because in me he found all that made him happy, for the possession of those
beloved is at any time a double recompense for the loss of Liberty.

It is not, Madam, the custom of our Country, to mourn the loss of a Husband
above a week, and the gravest Matrons are satisfied with the long penance of
Fourteen days in Tears. So that I was already Courted by several who had envied
the Duke's Happiness; and that Beauty which proved always fatal to my self and
others, in a short time got me a new crowd of Adorers, and though I was not
looked upon as a Woman nicely Virtuous, yet still my Eyes atton'd for that
defect, and the more solid part of Mankind judged (because I was Young) that a
Grave Husband and good advice might reclaim me, and work wonderful changes and
effects upon my easy Nature. Amongst the first that claimed my Love Assapan
appeared, I have already, Madam, given you the Character of that Man; but shall
now add that Love had transformed him, for though he was every way a Man truly
taking, and one that well deserved a Lady's good opinion; yet this passion to
which he had been mostly a stranger, wrought great alterations. For whereas he
was formerly addicted to Hunting, Riding, and such Manlike Exercises; he became
now tender in his Nature, gentle and Complaisant, spoke passionately, loved
dancing, Poetry, Romances, and had all the softness and inclinations of a
Lover. He grieved the loss of his Friend Minoya, but had too great an esteem of
me, to believe what some People spoke of my betraying his Honor or my own.

Adrastus (who moved no farther from me than into the Garden or another Room)
knew all that past, and was the more happy in his Confinement, when he saw
others labor to obtain what he unknown and with ease possessed* For if the
Addresses of a Gallant serve often to reclaim the Heart of an indifferent
Husband; much more must the real passion of another inflame a Man that loved so
violently. But Fortune that was never my Friend, at last betrayed the secret
Lover. For Assapan (one day as he came to my House) met the happy Man at the
Garden Door. They were equally surpised and equally grieved the unluckly
encounter. Adrastus however embraced him, and told him he had not yet departed
Capac, because Love had been his Friend, and had till that time protected him.
That his Life and Honor were now in his hands, and he dreamt no danger from a
Man of Assapan's merit. The Earl answered with that Discretion or Judgment
which was natural to him; but withal let him know he had been unkind, in not
trusting to his Friendship before Necessity (not Choice) had taught him so to
do. Adrastus alleged for an excuse, how much I was concerned in his
Concealment, and that it was not Honorable to betray a Lady's secrets,
especially those of love, without her positive command for it; and hoped he
would Pardon a Crime of which love not want of Friendship was the Author.
Assapan smiled, and gave him all those assurances of his safety which Oaths or
words could yield; and after they had discoursed some time about the injustice
of his Sentence, they came to see me. I was amazed at the unlooked for
Accident, and had almost fainted with the sudden Apprehension of my Husband's
danger. When Assapan, who saw my fears, approached, and begged a thousand
Pardons for being the Author of my griefs; Swore he was glad to see his Friend
happy, commended my choice, and added, he would not disturb my happiness, (though
he loved much) to be Master of the World. I returned him those thanks his
kindness merited, excused my self for not having sooner acquainted him with my
Circumstances, that it did not suit with my modesty, and that I was not sorry
for his knowledge, because 'twas what my heart would willingly have informed
him of before. He answered, that my Honor and his Friends safety should be his
greatest Care, that it was not convenient for my interest, that he should leave
off his Suit so suddenly, because the World had already seen him my Lover, that
while he continued his addresses, none could suspect him conscious of my real
Fortunes, and he would for the future proclaim to all, my virtue, as hitherto
he had done his Love.

I was o'rejoy'd at this Resolution the more, because I did not think he would
have born the Misfortune so patiently, or the Affront I put upon him with so
much Moderation. When he was gone, Adrastus (who had dissembled his real
Thoughts) began to let me know his Fears, that he doubted Assapan's virtue
would not be proof against so many Charms; that Love and Beauty had often
destroyed the most settled Resolutions, and trampled Honor under Foot: that he
was a dangerous Friend, and knew the Arts of Love, and all the weakness of a
Woman's nature. I found the aim of all this Discourse, and could almost have
reproved him for his fears. But then considering his Jealousy as the Child of
Love, I smiled, and embraced him, gave him all the Blessings mighty Love
bestows, and lulled his fears asleep.

Assapan came frequently to see me, and I could observe nothing in his Words
and Actions, that was not quadrant to those Promises he had lately made me. But
at last, prevailed upon either by the heat of his Love, or the hopes of my
weakness, he made those Addresses which did not at all please me, and swore
Adrastus was too happy, that he could no longer be my Friend or his, but a
Lover to the one, and a constant Rival to the other. This cruel and sudden
change gave me inexpressible sorrow, and taught me to fear a thousand
Mischiefs; then, as an addition to my Affliction, I saw it was what I could not
safely communicate to the lovely Partner of all my Cares, for when mighty pains
are in one Bosom found, it is over-charg'd and may in time be rent, but having
got a breast that shares the load, they straight take Wing and leave the
oppressed Heart, the o'reburden'd Soul mounts upwards, joys in its new Liberty,
and finds its Weights removed.

In the mean time the Earl continued his Visits, and failed not to urge the
violence of his flame, in words that never expressed a modest Love; and one Day
(the most unfortunate I er'e had seen, or now can know) told me, if I was not
married to Adrastus, I was not virtuous, and if I was, it spoke me regardless
of my Honor, if I considered him as the Author of Minoya's death, and
remembered what the World thought of me in that Husband's time.

You see, Madam, how Men are converted by Love into as many different
Resolutions and Humors as Proteus e're knew shapes; he who a few Days ago was
all Love, all Friendship and Tenderness, now became ill-natured, indiscreet,
and unkind. I was about to let him know how much I resented what he had said,
but then I remembered the weight of that secret with which my ill Fortune had
entrusted him, and with grief and anger painted in my Face, told him, he spoke
not like the generous Assapan, for he was my Friend, nor could I believe the
words meant to the Duchess of Minoya, because I was assured he once loved her,
and had a better opinion of her Virtue. When he saw me so modest and calm in my
Answer, I fancy he was at first sorry for his indiscretion; but when men once
doubt a Woman's virtue, it is impossible they should Love, and where there was
Love in the beginning Lust supplys its absence; though her faults have make her
too deformed for a Wife, yet her Beauty serves to make her good enough for a
Mistress; besides, those who are known to have yielded to one Man, are often
(if not always) by the uncharitable World suspected of the same weakness
toward another.

Thus it was with the unkind Earl, for (after he had paused some Minutes) he
told me I must consent to his Happiness, or begin my own Misery. This sentence
flashed like lightning to my Heart: I remained silent, anger and sorrow shared
my Thoughts, and all my Courage was scarce able to support me. He saw my
Countenance, but mistook my Passion, and from my silence drew Consent, caught
me in his Arms, kissed me, and asked if I was yet resolved to bless him with
Enjoyment? All his words were wounds, each of them reached my Soul, and I still
continued dumb. This he concludes a faint denial, embraced me in his Arms
again, and when I offered to resist, or call for help, he swore Adrastus should
answer for my unkindness with his Life. Fear made me weak, and the sudden
assault bore my Virtue headlong before it. Weeping I lay beneath the
treacherous Mass, and wished each moment he consumed in Joy, might bring whole
Years of cruel deadly Pains. The gods looked on and saw Lucretia ravished, no
wonder then they had no Thunder bolts in store, to relieve one who so often had
offended.

While thus in height of Pleasure he lay drowned, remembered what had passed to
move a new desire, roved wildly and immodestly over each part to kindle
expiring Flames, and surfeited with Joy still sought for more. The unlucky
Adrastus (led by wild Chance, or by unerring Fate) entered the Room to find his
loved Timandra. I saw him first, but gods you only know what torments seized my
Mind, and racked my guilty Soul! A while he stood immovable and gazed, then
fury entered, and his judgment fled, all thoughts of mercy from his nature were
excluded; revenge (the darling of his Soul) grew high, and in that frenzy
drawing nigh the Bed, with one dire stroke (as swift and sudden as if from
Heaven it had come) he stabbed the guilty Ravisher to the Heart. Cursed be the
hour (he cried) when first I loved, but doubly that in which I first betrayed
Minoya! Heaven! just Heaven! has now repaid that injury I did him. The Earl
groaned, grasped at his Sword, and in that Action died. Besmeared with Blood
all mixed with briny Tears, trembling and fainting from the Bed I rose, then
threw my self half dead upon the Ground, weakly I grasped the Murderer's
shaking Knees, and in my Arms with dying fervor hugged them, begged as he still
had loved, he would now prove kind, and if he thought my Heart had given consent,
he would tear it panting from my treacherous Breast; or if he would make me Mistress of
that Steel, that smoked with a Letcher's Blood yet hot upon it, my guilty Arms
or Limbs that grasped the Ravisher, or in the least contributed to the
advancement of his Pleasure, and spurred his triffling Lust to greater fiercer
Flights, should in a moment be divided from my Body, even that tender Body
which he had so often embraced, and thrown away as things of dangerous
Consequence to the rest, now grown infectious base and useless. Conjured him to
remember, how at my Feet he sighing lay, when just returned from Chira, how he
had begged and loved that Night I received him for my Husband, and how for his
sake I had abandoned Honor, Virtue and my Vows, and all that peace of Mind
which innocence bestows, and those who deviate from the right never know.
Trembling he held the fatal Dagger up, viewed me with rolling Eyes, and wildly
cried, Ah Heaven! Must she dye, and must Adrastus be the Author -- No! -- Oh
Timandra! Why were thou not less Fair, or more Virtuous? And I, unhappy I, less
in Love. This said, he kneeled and clasped me in his Arms, bid me farewell, and
remember him no more; then starting up, he exclaimed against Heaven and me,
raved for some Minutes, then again grew calm; bid me again farewell, and begged I
would forgive what he had said; then forced the bloody Dagger to his Heart, and
falling by me on the Floor expired. I shrieked when that sad stroke was given,
strove to recall his parting Soul, and stop its flight to Heaven. I pulled the
dreadful instrument of Death from that Breast, where I had so often rested my
welcome Arms, when wearied with excess of Love, and that so often equally
shared my Joys and Cares, kissed his pale Cheeks, and washed them with my
Tears. I remembered all his kind Looks, his sweet Embraces, his moving Words,
his Charms, and constant Love; and to sum up all my griefs in one Word,
Adrastus was no more, for me he lived, and for my Crimes he died.

The first who entered the Room were Zibelline and Curacas. The sad Object
moved both their pity and wonder; the faithful Servant embraced the dead Body
of his once kind Master, and (if he had not been prevented by my Maid) had
certainly posted after him into the other World. This would have added to my
grief, if it had been capable of Addition. I told them the whole series of this
Tragical Story, and Assapan's Body confirmed the Truth. Then after I had long
deliberated on what was to be done, and considered the shame and hazard that
attended my stay, I took what Jewels and Money I had, and that very night
(attended only by my faithful Maid and the Servant of my departed Husband) I
began my Journey, fortunate beyond my hopes, since it made me known to you. I
need not, Madam, tell you, how after I had traveled eight long Days and Nights
o're-whelm'd with grief, and surrounded with deadly Fears, and having lost my
way, my pitying Stars directed me to your House. Let it suffice, that when I
left you I went without any danger beyond Seas, where I have confined my self
to a Monastry, and though I am daily obliged to attend Religious Excercises, I
have nevertheless found a time to give you that satisfaction you desired, and
shall be glad to receive that faithful Journal of your Amors, which you have
promised to send me. I shall end with the following Lines I made at Sea in my
Voyage hither, when I have confessed my self your Debtor for your Cousin the
Abbess of M -- s kindness to me.

Men needy grown, wish for their Fortunes past,
Which, if obtained, they think would always last.
The Lover mourns, when Sylvia proves unkind;
And Seamen fear, when threatened by the Wind.
The married Man forgets his once loved Bed,
And blushing Maids think Men forget to Wed.
He that is grown Rich still sweats and toils for more,
And Quality in private would be Whore.
Give to the Spend-thrift back his lost Estate,
And he forgets those wants he knew of late;
His posting Years in Riots should be spent,
Grow poor too soon, and then too late repent.
Should Sylvia smile, her Lover straight is cloyed;
Begins to hate, because she is half enjoyed:
Forgets her Charms, and damns his former wish;
And flies 'cause it is an easy purchased Bliss.
Should Winds on Seamen always fairly blow,
Relieved from hazard they would Atheists grow.
"Continued pleasure tastless comfort bears;
"Joy is not Joy, if it is not mixed with fears.
Restore the Husband to his freedom lost,
He now affects what once he hated most.
Wearied with change of Loves, at last he is wise,
Longs to be that which once he did despise;
And Lust no sooner falls than Virtue has its rise.
Give to the Maid her wish, a married Life;
That got, she grieves the cares attend a Wife:
Hates what she has, and wishes Time recalled,
And often weeps to see occasion bal'd.
If he that is Rich should still increase his Wealth,
Yet double that, when sick it buys not health:
The more it grows, his pains with it increase;
His Cares grow greater, and his Pleasure less.
To nodding Virtue wished enjoyment give,
And Tears take place where Joy began to live.
She feels that Bliss she never can know again,
A pain in Pleasure, and a Joy in pain.
Thus still we live, and long to be undone;
Restless in ease, to toils and cares we run.
Strange! Nature prompts to every thing forbid,
Shows flowery Banks, in which are Serpents hid.
Your, etc. Timandra.

FINIS.
THE Unhappy Mistake: OR, THE FATE OF CROSSED LOVES.

A NOVEL.

Written by Mr. D. Cr -- rd, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Job Austin in Fleet Street, and sold by the Booksellers of
London and Westminster, 1700.

THE Unhappy Mistake, etc.
Sirena to the Lovely Timandra.
THAT Journal you sent me of your Amors, has confirmed me your debtor: I
grieve your Misfortune, and the death of that constant Lover Adrastus, and am
sorry that Minoya fell by the hand of a Man he had so long honored and
esteemed. But to repay part of that Sum I owe, take the following Account, with
the Truth of every Accident, as far as my memory could serve me. And as I
believe you have concealed nothing from me, so you will find me a very plain
dealer in mine, and my order the same, in which you delivered yours, without
the tedious preambles of Birth, Education, etc. with many other trivial
Circumstances, which relate not at any time to the story of my Love, or to your
Divertisement, which is my only aim.

My Father (the Duke of Xensa) wearied out with the weight of several
Employments, in which he had long officiated, and after several Services done
to his Prince and Friends, at last retired to his pleasant Country Seat,
situated near a calm Sea, but distant Seven or Eight days Journey from Coloa
(the Metropolis of Fabria) made rich, by the constant Court and Bounty of
Ziphares the present Sovereign. At this time I had reached the thirteenth Year
of my Age, and you may think perhaps, I was too Young to be sensible of that
mighty Passion, Love. But this I know, that for two Years before my Father had
abandoned the Court, I felt a certain tenderness for the Young Martius; and if
I had not all those little cares and pleasant pains which riper flames inspire,
I knew nevertheless what it was to grieve at parting. His Father (the Duke of
Mangroa) had lost a Brother (the Count Torrusco) by Xensa's hand, from which an
irreconcilable feud had commenced between our Families. But Heaven (that often
Blinds and infatuates those whom it designs to punish) permitted the Children
to be possessed with thoughts quite different from those of their Parents; for
the Charming Indoretta (Mangroa's only Daughter) had already made my Brother a
Prisoner to her Beauty. I was too sensible of this seeming union, and (though
Young) forbore not to flatter my self with the hopes of coming Happiness. The
Lovely Martius failed not to contribute to the deceit, and to give me a
Charming description of the World, e're my Journey in it was half begun; and
showed me all the sweets of Love, without its bitter allays. His Sister spoke
for him, and by the same Privilege and Example, I recommended Artaxus as my
Brother, and her Lover.

What opportunities we had were stole with hazard, consequently short, and
employed to the best Advantage. Our Mothers were both privy to what past, and
equally favored our growing passions. This was a Heaven of pleasure to what I
felt, when I saw my self confined to a Country House, and all those Blessings
lost; I valued each moment of the time past at a double price, and imagined,
that whole Years of Conversation would impart the same Joys those stolen hours
had given. My Brother felt an equal pain, the fair Indoretta was the Object of
all his thoughts, the Mistress of his Soul, and the end of all his wishes. He
would often (sighing) complain of that Obedience, he was forced to pay to his
Father. Ah Sirena! (would he cry) were thy Charms as powerful, as those of the
lovely Indoretta, the generous Martius had e're now followed us into the
Country, and though his Father (stubborn as my own) is averse to any alliance
with our Family, he had certainly found out a time to see us, and I had known
what thoughts the Charming Fair had of me. But sure he loves not! and forgets
to plead my Cause. I had all those pains for the absence of Martius which my
Brother expressed, but hid them so carefully, that he thought they proceeded
only from a sense of his Sufferings.

In the mean time my Father had other resolutions, which he strove speedily to
accomplish. Count Bonzeda lived in Mangroa's House, which was divided from ours
only by our adjoining Gardens. And though Xensa hated his friend, he had no
aversion for him; because he was a Man of a vast Estate, much in his Princes
favor, and had all those Advantages, which in this Age serve to recommend a
Husband. He had been a Widower five Years, but more remarkable for being the
Brother of the Lovely Manderina. The Count had seen me, and loved; my Father
(because it served his interrest) was pleased to see that Passion he had for
me, and without consulting my inclinations, the Match was immediately resolved
upon. Artaxus (who feared nothing more than the loss of his Indoretta) was
sensibly afflicted at these proceedings, and saw how far this Marriage would
make against his interest that way. He complained of me, and of his Fortune,
and used all the Arguments that could persuade a Young Heart (fond of another
Man) to disobedience and hatred. My Father failed not to observe my
indifferency, but mistaking the Cause, attributes all to Modesty, and flatters
me into compliance. I begged some time to consider of it, and he (without
thinking it severity, or opposite to my real sentiments of Bonzeda) allowed me
only fourteen days; and with a serious Countenance told me, he expected then an
answer that should speak me an Obedient Daughter, and if otherwise, I might for
ever look upon him as my Enemy.

I acquainted Artaxus with what had past, and he (no longer doubting his own
misfortune) Swore Bonzeda should bleed to prevent the mischief; he still hoped
that Martius loved me, and believed, if once I was Married to another, he
should lose all reasonable pretenses to the Charming Indoretta. His grief added
sensibly to mine, and though my fears told me that Young Mangroa had forgot me; I
endeavored nevertheless to persuade Artaxus to write to him, and to acquaint
him with the state of affairs. He was at first unwilling, because it argued
weakness to desire an Alliance of this Nature, with a Man that had by his long
silence shown his aversion, (or at least indifferency) but then remembering,
that I advised him mostly (as he thought) for his own quiet and satisfaction,
and that the esteem I had for Martius, was founded upon that relation he had to
Indoretta, but above all, rememb'ring the Charms of that Fair one, he was at
last overcome, and sent him a Letter to this purpose.

HAd Sirena been but half so fair as the Lovely Indoretta, or had Martius Loved
like Artaxus, Coloa had e're now been without the best of men, and Mangroa's
House had not been possessed by Bonzeda alone, who in this fatal absence, has
prevailed upon my Father's easy Nature, to bestow his Daughter upon him. Haste
then to the Country, to redeem a Mistress almost lost, and to save a Friend,
who lives only for the Divine Indoretta, and for you.

Artaxus.


The Letter was sent to a Friend of my Brother's at Coloa, and we numbered the
Minutes of each day, in expectation of an Answer, and to our grief, saw the end
of those prescribed me; but no return from this absent Youth. My Brother was
all rage, muttered Revenge against Martius, and Swore the affront should never
be forgot.

In the Evening, the Duke (accompanied by Bonzeda) came to my Chamber, and
asked how I had entertained that proposition he had made me, and if I was
disposed to show my Obedience, by my ready consent to the Count's Happiness? I
blushed and trembled at the unwelcome sound; yet even then I had all that
aversion for Martius, which love neglected could inspire; I imputed all my
present torments to his infidelity and unkindness, and was even ready to
pronounce his Name, so much he possessed my Soul, when Xensa (who from Silence
argued the instability of my mind, and concluding it convenient to apply mild
Arguments to my stagg'ring resolutions) in kind words, set before me the
Advantages that attended this Match, the Count's Love, and every thing that
might prevail with a Woman of my Years. Then seeing me still silent, come (said
he, and taking Bonzeda by the hand,) we must not expect too much from a Young
maid; Silence is a Woman's best Rhetoric, and their eyes ought to express the
Sentiments of their Hearts, especially in affairs of Love. My Daughter (no
doubt) knows what value to set upon your merit, and has sufficiently weighed my
Commands, a few days shall complete your Happiness, and in the mean time leave
the Burden of the management to my Strength. This said, he left me, and I could
observe the Count well pleased with my seeming modesty.

Artaxus entered as soon as they were gone, and I (drowned in Tears) told him
my liberty would shortly be no more; and I was doomed a Victim to my Father's
Ambition, or mistaken judgment. He sighed, and faintly said, Oh unkind Martius!
Oh my Divine Indoretta! Would to Heaven I could love thee less -- yet thou
deserve greater services than I am able to pay thee, though for thy sake I
parted with my life. We complained of Fortune, of our Stars, and spoke every
thing, grief, love, and anger could inspire. I wished for the happiness of
seeing Martius once more languish at my feet, that I might have the power of
Revenging that injury he had done me. And Artaxus swore he would ride Post to
Coloa, that with his Sword he might teach him to remember him.

While thus in pain we consumed the tedious hours, my Mother entered. She
discovered in our Faces too many signs of our inward thoughts, and (after she
had kindly chid us for concealing our Cares from her) offered all she thought
might give us some relief. Artaxus threw himself at her feet, and conjured her
to have pity on his weakness, and to remember, that Love he had for the Fair
Indoretta before he left Coloa; that it was what he could not overcome, to lose
her was to be eternally miserable, and that to prevent all that mischief which
threatened destruction to his Love, nothing was more expedient, than to put a
stop to my Marriage with Count Bonzeda. The tender Mother was sensibly grieved
for the pains of her Children; she knew the Duke's humor, and how little power
she had over him, but willing to contribute all she could to our happiness, she
bid us rely upon her Conduct, and in the mean time not to be distracted, with a
confused prospect of what was to come, for that was to weave a long and tedious
Web of Cares, which one thought, or kind word, was able to unravel, and we
would afterward laugh at those Bug-bears our fears had made. Her words
obtained that end for which they were designed; and we enjoyed that peace of
Mind, which much hope in midst of danger can bestow.

Night had her Curtains half asunder drawn, and that faint light appeared,
which speaks the coming of the welcome day. The longing Birds were fluttering
from their Nests, and laborers weary with their former toyls, began to think
of others now at hand. When Artaxus (whom Love had robbed of sleep) sent to me,
and acquainted me, that he designed for Zenitha, (a small Village three Miles
from our House) and therefore desired me not to expect his Company till Night.
He often went to this pleasant little Town, and the Duke (though bred a
Courtier) had that regard to Religion, which men wise and honest (without
Biggotry) ought to have, and told him, he should be glad to see him often
pursue the same road, because in the morning I might hear a Mass or two, and in
the Afternoon spend some hours in Conversation with the Abbess, who was his
particular Acquaintance, and a Woman that deserved that employment (or Post) in
the Church, to which his friendship had advanced her. Madam, that I may give
you the story in that Order in which 'twas acted, permit me to tell you what
happened to Artaxus before he returned.

When he had drove about half way, he entered into a pleasant Wood upon a
River's side; it was yet early day, and the Dew lay shining on the mossy Banks.
No noise was to be heard, but that of a gentle Wind which ruffled amongst the
Leaves, and played with every tender yielding Bough; the place (you would thought)
for happy Lovers made, and so much sweetness Charmed each sense, 'twas of force
enough to inspire those with a certain desire, who had never been sensible of a
flame, and made them wish for something which they would possess; even when
they scarce knew what it was they wanted.

My Brother having seated himself, (after he had forbidden his Servants to
enter the Wood) began the faint remembrance of his past Happiness, and then
formed a lively Idea of his present miseries. He complained of Young Mangroa,
and sighed for the Charming Indoretta. That Silence which reigned in the place,
contributed to his melancholy, and every Shade which was within his view served
for so many Charms to inflame and heighten Love. While thus he sat and mourned
his cruel destiny, begging of Heaven a quick relief, and making Vows unto the
Gods, as if on Love all happiness depended. He heard a faint groan which seemed
but a few paces from him. This accident surpised him, but more when he
perceived at the Root of a rugged old Oak (which extended its Arms to welcome
the noble guest) a Man nobly dressed and asleep. His Curiosity tempted him to
stay, and having posted himself behind an opposite Tree, he had not waited long
before the stranger awaked, who (after a few deep sighs) with a Voice that
Charmed the very Heavens, and set the Gods a listening, sung to himself the
following Lines.

1.
Ah! too fond Youth! Why do thou mourn
For one that loves not thee?
Her Heart does for another burn,
Ah! happy! happy! He!
Oh! lovely Maid! could thou but know,
How much for thee I undergo!
2.
Could thou but see how Martius lies,
Beneath this lonesome Tree,
No other Covert but the Skies,
And all for love of thee.
Sirena sure should kinder prove,
And give me pity, if not love.
It Is impossible, Madam, to express my Brother's thoughts upon this occasion;
but having considered them since, from that account he gave me, I find joy was
the o'reruling Passion; for a sudden faintness seized him, and he could have
remained immovable upon the place, if he had not perceived his long-wish'd-for
Friend (who yet had not seen him) about to depart. This awaked him from his
ecstasy; and having caught my Lover in his Arms, Ah! Martius (cried he) are not
my Eyes deceived? And do I really Embrace the Brother of my Lovely Indoretta?
The handsome Youth (surpised with the unexpected happiness) was at first
unable to reply. he hugged his Friend, gazed upon him, embraced again, and
said, Oh! Artaxus, Can you pardon my long absence, and seeming infidelity? is
Indoretta's Brother welcome to Sirena's? Is the Lovely Maid well? And can Count
Bonzeda be preferred to the Constant Martius? Young Xenxa (after he had again
embraced him) in few words related what I have already Written, and begged he would
repay the Complement with one of the same nature; the Youth told him, that his
present happiness so Charmed his Soul, he could not admit the remembrance of
past ills, without a palpable abuse of that present favor his relenting
Fortune had bestowed upon him. But that the Brother of Sirena should not
command any thing which he would not obey; he thereupon began as follows.
Where by the way, Madam, you may observe in his haste, that impatiency which
possessed him, till he reached the end.

WHen you left Coloa, all that was pleasant in it fled; Sirena was no more to
be seen, and consequently nothing to which I had not an aversion. The Duke
observed my melancholy, and often asked the Cause; but seeing no hopes of
discovering on it that way, he complained to a Young Lady who was always with my
Sister. She was a Woman of a piercing Wit, violent in her Inclinations, given
to Jealousy, and would stick at nothing, (how dangerous soever) if it conduced
to her pleasure, or in the least served her ambition. But to atone for these
faults, she was Beautiful to a wonder, could dissemble to a miracle, and had
all those Arts the most subtle of her Sex e're knew; add to these seeming
Advantages, Quality, and a vast Fortune; for she was the Earl of Sirama's only
Daughter, who dying in her infancy, had left her an Estate sufficient to
support her Rank in the World, e're she was obliged to it.

Ericis (for that was the Lady's Name) was glad of this opportunity, and failed
not to let my Father know (for Indoretta's confidence in her seeming
Friendship, had made her Mistress of the secret) what otherwise I had eternally
kept from him. This sensibly displeased him, and having found me in the Garden,
(after he had by his looks taught me what to fear) Martius (said he) must my
Enemy still Triumph over me? Have I no other to betray me but my own Son? And
must the Author of Turrusco's death, ruin the Honor of his Brother? No, Young
Man! Yours nor your Sister's madness has not yet infected the Father, and the
Event of a few days shall let you know, how far your Love is inconsistent with
your Reason and Interest. This said, he left me in that amazement the
unlook'd-for discovery justly gave. I suspected the weakness of Indoretta's
tender Nature, and judged he had by threatenings drawn this confession from her.
But as I was about to conclude her guilty, she entered the Arbor where the
Duke had left me. Tears trickled from her Eyes, her Beauties languish'd, and
the lovely kind Calisto felt not half her pains, nor blushed so much, though when
in Streams amongst the happier Nymphs, she bathed and wantoned 'till her fault
was known. I soon guest the cause, and told her how far I had shared in all her
Misfortunes, and was not wanting in my part of this. Ah! Brother (cried she)
can you forgive me? 'Twas I betrayed the secret, in trusting to the perfidious
Ericis, she alone knew it, and it is she only that has ruined us. My grief for
the accident, had not banished my pity from an affectionate Sister; to ease her
therefore, I concealed a great part of my pain, and persuaded her to have the
same esteem in appearance for the Young Countess of Sirama, she had formerly
shown in earnest.

Some days after, the Duke told me he had considered my weakness, and was now
resolved to provide for me a Wife, that (though Young) was acquainted with the
World, and would study to preserve the Honor of his Family, which I had so
evidently endangered, by a passion of which none but Madmen would be guilty.
This discourse almost o'return'd my Obedience; and I was ready to return him an
answer, that had spoke the lessening of my Duty, when he (who already perceived
the effect it had wrought) denied me the liberty, and on a sudden cried; Son
remember who lays this Command upon you, that in the Afternoon you wait upon
the Countess of Sirama, look upon her as the Woman I have designed for my
Daughter, her Fortune exceeds your Merit, and consider I have mine at my
disposal. This most sensibly afflicted me; she was the Woman who had begun my
misery, and whom I now saw destined to prolong the Scene. The Duchess remained
passive in the affair, and grieved nothing more than the affliction of her
Daughter, who yet believed her Artaxus innocent, and loved as much as Virtue
could allow.

In the Evening I waited upon my new Mistress, who (though she was perfectly
skilled in the Art of dissimulation) received me with that satisfaction, which
discovered it self in most of her Actions. After some discourse in which Love
had the least share, she (with a seeming and feigned tenderness) told me, she
had seen the Duke very much out of humor for some days past, that she was
sorry for his mistake, because she was persuaded I had never entertained any
thoughts for Xensa's Daughter; who besides her Father's hatred to our Family,
had departed from Coloa too Young to be sensible of any such flame; that she
heard some days ago that she was Marry to Count Bonzeda, and the Young Duke
was passionately in Love with his Sister the fair Manderina. Though I suspected
the Author of Malice, yet the story carried so much of a seeming truth and
probability in it, I was unable for some time to answer. But at last
recollecting my self, Madam, (said I) you hold a Correspondence it seems with
Mangroa's Daughter; for Bonzeda (though my Relation) has not yet acquainted me
with as much. However I Am glad to hear of his prudent Choice, and that Artaxus
weighs his own interest and his Father's Commands; for I must confess I harbor
not one thought for that Family, which is not exactly correspondent to the
height of Friendship. The dissembling Fair seemed satisfied with the Truth of
what I said, and we parted for that time, I full of grief, and she of hopes.

At night I felt all those pains unhappy Lovers know, I grieved my Fathers ill
nature, but more the loss of Sirena; I looked on Artaxus as a Man unjust and no
more my Friend, and though I did not firmly believe all that Ericis had told me,
yet it gave sufficient ground for doubts and fears to grow upon; and to doubt
the loss of what we Love, brings more of Torment, than a real privation of all
we possess besides. To this I added, that Bonzeda had concealed his happiness
from me by Mangroa's order. In the Morning I saw Indoretta, but as yet
concealed from her my new griefs, and resolved to complete my ruin, or begin
my better Fortune, by a sure knowledge of what had past. I Writ to you (my dear
Friend) a Letter, the words of which I still remember.

THis unkind silence favors the report (now current in Coloa) of your
Addresses to the fair Manderina, Bonzeda 's Sister and your happy Neighbor. I
live for the Lovely Sirena, and if she is now possessed by another, confirm the
truth by your answer, that I may be certain of my doom. I shall no longer
complain of Mangroa or Xensa, and especially of the first, whose aversion to
your Family seems justly grounded, since Artaxus is become guilty, and shares
in his Father's Nature. Indoretta (if you regard the news I know not) still
remembers you.

Martius.


Just as I had Writ it Furinus entered, I need not tell you, my dear Artaxus,
the esteem I had for this Young Man, let it suffice, that he possessed that
place in my Friendship, which was next to that I always kept for the Brother of
Sirena; and though he was something related to Ericis, and high in her favor, I
had nevertheless all that confidence in him which I then Judged his merit
claimed as due. He soon perceived that Grief under which I labored, and
offered all those Remedies I could expect from the best of Friends. It Is
natural to all men oppressed with grief and sorrow, to communicate their pains to
others, either because the burden seems divided when another feels a part, or
else because we are ready (like sinking Mariners) to hope for some relief, and
grasp at any thing that first presents it self, without examining if it can
contribute any thing to our ease or safety. Thus I deluded my self; and the
Young Man (when I had told him all) with a seeming kindness, offered to convey
my Letter to a trusty Friend of his at Zenitha; who would undoubtedly put it
into your hands, with that secrecy and conduct which the affair required. I
was heartily pleased with the opportunity, not knowing whom to trust, and after
I had conjured him to remember how much my Happiness depended upon what he had
undertaken for me, we parted.

A few hours after, the Duke sent his Page to acquaint me, that the Young
Countess was with my Sister. I knew the weight of that Message, saw it
impossible to shun her Company, without a manifest token of disobedience; and
went into the Room with all those pains which Dedalus e're knew, when through
the Air he boldly took his way, and saw the Object of his hopes behind,
unwing'd and sinking, and all the pleasures of a dear bought Liberty, dashed by
the absence of his better part. -- Indoretta (who knew how much my Nature was
averse to this dissembling Fair) strove to give me all that ease which was
within her Power, and forgot not to entertain my unwelcome Mistress with a
thousand little indifferent Stories, to divert that necessity which had
otherwise fallen upon me, of entertaining her with another Subject, to which I
had no inclination. Ericis fretted much at my Sister's seeming kindness, and
could have been satisfied with half that care she showed to please her. She
often fixed her Eyes on mine, and would, with a smile (mixed with Jealousy and
Anger) frequently tell me I was a constant Lover, or a Man altogether
insensible of a tender flame, and that perhaps I mourned a loss which might
with ease be repaid. I answered coldly to what she said, and often let her
know by my looks, that all she spoke was unwelcome. This vexed her to the
Heart, she knew her self handsome, of a sufficient Fortune, and was Distracted
when she saw her Charms neglected by a Man, for whom she had used so many Arts
to please, and I found by the Duke's frowns next day, how far she had resented
my indifferency.

Thus I lived for some time, felt a present pain, and had but a very confused
prospect of a kinder Fortune. When Furinus (for whom I often had wished) came to
see me, and gave me that Letter, from which I long had hoped for some relief.

THat story which has reached your Ears at Coloa, is a part of that truth which
is acting at Xensa; and errs in nothing, but that Sirena is not yet possessed
by Count Bonzeda. As for that aversion which Mangroa entertains for our Family,
it is no more than what Artaxus ought to have for yours, if he be sensible of
his own Merit, and your Treachery.

Artaxus.


It Is impossible, my Friend, to express all those different Passions which
possessed me, when I read this counterfeited Mark of your sudden Change. I thankt
Furinus (who was seemingly sorrowful for me) and owned my self his Debtor for
that care he had shown; swore Sirena should possess my Heart no more, that it
had been too long a Slave to that false Fair One, who had so soon forgot my
Services, and whole Years of Love; and that Artaxus should bleed, and with his
Life atone for his fault.

I acquainted Indoretta with the Misfortune, and she bore it with that patience
which becomes a Virgin Love. However I had not failed to acquaint you how
sensible I was of the injury you had done me, and had at least been satisfied
how I became treacherous to a Man I had esteemed so much, if a sudden Fever
had not put a stop to my Resolution, and prevented my intended Journey. Mangroa
(though fixed in the pursuit of any thing he had once begun) was nevertheless
affrighted with my Danger, and almost repented the unkindness done me. But my
distemper at last increasing, he (now full of Fears) seated himself upon my
Bed's side, and (like a tender Mistress weeping over her wounded Lover)
confessed his Cruelty, and begged my Pardon, with a thousand Assurances, that
(if kind Heaven restored me to my health) Sirena should be mine. He Would humble
himself even beyond his Nature, and beg for Friendship from the Man he hated;
that former quarrels now should be no more, and all his interest should yield
to my future happiness, than which he knew not a greater. The Brother's unkind
Letter had raised my Anger, and moved my sleeping Griefs, but had not weakened
or destroyed my Love, and the fair Sister still possessed my heart; for when most
I strove to raze her from my Soul, the all-conquering Maid with double force
returned; wonder not then if this restored my health, for hope from Love can
never be divided, and Indoretta's Tears kept back my Soul, when on the Wing and
eager for its Flight.

When I was recovered, a new Misfortune befell me; for Mangroa suddenly lost the
best of Wives, and I the kindest Mother Nature e're had made; my Sister had all
that sorrow e're possessed a tender loving Daughter, who grieved the death of a
kind Parent, and the Countess of Sirama was the only Person that rejoiced; for
in her she lost an Enemy, and one who had favored my Passion for the lovely
Daughter of cruel Xensa, her Rival in all her Virtues, and one who
notwithstanding of her absence and seeming Cruelty, was dearer to me than
health to those who suffer deadly Pains, a calm to Seamen wearied with the
Winds, to Travelers rest, or Men condemned Reprieves. Had Paris loved his
Helena so well, or had she been but half so sweet, so good, as blessed Sirena to
my view appeared, a thousand Years of Famine and of War, Ripes, Butcheries,
continued Scenes of Blood, with the Destruction of his House and Country, had
proved a price too low for so much Beauty. The gods themselves had fought for
happy Troy, and the young Man successful proved in Arms, old Priam's Seat
immovable had been, his Household gods and Children had been safe, and
Agamemnon had returned with loss. Those hopes the Duke had given me, were as so
many Arrows from the God of Love, and Grief (a mighty passion in it self)
served now to raise a greater in my Breast.

Ericis came frequently to see my Sister, and though Mangroa seemed inclinable to
favor that Passion I had for the Daughter of his Enemy, yet he had not fully
laid aside his first Resolution; and judging that a present Beauty, and long
absence would work my Cure, he made use of gentle Remedies, and told me it was
not honorable so soon to abandon a Lady's service, after I had confessed her
my Mistress; that it was convenient I should often wait upon her, lest Xensa or
his Friends might apprehend the cause of this sudden alteration in his humor,
and think his friendship the effect of Necessity not Choice. Where the power of
being Active or Passive is left to our selves, how far so ever the thing be
opposite to our Inclinations, we perform it with ease and some pleasure; and
this proceeds from that aversion we have to restraint, and our Love of liberty;
for we are all born Free, and have a right to all things, and not to continue
in this State, is a privation of our own Strength, and argues our weakness in
not being able to surmount, or remove that difficulty or impediment, which
denies or bars us from Enlargement. Besides we naturally have some respect for
those who contribute to the success of our Love, though they did it without
design, or with an intention wholly to destroy it. Think it not strange then
that I could now look upon Ericis, with an air much differing from that she had
formerly seen. The false Fair seemed pleased with this change, and concludes
the answer of my Letter had wrought it; and failed not to acquaint the Duke how
much I obeyed, who every Day by his looks confessed his Satisfaction. These I
took for so many natural Signs of his kindness, and failed not to flatter my
self, so far as to believe he would forget nothing, that might advance that
friendship he designed with Xensa; and as it is impossible to Love where there
is no hope, it follows that to hope much is to feed the Flame, and make it
rage to more unruly Fires.

Things were thus, when a Happiness I never had hoped befell me; for one Night
as I came from a Ball at Court, (where my Friends had detained me too long) I
saw at a small distance (by the help of his Flambeaux's) the rambling
Fernanthus Duke of Meroa. I knew his humor, and (not resolved to turn Scowrer
that Night) endeavored to avoid him, and therefore softly placed my self, at
the first door which offered; but as I began to rest upon it I found it fled,
and gave me access to the House unlooked for. I was at first surprised, but
more when I heard a Woman, in a low Voice, cry, Sir, Sir, are you come? I
presently recollected my self, and answered Yes, e're she had fully pronounced
her last Words. She took me by the Hand, and (without any Lights) led into a
Room, where another leaping from the Bed caught me in her Arms, and cried, Ah
my dear Youth! Why have you staid so long? Know you not how much these unkind
delays shorten the Scenes of Love, and Day appears e're you have trod the
Stage? I made no reply, but seemed impatient of the coming Heaven, half naked
on the downy Bed she lay, her Arms expanded ready to receive me, breathed short
and sighed, then asked me why I staid, and by a rapture known to burning Youth,
anticipated what should be jointly shared, and give to both an equal part of
Heaven. I soon undressed, and kissed the longing She, ran over the Field of
Love with eager transports, melted with sudden Pleasures and too much of Bliss,
and languish'd e're my Joys were half begun. The kind one smiled, and sighed at
what was past, and used those ways which kindle or excite to a new Love the
drowsy fainting Soul. She caught my trembling Body in her Arms, kissed me, and
said, Can you be kind no more, has too much Love destroyed our mutual Bliss,
and has Furinus no more Joys in store? Thus would young Martius with Sirena
done, the sudden leap to happiness had drowned his Soul in Ecstasy, and made
desire weak. But those to whom long practice gives the art of taming by degrees
unruly Flames, should know the way to better, longer Loves -- Yet stay, my
Dear, (added she in another tone) what effects will that counterfeited answer
produce, does he forget Sirena now? And does the Countess of Sirama triumph
over that successful Beauty? Her immodesty had moved my wonder, but these last
words surprised beyond belief; and 'twas no longer in my choice to doubt whom
it was I had embraced, and to prevent that discovery which a longer Discourse
had certainly produced, I renewed those Joys for which she longed, and by my
Love supplied the want of Words. While thus we dallied, and height of Pleasure
filled the Fair Ones Soul, I stole a Ring, and for it left my own. Then leaping
from the Bed (with a Voice much differing from that of Martius) I bid the Maid
farewell, and though she knew not whom she then had blessed, I left her nevertheless
satisfied, that she had bestowed her Favors upon a Man, for whom she had not
meant them. Her Woman, who waited upon the Stairs, knew nothing of the matter,
and with soft steps taught me the way, whispering in my Ear that I had not
staid my usual hour, yet hoped I I was in health; as she opened the Street
Door, a Man muffled in his Cloak rushed in, caught Pandora in his Arms, (for
that was the Maid's name) and cried, Is thy Mistress well? Why was the Door no
sooner opened to an impatient Lover? The Wench, without any surprise asked him
what he meant, and assured him he had mistaken the House, adding, her Mistress
was a Person of Quality, knew him not, nor would she be disturbed at an hour so
unseasonable. Ha, (replied he with a louder Voice) is Furinus already forgot,
and is it for this, I have betrayed young Mangroa? At this I suddenly leapt
forwards, and drawing my Sword, Know Sir, (said I) Martius has a Friend shall
punish this Treachery. He (without any reply) retired into the Streets, I
followed, and after a few thursts had past between us, his perfidious Soul at
last owed its passage to my Sword, and left his body motionless behind.

When I came home, the Duke was gone to Bed, and none were witnesses of my long
stay, but those of my own Servants who waited for me. It Is impossible to
express those Joys this Night brought me. I saw Artaxus still my Friend, was
persuaded Sirena had not then forgot me, and doubted not but that the answer of
my Letter was forged by Ericis, with the assistance of that young Man whom I
had now punished for his Perfidy.

In the morning the Fair One came to see my Sister, and I was surprised to find
in her Countenance, not one sign of grief or inward Disturbances. The Duke soon
after entered the Room, and I was obliged to a greater Compliance than any I
had yet shown; she was heartily pleased with my looks, and if she had any real
Torment for the loss of her Lover, she let me know by her Behavior, she
enjoyed a pleasure that o're-rul'd her Griefs, and hopes of possessing a new
Lover of greater Quality, and (as she thought) Master of more Charms, was able
to atone for the death of one, whom frequent Loves had rendered stale and
homely to the view. But that which most she feared was, that he who had
supplied his place was not ignorant of her Quality, and might disclose the
secret, for the loss of her Ring could not be easily digested. But this trouble
also fled, and the present appearance of better Fortune, (like the Sunshine of
a new Day) dispelled from her thoughts, the remembrance of that Storm and
Horror which had raged the preceding Night. In the mean time, credit this
sudden Change in my Fortune which follows.

My Father (now a Widower) began to to entertain some thoughts, to which he had
been long a stranger, and eased me of my feigned Courtship, by the reality of
his own; he forgets to bid me wait upon Ericis, attones for my indifferency by
a passion truly violent, and practiced all those little Arts, which are
inseparable Companions of growing Love. I observed this Change, but concealed
my knowledge from him as much as possible, and the kind Indoretta who was
pleased with the fidelity of Artaxus, and his continued Friendship to me, upon
which she knew the success of my Love depended, thankt Heaven, and her kind
Stars, for this new addition to my Happiness. The Countess, in whom ambition
was always prevalent, wanted only to be a Duchess; and though she saw no hopes
of seeing her Son a Duke, (if Heaven should send her one) yet she was pleased
with her Fortune, when she considered, she might certainly possess the Father,
and had only hoped (and it may be upon small grounds) the possession of the
Son. Thus we lived all happy, hoping each Day might bring us some advancement
in Fortune's Favor; I never praised the lovely Sirena, but when I found
Mangroa pleased with the subject; nor did he ever mention the Countess of
Sirama. My Sister was wholly devoted to my Interest, and always found her
happiness in mine.

One Evening the Duke sent for me to his Chamber, and after he had made me sit
down by him, Martius, (said he with a kinder air than usual) I have long
observed that indifferency with which you treat the Countess, and have
considered that Love which has always possessed you for Xensa's fair Daughter;
and though I confess she deserves all that passion you have for her, I see it
with sorrow, and could wish your judgment might present to your View those
difficulties which are to be overcome, e're this Match can be perfected, the
hatred that Man bears to my House, and how far my Honor is concerned in the
resentment of Count Torrusco's death. Here he paused some time, but seeing I
did not reply any thing, he proceeded and told me, That, to ease me of one
Pain, that I might the better endure another, he was resolved to Marry Ericis
himself, for the next morning should finish the Work, if Coloa was not
destitute of Priests; that he had made it a secret till now, because good
things unlooked for impart most of pleasure, and consequently this news would
bring me more of happiness. This said, he expected my Answer and Thanks,
instead of which I threw my self at his Feet, and conjured him to remember that
promise he had once made me; that Xensa bad killed Turrusco Honorably, and
that his hatred to our Family proceeded only from that which he saw Mangroa had
to his. As for the Countess of Sirama he should add infinitely to my
Misfortunes, if he married her, for she was a Woman virtuous only to those who
had not carefully examined her Conduct; and thereupon told him the whole story
of that night's Ramble, as I have already related it. The Duke was infinitely
surprised, and for some time remained silent, then on a sudden throwing his
Arms about my Neck, he swore he deserved not a Son so dutiful; that he had
hitherto used me unkindly; but that his future Actions should atone for those
past, and if I would promise to abandon the bewitching Sirena, to whom Bonzeda
was to be Married, I might begin my Journey for the Country when I pleased I
returned him that answer my Duty and his Kindness required; and withal assured
him the Count's happiness should not be disturbed, that I would endeavor to
Love Manderina as much as I had done Xensa's Daughter, and should make it my
Study to preserve by merit that place in his good opinion, to which his
goodness without that had advanced me. He was satisfied with what I said, and
for that time left me without any diminution of my hopes. In the Morning he
writ the following Lines to his Bride.

Madam,
I must confess I Am sorry to lose the Countess of Sirama, but not the Mistress
of Furinus. To unriddle the meaning of this. Remember only, that another Man
made happy by chance, that night you lost your Lover, has sufficiently informed
me of your double dealing; and that I am no longer in a condition to be imposed
upon.

Mangroa.


The detected Fair One was overwhelmed with sorrow at the first reading of the
Duke's Letter, and after she had for some time given way to Tears, (sometimes
in Women the natural signs of grief or pain) Anger and Revenge (the darling
passions of that tempting Sex) took place, and she imagined with her self a
thousand means and ways to bring distraction to our Family. But willing first
to use the force of her Charms, she came to our House dressed in smiles, and
modest looks. My Father waited upon her, and showed more of sorrow for his
loss, than Pride or Resentment for the misfortune of this cunning Fair. She
talked a while of things indifferent; and at last fell upon the Subject of that
Letter he had sent to her. At which time the Duke gave the sign, and I (as he
had commanded) entered. She soon perceived her Ring, (for I had put it on for
that end) and with tears in her Eyes withdrew, confirming sufficiently the
truth of all I had said. In short, my dear Friend, I began my Journey that
Evening for Zenitha, though not before I had received your kind Letter, and had
assured Indoretta of your Constancy. The Duke gave me some Letters to my Rival
Bonzeda, whom I am resolved not to acquaint with my arrival, 'till I have seen
the Mistress of my Vows, the Charming Sirena, a happiness I must expect from
your Friendship, not Fortune or my Merit.

Here Martius stopped, and Artaxus (who loved no less than he) took him again in
his Arms, Swore he would serve him with his Life and Fortune, and that very Night
bless him with Sirena's Company. Thus having spent part of the day, they at
last chose different Roads; Martius back (...) Zenitha, and Artaxus home.

In the mean time I knew nothing of my Brother's happiness, and when he came
home (though he strove to hide it, because the Duke was present) I could read in
his Eyes some signs of those hopes and motions of Joy which had winged his
Soul. Xensa was no sooner gone, than he embraced me. Ah! My Dear Sister (cried
he) I am still happy, Martius proves a just Friend, and Indoretta waits for the
Fortunate Artaxus. These words pleasantly surprised me; I loved too much to be
disinterested in the Story, and begged with impatiency he would let me know
where he had this account of his and my good Fortune. Then it was, Madam, he
related the Story of my Lover's absence, the same as I have already Writ it;
adding he had given him the Key of the Garden-Door, and we might meet with all
the privacy imaginable. Love, not he, persuaded, and I thought time moved
backwards till the hour arrived.

It was when every Creature seemed a-sleep, the heavy Waters murmured as they
went, and moved as if they shortly meant to rest; the adjoining Shore no raging
Billows knew, and every Fish dreamt in his Ousie Bed. The Earth seemed all one
Cave, the Heavens one shade, and dying Stars did the new light invite. All
happy Lovers lay in slumbers chained, and Cynthia to her Damon seems forgot.
The waking Joys of mighty Love were fled, and Morpheus reigned when that Young
God gave way. Sometimes a Bird half waking took the Wing, and with slow motion
reached some neighboring bough, then faintly murmuring hushed it self to rest,
and sleeping bill'd as if its Mate were nigh. 'Twas then, I say, Madam, Artaxus
and I stole gently forth, to meet the wished for welcome generous passionate
Martius. As we entered the Garden, the Lovely Youth rushed in; Fancy (that
erring guide where Judgment's gone) paints him with all his Charms, and perfect
thoughts supplied the want of day. I saw him kneeling, begging at my Feet,
grasping my hands, and sighing as he spoke, his Eyes (at least I thought so)
darted Love, and all his trembling touches reached my Heart. Faultring he
cried, Sirena! Lovely Fair! Now all the pains of absence are repaid, and
present Blessings banish rooted cares. Artaxus, thou best of Friends, to thee I
owe this mighty happiness, and if the Charming Mistress of my Vows had any
favorable thoughts for the constant Martius, of which her Brother's Love is
not the Cause, even that Joy which those thoughts would impart to me, I Would own
the effect of his Friendship, or her Mercy, without respect to Merit on my part.

My Heart was seized with tenderness and joy, I long had loved him, and had
mourned his absence, and all his words (like Arrows shot from Love) dart to my
Soul, and kindle dying flames. Night made him bold, and Passion spurred him on,
and in this rapture rising from the ground, he clasped me in his Arms, sighed
deep, and kissed me with an eager action, and almost banished Virtue from my
Breast. After we had seated our selves in an Arbor, we discoursed of Love, of
the pains that Passion brings, and day arrived e're we had thought it nigh.

In the morning he waited upon the Count, and was by his Sister (the Fair
Manderina) received with that Modesty, which Young Women generally profess,
especially before those whom they see designed their Husbands. Xensa was soon
acquainted with the arrival (as he judged him) of his Young Enemy; and waited
impatiently for Bonzeda's visit, who no sooner came, than he informed him of
his fears, and to prevent future danger, resolved to see me speedily married.
The hated Lover was o'rejoy'd at the proposal, and the third day following was
prefixed for that, on which this Gordian Knot was to be tied. My Mother
acquainted me with the unwelcome news, and I failed not to beg that assistance
she had often promised; and with Tears in my Eyes let her know how much I hated
Bonzeda, and what thoughts I had for the Young Mangroa. She sighing told me,
That things were now come to the last extremity, that I had been married some
weeks ago, if her Friendship had been wanting, or diligence asleep. That the
Young Duke's Arrival gave the Count and my Father so many fears, that Arguments
were become useless, and my Marriage alone was able to secure them. But that
one Remedy, or at least a Reprieve, offered it self, which was to be purchased
thus. I should immediately feign my self indisposed, confine my self to my
Chamber for some days, and if the Duke still continued resolute, at last to my
Bed. But withal, that I should not attribute my Distemper to that Storm which
threatened me, and if 'twas asked (...) him know, that nothing impeded his (...)
happiness, my Sickness excepted, that my (...) gave consent, and my (...) time
^^ey.

I complied so readily with this relishing Counsel, that when the Duke entered
my Chamber I immediately fainted. He called for help, and the Duchess (who
knew my Distemper) came running (drowned in feigned Tears) to my Assistance;
telling him, I had been under this indisposition for some days, that she
wondered at the cause, and feared some dangerous consequence. Xensa was
surprised with what he heard, and the Count (who was with him) had only this
Satisfaction, that he saw me incapable of holding any Correspondence with his
Rival. However they both departed without acquainting me with what they had
designed the preceding day. Artaxus was perfectly versed in the Plot, and told
me Martius would wait upon me at Night; that I must not deny him that
happiness, that none could be conscious to the interview, and every thing
conduced to promote the design. I loved, and a few Arguments served to
persuade; the Youth possessed my Heart, and all my thoughts centered in forming
lovely Ideas of the bewitching Conqueror. He had free access to Bonzeda's
Garden, and by a small Ladder of Ropes (made for the purpose) he easily got
into ours. His Servant (as soon as he had ascended the Wall) was ordered to
Withdraw the Pliant Stairs, and retire to his Master's Room, least his
continued stay had occasioned a discovery; for Bonzeda had many Windows
opposite to that place. My Brother waited at the Window (to which a second
Ladder was fastened) and received him. The Duke lay in the next Room, and you
may believe we forgot not to tread softly. The happy Youth caught me in his
Arms, gazed, and sighed, as if this had been our first meeting, since my
departure from Coloa. He swore no time or accident should weaken his Love, that
he would show the Constancy of a Martyr, who suffered for Eternal Joys; Nature
should start, and all things suffer change, the Frame of Beings inverted, the
Earth turned into its primitive Chaos, e're he forgot my Charms. That if the
Globe shook beneath him, or gaped so wide, it showed the infernal Powers,
howling and grinning, rattling in their Chains, and all the Souls of damned
departed men; or if the Skies should sink by slow degrees, until the Crystal
Arch pressed down his Head, he would not fear or dream of coming death, his
thoughts should then pay homage to his Love, and in this vast and terrible
Confusion, he would clasp the Fair, the lovely, blessed Sirena, lay her all trembling
to his faithful Breast, and then possessed of all Heaven could bestow, he would
smile, and sinking kiss the precious treasure, laugh at the angry gods, and
bless his glorious fall.

Thus we spent the few hours; he still swore he loved, and my Eyes informed him
how readily believed. But the Servant returning gave the usual sign, and we
parted, though not before we had made a new Appointment.

The following day appeared to both an Age, and Time seemed drowsy by his
tardy flight; at last the hour much wished for took its place, and brought the
Welcome Lover to my Soul. My Brother (if by design or chance I know not) was
absent, and we enjoyed a Heaven without disturbance. For though he was much
esteemed by Martius and beloved by me, yet we were both glad of his absence. We
spoke a thousand extravagant things, and Love to us appeared the darling Virtue
of the World, the end for which we were made, and the very Cause of our
Creation. He sighed, and gazed upon me, spoke sometimes faintly, and in a
Minute would grow silent, grasp my hand, kiss it, and almost breath out his
Soul in raptures. I felt a sickening pleasure at my Heart, a longing joy
distracted my Soul, and I wanted something to complete the Bliss, yet knew not
what it was; my Blood flushed to and fro, seemed all in every part, and in no
part to stay, but spoke my Nature tossed 'twixt fear and gladness. While thus
we sat blessed with our present fortune, yet uneasy in the anxious wishes of a
better, losing the present sweets in thoughts of more; a sudden noise surprised
us in this Lethargy, and waked us from an ecstasy of Love. My fears on this
occasion were inexpressible, and (knowing it too late to make use of our hempen
Stairs) I caught my blushing Lover by the hand, conjured him to save my
Reputation and my quiet, which were now evidently in danger, made so only by my
Love to him He who knew how to Obey, smiled, and placed himself behind my Bed,
where he remained unseen. The Duke soon knocked at the Door, and I as
expeditiously opened it. Ha! Daughter (cried he) I Am glad it is no worse, I
heard some small noise in your Chamber, and was concerned for your health. This
I took for my Cue, and with a faint voice answered; that I had been ill most of
that day, but that I was now grown better, Ah! replied the Duke (who stood
shaking in his Nightgown) you have been too long from your Bed, it is there you
must expect rest, for sleep to the Sick is a reprieve from pain. This alarmed
my Soul, and I made use of all the Arguments I could invent, to show the
inconveniency of that Method he proposed to perfect my recovery; but 'twas in
vain; he called for the Duchess, and she (not knowing the Circumstance of
affairs) confirmed him in his Resolution. He withdrew into the next Room, and
she staid by me, as if I had stood in need of her Assistance e're I could be
undrest. Thus I was obliged to obey; and the Duke returning took my Mother by
the hand, and so left me, having first wished me good health, commended
Bonzeda, and ordered one of the Maids to remove the Candles. My Charming
Martius thus relieved, threw himself upon his knees, clasped my hand, and
sighed, as if his winged, slippery Soul, had sought an opportunity to escape
its Prison; his continued silence, and eager grasps spoke him languishing for a
Joy unknown, and I (divided between Love, Fear, and Honor) found my self
unable to speak my thoughts. Sudden motions of alternate Passions stopped my
faultering Tongue, and my bosom ecchoed moving sighs to his. While thus our
Souls and Nature seemed at War, he gently moved and caught me in his Arms, laid
his Head to my panting Breast, trembled, breathed quick, and kissed me with the
eagerness of departing Lovers. Then giving way to a flash of Love inflamed, he
^e^ch'd too soon that pleasure which he sought, and in ^he ^e^rch of the
unbounded Joy, he lost the present transports of the mind.

'Twas then, Madam, he spoke, and begged a thousand Pardons for the
indiscretion he had committed, swore he loved me yet even to madness, and would
not for a thousand Empires quit the Room. I begged (but 'twas faintly) he would
leave me; I told him his Servant no doubt waited for his return, because the
time appointed was elapsed, and if he walked too long in the Garden, it might
discover what our mutual interest obliged us to conceal. He made no reply, but
stopped the sound of Arguments with kisses, Love reasum'd his Throne, and set his
Soul on Fire. He claspt me again in his Arms, finished our imperfect Joys, and
I could say no more than -- Ah my Honor -- Will you Love -- Oh kind Heavens!
The Night was spent with all the pleasure Love could give, he swore eternal
Constancy, I believed all, loved all* and dreamt my self in Paradise. Sleep was
to both a stranger, and coming Day proved hateful to the sight, we shrinkt and
smiled and wished a Night like that, in which great Jove his dear Alemena
blessed, inverting order to promote his Joys. At last we parted, but with those
pleasant desires which Men enjoy, when dreaming of a Heaven they never possessed,
or know but faintly in a tempting trance, they grieve their judgment was no
longer hushed, and wish and long to see the Scene again.

In the morning the Duke came to see me, the Count was with him, and both of
them alleged I had not slept last Night; that my eyes verified this truth, and
I was unjust to my self in not having a greater regard for my Health. The fresh
remembrance of what had past made Bonzeda's visit more unwelcome than ever, and
my aversion for him almost cast me into a Fever. Xensa who observed my
disorder, but not the Cause, presently left me, after he had told me, that he
hoped a few Days would bring me perfect ease, and give him that happiness he
had so often wished, of seeing me married to his Friend, a Man who well
deserved my esteem, and loved me passionately.

A few minutes thereafter Artaxus entered, and told me he had been at
Bonzeda's, had seen my favorite Lover, and was resolved to go to Coloa; that
he could live no longer without his Indoretta, and he would rather choose to forfeit
his Father's kindness and fortune, than endure the loss of her he loved; adding
withal, that Martius had persuaded him to it. These last words gave me a vast
deal of Pleasure; 'twas an argument of his Love, and spoke the last nights
Joy's had rather fanned than extinguished his Flame. This made me (besides the
help of my natural inclinations that pleaded powerfully for him) easily resolve
to see him again at the usual hour. In the mean time my Brother plied the Duke
for his consent: He weighed not at first the Cause of his Journey, and Artaxus
(promising to return in a few Days) easily obtained the favor desired. But as
he was ready to take Horse he received new Orders, for Xensa, upon second
Thoughts, began to suspect the business, and therefore charged him not to think
of going to Court, 'till my Marriage with the Count should be accomplished.
Artaxus stormed and raved at this sudden change of his humor, and remembering
Love more than Interest, took Post immediately for Coloa. The Duke was then
confirmed in his suspicions; and swore this manifest token of his disobedience
should never be forgot; that he would remember him no more as his Son, and damn the
hour that brought him first to light. The Duchess forgot nothing that might
excuse his fault; she insisted on the force of Almighty Love, on the number of
his Years, and how insupportable 'twas for Youth to be mewed up in a Castle, or
confined to the narrow bounds of a Garden: But her Arguments were of no
strength, and Bonzeda's Agents in the Family added matter to the Fire of the
Duke's wrath.

At night my Lover beat his usual Road, and entered my Chamber with that joy in
his Face, which spoke his Soul at ease. I received him with that sondness which
my Love inspired, and we consumed the hours in amorous Sighs, languishing
looks, firing Touches, melting Glances, and eager Wishes. He longed to renew
those joys which rowsing moving Nature taught to both; and I, who doated too
much, (yet willing to preserve his Love in health) denied him the opportunity
of a surfeit, made the Heaven almost inaccessible, yet allowed him those
privileges which served to kindle his Soul, and make it burn for more. Thus,
Madam, we lived happy, by starving our selves in midst of Plenty, and
heightning the appetite by scanty Joys, to a mad hunger for a waste of
Pleasure. My Marriage was still deferred, and Artaxus sent me a perfect Journal
of his proceedings by every Post. But wearied with my continued Confinement, I
sometimes (and at the Duke's desire too) walked abroad: The Sea-shoar was the
place I commonly chose, which at last produced this adventure.

All silent were, no Beast was seen to roam, his panting Flocks each Shepherd
homewards drove, the Labourer left his Plow and wisely sought for shelter from
that heat which scorched the Earth. I sat beneath a mossy Rock, on each side
Clifts and frightful Precipices, dark Recesses and solitary Caves, not made by
art but owed their form to Nature. The bubling Streams with noise came tumbling
down, dashing from Point to Point their scattered Parts, then meeting roared
and rushed into the Main; who all received next minute tossed 'em back, and kept
them in perpetual motion, till the Sun's attractive rays exhaled the foam from
much concussion wrought, and sucked the stranger body from the rest. This
melancholy retreat gave me inexpressible Satisfaction, I viewed the irksome
Shades with greediness, and languish'd with the pleasure. My Maid was silent,
and nothing offered it self to disturb my contemplative Soul. While thus I sat
and gazed upon the Waves, who now appeared like Ice or Crystal Fields, (not one
breath of wind dividing the united Element) the Skies (quick as thought) grew
black, the sluices of the burdened Clouds flew open, and you would thought the
Heavens had melted into Rain. The Birds who sought their Prey upon the Waves,
found a new fresh Sea above them, and sunk beneath the smarting weight into the
briny old. Thunder soon followed the amazing change, and bursting Clouds shook
the tottering Globe. Fire flashed through the thickened Air, and showed the
gaping Heavens, the Skies in labor, and the jarring Elements at a dreadful
War. The scaley Monsters showed their aweful Heads, and roused from the bottom
of the boundless deep, howled, and threw up floods of gorging Waves to quench
the distant heat, then grinning plunged to hide themselves from Heaven. The
distant plains seemed all a heap of Rubbish, forsaken by every Beast, and
covered with the Wreck, which rolling floods from neighboring Mountains
brought. To increase the frightful Scene, the winds grew high, tore up the
stubborn Oaks and yielding Pines, ransacked the plains, and swept off the
budding Corns, levelling the superb Palace with the humble Cottage. The
wondering trembling Swains dejected stood, and saw their Huts transported from
their Seats, and placed on Rocks, or on some rising Grounds, whose height
secured them from aspiring Streams. In a word, Nature seemed mad, the Elements
in a freak, and the Earth grumbl'd as if a fatal Colic had rent her peaceful
Bowels. You may believe, Madam, my Soul was surprised with the amazing sight,
and I dreamt of nothing more than present ruin. My Maid fell upon her Knees,
begged the protection of the angry gods, and swore eternal constancy to Heaven,
if once relieved from these distracting Fears. While thus she was employed, I
could perceive a large Vessel tossed by raging Billows, laboring to reach the
open Seas, yet forced on shore by Winds. Pity on a sudden filled my Breast, and
I had so many anxious Thoughts, for the safety of those in a more imminent
danger than my self, that my past fears vanished, and all my cares and wishes
were for them. Just now you would thought the floating Castle stood on a high
Mountain, making War with Heaven, and proudly threatening to assail the Clouds.
Then in a moment all its height was lost, and sinking Seas would plunge it deep
as Hell. At last the crowding Waves rushed doubly on, and forced the moving
Palace against a Rock. The Seamen shrieked aloud, struggled for parting Life,
and the next moment vanished. The sad Object moved my Tears, and I could have
fainted under the weight of other People's Misfortunes, if a certain joy (at
that time not known for such, but arising from a sense of my own safety) had
not supported me. The greatest part of Mankind loves to see his fellow Creature
in evident danger; and though he views him with trouble, yet if he examined
himself narrowly, he would find the remembrance of his own Condition, (when
compared to that of the other) gives a certain pleasure that counterballances
the Pain; else why should we at any time flock to see Executions, Combats,
Shipwracks, raging Fires, and such horrour-giving Objects; for Nature is averse
to its Enemy, and grief no doubt is such -- But to return, the Clouds who had
now shak'd their droping Wings withdrew. The dismal Curtain furled up, and
Heaven showed a smiling Countenance, as if a Sacrifice of so many Lives had
asswag'd its hungry fury. Eolus sounded a retreat to the raving Winds, who
grumbling retired to their hated Prison, and Neptune (relieved from his old
Disturber) slept as if the past toils had forced him to a Peace. The joyful
Birds came fluttering from their Nests, sprung through the Air, and trod the
Boughs again, then Sung, and mounting spread their matted Wings. In fine, every
thing seemed at liberty, but Sirena, my grief for what I had seen sunk my Soul
into a demi-trance, and left me not the power to move. I considered the quality
of that inconstant Element, the Cause of Winds and Rains, how far Chance, the
gods and Nature, shared in what befell us; and if Heaven (which we paint all
Goodness and Mercy) could have a hand in the destruction of so many Creatures,
which it self had made, or took a certain pleasure in the punishment of
Offenders, whose Actions were so inconsiderable and seemingly below the notice
of the Almighty Mind. Thus my Soul traversed a Labyrinth of mysterious
Problems, my Reason exerted its Power, and almost shook off the Yoke of
Imposition, searching into the truth of things, which believed bring no ill
consequences, if not a real happiness, and if rejected or discredited, give
Nature her sway, and set the World loose, break the hinges of humane Society,
and set up an Insurance Office for Villainies and Bloodshed.

At last, Night approached, and I was obliged to abandon my solitary Tent. But,
oh kind Heavens! how was I surprised, when on the Sand two Shipwrackt Bodies
lay, in fast embraces locked, as if the dead Clay had retained a perfect
remembrance of that Union which was between their Souls. Coming nearer, their
Clothes informed me they were of Quality, and I stood sometime motionless, and
gazed upon the moving Object* where the ruins of so many Beauties so sweet
appeared, you would thought death had been a gentle sleep, and cruel Waves been
soft as Summer dews. In this juncture the Duke (who had dreaded the effects of
the past Storm) appeared; and though naturally hardy and of a rough disposition;
his Soul melted at the sight, and his Eyes confessed the trouble of his Mind.
He presently ordered his Servants to convey the dead to his House, and having
seated our selves in the Coach, drove straight home.

Some hours after, one of my Maids came running into my Closet, and with
gladness told me, that the Lady whom I found on the shore was yet alive, that
her Soul was loath to abandon so fair a body, and they had some hopes of her
recovery. But the Man was lost beyond redemption, for not one sign or Symptom
of coming Life appeared. This news banished that grief which had lately possessed
me for the unfortunate Fair; and I flew between hopes and fears to give that
assistance in my power. When I entered, the sick one lifted up her Eyes, looked
fix'dly upon every Object, moved her Lips as if she had strove to speak, then
sighed and fainting shut them both again. The Duchess used her utmost Art, and
drove back the posting Soul when almost gone. But having spent the greatest
part of the Night in this Charitable Employment, we withdrew; leaving the care
of our Charming guest to my Mother's Maids and mine.

The joyful Birds had scarce ushered in the coming day when I arose. I had
dreamt of this unfortunate fair One all Night, and my wishes for her safety
became the employment of my anxious Soul. Nor did I Petition Heaven in vain,
for when I entered the Room, she mo'vd her Head from the Bed, and in an
almost-dying accent, begged Pardon for that trouble she had given me, thanked
me for my assistance, then asked me the place and time in which I found her, if
I had seen her Husband on the Shore, for now all her fears were for him, and if
he was lost, no Art, no Argument, or Cause could save her Life, her Soul was
incorporate and mixed with his, and both should wander in the other World, if
not united there like Bodies here.

That tenderness her loss inspired, drew Tears from my Eyes, and I faintly
answered, -- I had seen none such, that she alone had reached that part of the
Shore where I had been, but that orders should be given to enquire of all the
straggling Shepherds, and watchful Fishermen for him she wanted, that Heaven no
doubt had preserved him, and she would soon be happy. The distressed Fair One
sighed, conjured me to use my utmost diligence in the search, and to remember
her life depended on the success. In the mean time the Duke ordered the dead
Body to be interred, according to the custom of our Country, where nothing was
wanting, which Quality have bestowed upon them, as the last mark of Honor. For
by that account which the Fair One gave of him, we perfectly knew him for her
Husband. The Duchess (whose grief upon this occasion was in nothing inferior
to mine) advised me to acquaint the ignorant Widow with her state, to prevent a
double pain, which the certain knowledge of her Circumstances would doubtless
give. I obeyed, and in the Evening entered her Chamber with a Golden Cross
(beset with ^mall Diamonds) in my hand. The mourning Fair no sooner espied me,
than starting, (she cried) is he alive? Has he sent me this pledge which has
cost me so many Tears? Am I happy? Or must I dye? Tears rushed into my Eyes,
and sudden grief denied me the use of Words. I stood some minutes silent, and
at last confessed him dead. At this unwelcome sound the unhappy Fair (with a
Countenance pale as death) leant her declining Head upon the Pillow, lifted up
her hands, and cried, O! Unhappy Delia! thou have lost -- and then fainted. I
applied those Remedies commonly used on such occasions, and by the force of
Spirits denied a flight to hers. Oh Gods! when she lifted up her Eyes again,
how my Soul sorrowed for her. So dying Roses covered over with dew, look gay,
and fresh, and tempting to the sight; yet move the Heart, because their sweets
are flying. Ah! Madam, (cried she) Pardon this undecent, but just grief, let
not my Tears disturb your Peace, for a few hours will give me rest for ever. My
Soul murmurs at its tedious imprisonment, rouzes and shakes it self beneath
this load of Clay, longs to be gone, and flutters in its Cage; it is now a
traveller wrapped in contemplation, surveys the happy state of separate Beings,
Chalks out the way to Heaven through open Air, and longs and seeks Valentio as
it mounts. -- Oh my Husband! -- Oh unfortunate surviving Delia! -- This said,
she sighed, as if her heaving Breasts had pressed her rising Soul, and I (now a
sharer in her sufferings) wept, and in my silence expressed the pains that rackt
my easy Heart. She who amidst her own troubles forgot not mine, conjured me to
leave her, and to forget I ever saw her; begged my Pardon again for those Tears
her misfortune had brought me, and swore that no temptation should fool her
into a love of Life. I set before her (with more affection than Art) the
inconveniency of immoderate grief, taught her to hope a better fortune, and
rely on Heaven. But she (dumb with excess of sorrow) made no reply, pressed my
hand between hers, sighed, and cried Valentio! Unwilling to be gone, I seated
my self upon her Beds side, and with Tears besought her to remember the present
state of her health, the impossibility of retrieving what was past, and that
her Stars, though cruel in other things, had been kind in bringing her to a
House, where she might freely command as at home. She who was no stranger to
good breeding, and in the depth of affliction showed a ready mind, when able to
speak, gave me an obliging return; adding that my cares augmented the weight of
hers, and served to hasten the o'reburden'd Soul to an end of all its Labors.
But that to repay part of those kindnesses I had shown, she would acquaint me with
her life on whom they were bestowed, that the recital of her past adventures,
or emergencies of Love, was now the only pleasure of which she was capable: For
the remembrance of Joys long fled, brought back the happier State of Life, and
matched it with the present; then showed how far we fell, how low we sunk, and
Charmed the melancholy Hypocondriack Soul with a full taste of misery; the
sweets of the one increasing the sense of the other's bitterness. I endeavored
to divert her resolution, and defer that account she offered till her Health
could consent to the labor; but 'twas in vain, for the harrass'd Fair, after a
few deep sighs and dying looks, began as follows.

THE Kingdom of Marintha (to which I owe my Birth) was long distracted with the
fury of a Civil War, the two pretenders to the Crown (Othar and Decius) divided
the Nation, and he who signalized himself for neither of the Parties, was
liable to the outrages of both, and judged a common Enemy, or at least one that
had no regard to the welfare of his Country, but to his own interest; and
waited with a semblance of quiet, till Fate should decide the difference, and
Crown the Conqueror, to whom he might safely pay homage, and secure his
Fortune. In the mean time my Father, who was naturally Loyal, sided with
Decius, whose Party then was weakest, while his Younger Brother (to whom Money
was a God) fled to Othar's Camp, and there was received as a Man who brings
supplies of Gold to a Prince in wants. The two Young Kings (for both were
Crowned, and maintained an equal Title to the Throne) impatient of delays, and
fond to reach a Diadem in view, at last encamped in a large Plain, where each
of them waited for the nearer advances of the other. In a few days the eager
Armies met, Victory hovered over their Heads, viewed the terrible Combat with a
secret Joy, then clapped her bloody Wings, and perched at last on cruel Othar's
Standard. Here poor Decius fell in search of Power, and my Father (whose
Quality and Post in the Army advanced him to his Princes Person) lost his Life
in his defense.

Thus Othar Conquered, Fame flew before his Arms, and brought the sad news to
that part of the Country, which had owned the deceased for their King; and my
Mother, who soon became acquainted with her loss, fled into the other World to
secure her self from an Addition to her misfortunes in this. My Uncle, (the
unkind unjust Arates) now Master of the new Monarch's favor, forgot that
respect he owed to the memory of his Elder Brother; and having purchased with a
bribe the gift of his Estate (which the King had now taken into his own hands
as a forfeiture upon the score of Rebellion) he possessed himself of the House,
discharged the old Servants, and kept not one in his Family but my self, that
e're had seen or known the kinder Master. I was yet too Young to be sensible of
my own misery, and smiled and played about this Author of all my following
ills. But reaching too soon the Fourteenth Year of my Age, and my Face
promising a larger stock of coming Beauties and good Nature, the Neighboring
Youth began to take notice of me, to speak kindly to me, pay me much respect,
covet to be nigh me, and sighing, often informed me of my Circumstances, and
that my Eyes would purchase more than cruel fortune had robbed me of Arates
observed my budding power, and wisely foresaw that if I should marry to a Man
of a good Estate, I might (assisted by the help of Wealth) lay a claim to what
he possessed of mine, and to prevent that Misfortune which his guilt taught him
to fear; he confined me to my Chamber, appointed me a stern Governess, and
proposed to my Lovers the advancement of two hundred thousand Malors, a Sum
that exceeded in that Country the value of any Estate possessed by a Subject.
Thus he inverted the common Custom; and instead of giving a Portion, he set his
Niece to Sale, yet half assured that none would buy her at a price so large.

My Lovers in shoals withdrew; at Night no music reached my longing Ear, no
sighs but those the old Matron vented for her decayed Beauty, and chilled
Blood. In the Morning the decrepid old Hag awaked me, and with eyes distilling
scalding Rheum, taught me how to employ mine, on Books of dull Morality, and
duller Rules for Life and Conversation, then mumbl'd Praises to the Almighty
Power on my behalf, that sent me such a Friend as old Arates (for now he had
past his great Clymacterick Year, yet still a Batchelour). Thus the ignorant
(with the height of Devotion) bless Heaven for a Mischief, and when infernal
Powers send a Plague, they thank that greater Power, whose Anger for committed
Crimes, only permitted the ill to be to punish stiff offenders. Thus we spent
the tedious day, and my long imprisonment had almost taught my Soul to forget
the thoughts of Liberty; when the dear, the loving, but the lost Valentio, (who
still had shown a Love beyond what mine, or the noblest Beauty could claim as
due) at last offered the payment of the Sum proposed The old Miser was startled
with the News, and told him since his all was spent in the pursuit of a Woman,
he must expect to live a married beggar. The young Lover laughed at coming
Poverty, and swore Hell it self should not fright him, or shake his Soul
resolved, he loved to madness, and he would rather beg with Delia, trace the open
Fields for Bread, and seek shelter in a Clift beneath some hanging Rock, (where
bleak Winds grumbl'd round his careful Head, and Waters murmured in the hollow
Chasms) than live in Courts without her, where Wealth, Pomp, Pride, Luxury, and
Ease, with the gaudy shows of Honor, tempted the Mercenary Soul to abandon
that settled peace of Mind, which the Company of her we love, and a moderate
fortune never fails to bestow. My Uncle now saw 'twas too late to raise
Objections, and unwillingly consented to the Match on these Conditions, that I
should show no signs of aversion for his Person, (for he had the goodness to
pretend to a Love of my welfare) and that upon the first Day of the second Year
after his Marriage, he should add fifty thousand to the number of Malcors
already given.

Thus Aratus secured himself, for by the continued Poverty of my Husband, he
weakened the power of Revenge. For, Madam, the form of Government in Marintha
differs from that of Fabria, and there Men often do themselves Justice without
having recourse to Law, while the Prince (whose Authority is limited by the
People, or a chosen number invested with the power of the whole) winks at these
Outrages, and sees the strong overthrow the injured weak, without offering to
disturb the course of either.

In the mean time I was kept wholly ignorant of these Transactions, and was
strangely surprised when (after a consinement of two long Years, where I was
seen by none, but my old Governess) the Gay, the Joyful, blessed Valentio
entered. I thought he too had forgot me, and those sparkles of Love he had
kindled in my Breast e're my Imprisonment, were now almost extinguished, or at
least burnt so faintly, I scarce perceived the flame. The amorous Youth fell
upon his Knees, darted his Eyes on mine, sighed, and (with a voice that would
have charmed a departing Soul back to Life) said, does the Divine Delia
remember her slave Valentio? Can she believe I love her? That my long absence
was an effect of necessity, not the will of my Heart? And that now she has
liberty, if she can but Love. My surprise at the unexpected accident made me
uneasy, I felt a new Pleasure, and had a perfect remembrance of my past
troubles, knew not what to answer, and wished he would consult my Eyes, for the
resolves of my yet wavering Soul. In this confusion of the mind he graspt my
Hand, forced it to his Mouth, and kissed it with the Fever of a violent Lover,
conjured me to remember how I had been used, to consult my reason before I
spoke, and to make use of that opportunity which kind Heaven lent me, lest my
Uncle's humor altered to the worse, made him for ever Miserable, and gave me
no hopes of better Fortune than I now enjoyed. As he spoke, Aratus entered, and
with a sour Countenance told me he had always shown himself a kind Parent, and
he came now to give me (in his consent to my Marriage with Valentio) a sensible
mark of that affection he ever had for me. This pleasant turn of sporting Fate
elevated my Heart, joy sparkl'd in my Face, and though my reason could not find
the Cause of this quick change, yet I was eased, because I had no ground to
doubt the validity of that Proof, which fell within the Cognizance of my
senses. Then looking on him I loved, I blushing answered, his Choice was to me
a Guide, and I should not be wanting in my endeavors to esteem the Man he
designed my Husband. The surly old Man seemed pleased with what I said, and
calling my Gouvernantee aside, they both withdrew.

When he was gone, the wonderful Valentio failed not to thank me for my
compliance, and spoke all that a Man who loved to excess could utter to the
Mistress of his Soul, and I forgot not to weigh his Merit. You may wonder, dear
Madam, at the easy conquest, and that not having mentioned this God-like Youth
during my Confinement, I should now so suddenly resign my Heart, and dote upon
his Charms. But to remove that, consider my Years at parting; that from my
infancy, I had more tenderness and esteem for him, than for the rest of
Mankind, and that he being then very young, his person and the beauties of his
Soul, were bettered in the space of two Years; of this last, I modestly
informed him, and he (who never spoke otherwise than he believed) swore mine
surprised him, that I was ever the wonder of my Sex, and that Nature had spent
the time of my long imprisonment, in perfecting that noble Work she had begun
with so much Art.

In a few days we were married, and my Uncle (who could dissemble handsomely)
seemed well satisfied with all that past, while I (who was wholly ignorant of
what my Valentio had done for me) promised to my self an age of Joys, and
eternity of Peace and Happiness to come. My young Husband's Love increased with
the number of his Days, and time that wastes all things, served to augment the
force of his flame; for me he seemed to live, and if at any time my nature was
disordered, it wrought that effect upon his Soul, which Minds united for each
other know. His humor spoke his heart susceptible of Love, and capable of any
tender impressions, subject to anger, to revenge a stranger, and formed by
bounteous Nature for a Lover. In the day time he was ever nigh me, sighed and
swore he never could Love too well, that I deserved the esteem of all Mankind,
and had Eyes of force to melt a savage Heart, teach those inclined to War,
practiced in deeds of horror, and conversant in blood, to long and languish
after softer Pleasures. In the Night he seemed uneasy for nothing but the
privation of Light, and when the Sun appeared he would gaze upon my Charms, and
bless the day that brought us first together. Then surrounding my panting Body
with his trembling Arms, he would smile upon me, and swear by all the Powers above,
and by my self, that no time or accident should e're deface my lovely form
which the young god had rooted in his Heart; if withering Age came on, and
Nature failed, or laid waste the field of Beauty, he would call to mind the present
happy minute, fetch it back from the boundless heap of Years long fled, and
place it before his Eyes, renew his weakened Love, and dote upon his charming
Delia, with all the longings of a hot young Lover, who can never be blessed
enough; my Eyes should kindle dying flames, we should embrace like Youth, and
burn with equal Fires.

Thus have we lain and blessed our mutual Fortunes, heard the cold North Winds
battering against the Windows, and shivering Oxen lowing in the Plains, the
Birds chirping on the Battlements; and bleeting Lambs proclaiming double wants,
the Trees crackling against each other, and tender Blossoms wafted throw the
Air. Then have we shrinkt, locked our selves together, breathed quick and low,
and laughed at distant Storms, forgot the chilling Airs that raged abroad, and
played and wantoned on the yielding Downs. -- But ah! this charming Scene how
soon it fled! How quick time flew to finish so much Bliss! He showed his hoary
Head, and moved like Age, to make us think he would have longer staid, but
while we looked about and dreamt no loss, he mounted straight and left us in
distress. For six Months had scarce elapsed, when my Husband began to droop,
sigh when he looked upon me, frequent the solitary Walks, and languish under a
Disease unknown. This gave me a thousand Fears, I loved as when first the
Priest saluted me a Wife, and wished me happy in a married State, and that
melancholy which possessed my dear Valentio became Epidemick, the Servants looked
like Ghosts of Men, and I seemed the reverse of Woman, or something on this
side or beyond Humanity, my curled Locks hanged loosely in the Air, no smiles
adorned my brow, my Beauties fled, and Love seemed just a dying. A thousand
times I asked the Cause, and with Tears in my Eyes conjured him to lay open his
Heart, to hide none of his thoughts from Delia, whose very Soul he knew devoted
his; that if he loved me not, why would he not tell me so, and make me happy
when he meant me ill, for the killing sound would reach my fore-boding Heart,
and like sudden Thunder fright and strike me dead. He still swore he loved me,
that his melancholy proceeded from some indisposition of his Body, and begged
I Would inquire no further into the Cause; with Tears in my Eyes I left him, and
all my looks spoke my Soul uneasy.

In the mean time, my poor Valentio became a shadow, his Heart was in perpetual
agitation, and heaved his anxious Breast, as if the mighty secret had struggled
for a Vent. I observed this with incredible Pain, and used all the arts which
Love inspired to extract the hidden Mystery. At last (when even Nature you would
thought nodded, as if the Globe would have slipped through her Fingers, and
crushed our sleeping Antipodes) as in Bed we lay, I urged my griefs again, bid
him remember how I still had loved, the joys of that Night, when smiling Hymen
gave his wished consent, how I lay fainting in his Arms sick with pleasure, yet
willing to advance his, and wellcoming the new Joy whose fierceness almost
drowned me, how eagerly he graspt me, how he pressed my Lips, and set my Soul on
fire, when past flames had half consumed its strength. He (who now considered,
how constantly I shared in all his wishes) melted into Love, laid aside the
Heart of stubborn Man, took me in his Arms, sighed, and cried, Ah Delia I am
ruined! -- Thou undone! -- And cursed Valentio is the cause of all!

It Is needless, Madam, to repeat what followed, besides my strength at present
tells me, I must be concise. He informed me of what had past between him and
Arates before the Marriage, that his Creditors were become uneasy, that his
Friends had abandoned him, because he had acted in that affair without consent
or advice, and nothing could secure him but a speedy flight. I believed my self
miserable, fallen low from the height of happiness, and spent the tedious Night
in Tears, while he (whose cares were equal to my own) conjured me by that Love
I bore him, to undergo patiently that load of Poverty, to which his
indiscretion had brought me, to forget the scenes of past Loves, and to rely
upon Arates (who could not choose but relent) for a return of Fortune; Love was
the cause, and the Crime was easily pardoned; the weight of his griefs lessned
the sense of my own, and the throbbings of his oppressed Heart, stunned my Soul
almost into a Lethargy. I embraced him a thousand times, swore the possession
of his Heart repaid the loss of Wealth, and I Would show the Courage of an Amazon,
under my new Misfortune; begged he would tender his own safety, and remember that
when Valentio died, his Delia too was lost.

At last the unwelcome Day appeared, and the afflicted youth seemed plunged in
an abyss of Despair. O gods! How often he did clasp me in his Arms, gaze upon
me, and sigh as if he would have sunk into Eternity, his racked. Soul shook his
tender frame, and in the labor forced Tears from his eyes, which the manly
Youth strove to hide, and tossed in a Sea of o'rewhelming cares, removed the
signs of weakness from my sight. Then starting from my embraces he would cry, must
I leave my Delia? Must I be damned to the boundless pains of an eternal
Banishment -- Oh can I abandon Heaven in view? And shut my self for ever from
the joys of Paradise? -- Oh my Guardian Angel, take me once more into thy
Bosom, give a new life to my fainting Heart, and teach me to forget my past
happiness, or at least to be insensible of my coming torment; hush my warring
Soul to rest, and let me dream no more of what I Am doomed to suffer. -- But ah,
my Delia! My all! Thou better part of divided Valentio, I must leave thee, the
curse of Poverty drives me from thy Arms, and the jealous gods have envied my
past happiness. I must wander from my self, for if I retain my strength of
judgment, I carry Hell about me -- But sure my kind Memory will not in this
exigency forsake me, she will stand the first shock of Fortune's Malice, and
prompt me on to madness, awake me from a Lethargy of sorrow, and by presenting
thee to my view, give a new edge to my Afflictions; divide Valentio from the
Husband, and oppress me with a double load, send me raving into the other
World, cursing my Stars, my Fortune, nay -- the gods, but most of all my self
-- yet blessing thee.

In this afflicting juncture my Courage failed me. I saw misery before me, and
thought my self already contemned and trampled upon, by every Fool, whose
Fortune (not Merit) had bestowed upon him a larger stock of Wealth than mine;
for Virtue when o'reclouded with Poverty gains no esteem, and he that is poor
may speak like an Oracle, yet unregarded, while the rich (whose wit will hardly
allow him the title of a Man) speaks weighty Sentences, is aplauded by cringing
fawning Knaves, and bubl'd into a Love of his own ignorance. Poor Valentio,
read my thoughts in my Eyes, and (after a deep sigh that expressed sorrow to the
life) he fell into a new Delirium, exclaimed against just Heaven, and wished
for Thunder from the gods incensed, to drive his tortured Soul unto the shades;
that the Center would open and swallow down his Body, or falling Mountains hide
his guilty Head. Then reflecting on what he had said, he begged Heaven's pardon
for himself, and protection for his weeping Delia; took me into his Arms, laid
my Head to his beating Heart, and conjured me (in the name of all the gods) to
forgive him, to Love him much, or else forget him soon. -- Now, divine Sirena,
let me drop the Curtain, and hide a Scene so moving, that my frighted Soul
starts at the view. We loved and parted, and let that express the whole.

When he was gone, my cares for him increased, I had forgot a thousand things I
had to say to him, nor could I tell to what Country he designed to commit
himself. My Uncle (by Nature cruel) smiled at my misery, and I had no comfort
but the Tears of my Servants; of that too I robbed my self, and discharged them
all, excepting one Maid who had been with me from my infancy. His incensed
Creditors seized upon his Estate, and I withdrew to a humble House (some days
Journey from that place) where I lived unknown, and secured from sharpest wants
by Jewels of considerable value, which my Valentio had left me.

In a few Months I brought a Son into the World, and though I saw not a Fortune
sufficient to maintain him like the Heir of the great Valentio, yet I was
o're-joy'd at this Gift of Heaven, and methought I read already in his Face the
features of his Godlike Father; yet this comfort was scarce able to allay my
griefs; I sighed for my absent Husband, and consumed whole Nights in Prayers
for his safety. Thus I lived without any change of Fortune, till one Morning as
I sat by a River's side, and recounted my past ills, I espied on Horseback one
of my old Servants. This sharpened my memory, and brought Valentio to my Soul,
with all his graces and ravishing looks about him. But as I began to create
this soothing Phantom, the Man approached; and with a merry Countenance told me
Arates was dead. That to me he had left his Fortune, and that Heaven thought it
fitting to reward my Virtue and Constancy. This News brought more grief than
joy; for I no sooner remembered my sudden flight to Happiness, than I considered
my Husband's absence. If he had been present how blessed we had grown, Friends
had increased with our Fortune, and Love had Crowned our joys.

In a few days I possessed my Fathers House, where his Brother had made me so
long a Prisoner, and was visited by most of the Quality in the Country, and
among'st those Valentio's Relations, all wished the Youth at home, but none yet
knew that Kingdom in which he resided. A midst this pomp I found my Love for
him held the first place in my Breast. Music increased my melancholy, and
Scenes of mirth fanned the passion to a height. At last another change befell
me, which in short was this.

My Son was indisposed, and I had laid him upon the Bed, where soon after
falling asleep, I was obliged to endeavor the same state of silence to secure
his; so that in a few Minutes (my Maids having quit the Room for fear of giving
disturbance) my senses were partly hushed, and I lay by him in that Condition,
which speaks the Soul not perfectly awake, or capable of producing a series of
coherent thoughts, yet not wholly overcome with the weight of drowsy Nature. I
had spent five tedious Years alone without any real comfort, but the smiles of
my Lovely Infant, and therefore dreamt my poor Valentio dead. Methought I saw
him pale and trembling at my Bed's side, accusing me of that I never committed;
then threatening sad revenge for injured Honor, yet in his fury still withheld
by Love. This suddenly roused my wandering Judgment, and starting with the
quick return of scattered thoughts, I leapt from the Bed, called for Valentio,
sought him through the Room, as if I had really seen him, then laughing at my
own frenzy, I retired into my Closet, where (to my infinite surprise) a
Cavaleer (nobly dressed) caught me in his Arms, and cried, Oh Delia! Delia! -- I
have thee -- I see thee -- my Reason runs to madness with excess of Joy, and I
could sink beneath the vast load of soothing pleasure. The Charming voice soon
informed my watchful Soul. -- Oh gods! -- Oh too kind Heaven! (I cried) my
Husband! -- my Valentio! -- my Love! Oh what shall I say? gladness confounds
me, and ^ am dumb with ecstasy. To express this meeting, Madam, I need say no
more than that our Tears of Joy were as numerous as those of sorrow at our
parting, when we never dreamt of being blessed again. My hasty impatient fancy
started a thousand questions, which spoke my love outrun my tardy Judgment,
and he (who had as much to ask as my self) answered in one word, and made new
demands in the next. We gazed on each other, then embraced, kissed the dear
pledge of our Loves (who was now awake) sighed, and bill'd again like cooing
Turtles in a shady Grove, where peeping lights inform them storms are past, and
they may perch again on loftier Boughs. When the first transports were over, I
informed him of my. Fortunes, and he (to oblige me) gave this succinct and
Cursory account of his absence.

WHen I left thee (my lovely Delia) I felt all those pains which could possess
a tender Soul; one who had loved, and made the Center of his wishes miserable,
while her goodness (that permitted her not to complain) showed (in more lively
colors) the horror of his guilt. I had not before that time examined my own
resolutions, and being wholly indifferent in what Country I spent the remainder
of hated life, I rid some days rather a confused Wanderer, than a formal or
resolved Traveller. At last I arrived (after 7 Months spent on the way) at a
Frontier Town of Peru-alta, and there having learnt the Language of the
Country, I went to the Camp, where the present King Pharnaces resided in
Person. I had not stayed long, e're oppertunity offered her self to my
advantage, Fortune courted my wishes, and presented the Enemy to our view. We
encountered, and (my losses having taught me how to value my Person) I did more
than solid Reason could assent to, and had the honor to save my General when
dismounted, and almost trod to death by the Enemies Horse, who rushed on in
joyful crowds at their seeming Victory, not coveting blood so much as a noble
Prisoner. This piece of service gained me his acquaintance and esteem, and his
Kinsman (the haughty young Antharsus) showed me not a few signs of his good
will. But Winter soon followed the Battle, and the Scene (where honor was to
be got) withdrew, and left the impatient Youth of the Army in their Winter
Quarters, wishing a return of the Year, that Mars would again show his Head,
and rouse their dying Spirits. When that time came, my grateful General, who
remembered my past actions, gave me the Command of five hundred Horse. And
having received Orders to view the posture of the Enemy, I found my self
encompassed in a Wood by a greater Number. My men shrunk when first assaulted,
and offered to secure themselves by flight. But seeing that resistance I made
with the remaining few, and finding the way stopped, they became more resolute,
and turned to sell their lives for dear-bought honor. In this Engagement I
lost three hundred and fifty Soldiers, killed of the Enemy seven hundred and
nine, and returned to the Camp with sourscore Prisoners, of which he that
commanded the adverse Party was one. The General (who was more over joy'd at my
success than my self) swore such an Action as this deserved to be eternally
remembered, and next day presented me to the King, at which time I had the
Honor to kiss his Hand, and to be styled the Soul of his Army. Reduan (for
that was the General's name) extolled my Valor to the Skies, and the Queen
(who was present) readily answered she believed all, for the Countenance of the
Noble Stranger spoke his Praises to the World, e're he opened his mouth. I
thankt her with that respect her Quality inspired, and her Daughter (the
Princess Almeria) whose Eyes were fixed on mine, blushed as I spoke.

Fortune (not yet wearied of doing good) brought me once more into the Field,
where I saved the King's Life twice in one hour, and was at Night preferred to
the Post of Captain of his Majesty's Guards, Gentleman of the Bedchamber, and
Knight of the Dacian Order. Almanzor's Fortune never equaled mine, for in less
than six weeks after my Advancement, I beat the Enemy thrice; and at last drove
them to the necessity of suing for a Peace. The old King still entrusting me
with his Army, while the generous Reduan (wearied with the Toyls of War)
attended his Prince's person, and saw the youth of Peru-alta sweating in blood
for the smiles of that airy Mistress, Honor, of who is favor and friendship he
himself had been long possessed.

Things being at last composed to Pharnaces advantage, he abandoned the
hardships of a Camp for the softer pleasures of a Palace, and fixed his moving
Court on the Banks of the River Sapho. I had a stately Appartment assigned me
within the Gates, and at Night felt my self a Prisoner in a gilded Cage; thou
my Dear Delia filled my Soul, I thought I saw thee pensive and alone, despised
by all, and shunned by those who knew thee, without Friends and without me,
reflecting on thy past happiness, and mourning the present state; I Have sighed
for thee till my heaving Heart has shook the tottering Bed, and waking implored
the Pity of the Gods, or if I dreamt, my Soul was with her I loved, surveyed
her Charms, and returned to glad my longing Heart, which too soon found out the
tempting Cheat, and weep'd because it no longer cozened.

One Night while I lay in this Melancholy condition, a small noise on the
Stairs surpised me, immediately after my door was opened, and I could see the
Queen enter my Chamber with a light in her hand. I feigned a dead sleep, and
she who took it for real, approached my Bed without any signs of fear. Stood
almost motionless, gazed upon me, sighed, and then retired. This odd sort of
visit very much affected me, and though I had some grounds to suspect the Cause,
yet it gave me matter enough for a great many reflections. But while I dived
into this Mystery, my Door was a second time set open, and I could hear a
Woman's Foot press the floor, who after a short stay withdrew, and suddenly
re-enter'd with a Candle, coming to my Bed's side, she showed the Beauties of
an Angel. She had a loose embroidered Nightgown about her, which sometimes
flew open, and discovered to the View a thousand ravishing Charms, her tender
Shapes glanced through the fine wrought Shift, and almost gave Enjoyment by the
sight, and I had no doubt shown my self awake, if she had not in a few Minutes
abandoned the Room. When she was gone, how soon did Delia's lovelier form check
my wandering fancy, and I damned my past wishes when I thought of thee. Thy
Beauties still surmounts hers, and that of all Women, and Almeria (for 'twas
she) soon vanished from my Soul.

Next morning the King, Queen, and Princes went a Hunting, attended by most of
the Nobility. As we past a spacious Heath some Miles from Court, it was my
Fortune to ride next to her Majesty; she eyed me with a pleasant Countenance,
and told me she presumed by my looks, I came abroad to catch Hearts, that my
Eyes had tenderness in them, and I could not fail of gaining some Fair
Prisoner. This obliging discourse put me to the Blush, and I was at a loss for
some time what to answer. While she, who was no stranger to intrigue and
Gallantry, reassumed the discourse, and told me that I was not obliged to study
for an answer, since one kind look, or bewitching smile, was enough to repay a
thousand such complements. Adding, she supposed I was Born a stranger to
Peru-alta, I owed my Birth to some colder Climate, where Love was not the grand
business of the Nation, that with them such addresses were common, that she was
not yet very old, and the King already doated. Believe me Delia I knew not how
to answer; the Letchery of the Royal Baud exceeded what I e're had seen in all
my travels: But just as I was ready to speak, (and the sparkling of her Eyes
informed me she wanted a return) the King approached, and I blessed my Stars for
the lucky hit. With the first opportunity I chose another Road, and fell into a
new snare, studying to evite the old. For Almeria (who had seen me with her
Mother) smiling asked me, if the Charms of a Queen had gained my Heart, if
Majesty and Power could do more than Youth, and a moderate portion of Beauty.
This strange Method very much surprised me, I had considered but faintly the
natures of these Ladies, and almost fancied the King's Jealousy the cause of
all, that they flattered to try me, and seemed fond to advance my ruin.
However as I was about to reply, Antharsus came galloping up, and I was
opportunely relieved from a second Dilemma. He showed a vast submission to the
Princess's Commands, and the least of his Actions spoke his care to please, yet
he did all with an Air that spoke him inwardly proud, and of a surly
disposition. Almeria fretted at the accident, and by her Conversation gave him
undoubted marks of her displeasure. The haughty young Soldier easily observed
it, and guest the cause. The Natives of that Country are generally blacker than
those of Merintha, and a Man of my Complexion seemed a Demi-God amongst them.
Next day I had a Note sent me to this purpose.

SIR,
If you are the same you would have your self esteemed, meet me two hours hence,
(armed only with your Sword) on the Meadow by the River's side, where, in the
same Condition and without Attendants, you will find

Antharsus.


This did not much surprise me, I knew the Cause, he envied my Fortune, and
judged I had robbed him of his Honor, and that esteem the King and Army had of
him, but most of all he grudged me Reduan's favor and Almeria's. In the mean
time I failed not to wait upon him, and without a recital of Particulars, know,
I got Victory on my side, for after he had received three Wounds, he fell with
his Sword in his Hand. I soon ordered the Body to be taken up, and in my Coach
(which waited at a small distance) sent him to his Apartment in the Court. Then
going straight to the King, I fell upon my Knees, begged his Pardon, and
confessed the truth of what had past. The old Man weighed not the Challenge sent
me, and giving way to his passion, commanded me instantly to Prison. I laid my
Sword at my Prince's Feet, and without murmuring obeyed. At Night (when all was
hushed) Almeria came to see me, she urged her Love, the hazard she run for this
dear Visit, bid me hope for sudden Freedom, and swore she would abandon the
prospect of being a Queen, rather than I should suffer. While she spoke the
generous Reduan entered, and seeing the Princess, was about to retire; but she
kindly called him back, told him she was fully assured of his Honesty and
Friendship, and would conceal nothing from him; my Friend begged her Pardon and
mine for the indiscretion of his Kinsman, and (knowing the Prince's mind) added
he was glad of that choice she had made, for no Man could better fill the
Throne of Pharnaces, than the Warlike Valentio, (for I had not changed my Name,
because assured none knew from whence I came) that my Conduct spoke my Quality
answerable to my Fortune, and my Courage fit for Empire. The Royal Maid was
pleased with what he said, and in the mean time asked him what expedient he
could propose for my Liberty? he (who ever esteemed me beyond my Merit) advised
her to confess to her Father that affection she had for me, which in the first
place would secure my Life, if his Kinsman (who was dangerously wounded) died;
and Pharnaces having no more Children, could not (with reason safe) cross her
inclinations too far, lest he should endanger her Health. Kind Almeria at first
was silent, but consulting Love, she gave consent; desiring Reduan first to
speak favorably of me, and give him a hint of her passion, that she might not
have the first shock of his fury, which would undoubtedly follow the unlooked
for News.

The General failed not to obey, and Pharnaces (naturally hasty) stormed at
what he heard, wondered he should favor the murderer of his Kinsman, and a
stranger, and swore my Life should answer for the Crime committed. My good old
Friend alleged, he ought not to consider Valentio as a Foreigner, but the
preserver of his Life and Honor, and one who possessed the affection of his
Soldiers and Daughter; as he pronounced these last Words the Princess entered,
and by her Tears mollified the stubborn old Man; (for those subject to sudden
anger are easily persuaded) you may believe, my Delia, I longed to be informed
of the success, and was pleasantly surprised when my Lieutenant entered, showed
my Keeper his Orders, restored me my Sword, and told me I was again a
Favorite. I knew this sudden Change an effect of Almeria's Love, Reduan's
Friendship, and the Queen's Dotage, for as I was informed afterward by her
self, she forgot not to intercede for me with her easy Husband; Pharnaces
received me with a calm brow, the Daughter blushed, and the Mother bid me by
her looks consider her as the Author of my Liberty. I was divided amongst them,
thou (my Dear) possessed my Heart, Almeria my esteem, Reduan my Friendship and
Gratitude, and the Queen my pity with a mixture of aversion. In the evening I
went along with the General, and saw Antharsus showed my grief for my own good
Fortune, begged he would believe me his well-wisher, and swore I was ready to serve
him at all times, and upon all occasions.

A few days after the King took me aside, and having called for Reduan, we
entered his Closet, tho not before Orders given to acquaint the thronging
Courtiers, that he was not to be seen. Valentio (said he with a kind air) my
Daughter loves you too much, and though I have that esteem for you which all
good Men have, yet I should be sorry, if I were obliged to give my Crown to a
Man who has none of my Progenitors blood in his Veins, besides my Subjects will
never submit patiently to the Government of a stranger. Advise with your Friend
and mine, and (if possible) find a method by which I may be secured from my
just fears, and Almeria's too violent passion may be kept a secret. I readily
proposed my absence, to which he and Reduan seemed much averse, and forced me
to second thoughts. I had concealed my Marriage from them both, and was now
irresolute if I should inform them; but finding no other way to escape, I
confessed the truth, told them, I had a Wife with the Face of an Angel, and the
perfections of a goddess, one whom I could never cease to Love, and for whose
sake I would abandon more than Empire. Pharnaces rejoiced at the Discovery, and
generous Reduan was rather pleased than incensed, because (as he said) I had
Courage without extravagant Ambition, and a real Love without the base allay of
Interest. The King (who was not long a plotting what next to do) conjured me to
bring thee to Court, that nothing would sooner quench Almeria's flame, than to
see me fond of another, whom I was more powerfully obliged to Love; that I
should ever be Master of my present fortune, and as opportunity offered, he would
advance me to a greater, that he was loath to lose so good a Friend and
Soldier, and if I left the Court without designing a speedy return, his
Daughter would think it an effect of his Commands, and would for ever impute
the loss to him, languish for my absence, and murmur at his cruelty; that if my
Delia's presence did not convince her of her error, he would afterward bestow
upon me a competency for Life, and I should retire to what corner of the World
I pleased. I left thee without a Fortune, I was ignorant of what Heaven had
done for thee, and in a word, I embraced the offer. I kissed the Queen's Hand,
and that of the amorous young Princess, promised to return in a few Months, saw
Antharsus in the way to perfect Health, and left the constant, kind Reduan
sorrowful for my absence. On the road I had a thousand Fears for thy safety,
and when I dreamt thee Well, I joy'd because my relenting Stars had made me
Master of a Fortune suitable to thy Quality, though not Merit.

When I crossed the River of Tara, which divides Merintha from Amula, I was
informed of Arates's death, and coming straight to this House, I was told by
your faithful Maid Melissa, that you was in this Chamber alone, concealing the
Story of my little Son, that you might glad my Soul with the welcome News. When
I entered, I found you upon the Bed, and espying the Hat and Feather beyond
you, (the obscure light, for the Curtains were drawn, denying a full view of
his Face) I had a thousand sudden Fears, I thought thee false, and in a height
of unaccountable passion drew my Sword, with a design to punish the Treachery.
-- But oh, ye merciful gods! how ravished I was to know my self deceived; for
while* I struggled between sudden Passion, Love, and the weak remains of dying
Reason, the lovely Boy moved. Pardon, O my Delia, (continued he, and taking me
in his Arms) this Crime, which nothing but excess of Love can excuse, and
believe, that, satisfied and persuaded of thy fidelity, I retired into the
Closet, with that joy at my Heart, which none can know till doubly blessed like
me.

Here he ended his Relation, and I felt the motions of my Heart, which are not
easily expressed. I grieved the easiness of his Nature, that by a seeming guilt
suffered his Reason to be dispossessed, that unheard, he could resolve to punish,
and without Trial pronounce my Doom. Yet these thoughts were soon removed, when
I remembered his constancy, how for me he had renounced the hopes of a Crown,
and for the smiles of a Wife, abandoned courting Majesty. But that which most
racked me, was the necessity I lay under, of traveiling to Peru-alta; I formed
to my self a frightful Idea of the Court, dreaded the Queen and Princess, and
thought Valentio already forced from my Arms between them. But then remembering
how far his Honor was engaged, how gratitude forced his return, and that he would
forfeit life sooner than his Promise; how the King esteemed him, how Reduan
loved him, and the interest his eminent Services had gained him in the Nation;
I began by quick degrees to change those thoughts, for others more agreeable.
In a word, Madam, after a few Weeks we began our Journey, and because nothing
of consequence happened on the Road, (excepting that Melissa lay three days sick)
I shall change the Scene, and in a minute, place my self at the Court of
Pharnaces. The King swore himself o'rejoy'd at my Husband's Arrival, Reduan
showed a constant Friendship, the Queen smiled, and Almeria alone seemed
dejected. She upbraided Valentio with Treachery, because he had dissembled his
real Circumstances; yet said she forgave him, seeing the Charms of his happier
Delia sufficiently excused the Crime. The Youth at Court came frequently to see
me, and Antharsus (who by the King's special Command was reconciled to my
Husband) made always one in the Crow'd. He seemed very much to affect my Maid,
and believe me, Madam, she out-did all the Beauties at Court. The Princess,
('it is true) was lovely, and had a singular Majesty in all her Actions, yet not
so powerful in the assault of a Heart as Melissa.

Things stood not long in this Posture, for my Husband's ancient Enemy still
retained a perfect remembrance of the affront put upon him, and studying
revenge, at last this opportunity offered. The General and Valentio were
discoursing concerning the Natures of Women, the constancy of some, and the
weakness of others, if the Causes proceeded from the disposition of the Body,
or the Mind; and if any Man could assure himself of his Wife's fidelity, Reduan
(according to his usual goodness) swore my Husband was happy, that he believed
his Delia's Virtue proof against the strongest Temptation, and I seemed
Mistress of a Judgment of force to beat off those assaults, which (with
incredible ease) would o'return the resolutions of others. Valentio thankt him
for this Complement; and Antharsus swore all Women were fickle as the Winds;
he would debauch her, that pretended most to Chastity, and banish Virtue from her
thoughts in less than three Days; that modesty with our Sex, was but a Cloak to
private Sins, our Nature's wavering (or rather veering) toward the point of
Vice, and withheld only by a fond Love of Reputation, which exactly weighed,
is rather innate Pride. The General showed his dislike of what he said, and
calmly bid him consult his Reason e're he spoke; but my Husband who took
impatiently every thing that came from him, and who knew the words levelled
against himself in particular, told him (with anger in his looks) that Delia
was proof against him and all Men, that he should have access to his House, and
if I changed my Love, or endangered his Honor, he would forfeit his Life.
Antharsus suddenly replied, 'twas too great a Wager, but he would lay his Fortune
at stake, (a common Bet in that Country) that Valentio should absent himself
for three Days, and at his return receive undeniable proofs of his error in
trusting to a Woman. Honest Reduan chid his Kinsman, and opposed the budding
mischief. But my Husband (confident of my Conduct) was resolute, and swore he
would not upon any terms desist; and that a few Days would experimentally teach
the young Man, not to trust too much to his Merit, or to overrate his Person or
Parts.

Valentio soon writ to me, by which I was informed, he had received sudden
Orders from the King, that he was obliged to visit a Town some Miles distant,
and I should not expect his return till the fourth Day following Antharsus
(already half assured of success) came immediately to see me, and took care
that most of his acquaintance should have notice of his Visit, he frequented
the Windows, and upon every trivial Occasion fooled me thither, that all might
know us together: At Night he entered privately, and finding Melissa in her
Chamber, he renewed his Addresses to her, she (whom Ambition had blinded) had
scarce the power to deny him any thing. He swore boundless Love for her, and
seemed to desire nothing more than a speedy Marriage between them. With this
bait he easily deluded the credulous Maid, and gave her large presents to
confirm her in the mistake. On the other hand, he proposed no other proof of
her affection, than the delivery of that thing which her Mistress most
esteemed, and which she knew Valentio had given me. She readily complied, and
(while I slept) stole the Key of my Cabinet, taking from thence this Cross
which now you see, and which my Husband had given me when he fled from
Merintha. The young Man (glad of his feigned Victory) gave her a Jewel of a
considerable value, conjured her to conceal this Transaction from all the
World, and retired to his own Appartment, eased because he had begun his
Rival's ruin.

When Valentio returned, he saw too soon the stolen mark of fictitious Conquest,
and believed me base. He dissembled all when in my Company, though not so well as
to blind my fore-boding Soul. I asked the cause of his discontent, and he
reassumed his old excuse, want of Health. Thus we lived, I was ignorant of what
had past, he jealous and tormented, Melissa glad of her coming Fortune, and
Antharsus fond of his own Villainy. The Nights were spent with different
passions on all sides, and Day was always welcome to my watchful Soul.

One Morning the lost Valentio asked me if I would go with him into the Fields:
I readily consented, and having seated our selves in the Coach, we drove a Mile
by the River's side, and then alighted. Sorrow pressed his Brow, and his looks
spoke his Heart plunged in grief; yet still methought I read anger (or rather
gloomy revenge) in his Eyes. We walked another whole Mile without exchange of
Words, and my Heart (sinking with the sudden apprehension of some coming
mischief) taught me to expect greater troubles than yet I had known. While thus
we walked he caught me in his Arms, cried aloud, This for my Honor lost! Now
Love Antharsus! Then threw me headlong down the hanging Bank. The Streams with
mercy yet received me, and my Clothes kept me a-float, till a Neighboring
Shepherd came to my relief. The poor Man took me home to his House, and made
use of Remedies within his Power to bring me back to Life. When my Reason
reassumed its Seat, I inquired of my deliverer, if any other Man appeared to
save me from sinking, and he assured me he had seen none. It Is not easy,
Madam, to guess my Pains. I remembered every word my Husband spoke, when he
plunged me into the River; how furiously he looked, and how his Eye Balls
rolled, that I was innocent, his Cruelty even beyond his Nature, that he had
long designed my Death, and that Repentance had not immediately followed the
act, since he had not staid to afford me help when I struggled in the Water.
Yet after all I loved him, 'twas that tormented my Soul, and I could have died
that very moment, if the desire of evincing my Innocence had not o're-rul'd
that of Life.

In the mean time I was not to be found at Court; Antharsus industriously gave
out, that Valentio had murdered his Wife; and the King, who thought it an
effect of ambition, and a design to make way for his Marriage with Almeria,
easily believed what was said, and gave immediate orders for his close
Confinement. Now careless of Life and Honor, (since by his own Hands he had
destroyed what his Soul yet doated on) frankly confessed the Crime laid to his
charge, and though the Queen, the Princess, and sorrowful Reduan used their
interest with Pharnaces* he was nevertheless brought to his Trial, and
Condemned to lose his Head at his own Gate. The false Melissa did not yet
grieve for what she had done, and urged Antharsus to the performance of his
promise. The proud Youth was startled with the proposal, and considering the
vast distance between a Princess and a serving Maid, he showed her not a few
signs of contempt. She observed this, and to hector him into Compliance and
good Nature, alleged the service she had done him, his Vows, and the
opportunity she had to render him infamous by a full discovery. He, who feared
nothing more, and who scrupled not to add one Crime to another, run her against
the Table with his Sword, and so left her, pleased by a greater mischief to
conceal a lesser. Melissa (now mortally wounded) faintly called for assistance;
and Reduan with several Officers entering, she confessed her guilt, told them
Antharsus had used her thus for fear of a discovery, begged my Husband's
Pardon, (tho absent) and soon after died. I had sent the poor Shepherd every
day to Court, where (his Wife being a Nurse) he got certain information of all
that past; and I was acquainted with this Accident, almost as soon as it
happened. Then it was I went to see Valentio -- Pardon, Madam, this too concise
way of relating my Story; but the remembrance of that Joy he showed, when he
knew me alive, adds to my present pain, and makes me more sensible of my loss.
Besides, I find the kind Sister extends her welcome Arm to cut my thread of
Life. I have no more time than serves to inform you; Antharsus fled, My Husband
was set at Liberty. We left Peru-alta as soon as possible, and designing to
visit Fabria in our return to Merintha, that storm arose when we were upon the
Coast, which robbed me of my Son and Husband. -- Oh Valentio! -- I come! -- now
I Am -- happy. --

This said, she immediately died, and one Moment finished her story, and her
unfortunate Life. The Duke and Duchess were sorry for her Death, and in a few
days she was laid in the same Grave with her Valentio. Manderina had waited
upon her too when alive, and during that small space of time, we renewed our
Ancient Friendship; she asked me concerning my Brother, and wished him success
at Coloa; I wished her happiness, but not in the Arms of Martius, and she (not
inclined that way so much as I had suspected) smiled, and said, he deserved my
Love but not hers; to me he showed himself a Prisoner, but to her a Rover; and
one whom no Beauty could fix, or Charms confine. Artaxus informed me by his
Letters, that Indoretta still proved kind, that Fernanthus Duke of Meroa (a mad
piece of Quality) was his dangerous Rival, because assisted with Mangroa's
Authority, that he was obliged to live too incognito, and did not yet know when
he would return. -- Now, my dear Timandra, my Story draws toward a fatal
Period, my Misfortunes exceed yours, and my Ruin was completed by envious
Destiny, in less than twenty days after the death of unfortunate Delia.

My Welcome Lover had come to see me at the usual hour, and after some time
spent in my Company descended again into the Garden. Bonzeda it seems waited
there with a design to serenade me, and approached the Window just as Martius
was upon the foot of his supple Stairs. The Youth finding himself surprised,
and not knowing their intention, or whom they were, drew his Sword, and laid
the unwary Count dead at his feet. Xensa (who was not yet asleep, and too soon
heard the noise) came running down the back Stairs; but not examining the Party
or the Cause, he chose the weakest side, and was killed by Bonzeda's Servants,
e're he had well entered the Garden. Poor Martius still defended himself, and
the back door being suddenly broke open, a Cavalier rushed in to his
assistance. The clashing of the Swords, with the confused Shrieks and Oaths of
those engaged, awaked both Families, and now a bloody Combat commenced (or
rather was renw'd) the Count's Servants fought to revenge their Master's full,
and my Lover for his Liberty. At last he was a Conqueror, and the Enemy fled.
'Twas then he had leisure to thank the Stranger for his assistance. During this
bloody Scene, I had still slept, and it seems my kind Lover, (more cautious for
my Reputation th^n my self) had left me in that condition, choosing rather to
leave me without a word at parting than run the risque of a discovery by his
stay. However, I awaked just as they entered my Chamber, and seeing Martius and
my Brother (for 'twas he that had assisted him) covered with blood, I leapt
from the Bed, asked the Cause, and almost raved with the sudden fright. My
Lover (still anxious for me) would have concealed the truth, till he had
prepared my mind for the shock; but Artaxus in few words informed me of all,
and added that Ericis had seen him in Coloa; that she acquainted Meroa with it,
who soon after sent him a Challenge, that he fought him, and had the fortune to
kill him, that he had posted home with a design to provide himself with Money,
and to settle his affairs; that as he arrived, he heard the clashing of Swords
in the Garden, and forced the Door from off its hinges, to give relief to those
oppressed. Madam, you may paint my griefs from your own: And though the loss of
Constant Adrastus, exceeded that of a Father, yet to remove the inequality, I
saw my Brother and my Lover obliged to abandon Fabria. However to make my
misery truly equal to your own, I was robbed of Martius and Artaxus too. For
they had not been gone six Months, (during which time, I received many Letters
from them) when I was informed of both their deaths; the occasion of which take
in few words.

They had fled into the Province of Cathinna, where wearied with so long an
absence from those they loved, they at last resolved upon a Journey home. By
the way they lodged in a small Village, where (not finding conveniences for
lying together as they used to do) they chose their respective ^nns. At Night
my Lover's Host, discoursed the story of Xensa's and Bonzeda's death, and how
young Mangroa had by his flight confessed himself guilty of the Murder. Martius
was very much surprised with the Relation, and scarce thought himself safe; but
being always of an invincible courage, these thoughts soon fled, and he retired
to his Chamber. My Brother's fortune was almost the same; for his Hostess spent
most of the Night on his Adventure concerning Fernanthus; and being at Supper
with him, she said to her Husband, This Gentleman (looking on my Brother) very
much resembles Young Xensa; if he is the same Fame paints him amongst us.
Artaxus smiled, and soon after went to bed, where (wearied with his Journey) he
fell asleep, and dreamt no more of what had past. About midnight the House was
surrounded with Armed men, their leader crying, guard the Doors, and secure the
Murderer. It seems, Madam, a Highway Man, who had robbed, and afterward
killed a Gentleman, ten Miles from that place, had come to the same Inn that
Evening, but not known to be such, he had paid his reckoning and pursued
another Road. The now Duke of Xensa surprised with the sudden noise, started
from the Bed, and laid hold of his Sword, resolved either to purchase liberty,
or fall in the attempt. In the mean time Martius could find no rest, he dreamt
of some coming danger, yet knew not what it was, and feared my Brother's safety
more than his own. At last hearing a noise in the Streets, he called his
watchful Host; and inquired into the cause. He soon informed him, and the Youth
(judging my Brother betrayed) half dressed, and Armed only with his Sword, run to
his assistance, and came just as Artaxus had engaged with the furious Mobb,
who, by his resistance, and desperate endeavor to escape, easily believed him
the Robber, and used their utmost force to repel his. Young Mangroa no sooner
arrived, than he made his way through the Rabble, and calling aloud for
Artaxus, at last reached him. Xensa hearing his own name proclaimed, concludes
they certainly knew him, and not discerning his Friend in the dark, or
remembering his Voice in the hurry, he turned his Sword upon him, as his most
dangerous Enemy; because next to his Person. My Lover from his resistance
argued his own mistake, and sought to secure himself by the death of his
Adversary. -- Oh! Cruel Heavens! they both fell, my Brother was killed by my
Lover, and Artaxus robbed me of Martius. -- Judge of my sorrow by my
misfortune, for I Am persuaded, Madam, no loss ever equaled mine. The Duchess
died with sudden grief. The constant Indoretta poisoned her self, and the kind
Manderina languish'd a few Months, and then fled into the other World. I had
then retired from pomp and noise, and spent the remainder of my Years in
Devotions, if my Friends had not over-perswaded me to the Contrary, and with
cunning Arguments had not juggl'd me into a love of Liberty, and aversion to a
recluse Monastic Life. However, in not abandoning the World, I had the
Happiness of your acquaintance, for you came to my House, Madam, two Years
after this Tragedy had been Acted. -- Excuse me if I have not Writ my Letter
with that Art you show in yours, or if I have dwelt too long upon the story of
unhappy Delia, think 'twas my design to divert you from too serious thoughts.
-- I Am glad my Cousin the Abbess is your Friend; and am,

Your, etc. Timandra.

FINIS.

