A LIE is no SCANDAL.

Or a VINDICATION OF Mr. MUNGO CRAIG, From a Ridiculous Calumny cast upon him
by T. A. who was Executed for APOSTASY At Edinburgh, the 8 of January, 1697.

Ps. 26. v. 6. I will wash mine hands in Innocence so will I compass thine
Alter O Lord.

Ps. 31. v. 18. Let the lying Lips be put to Silence: Which speak grievous
things proudly and Contemptuously against the Righteous.

Plaut: in Amphit. -- Qui non deliquit decet

Audacem esse, and considenter prose and proterve loqui Nam

Horat. Epod. 6. -- Si quis atro dente me petiverit,
inultus ut Flebo Puer?
Written, January 15, MDCXCVII.

A VINDICATION, Of Mr. MUNGO CRAIG, from a Ridiculous Calumny cast upon him by
T. A. lately Executed for Apostasy.
Section I. Containing the Introduction, the Calumny, and some General
Observations.
ALthough there be no Divine Truth which concerns our Eternal Felicity, more
demonstratively deducible from the Axioms of sound Reason, more clearly holden
forth in Scripture, or better countenanced by the experience of all Ages; than
the being of a Providence, whereby every thing falls out according to the
eternal purpose of him that works all things according to the Counsel of his
own will. Ephesians, 1.11. This being the necessary result of his Glorious
perfections, with respect to his end in Creating of the World. yet, there is no
subject about which Men can employ their intellectual faculties wherein they
will find their wit nonplus'd in a higher degree, than in the stupendous
intricacies of this unfathomable deepth; whose beauty and harmony, we can no
more unridle in particular instances, than we can grasp the infinite
understanding and free-will'd Councels of God, by the narrow limits of our
shallow apprehensions. which made the Holy Apostle exclaim in the ii, of the
Romans and 38. v. O the deep of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of
God! How unsearchable are his Judgments and his ways past finding out. Now, as
the truth of both these positions, is abundantly perspicuous to any who is not
altogether a stranger to the things of God: So, (considering the fewness of my
days and shortness of my experience) it is evident to me in an eminent degree.
The Lord having dealt with me in such a manner, as I have often seen the thick
Clouds of apparent ruin dispelled in a moment, and issue in my real Good. And
upon the other hand, when my Spirits have been dejected, for the disappointment
of mine expectations, in that which I imagined would be conducible to my
well-being; a few days persuaded me of the falsity of my Judgment, when I
perceived that it would have terminated in my hurt either one way or other. And
truly I cannot but say except I give my Conscience the lie, that ever since I
could make any considerable use of Reflection and Memory; I have observed the
Finger of God in every step of my Life. So that I have learned to wait with
patience, on his meaning in any Emergency of his over ruling Power for the
Future, hoping through his Grace to be found among these; whom he loves and
chastneth, and that when he has tried me I shall come forth as Gold, Job. 23,
i0. But here, I must confess that the present and humbling dispensation
wherewith the Lord has been pleased to try me, for ends best known to his Holy
Majesty, is so odd, by reason of a strangely surprising and ridiculous calumny
cast upon me by that poor Creature lately Executed for Apostasy; that I am
totally puzzled how to behave under it but, Let me not be ashamed O Lord for I
have called upon thee: Let the wicked be ashamed and let them be silent in the
Grave, psalm, 3i, i7. I say it is strangely surprising, first because, (as I
call the searcher of hearts to witness) it came to my ear as unexpectedly, as
if I had seen the orderly Course of Nature; which God has established in the
Universe, turned in a moment to Confusion. 2ly. Because it came from one who
was to die, and pretended to reced from his former Principles. But more of this
af^erwards. 3ly. Because it has had reception among some who are real
Christians, but biased by Misinformation. Nevertheless, upon reflex thoughts
my Admiration Ceased as to the two first points, when I considered the
qualities of my Accuser and had Read his Speech. And likewise as to the third,
when I considered that it was only among such as were unacquainted with me that
it had reception; and that it is disseminated and somented only by a Graceless
crew of profligat Persons, who cannot endure to see vice crub'd without wheting
their malicious Tougues on such as appear against it. I call it rediculous and
false, because I Will shortly prove that it is so. And although I be persuaded,
both from my own experience, and from the method of the Lords Dispensations
toward his People in the whole Canon of the Scripture, that it will terminate
in my Advantage; yet seeing that it is a public Scandal to that Holy calling;
whereunto out of his abundant Grace and Mercy, he has been pleased to call
me. Having an Eye solely to the Glory of God, and that I may not be a Stumbling
Block to any weak Conscience; I have thought it not only convenient, but my
indispensible duty to give a public Testimony in my Vindication against it.
For the regular performing of which, I shall first lay down his own words for a
principal Copy of his Speech. And 2ly, I shall prove them to be false. And
lastly Answer some Calumnies that are commonly rumoured, whereof he makes no
mention in his last Declaration. The words are those,

AND I CANNOT WITHOUT DOING MY SELF A MANIFEST INJURY, BUT VINDICAT MY
INNOCENCE FROM THESE ABOMINABLE ASPERSIONS, IN A PRINTED SATYR OF Mr. M. C's
WHO WAS AN EVIDENCE AGAINST ME WHOM I LEAVE TO RECKON WITH GOD AND HIS OWN
CONSCIENCE IF HE WAS NOT AS DEEP LY ENGAGED IN THESE HELLISH NOTIONS AS EVER 1
WAS.

Before I descend to the particular Anatomy of his Accusation, I must make two
General Observations, how the wonderful providence of God had over ruled his
Malice in making his Calumny carry its own Refutation in the forehead of it. My
first General Observation is. That one parr of the words is a manifest and
undeniable contradiction of the other, for first he says, that he is innocent
from these abominable Aspersions which I lay to his Charge; and yet he leaves
me to reckon with God and my Conscience, if I was not as deeply engaged in them
as he. Now, if he stand to the first that he is innocent, that I Am not guilty
as the parallel which he runs betwixt our engagements clearly demonstrats, and
so the last part of the Calumny falls to the ground. And if he stand to the
second, that I am guilty, then he is not Innocent, and consequently the former
clause must be false. Now, although I shall prove both the Clauses of the
Calumny to be false, yet it is clear that according to himself one of them must
of necessity be so. This being as Logicians term it Argumentatio ad hominem.
Where I must extol the goodness of God, in that when the wicked even mine
Enemies and my Foes came upon me to eat up my Flesh, they stumbled and fell
Psalm. 27, 2. My second g^neral Obse vation is, that he does not positively
affect that I was as deeply engaged as he but leaves me to reckon with God and
my Conscience i^ I was not so. As if he had said, I have a Suspicion For the
(a) that Mr. M. Craig was once so as I am, however, ground o^ be it so or not,
I leave it to God and his conscience, this suspicr^ if they clear him I clear
him. To which I sub- on see Sect some but they have sufficiently cleared me,
and 3. Cons. 8. will clear me in the day of general Judgment, be fore Men and
Angels, Ergo (according to the most Genuin^ sense that his words can admit of,
considered with their Circumstances) I am sufficiently cleared. And although
this Phrase may be admitted for an affirmation in more trivial affairs, where
there is no ground of Jealousy, that the Person speaking is either capable or
willing to Sophisticat^ yet, it is not so to be let pass if we consider Thomas
Aitkinhead'^ dexterity in that Art. Especially, seeing that from the sequel of
my discourse (b.) I shall make it apparent, that he had a design to put a blur
upon the World in it ei-Sect. 3. ^ther through malice or mistake. And now I
appeal Con. 8. to any competent and unprejudiced Person, if ever two
propositions were more repugnant, or if ever the oracles of the Heathen Demons
were more equivocal. But admitti^^ all which I have observed to be null, yet I
shall prove both the parts of his Calumny to be false in the two following
Sections.

SECTION II. In which the first part of the Calumny is demonstrated to be false.
HIs position here is, that I did cast abominable aspersions on him in my
Satyr of which he was innocent^ I contradict it thus, I laid nothing to his
Charge in that Satyr, of which he was not guilty. That I may prove my
Assertion, observe 1, that all that I mention of him in that Pamphlet, may be
divided into two parts 1, a relation of some ridiculous and airy Fancies in
Philosophy and Chimestry, reduced into five heads. 1 Of the Chimaerical virtues
or properties which he attributed to his Aurum potabil^ as he termed It. 2 Of
his design of inventing a way to keep Commerce betwixt the Terestial Glob, and
the World which he imagined to be in the Moon. 3 Of his new and extraordinary
Way of making the Philosopher Stone. 4 Of his rediculing the received and self
evident principles of Reason. 5. Of the Extravagant and Blasphemous power Which
he attributed to Man's Imagination. That all these and many other Wild Effects
of unbridled and daring Ignorance, Were his common discourse, almost every one
who had any acquaintance of him can Testify: I shall Instance some, viz. Mr
Patrick Midleton Mr. Adam Mitchel Mr. Hugh Cravefaord Mr John Neilson etc.
Moreover, that about Imagination was an Arucle of his Lybel and sufficiently
proven against him. The second part, is a general Information of his
Extravagancies in Divinity, without so much as naming any thing in particular;
because I looked upon it as little less than Blasphemy to name them again, when
not called thereunto, and that the Epithe s whereby I designed them there, were
very congruous to the things lybelled against him, non that ever heard his
Lybel can deny. Now, that he was guilty of these, I have no more to say, but
that (after a due and punctual process of Law, whereby every thing contained in
his Lybel was sufficiently proven, together with several Articles which were
not Lybelled, by Witnesses who heard them in different places, and at several
occasions, uttered by him, in the Spirit of Malice and Bitterness, with
frequent Repetitions, without any Provocation, yea, contrary to the found
Admonitions of those, who, with abhorence, were his Auditors.) he was Capitally
punished for them.

Observe, 2ly. That it is to his Extravagancies in Divinity, that his Words
have more special Reference, which I Collect from the two Epithets he gives
them; viz. Abominable and Hellish, and likewise from the strain of his Speech,
Where he endeavors to Lenefie his Guilt, by attributing it to a love of Truth
inherent in his Nature; tho non that ever heard him on these points could
perceive that it flowed from such a Principle. And really I cannot see, how
cursing and railing against Holy and tremenduous mysteries, Which Man's Wit
cannot Comprehend, can consist with love of Truth, or how a high Conceit of a
Man's own Wit above all others, and a rejecting of all Instructions th^^ could
be given him, as if he were above the possibility (...) having further Light in
the knowledge of things, can cous^^^ With the Character of a Philalaethes, And
yet both these in the highest degree were his Properties.

Observe, 3ly. That (as we may Collect from the former observation) this does
not only Reflect upon me, b^^ likewise upon the rest of the Witnesses, who
Testified th^^ he was guilty of such abominable and Hellish Notions. Ye^ and
upon the Wise and Grave Judges too, as if they either had given ear to
Calumnies, or, admittted incompetent Witnesses against him; Whereas, never was
a Process mo^^ punctual, never a more unanimous consent of Witnesses, who heard
them at different occasions as we said before, yea, of a great number of
Witnesses Who Were called together, many were strangers one to another.

Observe, 4ly. That this Contradicts the former part o^ the speech, in which he
declares, that since 10 or 11 Years o^ Age, he was guilty of this Apostasy for
which he suffered These things being premised, I make the falsehood of hi^
position apparent thus; either his position or mine must b^ false, the one
being the contradiction of the other. But that mine is not false, is evident
from the former Observations. Ergo. His is false which was to be demonstrated.
And this in the opinion of any judicious Person, is sufficient to debilitat the
Credit of the other part of his Calumny. For how is it to be thought, that a
Man would stop to ly^ in so private a Business as my Reputation, who had the
impudence, to call these things abominable Aspersions or Calumnies, that were
so generally known of him, and legally proven against him, I might here take
notice, that he promises to vindicat his Innocence from these things, and yet
does it not, for he says not a word more upon that point. And if by Vindication
he mean only the bare asserting of hi^ Innocence, (which indeed is a Notion of
vindication not a white strang^r than the Person that spoke it) then by the
same Rule, the bare asserting of my Innocence from what he lays to my Charge,
would be (by a Thousand times) a more valid Vindication of me, because such a
thing could never be laid to my Charge by any Man.

SECTION III. Wherein the second part of the Calumny is demonstrated to be false
THere is one previous consideration I would offer to the Reader, before I
proceed to this point. viz, That in proving the falsity of the other Clause, I
had a great advantage that I lake here, my proper station in that being to
Oppugn, but here the scene is changed, my Office properly being to defend my
self from any thing that he had to lay to my Charge, and his to prove it. But
by his bare asserting of the thing and that but seemingly too Sect 1. Observe,
2.
without giving particular Instances, I am deprived of many eminent Topics,
from which I might have made his malice demonstratively evident to the World.
Notwithstanding, in the strength of the Lord, I shall lay down such grounds for
the contrary of his Assertion, taken in the strictest sense that can be put
upon it, that tho every one of them in it self considered will not be a
Demonstration, yet, we may draw a conclusion from them collectively considered,
not inferior to any evidence that a thing of that nature can admit of; which
may serve for an Example that a Holy and Wise God will never leave oppressed
innocence without a sufficient ground of Vindication. Then.

Consider. 1 That I am neither a Stranger come from America not any other
remote place, but had both my Birth and Education in, and about the City of
Edinburgh, and has had Converse with People of several Ranks and Qualities, and
I give a public defyance to any one, or all of my Acquaintances, if ever I
spoke or Acted any thing, that tended that way either directly or indirectly.
Yea, I Magnify the Lord for it, that my Life and Conversation has been so void
of Offense before God and Man. (I speak not here of those Infirmities which are
the inseparable adjuncts of corrupt humane Nature; but of gross Enormities in
Principles or practices) that the Rumor of this, was as Astonishing to any that
had particular acquaintance of me, as to my self, and is very far from having
the least Degree of their Credit.

Consider 2ly, That this Clause is both Ridiculous and Impossible. For I Am
confident, that no Intelligent Person who over heard his Lybel can deny, that
it is Ridiculous to suppose any Rational Soul guilty of such Horrid and
Presumtuous Blaspheniy; that is not either wholly debauched with grols
immora^^ty, or dround and misted with self conceited Ignorance: And I defy any
man to lay these to my Charge And Ah Christians! who gives Ear to this
groundless Calumny, what for a Monster conceive ye me to be were I guilty of
any such thing In painting out that Sin in such black and dismal Colors, as I
did in that Satyr, in de^e^^cing son^a^y Wo's against the guilty, and in
Attribution to them such He ^^ish properties. Can it enter into your minds
(...) a Man could ever screw up his Soul to such a hight of Hypocrisy, and
shake from him so far the aw and d^^^d of a Supreme being? As for my part I Am
persuaded that if it be not simply impossible it is the greatest trouble i^ the
World, for men or these Principles to play the Hypocri^^^ And now (whatever
Misconstructions some may put upon it) I call God to Witness, that out of
sincere love to the everlasting Gospel, and disdain to that mystery of
Iniquity, I threw in that Mire of Mine to the public Treasury. Neither does
any thing there delivered express the Thousand Degree of that Detestation which
my Soul conceives against that Hellish ^^homination. Do not I hate them. O Lord
that here Thee: And am not I grieved with those that rif^ up against Thee? Ps.
139 v 21, I hate them with a perfect hatred: I count them mine Enemies. But
mistake me not, as if I endeavoutred from this, either to clear my self, or to
Extort your assent to my Innocence. But I observe it only by the By as an an
instance of Probability. I say also, that it is impossible, because, although I
had erred in my Judgment as to the Matters of Religion (as God forbid tha^
either I had or should do it) yet I could not be so guity a^ he; in that I
neither Railed against nor Scandalized the Sublime and Sacred truths of
Cristianity, as he did.

Consider 3ly. that I was an avowed Oppugner of him, and endeavored diligently
to extricat him from those Souldestroying P^^nciples of which he was possessed.
As Mr. Patrick Midl, top, Richard Comlie, and several others can Testifi^ upon
Oath.

Consider 4ly. That it was but small and short acquaintance I had of him, as to
particulars, being only from Feb. 1696; till April tha^ sam^ year. And a^oon as
I had discovered, the Latent treasure of Corruption which was within him, and
had perceived, that all ordinary means of Recovery proved ineffectual; I wholly
abandoned his Company, and sep^^^^ed from him only upon that Account. As is
well known to the most part of my Acquain^^nces. From which date of April till
he was Apprehended, I never saw him but twice or thrice.

Consider 5ly, that it was not I alone, that T. A. Not only. without all
ground, but against all Reason; Slandered as guilty of his horrid
Extravagancies. For I can prove that he was so Bewitched with his Hellish
Delusions, that he ordinarily said; that all knowing Men were so, whatever they
said to the contrary, And Mr. Patrick Midlton Mr. John Neil^on and I can
declare, that he boasted how he had prosolytiz'd to his Apostasy a certain
Minister of the Gospel. How ridiculous this is let any man Judge.

Consider 6ly the qualities of my Accuser, we are certain and it was legally
proven against him, that he was an Apostat from the Faith, a Blasphemer of God,
and a contemner of the Sacred and ^rem^nduous Mysteries of our Holy Religion.
And the Spirit of God makes us Infallibly certain, 2 Timothy 3. v, 3.
that such should be false Acensers (i^) and as we are certain of this, so we
are uncertain whither he had the very first Decrees of solid Repentance. The
Lord forbid that I should take upon me the Incommunicable attributes of God,
and prentend to be a searcher of Hearts. But I say, we are very uncertain of
it, if we consider 1 That he gave but little satisfaction to tho Pious and
Reverend Ministers, who Labouted Industriously to Reclaim him. 2ly. His last
Speech is very unbecoming, a dying Man in his Circumstances, being so far
Stuffed with the Affectation of a Bumbast and Airy S^^le, which he was not able
to Manage; that he run himself inevitably to writ^ what no Man can make souse
of, where we are entertained with much of Extravagant and Illogical Reesoning,
in order to self Justification; but with nothing that Savours like a Soul
Touched. with a Sense of such nefarious Blasphemy as he was guilty of. For the
danger of such a Case, see Heb; 6; v, 4, 5 and 6. And the 10 Chap, of that
Epistle, and v, 26 29.

Consider. 7ly. The motives he had to Incense him against ^e, 1 be entertained
a suspicion, that I was the first that discovered him to the Civil Magistrate;
which although it was not true, yet seeing he firmly believed it; it could not
but have great influence, to prompt a man of his Principles to Revenge. 2ly, I
had made his name public in that Satyr. 3ly He knew very well, that I would
prove an impartial Witness against him; now I can prove that he said that his
only Refuge lay in framing Objections, that might Incapacitat his Witnesses to
give evidence against him. And because he could lay nothing to my Charge; he
endeavored by this device, either to have my evidence rejected or at least to
put a stain upon my Name. But the hope of the wicked shall Perish.

Consider 8ly. That he could move no objection against me before the Lords of
Justiciary, that was of Force to incapacitat me to bear Witness against him;
for it is beyond all Contraversie, that if he could but have raised a Suspicion,
in their Lordships that I was such a Person; my evidence had been rejected. It
being simply impossible to bind a man, to declare the verity upon an Oath,
whose Tenor, in his Judgment, was not Obligatory. These things being duly
considered, and counterpois'd with the Calumny; in the Balance of a sound and
impartial Judgment; the Slander will be found to have no proportion to my
Counter Reasons. But, for the more perspicuity, I shall Rank up the degrees of
its improbability, in the following Epiromy.

An Apostat from from the Faith Sect. 3. Con. 6.
to whom faise Accusation is an effential Property 2. Tim. 3.3.
of whose solid Repentance we are very uncertain; Sect. 3. Con. 6.
from a habit of Slandering and Jealousy Con. 5
has Ambiguously Sect. 1. Obs. 2
and Contradictoriously, Obs. 1.
either out of the Spirit of Malice and Revenge Sect. 3. Con. 7.
or from mistake: Prop. 4.
Slandred one, who is not only of an unblamish'd Reputation, Con. 1.
and given proof of his dislike to these horrid Abominations, Co. 2.
but likewise endeavored to reduce him, Co. 3^.
and because he could not prevail, sepetated from him. C. 4.
Yea one, against whom he could bring no relevant Objection, when his very
Life, in a manner, depended upon the the moving of it. C. 8.


What degree of Credit such a Report should receive, let every one judge
pro^arbitrio: Now me thinks, non can rationally deny, that his Calumny deserves
no inconsiderable Station among improbabilityes of the first magnitud. But that
we may not rest here, I shall likewise demonstrate; that it is de facto False.
And that I may be methodical, I Will first lay down two observations. 2ly. I Will
propose and prove some propositions, in order to draw my Conclusion. My first
Observation is his behavior toward me, before the Lords of Justiciary; when I
was called to Witness against him. viz. When their Lordships enquired if he had
any thing to object against me; he answered, that I should have said to him,
before one of the Witnesses then present: that Dr. More was the first that
convinced me of the truth of Christianity. There Lordship, Replied that it was
no Objection in Law, and that I might bless God for my Conversion: But the the
thing as he expressed it, being Notoriously false, I desired Permission to speak
for my self but their Lordships thought it not necessary, because the
Objection was of no Consequence. Their Lordships enquired, if he had any more
to say, he aledged that I had Malice against him, because I had mentioned his
Name in that Pamphelet. from which I was cleared by Oath. It being further
enquired, if he had any more to Object against me; he answered, NO. My second
Observation is, a Succinct and real Narrative of the passage, on which he
builded, his first and main Objection. And it is this. when Mr, Patrick
Midleton and I went to see how he behaved in Prison, we found upon the Table,
Sir Charles Wolsley's Discourse on the reasonableness of Scripture Belief. On
which I took occasion to ask, what satisfaction it had given him as to his
doubts. But when by his constrained and ambiguous Answer. I understood that his
satsfaction was little or none, I (having read the Book about two Years
before.) Magnified it for the most accomplished discourse that ever I saw on
that Subject. and to enforce the Doctrine there delivered, home upon him (if
the Influence of such a slender Authority as mine, might have prevailed any
thing with him) I said, that it had so great force upon my Judgment, that tho I
had doubted never so Sceptically upon that point, (as I bless God, said I,
'twas never my Temptation.) Yet, I could not have any longer denied my Assent to
the Verity and Divine Authority of the Sacred Scriptures, I further added, that
More, Crotius and others has laid down such solid reasons, for proving the
Theory of the Christian Religion, that no rational Soul that ever was at the
Pains to weigh them duly, can miss to be a Speculative Christian. For, we must
understand, that soli^ Grace and justifying Faith, (which are the necessary
requisits of a real Christian.) being supernatural Donatives can neither be
acquired by us, this or any other way. But they are the Gifts of God, infused
into us and bestowed upon u^ from above; solely upon the score of the infinite
Merits of Jesus Christ. From which Observations the Truth of these following
propositions is abundantly perspicuous; upon which account, we shall be the
breifer in their Illustrations.

Proposition 1. He could say nothing to my Charge, but what he la^^ to it
before the Justiciary Court. This is clear from his Answer to their Lordships
last query, which was that he had no more to Object against me: Compared with
the 7 consideration of this Section.

Prop* II. That even by his own Expression I, was froc'd from guil^. This is
apparent from their Lordships Answer to his first and main Objection.

prop. III. What he said hefore the Lords of Justiciary, was wholy grounded
on that passage related in the 2. Observation. The truth of this appear^, from
comparing of the two Observations together. But, it is put beyond all doubt, by
his referring it to one of the Witnesses then present for there was not a
Witness then present, that ever was with me and him together; except Mr
Midleton and another. The other can declare that he never heard us speak any
thing about Religion. And Mr. Midleton can depone thet he never heard me use
any discourse to that purpose but then.

Prop. IV. He vvildely wrested my words to a quite different sense, This is
evident from the Comparison of the two Observations And from it we have this
natural and undeniable Corrolary. That vvh^^ he said before the Lord of
Justiciary, vva^ either a LIE ^^t of a design to frame something like ^h
Objection, and stain my Reputation; gr^^^ted (...) self-defence and Revenge, Or
at least a MISTAKE. Which might (...) occasioned from his habitual use of
wresting Men's words* or from ^i^ inadvert^ncy when I spoke, for truly, he never
much relish (...) discourses of that nature.

Pro. V. What he says here, is either the same with what he said before the
Lords of Juistciary. or a LIE. This proposition is a plain Corrolatly of the
first, for, seeing he had nothing to say but what he said then this must either
be the same or a Lie; seeing I never saw (...) nor spoke to him since. Moreover
the particle WAS, is the same with what he said before the Lords of Justiciary,
viz. That (...) was convinced. And the Ambiguous Phrase which hens^^, (the
Circumstances duly considered) denots that he had either a design to Cheat the
World by Sophestry; or at least that he was not positive in what he said. Hence
I draw the following Conclusion

If what he lays to my Charg^, be either a LIE or a MISTAKE, th^^ I Am free,
But it is some of there two. Ergo etc. The Major Proposition, is
incontraver^ible. And I prove the Minor thus; if what he said before the Lords
of Jasticiary was either a LIE or a MISTAKE And of thi^be either the same, or
as ill; Then, this is LIE or a MISTAKE* (...) he said before the Lord of
Justiciary, was either a LIE (...) a MISTAKE; And what he says, here is ei^^^
the s^^^^r ^ill. Ergo-vvhat he says (...) is either a LIE or a MISTAKE. Q. E. D.

The Connection of the Major proposition, is founded upon that Axiom qua e^dam
sa^^um tettio, san^ (...) int^r se. The first part of ^inor is grounded on the
Co^olary to the 4 proposition; and the last part of it on ch^ 9 proposition.
Now M^ thinks that I perform^^ what I promised, in proving the Calumay, not
only highty improbable (...) likewise, de facto false.

SECT IV. Containing the Conclusion.
Having constricted my self, to such narrow Limits; in R^^^ting What T. A.
really said it would be both a Foolish and Impossible ^^terprise to endeavor
to answer every frivolous Calumny of lying Fame. When one lover of Sla^^^^, may
b^^rch more Lies in an ^our; than all the World can refute in (...) Age.
Wherefore, I ^h^ll ^e (...) brief and General in this part as I can. Some say
that I was the first who Inffill'd these principles in hin^. Others asseit that
I le^t him Athiestical Books, with in numerable such frivolous stories. The
first of these he refutes in his Speech, where he Declares that since 10 or 11
years of age he was or these Principles Whereas I never saw him so much as by
the Face till he was 17. And had not the opportunity to discover his corrupt
qualities till about the end of March 1696. And as for the other objection or
any such like, I answer that if any can prove them legally against me; I am
willing, to suffer condign punishment for them. To which I add that if ever I
made Athiestical Book either my own Study, or lent them to others. If ever I
was instrumental in perverting any, from the Christian Faith If ever I
entertained a dislike to the same, or if ever I knew any that were of
Athiestical and irreligious principies, except T. A. then let the Almighty power
down upon me all the furious darts of his Fiery Indignation both Temporal and
Eternal. And would to God, that I were as certain of a Saving Faith to lay hold
upon the merits of my Savior; as I am and ever was perswa^ed, of the truth of
the Christian Reformed Religion as its holden forth in the Holy Scriptures.
From on jot of which, before I receded (if the Lord would afford me Strength
equal to the Absolute determination of my Mind.) I would willingly endure any
Misery, that can be inflicted on Body and Soul; except a Total separation from
the Glorious presence of God; which is so inseparably connected with the great
end of our Creation and Aticles of the Covenant of Grace, that non can chufe
the one and reject the other. And what God has joined let no man put Aslunder.

But it may be Objected. Is it not a strange thing, that a man should go to
Death with such a Lie in his Mouth? I Answer that it would be a stranger thing,
if a groundless Surmise upon the bare words of such a Person as he was should
be of Force to invalidat clear evidence; backed with the Execrations and
Protestations of one, who can defy the World to lay any Scandalous Enormity to
his Charge. Moreover, I could clearly evince that this is not the only Lie in
his last Speech, but seeing I love to hector no man especially the Dead; except
where Necessity impels me to it I forbear it. desiring Earnestly that
Christians would Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both
vvil bring to Light, the hidden things of Darkness, and will manifest the
Councels of the Hearts: And then shall every man have praise of God. 1 Cor. 4
and 5. Now, be Merciful to me O God for Man vvoud swallow me up, etc. Psalm,
56, v. 1. Every day they Wrest my words: All their thoughts are against me for
evil. v. 5 But in God have I put my Trust: I will not be afraid what man can
do unto me, v. 1 1. -- Thou have dellivered my Soul from death Wilt not thou
deliver my Feet from falling? that I may walk before God in the Light of the
Living.

MUNGO CRAIG.
January the 15. 1697.

