A Modest APOLOGY Occasioned by the IMPORTUNITY of the Bishop of Derrie, Who
presses for an Answer to a Query, stated by Himself, in his second Admonition:
concerning Joining in the Public Worship Established by Law.

In Answer to the Query; The pondering of some weighty Exceptions is first
Desired: And then such a Resolution is given to the Query, as the Word of GOD,
and thereby the safety of our Consciences will allow.

By a Minister of the Gospel at the Desire of some Presbyterian Dissenters.

Jer. 6. 16. And ask for the old Paths, where is the good Way, and Walk
therein, and ye shall find rest to your Souls.

GLASGOW, Printed for the Author, 1696.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THou may justly expect some account of this little Treatise, what has been
the Occasion, and for what End it is now Published: Know therefore that the
Bishop of Derry has been at pains to direct two Admonitions to the Dissenters
of his Diocese; of whom We are a part, wherein he has taken the trouble of
industrious and particular searching into our Manner of Worship. As to his
first Admonition several Replies were made, which he has never yet answered,
as to the most material Questions under Debate; though many of his Assertions
were contradicted and confuted by plain Scripture and Reason. His second
Admonition much of it, being Repetitions of the first, and pure Matters of
Fact, as how often the Presbyterians in his Diocese have celebrated the Lords
Supper, and where, and when and such little Things; as hims^ calls them
wherein the Merits of the Ca^ is nothing concerned: We shall therefore henc^
forth be little concerned with them, judgi^ the account given in Answer to his
first Adm^nition sufficient (if not more) we never havin^ subjected to his
Episcopal Inspection: and the Reasons for our not subjecting the ensuing
Di^course shall discover.

There is nothing in this last Admonition w^ shall notice at present, but the
Authors Persw^sives for our joining with them in public Wo^ship; which he
insisteth upon Pages fifth a^ sixth, it were tedious to Transcribe all, b^ what
is quoted shall be his own words Pa^ fifth. If then it be their Opinion that it
is La^full for you to Join in our public Worship, at le^ when ye cannot go to
your own Meetings, and the you had better do so than stay at Home, espec^ally
where the established Ministers are Sober^ Able, Orthodox and diligent as those
of this Dy^cess I presume generally are, I desire you to call, ^ mind, whether
your Ministers have declared the Opinion in this Point or no etc. ibid. but if
yo^ Ministers have not made any such Declaration of the Opinion in this Point,
though they know it to be la^full; Judge with your selves whether they have
disch^ged the Office of faithful Guides to you etc. Ibi^ And therefore you
ought every one of you to require ^our Ministers direct and positive Resolution
in it etc.

This is the most material Passage in his Book, and the occasion of the
following Discourse whereby the Reader will perceive how much we are concerned,
and constrained to make a Reply; otherwise our Ministers shall be under the
odious imputation of Unfaithfulness, and if we should be silent now when so
pushed to a positive Answer and Resolution many would say fugisti quia tacuisti
that we desert our Cause by Silence: and whatever be his Design who urges this
Declaration, and thereby a discovery of our Reasons for not Joining in their
public Worship: which is Suspicable considering how often he has been our
Accuser; yet therein we leave him to the Great Judge, who judges Righteously:
and shall now as he has publicly exposed, and given us the Challenge; so shall
We by the help of GOD manifest to all who shall please to consider the Reasons
convincing and obliging Us to steadiness in the Communion whereof we are
Members; Judging our manner of Worship founded on the Word of GOD, and
therefore neither Wearied nor Ashamed of it. As also our just Exceptions
against that manner of Worship urged by our Monitor for our own Vindication,
and the Satisfaction of those who may be Prepossessed, with such an
uncharitable Opinion of us; as if we had nothing to say for our selves, nor any
thing to Object but ignorant trivial Scruples. But let the impartial Reader
after perusal Judge if the Exceptions following may not rationally determine us
to an Aversation, and keeping at distance from that manner of Worship we except
against, at least these parts of it that are exceptionable.

If any shall say that Debates of this Nature are now Unseasonable. Answer 1.
It cannot be expected that any thing appearing in the defense of Dissenters,
will be at any time Seasonable to Some; so that their Season would be never:
Yet their exposing of Us is never thought out of Season; But whoever be
displeased, yet the Author of the Query of all Men has least Cause to offend;
Himself giving the Occasion for all that is here Debated. 2. If any healing of
our Breaches were appearing (which We earnestly Pray for) it could not be
Unseasonable to discover the Wounds that need healing; We think rather the
sight of these painful Wounds and Grievances should excite all to exert what
is in their Power for our Healing: it is said of some of the Grecians that when
any of their People were long and dangerously diseased, no Cure proving
effectual that such Persons, were taken to some Place where there was greatest
Concourse of People, that all who passed by might take notice of their Disease,
and in compassion do what they could for their Remedy: And what is here written
is neither intended, nor has of it self a tendency to irritate any: no
Railing, no Reviling, no satyrick Invectives, shall appear; but rather a
peaceable narrative of our VVounds and their Causes: all which might be healed
by relieving us from confessedly unnecessar Impositions which we cannot conform
to without wounding of Conscience.

3. If some Masters of Policy cannot or will not be persuaded of its
Seasonableness; yet we desire them to be so just, as to consider that it is now
extorted from us: Others have exposed us as unfaithful to one another, and our
Ministers both by Word and Write Reproached, for not giving Counsel to their
People for joining with the Paroch-Churches: and is it advisable that we
expose our selves by Silence; and so perpetuate the Imputation, and harden such
as seek occasion against us?

If any shall say that there are plenty of Books already extant, whereby our
Principles and manner of Worship, are sufficiently Asserted and Justified; and
our Practice in not Joining with the Established Church vindicated from Schis^
and all culpable Separation. Yet let the Rea^er consider that by the late
Confusion, and Co^bustion in this Country; many of these Boo^ are destroyed,
at least in this Part of the Na^on, whereby many of the People want that he^ to
stand up for their own Persuasion, which formerly they had: And of all People
we kno^ Dissenters in this Diocese, do most need suc^ help the weakest of them,
being often acco^ed with Questions more proper for studied D^vines, than poor
Countrey-People; and if the Answers of these poor People do not relish, ^^
shall have it published that the Dissenters here are a most ignorant People,
insulted over, and exposed to Contempt: Therefore we thought it necessary in
our Circumstances, because of our Love to the Truth, and to the Weakest ^^
these who adhere to it, to afford what He^^ we could; Acknowledging that this
pres^^ Undertaking might have been performed ^^ greater Advantage, by some
abler Pen (which i^ hoped will yet be done) but whatever weakness appear in this
little Tractat, shall not be imputable to many, but to some of those to whom
the Authors Admonition was Directed, and thereb^ concerned to exoner their
Conscience, by making it appear that neither trifling Scrupl^* Peevishness, nor
perverse Obstinacy; but mere ^y that our Consciences cannot be stretched to ^he
Latitude, that others take in the Worship of GOD; has procured the following
Reso^ution, to the Authors Query. If it be displeasing to him it is that which
we could not prevent but himself might have prevented it by permitting us to
Live in Peace without such Queries: For he could not but foresee, our Answer
would be conformed to our own Principles, and Practice, though we have no
Pleasure in provocking him, or any other, being desirous to live Quiet and
Peaceable in the Land giving thanks to GOD, the Author of all Good, and to his
Majesty's Clemency, under whose happy Government, we enjoy Protection; and to
whom we owe most entire Acknowledgements of Gratitude; which we are desirous to
testify on all Occasions, and at this present are confident that when many are
found Guilty of these execrable Conspiracies to take away his Precious Life,
there shall not one of our Principles be stained with Disloyalty, but all in a
cheerful readiness for his Majesty's Preservation, and Service.

There is one thing more that the Reader is desired to Notice, that
notwithstanding the Exceptions hereafter mentioned, stand in the Way of our
Communion with the Established Church: yet we doubt not but many of that
Communion are Godly Persons, and are known to be of su^ a
Christian-Conversation; that we could free partake with them in
Gospel Ordinances, p^viding we could obtain it without danger of Si^ning; nor
do we take it on us to Judge the^ for following their own Judgment: only ^
cannot see with their Eyes, nor they with ou^ but must wait until GOD reveal
it to them w^ are otherwise minded: Persuading our Sel^ that the Sober, and
Judicious of another Pers^sion, whom we Love and Honor in the LORD will not
Condemn, but rather approve of o^ Ingenuity in allowing Men to know the weig^
of these Reasons, that binds Us up from t^ Communion, which otherwise we would
Co^ for the Churches Peace.

This ingenuous Apology is neither for Ostentation nor Irritation, but a
necessary Vindication of our Practice, unto which we are pressed.
IN laying open Our Exceptions, we shall begin with that which is the Root of
all these Eclesiastick-Impositious, whereby our Consciences are Burdened, and
our Selves ^hrust out from Communion with You, in the ^ublick Worship of GOD:
Our Ministers and their Ministry is Rejected, if they Subscribe not ^o this
Article Cannon 36. viz. That the Book of Common Prayer and of Ordering of
Bishops, Priests and Deacons contains nothing in it, contrary to the lord of
GOD, and that it may Lawfully so be used, and that he Himself will use the Form
in the said Book ^rescribed, in public Prayer, and Administration ^f the
Sacraments, and none other.

Here is a plain and full Extrusion of all Mini^ers who are not for Bishops
over Presbyters (for ^he Canon mentions only such Bishops) or will ^se any
other Form in Prayer than the Service ^ook, and to this Form of Service the
People must ^lso subject, for no other Church Communion is allowed them, but
where these are Consented u^ to: But this our Consciences being Directed b^ the
Word of GOD, cannot Comply with, co^plaining of it as a most heavy Imposition.

And this Jurisdiction of Bishops over Presbyters is the Ground of our first
Exception, and the because the Office of a Bishop having Authori^ over other
Ministers of the Gospel, is not foun^ in the Scriptures, and therefore wants
Divi^ Institution; And if such a Bishops Commission ^ not found there, then We
are not obliged to su^ject to him as an Officer in the House of GOD Such
therefore as will stand on no lower Groun^ for Prelacy in the Church, than
Scriptural-Auth^rity, are obliged to make it appear; And We desire no more, but
direct us to any Scriptures wh^ this Commission is granted: if this could be
do^ ye would not only save us a Labor of proving Negative, but should also
find us as comformab^ in Point of Subjection, as any of your own Communion: but
after frequent (and according ^ our Measure) serious reading the Book of GOD*
We could never yet observe a Bishop set ov^ Presbyters: but We frequently find
that a Bisho^ and Presbyter are one office; as hereafter shall appea^

Reason 1. If Christ had instituted the Offi^ of a Prelate, or Bishop over
Presbyters, then t^ said Office would be mentioned in some of the^ Scriptures
which designedly gives an account^ all Church Officers in the Gospel Church.

But in none of these Scriptures is there any mention of a Prelate or Bishop
over Presbyters, Therefore Christ has not instituted the said Office.

For the first Proposition that if there were Institution for such an Officer,
he would be mentioned in these Scriptures; is evident because the Apostle
sets himself to show what Offices Christ had set in his Church, both
Extraordinary and Ordinary; And who dare say that the Apostle failed in the
Enumeration, being inspired by the Holy Ghost, and how can it be imagined that
so eminent a Church Officer making so great a Figure in the Church could be
omitted? was it not of great Importance for the Church of GOD in all succeeding
Generations to know if there was One appointed to have Authority over many
other Ministers, without whose placet they should neither have Power to Ordain
other Ministers, ^or Govern their Flocks? If Christ had instituted such an
Officer would he not have given some ^ntimation of Him? That other Ministers
might ^ave known it was their Duty conscientiously to Obey Him: But we have no
where any such Inti^ation from Christ or any of his Apostles, but the contrary
as shall appear.

And that a Bishop over Presbyters is invisible ^y any of these Scriptures,
where Church Officers are purposely enumerated the Reader shall have them in
ready and full view.

1 Cor. 12. 28. And GOD has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondary
Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that Miracles, then Gifts of Healin^ Helps,
Governments, Diversities of Tongues.

Romans 12. 6. Having then Gifts differing accordin^ to the Grace that is given
to us whither Prophecy let ^ Prophecy according to the proportion of Faith or
Min^stry, let us wait on our Ministry, or he that Teache^ on Teaching, or he
that Exhorts on Exhortation, ^ that Gives let him do it with Simplicity, he
that Ru^eth with Diligence, he that shows Mercy with Chee^fulness.

Ephesians. 4. 11. And he gave some Apostles, an^ some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some P^stors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints,
f^ the Work of the Ministry, for the Edifieing of the B^dy of Christ.

As for any other Scriptures alleged to favor the Episcopal Cause, they shall
be considered in their due place: But these Scriptures now mentione^ are the
places that all Church Officers, do ordinarily betake themselves unto, who are
willing t^ have their Commission and Title tried by the Word of GOD because by
them we are particula^ly instructed; Who they are whom GOD has s^ in his
Church and in what order, as first second^rily etc. now let the Reader
demonstrate a Bisho^ over Presbyters, by any of these Scriptures, and ^e shall
not want reverence; let him appear, and ^ell us plainly where he fixes his
claim for he will ^ot for Truth and Modesties sake challenge all ^hese Offices
and Gifts to be his, and some of them ^eing now out of his reach and ceased; as
Mi^acles, Gifts of Healing, and Diversities of Tongues: ^t's agreed that all
these may be laid aside from ^his Debate as Extraordinary. Some of the Offi^es
mentioned are too low for a Bishop, being the ^owest Set of Church Officers, as
Deacons under ^he Denomination of Helps giving with Simplicity and
Cheerfulness: neither will these be concerned ^n this Debate.

We shall come then to the Highest and First in ^he Roll, the Apostles being
set down first; and Bi^hops now the First and Highest in the Church: ^ere some
of them fix their Claim, as Successors ^o the Apostles; and plead it with all
earnestness, ^ut no success for lack of Arguments, and the ^eight of Arguments
against it: and that We be ^ot amused with big and ambiguous Words not
^nderstood, We crave that Justice of those who ^aintain this Apostolic
succession, to let us know that they understand by it: if it be that Prelates ^^
the Gospel Church have succeeded to the entire ^ffice of Apostles or 2d. if they
have fucceded un^o the Doctrine of the Apostles, or 3d. unto such
^ospel-Administrations, performed by the Apostles as were necessary to continue
in the Gosp^ Church? as Preaching, administration of Sacrame^ Discipline etc.
or 4th. if by Apostolic Succ^sion they understand Apostolic Institution? T^
is such as have Commission from Christ's Apostl^ to Feed his Flock.

If the first of these be affirmed that Bishops ^ver Presbyters succeed to the
Apostles entire Off^ Then,

First we have many more Apostles than e^ Christ did Institute, for all Diocesan
Bishops m^ be Apostles.

2. Then they have all immediate Commissi^ from Christ, as all the Apostles had;
For we m^ see that when one Apostle was wanting, the Det^mination who should
fill his Room, the imme^at Decision thereof was left to GOD by Lots ^ Acts 1.
When Mathias was appointed to take p^ of the Apostleship, from which Judas fell
by Tra^gression: This manner of Election our Bishops w^ not pretend.

3. If Bishops Succeed to the very Office a^ Commission of Apostles, then they
are infallible Doctrine, and may write Canonick Scriptu^ which their modesty
will not challenge.

4. If Bishops succeed the Apostles Office the shall all lose their Diocesses,
for the Apostles ^ no Diocese but the wide World, they had no li^ted Bounds but
the Bishop is restricted by L^ limited Bounds; for as Diocesan his Power
exten^eth no further then the circumscribed Diocese ^hereof he is Bishop.

Secondly, If it be said that Apostolic Successi^ is by succeeding to their
Doctrine; then all Gos^el-Ministers have the same claim, for they also reach
the same Doctrine, feeding the Flock with ^e same sincere Milk of the Word. So
that every faithful Gospel-Pastor preaching sound Do^rine neither Corrupting,
Diminishing, nor Ad^ing to the Word of GOD, may put in his Claim ^r this Kind
of Succession; And that with great^ confidence than such as make Additions of
do^rinal significative Ceremonies of their own In^ention.

For the third manner of Succession, to these Go^el-Administrations which were
to continue in the ^urch though performed by the Apostles. Consider, ^ First,
That all Gospel Ministers partake equal^ of that manner of Succession; As they
are Pa^rs entrusted by Christ with the feeding of his ^ock: Let the Maintainers
of imparity among ^ospel-Ministers show a Difference, or what Mi^sterial Acts
are reserved to some, and denied to ^hers.

2. These Gospel-Administrations, now to be ^erformed by the ordinary Pastors
of the Church, ^ke not their Original Authority from the Apo^olick Office but
from Christ's Commission, and Precepts to the Pastors of his Church, to perfo^
these Ministerial Acts: the Pastor being a disti^ Officer in the House of GOD,
depends not ^ the Apostolic Office, nor is there any need for ^ Because the
Pastor has his Commission disti^ from the Office of an Apostle; though the
matt^ of their Administrations in some things coincid^ yet that makes not the
two distinct Offices coi^cide: the Pastors Office being entire by it self, the
Gospel Charter.

Fourthly, If by Apostolic Succession be mea^ only Apostolic Institution,
that is that these a^ the Apostles Successors, whom the Apostles d^ Institute
and Appoint to be the Pastors of t^ Church; This manner of Succession we
ackno^ledge to be most firm, and therefore whosoev^ can instruct their Office
in the Church, to be Apostolic Institution have the true Right a^ Title, and
therefore shall now most willingly jo^ Issues for its Trial, knowing that
Bishops ov^ Presbyters were never instituted by the Apostl^ as shall hereafter
appear.

Object. Some Bishops can draw the line of ^piscopal Succession, from the
Apostles days un^ this day.

Answ. A line of Episcopal Succession that is the Succession of Diocesan
Bishops (for its Bisho^ of that new Cut and Model, who are concerned this
Debate) such a Line of Succession, can no M^ draw from the Apostles Times; The
Reason is ob^ious, because there were no Diocesses, and therefor no Diocesan
Bishops, long after the Apostles ^imes: For the first three Centuries the
Church was under Heathnish Persecutors incapable of a^y Diocese for a Bishop,
and therefore Eusebius. commonly calls the Bishop a Bishop of a Parish, the
Church knew not what a Diocese was before Con^tantin appeared, and then began
to follow the Mode of the Civil Government.

2. Though a Line of Succession could be drawn from the Apostles Times, that is
of Scriptural Bishops, having no greater Charge then they could personally
oversee; Yet as this makes nothing for Diocesan-Bishops, so it proves nothing
of Apostolic Succession, because a Succession from the Apostles Times, can
never prove a Succession to the Apostolic Office; the one cannot infer the
other.

Object. Some Apostles came to be Bishops of Cities, and from thence an
Episcopal Line of Succession is drawn not only from their Times, but from their
Persons.

Answ. That Apostles were Bishops of any Ci^y or Diocese is false, because they
were not limited to any certain place, as all Diocesan Bishops are, and
therefore it implies a Contradiction, that they were limited, and not limited:
But if any shall say it will make no Contradiction, to be limited in one
Respect, and unlimited in another R^spect; that is the Apostles Charge might be
lim^ted as they were Bishops, but unlimited as the^ were Apostles. Answ. This
Distinction leave^ the Difficulty untouched, and is but a begging ^ the
Question, to suppose they had any limite^ Charge as Bishops, which can never be
prove^ by Scripture, Reason, or Antiquity. For,

2. No Man had Power to restrict their Charg^ whom Christ had left free.

3. As no other Men had Power to alter or mak^ narrower Limits to the
Apostolic Charge, so neither had they Power themselves, to alter their own
Commission, by being bound as Pastors ^ Bishops of a particular Charge; For
thereby the^ should be disabled to discharge the general Commission, of
Preaching and Planting Church^ through the World.

4. This were a degrading of the Apostolic^ Office, to reduce it to the Office
of a Bishop or P^stor, and therefore ignominious to the Apostles; besides the
confounding of these two most distin^ Offices of Apostle and Pastor, by all
which it is a^ parent that a Bishop over Presbyters has no clai^ to that
Office by Succession to Apostles: and t^ maxim holds sure Apostolo in
quantum est Ap^stolus non succeditur.

All the rest of the Sacred Roll of Church-O^ficers shall be easily dispatched.
For,

Prophets who are twice enrolled next to the Apostles will sustain no Debate,
whether Prophe^ying be taken more strictly for predicting things ^o come, or
more largely for opening the Myste^ies of Religion, or expounding the
Scriptures; For in the first sense Bishops are so Modest as not ^o claim it;
Though some had that extraordina^y Gift in the Apostles times: In the second
sense ^t imports no Authority over other Ministers, and therefore can do them
no service.

The next are Evangelists, but nothing can de^cend from that Office, for the
Office of Bishops; because it is agreed on all Hands, that Evange^ists were the
Apostles Adjuvants traveling from ^lace to place on Gospel-Service, without
any fix^d residence either in Parish or Diocese, and therefor no claim is made
to that, for it would deprive them of a fixed Diocese.

As for Teachers since teaching of it self imply^th no Authority over other
Teachers, it can yield ^o Argument for Episcopal Authority, whither ^y these
Teachers be understood such Doctors of ^ivinity, as are set apart for
instructing and pre^aring others, for the Ministerial Calling, or for
^xplaining of Scriptures: neither of them can ^rove Authority over others, of
the same Office, ^d therefore is not pleaded.

As for Pastors, we acknowledge these to be the ^dinary established Ministers
of the Gospel, unto whom the Charge of Feeding the Flock is committed; and
these in Scripture are called Bisho^ or Presbyters, all of them by the
Gospel-Chart^ under one Commission for equal Authority and Power in the Church;
as hereafter GOD willing sha^ plainly appear.

As for Governments, and these who Rule: wh^ come in among the last of the
Roll, they are d^stinct Officers in the Church, being neith^ Teachers, nor
Pastors; but such as Rule as is ^vident 1 Timothy 5. 17. where they are said to ^
worthy of double Honor, specially such as L^bour in Word and Doctrine, here
are Elders t^ Rule who do not teach, and therefore Bishops ca^ not make this
Officer their Claim because a Bishop must be apt to teach, and if he only Rule,
an^ do not Teach; Some will be sure to call him Ruling-Elder, which he is not
fond of.

As for Ministering, and Exhorting; they are t^ low for a Bishops Character; and
therefore n^ pleaded.

By all this Pains taken in searching for a Bishop Superior to Presbyters, the
candide Read^ will perceive, that we do not wilfully blind for our selves, but
are willing to search the Scripture and be determined by them: but in all these
Sc^ptures where Church Officers are particularly ^ numerated, there is no such
Church Officer to ^ound as Bishop over other Ministers of the G^pel, either in
express Words, or by any true Consequence from them: and therefore we cannot
^ubject to the said office, as an Institution of Christ.

A second Reason shall be taken from the Words ^f our Savior Luke 2^. 24. And
there was also a ^trife among them, which of them should be accounted ^e
Greatest, and He said unto them the Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over
them, and they that ex^cise Authority upon them are called Benefactors; but ^e
shall not be so, but he that is Greatest among you, let ^m be as the Younger,
and he that is Chief as he that ^oth Serve.

The parallel place is Matthew. 20. 25. and by ^ese Scriptures Christ Discharges
Prelacy a^ong his Servants, or that one of them should be ^reater than another;
Therefore We cannot con^orm to it. For clearing of this that Christ has
^rohibited one of his Ministers to be Greater than ^other.

Consider first that the Apostles, though generally ^odly Men, yet by reason of
remaining Corrup^on did too much affect Pre-eminence, which ^ised Heat and
Strife among them, a Disease not ^sily c^red.

2 Christ perceiving this proud Debate rebuk^h it by showing it shall not be
with them, as with ^reat Men of this World, in their exercise of ^ordship and
Authority, for none of them shall be ^reatest or Chief.

3. It cannot be said without Violence to t^^ Text, that Christ does only
reprove the affecti^ of Greatness, though that be reproved, yet it is n^ all that
is reproved; for Superiority it self, or o^ of them to be Greater than another
is discharge Christ's Words are, it shall not be so, the Thing self is
forbidden, besides the Love of it, he she not be Greatest whither he Love it or
not; The makes it evident to be a mere perverting of t^ Text contrary to our
Saviors express Word^ when Men say that nothing is here discharged b^ the Love
of Greatness, for Christ does not say t^ Kings of the Gentiles Love to exercise
Authorit^ but it shall not be so among you, but they do e^ercise Authority and
it shall not be so among yo^

4. Nor can it be said that only Tyrannical D^mination is forbidden, by these
Scriptures beca^^ the word here is (...) which signifies la^full Authority;
and commonly taken in that se^ so Matthew. 8. 9. I am a Man under Authority, the
same word, so also it is made use of to signi^ Christ's own Power John 17. 2.
Thou have given H^ Power over all Flesh: so that the same Author^ that is
lawful among others, yet shall not be u^ped by any of his Servants, over one
another.

5. Whatever might be the unwarrantable ^pectations, of Christ's Disciples
hoping he w^ erect a Temporal Kingdom, and thereby Pl^ of Trust and Honor
might fall to their sha^ ^is Attendants; Yet their Master gave them no round to
expect such Worldly Honor, showing them that His Kingdom was not of this
World, and that they might expect to be Hated, Despised and ^ersecuted for his
Names Sake: And therefore ^he Instructions given them by these Scriptures
^oncerning Superiority, relates to the lowly ^tate they were in, and might
expect for the future ^s his Servants; And not to a State of Worldly Gran^ur
which He did not promise them, nor did they ^fterwards Possess, but as it was
grasped without ^is Commission. And this is manifestly confirm^d by our
Saviors following Words verse 27. but ^ am among you as he that serves, in
which Words ^y his own Example, as one that serves among them he rebukes
Dominion and Superiority over ^ne another; This Example immediately follow^g the
Prohibition of one of them to be Greater ^an another, is most remarkable, that
though himself had absolute Dominion over them as their LORD, yet to have this
engraven upon the hearts ^f all his Servants in his Gospel-Kingdom, that ^one
of them should usurp Authority over ano^er, he condescendeth upon this over
coming Ex^mple, of serving as a persuasive against their De^ate, who should be
Greatest.

6. This Superiority being prohibited among ^e Apostles, who were all of one
Order; The same ^uperiority is thereby forbidden all Ministers of the Gospel,
who are by Divine Institution of o^ and the same Order: And therefore
Scriptural-B^shops and Presbyters being of one and the same O^der, and under
equal Commission by Divine Ins^tution, are under the same Prohibition of
Super^ority over one another: For it were ignorant I^pudence to say, that the
Apostles might not usu^ Authority over one another, but Bishops or P^stors may
do it.

By these Scriptures then we have our gre^ Lawgivers Determination and Verdict
passed ^ that unhappy Plea of Greatness among Church Men, which should end the
Dispute, being a mo^ solid Argument against Prelacy in the Gospe^ Church, and
no reason to pass from it on that u^ just Pretense, as if nothing were
forbidden, b^ love of Greatness, the which Opinion contradic^eth the very words
of the Text.

A third Reason why we cannot approve of a Bishops Jurisdiction and Superiority
over oth^ Gospel-Pastors is, because by the Gospel-Chart^ all Gospel Ministers
have parity of Ministeria^ Power committed to them, and therefore none them
have a Right to Jurisdiction over anoth^ besides many other Scriptures, this
our Asserti^ shall be proved by Acts 20. 17, 28. by this Sc^pture these things
are clear.

First, That these who are called Presbyters Elders verse 17. are called
Overseers or Bisho^ verse 28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all
the Flock, over which the Holy Ghost has made ^ou Overseers; to feed the
Church of GOD which He has purchased with his own Blood.

It has pleased GOD to make this Truth so plain that Bishops and Presbyters
are one, that it has stopped the mouths of the greatest Gainsayers Papists and
all who are not Antiscripturists, being convinced by its undeniable Evidence;
it must ^hen be Presumption to excogitate a Difference ^etween those, whom the
Holy Ghost has ^ade one, and so great a Difference that some of them shall be
subordinate to the Jurisdiction of another, this is to be Wise above what is
written, and who should be obliged in the Matters of God ^o subject to that
Wisdom that comes not from ^bove.

2. By this Scripture it is evident, that the Com^ission given is to feed the
Flock that is to Lead, Guide and Govern the Flock, with Pastoral Power, for
without this Pastoral Authority they could ^ot Discharge the Trust committed to
them; the ^astors part being not only to take care that the ^lock have good
wholesome Food; But to keep ^em in Order, to preserve them from Straying, ^ bring
again that which was driven away, and to ^eek that which was Lost; For if the
Flock be not ^ttended, defended from Injuries, and so ordered ^ to be kept from
Straying, they are as if they had no Shepherd which we may see at length, ^zek.
34. from verse 2 d. to verse 7th. the People the are as if they had no Pastor,
if their Pastor have ^ Power to Govern them, or neglect his Office^ GOD will
require his Flock at the Pastor's han^ and yet he is not capable of giving an
account if ^ be deprived of Power to Govern them: We man see this farther
confirmed. By that which is wri^ten to the Hebrews Cap. 13. and verse 17. the
M^nisters who Watch for the Souls of the People a^ allowed Ministerial Ruling
over them, and the People obliged to submit because, these who wat^ for their
Souls must give an Account.

If it be said that none Watch for the Souls ^ the People but a Bishop, over a
vast number ^ Parishes; then these People are forced into Mis^ry it being
impossible for one Man, to Watch ^ver all their Souls.

Again if it be said that other Ministers under him Watch for the Souls of the
People, then these Ministers who Watch have by the Scripture Power to Rule, as
these who must give an Account, an^ to deprive them of that Power which Christ
ha^ committed to them, can be no less then Sacr^ledge. Will a Bishop assuming
the sole Power ^ Government to himself, say in earnest that he wi^ stand up for
all the Ministers that are under hi^ and take their Accounts off their Hands,
and Answer to GOD for them all? will he indeed ta^ such a Burden upon him? Or
if he would what Minister dares trust him with it? For if the Men ^e Ministers
of the Gospel themselves, they shall ^ever be clear before GOD by another
under^king for them because themselves were Person^lly entrusted with the
feeding, and therefore the ^overning of the Flock. For,

Thirdly, By the abovementioned Scripture we and all Gospel-Pastors equally
interressed in the Commission, no imparity of Ministerial Power, ^or any color
for it in the Text, Bishops and ^res byters being not only under one Name, but
under one and the same Commission: Who then, ^ath Authority to make some of
them subordinat ^ another Who are made equal by Divine Insti^tion? if Men would
be concluded by plain Scri^ture, this should put an End to the whole Dis^ute.

Fourthly, We are the more obliged to take this ^ext as the Revelation of GOD's
Will for the pa^ty of Gospel Ministers, that none of them ^ould have
Superiority over another, because the ^ne when these words were spoken, was an
op^rtune Season to have discovered imparity if the ^oly Ghost had allowed it:
Because first the A^stle did call these Ministers together to give ^em
Directions as Ministers of the Gospel. 2. ^e was now to take Leave of them so
as to see their ^ces no more: And it was of great Importance for the Church of
GOD, in future Ages to know if was the Will of GOD that such an Officer as a
^shop over Presbyters should be in the House ^ GOD, that they might obey him in
the LORD 3. The Apostle in the following Words give^ Warning that after his
Departure grievous Wolv^ shall enter in among them, not sparing the Flock, a^
verse 30. of their own selves shall Men arise spea^ing perverse things to draw
away Disciples after the^ Yet for all this Danger he gives no Direction set up
a Bishop over other Ministers for pres^ving the Flock, nor any Intimation, that
it w^ the Will of GOD to provide such a Remedy a^terwards; But requires the
Pastors to Watch, a^ commends them to GOD, and the Word of h^ Grace, which
was able to Build them up: when by we may see they are remitted to the word for
D^rection, in what concerns his Church, and n^ to invent without the Word a
Remedy of the^ own devising. 4. From the same Scripture ^ are also instructed,
that the instituted Pastors ^ the Church, are to feed and take heed unto all ^
Flock, over which the Holy Ghost has man them Overseers; And therefore
Gospel-Ministe^ are to have no greater Charge, than such as the may perform all
the Duties belonging to a Pasto^ to all the Flock; And if any Minister assum^
greater Charge than he can perform these Du^ unto, then it is not that Charge,
that the Holy Gh^ has committed to him.

If it be said, that the Bishop feeds the Flock ^ his Substituts, such as he
is pleased to appoint.

Answ. But quo jure? by what Right or Autho^ty can he substitute another, to do
that which he ^th assumed for his own Work, and personal Per^rmance, it was a
doubt that the learned Sir Fran^ Bacon said he could never be resolved of, how
a Man that had a Trust committed to him for his per^nal Faithfulness could
delegate that Trust to another, ^d if a Bishop say he never engaged to Feed so
^any: then it may be justly replied, he was never ^astor to so many; Why then
should he presume ^e Title and Name of their Pastor? When he ^^weth it simply
impossible for him to Teach ^d Feed them or the twentieth part of them,
ac^rding to the Duty of a Pastor.

It Is also to be observed, that as by this and man other Texts, the Ministers
of the Gospel have ^ual Pastoral Authority de jure, so we find in the ^riptures
that de facto they are placed in Possessi^ of this Ministerial-Power, and
exercise it with ^vine Approbation: For Presbyters ordain Mi^sters as 1 Timothy 4.
14. and are therein approved ^ the Apostle Timothy being charged not to ne^ct
the Gift he had thereby received. 2. A Com^nity of Presbyters exert their Power
in Church ^scipline, and are required by the Apostle so to ^ 1 Cor. 5. 4. and
5. verses. This Sentence was ^icted by many, not by one, assuming the sole
Power of Jurisdiction to himself; which is c^sonant to our Saviors Doctrine
Matthew. 18. 1^ who requires the offended Brother to tell ^ Church, not a single
Person: if Christ had committed the Power of Discipline to One, than ^
Complaint of the offended Brother should h^ been to that One; for to whom
should he Co^plain but to such as had Power to do him Justi^ and remove the
Offense? But we see Christ's ^pointment is not to make Application to One, ^ to
the Church; Therefore it is no Institution Christ that authoritative
Church Power, be lo^ed in one Person.

So also we find that Presbyters are Constitu^ Members of that famous Juridical
Synod at Je^salem Acts 15. the Apostles and Elders came to ^ther to consider
the Matter; in which Assem^ there is not one found to Overruled the Rest, ^
assuming a negative Voice; Though some pres^ had more just Authority in the
Church, than ^ now on Earth can pretend to, yet all had f^ liberty to speak
their Judgment, and all car^ by Suffrages, and that which was concluded pl^ed
the Apostles and Elders, and is published in ^ Name of the Apostles and Elders:
whereby it is parent that in the Apostles time Presbyters ^ in the actual
exercise of Church Government ^therwise the Decrees of the Synod had never ^
published in their Name. We shall not at pr^ multiply Arguments but let these
three be duly ^nsidered. 1. That the Office of a Prelate can^t be found in the
Roll of Church Officers. 2. ^rists Discharging his Ministers to be one of ^em
Greater than another. And, 3. The Di^e Institution of parity among Ministers.

Object. Timothy and Titus are called Bishops in ^ Bibles therefore Bishops are
by Divine Insti^tion.

Answ. All Gospel Pastors are Bishops accor^g to the Word of GOD, and therefore
though ^ey were Bishops (which cannot be granted) ^t the Episcopal Cause gains
nothing because ^shops above Presbyters are never found in our ^bles.

2. These Postscripts to the 2d. Epistle to Ti^thy and the Epistle to Titus are
not Canonick ^ripture, but added several Ages after the Canon Scripture was
closed, and after the Church be^n to degenerat: which is irrefragably evinced
Mr, Pryn in his Unbishoping of Timothy and ^us, and is acknowledged both by
Papists, and ^ers that the most ancient Copies have no such ^stscripts, and
therefore our Bibles have these ^stscripts still at some distance from the rest
of ^se Epistles; But the Difference is not altoge^er so observable now as
formerly, when these ^stscripts were purposely Printed in very small ^aracters,
to make the Difference discernable by all who read them, 3 Timothy is expressly
^led an Evangelist, 2 Timothy 4. 5. and therefore co^ not be a Bishop, neither in
Scripture sense a^ Pastor to a particular Flock whom he might p^sonally
oversee, nor in the Prelatical sense as a ^ocesan Bishop; because an Evangelist
was no^ ^mited to any particular bounds as has been cle^ed already; And to say
that Timothy was Bish^ of Ephesus is against reason, for Timothy was p^sent
with the Apostle Paul when he commit^ the Charge of the Flock to the Presbyters
in common: but no mention of Timothy as their Bishop^ whom the Charge had
chiefly belonged if he h^ been the only Bishop of Ephesus.

As for Titus he was employed in the like G^pel-Service from one place to
another as Tim^ was.

But it is said Tit. 15. That he was left in Cret^ ordain Elders in every City
therefore he had Epis^pal Jurisdiction.

Answ. 1. Timothy and Titus were both ex^ordinary Officers in the Church, as
appears ^ their constant Travels from place to place, the Work being to erect
Churches and plant Bish^ or Presbyters in these Churches; but not to Bishops of
them themselves, their Power be^ greater than ordinary Bishops or Pastors as is
^ served by Chrysostom on Ephesians. 4 that their Work ^ to plant Churches; and
Bishops or Elders to be their ^dinary Pastors. 2. Seeing Titus was to ordain
El^ers in every City of Crete then where was his own ^iocess? For it cannot be
supposed that he did ^rdain himself Bishop of one of these Cities. 3. ^eing he
was to Ordain Elders in the plural num^er in every City, and by the Scripture
these El^ers are Bishops then mo Bishops then one was ^ be in every City which
is contrare to the Epis^opal Constitution. 4. If it be said that Titus ^as
Archbishop or Metropolitan. Answ. This ^cketh nothing but Proof which no where
can ^e had; For the primitive Gospel Church knew ^o such thing as either a
Diocesan Bishop, Arch^ishop, or Metropolitan long after the Death of ^imothy
and Titus: there being no certain Rule ^or modeling of Diocesses until the
Reign of Con^antine the Great at which time the Church did ^ollow the Civil
Government as to Diocesses this ^ishop Stilling-fleet makes out in his Irenic
page ^76. 377. 5. There is nothing to be found in ^e Scriptures to countenance
this Assertion that ^itus was Archbishop of Crete all that can be said is, ^at
he was sent to Crete upon a piece of special ser^ice for the Church, which made
him no more Bi^op there then when he staid some time in other ^laces: Aquinas
run into the same Mistake as ^o Dalmatia, for because Titus went to Dalmatia
therefore he calls him the Bishop of Dalmatia. 6. ^f it be said that the least
that Bishops can Gain from Titus being left to Ordain Elders is that ^shops
have sole Power of Ordination seeing T^ alone ordained. Answ. This is but to
beg^ Question, for we deny that Titus was a Bish^ let that first be proved. And
2. That he orda^ed as a Bishop. And, 3. That he ordained alo^ For his ordaining
of Elders makes him no Bisho^ no more then the Apostle Paul's ordaining man him
a Bishop; they ordained as Extraordina^ Officers in the Church making way for
Bisho^ or Pastors: and though Titus was invested wi^ extraordinary Power above
any Bishop or Pasto^ yet that it self will not prove that he ordained s^
paratim without Presbyters; Because he was Ordain Elders in the same manner
that was the ^stablished Way of the Church in conjunction wi^ Presbyters as the
Apostle Paul did lay his han^ on Timothy conjunctim with the Presbytry the is
jointly with a Presbytry.

Object. 2. The Epistles to the seven Church of Asia, are directed to the
Bishops of these Chu^ches, because each of them is directed to one si^gle
Person called the Angel of the Church.

Answ. That these Epistles are directed to t^ Bishops of these Churches, in the
Scripture se^ we easily acknowledge; but then no advanta^ to the Episcopal
Cause is gained: For if these A^gels be Bishops, and Bishops the same with
Pr^byters: then ye are just where you were, not li^ ^d one step higher than a
preaching Presbyter or ^ospel-Pastor.

2. Whereas the Angel is spoken unto in the sin^lar number you have no
advantage by this either, ^r you shall find one and the same Angel spoken ^ in
the plural number: As to the Angel of the church of Smyrna Rev. 2. 10 The Devil
shall cast ^me of you into Prison the Speech is directed un^ the Angel yet the
plural number is used (...), to ^ew that it is not one single Person only that
is de^ted by the Name of Angel so also to the Angel ^f the Church of Thyatira
but unto you I say (...) ^ere the Angel is expressly spoken unto in the plu^l
number; So that any Argument from the ^ame Angel utterly fails you; For
though an ^gel be named in the singular number yet that by ^e Name Angel is
understood a collective Body ^ Ministers is evident, otherwise let any Man
under a Reason why the Angel is spoken to in the ^ural number, as mo than one:
And hereby we ^ve solid ground to think that the Angel is spo^n to in the
plural number purposly to obviat or ^rrect the Misapprehensions of any who
would ^ink that a Bishop over Presbyters is understood ^ the Word Angel.

Object. 3 But the Government of the Church ^ Bishops having Authority and
Jurisdiction over ^esbyters is so Ancient, that we cannot judge it ^ any lower
Derivation then from the Apostles, albeit we have it not by express Scripture.

Answ. 1. If you have such a Government the Church by due consequence, from any
Scriptu^ of the New Testament; We are ready to ye^ Subjection, albeit ye cannot
Prove it by expr^ Scriptures, ye shall not be so hard put to it; ^ for you only
to Affirm and Assert it Apostoli^ without any Proof cannot convince Men's
Judg^ments and satisfy their Conscience, in a matter so great Importance; Your
selves being Judge if you have Proof for it make it appear. Bish^ Laud and some
other Bishops with him, said o^ publicly, if Prelacy were not the Apostolic
G^vernment they would forth with throw away the Rotchets; But they kept them as
long as the could, and the Proof went no further: upon whi^ Mr. Pryne did
challenge them for breach of P^mise. Why do ye not stop all our Mouths,
^proving your Assertion and so satisfy a great B^dy of Protestants at Home and
Abroad. Who gi^ Reasons from Scripture contrare to your Asser^on; And to say it
must be Apostolic because its Antiquity, is little less then to say we will
ha^ it from them whither they will or not; their Doctrine and Practice refuse,
and yet it must be ^torted from them.

2. We have made it appear already that the ^postles did prescribe another Form
of Governmen^ be managed by the Ministers of the Gospel in ^ ^ty of Ministerial
Power: and how to impose upon our own Reason and Belief, that by some in^isible
Prescription they have contradicted all ^is, were hard measure; should we, or
can we ^ject what they have Recorded by Inspiration of ^e Holy Ghost, and
betake our selves to some fan^ed Tradition? Could this be a safe Way for our
^onsciences? Or could we Answer to GOD for ^? Your selves being Judges.

3. If the Antiquity of Prelacy be at last its only ^ea, and strongest Defense
Cyprian will soon An^er for us that Antiquity without Verity is but moldy
^rror, and as Sir Francis Bacon termed it, a Cipher without a Figure.

2. If this Plea should hold Good, then there ^ a Door opened for the most
Ancient Errors, ^herewith the Church was infested even in the A^ostles times,
and such as soon after endangered ^e renting of her Bowels.

3. And however Ancient Prelacy be found yet may and does suffice us that it
has no Institution ^ the Gospel Church, by Christ or his Apostles: and
therefore can claim no better than Humane Appointment for which Appointment, no
Commis^n was granted to the Church.

Object. All that is Alleged by you against E^iscopacy is but your own late
Sentiments: For ^e Ancient Fathers who understood the State of ^e Primitive
Church better than you do generally bear Testimony that Bishops have been in
all Ag^ of the Gospel Church.

Answ We are of the same mind with Aug^stin who being urged with the Authority
of ^prian answered; That what he spoke according to ^ Scriptures he would
willingly accept; but when he sp^ without them, with his good leave he would
dissent; ^ well knew that the best of sinful Men were F^lible, and no Man to
be followed further then ^ was a follower of Christ.

2. When it is said that the Fathers do general^ assert Episcopacy was in the
Church, it will n^ thence follow, that they asserted it should be the Church:
it is one thing to affirm that in the and the other place there were Bishops
over Pre^byters, but another thing to affirm there was Divine Institution for
such Prelacy there is vast diff^rence between the two: and where this is not
a^verted the Testimonies of the Fathers are b^ wrested and perverted, as if
they all approved Prelacy, because they make mention of Bishop For,

3. We shall find the choice of the Fathers ^claring that from the beginning it
was not so: a^ that the Difference between Bishop and Presb^ter, came in to the
Church by Custom, but by ^ Divine Appointment; That the Church in ^ primitive
times after the Apostles was govern^ and should be governed by the common Cou^
^f Presbyters: and therefore we are willing they ^pear and speak for
themselves, knowing they and up for us more than for you.

Palycarp Epist. ad Philip. persuades the Peo^e to Obey their Presbyters as
Christ; We are not ^ncerned in his manner of Expression if it appear
^yperbolick, this being sufficient to us that his ^xhortation is to obey
Presbyters in the Lord, but ^t Bishops over Presbyters.

Ignatius Epist. ad Trallens. requires the People subject to the Presbytry
calling it Gods Court.

Ireneus lib. 4. cap. 44. it becomes you to be O^di^nt to Presbyters who have
their succession from the ^postles.

And in his Epistle to Victor called Bishop of ^ome he has these Words. The
Presbyters of Rome whom you have succeeded: This Epistle and this ^ententence
in it is quoted by Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 23. ^hereby it is evident that all the
Bishops of Rome the second Century were but Presbyters in Ire^us his Judgment.

Tertull. Apolog. cap. 30. calls Presbyters pre^ents of the Churches
Praesident probati quique Senio^.

Theophylact. in Philip. 1. affirms that whiles the ^postles lived the Names of
Bishops and Presbyters ^ere not distinguished.

Chrysostom commenting on the same Scripture ^clareth himself to be of the same
mind.

Jerome is more plain then pleasant insisting length in the Probation of his
known Asserti^ that Bishops over Presbyters are not by Divi^ Institution for
which he quoteth many Texts, a^ Commenting on the first cap. to Titus says a
Pr^byter is the same with a Bishop, and before that Fa^ons did arise in
Religion by the instinct of the Devil ^ Churches were governed by the common
Council of Pr^byters: It Is strange that this Discourse of Jero^ escaped an
index expurgatorius confidering h^ Bellarmin and others fret when ever it is
mentio^ed, it is so plain and full against the Divine Rig^ of Prelacy. That some
of them spare not to sa^ the Good Old Father erred; But he goes on^ his
Epistle to Euagr. and says let Bishops know the it is rather by Custom then by
the Lords Appointm^ that Bishops are above Presbyters.

Ambrose on Ephesians. 4. says that Bishops were set ^bove Presbyters by a Council:
But gives no accou^ of the time and place of that Council; Howev^ that same
which he says suffices because supp^sing it were enacted by a Council, then
the pre^tion was but by Humane Authority.

August. Epist. 19. confesses that it was but by present Custom of the Church,
that Bishops were gre^er than Presbyters.

Gregor. Naz. orat. 28. wishes the utter Abol^on of Prelacy calling it a
Tyrannical Government.

Theodoret. commenting on Phil. 1. says t^ these Bishops mentioned in the Text
were Presbyters.

Oecumenius commenting on the same text de^lareth himself of the same mind.

Chrysostom commenting on Hebrews says ^at Heb. 13. 17. made always his Soul
to tremble ^hen he thought on it, and Homil. 34. page 602. fal^th a wondering if
a Bishop can be saved, any of them ^peciallie who^are greedy of so great a
Charge and Hom. ^. page 627. he calls them miserable Wretches who ^esire it,
for says he thou must give an account of all whom thou Rulest: these are the
words of Chryso^om.

Basil de Spir. Sancto says that by Ambition to overnall, all Church
Government came to nothing.

Many mo' might be added but we suppose ye ^ill think these too many speaking
at this Rate.

It should also be observed that Bishops of old, ^mmonly had no greater Charge
then they could ^ersonally oversee. So,

Eusebius. lib. 10. cap. 4. says expressly that a Bishop ^d no greater Charge then
he could take personal notice their Souls. And lib. 6. cap. 29. says that an
236. the faithful in Rome did meet together in one place choose another Bishop,
in Place of Anterus.

Cyprian lib. 2. epist. 5. When a Bishop was to Chosen, the whole Body of the
People were called to^her that he might be Elected before all their eyes, and
the suffrage of the whole Fraternity: Here are two ^ings to be Noted that the
Body of the People Elected their own Bishop, next that the People whom the
Bishop was to take Charge, could me^ together in one place, One Bishop had
common ^ but one Altar or Communion Table, so that, o^ Bishop now after the New
Model takes a grea^er Charge than would have well served twen^ yea forty in
former times.

Primat Usher in his Relig. of Irish says that P^trick Planted in Ireland 365.
Churches, and as many Bishops; and that afterward in Malachias ti^ the Bishops
were more multiplied: Let that numb^ be compared with the present number of
Bisho^ in Ireland; And then let the Reader Judge w^ has the greatest regard to
Antiquity, or who t^ Bishops are that are most capable to Discharge^
Pastoral-Duty to the Flock whether few abo^ twenty in a Nation or many
hundreds. And if ^ will not regard the account given by Mr. Clerks and others,
though convincingly demonstrat^ that many Bishops lived so near to one another
and their Sees so contiguous that their Char^ could not exceed the Bounds of an
ordinary Paris^ and that many of them were Bishops of Villag^ yet ye will take
notice of your Friend Mr. Ful^ who says that Bishops of Old were set too thick
for ^ to grow; Lydda, Jamina, and Joppa being Episcop^ Towns, and all of them
within 3 or 4 Miles of oth^ For Bishops had then their Sees in Poor and
Contempti^ Villages; And that none may think he speaks random. Sozom.
confirms the same that Villages ^ad their Bishops, lib. 7. cap. 19.

Object. But the Church upon mature Delibe^ation found it expedient to invest
some with ^ower and Authority over many others for pre^enting or healing of
Divisions and keeping all in Unity and good Order.

Answ. The most knowing and moderat of the ^piscopal Persuasion take Sanctuary
here, and ^resume no higher; alleging the Church was ^onstrained to it, for
compescing turbulent Hu^ors and obtaining peace to her self.

2. Though this be the strongest Effort, and most ^lausible Argument that the
Episcopal Cause can ^aim: Yet when pondered in the Balance of the ^anctuary
it is found light: because first Christ did ^re know all the Trials, Temptations
and Events, ^at should befall his Church, yet he saw it not fit ^ prescribe any
such Remedy who is faithful in ^l his House, the Government is upon his
Shoul^rs, and the House is his own: if any Man ac^se him for omitting so
necessary a Mean as is ^retended, for the good of his Church; let him ^onsider
how he will give an account when he is ^dged by the same Lord of his House: for
his ^re and faithfulness has fully appeared already, ^ setting so many
Officers in his House, as he ^ought necessary; And therefore if an Oecume^k
Council were assembled, more full than ever yet appeared in the Christian
World, they cou^ not jure set another Officer in the House of Go^ to Command
and bear Rule over these Office^ whom Christ has entrusted to Feed his Floc^
though Dr. Stilling fleet now Bishop once scepti^ as to any particular Form of
Church-Gover^ment has taken much pains in his Irenic: to pe^swade the World,
that it is left to Humane Pr^dence whither the Church be Governed by Bishops
over Presbyters, or by Ministers in pari^ of Power; And strenuously opposes
the Divi^ Right of Prelacy: yet since he ascended and fi^ed in that Orb
himself, tempora mutantur and nos m^tamur in illis, Presbyters are now so
contemptib^ in his Eye, that if his new Labors and Argumen^ can prevail, they
shall not so much as be tollera^ed to Labor in their Masters Vineyard.

Aureus heu fragilem confregit malleus urna^ That his Book is so answered that
many dou^ his Confidence to give it a Reply; but leaving hi^ from whom better
things were expected.

3. Consider that if Bishops be set over Presb^ters for Preservation of Unity
in the Church the some new Order must be set over these Bishops, f^ they may
fall out by the Way, as well as other B^thren, as they often do; and these who
are set ^ver them may likeways fall into Divisions, for i^ rare to see
Promotion make Men more Lowly a^ Meek; Archbishops and Metropolitans ha^ been
scandalously divided by their own Pride to ^e height of Excommunicating one
another; and when all these fail so that Unity is not obtain^d whether shall
Men go next if not to a principi^m unitatis and caput Eclesiae to whom all must
subject; And thus it was indeed that the Pope ascen^ed his Throne, and as many
have observed and ^e Groaning Church under that Tyrranny yet ^ndeth, the Remedy
proved worse than the Dis^ase: this manner of Cure to elevate some Mini^ers
above the Station that Christ had placed ^em in, and Robbing other Ministers of
their ^e Right; Could never have good Fruit, nor ^d ever Men ground to expect
GODS blessing, ^on such an unwarrantable, and audacious Pre^mption.

Object. Presbyters do voluntarly Elect and set ^ Bishops to have Authority and
Jurisdiction over themselves, and therefore though they be now ^eprived of
Jurisdiction they have no Cause to ^omplain for violenti non fit injuria, blame
themsves.

Ans. 1. If Presbyters chused and made Bishops ^er themselves (as we grant is
said to be done at ^exandria) then Presbyters had all that Power ^ Jurisdiction
at first, intrinsecally in themselves: ^r they could not give that to others
which was ^t their own: and this of it self is yielding the ^use, when it is
acknowledged that Presbyters had the Original Ministerial-Power by CHRIST
Commission.

2. It was not in the Power of Presbyters to ^lienate that Power which Christ
had conferred upon them (for id possumus quod Jure possum^ Christ having
bestowed upon them full Pasto^ Authority, by what Warrant could they give t^
away to another or any part of it? For it was g^en to be exerted by themselves
in their Person Service according to their Masters Directions; their Master had
thought fit to lodge that Po^ in the Hands of others, he would have bestow it
himself but never left it to their Option to S^ or Give away his Gifts and so
disable themsel^ for the Trust and Service he committed to the besides that it
is inaccountable Ungratitude ^ Contempt of their Master, to throw away ^
Commission, and let others Dispose of it as t^ please: And whoever have done so
we are thereby obliged to the like Practice.

3. If this be the deed of Conveyance whereby ^shops over Presbyters have
obtained a Right ^ Title to sole Jurisdiction in the Church, then t^ cannot say
they have this Right and Title f^ Christ: It Is a Gift of the Presbyters, but
not a ^ of Christ; And a very dishonest Gift Dishono^ble both to the Giver and
Receiver.

Yet there are many Reasons to persuade the inadvertent succumbing of some
Presby^ ^ve great Occasion for the rising of Prelacy pau^tim by Degrees. For
first,

Some Ministers being seated in Places of Emi^ncy in the World specially Great
Cities, in con^rmity to the Civil Government and Jurisdiction ^ these Places,
the Ministers of these Places had ^o early some Titles of Honor, not common to
^ other Ministers. 2. And if they were eminent ^r Abilities and Prudence, or of
long standing in ^e Ministry; When other Ministers and they ^d meet together
for the Affairs of the Church, ^mmonly such Men were Chosen to preside for ^e
orderly Management of their Judicatories, as ^olocutors or Moderators; Which
cannot be ^nting without Confusion: yet he who did Pre^e had no power of
Jurisdiction over the rest, it re^aining in their Power to choose another for
that ^rvice as they should see it expedient. But, 3. his sometimes falling into
the hands of ambiti^s Men made interest not only for their conuance, but for
their farther Promotion usurp^ upon other Ministers, who were more meanly
^ated, until they had wrested Power out of their ^ands, and did appropriate
all Jurisdiction to ^emselves, the other Ministers sinfully succum^ng under
this Usurpation, until there was no ^trieving of what they had Lost.

Our 2d. Exception is your Liturgy, which after ^rious Perusal we cannot
approve not that we are against a general Directory for decent Order
Gospel-Administrations, that each part of W^ship have its due place; This we
acknowledge be necessary: And therefore all the Reform^ Churches have provided
themselves with su^ Directories. But that which we cannot comp^ with is such a
Form of Divine Service or Worsh^ as is Composed by a few, and peremptorily
i^posed on others, so as that Form of Worship s^ be used, and no other. Our
Reasons are,

First no Liturgy or stinted Form of Worsh^ was either Composed, Used or
Imposed, by t^ Apostles, or any Gospel Ministers in the first ^ges of the
Church: If any Affirm there were su^ Forms it is their part to make them appear
whi^ has never yet been done but by a manifest F^gery of the Apostle James his
Liturgy which ev^ Papists (though most fond of Forms) are asha^ed of, therefore
Bellarm. de Jacobi Liturgia pa^ 146. and 150. confesses it spurious.

2d. Reason as there were no Liturgies in the ^postles times for Divine
Service, so the Chur^ wanted a fixed Liturgy for the space of 600 yea^ Dr.
Burnet in his History of the Reformation makes it appear that Liturgies were
not so mu^ as the matter of Public Consultation for ^^ years after Christ; And
that the first Liturgy t^ was Imposed, was Composed by Gregory an. 60^ Others
also more ancient Confirm the same ^ Socrat. who lived in the fifth Century
lib. 5. cap. ^1. page 698. says that generally in any place, a^ong all sorts
of Worshippers there cannot two be found, ^greeing to use the same Prayers:
Sure then there was ^o Liturgy, obliging them to agree in a Set-Form. ^amous
Bishop Usher affirms yet more, Relig. of ^e Irish cap. 4. page 31. that the
Roman Use was ^ought in to this Nation but 500 Years before his own ^me, by the
Popes Legates, Gillibertus Malachias ^d Christianus whereby as Mr. Clarkson
observes, ^at the Roman Liturgy was not admitted here before the 12th. Century,
so that imposed Litur^es are but a Novelty in the Church: And to this ^ree the
Testimonies of ancient Fathers, making manifest that the Churches public
Prayers ^ere not read out of a Book. Justin Martyr A^ol. 2. page 139. says
their Prayers, and Thanks^vings were according to their Ability: and very ^ean
Abilities would serve to read Prayers, if ^ere had been any such extant. But
Tertull. Apolog. 39. makes it yet more plain who says ^ Pray without a
Monitor, because we Pray from ^ Heart.

These Testimonies make it abundantly appear ^at the first imposed Liturgy was
no Elder but ^ntemporary with the Popes Establishment, and ^t received in this
Nation several hundreds of ^ars afterward: and that this Liturgy was first
^posed when a Pope was Imposed as an Universal Head to the Church, does
conciliate no great ^neration for that Composure: it is also notou^ known that
the Liturgy unto which we are req^red to Conform was taken out of that Roman
^turgy, and though many Things were left out our Liturgy, which were in the
Roman yet t^ Argument made use of for gaining of Papists, ^ the Communion of
the Protestant Church by Pr^clamation in the Reign of Edward the 6th. ^ that
they should hear their own Service in English wh^ formerly they heard in Latin.

3d. Reason as neither Christ nor his Apost^ did form any Liturgy for Divine
Service, so n^ther He nor any of his Apostles did ever give Commission, to
other Men for Composing such a For of Divine Service, which should oblige oth^
to Use it, whereby it is manifest that such a For of Service wants Divine
Institution: and the^fore we cannot Consent to it as any Ordinance^ GOD.

4th. Reason because Men's Composing and I^posing a Form of Worship, without
Divine In^tution or Commission, casts an injurious Im^tation upon those to
whom the Care of the Ch^ches was committed, as if the Church had not be^
sufficiently provided for the Service of GOD, ^ all that Christ's Apostles had
prescribed; But t^ Men were constrained to devise some new and b^ter Way, than
what we have by Scripture Dire^^n: this is such a Reflection as we cannot be
guil^y of, if any shall say the Composers of the Liturgy no doubt had Direction
from GOD before ^hey attempted such a Work. Answ. Let this Direction or
Appointment appear and We shall Conform to it: or if any shall say that the
Exter^als of Worship, and the manner of Church-Administrations are left to the
Discretion of Church Officers, and so they may Compose a Model of Service as
they think most expedient for the Chur^hes Good. Answ. There is great
Difference between a Model directing the external Order of that Worship, which
GOD himself has Appoin^ed; as to common Circumstances for Time and Place, and
how one part shall Succeed another, and such a Model wherein is contained
Worship ^o be offered to GOD which he has not prescrib^d, Church Officers may
safely do the first but ^ave no Power for the second: The Worship of GOD is not
such a trivial matter, but that Christ ^r his Apostles in his Name, would have
given Directions for what was necessary, will Liturgists ^ndeed claim to more
Authority and Wisdom for Gospel-Administrations than CHRIST'S Apostles, ^ho
never imposed, but left us free of such Bonds?

5th. Reason, The imposing of a Form of Divine ^ervice composed by one or a
few, derogateth ^om the esteem due to other Ministers of the Gos^el, both of
your own Persuasion and others; and is a real Reflection against your Selves:
as if in ^ Age there were Men so qualified for the Scrvi^ of GOD, no Men
assisted by the Spirit of GO^ for Gospel-Administrations, as if no Ministers
ha^ the Blessing and Benefit of Christ's being with h^ Servants to the end of
the World, no Ministe^ partaking of these Gifts, that Christ received f^ Men;
But only a few Composers of Liturgy; the all others must take both Matter, and
Form ^ Divine Service from them, and so to serve GO^ with that which cost them
nothing: and yet the Composers but Men, not so much as pretendin^ to Divine
Inspiration or any Commission from Christ, for the said Composure: by what
Arg^ment can a Minister of Christ convince his ow^ Conscience, that it is his
Masters Will to be serve^ in that manner? And if he please not his Mast^ what
Comfort can he have in the Service? An^ how can he know it will be pleasing to
him excep^ one way or other he had revealed it?

6th. Reason, The obliging of Christians ^ serve GOD by an imposed Liturgy is a
Lording ^ver the Heritage of GOD; Which is expressly fo^bidden: And that it is a
Lording over GODS H^ritage is evident because it is imposed as one of the
principal Terms of Communion with the Church, s^ that such as will not Conform
to it shall be Excl^ded the Churches Communion; this is to take Dominion over
Men's Faith and Consciences; F^ ^f a Man's Conscience will not permit him to make
that his Worship to GOD, which is only devised ^y Men: Yet he must either
Comply renitente ^onscientia against his Light, or shall be no Mem^er of the
Church.

Next it is a Lording over the Heritage of GOD, because it depriveth us of our
Christian Liberty, which we must stand fast in after Christ has made ^s free;
We are not to be entangled again in a ^oke of Bondage: But to be obliged to
serve ^OD by a Form he has no where commanded a very Bondage, depriving us of
our Liberty to ^erve our LORD, as himself has Appointed (for ^e plead for no
Lawless Liberty) only in the ^ure Matters of GOD, his Worship, and our
Con^iences we desire to be Subject to GODS own ^ppoiniments, and not to the
Ordinances and Com^andments of Men.

7th. Reason, A peremptory imposed Liturgy ^epriveth us of the Benefit of GODS
Gifts, pur^ased by Christ and bestowed by his Spirit on ^inisters, for the
Edification of his Church: and ^erefore we cannot approve of it: For by this
^nted Form whatever measure of the Spirit of ^ayer be powered out upon a
Minister Helping ^d Teaching him what to Pray, what ever en^gement of heart be
given by the Spirit of Grace ^d Supplications; Yet nothing of this must ap^ar
for the Good of the Church; Because the man's mouth is muzled up, by a
peremptory For^ which we humbly conceive is most dangerous a^ a great
Obstruction to the Churches Edificatio^

8th. Reason, Though our blessed LORD ha^ given us a Pattern of Prayer, and
therein a sum^ all we are to Pray for; Yet when the best of M^ offer to make a
Collection of the Particulars contained in that Sum, though the Pattern be
P^fect, yet their Collections are always Lame a^ Deficient: considering tbe
innumerable Nece^ties of the People of GOD: And so fails of pretended End, to
furnish People with all man^ of necessary particular Petitions to GOD: F^
hundreds of Instances may be given of necessa^ Petitions, all of them according
to the Word^ GOD, and particularly founded on the LORD Prayer; Yet no mention
of them in the Book^ Common Prayer; And therefore such Forms Men's devising do
but limite and straiten the Ch^ches Prayers, they are so far from being a He^
especially when they are so enjoined that suc^ Form shall be used and no other.

9th. Reason, The Case of Souls in this Lif^ very various; Sometimes secure and
need to ^ awakned, sometimes cast down and need to ^ Comforted; sometimes in
Doubts, by reason their Ignorance, Weakness, and Guilt; the D^pensations of GOD
toward them are also very ^rious; sometimes Humbling, and sometimes Co^forting;
And therefore the reading of Scriptures, (...) Prayers; are to be Ad^pted to
the Conditi^ of the People, so far as Ministers can be ac^inted with their
Condition, and Exigences: ^ by a stinted Form the poor People must take ^at
falls out such a day of the Year, whither ^e suitable to their present Need
or not, they ^ll have no other for that time, the Minister is ^und to read his
set Task. If the Righteous ^OD should by some sudden Judgment call his ^ople
to speedy Repentance and Mourning, yet ^he Book appoint a Feast Day of Joy at
that ve^ time, the Minister and People must do as the ^ok requires, and then
behold Joy and Gladness ^en GOD calls unto Mourning, which is an ^quity that
GOD does most severely threaten, ^. 22. 12, 13, 14, verses. So on the other
hand, ^en it pleases GOD to grant some signal Deli^ance to his Church, that
requires present so^n Thanksgivings to GOD: if the Book re^ire that to be a
time of Humiliation and Mourn^g, the Book must be obeyed, rather than the
^esent Call of GOD: but Moses the Servant of ^e LORD was of another mind, Exodus
14. 30. the LORD saved Israel that Day out of the Hands of ^e Egyptians, and in
the beginning of cap. 15. ^en sang Moses and the Children of Israel this Song
^o the LORD; not deferring it as prelimited by ^me other Work: So Ministers of
the Gospel, being the Stewards of CHRIST, are required do all to Edification,
attending the present Dut^ the People of GOD; Being also obliged to dis^bute
that Food Christ has provided for the^ due Season, that every man may have his
Por^ as his Necessity requires.

10th. Reason, That manner of Service to G^ which we cannot perform in Faith,
we can^ Comply with, but serving GOD by an impo^ stinted Form we cannot perform
in Faith, ^ therefore cannot Comply with, we cannot p^form it in Faith, because
we know of no Autho^ such a Form has from GOD, as any Ordina^ of his. And
therefore seeing we have no way be convinced that it is the Will of GOD we se^
him after that manner, no Ground, no Prece^ no Promise, for our Faith to fix
upon; We c^ not perform that Service in Faith, and so to u^ would be Sin.

As for the Book of Common Prayer, and the P^ticulars therein, which has been
so offensive the Consciences of many, we need do no more, put you in mind of a
part of these Complaints a^ Exceptions published by those who had Commi^on from
King Charles the 2d. to alter and ame^ it.

They except against the reading of the A^cryphal Books, desiring that nothing
be read^ the Church for Lessons but the Holy Scriptures ^ the Old and New
Testament. They except a^inst the Religious Observation of Saints days, as ^
they were Holy Days, having no Foundation in ^e Scriptures. They except against
that Version ^ the Scripture used throughout the Liturgy as ^ving many Defects,
whereof they give particu^r Instances: Likeways that the Liturgy is De^ctive as
to Prayer, in the confessing of Sins, Pe^tions and Thanksgivings; that the Body
of the ^ayer-book consists much in Generals and that ^e Catechism is
Defective as to many Doctrines ^f our Religion. They except also against the
^eoples uttering a great part of the Petitions in the ^etany, whereas the
Minister should be the mouth ^f the Congregation, and that the speaking of so
^any occasioneth a confused Murmur in the ^ongregation whereby what is read is
less intelli^ible, and therefore unedifying. They also ex^ept against the aerie
sign of the Cross in Baptism. As ^so that none may receive the Lords Supper who
^ares not Kneel in the Act of Receiving, which was ^ft free 1. and 2. Ed. 6.
and was not the Gesture ^e Apostles used, nor in the purest and primitive ^mes
of the Church. They except also against ^hese words of the Rub. The Body of our
Lord jesus Christ which was given for thee preserve thy ^ody and Soul unto they
everlasting Life, they desire that the Minister be not required to repeat the

words to each one in the singular number but it may suffice to speak them to
diverse jointly, ^cording to our Saviors Example, they Comp^ also that when a
Child is to be Baptized the G^ fathers and Godmothers are concerned, but
mention of the Parents in whose Right the Ch^ is Baptized, and who are fittest
both to Dedic^ it to GOD, and to Undertake to GOD, and Church for it. They also
except against the words in the Prayer after Baptism viz. [tha^ has pleased
thee to Regenerate this Infant by ^ Holy Spirit] they declare that they cannot
Faith say that every Child that is Baptized is generated by GODS Holy Spirit.
And in the l^ Rubr. before the Catechism it is said to be cert^ by GODS Word,
that Children by being Ba^tized have all things necessary to Salvation and
undoubtedly saved these words they complain of dangerous. These are a few of
the many Exce^tions mentioned in that grand Debate, and an mendation earnestly
and modestly pursued as ^ mean to prevent our separated Assemblies but t^
Pursuers for Peace, constrained to desist wi^ Grief, being disappointed of
their just Expect^tions.

Our 3d. Exception is because Kneeling at t^ Lords Table is peremptorily
imposed which W^ cannot Conform to. Because, First, CHRIST caused the
Communicants sit at ^ble, when the Lords Supper was first Celebra^d, and
therefore Christians in following Ages ^ould follow the same Example. That he
caus^ the Communicants to sit is evident, for being ^ Disciples they were
ordered by their Master ^d would not have presumed such a Posture with^t his
Direction. It Is said they sat down toge^er, and when all public
Administrations of that ^enings Service was over then at Christ's Com^nd they
arose.

And that this Example of Sitting at the Lords ^ble is obliging to following
Ages will appear if ^ consider.

First, That Christ's Example obliges us to I^ation wherein his Example is
Imitable, but his ^ample in this is Imitable, and therefore should imitated.

And that his Example of Sitting at his Table, ^ Imitable is clear there being
nothing (in ordi^ry Cases) to obstruct it but the vain Inventions Men.

2ly, We cannot alter the Posture of the first ^ommunicants without Reflection
upon his Wis^m, and Authority, who Appointed the said Po^re at first.

3ly, No Posture in Communicating can be ^eferable to that of Sitting at the
Lords Table, because the first Celebration even as to the manner must be taken
as a leading rule to after Ages (wh^ the same manner is practicable) otherwise
Ch^stians were left to use what manner they please; having no Light from GOD
and his Word, ^ every Man to follow his own Imagination: A^ thus Men have
devised such a Posture as is m^ inconsistent, with the Nature of a blessed and
m^ comfortable Feast.

4ly, There cannot in any Age after the first ^lebration, be a greater
inducement for a more verential Gesture at the Lords Table, then was ^ the
first Celebration: Christ himself being the Personally and visibly present, and
always an Obj^ adorable; Yet then this Posture of Sitting at ^ Table was
allowed, and approved by Him.

5ly, CHRIST having granted this Priviled^ Dignity and Comfort, as to sit with
Him at ^ Table; By what Authority can Men deprive Ch^stians of this Honor and
Comfort? VVhi^ Christ did condescend to confer upon his Peop^ Who dare say that
their Sitting fell out Accid^tally, being managed and ordered by Him w^ is the
Wisdom of the Father? With what Fa^ can any say that He was not concerned,
whith^ Communicants should be performing exter^ Acts of Worship in the very
time of Communic^ing or not? Can it be said His Worship is so ^tle regarded by
Him? as if it were a thing ind^ferent whither they did Sit or Kneel and Wors^
^id He not by his Doctrine severely reprehend ^l Worship not commanded? and
having a great ^egard to his Worship, would he not have com^anded this
Worshipping Posture, if it had been ^is Will that Communicants should then have
^eeled and Worship? But we see He required a ^able-gesture, as a Pledge of
Believers being set ^own with Him in his glorious Kingdom above, ^hereof He
puts them in mind at the first Ce^bration: Believers therefore are obliged
to put ^ high Value upon this Privilege of Sitting with ^im at his Table, as a
Pledge of the Honor He ^ath promised they shall partake in a better Place;
^herwise they shall prove ingrate and unworthy ^f such Favor if they neglect
their allowed Pri^ledge.

Object. But since you lay such weight on the I^itation of Christ's Example of
Sitting and causing ^e Communicants to Sit with Him at his Ta^e, why do ye not
imitate his Practice in other ^ings at the time of the first Celebration? as
Ce^brating in the Evening, choosing an upper Room ^c.

Answ. There is manifest Reason why Christ ^d his Disciples Example should be
imitated as ^ a Table Gesture, in so Solemn an Ordinance, ra^er then as to the
Circumstances of time and place ^ommon to other Actions; So that this Objecti^n
appears insipide, if it be considered that Celebrating at Noon, or Evening,
in a lower, ^ upper Room, are wholly extrinsick to the Or^nance it self, being
common to Sacred or Civil ^ctions; and not so much as affecting the exte^
manner of Celebration: but it is not so as to ^ting or Kneeling at the Lords
Table for by Sitti^ the Worthy Communicant enjoys an hono^able Privilege
allowed him by Christ: And ^ Kneeling when Partaking he engages in sta^
Worship unseasonably without a Command, ^ hereafter shall appear; So that there
is great d^ parity as to Obligation to these common Circumstances, and a due
Table Gesture: But if any ^ Contentions and still urge an equal Imitation^ Time
and Place, as well as Sitting at the LORD Table: let such remember that the
first Celeb^tion of the Lords Supper was in the Evening ^ the account of the
Passover, commanded to be ^ the Evening, the LORD seeing it fit to instit^ his
Supper immediately after the Passover: so t^ any Obligation to that Time is now
ceased: A^ for the Place, Christ has cleared us of any Ob^gation to one place
more than another but ^ quires to Worship Him in Spirit and in Truth.

2d. Reason, As our blessed LORD has gi^ us this Obligatory Example, so it is
to be co^dered that He has not Authorized any to man Change, nay not so much
as a Permission to A^ point or Impose another Gesture then Sitting^ ^s Table;
and wheresoever it is presumed, is un^rrantable Humane Invention to devise a Way
^etended more for the Honor of Christ then he ^th devised himself, as if Men
knew the way of Glory, better than himself; If our blessed Sa^our had seen a
more humble Posture at his Table ^nducive to his Glory, would he not have
pre^ibed it? Would he have engaged the first ^mmunicants to Sit down with Him?
Shall blind ^ortals, take on them to say we think a more ^mble way would
glorify Him more? If He who ^he Wisdom of the Father has seen fit to have ^e
Gospel-Ordinance, wherein the Glory of his love should shine in a more peculiar
manner, not ^ly in remembering his Death, who loved and ^ve Himself for us; But
his Condescension also ^ Converse with his People in so Friendly a man^r,
allowing them to Sit and Feed at his own Pa^e, that all things in this
Ordinance might con^r to raise their Love for the glorifying of his love; After
he has thus appointed to take Glo^ to himself, shall Man who is but of
yesterday ^t knowing the depth of his Designs, or the ^reatness of the Glory he
has, and the Pleasure ^e takes in the elevated Affections of his People, ^d
what means he sees most fit to use for that and, begin and Judge the Lords
Condescensions ^ be needless, or not so proper as some external Acts ^f
Worship devised by Men? this is too high for Man that is but Sprung of the
Earth.

3d. Reason, Together with the Example gi^ by Christ, and no allowance to
decline from We are to consider also that the Nature of the ^dinance of the
Lords Supper requires a Ta^ Gesture, Christ himself gave it at first a
Table-^sture, and so it should continue; What Evil h^ Men found in it? or
rather who dare Charge i^ Evil? When it is remembered who gave it its Or^nal; How
much safer were it for Men to be af^ of their own Inventions in the Worship of
GO^ then any thing that flows from that holy Fo^tain: If it be said that we
are so sinful that it ^ Presumption to Sit at his Table: but had not Ch^
sinful Men Sitting at his Table, before his Ey^ Sure they were not Perfect as
their Practice ^ very Night did Discover, besides their manif^ Weaknesses
appearing at other times, yet Ch^ allowed them this Honor, which they accept^
they thought it not safe for them either to jud^ or neglect his Condescensions,
and choose a m^ humble Posture: though great Reverence is ^ to the LORD, and
will be rendered to him by ^ sincere Communicants, as also external Acts ^
Worship as he requires them; Yet when ^ LORD calls to his Table, allowing
his Peo^ to Feast with Him, it is not left Arbitrary whi^ they shall Conform to
Table-Priviledge or not for that mean Objection against Sitting wh^ some make
Use of, that at the first Celebration ^ere was a leaning toward the Table, it
argues Cause unfurnished for its own Defense, where so ^ivulous a Scruple is
objected; Because all that ^e plead for is a Table Gesture according to the
^ommon Use of Nations, and it is well known that ^neeling is no Table Gesture
any where.

4th. Reason, This Religious Kneeling is per^rmed before the Sacred Signs of
Christ's Body ^d Blood, the Bread and Wine being designed^ set before the
Communicants: And therefore ^e cannot Comply with it for clearing of this.
^onsider,

First, That the Bread and Wine in the Lords ^upper after Consecration are the
true Represen^tions of Christ's Body and Blood.

2. The Fathers commonly called these Sym^ols the Images of Christ, so we find
Primat Ush^r in his Answer to the Jesuits Challenge page 74. ^he Fathers
expressly call the Sacrament an Image of ^hrists Body. So Hospin. de orig. imag.
page 245. ^he Eucharist is called by the Fathers Imago signum, ^igura
similitudo, and this he proves by Origin ^azianz. Augustine, so Dr. Brug. lauf.
of Kneel^g page 116. Sacraments are the Lords Images.

3. Consider, That where Kneeling is used at ^e Sacrament the Communicants
cannot receive ^ntill they Kneel, and thus they have not so much ^s Liberty to
follow Christ and his Disciples ^xample.

4. It Is acknowledged that this Kneeling is ^ pointed, for keeping up a due
Estimation of the Sacred Rites.

5. This Act of Adoration is performed in K^ling when the Minds, Eyes, and
Hands of the Co^municants, are fastened upon the Sacramental Sig^ so that though
the Adoration be to Christ yet i^ by these Signs or Images; For otherwise why
the Act of Adoration no sooner, no later, but ^ served until the Communicant
have these Si^ straight before him and partaking of them and t^ the Signs,
which many call Images appear to P^ticipate the Honor, conferred by this
Religion Kneeling.

Object. But it is solemnly Declared by such Kneel at the Lord's Supper, that
there is no W^ship designed, or conferred upon the Sacramen^ Signs.

Ans. It may be charitably supposed, that man Christians kneeling at the Lords
Supper, do inte^ no Worship to these Signs; And on this acco^ think their
Consciences safe: But with all d^ respect to such Persons, it may be inquired
w^ then is the Kneeling purposly before these Sig^ Which are the
Representations of Christ's B^ and Blood. And for their sakes who are
Con^entious Christians judging themselves obliged ^ that Reverential Posture of
Kneeling, that the may Worship and Adore Christ only; Hating ^ Image Worship:
Let such be pleased to Consider,

First, That in this circumstantiat Case of Wor^ip before these Signs, there is
evidently danger ^f Image Worship, and if committed the Guilt is ^reat, because
GOD has expressly forbidden to ^orship Him by any Image, or Likeness of any
^ing in Heaven or Earth.

2. We are commanded to abstain from all ap^earance of Evil, and therefore this
Religious ^neeling were much safer apart from these Sa^ed Signs, then directly
before them; Let it be ^aced rather in some other part of the Commu^on-Service,
or Administration (by such as think ^ublick Kneeling necessary) where direct
Wor^ip is required, as in Prayer, that it may be seen ^e Sacred Signs are not
interressed in the Wor^ip.

3. No Conscientious Christian has cause to fear ^ will be a Sin to forbear
Kneeling, in the time of ^artaking, having such blessed and clear Example ^r
Sitting and no Command for Kneeling at that ^stant.

4. If the Worship must needs be before these ^igns, then the Intention of the
Mind directing the ^orship to Christ, is not sufficient to vindicat the ^ction
from all Image Worship, for Intentions do ^ot alter the Nature of Actions: the
Command of ^OD is not only against bad Intentions, but the ^cts themselves as
bowing etc. And if this were sufficient to free an Action from Image-Worsh^
that the Purpose and Intention of the Worship p^ was not to Worship that Image,
then an open D^ is made for any Image Worship, providing the ^tention of the
Worshipper, be not to direct Worship to that Image; If so then a Man ne^ never
scruple what Image of God or Christ ^ made, but fall down before it, and
Worship GO^ in his Heart; If this were true, how weak sim^ Men were these, that
adventured their Lives there than fall down to Worship before any Ima^ might
they not have saved their Lives and say have no regard to the Image, but intend
to Ad^ GOD only in our Hearts; What a poor shift wo^ this appear, before the
express Command of G^ Discharging bowing down before any Image, Likeness of any
thing in Heaven or Earth.

Object. But if a Man were in a House wh^ there were many Images, might not a
Man sa^ly Worship GOD in that House, because some mages are before him.

Answ. No Man is to neglect Prayer, or Worshipping of GOD, though the walls of a
Ho^ were covered round with Pictures or Images, such Images may be all for
Civil Uses, when Religious Worship is nothing concerned; o^ others had set up
these Images for religious W^ship, yet if a Man be necessarly by Providenc^
such a Place, having no other Apartment for W^sh^p, he is not for fear of
Image Worship to ne^ect the indispensable Duty of Prayer or Wor^pping GOD, he
having no hand in Erecting these Images nor approves of them.

But First, if this same Man shall behold one of ^ese Images, with greater
Delectation than all ^e rest.

2. The Reason of his Delectation is, because at Image does most lively
represent the Ob^ct he intends to Worship this Image is to him ^ectum
significative a quo.

3. Supposing also he has the Advice or it may the Command of others to pitch
upon that I^age.

4. Whereupon he resolves to Worship before at Image the which Image is
materia circa quam.

5. And leaving all the rest, he approaches that ^age, and when he has it
purposly straight be^re him and near to it he Worshippeth.

6. In the mean time he says I purpose no Wor^ip to that Image but I Worship
GOD before it ^doro Deum sub hac Figura figuratum, the Questi^ thus stated, the
Doubt is easily resolved, and ^t the Reader judge, if that manner of Worship,
^e not forbidden expressly by the Law of GOD, ^d whatever Protestation be
against all deference ^ the Image if it be not protestatio contraria facto by
^ch a Man.

Object. When we Kneel at the Sacrament, we are then Praying to GOD, and who
can be bl^ed for Prayer?

Answ. No Christian will be against Pray^ and in a special manner Men should
pray for ^ blessing of that Holy Ordinance, that they ^ have true spiritual
Communion with CHRIST which is not only to be solemnly performed at
Consecration of the Elements, but each Com^nicant is to be frequent, and
fervent in Prayer fore they come to the Sacrament; Yet Praye^ not the proper
Work of Communicating, in very time when we partake; because the Nat^ of the
Work is to Meditate, and Feed upon Chr^ receiving him into our Hearts by Faith,
when receive the Bread and Wine, and therefore Pr^er not being the Communicants
immediate Du^ when he is eating that Bread and drinking of Cup, so neither can
Kneeling be his present Du^*

Object. But we are to Pray always?

Answ. That Praying always is not so to be ^derstood, as if we were not to
allow time for ot^ Duties, differing in their Nature from Prayer; are to
Believe, hear the Word, Praise etc. these are not prayer, so we are to partake
of Ch^ Body and Blood in the Sacrament, yet that p^ taking is not Prayer.

It should also be considered that there is g^ Difference between stated set
time for Pray^ and some speedy Ejaculations to GOD which ^ performed without
interruption to another ^ty: But to turn the Sacrament, to a stated ^ayer from
the Beginning to the End of Partak^g, goes too near the over-turning of the
very ^ture of the Sacrament; So that it might be just^ enquired at any Person
who Kneeleth all the ^e he Partaketh, whither he be Praying all that ^e or not?
If he say that he was not all that ^e Praying; Then it may be demanded why he
^s all that time on his Knees, if not about imme^at Worship as Prayer, if he
say that he was all at time in Prayer then it may be said the Man ^th been at
Prayer, rather than Communicating: because it is impossible the Man could
Communi^te aright, if he allowed no time for Meditation discerning the LORDS
Body and receiving of ^im Spiritually when he received the Bread and ^ine, but
spent all the time of Partaking in Pray^, which by its Unseasonableness
diverteth the ^oul from its immediate Duty.

The comfortless Original of Kneeling at the ^ords Supper, is also to be
remembered coming in ^ith Popish Transubstantiation: And Papists do ^et frankly
tell the World that if they did not be^eve CHRIST'S Corporal Presence in the
Sacra^ent they would allow it no VVorshipping-Po^ure.

Our 4th. Exception, Is against the Sign of Cross in Baptism, because it is
performed as Act of Worship without Divine Institution; A^ therefore cannot
approve of it as a warranta^ Administration, but Judge it vain Worship
Dis^proved of GOD.

Here are three things to be considered distin^ly, 1. That as the Sign of the
Cross is Used ^ Baptism it is Worship. 2. That it is VVors^ without any
Institution of GOD. And, 3. T^ therefore it is Unwarrantable.

For the First that its Worship is evident, ^cause by the Sign of the Cross
Persons are sole^ly Dedicated to GOD, the which Dedication is its own Nature an
Act of Worship. For, This Dedication is an actual solemn Acknowled^ment of
GODS Sovereign Dominion, Right a^ Title to the Persons so Dedicated, and
therefo^ is present Homage rendered to GOD which Worship. 2ly, This Dedication
is directed GOD, and terminats in Him and therefore is Wo^ship, for a deliberat
Solemn Devoting of Person to GOD cannot be performed without immedi^
Application presenting the Persons to GOD, whither for Blessings, or Services;
otherwise it c^ be no Dedication to Him.

There can be no Evasion for this, nor any W^ to Vindicate it from being an Act
of VVorsh^ while these who Use the Sign of the Cross, o^ and declare it to be a
Dedicating Sign.

And that the Reader may see this Dedication ^cknowledged take the Bishops own
words for it ^ his second Admonition Appendix page 25. And ^t only Our Church,
but all other Christians from the Apostles time, have for this Reason looked on
making ^e Sign of the Cross, as a very fit Instance and Decla^tion of their
Glorying in CHRIST'S Sufferings, and ^adiness to follow Him in them, which is an
effectual ^edication of our selves to his Service. This Asser^on is highly
Uncharitable, for if all Christians ^nce the Apostles time have so looked upon
the ^ign of the Cross, then it follows that they are ^t Christians who look
otherwise on it, the Con^quence cannot be avoided if this Assertion be ^ue: But
that which these words are quoted for to prove that the Sign of the Cross is
used for a ^edication of People to God, which the Canons of ^e Church of
England does also affirm Can. 30. ^he words are, so that for the very
remembrance of ^e Cross which is very Precious to all them that rightly ^elieve
in Jesus Christ and in the other respects mentio^ed, the Church of England has
retained still the Sign ^f it in Baptism, following therein the Primitive and
A^ostolical Churches, and accounting it a Lawful out^ard Ceremony, and
honorable Badge, whereby the In^ant is Dedicated to the Service of Him that
dyed upon ^e Cross, as by the words used in the Book of Common Prayer it may
appear.

No farther Notice shall be taken of these wo^ at present but that they Declare
the Sign of ^ Cross to be a Dedication of Infants to the Serv^ of CHRIST, and
this Dedication to GOD be^ confessed is sufficient to Prove it Worship;
Offerings made and given to GOD were alwa^ parts of Worship.

The second Thing is that this Worship by ^ Sign of the Cross, is without any
Divine Instit^on, which will be acknowledged by all who c^sider what Divine
Institution is, and where i^ to be found; If the Scriptures be wholly Sil^
never mentioning, never Commanding any s^ Sign to be Used, either by express
Words, o^ any true Consequence, then it can have no Div^ Institution: But no
color for it can be found^ the whole Book of GOD, therefore it want^ Divine
Institution: If Men could show any P^scription for it, we would Debate it no
more.

But seeing the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, destitute of all Authority from
GOD, either ^ Precept, or Example: We cannot but look up^ it, as mere
Will Worship, and therefore an ^warrantable Administration in the Church of G^
which we cannot Conform to. Which is the the Thing to be considered. Our
Reasons are,

First, The Law of God is Perfect unto which ^ must not add, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. It
pleases God to give ^ Perfect Rule for our Worship, as to the Object ^dorable,
and the Acts of Worship He requires pleasing to Himself, and the very Manner
of ^orship acceptable to Him; And whatsoever ^eaketh not according to this Law
we are oblig^ to Reject as having no Light in it, Isaiah 8. 20. ^d therefore
finding nothing in the Laws of ^OD for such Worship as is imposed by the Sign ^
the Cross we cannot Comply with it.

2ly, We find in the Scriptures the LORD de^aring his Indignation against all
Worship that is ^t commanded by Himself, Jer. 7. 31. And they ^ve Built the
High Places of Tophet etc. which I ^mmanded them not neither came it into my
Heart. So ^r. 19. 5. The same Guilt is charged in like man^er because the LORD
Commanded it not, nor spoke ^ nor came it into his Mind. It will be no Evasi^
for any Man to say, that the Evils mentioned ^ these Scriptures were Gross and
Abominable I^olatries, because whatever Displeasure GOD ^d against these
Execrable Inhumanities, and I^olatries; Yet it pleases Him to Declare, that
^is not Commanding should have been sufficient to ^ deter them from all such
Practices: What can ^e more plain, then that GOD makes that the ^ery Reason
why there should have been no such ^orship because He did not Command it? And
^is is written for our Instruction to make us ab^ain not only from all Worship
contrary to the lord of GOD, but that also which is besides, or without the
Word of GOD: And shows it t^ Dangerous unsound Divinity, that if Men do^ Act
or Worship contrary to the Word of GO^ therefore they are in the way of GOD and
appr^ed of Him.

3ly, That Worship without Institution is ^ lawful, is clear by that plain and
full Warn^ given by Christ himself Matthew. 15. 9 In vai^ they Worship Me
teaching for Doctrines the C^mandments of Men: Where we may see that all s^
Worship as has nothing for its Authority but ^ Commandments of Men, is Vain,
and theref^ will not be accepted of GOD: This Script^ has so much Light and
Brightness coming for from Him who is the Light of the World, and ^ so plainly
against the Inventions of Men in ^ Worship of GOD, that some having no other ^
to Defend themselves, give no other Answer ^ that this Scripture is the common
Cant of D^senters; But is that an Answer that Men dare g^ an Account of to GOD?
What a poor Shift ^ this be found when Men shall be Judged, for ^truding what
Worship they please upon the H^ Majesty of GOD.

And from this same Scripture We are yet f^ther instructed, that Vain Worship,
bears ^ Name of Worship, not that it is accepted Worsh^ but presumed, by such
as offer it: Which a^ makes Null the Evasion of these who know^ their
Religious Ceremonies have no Authority ^ the Commandments of Men; Therefore do
^ call them Worship, sometimes saying they are ^ substantial Worship, sometimes
not tmmediat ^rship, sometimes not proper Worship, as Men in ^ubt what to call
them, and afraid to give them ^wfull a Name as Worship, yet being obtruded GOD
as Worship, they bear that Denominati^

4. The Evidence of this does yet farther ap^r if we consider, that the most
ample Commis^ given to Gospel Ministers, is to Teach the ^servation of
whatsoever Christ himself has ^mmanded, Matthew. 28. 20. Teaching them to ob^e
all Things whatsoever I have commanded you, ^e Ministers are instructed to
Adhere to their ^sters Commands neither imperiously to Im^se Commands of their
own upon the Conscien^ of Christians, nor the Commands of other ^en: Their
Commission for Doctrine, Worship, ^scipline, Government, and Practice, exten^g
no further than Obedience to the Commands Christ; Which does also farther
confirm that ^s not sufficient, that what we pretend as Ser^e to Him be not
against his Commands but ^t all Christ's Worship and Service must have ^e
Authority of his own Commands: Whereby ^ manifest that no Minister has Power
to Re^re much less under Penalties to command the Performance of such Service,
and Acts of Wor^ as their Master has no where required, and w^ he urges such
Obedience he Acts with Commission, and not as the Servant of Christ;
therefore every Minister of Christ should b^ readiness to satisfy the
Consciences of the Pe^ of GOD, that what he Imposes must be Permed, because
his Master has Commanded We speak not now of common Circumstances due Decency
and Order, which are not esse^ to Worship; These are not the Debate nor sho^ be
scrupled providing there be not an over-s^ching of Decency and Order, and
thereby ^ Acts of Worship Introduced and Imposed, which Case we are not obliged
to blind obedie^ And it is very remarkable that on these Ter^ Teaching to
Observe whatsoever CHRIST ^ commanded He promises to be with his Serv^ to the
End of the World: As therefore Minis^ would expect Divine Assistance and
Countena^ they must closly Adhere unto and be Limite^ his Commission in his own
Service. Judic^ Melancthon lamented that Men understood n^ greatness of that
Sun to forge Worship without a ^mand of GOD; And who can Love GOD, an^ Honor
but lament the same? For if we D^ his being LORD of his own Worship, we g^ far
in denying Him to be our LORD and La^ver, or that He is concerned how He be
Wor^ ^d which is no better: Having declared himself ^ a special manner Jealous
as to his Worship. ^arned and Pious Augustine Epist. 119. Com^ineth bitterly not
only against the growing ^ber of Ceremonies in his time but against the ^ture
of them, that they were quasi observationes ^cramenti servilia Onera and
resecandae that they ^re observed as Sacraments, slavish Burdens, and to ^ cut
off; Yet these Ceremonies of Men's Invention ^e so pleasing to corrupt Nature,
and begun in his ^e to be so Countenanced, that he says ibid. Liberi^
improbare non audeo, I dare not more freely reprove ^m speaking as a Man
oppressed with Grief for ^e Additions made, and Corruptions in the ^orship of
GOD, and declared his Desire, that Men would content themselves with that which
the ^ipture requires in the Service of GOD.

A 2d. Reason, Why we except against the Use the Sign of the Cross, is because
it is made a^her Dedication of the same Persons already De^ated to GOD in
Baptism, and therefore casts ^ Imputation of insufficiency on the instituted
De^cation performed in Baptism; For if baptismal ^edication were not presumed
to be imperfect ^y is there another Dedication immediately ad^d to the first.

For Clearing and Vindicating this Exception ^m being a groundless Scruple let
it be conside^d: That it is Agreed on all Hands in the Sacrament of Baptism, the
Persons baptized are D^cated to GOD; This the Author acknowledg^ Appendix to
his 2d. Admonition page 16. I ^ Baptism is a Bond, and Dedicates us to GODS
Serv^

2. This being the Dedication which CHRI^ has Appointed by his own Ordinance,
is th^fore Full and Complete as to Sacramental D^cation.

3. If all that is necessary be completed ^ Christ's own Institution and
Ordinance of B^tism, as to Representation, Application, O^gation, Dedication,
and Confirmation; So ^ as concerns the Nature of a Sacrament; Then the is no
need of any adventitious Act devised ^ Men to make that more Perfect, which
Christ h^ already done by his own Ordinance: And when is Attempted, no Man can
Excuse it of argu^ Christ's own Ordinance to be Imperfect.

4. And it should be particularly observed, t^ the Dedication pretended by the
Sign of Cross, is either as to its Nature, the same De^cation performed by
Baptism already, or it is so^ new Dedication and of another Nature: If the f^
that is the same Dedication, then let a Reason given by any who can, why a
Sacramental D^cation may or can be warrantably Reiterated, ^ the Persons
Baptized are thereby declared M^bers of the Catholic visible Church, posses^
of her Privileges, and dedicated to GOD; ^ what Authority then can this
Dedication be Rei^ated? For Ministers have no Commission ^om Christ, to Perform
this Dedication Mini^erially and Sacramentally in his Namc but once, ^ more
then Persons can be twice initiated Mem^rs of the Catholic Church, except the
first be ^ade Void and Null.

If it be said that the Dedication by the Sign of ^e Cross is of another Nature
than the Dedicati^ by Baptism. Answ. 1. It Is granted we do ^t Baptize the
Persons again, and you have other ^ords when ye use the Sign of the Cross, and
you ^ant the Institution for it which ye have for Bap^sm; Yet by the Sign of
the Cross you Dedicate ^e same Persons to Christ and his Service, whom ^e
Dedicated before by Baptism to Him and his ^ervice and immediately after
Baptism, in the same ^omplex Worship. But, 2dly, Suppose your ^dditional
Dedication be of another Nature by that Authority do you add to his Work whose
^ork is perfect? Baptism being sufficient for all ^s Holy Ends by Christ's
Institution, and particu^rly obliging us to Him and his Service, does it ^ot
argue by your Practice a Deficiency in the Sa^ament? And therefore must be
helped immedi^ly by a New Dedication for which there is no ^adow of Divine
Authority.

Object. But albeit we be Dedicated to the Lord Baptism, is it not lawful, yea
necessary that we give our own selves to the Lord, and renew ^ Covenant with
Him.

Answ. No doubt but baptized Persons sho^ after Baptism, when capable give
their own sel^ to the LORD, and renew Covenant with Hi^ But this will not help
the matter, for Peoples f^ and deliberat giving up themselves to the LORD is a
far different thing, from another Man's De^cating and Giving them to the LORD;
When Person is dedicated to the LORD by Baptism i^ the Ministers Act in the
Name of CHRIST, b^ when the Man Devotes or Dedicates himself the LORD it is the
Man's own Act: The Q^stion under Debate is not what the People themselves may do
in giving themselves to the LORD and his Service or what a Parent may do in
De^cating his Child to the LORD but what Minist^ may warrantably do in the Name
of CHRIST, the Dedication of others; And this Dedicati^ can never be made in
the Name of Christ, but ^ Commission from Himself.

A 3d Reason of our excepting against the Sig^ of the Cross, is that it is made
use of for the mo^ execrable Idolatries; And being in it self but a h^mane
Invention, therefore should not be retaine^.

It Is well known how Papists Idolize this Sig^ calling it Signum salutiferum,
and in the Rom^ Breviary O crux salva presentem catervam hodie co^gregatam, and
ibid. and ut hoc lignum sit remedium s^lutare generi humano, here the Cross is
prayed un^ and put in the Room of CHRIST. And ^s Image of the Cross being made
so Abomi^le an Idol, that it is Adored and Trusted to as ^OD, and much more
frequented for help to ^serable Sinners, than Christ himself: Who can ^ve a
regard to Christ's Honor and not detest it? ^ an Engine for Dethroning of
Christ, and Ere^ng an Idol in his Place? Who can have a regard the Commands of
the Great GOD discharging Idol-Worship, and all Worship to himself by ^ages,
and not abhor it, as Rebellion, Affront^g and Out-daring, his Commands.

Consider that the Cross and its Image being made ^ Papists an Object of
Adoration, and so made ^eir Idol-god, it thereby comes to be of the ^e Nature
(as to the Point of Worship) with these ^ols of the Heathen, which GOD
commanded Destroy, Exodus 23. 24. and Chap. 34. 13. so ^o Levit. 26. 1.

It Is also to be diligently noticed that Numb. ^. 8. The LORD commanded a fiery
Serpent to be ^ up upon a Pole, in the Wilderness, that such as were ^en with
Serpents looking to it might be healed, this ^s GODS own Institution but 2
Kings 18. 4. ^hen the People came to burn Incense to it, and ^ereby made it an
Idol, Godly Hezekiah broke ^n pieces calling it Nehusthan Brass.

Now if this Brazen Serpent was to be destroyed, being at first GODS own
Institution, beca^ it came to be Idolized; How much more are the Idols to be
destroyed, that never had any Bei^ but by the Imaginations of Men; The Sign of
^ Cross had never such an honorable Original^ the Brasen-Serpent, yet being
abused to Idolat^ it was to be broken in Pieces; And why not t^ Sign of the
Cross which is no less Idolized the that Brasen-Serpent: The Remedy that GOD
a^pointed was not to Purge it from all Idolatr^ Uses, but let it self remain,
as some say of ^ Cross, we will not Idolize it but nevertheless will still
retain it: Might not the Israelites w^ better reason have said spare the
Brasen-Serpe^ GOD himself appointed it, and we will burn more Incense to it;
Nay but that Wisdom whi^ comes from above says otherwise, let it be b^ken in
Pieces that it be no more any occasion o^ ^dolatry: And so should the Sign of
the Cross served, the Honor due to GOD only, being tra^ferred to it.

That Memorable Saying of Bishop Juel R^corded by Doctor Humphrey on the Life
and Dea^ of Juel is worth notice if that evil Cross stand we f^ and other
Reformed Churches have been so co^vinced of the Danger of that ensnaring Sign ^
the Cross, that they have not only abandoned ^ Use of it in the Worship of GOD,
but lest it shou^ be a Temptation to Idolatry, have thro^ the Crosses down
every where, which were E^cted by Papists which made the Papist Bretse^s Tom.
3. lib. 3. cap. 6. Say the Popish Helve^ns are distinguished from the Reformed
by Crosses on ^eir Temples, and ibid. If the Calvinists had not hated ^e Cross
they had not thrown them down from the Tops their Turrets.

4. And this is another Reason of our Excep^g against the Sign of the Cross,
that thereby ^pists are hardened in their Idolatries, besides ^eir using of it,
as a common Charm, in most of ^eir Actions Sacred or Civil; When they observe
^y of the Reformed Churches still Retaining and ^sing that Sign, are ready to
take Comfort to ^emselves as if their own Crime were not great: ^d as it is an
occasion of hardening them in their ^ay, so it proves an Offense and Grief to
many ^earers of GOD, who dare not for fear of offen^ng GOD, Comply with it,
accounting the use ^ it in the Worship of GOD an high Encroach^ent on the
Prerogative of Our LORD and Law^ver: This is it which made a German Divine
la^ent over us, that the Cross stuck among us in the be^ining of our
Reformation, saying it proved a Crux a ^oss and Grief indeed, to many Godly
Ministers and people: And were there no other Bar in the Way ^ many, this of it
self would block up their Way ^om Conforming.

5. By the Sign of the Cross the Honor due to Christ Crucified, is transferred
from H^ and conferred upon a piece of Wood; Which ^vidently appears by
Papists directing t^ Prayers to the Cross it self, Bellarmin says t^ are three
Things signified by the Cross. 1. Lign^ 2. Imago. 3. Imago in aere efformata. ^
would think, the meaning of the first mi^ suffice to render the two following
use for it being but a stick, with what Face can a R^gious Image be made of it?
And an Image in Air appears a mere Chimera, for nondum for^ formando
evanescit in auras, but the Honor con^red on the Cross by others who are not
Pap^ appears to be founded on the Misapplicatio^ these Scriptures, where the
Cross is mentioned*

First, By the Cross is signified the Death Christ as Gal. 6. 14. so also it
signifies the ^ctrine of Christ as in the 12th. verse of the same Sometimes by
the Cross is signified the Aff^ons that the Followers of Christ shall suffer
for Names Sake as Matthew. 10. 38. it signifies also material Wood or Tree upon
which Christ suffe^ so Matthew. 27. 32. Now to apply that whi^ spoken of Christ's
Death, Doctrine etc. to piece of Wood cannot be justified: The Cro^ Christ is
mentioned with Honor, therefore piece of Wood is honorably mentioned, is
a^ced Consequence; Though all Honor be d^ Him who dyed upon the Cross, yet no
Ho^ ^ be due to the Cross it self, or its aerie Repre^tation, but rather the
contrare, as a passive In^ument of his Sufferings: The Papists specially ^
Commentators on Thom. their Angelicus Do^r say that Fundamentum Cultus Crucis
quia tetigit ^rpus Christi the Foundation of the Crosses Wor^p is because it
touched the Body of Christ, a ^ifull Foundation for such a Stucture, but such
^undation such Building: if that which touch^ Christ's Body can Found either
Worship or a^ Religious Deference, then as some Divines ob^ve why not also the
Spear that pierced that Pre^us Body, for that was nearer to it than the ^oss?
Why not the Nails that pierced his Hands ^d Feet: These also were nearer than
the Tree, ^ it imaginable that a true Lover of Christ could ^ hold that Spear
or these Nails without Indigna^n, rather then any Love or Regard to them, ^ we
say of the Cross our blessed Redeemer was ^t to Open Shame and Ignominy before
the ^orld by his Dying on a Tree, that being an ac^rsed Death, what deference
then can be due to ^at Tree, which was a passive Instrument of his ^nominy his
malicious Enemies desiring He ^ight be Crucified, because it was a painful
shame^ll Death; There being several other ways allow^ by the Roman Laws for
executing the Con^mned: And that He thus Dyed by the de^rminat Counsel of GOD,
says nothing as to the Malice of those who sought His shame, nor ^ it be said
that the Tree was sanctified by touchi^ of his blessed Body, no more than the
Spear Nails, no more than the cursed Lips of Judas, ^ the contact of Christ's
blessed Lips, when he K^sed him: And therefore We may safely conclu^ that no
Deference is due to that Tree, or its aerie ^mage.

6. This also makes our Exception against t^ Sign of the Cross appear the more
Just and R^tional, because when this Sign is used, it is sa^ to be a Token that
the Person so signed hereaft^ he shall not be ashamed, to Confess the Faith
Christ Crucified, and Manfully to Fight under ^ Banner: This we except against
because there no Ground to believe that such an Effect, as t^ Manfull Fighting,
shall attend the said Sign: Because First, The Sign it self cannot produce this
^fect, having no inherent Power or Virtue to pr^duce it; This will be
acknowledged by all P^testants though Bellarm lib 2. de Imaginibus ca^ 30.
Says that the Cross has an efficacious Power p^pria Virtute and opere
operato: but our Friends of another Persuasion, will not Join with him in thi^*

2. Since the Sign of the Cross of it self has inherent Power and Virtue to
produce this Effe^ that such as are signed by it, shall Fight manful^ etc. then
this Efficacy must be by some Promis^ GOD, to the Sign of the Cross: but no
such P^mise can be made appear in the Book of GOD, for ^OD did never either
Command the Sign of the ^ross to be used, nor promised any Blessing by it.

3. If it be said that such a Blessing is hopeful^ expected, because the Sign
of the Cross is used ^or a good End. Answ. But if there be no Ground ^or our
Hope, and no Foundation from GOD for ^uch Expectation, then the Hope is vain:
Seeing ^ cannot be expected in Faith. 2. Suppose it be ^or a good End, that the
Sign of the Cross is U^ed, yet that is not sufficient: For
Gospel-Admi^istrations, must have Gospel-Rules; And Holy Ex^ectations, must be
Founded on the Promises of GOD.

4. The signing with the Cross is said to be a To^en that the Person so signed
shall not be ashamed etc. this imports no less, then that this Token ^or Sign
is so sure, that it is signatum viz. that he shall manfully Fight, shall follow
the Sign, otherwise why is it said that this is a Token, he shall manfully
Fight as to the Event, whereas it is found by manifold Experience, that this not
being ashamed of Christ Crucified, and manfull Fighting does not always attend
the Sign of the Cross, for many such has turned Atheists and Apostats.

5. If it be said that the Sign of the Cross is only an obliging Sign, that the
Person so signed must not be ashamed of Christ crucified etc. Answ. 1. There is
great Difference between these two, he shall not be ashamed, and he should not
or ^ not be ashamed, the first engages the Futur^ of that which is betokened,
that it shall be; a^ the second is but a mere Declaration of Duty.

2. The Person baptized according to Christ's ^stitution is thereby sufficiently
obliged, as to ^ cramental Obligation already and no Man has A^thority, to
impose another Obligation, in t^ same Complex sacramental Action.

These are some of the Reasons that it is hop^ will justify our not Complying
with the Sign the Cross in Baptism, and may satisfy those of another
Persuasion that we do not indulge peevi^ Scruples against it but are overawed
with t^ Word of GOD, not daring to add to it, or off any Worship which He has
not commanded.

Our 5th. Exception is your peremptory requi^ing the Reordination of our
Ministers, otherwi^ by your Laws they shall be no Ministers amo^ you, nor to
any others so far as your Power c^ reach; And this we judge a rejecting of us
altog^ther, and a manifest Injury to the Church of GO^ for first our Ministers
of the Presbyterian Persw^sion are Elected, and Ordained according to t^ Rules
of Scripture, the People Electing and a Presb^try Ordaining: It were good if
you were able ^ say as much for your selves.

2. As our Ministers Ordination is Scriptura^ it is the same Ordination
approved and practis^, by the Reformed Churches Abroad allowing ^ Bishops
Superior to Presbyters, as appears ^ainly by their Confessions of Faith, of
which ^u may now take a taste.

The French Confession Art. 30.

We Believe that the True Church ought to be Gover^d, by that Regiment or
Discipline, which Our Lord ^sus Christ has Established, viz. That there be in
it ^astors, Elders aend Deacons, We Believe that all true ^astors in whatsoever
Place they be placed have the ^me and equal Authority among themselves given
un^ them under Jesus Christ the only Head.

The Confession of Belgia Art. 31.

In whatsoever Place of the World the Ministers of ^e Word of GOD do keep, they
have all of them the ^me and equal Power and Authority, being all of ^em
equally the Ministers of Christ the only univer^l Head and Bishop of the Church.

The latter Confession of Helvetia.

The Power that is given to the Ministers of the church, is the same and alike
in all, in the beginning ^e Bishops or Elders did with a common Consent and
^abour Govern the Church, no Man lifted up him^lf above another.

These and the like Confessions, of other Reformed Churches are the public
Standard a^ Authentic Testimony of their Judgment A^ therefore the private
Sentiments of a few late F^reign Divines, writing in Favor of another
G^vernment of the Church, whether by Mis-inf^mation, or declining from their
own profess^ Principles, are not to be valued; Though so^ are now at great
Pains to scrape together, if not procure Epistles from Foreigners approving
Episcopal Government, and so to impose on t^ credulous, a belief that the
Churches Abroad a^ of the same Mind; But the public Records these Churches are
a permanent Testimony again them so that it is evident the Government of the
Churches being by Ministers in parity of pow^ there can be no Episcopal
ordination among the^*

3. If Ordination performed by Ministers in p^rity of Power be not valide, but
Null and Voi^ for the want of Prelacy, then their Ministeri^ Administrations
are also null and void, as perfor^ed by non habentibus Potestatem, and if so
then the great Body of Protestants have neither lawf^ Pastors to Feed them, nor
due Administration Sacraments, nor are so much as professed Chris^ans, wanting
Baptism the public Badge of Ch^stianity; For if Ministers be not lawfully
Auth^rized and Ordained, they cannot warrantably Ba^tize in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Ho^ Ghost: (it being a Profanation of that Ordinan^ f^r any
others to Administer it) Let us then make Supposition that a baptized Member of
the Re^rmed Churches Abroad, should seriously en^uire at any of you, whether he
were Lawfully ^aptized or not (for you give him Occasion to ^oubt whether such
a Minister had Authority to ^aptize him) what would be your Answer, if you ^y
he was not lawfully baptized, because the Mi^ister wanted Episcopal-Ordination:
then you ^ake your selves Schismatics of the highest ^orm, Unchurching so many
True Churches of christ: And if you say he was lawfully Baptized, ^en the
Minister who baptized him was lawfully ^rdained, and if he was lawfully
Ordained by Mi^isters in parity of Power Abroad, why then are ^ot Ministers
lawfully Ordained at Home being Ordained in the same manner, without Episcopal
Ordination; And if lawfully Ordained why is Re^rdination required: If you will
please patiently to ^eflect on your own Way as to the Point of Re^rdination it
will be hard to make one part of it ^onsist with another, for if ye own the
Gospel-Ad^inistrations of Ministers Ordained without a Bishop, you are thereby
engaged to own their Or^ination as valide: And that you do acquiesce in their
Gospel Administrations as valid is manifest, for instance, if one baptized by a
Presbyter who ^ever had Episcopal-Ordination, shall come to ^e a Member of your
Communion you require no Re-baptising, and if ye have other Pre-requi^ for
Confirmation, ye will confirm and admit ^ to the Lords Supper, and if afterward
he s^ripen farther, and be qualified for Church-^ders, you will make a Minister
of him this a^ many other Instances, are sufficient to Prove y^ convinced and
satisfied that the Gospel-Admi^strations of such Ministers are Valide, before
GO^ and Man: Let the Reader then Judge how congruous it is for you to require
their Re-or^nation, after upon the matter you have ackno^ledged the validity of
their Ordination already.

4. We humbly offer it to Consideration, t^ a Bishop over Presbyters not being
by Divine stitution, has no greater Power in Ordinati^ than any other
Gospel-Minister, because all t^ Power he has by Commission is as a Presbyter,
Scriptural Bishop, and as such, all such, have qual Ministerial Power granted
by the Gosp^ Charter, as has been abundantly evinced alr^dy, and therefore
Ordination is as valide with a Bishop, as with him, if a Presbytry Ordai^
Which is the Scripture Pattern: And many Inst^ces might be given of the
Ordination of Mi^sters without a Bishop. Gelas. in act. Council Nic^ Asserteth
that Presbyters Ordain though the Bisho^ not present and Ambrose on the Ephesians.
says the sa^ and your own Bishop Stilling fleet in his Iren. p^ 380. 381.
affords you plenty of such Instan^ where Ordination of Ministers, was
performed without a Bishop: And though the Kingdom of ^otland did early receive
the Christian Faith yet ^e find by Johanes Major de gestis Scot. lib. 2. ^p. 2.
That there was no Episcopal Ordination in that ^urch before An. 430. and that
they were instructed ^e Episcopis. So Fordon Scot. Chron. lib. 3. cap. 8. ^nte
Palladij adventum habebant Scoti fidei Doctores, Sacramentorum Ministratores,
Presbyteros solum^odo, vel Monachos ritum sequentes Eclesiae primitivae ^eir
Teachers, and such as administered the Sacra^ents were only Presbyters or Monks,
following ^e Custom of the primitive Church.

Having now discovered some of the strongest ^ross-bars that are laid in our
Way obstructing ^r Communion in Worship, with the established church: We shall
come a little nearer the propo^d Query, being required to give it a positive
^esolution: And as hitherto so GOD willing in that remains, nothing shall be
said in Heat or ^itterness, but with that Temper and Modera^on, which becomes
Christians sensible of the ^o, by our continued Rent and Divisions: only ^ the
Matters of GOD, it is not in our Power to ^me and go at pleasure; But that
nothing may ^e wanting on our part for convincing, and if ^ossible satisfying
all concerned: We shall ad^yn these Considerations following. First, Concerning
fixed Communion with the Parish Ch^ches. Secondly, Concerning occasional
Comm^nion. And Lastly, When these of our Perswa^on want Ministers of their own.

For the First, We humbly Assert that in t^ Communion whereof we are Members
our Mi^sters are Elected, and Ordained according to Sc^pture-Patern; We have
the Word and Sac^ments administered in their native Simplicity, a^ Purity
according to the Rule of the Gospel: A^ therefore have no Reason to Desert our
own, a^ Join in another Communion wherein so man Administrations are
exceptionable as has be^ already instructed; And be not offended if ^ Assert
farther the Way of our Worship to be n^ only more agreeable to the Scripture,
but also bear a greater Semblance, to the primitive Chur^ in Her purest Ages,
though Antiquity be oft^ pretended as the strength of your Cause: It w^ the
Advice of a Great Man of your own Perswa^on, that you should not go too far
back, lest you be for pecking toward the Scots Presbytery.

2. Seeing GOD in his great Mercy, has b^stowed on us his Ministers, and
Ordinances in p^rity, without the mixture of humane Inventio^ and has by his
good Hand upon us ever since t^ Reformation, kept us in the Possession of the
his great Benefits (though not always alike ^berty for public Administrations)
we should ^ ^e cannot now resile from that degree of Refor^ation, which GOD
has mercifully brought us unto without sinful Defection on our Part, but
^ratefully retain what we have attained unto, not ^aring to take the Guilt upon
us of deserting pure Ordinances and Join with others, unless you can ^onvince
us that our Exceptions are Groundless, ^r give sufficient Reason for such
Conviction, which We are always ready to Hear. But bare ^aying they are
Groundless, cannot convince us: ^ it be said that neither your Church-Communi^n
nor ours is fully Perfect, it shall be readily gran^ed, yet we are commanded to
hold fast that which ^ Good, and to stand fast in the Liberty where^ith Christ
has make us free, and not be in^ngled again with the Yoke of Bondage.

3. If there were nothing in Difference between ^e two Communions, but things
Indifferent which ^ight be done, or not done without Sin, then we Confess there
were no Cause to keep up separate ^ssemblies, but one should be made of both:
But ^ is not a Matter of indifferency what Government of the Church, a
Christian is obliged to own, and subject to by the Laws of Christ, nor can it
^e a Matter indifferent, what Worship a Man ren^reth to GOD, whether commanded
or not: ^any Ignorant People are deluded by telling them ^here is nothing
between you and us, but a few ^armless indifferent Ceremonies, that no man
should make a Scruple of; And thereby impressing the with an uncharitable
Opinion of Dissenters, ^ Men straining at Gnats: But are not so just as ^ tell
them that Dissenters neither think, nor o^ them Indifferent, but Sinful and
Prove them ^ be so, being obtruded on GOD as Worship, wit^out His Command.

4. There is no just Cause to Censure our ^ Joining in public Worship and
Communion w^ you; For ye have cast us out of your Communi^ by the Canons of the
Church you Adhere to, ^ appears by Can. 10th. and Can. 11th. when it is said
such as maintain other Meetings, then ^ allowed by the Laws of the Land, and
call themselv^ true Churches are to be Excommunicated but so it ^ that we
freely Confess frequent Meetings, not a^proved by the Laws of Men, though in no
Contempt of the Laws, but judged our Selves bou^ rather to Obey GOD than Men,
and to hold ^ public Worship to GOD for his Glory, and o^ own Edification; So
far as we were not imped^ by our Persecuters: And for our being true Chu^ches,
we do also Assert it, being Members of t^ true Catholic Church, adhering to
Christ t^ Head, his Word, and Ordinances; And as ^ are particular Churches, of
Pastors and Peop^ assembling together for the Worship of GO^ are integrating
parts of the whole, and Canon ^^ we are actually Rejected, because it is said
such ^ affirm the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of Engl. ^ay not with good
Conscience be used and subscribed un^ are Excommunicated ipso facto, this is
hard mea^re, for hereby we are Excommunicated before ^e be heard, and without
any Reason to convince ^s that it is a wicked Error, to Deny the Use or
^ubscription to these Rites and Ceremonies: But ^hus we stand Excommunicated
and shall not accor^ing to the Canon be restored, until we Repent Publicly,
and Revoke such wicked Errors; Though we cannot be convinced that it is an
Er^our, yet we shall not be restored, except we come ^ as Penitentiares, which
is no great Encou^agement that suffering Penance must be the first ^tep of our
Conformity, if you keep by your ^ules: And how come ye to Invite, or Quarrel ^s
for not Joining in your Communion seeing you ^nnot receive us before we
publicly Repent? and we in the mean while declare our selves not ^uilty, so
that we can neither Repent Privately, ^or Publicly, for denying the Use, or
Subscrip^ion to the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church.

5. It Is a great Discouragement to be of your Communion, that your Ministers
enter not their Charge by the Election and Call of the People, being their
Privilege, by Scripture-Patern to choose Church Officers as Acts 6. The which
Privilege ^as allowed and continued for several Centuries ^n the Primitive
Times, Cyprian presses it with great Vigor, and as we heard from him alread^
that a Bishop or Pastor, was to be Elected, in t^ sight of the People, and by
the Suffrages of t^ whole Fraternity: It Is thought unreasonable t^^ a Man
should be constrained to trust the Health ^ his Body, to a Physician of whom he
has no kno^ledge, whether he be either Skillful or Faithfu^ when he may have
others, of whose Judgment an^ Fidelity he approves; How much less should M^ be
forced to trust the Charge of their Souls, ^ Men whom they know not, approve
not, nor ev^ consented unto or desired to be their Minister^ Yet they must take
him who is Appointed whither they will or not, or want if it were to the^ Lives
end, they shall have no Liberty to Elect another.

If any Object that People may err in their ^lection: It Is soon answered that
so may one M^erre in his peremptory Determinations, as well Hundreds or
Thousands many of whom may b^ judicious Christians Rationally desiring, so^
Knowledge of a Ministers Gifts, and godly Co^versation, before they receive him
as their Pasto^ 2. The possibility of their erring in Election, cannot deprive
them of their Privilege. 3. If the should err yet their Electing makes not
t^ Man their Minister, until he be Ordained, a^ if the People have erred, then
the Ministers m^ forbear Ordination, until a qualified Person ^ Chosen; And so
both Ministers and People pre^rve their due Rights: And where this is not
^bserved, it commonly occasioneth an unprofi^ble Ministry, and Comfortless both
to Minister and People.

6. We cannot be of that Communion where ^ur Confession of Faith, and
Catechisms, are publick^ on all Occasions ridiculed, and exposed to Con^mpt; Is
it to be imagined that your selves would ^atiently sit and hear, the most
important Articles ^f your Religion, openly vilified: And if ye could ^ot bear
it your selves, why should ye expect it ^f us? Who have Cause to Praise GOD,
for so Orthodox a summary of the Christian Religion, ^s is contained in these
Books: Is it reasonable to ^hink that by our Presence and Silence, we should
^ppear to approve the condemning the public ^tandard of our Religion? Your
selves being ^udges.

7. We are so persuaded of tbe soundness of the Doctrine, contained in our
Confession of Faith, and Catechisms Larger and Shorter, that where^oever these
are contradicted, we have just Cause ^o suspect the hearing of unsound
Doctrine, and are ^equired by the Word of GOD not to hear the In^truction that
causes to err from the words of Know^edge: We know that the Doctrinal
Articles of the Church of Engl. are Sound and we Challenge a^y Man that dare
say, we ever speak of them but with a due regard: And it were much to be ^sired
that all who make Profession of these A^cles would faithfully Adhere to them in
their Doctrine.

But in the next Place some Allege, that thou^ we be not free to Join as fixed
Members of t^ Established Church, nor could we be received such without
Subjection to Episcopal Government, their Discipline, and Ceremonies; Y^ why
should we be so shy as not to hear their Mi^sters at any time we being all of
one Faith

That the Reader may have Satisfaction.

Consider First that we are not as Scepticks, w^ have either their Religion, or
manner of Worsh^ to seek, as not knowing what Church-Commu^on to choose: For we
are both in Judgment, a^ Practice established already, what manner of Wo^ship
we should Adhere to; And therefore need ^ expose our selves as unfixed: Some of
your sel^ have reproved severely, these who are of itch^ Ears, and the Rebuke
is directed to us of this Di^cess: We shall advert to what he has said, a^
beware of that Evil, hoping that while we are c^tent with hearing of our own,
we shall not be cha^ed with that Guilt of itching for others.

2. We desire also it may be remembered, t^ some of yours, particularly Dr.
Stilling fleet n^ Bishop, has Published his Reflections aga^ those of our
Communion, who at sometimes ^ ^ hear, and Join in your Worship; Because they
^ntinue not making this the Argument, that if we ^ink it Lawful at sometimes,
why not at other ^mes, and that Constant Communion is due where ^ccasional
Communion is allowed: But another ^f a great Character, in the Defense of his
Answer, ^o the Case of Protestant Dissenters stated and ar^ed, though under the
covert of another Name; ^ath raised the Censure to such a pitch, that they
^ppear to be Men of flexible and profligat Conscien^es who at sometimes, Join
in Worship with the ^stablished Church, not Resolving to Continue: ^ow then can
you advise us to Occasional Com^union? If it be not for this Reason, that you
^ay take Occasion to Reproach us, as Men of no ^rinciples who will turn and
return with the Tide ^f Worldly Interest: But belike you may have the ^ss
Occasion for this Imputation hereafter, this ^eing the best Use ye make of it:
Can any Man ^f sense judge it a rational Method for drawing us ^o your
Communion at any time, to tell us, it must ^e always, otherwise we are but Men
of a profligat Conscience? It would hereby appear that you desire none of us to
come near you, and discharge us to Join in your Worship, as we would not be
Stigmatized the next day for profligat Persons.

3. Whereas it is said we are of one Faith, it is well this is acknowledged, and
long may it be so: But some Observe that this is rarely Confessed, except when
you mind to improve it for an Imp^ta^ion, that being of one Faith, we are
thereby o^liged to Conformity; and wilfully Obstinat in ^fusing it: As if our
being of one Faith, engag^ us to any manner of Worship you require Commanded of
GOD or not: But it may be inferr^ with greater Reason, since we are of the sa^
Faith, therefore you should make the Door P^tent, and admit us freely, and not
to cast the stu^bling Blocks of unprofitable Ceremonies in o^ Way: Which your
Selves Know and Confess m^ be laid aside without Sin: But such as we cann^
Comply with without Sin, yet you will not pa^ with one of these useless
Ceremonies, if we shou^ never come nearer you.

But in the last Place that which is urged as mo^ plausible (when it appears we
cannot be fix^ Members of your Communion* and are not ple^ed, but rather angry
at Occasional Communion that at least when People want Ministers of the own, as
many of them do often want, why do n^ they then go to the Parish Church; why do
n^ your Ministers positively declare their Opinion*

For Answer to this, Consider,

First, That it is the Affliction of many Feare^ of GOD, to want the Benefit of
public Gospe^ Ordinances every Lords Day, we say it is the^ Affliction, but
cannot so easily grant that it is the Sin, when their circumstantiat Case is
such, the ^t sometimes they must either want, or Wound their Conscience, by
Joining in Acts of Worship, which they cannot find to be approved of GOD; They
dare not act as joint Worshippers, in these ^ery Acts, lest they not only
partake of other Men's Sins, but be active in sinning themselves: Such as are in
this Case are rather to be pitied than ^ensured. Bishop Stilling fleet has
these remark^ble words in his Irenic. page 119. 120. Let Men ^urn, and wind
themselves which Way they will, by ^^e very same Arguments, that any will Prove
Sepa^ation from the Church of Rome lawful, because She ^quired unlawful
Things, as Conditions of Her Com^union; It will be proved Lawful, not to
Conform ^o any suspected, or unlawful Practice, required by my
Church-Governour, upon the same Terms: If the ^^ing so required be after
Serious and Sober Enquiry ^dged Unwarrantable by a Man's own Conscience. Grant
but this Liberty allowed by this Learned ^ishop to forbear any Suspected; or
Unlawful ^ractice, though required by a Church-Gover^our; And then you will be
more sparing in Condemning the Practice of sober Christians, whose great Care
it is to have their Conscience convin^ed and satisfied before they practice
that which Church Governors require, when it is but Sus^ected to be Unlawful:
For while they are under ^his Suspicion, they cannot act in Faith but
doubt^ngly, and so Defile their Conscience: And their Conscience shall be much
more Defiled, if t^ Practice that which is not only suspected, but ^stinctly
known to be Unlawful, because desti^ of the Command of GOD. Memorable is t^
Saying of the Learned and Compassionate Bish^ of Hereford, I will in the
Worship of GOD do ^^ that which his Will tells me is acceptable to his Divi^
Goodness.

2. Consider that this Loss by the want of Pu^lick Ordinances on the LORDS Day,
or wh^ ever Guilt is in it, is Imputable to Those who D^bar the People by
sinful Impositions; For We c^tainly know that many of them Languish, Thir^ing
for Appearing before GOD in the Assembli^ of his People, to see His Power, and
Glory they have seen Him in his Sanctuary, and wh^ some of them have gone to
the Parish Church^ thinking they could not Live in Comfort witho^ the Public
Worship of GOD: Yet have retur^ed with Disquiet of Conscience, Resolving to ^
so no more, but rather to Change the Place ^ their Abode, for Gospel-Purity.
And if a^ should Object that many Presbyterians of t^ Country, have Removed to
other Places of t^ Nation, where there were no Ministers of the own Persuasion:
Yet it is apparent to the Worl^ that as they Removed in Hope to have Ministe^
where they were going, so they have been at i^ defatigable Pains, to Procure
that Benefit^ where unto GOD has granted Success.

3. We Deny that it is the Duty of Ministers, ^ persuade People to Partake in
such Worship, ^ is contrary to their Consciences: Let every Man be persuaded in
his own Mind, is the Apo^les Rule; And there is nothing wherein this is ^ore
Necessary, then that a Man be persuaded ^e Worship he offers, is Approved of
GOD; ^est he be found offering strange Fire unto the LORD: If their Scruples
were Ignorant, and ^nreasonable, then there were Reason for Advis^g them not to
Indulge such Scruples: But when ^ey give Reasons for their Forbearing, and such
^easons as their Ministers know to be solid, can ^y serious Christian think it
Advisable, that Mi^isters should persuade such Christians to act con^are to
their Light, and take a condemning Consci^ce to the Parish Church? Would you be
so dealt ^ith your Selves, if you were in their Circum^ances? And if you still
say that all these Scruples ^re but vain and frivulous Imaginations: Be plea^ed
to take Notice of the Words of Doctor Tailor ^ate Bishop of Down and Connar in
his Cases of Conscience page 325. A Symbolical Rite of humane Invention, to
signify, what it does not Effect, and then ^ntroduced into the solemn Service
of God is so like those ^ain Imaginations and Representations forbidden in the
second Commandment; Thaet the very Suspicion is more against Edification, then
their Use can pretend to. These are his Words, whom some called the Glory the
Church of Ireland, declaring that Rites of H^mane Invention should not be
introduced into ^ solemn Service of GOD: Why then are our People blamed for
being of his Mind? And absta^ing from such Rites of Humane Invention in ^
Service of GOD and that in regard to the sec^ Command, as the Learned Bishop
suggesteth.

4. Few of our People in this Country, are very far (as some by mistake give
Account) fr^ Ministers, and planted Congregations of the own Persuasion; But
either on one hand or a^ther, they are within a few Miles of them, wi^ whom
they can freely Partake in the Publi^ Worship of GOD, and do take Pains to
Trav^ for it.

5. Such Congregations as yet want Ministe^ of their own Principles, are
frequently Visited ^ LORDS Days by Neighboring Ministers; ^ that such as
cannot go far Abroad are then su^plyed: This our Ministers make Conscience o^
as they are Able, and by the good Hand of ^^ GOD upon Us, many of our
Congregations a^ now served with Ministers of their own, and i^ hoped these Few
who yet want, will soon be pr^vided, GOD continuing his Mercies with Us.

6. If it were so as some by Mis-informati^ give the Account, that so great
Numbers of People, have no Public Worship on the LORD Days: Then it meriteth
Consideration, how fix^ these are in their Principles, and what a vain ^tempt
it is, to think of forcing all these Christi^s, into a Conformity against their
Principles, ^o suffered Persecution many Years for their ^rswasion, and by the
Grace of GOD, yet Re^lved to Suffer more, if He please to make it ^eir Lot; And
rather then relinquish it wait pa^ntly, until GOD provide for them. If any ^y
that by this means a Schism is still continued the ^ Church, we shall Answer in
the Words of ^he whom no man will suspect a Friend to Dissen^rs Archbishop
Laud against Fisher as quoted by ^octor Stilling fleet in his Rational Account
page 4. For a Schism must needs be theirs, whose the ^ause of it is, the Woe
runs full out of the Mouth of CHRIST, ever against him that gives the Offense,
not ^ainst him that takes it ever. And the Learned ^ales Miscelan. page 218.
Wheresoever false or sus^cted Opinions are made a Piece of the Church Litur^y,
he that separates is not the Schismatic.

7. Some of the Parish-Churches want Preach^g on the LORDS Day, and some of
them have ^anted for many Days together, and not so much ^ Visited by their
Neighbor Ministers, yet ^ou d^ not allow them to hear our Ministers, ^hen they
want of their own: For what Reason ^hen should our People Join in your manner
of ^orship, more than your People in ours? Sure ye set up, and keep up many more
Cross Bar^ Impede our Way to you, then we do Impede y^ Way to us; For you shall
not be Troubled w^ any Part of Worship, but such as we shall Po^ you to the
Places of Scripture where it is Appo^ted; If ye could do so to us, we should
not be^ so long Separate.

8. Yet the Public Worship of GOD is great a Duty, and so much for his Glory
on Ear^ that nothing less, then a rational Fear of Sinnin^ or some other
invincible Impediment can E^ner Us from Guilt if it be omitted: And the fore if
it should so fall out, that some Christi^ were called to Live far from any
Congregati^ of their own Principles, rather then that the should be always
without Public Worship could not Offend at their Hearing of the Gos^ of
CHRIST preached, providing first that t^ know the Minister to be Orthodox whom
t^ are to hear, or have probable Grounds so to ju^ of him. And next that they
Join not in any ^ of Worship, which wants Institution fr^ CHRIST; All
Knowing and Unbyassed M^ will judge these two 'Provisos necessary and
^ficiently modest.

Object. Ye appear to be against all Accom^dation with us.

Answ. GOD forbid for we are for any Go^ Accommodation, that we may Live in
Conc^ and Peace, being obliged to follow Peace and Ho^iness with all Men, and
most pleasant for Bre^hren to dwell together in Unity, no Humor, no ^orldly
Interests, no vain Glory; Should obstruct ^, but when Obedience to GOD, and
Peace with ^ Men come in Competition, then every Christi^n ought, and every
true Christian will think O^edience to GOD, must cast the Balance, and ^ave
the Preference.

2. Yet so far as we are Agreed, and so far as we ^ave Attained let us Walk by
the same Rule, and Live in Charity one with another, for Men cannot make their
own Judgment to be what they Please, much less to be what other Men Please.

3. We desire to know what is meant by Ac^ommodation? If it be that we shall
entirely off^and, come over to you, be our Exceptions what ^hey will; If so
it is hard Measure, that we must ^e of your Judgment, be our own what it will,
^r Act against our Judgment which is the same ^r Worse: Sure ye should have
but a comfortless Purchase, though ye had Thousands of us among ^ou, Acting
against our Light and Conscience, what Comfort could you have in us, or we in
you? What Pleasure could it be to see Men running themselves by a
Self-condemning-conscience? This would make both you, and them Guilty before
GOD; You for Driving, and they for Yiedling; But if by Accommodation you mean,
t^ we should meet together as near as we can, y^ Yiedling what you safely may,
and we doing t^ like: Accommodation on these Terms were tr^^ Christian, take ye
such stumbling Blocks out ^ our Way, as safely ye may, without Sinning against
GOD; Do what you may do Lawfully ^ put us out of Danger of Sinning by our
Compl^ance, and by the Grace of GOD nothing she keep us from you. And if ye
could suffer free A^monition and Warning we would plainly in Lov^ without Gall
let you know our most intime Se^timents of your Way, that you can never be ab^
to give an Account to GOD, for causing such ^ Rent in his Church, by imperious
maintainin^ of these Things your Selves call Indifferent, b^ing no way
Necessary but as you are pleased ^ Impose them, and bind them as heavy Burden
on the Backs of others, without any Comma^ of Christ, which has occasioned the
Wound i^ of many Consciences, great Persecutions, and t^ Ruin of many Families
as to their external Cond^tion, bitter Contentions and Heats among the^ who
should Live together in Love as Children ^ one Father, and as Members of that
one Body ^ CHRIST, mutually assisting one another, enjo^ing the Fruits of our
Saviors Intercession, t^ we may be made one: you have also by these ^ gide,
unwarrantrble, and unnecessary Impositi^ns cast out many faithful Laborers
from their ^ork, in the LORDS Vineyard who were in their Day, and afterward
might have been a ^lessing to many Souls: Guilt of this Nature draw^th deep,
and as ye desire a comfortable Appear^nce before the Lord Jesus Christ; the
great Shep^erd of the Flock, and the Appointed Judge of ^ll, as ye desire to be
free of the Accusations, of Thousands and Millions against you in the great Day
of GOD, as ye desire to finish your Course with Joy, and to enter in to your
LORDS Joy: Consider your Ways, and be not so Tenacious of ^our own Traditions,
Customs and Inventions, ^s to scatter the Flock of CHRIST, and Rule them with
Force and Cruelty because they will ^ot Obey you in these things, that CHRIST
never commanded you to require of them; Remem^er that the Ministers Commission
is to Teach Men to Observe whatsoever He has command^ed, stand by your
Commission, as ye hope to stand in Judgment, when ye must give an Account of
your Stewardship.

It shall not be Tedious to Transcribe the Excellent Discourse of the
above-mentiond Bishop of Hereford at least a part of his Naked Truth, page 10.
He thus Addresseth the Bishops.

My Reverend Fathers and Judges of the Chur^ I with St. Paul Col. 3. Beseech
you put on Father Bowels of Mercy, Kindness, humbleness of Min^ Meekness,
Long-suffering toward your poor weak Ch^dren; And so long as they hold fast the
Body of Christ, ^ not so Rigorous with them for Shadows; If they subm^ to you
in Substance, have Patience though they do not Su^mit to you in Ceremonies, and
give me leave to tell y^ my poor Opinion this violent pressing of Ceremonies,
ha^ I humbly Conceive, been a great hinderance from Em^racing them; Men fearing
your Intentions to be f^ Worse, than really they are, and therefore abhor the^
And Page 11. This force urging Vnformity in Worship, has caused Great Division
in Faith, as well a^ Charity: For had you by Abolishing some Ceremonie^ taken
the weak Brethren into your Church, they h^ not Wandered about after seducing
Teachers, nor fall^ into so many Gross Opinions of their own -- Now I b^seech
you in the Fear of GOD, set before your Eyes the Dreadful Day of Judgment,
when Christ in his Tr^bunal of Justice, shall require an Account of ever^ Word
and Deed, and shall thus Question you: He^ are several Souls who taking Offense
at your Ceremoni^ have forsaken my Church, have forsaken the Faith ^ have run
into Hell; Why have ye suffered this? Na^ why have you occasioned this? Will ye
Answer it w^ to Preserve our Ceremonies? Will not Christ retu^ unto you, are
your Ceremonies more Dear unto you tha^ these Souls? Who has required these
Things at your ^ands? Will you for Ceremonies which you your selves Confess to
be Indifferent, no way Necessary unto Sal^ation, suffer your weak Brethren to
Perish for whom ^ Died? Have not I showed you how David and his Soldiers, were
Guiltless in eating the Shewbread, which was not Lawful, but only for the
Priest to eat? ^f David dispensed with a Ceremony commanded by GOD, to
satisfy the hunger of his People, will not ^ou Dispense with your own
Ceremonies, to satisfy the Souls of my People, who are called by my Name, and
Profess my Name though in weakness? Or will You tell Christ they ought to Suffer,
for their own Wilfulness and Perverseness, who will not Submit to the Laws of
the Church as they ought? Will not Christ return, shall ^hey Perish for
transgressing Your humane Laws, which ^hey ignorantly conclude Erroneous, and
shall not You Perish, for transgressing my Divine Laws? Which You know to be
Good and Holy? Had I Mercy on You, and should not You have Mercy on your
Fellow Servants? With the same measure You have met^ed, it shall be measured
unto You again: I tremble to go farther, but most humbly beseech You for
Christ's sake endeavor to regain these straeyed Sheep, for which He shed his
Precious Blood; And think it as great an Advantage, as great an Honor to You,
as it was to St. Paul to become all things to all Men that You may Gain some,
as doubtless You will many, though not all; And the few Standers off will be
the more convince^ and at long running wearied out, and Gained also. The^ are
the words of that Worthy and Compassionat^ Bishop, which the Imposers of
Ceremonies should seriously advert to

We shall add but one Testimony more of tha^ Celebrious Bishop Davenant on Col.
2. 20. I^ You be free from the Rites that GOD did Prescribe, the are You free
from the Traditions of Men; It is a mos^ wicked thing they should Impose this
Yoke upon You^ and You are most Foolish to Submit Your Necks to it For GOD
would not have Abolished the Ceremonia^ Law Instituted by himself, that a New
One may b^ invented by Men.

This Argument taken from GODS Abolishing the Ceremonial Law, and suggested by
this learned Bishop against the making of New Ceremonies by Men, appears to
us Unanswerable Wherefore not doubting but many of your Communion are truly
Conscientious, and some of yo^ wearied of these Ceremonies, openly Wishing
their Abolition: We are not altogether out o^ Hope, but that God in his Mercy
will yet impres^ your Minds, with the Duty of doing, what you safely may for
his Churches Unity and Peace: Which is all we desire, and would be your ow^
Peace in the end: And tho very large Concession^ have been already made on the
Dissenters Part i^ Order to Accommodation and Rejected yet this shall not make us
Cease, to Pray that the Father of Mercies would give us one Heart and one Way.

FINIS.

