Instructions unto (...) appointed by Commission from his Highness the Lord
Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, by and with
the advice of His Council, to be Commissioners for Ordering and Mannaging the
Militia of the (...).

1. YOU or any three of you shall immediately, upon receiving of the said
Commission and these Instructions, meet in some convenient place in your (...)
and so from time to time, as often as the Service shall require it, for putting
in execution these Instructions with effect.

2. You or any three of you, are to inform your selves of all Conspiracies,
Practices, and secret Meetings of Papists, or disaffected persons, and from
time to time any of you that are in the Commission of the Peace, are to take
Informations and Examinations upon Oath in Writing, as you shall see cause,
concerning the matters aforesaid, whether expressed by word or action, spoken,
printed, written, published, or done wheresoever, against the Peace and Welfare
of the Commonwealth.

3. You or any three of you, are authorized and required to disarm, secure or
commit all Papists, or other ill-affected persons, that have of late appeared,
or shall declare themselves in their words or actions against the present
Government, or shall hold correspondence with Charles Stuart, Son of the late
King, or with any other person or Nation, tending to the Disturbance of the
public Peace, or have or shall Minister any supplies to the said Charles
Stuart, or any adhering to him, or any other the Enemies or Rebels of this
Commonwealth, or who have or shall raise, or endeavor to raise any Tumults or
Insurrections within the same, or be justly suspected to do the same, and also
to seize the horses of all such persons for the use of the Commonwealth.

4. You are likewise from time to time to observe what Strangers, or other
persons from other places resort to your (...) and to what persons they apply
themselves, and you are to inform your selves as near as you can of their
business and occasions in those parts, and in case you are not well satisfied
with their reasons and accounts given you, you are then to acquaint Us, or Our
Council, with the names of such Persons, and to endeavor to secure them in the
mean time, and till further Order.

5. Whereas many Arms were raised and provided by Authority of the late
Militia, and other occasions, which remain disperced into several places,
whereof there may be a dangerous use made, to the disturbance of the Peace of
this Commonwealth. For prevention thereof; you are to take special care, that
all the Arms, so as aforesaid raised, and all other Arms in your (...) as well
Ho^^e as Foot, whether defensive or offensive, and also all Ammunition,
provision^ of War and Trophies, be secured by putting them into safe places, or
leaving them in ^a^e ^^ands, in such a way as you upon the place shall judge to
be most for the peace and safety of the Commonwealth. And that Inventories be
taken and kept of all the Arms, and other things so taken and secured; or left
in the Owners hands, to prevent imbezlement and misconversion of the same, And
to the end there may be assurance of having them in readiness for the public
use on all needful occasions.

6. Whereas by our said Commission you are empowered to raise such Horse and
Foot, as shall be necessary for the Peace of your (...) under such
Field-Officers or Commanders, as We shall appoint, We have herewith sent to you
Commissions for Field-Officers, which you shall cause to be delivered to the
several persons therein named respectively. And you or any three of you are
hereby empowered and authorized to grant Commissions to such inferior Officers
as shall be recommended to you in that behalf by the said Feild-Officer or
Officers, upon your approbation of them respectively.

7. Whereas there is a necessity of suppressing the present Insurrection and
Rebellion; wherein no delay can be admitted without apparent hazard to the
three Nations, you or any three of you in this exigency, are hereby authorized
to charge any person or persons with Horse, and Arms within your County,
Riding, Liberty or Precinct, with respect had unto the quantity of his or
their Estates, and with respect also to the ease of the peaceable and
well-affected people of this Nation, that the charge and burden of these Forces
may be laid upon the Malignant and disaffected party, who have been the Cause
of this Insurrection.

8. You or any three of you, are to take Care that such Horse, and Arms as
shall be charged to be provided as aforesaid, and all such other Horse and
Arms, as you shall find fit to make use of for the present service during the
time of any Insurrection, Rebellion or Invasion, be put into the hands of such
well-affected persons, and fit for War, as any three or more of you shall
approve of; Which person and persons, are hereby required to serve in Arms,
Horse or Footmen, accordingly. And that such persons be listed, trained and
mustered in several Troops and Companies, and formed into Regiments as you
shall see cause; and you or any three of you are hereby authorized and required
to cause the said Forces to be drawn out and employed for suppressing and
resisting the present Rebellion, and all other Invasions, Insurrections, and
Rebellions in your said County, Riding or Precinct, and to bring the Authors
and Abetters thereof to condign punishment. And you are to act and proceed
further, as you shall receive Orders from time to time from Us or Our Council.

9. You or any three of you may imprison any Mutineers, disordered persons, or
such as shall not do their duty, according to such commands and directions as
they shall receive from you in pursuance of these Instructions.

10. You or any three or more of you shall hereby have power to Fine such
persons for not sending in or appearing with their Horses and Arms (upon any
Rebellion, Invasion or Insurrection) the same not exceeding Twenty pounds for
each default. The said Fines respectively to be employed for the service
aforesaid. And likewise to levy or cause to be levied the same on the Lands and
goods of the parties so offending.

11. For the better inabling you to put these Instructions in Execution, you
are to require the Sheriff of your County, and all other Officers and Ministers
to be assistant unto you; And to keep correspondence with the Commanders of the
Forces in pay of this Commonwealth, who are hereby required, if ^here be cause,
and as you shall make your application, to give you assistance for the
Execution hereof.


