Unto his Grace, his Majesty's high Commissioner, And the Right Honorable
Estates of Parliament, The Humble Petition of Sir David Cunningham of
Robertland.
Shows,
THAT where there being a Process of Declarator of trust raised at the instance
of the deceast Duke of Hamiltoun and John Cunningham of Enterkine before this
present Parliament against the Creditors of Corshill, Mr. David Cunningham
Advocat and others for declaring that the Lord of Corshill stood Infeft in the
Estate of Robertland, for the deceast Duke of Hamiltoun, and Enterkine and
others mentioned in a Backbond granted be Corshill to them thereanent, or to
their behoof whom any of them contained in said Backband should nominat; And
all the said Creditors, and Mr. David Cunningham being cited, and the Process
called the last Session of Parliament, The said Creditors, and the said Mr.
David Cunningham were appointed to see in the Clerks hands and be ready against
the morrow thereafter, which Process not being debate the last Session of
Parliament, and Enterkine who was the last surviver, having conform to the
Backband of trust, declared that the foresaid trust was for your Petitioners
behoof; And your Petitioner having applied to Your Grace and the Honorable
Estates of Parliament, that a day might be prefixed for hearing of your
Petitioners Procurators upon the said trust, which being remitted to the
Committee for Private Affairs, It was some of the Committee their opinon that
the Process ought to be wakned, and the Creditors cited de novo. Whereas it is
Humbly represented to Your Grace, and the Honorable Estates of Parliament,
that Processes before the Parliament cannot be said to sleep? unless the
pursuer should suffer a Session of Parliament to interveen without prosecuting
his Action, this being an undoubted principle in Law that contra volentem agere
non currit praeseriptio. And the very continuing of the Sessions of Parliament
from time to time does virtually contain a continuation of all causes before
the same, otherwise the Leidges would be at continual expenses and trouble for
warrands for new Citations and Executing the same; And a great hazard, that
ever their causes should come in the Defenders taking all imaginable ways for
postponing and delaying the samen as they have done in this case.

May it therefore please Your Grace, and Honorable Estates of Parliament, to
allow the Committee to proceed without any new citation, upon an intimation to
be given to Mr. Stewart and Mr. Cunningham Advocats, who compears for the
Creditors, and himself.

And Your Petitioner shall ever Pray. etc.

