THE CASE OF JOHN SWINTON OF SWINTON, In Relation to HIS FATHER'S PRETENDED
FORFEITURE: Upon pretext whereof, the Estate of Swinton has been unjustly
Possessed by the late Duke, and this Earl of Lawderdale, ever since the year
1660.

WITH The Reasons of Reduction of the said Forfeiture, now Depending against
the said Earl, at the Instance of the said John Swinton, BEFORE THE PARLIAMENT.

Printed in the Year, MDCXC.

THE Duke of Lauderdale having, after the late King Charles's Restoration,
first entered to the Possession, and then obtained a Gift of the deceass'd
Swinton's Estate, upon pretense of his being forfeited by a Committee of
Estates, (for his being with the English) in the Year 1651. By which Right, and
a supervenient Decree of Forfeiture, pretended to be given against Swinton
(for the same Crime) by the Parliament 1661. he had that interest and power in
this Nation, to possess the said Estate as long as he lived, and at his Death,
to leave it in Succession to his Brother this Earl of Lauderdale, who has
possessed it ever since. Albeit there was nothing could ever be made appear, to
evince that there was any such Forfeiture against Swinton in the Year 1651. but
the pretended Extract of a Decree in absence, elicit from an Under Clerk ten
years after, of which there was never the least Warrant upon Record. And that
as to any Forfeiture in the year 1661. there was only a Process then intented,
that not being insisted in, never came the length of a Sentence. But to supply
this Defect, Swinton having objected it to the Duke of Lawderdale, the later
end of the year 1673. there were Methods taken in the Month of January 1674. to
procure Minutes to be made up by a Clerk, as if a Sentence of Forfeiture had
followed upon that Process 1661, and thereupon a Decree was got extracted 13
or 14. years after. Tho this was thought so ticklish a thing at that time, by
the then Clerk Register, as not daring to adventure upon it without
extraordinary Precaution; he first dealt with the late Earl of Crawfurd, (who
presided in that Parliament, when the Chancellor was absent) to sign the
Minutes, as in praesentia Dominorum Parliamenti, albeit 13. years after that
Parliament (at least that Session of it) was no more in Being: and then caused
application to be made in behalf of the Duke of Lauderdale, to the Lords of
Session, to give their Warrant for extracting, what he was conscious to himself
was so unwarrantably done.

That part which the Earl of Crawfurd, (a Person of such known Honor and
Integrity) was prevailed with to have in so unjustifiable a Practice, his
Lordship had the Justice to leave attested by him before he died, in a Missive
Letter, all written with his own hand, and deposited by him in the hands of the
Lady Helene Sinclair his Daughter, to be delivered by her after his Death (as
it punctually was) to the deceass'd Swinton, to whom it was directed. Which
Letter is conceived in these terms.

TYNINGHAME the 8 June, 74. SIR,
YE were pleased lately, both your self, and by some others, to say, that I had
done you an Injury in signing the Minutes of your Process, especially being out
of all Employment when I did it. I should think my self very unfortunate, if I
did any thing willingly, to prejudge you or any Man alive. Therefore I shall
tell the Truth (in point of Fact) now, not being able to speak with you when ye
desired me. My Lord Register sent down a Servant to my Lodging in James Deans's
House, some day in January or February 74. and said, If I were within, he would
come and speak with me. I bid his Man tell him, I was presently going out, and
should call to him up the way. When I was near the length of Cross, I met him
in his Coach. I made mine halt, and went out, (as he did) to the Plain Stones.
He told me I behoved to go to some House. So we went to Patrick Steel's House.
where he took out a long Scroul, and said, That was your Process. I told him I
knew nothing of it: it was so long ago, that I did remember nothing. He
answered, There is the Chancellor's Subscription, to what passed before he went
to England; Meanning the Minute before the Articles, mentioned hereafter, page
13.
and I being President after, behoved to sign it: for it could not be presented
then, I going presently to London. I first said, Being out of all Office, I
thought it unfit for me to do. Next I said, some of the Minutes (as the
Indictment was) were of old Writ, and a great deal thereof new. He said, Both
were Mr. John Hay of Haystoun's hand, and he was answerable for the Minutes.
Upon this Representation I did it: and I have told you the naked Truth, upon my
Honor and Conscience: and I did it without end of advantage, or prejudice to
any. But being pressed to it as my Duty, I hope ye will believe this ingenuous
Dealing, and keep no more prejudice or misunderstanding against,

Your affectionate Servant, Crawfurd and Lindesay.
Addressed on the Back, For John Swinton, These.

It might be thought strange, why the Duke of Lawderdale, being a Man of such
Power during the late King Charles's Reign, and knowing his Title to be so
defective as it was, should not rather have endeavored to have had the
deceass'd Swinton truly forfeited, either by causing insist in that Process,
intented before the Parliament 1661. or causing intent a new one; rather than
to have had recourse to such indirect and dangerous Methods to support a
supposed Forfeiture, whereof there either was no Warrant upon Record, or
whereof the Warrants upon Record were false. But the truth is, Swinton's being
taken and detained Prisoner by the ENGLISH, in the year 1651. being all the
ground there was for the Crime alleged against him at that time, for which he
was pretended to be forfeited; and continuing in that state, till after the
Fight at Worcester, and subjection of the Scottish Nation to the English: the
Duke durst not, for all his Power, adventure to put a Crime so calumnious, to
the Trial of a Parliament, as knowing Swinton would have been able to have
cleared himself, and consequently able to have recovered an Estate out of his
hands, that he had got himself thus possessed of, and could not but be very
loath to part with.

The Letter writ by the Earl of Crawfurd, having been shown to the late K.
Charles, and the entire matter of Fact represented to him, as it truly was; he
in the year 1682. granted Commission to the then Lord Chancellor and several
other Persons, to make Inquiry into the whole Procedure concerning the said
Forfeiture, and to inspect the Records of Parliament in relation to the same,
and to make Report thereof to His Majesty. Pursuant whereunto, the Records of
Parliament were inspected. And as there was nothing at all found as to the
pretended Decree of Forfeiture, in anno 1651. so as to that of anno 1661. all
that was found, did (from ocular inspection, and many other Circumstances
concurring with the Earl of Crawfurd's Letter, and even from the Records of
Parliament themselves) make it manifestly evident to be false. However, the
Earl of Lauderdale had that influence upon those, to whom the Trial of this
Affair was recommended at that time, as rendered the further Prosecution of the
Commission given them, ineffectual. Nor was John Swinton, who now represents
his Father, nor his eldest Brother before him, in a capacity to quarrel
otherwise their Adversarie's Title, so long as there stood pretended Decreets
of Parliament in their way, of a Forfeiture (how false and groundless soever)
against their Father.

Thus the Estate of Swinton has been unjustly possessed by the Duke of
Lawderdale, and the Earl his Brother, for the space of near 30 years: (for tho
the Duke got his Gift of the pretended Forfeiture of that Estate, in the year
1661. yet he entered to the Possession of it in the year 1660. eight Months
before the Gift was granted.) During all which time, the true Proprietars have
been debarred from access, to an Inheritance transmitted to them from their
Ancestors, by an uninterrupted Succession of above 600 years. And for the
Recovery whereof, upon the present Revolution, this Swinton the Representative
of the Family, being to make Application to the PARLIAMENT now sitting, as the
Supreme Judicatorie of the Nation, and in order thereunto, having after the
first Adjournment, intented a Reduction before the same, of the two pretended
Decreets above mentioned, of his Fathers Forfeiture; and the Earl of
Lawderdale, having been cited thereupon by a Warrant of the Council, (the Signet
not being open) and the Rents of the Lands by the Council's Order sequestered
in the Tennents hands during the Dependence, the REASONS of the said Reduction
are here subjoyned.

REASONS OF REDVCTION at Swinton's Instance against the Earl of Lawderdale.
THE PRETENDED DECREE OF THE COMMITTEE OF ESTATES, 1651. whereupon the Duke of
Lauderdale's Gift is founded, cannot be respected as a Decree and Doom of
Forfeiture, and ought to be reduced.

1. Because it is a Decree in absence, not subscribed by the Clerk Register
for the time, but by Mr. Thomes Henrison, pretended to be Clerk to that
Committee, from whom a pretended Extract thereof was elicit in the year 1661.
ten years after, and whereof there is no Warrant extant in the Records of
Parliament.

2. Though it labored under no such Defect; yet it being against several other
Persons, as well as the deceass'd Swinton, and particularly against one John
Hume, accused and convict for betraying the Castle of Edinburgh to the English;
It bears an express Declaration, That the King and Committee of Estates, for
Reasons and Considerations moving them, did restrict the Sentence and
Punishment, to the Execution of the said John Hume to the Death. Which clearly
takes off the effect of the Sentence, as to Swinton and all the rest, till it
should be reconsidered by the King and Parliament.

3. By the late CLAIM OF RIGHT, it is declared by the MEETING OF ESTATES, That
the causing pursue and forfeit Persons upon frivolous and weak Pretenses, and
upon lame and defective Probation, is contrary to Law. And it is evident, that
this pretended Decree proceeds upon most frivolous, weak, and irrelevant
Pretenses. The Crime therein libelled against Swinton being, That be hawing a
Charge in the King's Army, deserted the same and went in to the Enemy, and had
his frequent Residence with, and resorted to the Enemy in the Town of
Edinburgh, Cannongate and Leith, carrying has Sword about him. Which as
libelled, was both irrelevant and calumnious. For he did not desert the King's
Army, but being Lieutenam-Collonel of a Regiment of Horse under the King, and
at that time his necessary Occasions calling him over to his House in the
Merse, he gave up his Commission (as he, or any man in such Circumstances might
lawfully do) and one Crawfurd of Crawfurdland was immediately thereupon put in
his Place. And as he crossed the Water, (several Weeks, if not Months after he
had thus quit his Charge, and Crawfurdland had got it) being intercepted by a
Party of the English, and carried to their General's Quarters; he was for some
time detained there a Prisoner, and thereafter, upon his Parole, had liberty to
go home. Which neither in Sense, nor Reason, nor in the Construction of Law,
could be understood a deserting of the King's Army, and going in to the Enemy.
And that he resorted to, and resided with the Enemy in Edinburgh, Cannongate
and Leith; was a most frivolous and absurd Pretense, to infer the Crime of
Treason. For these Places, and the greatest part of the Southside of Forth,
being then under the Enemie's Power; it could infer no Crime, much less the
Crime of Treason, against any who had occasion for their lawful Affairs, to
come where the Enemy was; that they resorted to the Enemy, or conversed with
them. For if that had been relevant, the most part of the Inhabitants of this
side of Forth, might have at that time been forfeited upon the same ground. And
certainly simple Converse, and being present with an Enemy, is not relevant to
infer a Crime, unless it could be made appear, that the Party so conversing,
and present, joined with the Enemy in Counsel, or Acts of Hostility against the
State: which is neither libelled nor could be alleged in this Case. And as to
Swinton's having a Sword about him, when he thus resorted to, and conversed
with the Enemy; he being a Gentleman and a Prisoner upon Parole, had liberty to
wear his Sword: and his doing so, could infer no Crime against him, unless it
had be libeled that he had, whilst he wore it, used it as an Enemy.

4 As the said pretended Decree proceeds upon frivolous and irrelevant
Pretenses, and so upon that Head falls under the foresaid Article of the CLAIM
OF RIGHT; It falls under the same Article by the Defect of Probation. For the
said Decree being a Decrect in absence, neither condescends, as to Swinton,
upon Witnesses that were examined against him, nor upon what they deponed, as
all Decreets of this nature (where Parties are not found guilty by their own
Confession) ought to do: but only bearing, That the King and Committee of
Estates had found the foresaid Pretenses, libelled against Swinton, relevant
and SUFFICIENTLY proven, without expressing what way the same were proven, or
bearing even so much, as that Witnesses were adduced at all in the Probation.
Neither is there the least vestige in the Records of Parliament, of any
Probation whatsoever, led any manner of way against Swinton in this Matter. So
that the whole Probation in this pretended Decree, as to Swinton, resolving in
the simple Assertion of a Clerk, without any authentic Document of the
Probation upon Record, is in Law, no Probation at all.

5. The Duke of Lauderdale, after he had obtained his Gift of Swinton's
Forfeiture, founded upon the pretended Decree of the Committee of Estates,
1651. being convinced how groundless and illegal the said Decreer was; caused
raise a new Indictment against Swinton, (then a Prisoner in the Tolbooth of
Edinurgh) before the Parliament 1661. and therein, amongst other Crimes which
he caused charge Swinton with, he causes libel the very same Crime in the very
same words, that was libelled against him in the Decree 1651. giving him
withal the Designation of John Swinton OF SWINTON. Which was an implicit
passing from the said Decree, and a most evident Demonstration that it was
then looked upon by him as no Decree. It being obvious both in Law, and common
Sense, that a Man once forfeited, cannot be again forfeited, seeing by the first
Forfeiture, in the Construction of Law, he is no more in being, and can have
no Estate to forfeit. Upon all which Grounds it is manifest, that the said
pretended Decree 1651. is null and void to all intents and purposes.

AND the said Decree 1651. being null, the Duke of Lauderdale's Gift of
Forfeiture, as being only founded upon that Decree, is null, and must fall in
consequence. Nor can it subsist by the pretended subsequent Decree of
Forfeiture (if any such Decree had truly been) in the year 1661. because the
Gift is anterior to it: the said Gift being dated the 25 of May 1661. and the
Decree 1661, bearing Date the 12 of July thereafter. And by the CLAIM OF RIGHT
it is declared, that the disposing of Forfeitures before Sentence, is contrary
to Law.

AND AS TO THE PRETENDED DECREE OF THE PARLIAMENT 1661. The same is null, and
ought to be reduced.

1. Because the same proceeds either upon weak and frivolous Pretenses, or upon
Pretenses false and calumnious, and is destitute of all Probation whatsoever.
For as to the first Article of the Indictment whereupon it proceeds, bearing,
That Swinton sat and voted in the Parliament 1649. in which the Act concerning
the Engagement forfeited, and turned out of Office; It was not relevant.
Because no Man can be, not ever was called in question for sitting and voting
in a Parliament, or-acting therein in a Parliamentary Capacity. Seeing what is
done by a Parliament, is not to be understood the Deed of any single Person,
but of the whole representative Body of the Nation. And the King did so far
acknowledge that Parliament 1649. that he admitted Commissioners from it, as
from the Representatives of the Kingdom. And by his Treaty with them, he was
obliged to ratify the Proceedings of the Parliament, after his coming home.
Which was accordingly performed by him, in a Parliament held after his Return,
in the year 1650. Neither did it appear that Swinton voted for the rescinding
the Act in relation to the Engagement 1648. nor for the forfeiting, or putting
out of Office the Persons mentioned in the Indictment.

And as to the second Article, bearing Swinton's holding Correspondence with
the Usurper, by writing to, and receiving Letters from him, or by sending to,
and receiving Messages from him by word of Mouth; It was absolutely denied, and
neither was, nor could be proven, it being in it self altogether false and
calumnious. And whereas in the said second Article, it is alleged, as in the
first Decree, that Swinton deserted his Employment in the King's Army, and
went in to the Enemy; the former Answer to the said first Decree is oppon'd.

And as to the third Article, That Swinton did go along with the Usurper's Army
to Worcester, and fought there against the King, at least was with the Usurper
there in Arms. (and which is the only Crime insisted upon by the King's
Advocate against him;) It was likewise denied, as it was conceived. For if it
could have been made appear, that Swinton was at Worcester, he could have
instructed, that he was there as a Prisoner and not as a Soldier. Neither
could it ever have been proved, that he acted any thing there in a hostile
manner. But on the contrary, was ready on all occasions to serve his Country,
to the utmost of his Power in that sad Conjuncture: In which two of his
Brothers in the King's Service, Mr. Robert Swinton, who commanded a Troop of
Horse, and Mr. Alexander now of Mersington, and one of the Senators of the
College of Justice, had the fortune, the first of them to be killed, and the
other taken Prisoner. And the good Offices he did to many of his Country Men
at that time, it is hoped are not yet forgotten. And if he had been in Arms, as
he was not; yet this being a Crime alleged to have been committed in England,
he was secured by the English Act of Indemnity.

And as to the fourth Article, that Swinton did sit and vote in a Parliament in
England, declaring the King or any other of the Royal Family, incapable to
succeed in the Royal Government: and as a Reward of his Service, was appointed
one of the Commissioners for Administration of Justice, for which he got a
considerable yearly Sallary out of the puclick Revenues; If it could be made
appear, that he did sit and vote in any such Parliament, yet that was no Crime,
he being there as one of the Commissioners from Scotland after the UNION, and
after the three Kingdoms were under the Government of the Usurper, and erected
in a Commonwealth. And it was denied that he was present at the passing of any
Act against the King and the Royal Family. And if he had been present, as he
was not; it was when the Government was in the hands of the Usurper and
Commonwealth; and it fell under the Act of the English Indemnity. And as to
his being one of the Commissioners for administration of Justice, and having a
Sallary for it; He did not accept of that Employment before the Government was
settled in the hands of the Usurper, and Parliament of England, to which the
whole Kingdom of Scotland had then submitted. And it is very well known what
good Service in accepting of that Employment he did to his Country: it being
the Countrey's Advantage, that such Places of Trust, were in Countreymens
hands, rather than in the hands of Strangers, who understood nothing of the
Laws and Customs of the Kingdom. And as for any Sallary he got thereby, he was
never the richer for it: but on the contrary, it is very well known, he was
much more in Debt in the year 1660. than he was when he entered upon that
Employment.

AND as the said pretended Decree 1661, proceeds upon frivolous and calumnious
Pretenses, so the same is made to proceed upon so lame a Probations, as it is,
without any Probation at all. For albeit it bear to proceed upon Swinton's
judicial Confession, there is no such Confession in the Records of Parliament,
other than what is contained in the written Defense given in by him, under his
Hand, before the Parliament, which is so qualified, as it could never be a
ground of Forfeiture against him.

2. The said pretended Decree 1661, is null, Because the Minutes on the
Margent of the said Indictment, which are the Warrants thereof, are absolutely
false and forged. What is evinced from the following grounds.

First, The said Minutes bearing Date 7 February, 15 May, and 12 July, 1661.
and so being of a considerable interval of Time one from another, are
nevertheless written at one and the same time; and as by the same Hand, so with
the same Pen, and the same Ink: and by comparing the Ink wherewith they are
written, with that of a Minute on the foot of the Indictment, signed by the
Earl of Glencairn as Chancellor, of the same Date with the first of them, viz.
7 Feb. 1661. (and which is the only true Minute extant in the Process) it is
evident the Ink of the Minutes on the Margent is a great many years recenter.

Secondly, All the three Minutes on the Margent of the Indictment, being
Signatures of the Procedure of the Parliament, as to this Affair, in plain
Parliament; the first thereof 7 Feb. 1661. bears, the then Lord Advocat's
giving in the said Indictment, with the former Decree against Swinton (then
Panel) and craving that the said Decree might be ratified; and further, that
the said new Indictment might be found relevant, and admitted to his Probation;
the King and Estates of Parl. are said to ordain BEFORE ANSWER, the new
Indictment to be give up to Swinton, to see and answer. And yet it is evident
by the Records of Parliament, that the Parliament met not at all that day, but
only the Articles. And by the true Minute on the foot of the Indictment, the
said 7th. of February 1661. the Lords of the Articles ordained the same thing,
which the Minute on the Margent falsely says, was ordained by the King and
Estates of Parliament, viz. that the said Inditment should be given up to John
Swinton of that Ilk, to see and answer; and as it accordingly was: the Copy
thereof under the Advocat's hand, being delivered to Swinton, with these words
at the foot thereof, (written by one Alexander Reid, the Advocate's Servant at
that time, and signed by Mungo Murray, Ormand Pursevant) Edinburgh 7. Feberuary
1661. It is appointed, that this Indictment be given to John Swinton, and he to
answer upon Tuesday come a fourtnight, being the 26 of this Instant. Agreeable
whereunto, a Diary of the Proceedings of that Parliament 1661. written by
Robert Hamilton one of the present Senators of the College of Justice, who was
then one of the Clerks of Parliament, bears, that upon the 27 February, John
Swinton of that Ilk having formerly received his Indictment, was brought that
Day to the Bar, and after his Dittay was read, he was appointed that day
fourtnight to give in his legal Defenses. So that it is manifest, that the
Parliament not sitting on the 7th of February, and Swinton that day getting his
Indictment (by Order of the Articles,) to answer 14 days after; the first day
of his Appearance before the Parliament behoved to be the Day mentioned in
Robert Hamilton's Diary, and consequently that the said first Minute on the
Margent of the Indictment 7 February, 1661. is altogether false. Neither was
the term made use of, [BEFORE ANSWER] either the Style of Parliament, or indeed
of any Court at that time, it being a term introduced long after: nor was it at
all in this case intelligible, it being impossible that an Indictment could be
considered before it was given up, and seen by the Party.

Thridly, The second of the said Minutes bearing Date the 15 of May 1661. is
manifest from ocular inspecton to be false, and that it and the other two
(being writ all at the same time) behoved to be forged after the year 1670. For
when (...) that writes the Minutes, was writing the Ciphers of the Year, as
thinking upon the year wherein the said Minutes were (...) by him, (which
appears by the Earl of Crawfurd's Letter, behoved to be the year 1674.) he has
first written 167 and the taking himself, and finding his mistake, he makes the
Cipher 7 a 6. and adds the Cipher 1. to it, to make it the year which the
Minute behoved to bear, viz. 1661. the vitiat Correction standing in the Minute
thus, 1661. Into which mistake, a Man writing after the year 1670. might easily
fall; but it is obvious to Sense, that no Man could have fallen into such a
mistake, writing before the year 1670. 2. By this Minute May 15. Swinton is
made appearing and judicially confessing that he went with Cromwell and his Army
to Worcester, and was with him in that Battle; whereas there was no such
judicial Confession made, which certainly if made, had been taken under
Swinton's hand, and subscribed by the President of Parliament: neither of which
were done. And Robert Hamilton's foresaid Diary bears only, that the said 15 of
May, Swinton's Dittay with his Answers, were read before the Parliament in
his presence, and he also heard speak verbally for himself, and that the Lord
Advocate opponed the Dittay, and produced the former Decree of Forfeiture
against him, (which de facto was never produced till now, tho the first Minute
falsely bear, it was produced the 7 Feb.) and which former Decree the Panel
desiring to see, the Parliament assigned him Friday come eight days to see,
and say what he could say. Which last part, the foresaid Minute does also
bear, viz. That the Panel was ordained to see the former Sentence of
Forfeiture, and to answer Friday come eight days, being the 24. of May: but
with this difference, that the Minute bears, upon the Pannels desiring to see
the said Decree, it was then given up to him. Whereas it is evident by the
Copy of the said Decree, delivered to Svvinton by the said Alexander Reid, the
Advocate's Servant. that it was not delivered to him till the 17 of May; it
being so marked upon the back, with the said Alexander Reid's hand, viz. That
it was given to Svvinton upon the 17. of May, to answer the 24. By all which it
is evident, that Swinton did make no such judicial Confession the foresaid 15
of May, there being no vestige of it, either under his own, or under the
President's hand, extant in Process. And it being most absurd, after a judicial
Confession, which in Criminals is both Proof and Condemnation, (since confessus
pro condemnato habetur,) that any further Day should be assigned to the Panel
for Defense. 3. This Minute of the 15 of May 1661. ordains Swinton to see and
answer, as said is, against the 24 of May. And yet neither does the Decree
bear, that Swinton was again called, nor any thing at all of this Matter of
Fact, that he was ordained to see the former Decree upon the 15 of May and to
answer thereunto against the 24. (which these who framed the Decree,
industriously omit, as foreseeing the inserting thereof would have inferred a
Nullity against it.) Nor was Swinton ever again called, or brought before the
Parliament, either that Day, or any time thereafter.

Fourthly, As to the third and last of the said Minutes upon the Margent of the
Indictment, which is made to be upon the 12. of July 1661. and which is the
principal Minute whereupon the pretended Decree of the Parliament 1661. is
founded; the Falsehood thereof is most manifest: in that 1. It makes Swinton
compearing that Day as a Panel, whereas it is certain the did not appear that
Day, nor at any time after the 15. of May. 2. By this Minute not only the
foresaid pretended Decree of the Committee of Estates 1651. is ratified, but
Swinton is declared of new guilty of the Crime of Treason, upon his judicial
Confession. And yet there is no such judicial Confession extant, nor was there
ever any such Confession made by him, but what was so qualified as cleared him
3. It makes the Parliament ratify the said pretended Decree 1651. without his
being heard upon his Defense against the same, tho a Day was assigned to him
for that effect. 4. The said Minute has none of the Solemnities of a Sentence
of Forfeiture for Treason, seeing it does not bear, READ, VOTED, TOUCHED with
the Scepter, or any Warrant for Publication by sound of Trumpet, or for tearing
of Arms: which are the ordinary and indispensable Solemnities in use to be
adhibited, in the pronouncing of Sentences and Dooms of Forfeiture in
Parliament. And the Signatures of which Sentences and Dooms of Forfeiture,
after the voting and touching thereof, as always written upon a Paper apart,
distinct from the Process, and signed by the Chancellor, or President of
Parliament, and what is punctually observed inall the Forfeitures truly passed
in this Parliament, as is evident from the Records. No such thing being to be
found in Swinton's Case: what doubtlesly would not have been omitted, if any
Doom of Forfeiture had truly passed, by VOTE of Parliament, against him.

Fifthly, All the said three Minutes are subscribed by the late Earl of
Crawford, as President of the Parliament 1661. with these Letters adjected to
his Subscription, J. P. D. P. as if subscribed by him in that Parliament, in
praesentia Dominorum Parliamenti: and the Earl's Letter, which a little before
his Death he wrote to the deceass'd Swinton, in the year 1674. discovers not
only that they were not signed by him till then, which was 13 years after, but
that they were not so much as written till that time* And the Earl being a
Person of such untainted Honor and Reputation, as he was known to be, his
Testimony alone in this matter of Fact (so ingenuously declaring the manner how
he was prevailed with to sign the said Minutes at that time (and what scruples
he had against the doing thereof, when he did it) is sufficient if there were
no more, to convell the truth of these Minutes, and a convincing Demonstration
to the world, of their Forgery; and what undue Methods were taken at that
time-to perpetuat the Ruin of so ancient a Family.

Sixthly, And yet there is this further, and which is an Argument unanswerable
of the falsehood of the said Minutes, whereupon the said pretended Decree of
the Parliament 1661 is founded. That after they were thus made up by Haystoun
and the Earl of Crawsurd's Subscription impetrat thereunto in the manner
narrated in his Lordship's Letter, Sir Archibald Primerose the then Clerk
Register thought himself not in tuto to give any Extract thereof under his Hand
to the Duke of Lauderdale, till upon a Petition given in by the Duke to the
Lords of Session, bearing, that the said Sir Archibald scrupled to give any
such Extract, he was ordained by them to do the same: it being impossible to
imagine so knowing a man as Sir Archibald Primerose was, could have any other
reason to scruple at the doing of a thing of this nature, whereunto the duty
of his Office obliged him, (especially to a Man of such Power as the Duke of
Lauderdale then was,) unless it had been that he was conscious to himself of
the falsehood of those Minutes, which to gratify the Duke, he had persuaded the
Earl of Crawfurd to sign so many years after the Parliament 1661.

FROM ALL WHICH, it is evident upon how lame and defective a Title the Estate
of Swinton has been possessed by the late Duke and this Earl of Lauderdale,
these 30 years by past. The pretended Decree of the Committee of Estatees
1651. whereupon the Duke obtained his Gift, having proceeded upon such vveak
Pretenses, and defective Probation, and looked upon as so insignificant, that
it was passed from by Intenting of a new Indictment for the same Crime, before
the Parliament 1661. And albeit a Sentence neither did, nor could pass upon
that Indictment (after a Term was assigned by the Parliament for a further
Hearing) till Svvinton had been FURTHER HEARD, which he never was; a Decree
nevertheless is made up on false Minutes, as passed in that Parliament,
ratifying the former Decree against him, and forfeiting him of new, (which are
terms inconsistent in Law.) And neither the Duke of Lauderdale, nor this Earl,
having the least color to justify so horrid a vvrong, or the oppression and
hardship the deceass'd Swinton and his Children have been thereby exposed to
during so long a tract of time, with the loss his lawful Creditors have thereby
sutain'd; except the sole Pretense of Swinton's having possessed a part of the
Estate of Lauderdale, during a few years of the English Usurpation, tho the
yearly Rent thereof was far within one half of the yearly Rent of the Estate of
Swinton: and as to which this Svvinton, who now insists for Recover of his
Father's Inheritance, being content to allow all that ever his Father
intrometted with of the Estate of Lauderdale the first end of the Earl and his
Brother's Intromission with the Estate of Svvinton (which will be of ten times
a greater value;) IT IS HOPED the PARLIAMENT ex Justitia, will REDUCE the said
two pretended Decreets, and Gift of Forfeiture, with all that he followed
thereupon, and RESTORE the Swinton IN INTEGRV^^ against the same.

FINIS.

