THE CASE OF DR. JOHN JONES RESPONDENT, Upon the APPEAL of WILLIAM BEAW, etc.
THE Office of Chancellor, Principal Official, and Vicar General of the Bishop
of Landaffe was, and is an Ancient Office, and has been anciently before the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, usually grantable, and granted to Two Persons, to
hold for their Lives, and the Life of the longer Liver of them.

7. September. 1671.
Francis Lord Bishop of Landaffe, by Letters Patents under his Episcopal Seal,
granted this Office to Dr. Richard Lloyd and the Respondent John Jones; to hold
to them jointly and severally, and to the longer Liver of them. Which Grant was
duly confirmed by the Chapter of that Church, and accordingly the said Dr.
Richard Lloyd, for several Years, by the Respondent's consent, quietly held and
enjoyed the same.

20. March 1674.
The said Lord Bishop died, and Dr. William Lloyd succeeded in that Bishopric;
and upon his Translation to the Bishopric of Norwich, Dr. William Beaw
succeeded, and is now the present Lord Bishop of Landaffe.

June 1686.
The present Lord Bishop of Landaffe, having in his Custody the Original Grant
of this Office to Dr. Richard Lloyd, and the Respondent Constituted
Commissioners to Execute the Office, and refused to admit the Petitioner to
Execute and Enjoy the said Offices, as by Law he ought.

Whereupon the Respondent brought an Action at Law against the Appellant, and
others for the Profits of the Office by them received; which Action, by the
Death of One of the then Defendants abated.

Afterward, the Respondent brought his Bill in Equity against the Appellant,
to have an Account of, and Satisfaction for the Profits of the said Office, to
which the Appellant answered, and confessed the Patent and Grant to the said
Dr. Richard Lloyd and the Respondent; whereupon the Respondent proceeded to try
his Right and Title to the said Office in an Action at the Common Law against
the Appellant; and at Gloucester-Assizes, on full Evidence, obtained a Verdict,
and had Judgment thereupon.

That afterward the Court of Chancery Ordered, That a Trial at Bar should be
had upon an Action of the Case for Trial of the Title of the said Office;
whereupon, a Trial was had at the Kings-Bench-Bar; and upon full and long
Evidence, a Verdict was given for the Respondent, and upon the Importunity of
the Appellant's Counsel, the Case was Stated, and Argued before all the Judges
of the said Court of King's Bench; who on Hearing several Arguments on both
Sides, were all of Opinion, That the Letters Patent and Grant made to Dr.
Richard Lloyd, and the Respondent were good in Law; and that the Respondent was
well Entitled to the said Office for his Life.

20 November. 1691.
That the said Cause coming to be Heard in Chancery, on the Equity reserved in
the Presence of Council on both Sides, the Lords-Commissioners were of the same
Opinion; and Decreed an Account to be taken of the Profits of the said Office,
and the Respondent to be quieted in the Possession and Enjoyment thereof.

Which Decree, the Respondent hopes is Just; and that it shall be Confirmed.


