A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES HELD AT YORK, JVLY the 23 d. 1683. Not long
after the Discovery of the late Horrid Conspiracy against His Majesty's Person
and Government.

By HENRY CONSTANTINE, M. A.

PROVERBS XXV. 5. Take away the wicked from before the King, and his Throne
shall be established in Righteousness.

LONDON: Printed by J. Grantham, for Isaac Cleave at the Star, next to
Serjeants-Inn in Chancery Lane. 1683.

To the Right Worshipful AMBROSE PVDSAY Esquire; High Sheriff of the County of YORK.
AS this short Sermon ows its Birth unto you, so it seeks its Patronage from
you; you commanded it to the Pulpit, and advised it to the Press; so that both
the nature of the Subject, and your interest in the Preacher have made it
wholly yours; and though its hasty Birth denied it that just proportion, and
those Lineaments which a longer time would have given, yet I hope the Honesty
of the design will atone for the defects of the Discourse: I have added little
to what I then spoke, and have omitted nothing but a forward Parenthesis which
had given some disgust: None can justly Quarrel with the Character which is
laid down, but such as are Conscious to themselves how much they deserve it;
and no great wonder if these (having over-lived their Duty and Allegiance) like
aged Lais strive to break the Glass which shows them their own Deformity; but I
shall more easily bear the severest of their Censures, when I have gained your
approbation, whose Eminent Zeal, and Faithfulness to His Majesty's Service,
renders you fit for that great trust which he has now reposed in you; and shows
how much you inherit the Virtue, and untainted Loyalty of your Ancient Family,
the prosperity and continuance whereof, is desired, and hoped for by all that
have the Honor and Happiness of being known unto you; but by no man with
greater Zeal, than by him who is

SIR, The most Humble, and most Faithful of your Servants. HENRY CONSTANTINE.

A SERMON Preached at the Assizes held at YORK, July the 23 d. 1683. Not long
after the Discovery of the late Horrid Conspiracy against His Majesty's Person
and Government,
PROVE. XXV. 5. Take away the wicked from before the King, and his Throne shall
be established in Righteousness.
HEaven alone is that happy place where we can promise to our selves the
enjoyment of an undisturbed Peace, nor can any other Throne than the Throne of
God receive so firm an Establishment, as to secure it from the bold attempts of
malicious and Blood-thirsty men, and from those miserable revolutions which
have buried many flourishing Kingdoms in the saddest heaps of their own Ruins:
Thunders happen only in the lower Regions of the Air, whilst the Orbs above are
calm and clear; thus we who are left to people this lower Vale of Tears, lie
more open to the strokes of Violence and Sedition, whilst the Blessed
Inhabitants of the Mansions above are set out of the reach of those Blows, and
are secured from the very fears of such a fatal change. Once indeed, Lucifer
the Grand-sire of all this Modern brood of Rebels durst design a Change even in
Heaven it self; but being thrown Headlong down from thence, he rises full of
rage, and finding himself too short handed to reach the Throne of God, he turns
his revenge against the Thrones of Princes; he strives to wound the Almighty in
Effigy, in the most noble part of his Image, and to strike him through the
Sides of those that are his Vicegerents and Representatives here on Earth: To
this end he Musters up all his Legionary Forces, he Trains them in his close
Cabals, where they sit brooding over that Spawn of Treason which he has
infused, till they be ready to March upon some fatal Service. He taught Cain in
the worlds Infancy, not to take it well, that his Brother Abel should be the
greater Favorite in the Court of Heaven; and when he lodged so much Envy in
his Heart, he found it more easy to put the Weapon into his hand; insomuch,
that he who thought it an unreasonable thing, at Gods Demand, to be his
Brothers Keeper, was drawn at the Devils instigation to be his Murderer. It
had fared better with all after Ages, if the crimes of Envy and Ambition had
been buried in the Brothers Graves, beyond the possibility of a Resurrection;
but alas, they grew rather to a greater height with the growing world: the
corrupted nature of Man becomeing but too fruitful a Seed-plot of those vices,
which in time gathered so much strength, that they turned Usurpers, snatched
the Scepters out of the hands of many Princes, hurled the World into confusion,
filling every Kingdom with Sedition, and every corner with Blood: No Body
Politic can be found, which has not sometimes groaned and bled under the blows
which these Crimes have given; and if it have survived a civil death, yet has
it long after felt the smart, and seen the Scars of its former wounds: Nor is
there any Crown upon Earth which has not received a deeper Tincture of Red from
the Blood of those that contended for it, than its own Gold could ever give.
But where any Kingdom, for the Excellency of its Constitution, for the Purity
of its Religion, and for the Prudence of its Governor, becomes a nearer Type
of Heaven, and conduces more to the happiness of Men, there it lies more
exposed to the rage and malice of Hell; and there all the Devils Engines are at
work for its destruction. No wonder then, if so many Pioneers of his have been
employed to undermine the foundation of our established Government, which
justly deserves the highest Character. Africa shall no longer boast of her
strange productions, since our own Land is every age, nay, every luster almost,
teeming with such Black Monsters of Ingratitude and Rebellion, as are a shame
to our Kingdom; a scandal to Religion: and a reproach unto Manknd. It has been
put in the Catalogue of our English Blessings, that (by the care of our
Princes) we are now free from Wolves, and other Beasts of Prey, which in the
former times were so numerous and burdensome; but now, as if their Savageness
and Cruelty, had by a strange kind of metempschosi, past into some of the
Inhabitants themselves, we may complain of it as the Misery and Grievance of
our Nation, that we are over-stock'd with a company of degenerate Creatures,
who lie covered in their Clubs and Conventicles, (those Dens of Treason) and
are more inconsistant with the public Peace and safety, than those wild Beasts
ever were; Cant. 2. 15. Cunning Foxes, such as would break down the Strongest
Fence, and spoil the choicest Fruits of our Vineyard; cruel Wolves, such as
would not only tear in pieces some of the meaner Flock, and glut themselves
with the Slaughter of the common Herd; but would strike the Shepherd, (...),
(for so the Prince is called) and would quench their unnatural and ambitious
thirst in streams of Royal Blood. Nor is it easy to determine, whether the
villainy of so cursed a design, or the mercy of our deliverance be the greater
miracle; we may justly raise a Pillar for the monument of our thankfulness, and
may engrave it with Samuel's Motto, 1. Sam. 7. 12. Hitherto the Lord has
helped us. We have long sailed in the Straits, between the Popish Scylla an the
Fanatical Charibdis; and whilst some feared that our care to avoid the one
would insensibly cast us upon the other, we have not hitherto split upon either
of those Rocks which threaten our Ruin; the Sun is still in our Firmament, the
light of our Eyes is not darkened; nor is the breath of our Nostrils expired:
nor is the Crown fallen from our Heads. Which wonderful deliverance we owe
chiefly to the watchful care of Almighty God, who, when the wretches went big
with Treason, made the burden prove abortive, and crushed those Cockatrices
Eggs e're they had time to turn Serpents, or to exert their Stings. We owe it
also to the Wisdom of our dear and dread Sovereign, the tutelar Angel of the
Kingdoms peace; to the faithfulness of his Counselors, and to the diligence
of his Ministers; nor should any one of us at such a critical time as this, in
our respective places, be wanting to the defense of his Sacred Person, and the
security of his Government: we should set banks to that deluge which threatens
us with an innundation of Blood. Ministers should Preach Loyalty, People should
practice Obedience; and they to whom the Sword of Justice is committed, should
Take away the Wicked from before the King.

Solomon's Throne was nearer Heaven, than the Thrones of his Neighboring
Princes; he had a clearer eye to find out those who are the bane of Government,
and a more impartial hand to punish them; and upon this account was left by
David's last Will and Testament, the Executor of that Vengeance which was to be
inflicted on the remnant of those Rebels, who were concerned in Absolom's, and
in Achitophels Conspiracy; and having by such an execution, secured the Peace
of his own, he prescribes it as the most effectual means for the establishment
of all other Kingdoms; and lays it down as the great Maxim of Policy and
Government in the words of my Text, where he proceeds, a Remotione Mali, from
the removal of those evils that are so inconsistant with the Kings safety, and
the Kingdoms peace; Ad positionem boni, to the determining of that Blessing
wherein the great happiness of a Society does consist, which is the
establishing of the Kings Throne in Righteousness; the preserving and
delivering down of Monarchy in its Right-Line to succeeding Ages, that they
also may sit safely, rejoicing under the shadow of that best of Governments
which now is, and may it ever be, our Glory and Protection: a fit Pattern for
the Repairers of our breaches, who should first remove the Rubbish, should
first take away the bane and burden of Government, and then may better lay the
Foundation, and raise the Fabric of our Kingdoms Peace.

I shall observe the same Method, and shall begin, a remotione mali, with the
removal of that which is so absolutely inconsistent with the just Establishment
of the Regal Throne. Take away the Wicked from before the King. Where we may
find these three things:

1. An act of Justice, Take away.

2. The subjects of this act, or the Character of those persons who are to be
taken away, they are the Wicked.

3. The Reason of this removal; because the suffering of such is not consistent
with the safety of his person, nor with the due settlement of his Throne,
therefore must they be taken away from before the King; And of these three
parts in their order.

1st. Then, we have an act of Justice, Take away. Had but Mankind retained
their primitive innocence, there would have been no need of such a separation;
the Earth would have been filled with Righteousness, and the whole World with
Truth; then would Faction, Treason, War, and Murder have been such strangers,
that even their hateful names would never have been so much as heard in our
Streets; then would there have been such an universal conformity of all things
and persons, to the great design and end of their Creation, that no crime, nor
error would have been committed; therefore no punishment could have been
deserved. The wickedness of men first caused the Sword of Justice to be drawn,
and has sound employment for it ever since; Sin breeds, and feeds those bad
humors in the Bowels of a Nation, which must either be removed, or they will
quickly tend to its dissolution: This gives many wounds to the Body pollitick,
and causes it to break out into those Wens and Excresencies of Government,
which must be taken away, least they should grow more spreading and infectious.
Sufference is but a bad Chyrurgion, which instead of healing does but widen our
Wounds and Breaches. The greatest offenders grow more bold and impudent, when
they are buoyed up with the hopes of a forbearance; and make the most desperate
attempts, when they can work under the protection of an indulgence. Lay but the
Reins in the Neck of some Headstrong Creatures, and they will immediately throw
their Burdens, will tread down the Laws of Heaven, and Earth, and will violate
all civil and sacred Rights. Let such tares grow still amongst us, and our Land
will in a little time be like the Sluggards Field, the Weeds would suck all the
fatness, and sweetness to themselves; would overtop and bear down all before
them: would make our Kingdom a Map of Misery, and would quickly turn it into an
Aceldama, a Field of Blood. Execution is the very life of the Law, without
which it will prove but an insignificant Scarecrow, not able to keep the
dullest sort of Mortals within the compass of their duty; like that dead log
which every Frog in the Marsh could despise, and leap on at his pleasure. The
discovery of an evil, without the power to remove it, is but an addition to our
misery, and makes the blow more deep and dreadful. Nature, therefore for our
own preservation, has given us as many hands to take away what is hurtful to us,
as it has given eyes to find it out; nor will the greatest offender ever fear
the eyes of the Jurors in their enquiries after his crimes, if he never feels
the hands of the Judge in the execution of those Laws that are made for his
punishment. Pity to some sort of persons, is cruelty to the rest of the
Kingdom; and whilst we become their advocates, we become our own Traitors, and
lay open our naked Breasts to the stroke of those Weapons, which our
forbearance has unhappily put into their hands: so that by this means we may
make that sad Exchange which Ahab was threatened with, 1 Kings 20. 42. our Life
may go for their Life, and our people for their people. Thus to suffer the
known Enemies of our Church and State tamely to complete their intended
villainies, were but to list our selves in the number of those Rebels, and to
become guilty of a notorious Misprision of Treason. It Is a received Maxim: Qui
non prohibet peccare quum possit jubet, He that does not stand up in his place,
to take away these troublers of our Israel, when it it is in his power to
discover, and prevent their intended Treason, does but join forces with them,
and becomes one of that infamous number.

Nor should the multitudes of those who are concerned in such a Crime make it
more pardonable. It Is true, these render the Execution of Justice an act of
greater difficulty; but they make it an act of greater necessity; and furnish
all Loyal persons with an oppertunity of giving greater Testimonies of their
Courage, and Fidelity to the World: Nor should their former favors be any bar
to their present removal, Justice knows no Relations; and though the dispencers
of it, may, upon any civil account, accompany their Friends, m^ch^^ omo, even
unto the Altars, yet in criminal matters they can attend them no further than
m^ch^^ ^mato, to the judgment Seat, where (like that God whom they represent)
they must weigh the merits of the cause without any respect unto the persons,
and must overlook the sometimes unseasonable considerations of Nature, and
affection, which some of the greatest examples of Justice have so little
regarded, that they have been ready to sacrifice what was dearest to them, when
such a victim was absolutely necessary to the public peace and safety; Nor has
their eye spared the most intimate of their Friends and Favorites; and indeed
the Ear and the Tongue are only in the Commission of Oyer and Terminer for the
Trial of such causes; the one to hear the Evidence, the other to pronounce the
Sentence; the Eye is excluded. Hence it is that Justice is painted blind; and
for this reason the Athenian Judges are said to have kept their great Courts of
Judicature in the night only, that the sight of the person might not influence
them in the determination of the cause; and that an inconvenient pity might not
incline them to spare, and suffer those offenders, whom the stronger motives of
their own Duty, and the common safety, did engage them to remove, and take
away; but even in the broad day, Treason in a Favorite looks more black and
hateful to the World, than it does in one of the meaner crowd, who is decoyed
only into the Conspiracy; nay, sometimes it appears in such dismal and
confounding colors to the Traitor himself, that after a serious reflection upon
his own ingratitude, and infidelity, such pangs of despair and guilt do seize
upon him, that not waiting for the formalities of the Law, he snatches the
Sword into his own hand, and becomes his own Executioner.

Say not, that it ill becomes an Ambassador of the God of Peace to blow the
Trumpet of War, and sound an Alarm to a fresh persecution, (for under that
invidious name, some are resolved to expose the execution of our penal Laws)
when its nothing more than a just prosecution of such delinquents, whose crimes
are inconsistant with the public peace that I am pleading for: And this the
prodigious wickedness of some men renders too sadly seasonable, and necessary.
One would think, that those who are conscious of their own guilt, should be
(...), condemned in themselves, and calmly submit to their deserved punishment:
but if they be truly Innocent, they need never fear the penalty of our severest
Laws; nor did I ever hear the boldest enemies of our Government, dare to
arraign the public Justice of our Nation, where the greatest Criminals are
allowed the privilege of their own witness, and defense: nor is any Sentence
given, but upon a full Hearing, and clear Evidence, in the judgment of Twelve
unconcerned, and impartial persons at the least, against whom the Prisoner has
the liberty of making his own Exceptions, and that sometimes without giving the
reasons of such a refusal. God forbid that we should make the Righteous as the
wicked; or that we should so far imitate the cruelties of some former times, as
to clothe the Innocent in the Skins of Wolves and Bears, to represent them to
the World as the strangest Monsters of Fanaticisme and Sedition, and then
should bring them forth to be torn in pieces by the sanguinary Teeth of our
penal Laws. No, Ex ungue leonem, the marks of their villainies do betray their
guilt; and we charge none but such men, whose seditious principles, and
rebellious practices are so notorious, that the Kings Throne can never firmly
be established, unless they be removed and taken away.

2. This brings me to the second part of my Text, to the Subjects of this act,
or the Character of those persons against whom the Sword of Justice is to be
drawn. Should we take out of the Body of a Kingdom, what every zealous
brainsick person judges inconsistent with its peace and safety; should we
change and reform things after the model of some men's extravagant fancies, and
wild apprehensions, we should make it strangely monstrous, and misshapen; what
they prescribe for our Cure would prove our Disease; and so many removals would
be made, that we should have little left but confusion. Let but some giddy
Libertines have the guidance of this Sword; let them but reform and remove at
their pleasure, and they would quickly take away our Beauties, as Blemishes;
and our Guard, as their Grievance: they would remove the Kings dearrest
Friends, under the notion of Evil-Councellors; and the supporters of his
Throne, as the infringers of their Privilege: they would take away our
discipline, the Fence and Ornament of our Church, and the Penal Laws, those
great securers of the Peace, and unity of the State; nay, some of them would be
coming with their repeated cries of No Bishop, No King: but we hope they shall
never have the power of executing their extravagant Fancies. The Government
cannot suffer such bold attempts; and the wise man directs better in the words
of my Text, where he charges, that the wicked should be taken away. Which may
have either,

1. A more proper and restrained, or 2. A more large and unlimited
signification.
First then, the word, (...), wicked may be taken in a more proper, and
restrained sense; and in this acception it denotes men of a restless and
unquiet Spirit; of a turbulent and seditious humor; fretting like the foaming
Sea within themselves, and uneasy to the Government; Men that know not how to
bear the least restraint that is laid upon their Pride and Ambition, but resolve
to break the most just and easy Yoke, and to purchase their own dear liberty,
though sometimes it cannot be done at any lower price, than their own Blood,
and the Kingdoms ruin; Men, that go big with Faction and Discontent; and like
impregnate Waves swell above the highest Banks of Loyalty and Duty, till they
break themselves, and bring a deluge of miseries where they come. Numbers of
these may be seen, and if the Mercy of God had not prevented the malice of men,
would have been deeply felt amongst us. We may well wonder, in so mild a
Government, what possibly could displease; but Heaven it self could not please
the Apostate Angels; surely some of these had been trained up in Treason, and
waited only for an opportunity of reducing their seditious principles into
practice; some of them sure had feathered their Nests in the time of our late
confusions, and finding their stock of wealth and credit now in the wane, they
knew no better way to buoy up their sinking name and fortunes, than by beating
up the old March, that they might start a fresh Plunder. Their common note is,
Nolumus hunc regnare, for as some of the Rebellious Israelites would not have
the Lord to be their God, so these English Traitors would not have our most
Gracious Sovereign to be their King; for when they found that Heaven was deaf
to their repeated Prayers for his removal, they resolved to prove what the
keener edge of their Sacriledgious Swords could do, and having killed the Heir,
would have seized the Inheritance, and would have divided the spoils of Loyalty
amongst themselves; But what form or model of Government they would have
introduced in its place, we cannot so easily conjecture. Would they have
conjured up a Commonwealth? or have raised the departed Ghost of Democracy
from the Grave where it has for sometime laid? (and may it ever lie) kept down
by the just resentments of Mankind, who have found the little Finger of that
kind of Government, or Confusion rather, heavier than the Loins of Monarchy
ever were. However, when they had thus snatched the Scepter out of Moses's
hands, 'twould have been more easy for them to pluck the Mitre from Aaron's
Head. Church-disorders would have been the inseparable companions of such
State-confusions, for State-leveling and Church-leveling are Twins, brats of
the same monstrous Birth; and though the former, Esau like, be not so smooth
and taking, and consequently not so apt to be dandled by the Magistrate, who is
justly tender of any thing that touches his prerogative; yet the latter is a
more sweet and hopeful Babe, which under the notion of Tenderness of
Conscience, and Christian-Liberty, became the fondling of the former Age, and
was so long cherished, till it had like to have proved a Jacob, a supplanter
indeed, and began to Exchange Jacob's milder voice, for Esau's bloody, rugged
Hands.

Now that such deplored changes were designed by the disturbers of our Peace,
will be more easy for us to believe, when we consider, what men of the same
leaven had but too lately acted in the time of our uncivil, and unnatural Wars,
which I shall not now repeat, since they are still so fresh in the bleeding
memories of many thousands amongst us; I shall only wish, that our Eyes may
never be the Witnesses, nor our Land the Scene of such another Tragedy, so long
as Sun and Moon endures. This surely is sufficient to entitle those restless
and unquiet Spirits, these common Boutifeus and Incendiaries of our Nation, to
the Character of Wicked, which is given them in my Text; for though some of
them have put on the vizard, and appearance of Zeal, and Holiness, that under
so charming a disguise, they might draw in greater numbers of the credulous and
unwary multitude; yet this does but raise their wickedness to the greatest
height, in that they dare to bring in the adored name of God to the patronage
of their greatest Crimes; and by a wretched Imposture make bold to hang out the
Flag of Heaven, when they are Marching under the Banners of Hell. Certainly
there is no greater contradiction in the whole World, than Religion and
Rebellion: We may as soon join the two Poles, and unite God and Belial, as find
a Man who is Saint and Rebel at the same time. I am sure the Doctrine of the
Church of England does abominate, and Damn all such practices; nor is it
possible for any Man, who is true to its received Principles, to turn Traitor;
since it gives a greater reverence, and security to the Thrones of Princes than
any other Doctrine under Heaven besides: So that we are miserably abused by our
Friends of Rome, when they would fain lay this Brat of Treason at the door of
our Reformation, which we may with greater Justice return back to themselves,
who are the more proper Dads, and Patrons of it; for that the faults and
miscarriages of Princes should be censured and punished, either by their high
Priests, or by the representatives of the people, is a Doctrine that was never
taught or owned by any other, than Jesuits, or Jesuited Fanatics: some of
which latter sort are mere Machines acted only at the Will of those wandering
Spirits, the disguised Ghosts of our Kingdom, who walk in darkness, and would
haunt us to a Civil Death; they find these zealous Brothers, fit tools to
employ in the unhinging of our Government, and in pulling of this stately
fabric in pieces over our secure Heads; when alas, should they Midwive their
Treason into the World without a Miscarriage, themselves would be first buried
in the Ruins of it; yet are they ready to lodge any needless fears in their
disturbed Breasts, and to entertain any factious whispers against their
Superiors, with the strongest apprehensions of some approaching danger, which
they strive to prevent by turning their Asses Ears into Horns, and goring the
sides of Government, which can never be so peaceably established, as when these
Horns by the Sword of Justice are pared off, and taken away; for men of unquiet
and Seditious Spirits, may be justly termed wicked. But

Secondly, The word Wicked, may be taken in a more large and unlimited sense,
and thus it denotes the vicious, and ungodly; such as are strangers to
morality, as well as true piety; and these deserve the severest cognizance of
our Laws; they are most obnoxious to the Laws of Men, who have lost the respect
and obedience which is due to the Laws of God; whom neither the rewards nor
terrors of another Life can move nor affright; who will never take any other
measures, but such as their own lusts shall give; nor will make any difference
between things sacred and profane; who, if they could but avoid the censures
of all Courts below, resolve never to be scared from their Crimes with fears at
so great a distance, as those of the dreadful Tribunal above; and were it but
as easy to take away the wickedness of these men, as it is to find it, how
happy might we be? We have out-grown the former times in vice, and can teach
new modes of pride, and luxury, to which they were the greatest strangers; so
far have they been overdone in wickedness by their improved posterity, we have
changed the Simplicity of the former times into Subtilty and Hypocrisy; their
Loyalty into Faction and Rebellion; their Chastity into Chambering and
Wantonness; their Charity into Sacrilege and Oppression; their Church-Building
into Church-Robbing: These stain the Glories of our Kingdom, and find
employment for the Sword of Justice, which should pursue Sin into its closest
retreats, and should force it from the Horns of those Altars whereunto it flies
for a refuge. Nor does it always seek to shroud it self in darkness, but goes
sometime barefaced without shame, even in the sight of the Sun; so that many
who have so much wickedness as to commit the greatest Crimes, yet have they not
so much modesty as to conceal them. These are the proper Subjects of this act;
and the Sword is, by the Ordinance of God, put into the, Romans 13. 4. Rulers
hands, chiefly for this end, that he may execute wrath upon such workers of
Iniquity, who are the greatest enemies to the Kingdoms peace; so that whilst we
are sensible of no dangers, but such as come either from the Popish, or from
the Presbyterian Faction; and dread no Storm, but what is blown either from
Rome, or from Geneva; we may overlook the most dangerous of all Plotters, and
may leave the greatest Rebels lodged perhaps in our own Breasts, our Sins I
mean; which once removed, we should quickly gain a Conquest over all the rest
of our opposers; the threatening Clouds would easily be overblown, and and all
our Foes would be made our Footstool; but so long as these are spared and
suffered, it would argue the greatest vanity and presumption in us, to expect
so great a Blessing; for wickedness carries always a Curse in its Womb, of
which sooner or later it will be delivered to the sorrow of those who carry
such an unhappy burden. And this brings me to

The third and last part, to the reason of this removal; because the suffering
of such wicked men is not consistent with the safety of the Kings Person, nor
with the due establishment of his Throne: And if you take the word Wicked in
the former, and more restrained sense, it has been abundantly confirmed by the
dear experience of all Ages, that the near approaches of such unquiet, and
seditious Spirits, have not only shaken the Thrones, but have proved fatal to
the lives of the best of Princes; and the forbearance of such, is but a turning
of so many Tigers loose amongst us. Suffer such Snakes to be nursed up under
the warm wing of Majesty, and all the return which they make for their safety,
and protection is, but to turn Parricides, and to sting their common parent,
and patron, to whose indulgence they owe their Lives and Fortunes; and from
whom they have received that power, which they would by a monstrous and
unworthy return, employ to his Ruin: But if you take the word Wicked in the
largest sense for the vicious, and ungodly, it will appear very reasonable that
these should be taken away, who are not only Traitors to God, and to
themselves, but betray the peace and happiness of the Kingdom, and bring
Plagues upon the places where they live; and by their Crimes are undermining
the very Throne which they pretend to guard. It Is true, they may make many
foolish boastings of an impregnable Loyalty, and may entertain all Companies
with an account of what they have done and suffered in His Majesty's Service,
when by their Vices and Debaucheries they have contributed more to the removal
of his Throne, than their Swords or Councels could ever do to its
establishment. We find the people of Israel thus threatened, 1 Samuel 12. 27. But
if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed both ye and your King. It Is
not said if your King do wickedly (though Princes are no more exempted from the
common Infirmities, than they are from the common Nature of Mankind) but if ye
do wickedly, which shows, that the best of Princes may bear the burden of
their Subjects Sins, and may in this sense be as our late Sovereign of Blessed
Memory was, the peoples Martyr. Is it ever likely that he should be a good
Subject to his Prince, who is a known Rebel against God? or that he should be so
much concerned for the Honor and safety of a Crown on Earth, who vouches such
a bold contempt of the Majesty of Heaven? His unfaithfulness to himself in the
greatest concerns of Eternity, shows how unfit he is to be entrusted with his
Princes safety; for when he sets so low a price upon his own Soul, that when he
is blinded by his Passion, or bribed by his Lust, he will betray it to never
ending pains and torments, How can we imagine that he should set a greater
value upon the life of his Prince? Surely, when he is blinded by his Ambition,
or bribed by his Lust, or bigoted by a Party, he will tamely give up the most
sacred trust, and may be quickly tempted to turn Rebel: (the true fear of God
lays the strongest engagement upon us to Honor the King; who will find his
Throne to be the best guarded, when the people obey not only for wrath but for
Conscience sake) or if he were willing to engage in so just a Quarrel as that
of his Princes defense, yet will his assistance prove more inconsiderable, when
his Vice has dulled his Head, and weakened his Hand, and has strangely loosed
the powers of his dispirited Soul; when it has let out all that Noble Blood,
which should furnish him with a supply of fresh Courage, so that he is miserably
disabled either for his own, or for his Princes defense: His guilt makes him
unable sometime to engage with the terrors of his own Conscience; then the
resolution quickly cools in his fainting Heart, and the weapons fall out of his
trembling Hand, and he seeks a sanctuary when he should take the Field; nor can
they do any great service, when their Oaths are keener, and wound deeper than
their Swords; and their Debaucheries do a greater mischief to themselves, than
their Blows can ever do to their Enemies; and surely such Deboshe's, and Carpet
Knights, have sometimes been fatal to great Men, and to the best Cause in the
World, which has suffered by so weak a defense.

But futher, Sin deprives us of that which is our great, and only Bulwark
against the Treasons of Men, and the Rage of Devils, which is, the favor and
protection of Almighty God, who will never be the patron of wickedness; this
makes him our Enemy, it sends up a bold challenge to Heaven, and bids defyance
to all its Thunders; it lays us open to that vengeance from above, from which
all the Powers and Policies of the whole World can never secure us: They may
tell us of some clymaterical years, fatal to natural Bodies, and to Bodies
Politic, beyond which, Bodin seems to affirm, that the state of a Kingdom
cannot stand; but whoever felt a Nations languishing Pulse? or could find out
the critical days of a Kingdom? Are its unalterable periods set down by the
irreversible Decrees of God in those Sacred and Eternal Dypticks? or does it
grow weak, and old, and shrivelled, and bowed down with years as the Bodies of
Men do? No, it may flourish still, and continue as the Days of Heaven, as the
Sun and Moon before God, if his Wrath be not provoked by their Impieties: So
that it is not any strange Conjunction of the Planets, nor any Malignant
Influence of the Stars, which bodes the Death of Princes, and the ruin of
States; but the loose Manners, and the ungracious Lives of the people; these
are the surest prognostics of ruin; and if these be but once taken away, all
is safe. This the very Heathens did conclude; for when one was demanded, what
was the strongest Guard to a Kings Throne? He answered, The Piety and Innocence
of his Subjects: For if they were vicious, an Hundred Brazen Walls would prove
too weak for its defense. Nay, Matchiavel himself owns the wickedness of Men,
to be the ruin of Kingdoms. But we need no such Testimonies, finding this
Truth confirmed by the Sacred Book of God, and by the common experience of
Mankind. We may Read it in the Ruins of many once flourishing Kingdoms; and may
find, that God has turned many fruitful Land into Barrenness, for the
wickedness of those that dwelt therein: So evident is it, that if Atheism, and
Debauchery, Faction and Heresy be so common amongst us, these Sins, like the
Traitors in the Trojan Horse, will do us more mischief than Thousands of other
enemies in many years could ever do. The reasonableness of this execution does,
I hope, now appear unto you, and you see that men of Seditious spirits, and
ungodly lives are justly obnoxious to the censures of our Laws; they are to be
taken away, because the forbearance of such is inconsistent with the due
settlement of the Kings Throne, and the Kingdoms Peace; and when this is once
done, we may expect the Blessing set down in the latter part of my Text, where
we find a confluence of all those Blessings that can make an happy Prince, and
a thriving people: Here Mercy and Truth are met together; Righteousness and
Peace have kissed each other; and whatsoever can add to the glory and security
of a Nation, we find it here summed up in one short period. For there do the
people sit under the kindest influences of Heaven; there do they enjoy the
greatest favors upon Earth, where the Kings Throne is established in
Righteousness; a Blessing of such an absolute necessity to the common Peace and
safety of Mankind, that the want of this does not only take away the
flourishing, but the very being of a Kingdom; Take but Government once out of
the World, and we shall quickly find it run back into a State infinitely more
deplored than that of its first confusion; the whole Earth would be nothing
else, but a vast Wilderness; but an howling desert of Satyrs, and Savages; but
a Type of Hell; and men would be but a more cunning kind of brutes or fiends
rather, devouring, and being devoured one of another; and Government it self
without Monarchy, without the Throne of a King, would be a monstrous, and
confused Body with many Heads, whose disorders, would be its death; it would
quickly crumble it self in pieces by its private Factions, and interests; it
would be subdivided into several Parties and Cabals, each whereof would strive
to bear down their opposers, and to raise themselves upon the ruins of those
whom they either fear or hate; and when they have gained a share in the
Government, they would sooner be drawn to improve their short lived power for
their private advantage, and might be tempted to take measures from their own
coveteousness and ambition, rather than from the Public Good: So that no other
kind of Government can make so reasonable a provision for the Peace and
happiness of a people, as Monarchy can do: And Monarchy it self, the Throne of
a King, without a due establishment, will prove but a tottering, and uneasy
Seat, like old Ely's stool, from whence some of the most deserving Princes
(worthy of a better fate) have been thrown headlong down the precipice of an
untimely death; and even the firmest seeming settlement of a Throne without
Righteousness, would be nothing else but a medley of Tyranny and Injustice. Now
here all these inconveniences are avoided, and we meet with a concurrence of
all the requisites to a Kingdoms Peace and hapiness. For here is,

1st. The best Government's the Throne of a King.

2dly. Here is the best Guard, the strongest supporter of his Throne, and that
is good order, and due establishment.

3dly. Here is the best means in the whole world to procure, and continue so
desirable a settlement; and that is Righteousness. I have no time to enlarge
upon each of these particulars, I shall wish that these may not only be matters
of Speculation and Discourse, but of Experience and Enjoyment. We have at
present all these Blessings, which are the Glory of our Land, the grief and
envy of our Enemies; we have the best of Governments, under the best of
Princes; the best Laws, and the best Religion under Heaven: May these be
continued to us, and to our posterity, till Time it self be outdated, and lost
in Eternity; by that Favor of that God, by whom Kings Reign, and Princes
Decree Justice: To whom be all Honor, Praise, and Glory now and ever, Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed and Sold by Isaac Cleave.
THe second part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, Containing an
exposition of Magna Charta.

The third part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, Concerning
High Treason, and other Pleas of the Crown and Criminal Cause.

The fourth part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, Concerning the
Jurisdiction of Courts, all three by Ed. Cook, Mil.

The Reports of that Reverand and Learned Judge, the Right Honorable Sir Henry
Hobert Knight and Barronet; Lord Chief Justice of His Majesty's Court of
Common Pleas.

Offinia Brevium, Select and approved forms of Judicial Writs, and other
Process, with their Returns and Entries in the Court of Common Pleas at
Westminster; as also Special Pleadings to Writs of Scire facias.

A Vindication of the true Christian Religion, in opposition to the Abomination
of Popery, in a Sermon upon Exekiel 21. 24, 25, 26, 27. Being the Text
appointed for Master Whitebread, one of the Popish Consprators, to Preach upon
the accomplishing their wicked design. By J. Thomas, Rect. of St. Nicholas,
Preached at Cardiff. before the Bailiffs and Aldermen there.

The Popes Cabinet unlocked, or a Catalogue of all the Popes Indulgences
belonging to the Order of St. Mary; together with a List of all the Indulgences
daily, yearly, and for ever, Written in Italian, by Fr. Arcangelo Tortello, of
the Order of St. Mary; and now translated into English by John Sidway, late
Seminary Priest; but now of the Reformed Religion, and Vicar of Selling in
Kent; and one of the Discoverers of the Horrid Popish Plot, with the Cause of
his Conversion. Whereunto is added an Appendix, by the Translator, in which the
grounds and foundations of the said Indulgences being examined, are utterly
overthrown; and by consequence, Indulgences themselves apparently proved to be
mear Cheats: And also showing, that the Church of Rome does lay the chief Basis
of their Religion on Indulgences.

The Book of Rates now used in the Sum Custom-House of the Church of Rome;
Containing the Bulls, Dispensations and Pardons for all manner of villainies and
wickedness, with the several sums of Money given, and to be paid for them. The
second Impression.

To which is added the New Creed of the Church of Rome, and several other
Remarkable things not in the former Edition.

Published by Anthony Egane, B. D. late Confessor General of the Kingdom of
Ireland; but now of the Reformed Religion.

Englands Improvement Revived, in a Treatise of all manner of Husbandry and
Trade, by Land and Sea, plainly discovering the several ways of improving all
sorts of waste and barren Grounds, and enriching all Earths with the natural
quality of all Lands, and the several Seeds and Plants which must naturally
thrive therein; together with the manner of Planting all sorts of Trees and
Underwoods, with two several Chains to plant Seeds or Sets by, with several
directions for planting of Hops; also the way of ordering Cattle, with several
observations about Sheep, and choice of Cows, etc. By John Smith, Gent.


