THE CASE OF All Persons comprised in the Articles or Capitulations of the City
of Waterford, Fort and Castle of Bophin, and the Towns of Sligo and Drogheda in
the Kingdom of Ireland, humbly offered to the Consideration of the Honorable
the Knights Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament assembled.
THe Capitulations of WATERFORD, whereby all Persons comprised therein, are to
enjoy their Estates, were made with, and signed by, his Majesty in Person in
the second Year of his Reign, at his Royal Camp near CARRICK. And his Majesty
being resolved, that the said Articles, so given and agreed to by himself,
should be punctually kept and performed, and all the Security possible given to
the Persons concerned, was graciously pleased to order that the said Articles
should be ratified under the great Seal of ENGLAND, which was accordinly done,
and all the Persons entitled to the Benefit of the same, continued and
protected ever since, in the Possession of their Estates and Properties.

But now so it is, That by a Bill depending before the Honorable the House of
Commons, for applying all the forfeited Estates and Interests in IRELAND, and
all Grants thereof, and all the Rents and Revenues belonging to the Crown
within that Kingdom, since the 13th Day of February 1688, to the Use of the
Public, the Adjudications of those comprised in the Articles of LIMERICK and
GALWAY are to be comfirmed; and no mention of, nor Provision whatsoever made
for, the said Capitulations of WATERFORD, to the great Surprise of those
included in the same; who always took themselves to be upon as secure a bottom,
as any other articled Men in IRELAND, and their said Capitulations every way as
binding, and as Authentic as theirs.

There is no Provision neither made in the said Bill for the Articles of
BOPHIN, which are confirmed also under the Great Seal of ENGLAND, nor no Saving
for the Articles of SLIGO, or DROGHEDA which was the first Town that submitted
to their Majesty upon the Security of Public Faith; both which last recited
Articles, are by the Law of Nations, as obligatory and as binding as any of the
rest, although the Persons concerned, confiding very much in the public Faith
giving them as aforesaid, and being for the most part indigent, and not in a
Condition to be at the necessary Expense, made no Application to have their
said Capitulations ratified under the great Seal of ENGLAND. Which Ommission in
the said Bill, if not remedied, or redressed by the Honorable the House of
Commons, may be of the last ill Consequence to a great many Persons, comprised
in the said several Articles, considering that there is a latitude given in the
said Bill, to Prosecute on still for high Treason, any Person or Persons,
concerned in the late War in IRELAND, against the present Government, to which
Prosecution several of the said articled Men apprehend themselves to be liable,
if not protected by their said Capitulations, and provided for in the said Bill.

It is therefore humbly hoped, that the Honorable the House of Commons, will
take the Cast (...) Persons concerned in the said Capitulations into
Consideration, and make such a Provision (...) in the said Bill, as they may
hereafter have the Benefit of their said respective Articies.

THE CASE OF Persons Comprised in the Articles of Waterford, Bophin, Sligo, and
Drogheda, in the Kingdom of Ireland.


