THE CASE OF Mary Walwyn, Widow of John Walwyn Esquire Petitioner against the Right
Honorable Charles Earl of Monmouth.
JOHN Walwyn Esquire the Petitioners Husband being but Tenant for life of an Estate
of 400 l. per annum in the County of Hereford and having by the Petitioner two
Sons both Lunaticks or Idiots, in whom the Inheritance of the said Estate was;
and having two Daughters unprovided for, he being indebted and weak in Body,
considering the sad condition of his said Family, and being not able to make
any Jointure or Provision for his Wife and young Children, or payments of his
Debts after his decease he out of a prudential care to prevent his Sons falling
into the hands of Strangers, and the better to secure his Creditors the Payment
of their respective Debts did in his life time, viz. 26. June 1684. obtain a
Patent to the Petitioners Mr. Serg. Geeres, and Robert Dobyns Esquire for the
Custody of the Persons and Estates of his said Sons, the better to enable the
Petitioner after his death to pay his Debts; and to make some Provision for her
self, and other Children out of the Remainder of the Profits of the said
Estate; which said Patent was afterward renewed by the same Patentees, in the
Reign of the late King James, but being made only during pleasure, it became
void by the Demise of the said late King James: Whereupon one of the said Sons
being then dead, the same Patentees obtained a new Order from the Lords
Commissioners of the great Seal, for renewing the said Patent as to the
surviving Idiot; but before the Patent was passed, the Right Honorable the Earl
of Monmouth, preferred a Petition to the said Lords Commissioners for the
Custody to be granted to him; whereupon Council were heard on both sides before
the then Lords Commissioners; who, upon due consideration had to your
Petitioners own and her Families circumstances, and the value of the Estate,
did not think fit to grant the Custody away from the Petitioner; but afterward
the said Earl procured a Warrant from his Majesty for the same to be granted to
him the said Earl, and then the Lords Commissioners in obedience to His
Majesty's Commands, did 29. Jan. 1689. Order and direct that the Petitioner
should have the keeping of the said Son, and that there should be allowed and
paid to the Petitioner out of the said Estate, for the maintenance of her Self
and the said Idiot, and toward the Relief of his said Sisters (which Sisters
are both married and have between them 9 small Children) the annual Sum of 200
l. and the Surplusage of the Rents and Profits to be answered and paid to the
said Earl of Monmouth; and with these directions the said Lords Commissioners
did order a Grant to be passed the great Seal, which Grant passed accordingly
durante beneplacito as is usual. But the said Earl, not so contented, did
afterward obtain another Warrant from His Majesty, bearing date on or about 5.
Apr. 1690. directed to the said Lords Commissioners for passing another Patent
unto his said Lordship, for the said Custody during the life of the Idiot: And
the said Lords Commissioners in obedience to His Majesty's Commands did order
such Grant should pass, but subject to the aforesaid Order of the 29. Jan. then
last past, which was ordered should stand and be observed in all things, save
only as to the duration of the Ideocy. Which second Patent passed the Seal soon
after under the Restrictions aforesaid.

Tho during the time of the aforesaid Proceedings his Lordship was pleased to
promise, in regard the thing was harder on the Family than his Lordship at
first apprehended; That he would stop his Proceedings: Notwithstanding his
Lordship soon after sent his Agents in to the Country, to gather up the Rents
of the said Estate, and not only that, but the Arrears of Rent due before his
said Patent, and took no Care for the maintenance of the Petitioner and her
said Son and numerous Family, according to the aforesaid Order: By reason of
which the Petitioner and the Tenants of the Estate being well advised, refused
to deliver up Possession, or to attorn Tenants to him: And thereupon in Trinity
Term 1690. petitioned the Lords Commissioners to grant him a Writ of Assistance
to put him in Possession of the said Estate. But their Lordships well
remembering the Matter so often before them declared; That the Petitioners Case
was a Case of very great Compassion, and that the Petitioner should have what
was ordered her: And their Lordships appointed a Day to hear all Parties first,
which Hearing the said Earl was pleased to decline, as it may be presumed,
fearing their Lordships would not grant him what he by violence and force of
Arms soon after possessed himself of. And by reason of his Lordships Peerage,
the Petitioner durst not proceed before the said Lords Commissioners, to have a
performance of the said Order: And so matters rested till the 11 th. day of
Aug. last past. On which day the said Earl of Monmouth with a great number of
Attendants, in a forcible manner entered the Capital Message of the said Estate
called Hellens, in the said County of Hereford, where the Petitioner with her
said Son and his Sisters, and their Husbands then lived; and having got into
the lower Rooms of the said House, and put the said Sisters Husbands under a
Guard, his Lordship the said Earl of Monmouth with the Assistance of other
Persons, broke open the two Doors of the Chamber, where the Petitioner and her
said Son and his Nurse then were, and seized her said Son, and so from that day
being Tuesday till Monday following kept him in the said Chamber under a Guard,
and afterward carried him away, contrary to the said Lords Commissioners
Order, upon which his Patent was grounded. After which Surprisal of the said
House, the Tenants of the said Estate were sent for by the said Earl of
Monmouth, whom he threatened what he would do to them if they did not pay to him
the Rents and Arrears, as well due before as since his said Patent: By which
means most of them paid his Lordship some Rents and Arrears, out of which he
paid the Petitioner only 100 l. whereas there was then due to her above 400 l.
for the maintenance of her said Son and Family by virtue of the said Order.

Whilst these things were carried on by his Lordship, his Lordship was pleased
with one hand to seize the Person of the Petitioners Daughter, with a Pistol in
the other hand, commanding her to show to his Lordship the Chamber where the
Idiot her Brother was, which she being in extreme fright did do, and for what
Reason is best known to his Lordship, likewise kicked with his Foot the
Petitioners Sister; and his Lordship being asked by what Authority his Lordship
did all these things, he one while told them he had a Writ of Assistance, and
that one Pennington was gone for the Sheriff; and at other times told them,
that in Case they had given him any Opposition, he would have blown the House
up. And now his Lordship having in manner aforesaid gotten Possession of the
Petitioners said (...), Person, and Estate; the Petitioner and her said Family
are stripped of all, and cannot go for Relief to any but the Right Honorable
(...) Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament; From whom the Petitioner
implores their Lordships determination in the Premises, (...) the Necessities
of her Self and Family, which are 2 Daughters and their 10 Children, who must
fall under insupportable Pe(...), without their Lordships think fit to put them
into the same Condition in which they were by the Patent of King Charles II.
and re(...) by the late King, for the ends and purposes aforesaid, (viz.) the
Payments of the Just Debts of the Petitioners late Husband, and (...) Provision
for a numerous Family.


