The Case of Mr. Robinson and Mr. Thompson, truly Stated. In Answer to the
Complaint of Mr. Woolaston, for a pretended Breach of Privilege.
MR. Woolaston complained to this Honorable House against Mr. Robinson, Mr.
Thompson, and others, for a Breach of Privilege; pretending, That he had been
for several Months in the quiet Possession of Woodhall House and Park; and that
the said Mr. Robinson and Mr. Thompson, with several others, in a Riotous and
violent manner, during the last Sessions of Parliament, entered upon the same,
and turned the said Mr. Woolaston's Servants out of Possession.

The Truth of the Fact is shortly thus, (viz.)

Mr. Thompson was Tenant of the Premises by virtue of an Order of the Court of
Chancery, and obliged not to assign to any Person, without Order from that
Court; (The Premises being part of the Estate of Philip Boteler, Esquire an Infant,
now, and for some years past under my Lord Chancellor's Guardianship): And Mr.
Woolaston desiring to take the Estate, Mr. Thompson told him he could not
assign him the Possession, without Leave of the Court; nevertheless the said
Mr. Thompson was willing to permit the said Mr. Woolaston and his Friends to be
in the House, and to hunt in the Park, whilst Mr. Thompson was in London; and
thereupon in the presence of Mr. Woolaston writ to his Keeper, then and ever
since in Possession, this Order following, viz.

Mr. Crane, October the 26th. 1697.
MY Affairs not permitting me to come into the Country this Winter but very
little, and Mr. Woolaston having desired that he and some Friends of his may
have the Liberty of the Park and the House, until I come down; Th^^^fore this
is to acquaint you, That I would have you to observe all Mr. Woolaston Orders
and Directions in my Absence, as much as if you had my Ord^^ for any thing he
desires; and kill what Deer and Rabbits Mr. Woolaston orders* and dispose of
them as he directs; and this shall be your Authority.

Yours, Robert Thompson.
This is further to let you know, That I expect you kill no Deer, without Mr.
Woolaston 's Order.




Which the said Mr. Woolaston delivered to the said Keeper, and only by virtue
thereof had the use of the House, and liberty to hunt in the Park for about 6
Months. But the Court of Chancery ordering that Mr. Robinson should succeed
Tenant to Mr. Thompson; and the said Mr. Thompson justly fearing that the said
Mr. Woolaston would (upon being disappointed of succeeding him) use too great a
Liberty, (for which Mr. Thompson must have been answerable to the Court;) he
did thereupon turn such out of the House as he had permitted to be there with
his Keeper; and did then order his Keeper no longer to permit the said Mr.
Woolaston or any of his Friends to hunt in the Park.

Now forasmuch as the said Mr. Woolaston was never in Possession of the
Premises, but there only by the Permission aforesaid: It Is humbly hoped the
Honorable Committee will not adjudge the said Mr. Thompson guilty of a Breach
of Privilege, only for turning some out of his own House; of which himself (by
his Keeper) Then had, and still does keep the Possession.

SIR, This Complaint is to be heard before the Committee on Friday the 6th of
this Instant; when you are desired to be present.

