The CASE of Mr. WIN, AGAINST Capell, Swain and Price, PETITIONERS.
John Capell. THE 24th of March 1688/9, he delivered me at Hampton Court, an
Information of his own Handwriting; which I delivered the same Day to the
Right Honorable the Earl of Shrewsbury. Some Days after, Capell asked me for
some Money, to defray his Charges back to Windsor: But I not complying with his
Desire, he has ever since Published, That I had Suppressed Treasonable
Informations, calling me, Traitor, etc. Whereupon I was advised to take my
Remedy at Law against him; and complaining to the Bench of Justices of the
Peace in Middlesex, for being Scandalized in my Office, obtained a
Bench-Warrant against the said Capell, upon the 29th of August 1689. Being
taken in November, he appeared according to his Recognizance at Hicks-Hall, on
the 16th of December, being the last Day of the Sessions. I desired he might be
continued till the next Sessions, for that I had fresh and further Informations
against him; and objecting against his Bail, viz. John Temple, and John Price,
as being reputed Common Informers, and Insolvent, the said Capell was Committed
for want of Bail, and not for the Reasons suggested to the Honorable House of
Commons, as by the Votes of the 17th of December.

Robert Swain He and another, brought before me (in August 1689) one White,
alias Gray, a suspected Popish Priest; White alleged, he was a Minister of the
Church of England, but could not produce to me his Letters of Ordination. I
told him, That I must then commit him to Jail; he replied, He had been taken up
already by the same Warrant, (and by the same Persons) about a Month before,
and stood Bound over to the next Sessions, before two other Justices of the
Peace, (as by the Recognizance will appear;) So that I directed them, to apply
to the same Justices again, if they had any thing further to say against him.

Swain has ever since Published, 1. That I had Discharged a Popish Priest. 2.
That I was a Rogue, and Ryscal, and held Correspondence with the late King
James. 3. That he had told the King's Majesty, how that I had betrayed His
Majesty, and the Nation, by Discovering the Counsels to the late King James,
etc. 4. That before HE and OTHERS would have done with me, they would have me
in Newgate, and used as a Traitor; that in the mean time, he had got me turned
out of the Secretary of State's Office, etc. As does appear by several
Informations upon Oath, Numb. 1, 2, 3, 4. Upon which, I was also advised, to
bring my Action at Law against the said Swain, which is now depending.

John Price One of the Three Petitioners, I know not, and never had any
Discourse with him; only in the abovesaid Informations upon Oath, the Names of
Capell, Swain, and Price, (with some other English, and Irish Men,) are
mentioned to be a Gang, that drive on the Trade of Common Informers, and such
as Conspired together to do me Mischief.

That Capell, Swain, and Price, are Common Informers.
That Capell is such, appears by his having followed no other Trade since March
last; and being Committed the 16th of December, for want of Bail, declared, It
would be a Job worth to him 20 l. As by Affidavit upon Oath, Numb. 9.

That he Lodged at a Papists House, and protected Papists, by pretending to be
one of the Kings Messengers; And took Money of Papists, to excuse them from
being taken up, Numb. 10. 11.

Swain That he took Money of People he seized upon pretense of High Treason,
without showing any Warrant, or using any Legal Officer, as by Affidavits upon
Oath, Numb. 4, 5, 7, 8, 11.

That he prosecuted one, some years ago, for speaking Seditious Words against
the late King James; and offered to Compound for a Treat, and some Money; and,
for a Guinea to get the Indictment found Ignoramus, Numb. 8.

Price That he often passed for one of the Kings Messengers, appears by the
abovesaid Affidavits upon Oath, ( Numb. 5, 6, 7, 11.) which are against him,
and Swain, jointly. And that he and his Gang, pretending they were the Kings
Officers, Riffled Houses, without either Warrant or Constable, taking away
several Books, and other Things, Numb. 6.


