The CASE of great Numbers of SILK-VVEAVERS, as well French Protestants as
English, who are Makers of Lutestrings and Alamodes Silks in Spittle-fields,
and other Parts of England, in relation to a Clause Offered by the Lutestring
Company, to be Incerted in the Cole Act, Concerning the Sealing the said Silks.
I. FIrst, they are very sensible that there is considerable Quantities of
French Lutestrings, and Alamodes Imported into England, to the Prejudice of the
said Manufactury here, and are ready to Join with the Lutestring Company in
Petitioning the Honorable House of Commons, to prevent the same for the
future, being equally prejudiced by the said Importation with the Lutestring
Company.

II. But it seems by the Clause, That the Intent of the said Lutestring Company
is not only to prevent Importation of French Lutestring, and Alamode, but to
prevent all other Weavers (but what works to them) to make the said Silks,
contrary to a Clause inserted in their Patent upon the Petition of the Weavers,
that nothing therein contained should be construed to Obstruct or Hinder the
Weavers from making the same; or to that Effect.

III. The Clause offered by the said Patentees is, That all Alamodes, and
Lutestrings shall be Seized, and a Fine of 100 l. on those in whose Custody
they are found that are not Sealed at the Custom-house, or by their Company.

IV. They know that they will Seal none at the Custom-house, but what are
Imported from beyond Seas, or seized and condemned by Law, and the Lutestring
Company will Seal none, nor indeed can but what they make themselves, and what
is not Sealed is to be Forfeited, so that here will be all the Weavers in
England that make the said Silks, and are not of that Company (which are and
would be a far greater Number than those employed by the Lutestring Company) if
they were not interrupted in their Lawful Callings; and if not Relieved by the
Honorable House, may be the Ruin of their Wives, Children and Families.

V. The said Lutestring Company will then oblige the said Persons to work to
them at their own Prices, or to leave off working on the said Silks, and by
that means discourage the Growth of the Manufacture; and by Monopolizing to
themselves the Sole Dealing, and will set what Price they please on the said
Silks in prejudice of all the Subjects of England.

VI. Therefore, It is most humbly prayed, That there may some Provision be
made, that may pass with the said Clause to appoint where those Lutostrings and
Alamodes shall be Sealed that are made in England, by Weavers that work for
themselves, and not for the Lutestring Company; And that the same Penalty may
be laid upon those (that being Appointed) shall refuse to Seal their Silks, as
there is to be on them that do not Seal them at all.

THE CASE OF THE Weavers.


