The CASE of Francis Stratford Esquire; Sitting Member for the Borough of Newport,
in the County of Cornwall, against JOHN PRIDEAUX Esquire; Petitioner.
UPON the Day of Election, the Vianders adjourned the Poll to the House of John
Rattenbury, where all were admitted before the Poll began; But there appearing
very many Unqualified Voices amongst them, the Vianders found themselves
obliged to take convenient time to consult the Rates, and to inform themselves
fully, who were good Voices, before they declared the Election. The next Day
after, they Signed the Indenture for the Sitting Member at Werington, but a
Mile distant from the Borough; The 23th. Stat. of Hen. 6. Chap. 15. not
obliging them either to Time or Place.

The Sitting Member had 39 Voices.

The Petitioner had -- 72

Against the latter, 50 were excepted against, as not duly qualified, and 13
more having received Gifts and Entertainments were left to be disqualified by
this House.

45 Forty five were excepted against for having no Freehold in the Borough, or
not paying Scot and Lot.

11 The Petitioner's Council gave up Eleven, (viz.) Mat. Pomroy, Christopher
May, John Lucas, Isaac Carter, John Kellard, Robert Frost Junior, John Bear,
William Bray, Thomas Hodge, John Paul, William Kingdom Junior.

12 Twelve others not justified or spoke to by the Petitioner, (viz.) Nich.
Hodge, Tho. French, Francis Manaton, William Bewes Junior, William Bunsell,
Alex. Carew, Ely Foster, Degory Doidge, John Dimsie, Abel Rawl, Nicholas
Kittau, Degory Glanville.

4 Four no farther justified, than by Saying they had Voted formerly, (viz.)
Oliver White, Thomas Baker, Samuel Gift, Thomas Facy.

4 Four acknowledged by the Petitioner to be only Trustees, (viz.) Edward
Ellyot Esquire; Phil. Congdon, William Prout, Nicholas Phillips.

4 Four Produced Sham-Deeds without Livery, (viz.) William Major, John, Dawe,
Chr. Burnard, William Patchcott, Disqualified.

1 Robert Hecks owned he was put upon the Poor rate only to entitle him to a
Vote, but never Paid, and had 2 s. 6. d. given him.

1 John Clements rate appeared to be only for Skirme's House.

1 William Carry Esquire; was at the Committee, and did not pretend to be a
Freeholder, and John Wood declared, That he went with Degory Bewes to view his
Land, and they agreed it was in the Manor, but not in the Borough.

1 Degory Geake is no Payer, as appears by the Poor rate left on the Table.

1 William Bewes Senior, no Payer, proved by a Deed left on the Table, whereby
Degory Bewes is obliged by Covenant to pay the rates.

1 Philip King produced a Deed of 9 d. per Annum, but could not say he had
received any Rent in 20 Years.

1 Richard Kingdom Junior, had a Freehold made in consideration of Marriage,
which was not consummated till after the Election.

1 Tho. Wood produced a Deed for a Freehold, and John Wood offered to produce
another proving the Sale of his Lands, which the Committee did not think fit to
allow of, nor to admit of Evidence to prove others had been treated besides the
13 mentioned in the Poll, which your Sitting Member thought a great hardship,
by Reason when the Council would have confronted some of the Petitioner's
Witnesses, they were told, they should be heard afterward.

5 Five Voted for Estates others had done before, (viz.) Chr. Baron, Voted for
the same Tenement John Murth Voted for.

Arth. Tucker, for the same Estate John Harris Voted for before.

Tho. Wadden, for the same Plott of Land Leonard Pethick Voted for.

William Yeo, for the same Land John Fortescue Voted for.

Henry Glanville, for the same Tenement John Bartlet Voted for; and was also
treated.

13 Thirteen received Gifts and Entertainments, (viz.) Thomas Horwell, Walter
Kingdom, John Bennet, Robert Frost, Senior, Nicholas Burt, William Kingdom,
Senior, John Pearce, Degory Doidge, Senior, Christopher Kingdom, Edward
Kingdom, Paul Hopegood, Robert Pepperel, Timothy Harvey.

61 -- Sixty One Disqualified in all.

11 -- Eleven only remained good.

Of the Sitting Member's 39 Votes, 17 were excepted against, whereof 6 were
disqualified, and 3 stood dubious. So remains at least 30 good Voices, which
makes a Majority of 19 for your Sitting Member.

The Gifts and Entertainments were Proved as follow:
Robert Hecks declared, That he had 2 s. 6 d. given him by the Parson, Ely
Foster, who desired his Vote at the same time for Mr. Prideaux.

That the said Foster ordered him to draw 10 s. in Drink for Mr. Prideaux's
Friends, which he accordingly did.

That about Forty of Mr. Prideaux's Voters were Treated at Mr. Horwell's with
Cider, and about Twenty Gallons of Punch, where Mr. Prideaux was present, and
desired their Votes.

That Mr. Prideaux, and several of his Voices, drank out a Barrel of Ale at Mr.
Foster's, which was sent in from a Publick-House.

That Mr. Prideaux was at Christopher Kingdome's with most part of his Voices,
and drank with them before the Election.

That he told Mr. Foster, He thought he would get a Hundred Guinea's for his
Interest and Pains in procuring Votes for Mr. Prideaux. To which Mr. Foster
answered, No, Robert; but I shall get Fifty by it.

Thomas Kingdom testified, That Mr. Foster said he had received of Mr. Specott
Five and twenty Half Crowns for the Voters, and that he saw him give one to
Degory Doidge, Junior, who Voted for Mr. Prideaux; and also told the said
Thomas, That he and several others were to have Cordivan Gloves the next day at
Mr. Specott's where the said Kingdom went, and so did Horwell, Foster,
Bennett, Pearce, William Bewes, Senior, Edward Kingdom, Richard Kingdom,
Junior, and several others, and Dined there with Mr. Prideaux, and had each of
them a Pair of Gloves; and as soon as the Gloves were given, Mr. Prideaux
called the Glover into another Room, (as he believed) to pay him for them.

John Rattenbury declared, That on the 6th. of January he was with Robert
Pepperel, to wait on Col. Specott, and that Col. Specott sent for him into his
Chamber, and desired his Vote for Mr. Prideaux: Which he refusing, Col. Specott
told him, That he should lose a Pair of Gloves by it; and that Robert Pepperel,
who complied with the Colonel, had Gloves, and he had none.

John Wood declared, That Robert Pepperel, William Kingdom, Senior, and Degory
Doidge had promised him to Vote for Mr. Stratford; but the first acknowledged
to him that he had received Gloves, and the two latter confessed they had each
Half a Crown given them.


