THE CASE OF ALL THE Goldsmiths in England, Out of London.
By Reason of a Clause in an Act of Parliament, made in the 8th and 9th Year of
His Majesty's Reign; Entitled, An Act for Encouraging bringing in Wrought
Plate to be Coined. The whole Clause is as follows.

AND whereas it may reasonably be suspected that part of the Silver Coins of
this Realm has been, by Persons regarding their own Private Gain more than the
Public Good, Molten and Converted into Vessels of Silver or other Manufactured
Plate, which Crime has been the more easily Perpetrated by them, in regard the
Goldsmiths or others, Workers of Plate, by the former Laws and Statutes of this
Realm, are not obliged to make their Plate of Finer Silver than the Sterling or
Standard Ordained for the Moneys of this Realm: Be it therefore Enacted, by the
Authrity aforesaid, That from and after the Five and twentieth Day of March,
One thousad six hundred ninety seven, no Goldsmith, Silversmith or other Person
whatsoever, shall Work or Make, or caused to be Wrought or Made, any Silver
Vessel, Plate or Manufacture of Silver less in Fineness than that of Eleven
Ounces and Ten Penny Weight of Fine Silver in every Pound Troy, nor put to Sale^
Exchange or Sell any Silver Vessels, Plate or Manufacture of Silver made after
the said Five and twentieth Day of March (unless it be Silver Wyre, or such
things, a^ in respect of their smallness, are not capable of receiving a Mark)
until such time a^ such Vessel, Plate or Manufactured Silver shall be Marked as
follows (that is to say) with the Workers Mark, to be expressed by the Two
First Letters of his Surname, the Marks of the Mystery or Craft of the
Goldsmiths, which instead, of the Leopard Head and the Lion, shall for this
Plate be the Figure of a Lions Head erased, an^ the Figure of a Woman, commonly
called Britannia, and a distinct variable Mark to be used by the Warden of the
said Mystery, to denote the Year in which such Plat^ is made, upon Pain that
all such Silver Vessels, Plate or other Manufactured Silve^ which shall be
Made, Exposed to Sale, Sold or Exchanged contrary to this Act, o^ the Value
thereof, shall be Forfeited, the one half thereof, to the King, and the other
half thereof to such Person or Persons that will Seize or Sue for the same, t^
be Recovered by Action, Bill, Suit or Information in any Court of Record, where
in no Essoign, Protection, Wager of Law, or more than one Imparlance shall b^
admitted; And if any Silversmith, Goldsmith or other Person shall after the
sai^ Five and twentieth Day of March make any Silver Vessels, Plate or
Manufacture Silver contrary to this Act, and the same shall be Touched, Marked
or Allowed for Good by the Wardens or Masters of the said Mystery, or those
Authorized (...) Employed by them for the Essaying and Marking of Plate, and if
in the same the^^ shall be found any Falsehood or Deceit, then the Wardens and
Corporation of the Mystery for the time being, shall Forfeit and Pay the Value
of the Plate so decei^ fully Marked, the one half thereof to the King, and the
other half to any Perfo^^^ or Persons that shall Buy the same, and be Grieved
thereby, to be Recovered, as afor^ said; Any thing in this or any former Act or
Acts of Parliament contained, any other Order or Provision heretofore made to
the contray notwithstanding.

In the abovesaid Clause there are two things which we apprehend to be
detrimental to the Nation in general, as well as grievous to us in particular,
and that it does not at all prevent the melting down the Silver Coin of this
Kingdom.

1. For if any Person should be so Ill-disposed, how easiy is it for him to
melt down the Coin, and make it into Plate, for after it is melted, he may
either refine it himself, or get a Refiner to do it for him, for the Price the
new Standard is now advanced to, will pay the Charge, so that the altering the
Standard for Plate, does not at all prevent the melting down the Silver Coin.

2. In the next place, this new Standard is detrimental to the whole Kingdom,
for it lessens the Bullion a 30th part, so that there is one thousand Pound in
Thirty less then there was before the Standard was altered. It is also at the
least 10 per Cent. worse in the Waring than the old Standard, by reason of its
Softness, for in the common Use of it, it will wear away insensibly, which must
needs be a great loss to the Nation yearly.

3. It is very detrimental to all the Workers in Silver in England, except
London, for by this Clause all manner of wrought Plate is Forfeitable which
has not the Britannia Mark on it; which Mark the Londoners appropriate to
themselves, therefore we dare not use it on our Plate, which we make without
incurring the Penalty of Law; so that our Condition is very deplorable, for if
we do conform to the Act in relation to its Fineness, yet we are liable to a
Seizure for want of the Mark, as the Clause in the Act particularly sets forth,
and if we sit still, and work not at all, we and our Families must inevitably
perish. We do not think the Parliament intended our Ruin when this Clause was
inserted, but rather that it was surruptitiously obtained for the private
intrest of a few, for we prove above, that it does not prevent the melting down
the Coin, neither is it any way advantageous to the Nation in any other
respect, but on the contrary prejudicial, for since the Clause was obtained,
the Workers in London have advanced the Price of their Work one Third more than
it was before, knowing we were not able to right our selves.

All these things being put together, we hope the Parliament in their Wisdom
will see it necessary to lay this new Standard aside, and restore the old of 11
oz. 2 dwt. which was both beautiful and serviceable, and above 30 per Cent.
Cheaper to the Nation, and if the Parliament will give leave for a Bill to be
brought in according to the Prayer of our petition, no doubt but they may find
more effectual Ways to prevent the melting down of the Coin.

Why may there not be distinct touches allowed for some eminent Places in this
Kingdom? For in Henry the 6ths time, there was an Act to that purpose.


