THE CASE OF Edmond Boulter, Esquire; In ANSWER to The Petition of the Earl of
Radnor.
THE Substance of the Earl of Radnor's Petition, is, That the Earl, in Right of
his Countess, Daughter of Sir John Cutler, having great Demands on Mr. Boulter,
in relation to the Personal and Real Estate of Sir John Cutler, exhibited a
Bill in Chancery above a Year since, which Mr. Boulter should have Answered
before Hilary-Term then next following; and, That on Mr. Boulter, promising to
comply with the Earl's Demands, the Earl was prevailed with to stop his Suit.

That Mr. Boulter being since a Member of Parliament, refuses to satisfy the
Earl, and to put in his Answer to the Earl's Bill, although he declared to the
Earl, that he did not insist on, but wave his Privilege, but refuses to give
it under his Hand.

The Earl therefore prays the House to Approve of, and Confirm Mr. Boulter's
waving of his Privilege. Upon which Petition, it is observed, That it does not
appear by this Petition, what the Earl's pretended Demands were, nor how they
are Demandable of Mr. Boulter, whether against him in his own Right, or as he
is Executor of Sir John Cutler, or Trustee.

But, Mr. Boulter's Case is thus, (viz.) Sir John Cutler made Mr. Boulter his
Executor, and died the 15th. of April, 1693; and by his Will (after his Debts
and Legacies paid) gave Mr. Boulter his Kinsman all the rest of his Personal
Estate (which by the Custom of London he could give,) one half of which
Personal Estate devolved on the Countess the only Daughter of Sir John Cutler,
a Freeman of London, as her Customary Part. Of which Mr. Boulter has paid the
Earl 39000 l. and upwards: And Mr. Boulter has also, in Funeral Expenses, by
the Earl's Consent and Approbation under his Hand, and by Payment of Debts and
Law-Charges, laid out above 7660 l. Which Payments do consist of very many
Item's or Particulars, a Moiety of which belongs to the Earl to allow out of
his Moiety, and so is in consequence a Payment to him of so much. Besides
which, the Earl has enjoyed the Profits of Lands with his Countess, since her
Father's Death, amounting to about 14000 l.

And as to the Lands Sir John Cutler, by Deed of Settlement, settled all of it
upon Mr. Boulter, and his other Relations, in failure of Issue by his Daughter
the Countess.

After Sir John Cutler's Death, there being great Arrears of Rents from
Tenants, Mr. Boulter being entitled to Half thereof, and many Rents being
desperate, and Tenants poor, the Earl, under Hand and Seal, empowered Mr.
Boulter to make Abatements and Discharges as he did see cause. Which he did,
pursuant to the Power given him.

In relation to the Accounts of which Estate, (after Mr. Boulter had paid the
Earl such great Sums of Money,) the Earl raising many causeless Scruples in
many Particulars, Mr. Boulter though it high time to get an Adjustment and
Allowance of his Accounts, which were very large, and therefore desired the
Earl to adjust the Accounts between them: Which the Earl such great Sums of
Money,) the Earl raising many causeless Scruples in many Particulars, Mr.
Boulter thought it high time to get an Adjustment and Allowance of his
Accounts, which were very large, and therefore desired the Earl to adjust the
Accounts between them: Which the Earl delayed, but still pressed Mr. Boulter
for more Money; and gave out to his Creditors, That Mr. Boulter owed him a
great Sum of Money.

This, as Mr. Boulter (who had paid him near the full Moiety of the Receipts)
conceived, reflected very much upon him, and made him persist to have his
Accounts adjusted. Whereupon, when the Earl could draw no more Money from Mr.
Boulter, he brought the Bill in Chancery, in his Petition mentioned, which is
near Two Hundred and Fifty Sheets of Paper, complaining that Mr. Boulter would
not come to Account, and charging therein many things of great Reflection upon
Mr. Boulter.

Upon which, Mr. Boulter attended the Earl concerning them; who told Mr.
Boulter, That most of the Charges in that Bill was his Councel's Invention, and
against his Knowledge or Intent: And Mr. Boulter still pressed to have the
Accounts settled and allowed speedily, (Mr. Boulter being unwilling to leave
them unsettled, in case of his Death.) And the Earl promised fair, but Mr.
Boulter could get nothing finished, although the Earl made some proceedings;
which were only done, as Mr. Boulter conceived, to incline Mr. Boulter to pay
him more Money, but in a short time desisted therein.

When the Earl found that he could not prevail with Mr. Boulter to pay him more
Money, until the Accounts were actually settled and allowed, and there being
considerable of the Personal Estate still standing out, particularly near 20000
l. from William Lenthall, upon a Mortgage of Land in Oxfordshire, and upon the
Profits of the Office of Marshal of the King's Bench; the Earl desired to
compass that Debt or Estates to himself, and to have an Assignment of that
Security in further part of his Customary Part of Sir John Cutler's Personal
Estate. And Mr. Boulter was willing to comply with the Earl's Request, provided
he might have his Accounts settled and adjusted, and offered the Earl to abate
him 1000 l. of his share of that Debt.

Whereupon the Earl, April 30. School.
after the Bill Exhibited, Entered into an Agreement under Hand and Seal with
Mr. Boulter, that all Accounts between him and Mr. Boulter, relating to the
Executorship, and otherwise, should be forthwith Adjusted, and to perform other
Matters in that Agreement. But the Accounts are not yet settled by the Earl,
nor the other Matters (as Covenanted by the Earl to be done) although Mr.
Boulter has consented to a Marshal at the Earl's Request, and by that
Agreement, has let the Earl into Possession of the Profits of the Office of
Marshal, on which the Earl has reserved 1000 l. per Annum, as Mr. Boulter is
informed; and though the Earl does not perform that Agreement, yet the Earl
presses Mr. Boulter to make him an Assignment of Lenthall's. Land-Security
immediately, but procures not Mr. Lenthall to settled his Accounts with Mr.
Boulter; nor does the Earl perform the Agreement that relates to his Covenant
for other Matters for Lenthall to do. And Mr. Boulter does apprehend, that if
the should Assign to the Earl the Land-Security, without Settlement of
Lenthall's Account, it would after Involve Mr. Boulter in Trouble with Lenthall
on those unsettled Accounts with Lenthall.

Note, That since the said Agreement, the Earl and Mr. Boulter's Accomptants
have been Adjusting the Accounts in an amicable Way, and have gone a great way
in it; But the Earl will not settle the Accounts, upon pretense Mr. Boulter
keeps some Writings touching the Estate in Cambridgeshire; which (as is
alleged) the Earl Claims the Inheritance of, by a Gift from Mr. Boulter, to
the Earl and Countess; which if it be true, the Earl has the less reason to
Complain of Mr. Boulter, being 2500 l. per Annum Inheritance, and being settled
on the Countess for her Life, and on her Issue only: And she is Dead without
Issue. But the Matter of that Matter touching the Cambridgeshire Estate, is
also Controverted.

Wherefore, and in respect of the said Agreement, made long since the Earl's
Bill Filed, Mr. Boulter hops that this Honorable House will not Interpose,
until the Earl has performed his Agreement made since the Bill Exhibited,
relating to the Settling and Adjusting all Accounts of the Executorship, and
otherwise, as Agreed to be amicably done, and which are so far forwarded by Mr.
Boulter, that Mr. Boulter has permitted the Earl's own Agent to take a full
Account thereof, and of the Inventory of the whole Personal Estate, and of all
Receipts and Disbursements, and they are all before the Earl, to Allow, or make
his particular Objections thereunto; which, as yet, the Earl has not done; but
contrary to his Agreement, would without any Just Cause, engage Mr. Boulter in
a Troublesome and Chargeable Suit in Chancery.

As to Mr. Boulter's waving his Privilege, he has done no Act since he was a
Member for any such Purpose; But he believes he might (being asked whether he
would insist on his Privilege) say, he believed he should not. But surely,
every slight word will not make a Waver of Privilege of a Member.

As to the Matter of the Lord De la Ware and Sir John Cutler, it was thus; Sir
John Cutler had put in an Answer in Chancery, and submitted to many Orders to
be made in time of Privilege, without Complaint of any Breach; and afterward
would have resumed his Privilege;

Which the House would not permit him to do.

In this Case there are only such Words pretended, as before.

Mr. Boulter 's Intent is only to avoid a tedious Suit in Chancery upon
Account, and have all his Accounts adjusted by a Reference to Indifferent
Persons; which if the Earl refuses, Mr. Boutler being accomptable, in his own
Person and Estate, for what he has done touching Sir John Cutler 's Estate: He
hopes this Honorable House will not Interpose in this Matter.

THE CASE OF Edmond Boulter, Esquire;


