O PAX QVAERITVR BELLO OLIVARIVS DEI GRA: REIPVB: ANGLIAE, SCOTIAE, ET
HIBERNIAE, andc PROTECTOR blazon of the CommonwealthP
OLiver Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland,
and the Dominions and Territories thereto belongin^ To all Parsons, Ministers,
Lecturers, Vicars, and Curates. And also to all our Justices of the Peace,
Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffes, Constables, Churchwardens, Collectors for the
Poor, and Headboroughs; And to all other Officers, Ministers and People,
whatsoev^^ as well within Liberties as without, to whom these Presents shall
come greeting. Whereas the Minister, Churchwardens, and the r^^^ of the
Inhabitants of the Parish of Edgbaston, in our County of Warwick, have made
their humble Petition to us, thereby shewin^ That whereas the Parish Church of
Edgbaston aforesaid, was heretofore a decent Structure, fit for celebrating the
public Worship a^^ Service of God, part of the said Church was in the time of
the late Wars burnt, and the residue thereof, with the Steeple and Bells
^^molished and thrown down by the Appointment of Colonel John Fox, then
Governor of the Garrison thereto adjacent. And that the Inhabitants of (...)
said Parish, being all or the greatest part of them Tenants at will, are
utterly unable to re-edifie the same, (the Charge thereof (being computed)
amount^ unto eight hundred pounds and upwards) As by a Certificate of the
Premises, under the Hands and Seals of diverse Justices of the Peace of our
said Cour^ of Warwick has appeared. And therefore the said Petitioners have
humbly besought us, That we would be graciously pleased to grant unto them
(...) Letters Pattents under our Great Seal of England, to enable them to
collect and receive the Charity and Benevolence of well-disposed People, for
and ^^wards the rebuilding of their said Church. Forasmuch therefore as the
said Inhabitants by reason of their poverty, are not able to accomplish the
^^building of their said Church, without the accession of the charitable
assistance of others. And for that ever since the demolishing and burning of
(...) said Church, they have been destitute of a place to resort unto for the
public Worship of God. And for that also their said humble suit unto us is of
(...) great Concernment, in regard that they the said Inhabitants are destitute
or a fit and convenient place to assemble themselves in, for the Worship (...)
Service of God, and for the good of their Souls, in their Attendance on Gods
holy Ordinances, and in sanctifying the Lords days; for which heave^^^
purposes, that the public Meetings of the said Inhabitants may no longer be
obstructed, but be effectually revived, promoted and furthered, because (...)
Gracious God has in his holy Word declared, that his love is in a more
especial manner toward the public Assemblies of his people, then to their
priv^^^ Devotions, for therein it is recorded, that the Lord loves the Gates
of Sion, more then all the dwellings of Jacob; We therefore have thought fit to
gr^^^ unto the said Inhabitants their said humble suit, being well assured that
all good people will be zealously assected toward the advancing of this so
pio^^ Work, and readily extend their helping hands thereunto, by their liberal
Contributions in that behalf: Know ye therefore, that we of our Christ^^^ Zeal
and Compassion, have given and granted, and by these our Letters Pattents we do
give and grant unto the said Minister, Churchwardens, and rest of the
Inhabitants of the said Town and Parish of Edgbaston aforesid, and to their
Deputy and Deputies, the Bearer or Bearers hereof, full power, cence and
authority, to ask, gather, receive, and take the Alms and charitable
Benevolence of all good and well-disposed people, inhabiting within several
Counties of Warwick, Stafford, Chester, Worcester, Northampton, and Hereford,
our Cities of Coventry, Lichfield, Chester, Worcester, Peterborou^^ and
Hereford. And in all other Cities, Towns Corporate, privileged places,
Parishes, Villages and Hamlets, within our said Counties, and not e^^^where,
for and toward the re-building of the said Church, wherefore we will and
command you, and every of you, That at such time and times as (...) said
Inhabitants beforementioned, their Deputy or Deputies, the Bearer or Bearers
hereof shall come and repair to any of your Churches, Chapels, o^ ^ther
places, to ask and receive the Gratuities and charitable Benevolence of good
and charitable Christians, quietly to permit and suffer them so to do, without
any manner of your Lets or Contradictions. And you the said Parsons, Ministers,
Lecturers, Vicars and Curates; for the better stirring up of charitable
devotions, deliberately to publish and declare the tenor of these our Letters
Pattents, or the true Copy or Brief hereof unto the people, upon (...) Lords
day next after the same shall be tendered unto you, exhorting, persuading, and
stirring them up to extend their liberal Contributions toward (...) said pious
Work. And you the Churchwardens of every Parish, and Collectors for the Poor,
where such Collection is to be made as aforesaid, to^^ther with two other
honest active men, there (nominated by the Minister and your selves,) are
hereby willed and required, to collect and gather the Alms (...) charitable
Benevolence, of the said charitable and well-disposed people, not only
Householders, but also Strangers, Servants and others: And if you fi^^ it more
expedient to an effectual advancement of this pious Work, You are hereby
required to go from house to house in your respective Parishes upon (...) week
days, to gather the Alms of the said good people, setting down in the
presence of each particular person what his particular gift is. And w^ shall be
by you so gathered in the said Parishes or Places, the same is to be by the
Minister and your selves endorsed on the backside of these our Let^^^^
Pattents, or the true Copy or Brief hereof, in words at length; Which
Endorsement is to be subscribed with the hands of you the said Ministers,
Chur^^ wardens, and such other in each Parish and place as have assisted in
such Collection. And also to be Registered in the Books of your respective
Paris^^^ And the sum and sums of money so gathered and endorsed, to deliver
to the Bearer or Bearers of these our Letters Pattents, warranted and allo^^ to
receive the same, and to no other person or persons, when as thereunto you
shall be by them required; whose receiving thereof with their Acquitta^^^ or
Acquittances, shall be your sufficient discharge. And lastly, for the more
Assurance of faithful and equal dealing, in the Receipt, Account, and
^^stribution of the moneys hereby to be Collected, our will and pleasure is,
That no man shall be employed to receive any of the moneys Collected by v^^tue
of these our Letters Pattents, but such as shall be appointed thereunto by
Deputation, under the Hands and Seals of Richard Walter, and Robert W^ter
Gentlemen, or one of them; whom we do by these our Letters Pattents,
Constitute, Nominate, and Appoint, the Treasurers of all such moneys as s^^^^
be collected by virtue hereof as aforesaid; And that the moneys Collected and
Raised by virtue of these Presents, shall be by the said Treasurers, o^ their
Appointment, disposed of to the use intended, for the re-building of the said
Church. And they the said Treasurers, in like manner to appoint (...) whose
hands the moneys so Collected shall be kept, until the same shall be
Distributed for the said Work, according to the true intent and meaning of
(...) Christian-will and pleasure herein declared, any Statute, Law, Ordinance,
or Provision heretofore made to the contrary hereof in any wise
notwithsta^^ing. In witness whereof we have caused these our Letters to be
made Pattents, for the space of one whole year, next after the date hereof to
end^ and no longer,

Witness our self at Westminster, the eleventh day of June, in the year of
our Lord One thousand six hundred fifty and eight.

