A TRUE INFORMATION To the Nation, from the People called QUAKERS. Being a
Brief account of the PROCEEDINGS

Of some of the Magistrates in and about this City of LONDON, Against the
aforesaid People, from the third day of the 5th Month called July, to the last
day of the 6th Month called August, 1664.

Composed and Published for Satisfaction of those who desire to be Informed
Concerning this Matter. By J. C.

And Haman said unto the King, there is a certain people scattered abroad and
dispersed amongst the people in all the Provinces of thy Kingdom; and their
Laws are diverse from all people, neither keep they the Kings Laws, therefore it
is not for the Kings profit to suffer them: If it please the King, let it be
written that they may be destroyed, etc.

Ester. 3.8, 9. Let all who read consider what this Counsel brought forth.

Printed in the Year 1664.

A true Information to the Nation, from the People called Quakers, etc.
MAny and great have been the sufferings and persecutions that w^ the people
and servants of the Lord called Quakers, have undergone and sustained since we
were gathered out of the world to be a peculiar people unto God; and many Laws
and unrighteous Decrees have been made and prosecuted against us by every power
as they have come up one after another, thereby thinking to root us out from
being a people unto God in this Nation, or to destroy and root out the holy
seed and righteous plant which the Lord God Almighty has planted in us and
amongst us; and we have ever^ ^^^n the ^utt, for all the Babylonish Archers to
shut at, not only (...) ^his land or our N^^^vity, but also in every Region
when (...) Lord by his power has brought us to bear witness of his (...) and
power and we have been aways looked upon b^ man^ (...) (as the Apostles were in
their days) and so have been ever^ where spoken against, and Antichrist in his
Membe^s had bestirred himself even where ever we come, to raise perfec^^^ (...)
against us, and to seek our total ruin and extirpation i^ p^ssible: and thus
great opposition we have met with on every hand, and these things we have
sustained not for any evil doing, but only for the exercise of our Consciences
in Matters of Worship and Faith toward God, but the Lord who first separated
us from our Mothers womb, and gathered us from amongst the men of this
Generation to be a people to himself; he has been always with us, and in all
our sufferings which we have sustained from the hands of our cruel enemies, he
has given us courage, and boldness, and valor, so that we have been able to
bear all things with patience, and he has clothed us with the Armor of his
own righteousness, and put the sword of the spirit into our hands, with which
we have wrestled with the spiritual wickedness that has been in the high
places, and they have not prevailed against us, to bring to pass their several
Decrees and Determinations, but through the power of the Lord we have conquered
and overcome, and have seen the end of many who have risen up against us: And
through all these trials, and sufferings, and persecutions, the word of God
has grown and increased, and the blessed truth which we profess and bear
witness to, has greatly flourished, and spread forth its self, and many have
been and are daily gathered into it, and our number is daily added unto and
increased, blessed be the Lord Almighty, so that we do find (as the Apostle did
in his day) that our bands and sufferings serve for the futherance of the
Gospel of Christ, and for the exaltation of the worthy name of the Lord, which
is the main thing we aim at; so that what ever become of these our earthly
Tabenacles, or how ever they may be disposed of; we have our desire and
expectation, in chat the truth prospers and flourishes: And we do not at all
doubt nor question but that as the Lord has been with us in times past unto
this day and has born us up in the midst of our sufferings and trials, which
we nave undergone for his name sakes; and as he has renowned his worthy name,
and spread forth his truth thereby, so he will be always with us to sustain us,
bear us up, and carry us through all sufferings and tribulations whatsoever,
that (for the future) may come upon us for the Gospels sake, and that our
sufferings shall still (as in times past) make for the furtherance of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, and for the spreading, exaltation, and growing of
his blessed truth which we profess and bear witness to: And in the faith of
this we are resolved to rest in patience, waiting to receive the end thereof,
and we doubt not but there are several thousands in this Nation that are like
minded with us in this matter.

And now it is in my heart (for the Information and Satisfaction of such who
may desire to be informed concerning the present proceedings of the Magistrates
in and about this City of London, against us the people of God called Quakers)
to give a brief Relation of the Heads of their proceedings, that the
unrighteousness and cruelty thereof may be rightly understood.

The third day after the late Act came in force (which was made to prevent
Seditious Meetings of such, who under color and pretense of Relgious Worship,
do in their Meetings Plot and Contrive Insurrections) Being the first day of
the Week, and the third day of the 5th Month 1664. our friends were peaceably
Assembled together at their usual Meeting place at Horsly Down in Southwark, to
wait upon God and to Worship him, where a servant of the Lord was declaring the
truth to the people, at which time there came a ompany of armed Soldiers very
rudely into the Meeting, and as they passed in through the Entry, one of them
shot of his Musket up into the House, and the Bullet went through several
Sealings and came very near a Cradle where a Child use to lie: And afterward
they halled friends out of their Meeting, and brought them before three called
Justices,. (v z.) John Bromfield, John Lenthall, and George Moore, who
proceeded against them (according as is provided (in the aforesaid Act) against
such who under pretense of Religious Worship do contrive Insurrections)
although its well known to most people in this Nation, that we are no such
people, that in our Meetings use such practices, but have often given a public
testimony against them so because friends could nor for Conscience sake pay the
several Fines (which was five pounds a piece) which they unjustly imposed upon
them, they were to the number of 7 of them committed to the ^hite Lion prison
in Southwa^k there to remain without Bail or main prize for the space of three
Months. And that same night after they were brought into the Prison they were
put into the common Ward amongst the Felons, who took Money by violence out of
some of their Pockets, and kept it from them.

Again, on the 10th day of the Month aforesaid, being the first day of the
Week, the Soldiers, (viz.) the Red-coats (Guarded with a party of Horse) came
to the aforesaid Meeting House at Horsly Down where our friends were again
peaceably Assembled in the fear of the Lord to Worship him; And the said
Soldiers took many of them out of their peaceable Meeting, and being carried
unto the Guard at Marge^s Hill, the aforesaid Justices (so called) came and
proceeded to try them as aforesaid by the late Act, but when the Witnesses came
they could not at all prove that they were met under any pretense of Worship or
Religious Exercises, yet notwithstanding the said Justices imposed Fines on
them of five pound a piece. And for refusing to pay the said Tines, they were
committed and sent to the White Lion Prison aforesaid, (to the number of 13. of
them) there to remaim without Bail or main prize, for the space of three
Months.

And upon the 17th day of the fifth Month aforesaid, according to our usual
manner, our friends were peaceably Assembled together at our own hired House at
Mile-end-Green, and in the time of their Meeting, there came several armed
Soldiers rushing in through the yard, and set Guards at the doors that none
might pass out or come in; and after a while a servant of the Lord stood up to
declare the word of the Lord to the people, and as he was speaking and
m^^^ioning the name of the Lord, there Came in ^^ll^am (...), and one of them
in enmity and con^emp^, (...) name of the Devil; And commanded the Soul (...)
down that was speaking, which was acc^^^^ (...) ^ook the rest of Men-friends to
the (...) them into another room of the same (...) and Rider called Justices or
the Peace, w^o there ex^mi^ed them of their names, places of their ^^de, and
^ge, etc. and read to them some part of the aforesaid Act made to prevent and
suppress Seditious Conven^^^^es, in which Insurrections are plotted and
contrived, which Act does not at all reach us, we being no such people which
that Act makes mention of; yet they proceeded to charge several Fines upon us
(which we refusing to pay, be^^use we were not transgressors.) They committed
us to Prison in Newgate in London, there to remain without Bail or Main prize
for the space of three Months, which is the utmost Penalty for the first
offense (as they call it) of the late Act aforesaid.

Again, upon th 24th day of the 5th Month aforesaid, our Friends being met
together peaceably in the fear of the Lord, to wait upon him, and to Worship
him at their usual Meeting place near Wheeler-street in Sp^ttle-Fields, there
came one called Captain Longman, and with him two Files of Musquettecrs, and
two Constables with their guard of Halberds, Javlins, and o-other weapons. And
the said Longman using many evil words to friends led the men one by one, and
committed them to the Constables and Soldiers with the rest of their Guard,
who brought them to a house not far off the Meeting place, and there kept them
till two called Justices came to them (viz.) one C. Pitfield of Hoggsdowne, and
Richard Abell, who examined them of their names and wherefore they met, etc.
And then Fined them (to the number of 18.) some 5 s. some 2 s. some 1 s. which
for Conscience sake they could not pay being no Offenders, and so was by the
aforesaid Pitfield and Abell committed and sent to Newgate, there to remain
without Bail or Main prize for the space of six days, and with them were
committed ten more taken at the same Meeting, whose names they knew not; And
this is to be observed by the Reader, that their committing friends for so
short a time, is not because of any tenderness in the Magistrates toward
friends, but contrariwise, because they may the sooner get them in Prison again
upon the second and third offenses as they call it, in order to the fulfilling
of their envious wills, which is to expel us out of the land of our Nativity.

Again, upon the 24th of the 5th Month aforesaid, being the first day of the
Week, according to our usual manner, and at our usual Meeting House at
Mile-end-Green in the Parish of Stepney, our friends were Assembled in the fear
of the Lord to wait upon him, and to Worship him in Spirit and in Truth, and
when they were thus Assembled, there came a Constable with a Company of
Soldiers and Watchmen armed and violently rushed into our Meeting, and the
Constable commanded the doors to be shut, and without producing any warrant for
what he did, he ordered the said Soldiers and Watchmen every one to lay hold
of a man which accordingly they did, and led them forth of the Meeting, and so
to the Tower, and there kept them a while, and then and there brought them
before those called Justices, who demanded their names, places of abode, etc.
to which answer was given, and then because for Conscience sake they could not
pay the several Fines unrighteously imposed on them, they were committed and
sent) to Newgate Prison, there to remain without Bail or Main prize for the
space of six days.

Again, upon the 31th day of the 5th Month aforesaid, being the first day of
the Week, our friends were again Assembled in the fear of the Lord to wait upon
him, and to Worship him in the truth at our usual Meeting House at
Mile-end-Green, in the Parish of Stepner, where ohn Higgins was Ministering the
word of truth to the people, and there came diverse Constables and other armed
men, who violently rushed in upon them, and without producing any warrant for
what they did they said violent hands on them, and halled them out, and had
them to an Alehouse, where was William Rider and George Marsh called Justices
with diverse others, and being brought before them they asked their names, etc.
to which answer was given according to freedom, then they imposed a Fine upon
them, some five shillings, some more, some less, for Meeting together to
Worship God, which they say is an offense of their Law, which for Conscience,
sake friends could not pay, being indeed no transgressors of any just or
righteous Law; whereupon they were committed and sent to the common Prison at
Newgate, there to remain without Bail or Main prize for the sprce of five days.

Again, upon the 7th day of the 6th Month being the first day of the Week,
after our friends were parted from their Meeting place near Wheeler-street, the
most part of them, only some remaining behind were seized in the Street and
Alley, at the command of one C. Pitfield and T. Swallow Justices, so called and
were brought to an Alehouse, and from thence committtd to Newgate by the said
Pitfield and Swallow, there to remain without Bail or Main prize for the space
of six days, some of them being as they said for the first offense, and some
for the second, and yet they had no witness or evidence to prove that they had
met together.

And upon the 7th day of the 6th Month, aforesaid, friends being again
peaceably met, together, not under color of Religious Exercises, to plot or
contrive Insurrections, but really to Worship God in spirit and in truth at our
aforesaid Meetinghouse at Mile-end-Green, where there was a friend that was
Ministering the truth to the people, there came diverse Constables and other
armed men violently in amongst them, and halled them out before William Rider
and Thomas Player called Justices, to the number of 31. and after some
examination imposed several Fines upon them for their Assembling together as
aforesaid, which being altogether Antichristian, they could not for Conscience
sake pay; whereupon they were committed and sent to Newgate, there to remain
without Bail or main prize for the space of four days, some being for the first
offense as they called it, and some for the second, and several of them who did
not declare their names they committed to Prison there to remain till they were
delivered by due course of Law.

Again, on the 14th day of the 6th Month aforesaid, being the first day of the
Week, our friends were Assembled according to their wonted manner at their
usual Meeting Place at Mile-end-Green, where there was a friend that was
Ministering the truth to the people, in which time there came diverse Constables
and other armed men, and by force and violence halled them out of their
peaceble Meeting, and brought them before the aforesaid William Rider and
George Marsh, who examined them whether their coming there were to Worship God?
to which they could not deny, but innocently confess it, and vindicated their
right and privilege so to do, being peaceable subjects of this Nation, and in
no wise disturbers of the peace, for which they were declared by the said Marsh
and Rider to be convicted as transgressors of the late Law made to suppress
seditious Conventicles, some of the first offense, some of the second as they
call it, and some others that were for the third, and for refusing to pay the
several Fines then imposed upon them for their thus Meeting to Worship God,
they were committed and sent to the common Goal in Newgate there to remain
without Bail or main prize for the space of two days, such as were for the
first and second account; and such as were on the third account to be kept till
the next Jail-delivery, on order to their trial for Transportation.

And upon the 14th day of the 6th Month aforesaid, being the first day of the
Week, we being peaceably met together at our usual meeting place at the Bull
and Mouth in London, the Sheriffs with a certain number of Military officers,
and with guards consisting of the Mayors-officers, Sheriffs-men, City Marshals
and their men, with the Constables Guards, came and entered our meeting, and in
a furious manner pressed toward the place where a friend was declaring the way
of truth and salvation unto the people, and commanded him to come down, which
he being not free to do at their command, two of the officers stepped upon a form
near unto him, and in a great fury drew their Swords, and one of them with his
hanger smote him, and others of them laid on several friends with their swords
and staves till one of them broke his sword, and so when they had pulled out
the friend that was speaking, they came in more of them and halled out friends
both men and women, and brought them one, and two, and three, and four at a
time to the number of about 200 in all to Guild Hall, and several friends they
took in the streets that only stood to behold the cruelty of their proceedings
toward us, and brought them also to the same place, where they were kept close
prisoners till about midnight, and so that their works of darkness might not
arpear to the public view of the people, they ordered the Marshal of the City
with a very great guard of halberd-men to conduct us to Newgate about that time
of night, which with Torches lighted was accordingly done, though no M^ttimus
at all was sent with us, and the next day about ^o of us were called for again
to Guila-Hall, where they were brought before the Mayor, and being examined
concerning their meeting contrary to the late Act, several Fines were imposed
on them, which because for Conscience sake they could not pay, being no
transgressors of any just Law, they were recommitted, one for three months,
and another for one monech, and others for 14 days, though that which they
called their offenses were all alike* And on the 14 day following they called
for about 12 more of us, that were taken the first day of the Week aforesaid,
to the Guild Hall before the Mayor and Thomas ^^ams Alderman, where we were
examined apart concerning our meeting contrary to the late Act as they said,
and when they had imposed several Fines on us, and we refused to pay as
transgressour, we were recommitted to Newgate, there to remain for the space of
14 days, and the 6th day of the same week about 60 more of the same Company
that were taken at the Bull and Mouth the first day of the week aforesaid, were
called for to the Old Bail, where the Mayor was with some others, who examined
them concerning their meeting as aforesaid, which being done and the several
Fines imposed on them, refused to be paid, they were recommitted to the prison
at Newgate, there to remain for the space of 9 days without Bail or main prize,
so the illegalness of their proceedings against us may hereby be understood,
for they kept many or us^full five days without any warrant, or being brought
before any Magistrate, which is contrary to any known Law of England.

Also it is observable, that the witnesses that came in against us when we were
examined at the Guild Hall, were such that made no Conscience of their words,
for when friends that were taken in the street were brought before the Mayor
and examined, these witnesses would testify chat they took them in the meeting.

Moreover on the 16th day of the month aforesaid, being the 3d day of the
week, when we were met together in our prison room to wait upon God and worship
him, one of the Keepers men came in amongst us, and fetched him away that was
speaking, and put him in the hole where murderers use to be put after sentence
of death, and there kept a certain time. And on the 18th day of the month
aforesaid, being the 5th day of the week, as we were again assembled in our
prison room in the same manner and to the same end aforesaid, the Keepers man
came in amongst us again, and because he could not come at the friend that was
speaking by reason of the throng of friends that stood about him, he fell
laying on both men and women with a great staff, and some of the Felons that
were with him did also beat friends with their fists, and one of the women
thieves came with a knife, swearing she would stab friends, and did attempt so
to do though prevented, yet after a little season that tumult was qualified,
and the friend that was speaking amongst us was taken away and put into another
part of the prison.

Again, upon the 21th day of the 6th month aforesaid friends being pea eably
assembled in the fear of the Lord to wait upon him and woship him in their
meeting house at Mile-end-Greer, there came several Constables with their
guard, behaving themselves very rudely and uncivilly toward friends, but after
a while came two called Justices, Tho. Player and Will. Rider, and one of them
commanded that the friend who was declaring the truth to the people should be
fetched out, which was hastily done, and the rest after him were fetched out one
by one, and there examined by the said Player and Rider concerning the cause of
their being at that place, to which they answered, that their coming was to
worship the Lord; then they asked friends if they would pay half a Crown a
piece, to which they answered, nay, they could not make themselves
transgressors, when they knew they were innocent; whereupon they were
committed eleven of them to the common Goal at Newgate, there to remain without
Bail or main prize for the space of two days.

Moreover, upon the 21th day of the 6th month aforesaid, friends (as they
themselves had declared) being constrained in their spirits to continue the
assembling of themselves together at their usual meeting place at the Peal in
John's street, there to wait upon the Lord and to worship him, there came
amongst them one Thomas Steaks, and one Rich. Thorndell, and one Matthews, with
many other Constables and others to assist them, and seized on the most of
men-friends, and led them by the arm out of the meeting, and from thence to the
Sessions House called Hickses-hall, and brought them up into an upper chamber
where there was three called Justices or the peace, viz. Reg^nald Fost^r, John
Smith, Tho. Lucy, who examined every particular of them concerning the end of
their meeting together, to which answer was given, that the intent of their
meeting was to wait upon the Lord, so that they made their crime, and for so
doing they Fined them five shillings a piece, and because for Conscience sake
they could not pay it being no transgressors of any righteous Law, they were
committed and sent to Newgate to the number of about 28 there to remain without
Bail or main prize for the space of 4 days, and then to be discharged.

Again, upon the 21th of the 6th month aforesaid, friends being again
peaceably assembled at the ^ull and Mourn to worship God in spirit and truth,
the Marshal of the City with Constables and several military officers, and
other assistants came with swords and halberds, and entered our meeting house,
and violently halled out most or all that were there present assembled, and
left them in the street, yet the doors being left open, and way being made for
them, they returned into their meeting house again, and a friend standing up to
declare the truth to the people, was after a little time pulled down by one
Clarke, Captain of a Train-band, and others with halberds, and carried away to
the Guild Hall, where several others, were sent also, and whilst they were kept
there, the Mayor of the City, with the Sheriffs and Richard Brown, with several
officers of the City both civil and military came to the Bull and Mouth, and
with carnal weapons entered the meeting the second time, and brought out friends
before the Mayor and Richard Brown, who is a man so far from keeping the peace,
that he is usually observed to be the first that breaks it, who then and there
kicked some friends till thereby he drew blood from them, and pulled the hair
off the heads of several men, and pinched several of the women's arms till they
were black, by which all people may easily judge whether this man be fitly
qualified to sit in the place of a Magistrate, or whether he be not more fit to
have the Law executed, upon him for those inhumane gross abuses offered by him
to our friends, but the Mayor was more moderate and offered no such kind of
abuses, yet proceeded to the examination of friends concerning their names,
places of abode, etc which being done, they imposed several Fines on them that
told their names, which was to the number of about 159 which Fines they could
not for Conscience sake pay, whereupon they were committed to Newgate prison,
there to remain without Bail or main prize for the space of 4 days, and by
reason of the great number that were in the prison before, there was not house
room allowed them to lie down one by another, nor yet scarcely to sit, by
reason whereof many were constrained to walk upon the leads for several nights,
and as for those who did not tell their names which were in number about 27
they were committed to Briaewell, note here that though their Mittimus was made
for 9 days, yet for dispatch of their intended work against us, they altered
the Mittimus and ordered them to be discharged at 4 days end.

Again, on the 28 of the 6^h month aforesaid, friends being peaceably met
together at their meeting place near Wheeler-street to wait upon the Lord and
to worship him, there came a company of soldiers, and by the command of C.
Pitfield and T. Swallow (called Justices, who were then present) took friends
out of the meeting, and guarded them to an Alehouse, where they imposed several
Fines upon them for their assembling to worship God, and friends refusing to
pay their several Fines imposed, were committed and sent to the common Goal of
Newgate, to the number of 33 there to remain without Bail or main prize for the
space of ten days, only some of them to be kept till the next Jail-delivery to
be proceeded against in order to trial for Transportation.

And on the same day aforesaid, at Mile-and green according to our wonted
manner, friends were again assembled peaceably to wait upon the Lord, in which
time there came a company of halberd men and kept guard over them, till 3
called Justices, viz. W. Rider, T. Player, and G. Marsh, with a considerable
party of soldiers came also, who fetched friends out of their meeting, both men
and women, in all between 30 and 40. And the said ^^der with his company
examined friends according to their usual manner, and committed them to Newgate,
some on the first and some on the second offense as they call it, there to
remain without Bail or main prize for the space of 24 hours, and some of them
being on the 3 account, are to be proceeded against for Transportation, whose
trial we expect this present Sessions, but 4 of the aforesad company being
young Maids, they sent to Bridewell, two of which were put in the stocks.

Moreover, it is observable that six of our friends being passing through an
alley between John street and J^anses the same day aforesaid were taken by
Constables, and carried to Hickses-hall before 3 called Justices, who proceeded
against them as usually they do when they take us out of our meetings, and sent
them to Newgate, there to remain without Bail or main prize for the space of 3
days, only one of them to be kept on the 3d offense (as they call it) till the
next Jail-delivery, in order to Transportation.

Again, upon the 28 aforesaid, our friends being peaceably assembled at the
Bul^ and Mouth according to their wonted manner to worship God, there came
Ant^^ Ba^eman Mayor, and our old adversary R. Brown, who has not yet answered
for the blood of many that was not long since even stifled up in noisome holes
and prisons through his occasion) and with their usual guards of both civil and
military officers, and placed themselves near the door, and caused friends to
be brought out before them, where they examined them according to their usual
manner, and for refusing to pay the several fines by the said Magistrates
(unrighteously) imposed on them, they were committed to the number of 60 at
least and sent to Newgate (a back-way and not through the streets that their
works of darkness might the less appear to the view of the world) there to be
kept without bail or main prize for the space of 4 days, such of them as are
for the 1 and 2 offense (as they call it) others of them that are on the 3
account, the Keeper of the prison into whose custody they are usually sent,
receives orders from the Magistrates to observe their names, and to secure them
till Goal delivery, and as the Keeper says, he has now in his custody about
19 which are (as he says) to come to their trial (for their 3 offense so
called) this present Sessions; And this is still observable, that R. Brown
according to his wonted manner did (the day abovesaid) tear the hair of friends
heads with his own hands, and pinch the women, and abuse many in a very
inhumane and sad manner.

And this, is very observable, that because their works of darkness (which they
may well be ashamed of) should not appear or be much taken notice of; their
usual manner is (after the time is expired that friends are committed for) to
put them out of prison in the night season

So here all may see and take notice how vigilant some of the Magistrates of
this City of Land. are in suppressing the meetings and assemblies of the people
of God, whose gathering and assembling is for no other end, but only to wait
upon the Lord, and to worship him in spirit and truth according to the practice
of the primitive Christians, and because we know, and are persuaded in our
Consciences we cannot forsake this godly exercise, whatsoever we suffer for the
continuance thereof: And we may appeal unto all sober people through this
Nation (and to the witness of God in the hearts of our persecutors) who have
known our manner of life and conversation, whether or no we have deserved these
things at the hands of these men, or whether they are righteously or
unrighteously inflicted upon us; And although they may say they have a Law for
what they do, etc. And according to their Law they ought to do it, and if they
should neglect the putting this Law in execution, they shall not be accounted
the Kings friends, etc. I answer, so said the Jews concerning Christ; We have a
Law, and by our Law he ought to die; and further said unto Pilate, if thou let
this man alone thou art nof Caesar's friend, yet their saying they had a Law,
etc. did not make their proceedings just, no more this Law (by which these
Magistrates of London does now proceed against us to prison us in order to
banishment, and so to death (if we return again) bear them out in what they do,
or render their proceeddings just in Gods account in the day when the Lord
shall arise to make Inquisition for the blood of his Saints and servants, and
to render to every one a just reward according to their doings; neither in that
day can the Lawmakers bear out the Executioners of it, but every one must give
an account to God for his own doings, therefore it concerns the Executioners of
this Law (who have taken in hand this unrighteous (as it will prove) and cruel
work) to consider what they are doing, and whether they can stand justified in
the sight of God in what they do: For certainly (whether you will believe or
no) the Lord is with us and will take our part, and will plead, our cause, and
what is done unto us, he takes as done unto himself; And they that strive to
suppress us do not strive against us only, but against the Lord also who is
(our strength) and in the end he will surely be too hard for them, and will
grind them to powder and bruise them as in a mortar, except they speedily
repent.

And furthermore, it may be seen how the enmity of the devourer does appear in
these proceedings, who the sooner to hasten this work of banishment (and death
upon retu^n) does, usually commit friends for a very few days; nay, sometime
but for 24 hours that so they may have them soon again upon another account. Oh
sad times indeed, when (according to appearance), the greatest favor that can
be shown us (if they proceed, against us at all by the late Law) is to keep us
in prison as long as they can; when in the mean time Drunkards and Stage
players, and (I may say) all kind of Vice tolerated, and no notice taken of it
by these men who are so zealously bent against an innocent and harmless people,
that cannot run with them into the same excess of Riot.

THE END.

