THE CASE OF Andrew and Jeronimy Clifford.
ANdrew and Jeroinmy Clifford, being greatly injured by grievous Fines, and a
long Imprisonment at Surinam, by the Dutch, contrary to the Articles of Peace,
Petitioned the last Parliament for Relief, and a Committee was appointed to
Examine the truth of it, which appearing plain to them, they prepared a Report
in his favor, which the Chairman was ready to make to the House, but the Dutch
Ambassador, by his Agents, interposed, and promised Satisfaction, whereupon the
Committee Advised them to desist prosecuting their Petition any farther, and to
apply to His Majesty for His Recommendation to the States General for Relief,
which they did.

The Secretary of State, by His Majesty's Order the 13th of June (...), wrote
to the Ambassador for that purpose, and his Excellency Sir Joseph Williamson
the 2^d of September (...) delivered in a Memorial to the States General
pursuant to the said Orders, and Jeronimy Clifford the 19th of September (...)
Petitioned the States General by the Pensionaries Order for Relief, but his
Excellency never received any Answer, nor could the said Clifford obtain any
Redress, though he was in Person there, and solicited (...) months and more
for it.

Jeronimy Clifford, and his Father, conceive, and are advised, that their Case
is a Public Case, like that of Major Bannister in Surinam, and such as the
States General are obliged by the Articles of the Treaty of Peace in Anno 1667,
and 1674, to see Redressed.

And therefore humbly pray this Honorable House will be pleased to take the
Premises into Consideration, and to afford such Effectual Relief, as in their
great Wisdom shall seem meet, etc.

May 17. School. A True Copy of the Report prepared last Session of Parliament
THE Committee have Examined the Matter of the Petition, and find, that the
Petitioners are Englishmen, and were Inhabitants in Surinam when it was taken
by the Dutch Anno 1667; And that by the 6th Article of the Capitulation all the
Inabitants were to have and enjoy all equal Privileges as the Netherlanders
that should Cohabit with them; And by the 7th Article, That in Case any
Inhabitants of that Colony should then or thereafter intend to depart thence,
he should have power to sell his Estate; and the Government in such Case should
procure, that he be Transported at a Moderate Freight, together with his Estate.

That the Governor and Council of Surinam Fined Jeronimy Clifford 30000 pound
weight of Sugar, and Charges of Suit, and to beg Pardon on his Knees for
Representing his Grievances to them by Petition, which in the following
Sentence is called a Gracious Sentence.

That the said Jeronimy was (whilst he was in Prison) prosecuted Criminally for
presenting another Petition to the Governor and Council concerning his
Oppression and Injuries relating chiefly to a Contest about the Sale of a Negro
the 4th of January 1692, wherein as it is there alleged, many disorderly Words
are found, and amongst the rest, that he threatened the Government with these
Words: That in Case the Honorable Court keeps him any longer in Prison, he
shall be forced to use such other Means as he shall be advised for Relief. And
further alleging, That the Petitioner Jeronimy had publicly accused the
Governor of unjustly prosecuting him; And also, That the Petitioner (then a
Prisoner) spoke other more ill-natured, foul, and trifling Words, which (as is
said) were too long to be there repeated; Wherefore the Provincional Fiscal the
Prosecuter, demanded, That he the said Jeronimy, as a Mutineer and Troubler of
the Common Peace, should be brought to the Place of Execution, and Whipped to
Death; and to have his Goods Confiscated to the use of the said Fiscal, and to
pay the Charges of the Suit. Whereupon the Governor and Council Adjudged, that
the Demand of the said Fiscal was rightly founded in all its parts, but
inclining more to Clemency than the utmost rigor of Justice, the said Court
(acting in the Name of the States General, His Majesty of Great Britain, as
their Stadtholder, and of the Directors, Patrons, and Lords of the said Colony)
Condemned the said Jeronimy Clifford to Seven years Imprisonment in the Fort
Somersdyke, there to be Chastised; likewise Fined him in the Sum of 150000
pound weight of Sugar, whereof 60000 l. to be to the said Provincional Fiscal,
the Prosecutor; 50000 to the Modical Last, alias the Treasury of the Colony,
and 40000 for Building a new House of Correction.

That the Petitioner was on many other Occasions Oppressed and Fined, as he
alleges, to the value of 20000 l. Sterling and upwards, which the Petitioner
offered to prove particularly; but this Committee not judging it to be the
Intention of the House, that they should Examine all the particular Damages
which the Petitioner sustained, which would take up much time -- And for that
the Petitioners desire no no other Reparation than for what Damages they shall
make appear when it shall come to be allowed: Therefore this Committee did not
enter into a particular Exmination thereof, but further find.

That the said Jeronimy remaining in Prison at Surinam, at length, by means of
Friends in England, Petitioned His Majesty, setting forth the Particulars of
his Oppressions in Surinam, and His Majesty was graciously pleased to order Mr.
Blathwayt, Secretary of War, to represent the Matter to the States General, who
thereupon ordered, that the Governor of Surinam should be written to, and
ordered to let the said Jeronimy Clifford depart from Surinam with his Goods
unmolested, without further detaining of him.

That thereupon the said Jeronimy, after having been near 4 years a Prisoner,
was Discharged; and since his coming for Europe, has, for the Injuries done
him, and his Damages sustained, sought Reparation of the West India Company of
Holland, to whom the said Colony of Surinam belongs; who gave for Answer, That
they judged they were not concerned in that Affair.

That thereupon the said Jeronimy, according to the Articles of Peace between
England and Holland, applied by (...) Petition^ to the States General, and
annexed an Account of his Damages; who said, It did not concern the Dutch
West India Company; and therefore dismissed his Suit against them; and Ordered,
That in case he finds he has any just Reason of Complaint, he must demand the
same at Law (from those that he supposes to have damaged him) before the
Ordinary Court of Justice, as he should be advised.

That this seems to be a Public and National Concern, and the denial of
Reparation is contrary to the Twelfth Article of the Treaty Marine between
England and Holland, concluded at London the First of December, 1674. whereby
Right ought to be done for any Unjust Sentences, in Three Months.

That the Matter of the said Petitioner's Complaint being Examined by J. Van
Burcht, and S. Van Schagen, Two Advocates or Counselors of the States General
in Holland, they reported, That Mr. Clifford demanding of the Society of
Surinam (by an Account delivered in) Damages sustained by several Unlawful
Sentences at Surinam, amounting to the Sum of 224718 Guilders 5 Stivers. They
had seen and examined all the respective Orders, Sentences, and other Papers of
Proof belonging to each Article of the said Account: And that they are of
Opinion, That the said Clifford has been highly injured and wronged by the
respective Lords Governors and Council of Surinam, by their Orders and
Sentences tending to ruin him, and make themselves Masters of his Estate, and
to hinder his transporting himself and his Goods, as he was permitted by the
Articles of Capitulation at Surinam; and that by the Twelfth Article of the
Treaty of Commerce between England and Holland, the States ought to redress the
same in Three Month's time. Dated at the Hague the 30th of September, 1697.

By all which, it appearing to this Committee that the Petitioners have been
greatly Injured at Surinam, by the Governor and Council there by detaining
their Estate contrary to the Articles of Capitulation, upon the Surrender of
the said Colony of Surinam, and by several unjust Sentences, and particularly
that of Seven Years Imprisonment, together with a very great Fine Imposed upon
the said Jeronimy, for only representing his Grievances by Petition.

Resolved,
That it is the Oppinion of this Committee, that the House be moved, that an
humble Address be presented to his Majesty, that he would be graciously pleased
so to Recommend the Petitioners, That Justice may be done them for the Damages
they have Sustained at Surinam.



A true Copy of the Memorial delivered in to the States General by the
Extraordinary Ambassador his Excellency Sir Joseph Williamson, mentioned in the
Petition.
WHereas Andrew and Jeronimy Clifford, Merchants, late Inhabitants of Surinam,
having brought their Complaint before His Majesty in Council, of the great
Injustice which have been done them by the Governors and Dutch Council there,
the underwritten Ambassador Extraordinary of England has received Express
Orders from the King his Master, to use the best Office with the
States General, that speedy Justice may be done them, as well in regard of
Transporting their Estate out of the Colony of Surinam, according to what has
been stipulated by the Articles of Peace in the Year 1667, as also to the great
Losses and Damages which they allege they have since suffered by a long
Imprisonment, and by the immense Sums which they have executed from them, under
pretense of Fines and Pecuniary Mulcts.

This is what the said Ambassador would willingly promise himself from the
wonted Justice of the States General, especially since there is nothing that
more imports the Conservation of that Alliance and Friendship which the two
Nations, by the good Providence of GOD, find themselves so happily joined in
them to take care on both sides, to have speedy and full Justice administered on
all Occasions, where their Subjects may pretend Matters of Complaint one
against another.

In the Hague, the Second of September, School. Williamson.

Extract out of the States-Generals Octroys or Charters granted to the African
Company of Holland, Anno 1674. and to the Inhabitants of the Colony of Surinam,
Anno 1682, as follows.
THAT the Sentences pronounced within the Limits of these Octroys under which
Surinam is Included, as well betwixt the Inhabitants against each other, and
also between the Inhabitants and Strangers, and likewise concerning all
Controversies within the Limits of these Octroys shall be counted as Sentences
pronounced in Holland, by Judge of the Highest Courts of Justice, in which
Cases only Revisie or Revierie may be desired of the States General, or their
Deputies; and that no Judge or Court of Judicature in Holland shall have any
thing to say in such Cases, except the States General, or their Deputies.

Hereby it appears, That the Ordinary Courts of Justice in Holland are not
permitted to intermeddle in Judgments given at Surinam, so that the
States-General's referring the Petitioners to Demand Restitution by the
Ordinary Courts of Justice, is a plain Denial of any Reparation to them.

The CASE of ANDREW AND JERONIMY CLIFFORD.


