THE CASE OF Daniel Gwyn, Agent for the Spanish Pacquet^^^ts, in relation to
Mr. John Russel's Charge ^^^inst him for pretended Mismanagement in ^^at Employ.
^HE said Mr. Russel in his Pe^^^^on has ch^^g'd Mr. Gwyn with false Musters
on the said Pacqu^^ (...), imbezelling their Stores, extorting Money from
Sailors and others, defrauding the said Ships in their Victualling, and
impo^^^ng Salt in said Ships without paying Customs o^ Excise, to the gre^^
abuse of (...) M^i^sty, and wrong to the Sail^^^ (...) adva^^^^^ (...)

It Is humbly hoped it appeared before the Committee, that (...) many ^en were
actually in the Service of the said Ships as were charged to be ^^^id; and
generally two or more than were actually charged in the Paybook, served on
board, receiving no Wages; and one Man in (...) Ship (...) about four years
past served under another name, and these two Men^^ Pay was actually applied to
the defraying contingent Charge, which would have been (if not by this) some
other way discharged by the ^^st-Office. So that tho in strictness this may be
termed an irr^gular M^^^^ (seeing the very Man whose name was entered, was not
^^^ually (...) ^^^rd) yet the same was not to the Prejudice, but Service of the
Crown and not to Mr. Gwyn's private Advantage, as the Petition does (...) and
therefore notwithstanding the Committee (upon a Division) we^^ pleased to
resolve, That the said Mr. Gwyn has been guilty o^ ^^king false Musters
according to the Petition: yet if it appear to (...) Honorable House by the
Committee Minutes, that herein his Ma^^^^^^ (...) ^ot defrauded, it is humbly
hoped this Honorable House will (...) to the King

(...) ^^rties charge Mr. Gwyn with importing Salt in the said Ships (...)
^aying either ^ustoms or Excise, to his great profit.

(...) small quan^^^^^^ of Salt were by the Commander and Pur^^^ (...) ^^ese
Ships, (...) ^^^ted only for the use of those Pacquet-Boats (...) at first
(...) ^^ink those small Quantities brought over worth Entry, whilst spent in
the King's Service; but as soon as Mr. Gwyn was advised both Customs and Excise
were due, he did then endeavor to get the best information he could, what
quantities, and at what times imported, and what their Customs and Excise did
amount unto: and seeing a great part hereof was imported when the Duties were
very low, he did therefore make an Entry only of four weigh and quarter, as
imported under the last Impositions, and for which he paid as much Customs and
Excise as all that Salt would have paid, if entered when brought in (although the
Quantity was more) seeing much the greate^ part thereof was brought in when no
Excise was due for the same.

To prove the pretended Frands in victualling, Slade the Purser declared he
gave Mr. Gwyn a Receipt for 1100 weight of Pork, when only 600 pound was put on
board the old Spanish Expedition. It was alleged, Mr. Gwyn had charged higher
Prices for Victuals than others in those Parts then paid.

It did not appear, upon view of all Mr. Slade's Receipts, that ever such a
Receipt was by him given, or such a Quantity by (...) Gwyn (...) charged; and
that whatsoever Provision Mr. Gwyn had charged to the said Ship, was justified
by proper Vouchers under Mr. Slade's own hand. The several Provisions Mr. Gwyn
bought for these Ships was the best of the kind, and therefore their Prices
might be greater than was paid by others for a worse sort; and all those Prices
justified by proper Vouchers. And it is humbly hoped that several worthy Members
of this Honorable Committee do remember that Mr. Gwyn did produce an Abstract
of seven years Account of what Butter he had bought for his Majesty's Service
in that time: and (all Charge and ^^^s considered) he lost by the Butter he
bought upon the King's Account.

It Is alleged, Mr. Gwyn extorted Money from Sailors.

The Fact appeared to be thus, viz. In November 1697. Mr. Gwyn advanced of his
own Moneys about 600 Spanish Pistols, to pay off Sailors then to be discharged;
and having culled of the lightest about 30 l. and paid them the Captain at or
about 4 l. per Ounce (and this done, as the Captain proved, that the Seamen
might receive no light Pistols) he paid the rest to the Seamen at 17 s. 6 d. a
piece. Upon change of some of these into Silver a small loss was sustained; but
others were put off by the Seamen at 18 s. per Pistol. When Mr. Gwyn thus
advanced these Pistols, he could have paid them in London at 18 s. a piece; and
he dos humbly suppose not many instances can be produced where Agents advanced
Money out of their own Pockets to pay Soldiers upon such easy terms. How far
this may induce your Honors to resolve the said Mr. Gwyn has been guilty of
Extortions from the Sailors (as alleged in the Petition) is humbly submitted
to the great Wisdom and Justice of this Honorable House to several worthy
Members whereof it is known (and before ^^e Committee was proved) that the said
Mr. Gwyn at several times has advanced MANY THOUSAND Pounds for the necessary
Supplies of those Packet Boats, without any reward for the same.


