Martyrs in Flames OR, POPERY (In its true Colors) DISPLAYED. Being a brief
Relation of the Horrid Cruelties and Persecutions of the POPE and Church of
ROME for many hundred years past, to this present Age, inflicted upon
Protestants in Piedmont, Bohemia, Germany, Poland, Lithuania, France, Italy,
Spain, Portugal, Holland, Scotland, Ireland, and England.


With an Abstract of the Cruel Persecutions. lately Exercised upon the
Prorestants in France and Savoy, in the year 1686 and 1687.

Together with a short Account of Gods Judgments upon Popish Persecutors.

Published for a Warning to all Protestants, showing what they must expect from
that bloody Generation of Antichristians. By R. B.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. (...), at the Bell in the Poultrey, near Cheapside.
(...) 3.

TO THE Protestant Reader.
THE Imminent Dangers that we have so lately escaped, from the cursed
Principles and Practices of the Romish Faction, who if they had not been
prevented by an amazing Providence, designed to involve the Three Nations into
Popish Idolatry, and French Slavery, calls aloud upon us for the utmost praise
and thankfulness to that Almighty Hand that has begun to deliver us, and to
beseech him to perfect the same; and does likewise oblige every man to be upon
his Guard, and to forewarn all Protestants of the danger of the return of that
medly of Nonsense, Blasphemy and Superstition; There being very little
difference between the Popish Religion (if it deserves that name) and none at
all, since Treasons, Murders, Rapes, Burnings, Perjuries, and all the horrid
Cruelties Hell it self can invent, are so far from being counted Sins or Crimes
by that Synagogue of Satan, that they are often reckoned Meritorious, and a man
shall deserve Heaven for committing them; There being no Sin unpardonable, but
that which they falsely call Heresy, or the True Worship of God according to
the Scriptures; ^or this they would have turn^d our Land into Blood, Slaughter
and Confusion; For this they would have overthrown our ^eligion, enslaved our
Souls, or else have burnt our Bodies to ashes; as they did our Ancestors.

It is difficult to make a Draught of this bloody Beast of Rome, it would be a
horrid sight to draw him in his full proportion yet take a short view of him so
as to tremble at the thoughts of what-others have suffered, and we might have
felt had not the Divine Goodness discovered their black Designs, and we hope
will still prevent their damnable Enterprises against us.

His Eyes are like Flames that have consumed the Bodies of many Thousand
Mar^yrs; His Mouth is like Hell gaping for his prey; Blood gushes out of his
Jaws like Rivers; His bloody Tusks are the Racks and tormenting Engines
wherewith he grinds the Bones of Gods Saints; His Tail is armed with the stings
of Scorpions wherewith he lashes S^ates and Kingdoms; From his Throat belch
forth Curses and Excommunications, denouncing Judgment, Hell and Destruction
upon all that oppose him.

It is this Monster of Persecution and Cruclty that the cursed Instruments and
Vassals of Rome endeavor to advance in all places where they have power and
op^^ ^unity, and by this you may judge of th^^^ Religion and Principles: By
these (...) at the Tr^^ and what Spirit they (...) of; and the (...) of this
li^^^ (...) is (...) a brief Acc^^^^t of the M^^chiess and (...) perpet^^^d by
that Man of Sin, (...) his Agents upon the S^rvants of God (...) since he
appeared in the World, the like whereof were never Acted by Heathens, Turks or
Infidels, neither is a large Volume able to contain the tenth part of their
Horrid Massacres and Hellish Tortures.

To conclude, Let this be a Looking-Glass to my honest Countrymen who have
neither money nor time for perusing greater Histories, and let us all strive to
heal all kind of Divisions and Disagreements between the True Followers of the
Doctrines of the Blessed Jesus, and as one man let us by all justifiable and
lawful Methods in our several places and stations oppose this Armed Beast of
Persecution and Tyranny; that we may have cause to bless the Lord of Heaven and
Earth, and to praise him in the Congregation, who has caused our Enemies to
fall into the Pit which they had dug for these Three Kingdoms.

Introduction.
ABout Five Hundred Years after the Death of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, one Phocas (who had Murdered his Master Mauritius Emperor of
Constantinople, and his Children) first Advanced the Bishops of Rome, to be
Universal Bishops and Heads of the Church; at which time they were endowed with
these large Possessions and Donations which they call St. Peter's Patrimony,
and which they falsely assert to be the Gift of Constantine the Great.

After this the Church of Rome growing Great, Mighty, Rich and Proud, at once
lost its Humility and Purity of Religion, and assumed Politic and Tyrannical
Principles, which caused her Defiled Hands to lay aside the Sword of the
Spirit, and to make use of the Temporal Sword, which she used to the Deposing
and Murdering of diverse Kings, Princes and Emrors.

I. For after they had once tasted the Sweetness of Wealth, Ease and
Prosperity, the Popes began to swell in Pride and Pomp, and the more they
Flourished in this World, the more the Holy Spirit of God forsook them, so that
in a short time those Bishops who were Poor, Mean, Indigent, Persecuted, and
wanting all things, began to Triumph over Princes, to tread upon the Necks of
Emperors, and to bring the Heads of Kings under their Usurped Authority. They
were carried upon Men's Shoulders in all manner of Magnificence, as if the Earth
were not good enough to bear them; they were honored as Gods on Earth; and
Sovereign Princes, Dukes and Lords, etc. went bare headed before them. And not
only so, but through their Pride and Ambition they grew so great Apostates from
Christians, that of being Persecuted they became Persecutors of others, and at
last were so great Enemies to God and Religion, that the Pope may now be justly
Reckoned and Accounted the Antichrist, or Man of Sin, so long before spoken of
by St. Paul in 2 Thessalonians 2.

II. This Pride and Insolency of the Pope and his Clergy, appeared in several
Instances which might be given of it, but out of the Multitude we shall only
collect some few, to show what Slavery and Bondage both Princes and People were
formerly subject to, under this Antichristian Yoke. About the Year 1158.
Frederick, Emperor of Germany, Marching into Italy, the Pope hearing of it,
went with his Clergy to meet him; as soon as the Emperor saw the Pope, he
Allighted from his Horse to receive him, and held the Popes Stirrup while he
Alighted also, but it seems he mistook the Left Stirrup instead of the Right,
at which the Pope seemed to be very much offended, which the Emperor observing,
he smilingly told the Pope, That he desired to be excused, since he was not
accustomed to hold Stirrups, with which acknowledgment the Pope seemed to be
satisfi^d. After this there happened some difference between the Pope and the
Emperor, whereupon the Pope cursed him, and sends his Letters out against him
to all the Princes of Christendom, declaring, that he was an accursed person,
and ought to be avoided, and cast out of all Christian company: He likewise
stirred up his Subjects in Rebellion against him. The Emperor then marched to
Rome to chastise his Pride, but the Popefled to Venice, and the Venetians being
required to send him to Frede ich, refused it; whereupon the Emperor sent his
Son Otho against him, with Men and Ships very well furnished, but withal
charged him by no means to attempt any thing against the Venetians, till he
himself came: But the young man being full of heat and desire of glory ventured
to engage the Enemy, and was by them overthrown, and himself taken Prisoner.
Upon this misfortune, the compassionate Father, to release his Son from
captivity and misery, was forced to submit to whatever Conditions of Peace the
Pope should demand; whereby it was at last agreed, that the Emperor should
come into S. Marks Church at Venice, and there, kneeling down at the Popes
feet, he should receive Absolution and Forgiveness. This the Emperor
persormed; and the proud Pope setting his foot upon the Emperors Neck, said
that verse in the Psalm, Thou shall tread upon Lions and Adders; the young Lion
and the Dragon shall thou trample under foot; which the Pope applied to the
Emperor; but the Emperor answered, Not to thee, but to Peter this power is
given. The Pope replied, Both to me, and to Peter. The Emperor fearing further
quarrels durst say no more, but was absolved, and his Son was restored to his
liberty.

III. Not long after this, that is, in the time of that famous King Henry the
Second, one Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, was by his extraordinary
pride and insol^nce the occasion of very great disturbance to the King and
Kingdom: for the King c^lling his Nobles and the Clergy together, desired that
some Clergymen might be called to answer for some Villainies by them committed;
for it was proved that several persons had been murdered by their means: This
Thomas Besket would not consent unto, without a Clause of seeing this Order;
which very much displeased the King; but by the persuasion of his Brethren,
Becket afterward consented; yet being encouraged by the Pope, he again fell
off, and repented of what he had done, which the more enraged the King against
him: This quarrel continued many years, and the King was so tormented by this
proud Prelate, that he once passionately cried out, Will no body a venge me of
this Becket? These words were spoken in the Hearing of some Gentlemen, who
thereupon guessing at the Kings mind, four of them presently went to
Canterbury, and finding the Archbishop in the Cathedral, there they fell upon
him, and killed him upon the Stairs of the Altar, every one striking him over
the head with his Sword, and then made their escape. This Murder was charged
upon the King by the Popes Legate, and though the King swore that he was
neither aiding nor consenting to his death, yet he was forced to kiss the
Legates Knee, and submit to such Penance as he should appoint him; one part
whereof was, that he should absolutely submit to the Pope in all spiritual
matters. And it is likewise recorded, that King Henry coming out of France,
went to Canterbury, and as soon as he was in sight of Thomas Beckets Church, he
got off his Horse and pulling off his Shoes and Stockins, he went barefoot to
Beckets Tomb, the ways being so sharp and stony that his Feet bled as he passed
along; and when he came there, every Monk in the Cloister whipped the Kings Back
with a Rod; which shows (says the Historian) what slavery Kings and Princes
were at that time brought into, by the Popes Clergy. The same year the City of
Canterbury was almost burnt down, and Beckets Church was utterly consumed. This
Becket was afterward Cannized for a Saint; but a Popish Historian says of him,
That he was worthy of death and damnation, for being so obstainate against Gods
Minister, his King.

IV. King John the Son of Henry the Second, was likewise made sensible of the
danger of offending the Pope; for in the year 1205* the King being incensed
against the Clergy who possessed great Benefices, and yet neglected their
Charge, he endeavored to rectify this and some other great miscarriages about
Electing Bishops, and several other things: But the Pope fearing he would
entrench upon his Privileges and Gain, stirred Heaven and Earth against him,
Excommunicating and cursing him, giving his Kingdom to the French King, and
stirring up his own Nobility and people against him; so that the King being
compassed about with Enemies on every side, was forced to submit to the Pope,
promising to do whatever he should command him: Nay, the King took his Crown
off his head, and kneeling upon his knees, in the midst of all his Lords and
Barons, he gave it to Pandulphus the Popes Legate, saying, Here I resign up the
Crown of the Realm of England to the hands of Pope Innocent the Third, and lay
my self whol^^y at his mercy and appointment. Pandulphus took the Crown from
King John, and kept it five days; and the King giving then all his Kingdoms to
the Pope, to be held in Farm from him and his Heirs for evermore, his Crown was
restered again, King John engaging to pay seven hundred Marks a year for
England, and three hundred for Ireland; half of it at Easter, and half at
Michaelmas, as Rent for the sald Kingdoms. This King John was afterward
poisoned by a Monk, which was judged such a Meritorious Act, that the Murderer
bad a Mass appointed to be said for his Soul for ever after, by his
Follow-Monks.

V Pope Celestine the Third, standing upon the S^irs of St. Peter's Church in
Rome, he there received an Oath of Henry the Sixth, Emperor of Germary, and
then had him into the Church, and Anointed him, and sitting in his Pontifical
Chair, held the Crown of Gold between his Feet, and the Emperor bowing down his
Head to the Popes Feet, received the Crown; the Empress likewise was Crowned in
the same manrer: The Crown being thus put on, the Pope immediately kicked it off
the Emperor's Head with his Foot to the ground declaring thereby, that if he
pleased he could depose him again: Then the Cardinals took up the Crown and
again put it on his Head.

VI. Nay to such a height did the Popes at last arrive, that they governed all
things: Emperors and Princes have been forced to kneel and k^ss their Toes;
nay, they asserted, that all Kings were Slaves, and in subjection to them: And
that all must be judged by the Pope; but he by no man.

The Persecutions Committed by the Papists, upon the Waldenses and Albingenses,
and other Protestants in Piedmont, Savoy, and the Valtoline, from the Year,
1160. to the Year, 1656.
WHen by the just Judgment of the Almighty, All the world wondered after the
Beast; and the Kings and Princes of Christendom, established the Authority of
the Pope and Church of R^m^, appointing to slaughter and destruction such as
denied the horrid Blasphemies and Errors maintained by them; it occasioned many
good Christians to detest their Superstitions, as unknown to the Ap^stles, and
the Primitive Church: And the first we re^d of, was one Berengarius, who boldly
and faithfully published the True Religion contained in the Scripture, and
discovered the falseness of the Romish; He lived about the time of William the
Conqueror his coming into England; about which time his Followers being taken
notice of, as dissenting from many of the Common received Opinions of those
times, they were branded with all the odious Name of Heretics.

About Twenty years after this one Peter Bruis was a famous Preacher among
them, who taught them publicly a long time at Toulouse in Savoy; in a short
time after they were grown to so great a multitude, that the Popes of Rome were
resolved, if possible, by any means to extirpate and destroy them; to which
end, they at first incited several of the most Learned of their Party to write
against them, and warned diverse Princes to have a care of them, and to banish
them out of their Territories.

The first then that flung away the Spiritual Keys, and began valiantly to
brandish the bloody Sword of Persecution against them, was Pope Alexander the
Third, who began therewith to hack, hew, and murder the poor Waldenses, so
named from Peter Waldo, or Waldo of Lions in France, who appeared very
courageous in opposing the many Corruptions of the Romish Church; as Holy Oil,
Consecrated Images, Popes Indulgences, Candles, Merits, Auricular Confession,
the Supremacy of the Pope, False Miracles, Purgatory, Praying for the Dead,
Prayers to Saints, extreme Unction, and many other Fopperies of the Popish
Communion: This Persecution of Waldo and his Followers (who were increased to a
very great number) began in France in the Year 1060. Waldo being compelled to
fly into the Mountains of France, among the Savage Inhabitants, to whom he
taught his Doctrine, others fled into Picardy, from whence they were called
Picards, several into Flanders and Alsatia, and thereby (for the safety of
their Lives) they spread their Doctrine into all places.

King Philip of France being incited by the Ecclesiastics, raised Arms against
them, and destroyed Three Hundred Gentlemen's Houses and likewise several Walled
Towns: And those that fled into Flanders escaped little better, for they were
pursued, and many of them for their Religion put to Death. And the Bishops of
Mayence and Strasburgh, raised great persecutions against those which fled
thither, there being Five and Thirty Citizens of Mayence burned in one Fire,
and Eighteen in another, who suffered Death with very great constancy: and at
Strasburgh, at the instance of the Bishop, Fourscore were likewise burnt for
professing the same Truth, and yet by the exhortations, constancy, and patience
of these Martyrs, there were such multitudes who entertained their Doctrines,
that in a few Years after in the County of Passau and in Bohemia, there were
above Fourscore thousand persons that made profession of the same Faith. Some
of them likewise fled into England for shelter, but were more barbarously and
cruelly put to death at Oxford, by the Papists there, than ever any Christians
were before that time, for matters of Religion: and Three years after Pope
Alexander the Third, made a Decree in the Council of Tours in France, that
these Gospellers, and all their Favorers should be Excommunicated, and that
none of them should buy or sell, according as it was foretold in Revelat. 13.17.

At Colen in Germany Four Men, and Two young Women were discovered hid in a
Barn, and the Papists not being able to dissuade them from the Truth, The Men
were all tied to the Stake to be burnt, but the R^manists pretending to pity
the young Women, persuaded them to recant, but they perceiving their design,
got out of the hands of those that held them, and voluntarily leapt into the
Fire, where they were burned with them: about this time a Proclamation was
published in Aragon, whereby it was made Treason to relieve these poor
Christians, or to suffer them to live in that Country, and liberty was given to
all people to abuse them at pleasure, without being punished for the same. But
these people still increasing, the Pope was resolved to suppress them by all
means possible, and therefore about the Year 1201. he set up the Bloody
Inquisition, which with its Racks, Tortures, Fire and all manner of Cruelty,
has destroyed an innumerable company of Good and Holy Men. And in the same
Year a noble Knight called Emandus, and one of the Waldenses, was burnt at
Paris: and the persecution still continuing, the people of Dat phine flying
from their barbarous Enemies, sheltred themselves in ^he Caves upon the
Mountains, but their cruel Adversaries having notice thereof pursued and
destroyed many of them, and the rest fled higher into the Mountains (which were
all covered with Snow) together with their Wives and Children, the Mothers
carrying some in their Arms, and others in Cradles, and the Night coming on,
and having no means to make a Fire for their tender Infants, they were so
benumbed with cold, that in the morning above Fourscore of them were found dead
in their Cracles, and most of their Mothers died likewise: Many also were burnt
in the same Country of Dauphin, and the Fire of Persecution raged through the
whole Land, so that there was scarce a Town or City in P^edmont but many were
put to death therein, and at Turin one of them had his Bowels taken out of his
B^lly, and put into a Basin, and was afterward cruelly Martyred. One Gerrard
being at the Stake to be burnt, requested the Hangman to give him Two or Three
Stones, which he at first refused, thinking he would have thrown them at some
body, but afterward did, and Gerrard taking them up into his hands said, When
I shall have eaten up these Stones, then shall you see an end of our Religion,
for which you now put me to death, and then throwing them on the Ground, he
cheerfully died. These Countries being so hot with the Fire of Persecution,
many of these poor People fled into Calabria, where they began to plant and
build Towns, as Saint Xist La Guard, and diverse others, where they continued
till the year, 1560. at which time they were most grievously persecuted by Pope
Pius the Fourth, and were forced to leave their Houses and Habitations, and to
fly into the Woods for the saving of their Lives, but being there pursued by
order from the Viceroy of Naples, most of them were cruelly and barbarously
murdered by the Soldiers, and some flying into fortified places, were so
straightly besieged, that they died with Famine: And at the same time one Charlin
was rackt in so horrible a manner, that his Guts came out of his Belly: Another
was tormented upon the Rack Eight hours together, to force him to confess what
they pleased against himself and others, which yet he refused to do: Some were
stripped stark naked, and whipped to death with Rods of Iron, others were drawn
through the Streets, and burnt with Firebrands, some thrown down from an High
Tower, and some cut to pieces with sharp Knives. By order of the Inquisitor
Panza, Fourscore persons had their Throats cut, as Butchers do Sheep, and then
causing them to be divided into Four Quarters, he made their Limbs to be set
upon Stakes for the space of Thirty Miles as a bloody spectacle: A young Man
was thrown from an High Tower, because he would not confess himself to a
Priest, and the Viceroy passing by at the same time and hearing him implore
Gods Mercy, not being quite dead, he kicked him on the Head, and said, Is the
Dog yet living? Take him and cast him to the Hogs. Threescore Women were so
cruelly rackt, that the Cords pierced their Arms and Legs to the Bones, and
then being cast into Prison all there died, except Nine of the handsomest, who
being delivered to the Fathers of the Inquisition were never heard of
afterward: Many more were delivered to the Secular Power to be burnt, and if
any interceeded for them, they were presently put on the Rack as Favorers of
Heretics. One of their Ministers was famished in Prison, another was carried
to Rome, and burnt, the Pope and Cardinals being present at that pleasing
spectacle; but the Minister spoke so many things out of Gods word against them,
that the Pope gnashed his Teeth for Anger, and afterward promised the Marquess
of Butiana to make his Son a Cardinal, if he would clear Calabria of these
Waldenses, which was then no hard matter, for the Inquisition, and the Vice Roy
of Naples, did by all manner of Cruelties destroy Man, Woman and Child, so that
in a short time, they were utterly rooted out of that Country.

The Waldenses who fled out of Pi^dmont into Provence, increasing daily, and
their Habitations being near to Avigmon (many times the Popes Seat) he soon
raised an horrid Persecution against them, but the greatest was in the Year,
1360. in the time of Lewis the Twelfth, wherein many suffered, which continued
for some time more or less furious, to the Year, 1540. About which time the
Inhabitants of Merindol, Cabriers, Posin, and other places in Piedmont, were by
means of the Popes Agents cruelly Burned, Massacred, and Destroyed, the Towns
were fired and laid waste, and the Country round about made desolate; the poor
People were slain, the young Virgins ravished, and barbarously abused, Children
were pulled alive out of their Mothers Bellies, the Breasts of many cut off, so
that the Infants died of Famine. There were only Threescore and six weak men
left in the Town of Cabriers who offered to deliver it up, so that they might
go to Geneva or Germany, but the Enemy entering, caused them all to be brought
into a Field and cut to pieces the Soldiers striving who should show the best
Manhood in cutting off Legs, Arms, etc. The Women they put into a Barn with
their young Children, and some great with Child, and then firing a great
quantity of Straw, they were barbarously burnt together; and some endeavoring
to escape through the flames, were knocked on the head by the bloody Papists;
many fled into Caves and Cellars, who being brought forth stark naked into the
Fields, were there slain: Others being bound back to back, were in sport run
through with one Sword. As soon as any were found, the Villains cried, Kill,
kill, destroying all they met with; so that above a thousand Men, Women and
Children were slain in this place: Some desired leave to depart to some other
place, but one Opede, a Chief Commander amongst the Papists said, That he would
send them to dwell in H^ll, among the Devils. At Costa, another Town, they
committed great slaughter, and many of the Inhabitants flying into an Orchard,
the Soldiers ravished diverse of the Women and Virgins, and abused them in so
filthy a manner for a day and a night, that the Women with Child, and younger
Maidens died immediately after. Many more were the outrages committed by the
Soldiers in this Country, but the Tremendous Justice of God did not suffer
some of the most violent. Persecutors to go unpun shed: For Opede, the
Commander of these Villains, was struck with a strange kind of bleeding in the
lower parts, that he was not able to make any U^ne; so that his Guts rotted
within him and Worms bred in his Bowels, which continually gnawed him; and so
he lay raging and blaspheming, saying, that he felt a fi^e within him, which
bu^nt him from the Navel upwards: Which was accompanied with a most filthy
stink from his lower parts, and in this miserable manner he ended his wretched
life. There was likewise one John de Roma, a Monk, who used horribly to torment
these poor Protestants: And among the rest, he would fill Boots with boiling
Oil, and put them upon their Legs over a soft fire. Thus he tormented many: But
at last, Francis the French King being informed of his Hellish cruelty, sent to
the Parliament of Provence to apprehend him, who condemn him: But he having
notice of it, fled to Arragon, where a while after he was robbed of all he had
by his own Servants, and then fell into an horrible Disease, unknown to the
Physicians, being intolerably tormented with pains all over his Body, so that
he had not one minutes rest, and no Creature was able to endure him, for the
intolerable stink which proceeded from him, nor he himself, for his Body was
full of nasty Sores and Ulcers, which swarmed with Vermin, and rotted away from
the Bones by piecemeal. In the midst of his torments, he would in a great rage
cry out, Oh! Who will deliver me? who will rid me out of these intolerable
pains which I now suffer, for oppressing and tormenting those poor men?
endeavoring several times to kill himself, but had not power; and in this
horrible anguish and despair he fearfully died, no man being able to bury him,
for some time, by reason of the loathsome smell proceeding from him, till at
last a poor man with an Iron Hook dragged his Carcass into a Hole he had dug
for him.

During this Persecution, the Bishop of Aix, with some other Bishops, walking
with some of their Wenches through the Streets of Avignion, they saw a man
selling bawdy Pictures, Images, and Songs, which they presently bought up: But
going a little further, they found a man selling of French Bibles, at which
being extremely enraged, they asked him how he durst be so bold to sell such
Merchandise in that Town? the Bookseller answered, Is not the Holy Bible as
good as these goodly Pictures you have bought for the Gentlewomen? The Bishop
of Aix said, I renounce my part in Paradise, if this Fellow be not a Lutheran:
The Attendants cried out, a Lutheran, a Lutheran, to the fire with him, to the
fire with him; one giving him a blow with his Fist, others pulled him by the
Hair and Beard, so that the poor man was all embrued in Blood before he came to
Prisor The next day he was brought before the Judg^ where by the instigation of
the Bishops he (...) burned the same day with two Bibles (...) bout his Neck,
one before, and anoth^^ (...) ^ind, where he made a most Christ (...)

This long and Bloody Persecution of these Waldenses lasted near five hundred
years, in which time the Gospel spread into Bohemia, Austria, Germany,
Flanders, England, Poland, Italy, Spain, Dalmatia, Creatta, Sclavonta,
Salmatia, Bulgaria, and in other places to which they were driven, where they
were tormented and persecuted according to the power and influence that the
Pope and his Agents had over the Princes and Governors o^ those Countries.

The Albingenses were the same with the Waldenses, prosessing the same
Doctrines and Principles, and differing only in name, their Country being
called Albi, the chief Preaches among them being one Arnold, from who^ they
were sometimes called Arnoldists. Pop^ Alexander the Third began with them,
condemning them for Heretics; and Pope Inncent the Third raising a War against
them calling it the Holy War, giving the same Pa^dons and Indulgences, and
promising Paradis^ to all that would fight against the Heretick^ with the same
encouragement, as th^se which went to the Holy Land, against the Turks an^
Sarazens. In this War he so thundered o^^ Excommunications, and used Temporal
Arm against Reymond, Earl or Prince of Tholous^ that he was forced to submit;
and his Nobili^ (...) much astonished to see their Lord, (...) (...) ^vested of
his Possessions, but led to the Church to be reconciled to it, where the Popes
Legate commanded the Earl to strip himself stark naked, all but his Linen
Drawers; they then put a Rope about his Neck, and led him nine times round the
Grave of one Peter an Hermit, who was killed in that War, scourging him with
Rods all the while; of which the Earl complaining, the Legate told him, That he
must submit, if he would be reconciled to the Pope; yea, he must be thus
scourged before his Earls, Barons, Marquesses; Prelates, and all the People. He
made him likewise Swear to be obedient to the Pope, and Church of Rome, all his
life, and to make Irreconcilable War against the Albingenses.

The Legate then acts the part of a General, and Besieges Bezier, and the
Albingenses desiring to come to Terms, the Legate would admit of nothing but
the renouncing of their Religion, and embracing Popery; which they absolutely
refused upon those Conditions, saying, That God was able to defend them; but if
he would please to honor them to die for his sake, they would rather displease
the Pope than God Almighty. In a short time the City was taken by Storm, being
assaulted by above an hundred thousand Papists, the Enemy entering and slaying a
great multitude, killing all they met without distinction, the Popes Legate
bid^ ding them kill all, both Catholics and (...) ticks, for the Lord knows
who are (...) that there were threescore thousand persons slain in this City;
the Priests and Friars going about the Streets in the mean time, with Crosses
and Banners, and singing, Te Deum Laudamus: after which, they set the whole
City on fire, and burnt it to Ashes.

They marched next to a Town called Carcasson, which these bloody Villains (who
called themselves Holy Pilgrims) took by Storm likewise, killing, burning, and
destroying all before them, as they had done before at Beziers. They next
proceeded to the City of Carcasson, which was about two miles from the Town,
and was defended by the Earl of Peziers: when they offered to capitulate, the
Legate would grant no other Conditions, but that the Earl, and twelve more,
should come forth with their Baggage, but all the rest, both Men, Women, Maids
and Children, should come forth stark naked, without any covering, either of
Shirt or Smock, and humble themselves before him: but the Earl disdained such
unworthy Conditions, upon which the Legate assaulted the City; but they that
were within threw down Stones, Fire, Pitch, Brimstone, and Scalding Water from
the Walls, which so galled the Legates Soldiers, that the Earth was covered,
and the Ditch filled with their dead bodies.

The Legate finding Force would not avail; (...) Policy; and therefore, upon
pretense of Parley, he persuaded the Earl to come out of the City, with great
Oaths and Execrations for his safe return; but having him in possession, they
k^pt him Prisoner, and then Instantly stormed the City, to the amazement of the
poor Citizens, who expected nothing less: but there being happily discovered a
Vault in the Town which went to a Castle some miles from thence, the Citizens
in the the Evening began their Flight, with their Wives and Children, carrying
Victuals with them only for some few days: the next morning they arrived at the
Castle, and from thence dispersed themselves, some one way, some another,
leaving the City, and all therein, to the fury and rage of the unholy Pilgrims.
They then surprised the Castle of Bezon, where they pulled out the Eyes, and
cut off the Noses of an hundred Albingenses, leaving only one with one Eye to
guide the rest to Calaret.

They took likewise the Castle of Menerly, defended by the Lord of Terms, whom
they flung into a filthy Prison till he died; his Wife, Sister, and Daughter,
who was a Virgin, and likewise diverse Noble Women, after they had in vain by
frowns and threats endeavored to draw them to Popery, were burnt in an huge
fire all together: And after that, they burnt an hundred and fourscore more in
another great fire, who embraced the flames with joy giving God thanks that he
was pleased so to honor them, as to die for his Name. Simon Monford succeeded
the Legate in his Generalship, and at the taking of the Castle of Lavaur, all
the Soldiers were put to the Sword, except fourscore Gentlemen, whom that
cruel Earl caused to be hanged, and the Lord Aimery on a Gibbet above all the
rest: the Lady his Sister was cast into a Ditch, and covered with Stones: the
rest of the people, who were about four hundred persons, were forced into a
great fire made purposely for them, and so all burnt, except those that would
forsake their Religion, which were very few.

About this time there was one Reynard Lollard, a godly and learned man, who by
his preaching stirred up the English in Guiene to assist the Albingenses, which
they did accordingly, but this worthy man was afterward burnt in Germany: They
say he foretold many things by Divine Revelation, which came to pass in a short
time. In the year 1213. near Muret, upon the Gavon, there was a Battle between
Simon Montford, and the King of Arragon, who assisted the Albingenses, in which
Fight the King of Arragon, was slain, and the Enemy reported, above two
Millions of Albingenses, with him, which the Albingenses attributed to the too
great confidence of the King, who depended much upon his numbers, and was
feasting while his Enemies were in Council.

Friar Conradus of Marpurg, the Popes Inquisitor, made terrible havoc of all
that professed the Gospel, under the names of Heretics, whom he tried, by
making them pass over red hot Irons laid at an unequal distance blindfold, and
those that were burnt were accounted Heretics, few escaping the hot Irons; so
that neither Noble, nor Ignoble, Clerks, Monks, Nuns, Burgesses, Citizens, nor
Country people, escaped the Flames. By means of this bloody Inquisitor, Prince
Lewis of France took the Town of Miramond, and therein destroyed five thousand
men, women and children of the Albingenses: And in the year 1234. many of them
being fled into France, the Pope caused a Crusado to be preached up against
them, whereby a great Army of Pilgrims assembled together, and were sent
against them by Pope Gregory, who slew the poor Protestants, with their Bishops
and Ministers, burnt their houses, destroyed their Towns, and plundered and
carried away their Goods: And about the same time, some who had retired into
Germany, Millain, and other parts of Italy, were likewise burnt and destroyed:
A while after, four hundred and twenty of these Albingenses were burnt at
Toulouse.

A great Persecution was raised against the Protestants of Albi in the year
1281. so that they were almost all extirpated, and rooted out, and forced to
fly to all parts for safety of their lives; and at the same time, by the Popes
Order, the Bones of several famous Ministers among them were dug up and
burnt, twenty or thirty years after they were buried. In the year 1315. the
Friars Inquisitors raised an hot Persecution against these Gospellers in
Pashaw, and burnt many of them, who died cheerfully and constantly in the
Faith; and one of them, who was burnt at Vienna, confessed, that there were
fourscore thousand of them in Bohemia and Austria at that time. In the year
1332. Lollard Walterus, a famous Preacher (from whom his Followers were called
Lollards) was taken and burnt at Collen: But notwithstanding all these horrid
Cruelties used by the Papists against these Saints and Servants of God, yet
they could never prevail to a total extirpation of them, but they still
increased and revived, and their Posterity profess the same Faith to this very
day.

In the year 1620. in a Country called the Valtoline, or the Grisons Country,
the Papists committed very great cruelties: those poor people had for a long
time enjoyed the Freedom of their Religion; but about the time aforementioned,
when the Minister of a Town, called Tell, was preaching to his Congregation,
the bloody Papists rose in Arms and set upon them, beating and killing several
of them: and among the rest, there was an Honorable Lady who was exhorted to
change her Religion, if not for her own sake, yet out of pity to her young
Insant that she held in her Arms, which otherwise together with her self,
should be immediately slain: But the Lady with an undaunted courage answered, I
have not departed out of Italy, my Native Country, nor forsaken all the Estate
that I had there, to renounce the Faith of my Lord Jesus Christ; No, I will
suffer a thousand deaths, if it be possible, rather than do it: And why in this
case should I have so much regard to my Infant, since God my Heavenly Father
spared not his own Son, my Lord Jesus, but delivered him up to death in love to
me, and such sinners as I am? And then giving her Child to one that stood by,
she said, Behold, my Child; the Lord God, who has care of the Birds of the
Air, is much more able to save this poor creature, although it should by you be
left in these wild Mountains. Then unlacing her Gown, she opened her Breast,
saying. Here is the Body which you have power to kill; but my Soul, on which
you have no power to lay your hands, that I commend to my God. And then these
Bloodhounds presently slew her and cut her to pieces: The Infant being a
lovely sweet Child they spared, and delivered to a Popish Nurse to be brought
up. These Villains carried diverse Women and Children to the tops of high
Mountains, and if they would not promise to go to Mass, they were thrown down
headlong, and torn to pieces.

One Dominico Berto, a young man of sixteen years of age, because he would not
turn Papist, was set upon an Ass, with his face to the Tail, and the Tail in
his hand for a bridle, and with many scoffs and mocks was brought into the
Market place: there they cut off his Nose, Ears, and Checks, and then burnt
many holes in diverse parts of his body with hot Irons; and thus they
barbarously continued to torment him till he died.

They likewise seized upon a Noble young Virgin, and carried her through the
Streets with all imaginable disgrace: They put a Miter of Paper upon her head,
besmeared her face with dirt, and buffetted her on the Cheeks with their Fists,
and then bid her to call upon the Saints; but she smiling said, My trust and my
salvation is only in my Savior Jesus Christ, and upon him only will I rest; as
for the Virgin Mary, though she be blessed above all women, yet she is not
Omniscient, and therefore knows not our requests; yea, she her self has need
of the Merits of her own Son, without which she could not have been saved. But
they reviling and abusing her, she courageously said, I willingly endure all
this, as it becomes me to do, desiring no better usage, since the same was done
to my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and to his Apostles, and to thousands of
the holy Martyrs. Upon this they carried her away and murdered her in the
Fields.

In one house they slew a man and his Wife; and there being a little Girl in
the Cradle of about three years old, of a very amiable countenance, the poor
Child seemed to smile upon them, whereupon one of these bloody Villains took
her by the Heels and dashed out her Brains. From thence these Wretches went to
a Town called Bruise, where they murdered many, by shooting some, drowning
others, burning others, and grinding their very bones to powder. Amongst
others, they found an ancient Woman of fourscore years old, whom they earnestly
persuaded to hear Mass, and that she would respect her age; to whom with a
worthy resolution she answered, God forbid that I who now of a long time have
had one foot in the Grave, should forsake my Lord Jesus. Christ, who has so
long preserved me in the knowledge and profession of his truth, and that I
should now put my trust in Creatures and should receive the Traditions of men,
instead of the holy Word of God. Upon these words they immediately slew her.

The sufferings of the poor Protestants in Piedmont continued still; they are
under the Government of the Duke of Savoy, and are the Offspring of the old
Waldenses which inhabited there, and have ever since professed the same
Religion; they have Evangelical Churches in the several Valleys of Angrognea,
Bobio, Villaro Valguicharda, Roras, Tagliacetto, and diverse others; in all
which most of their Inhabitants are Protestants, and had been long indulged in
their Religion by the Princes of Savoy, to whom they were Subjects: but in the
year 1565. a cruel Edict was published, that all such as would not comply with
the Church of Rome, and go to Mass, should within ten days be banished from
their Country, and Habitation; but by the Intercession of the French King, and
the Elector Palatine of the Rhine, this Edict was recalled, and they continued
quiet till the year 1655. wherein that late horrible Massacre was committed
upon them for the sake of their Religion.

The Papists had all along by many cunning Plots and contrivances endeavored
their subversion, by using all Arts to stir them up to Rebellion, and by
planting Jesuits Colleges among them, which like Goads in their sides still
annoyed them, and proved a great trouble and affliction to them; for they often
procured some cruel and harsh Edict, or Proclamation, by their Complaints and
Lies which they raised in the Duke of Savoys Court against them: As in the year
1602. they got an Edict for banishing all private and public Protestant
Schoolmasters, as Enemies to the Government, and disturbers of the Peace: and
likewise another Edict 1622. that no strangers, either Ministers or others,
should be entertained among them. In 1634. an Edict came out, that all the
Protestants of Compiglione should be banished; and in 1654. the same was done
against those of Martino, and Perosa. These Missionary Fathers behaved
themselves among them more cruelly than Turks or Barbarians. But at last
resolving utterly to root out the Protestants from among them, and thoroughly to
perform the will of their Unholy Father the Pope, they procured an Order in the
midst of Winter, that is, January 25. 1655. (which is very sharp in those
Countries) for the banishing of all Protestants out of the Valleys of Lucerna,
Lucernetta, and seven other places, within three days after publication, unless
they would turn Roman Catholics; and this extended to all in general, none
being excepted, of what Rank, Degree, or Condition soever they were. And thus
these poor Creatures were forced in compliance with this cruel Edict, to fly,
for the security of their Lives and Consciences, in the depth of the Snow, and
when all the Valleys were covered with water, there being among them some Women
with-Child, others newly delivered, young children crying and lamenting, old
women, and decrepit men, leaning on their Staves, all dragged over the lce;
through Rain, Snow, Waters, and a thousand inconveniences and hardships; (...)
that it would have grieved the heart of a (...) to have seen them leaving their
Goods behind them, or selling them for little to the Papists, who took no pity
of their bitter tears, sighing, wringing of Hands, beating of Breasts,
mourning, complaining and lamenting; but all these calamities were but as the
bleating of Sheep, or the lowing of Oxen to Popish Ears, and they rather
rejoiced at, than commiserated the condition of these poor Wretches: They were
no sooner gone, but their Houses were pillaged, rifled, and ransackt of all
that was left, and then pulled to the ground; yea, the Trees were cut down, and
such havoc and devastation made, as all was turned into a Wilderness.

This cruel Edict was put in execution by one Gustaldo and others; but this was
not all, the Design was for the utter extirpating and rooting out Heretics, as
they called these Religious Souls, it would not satisfy them to have banished
these few, and the poor Protestants could have no redress at Court, for all
their humble Petitions and Remonstrances could not be heard. The Papists had
yet more wicked and bloody Designs against them; and to that purpose, they
employed some Romish Agents who had great influence over the Duke and Duchess
of Savoy.

It is next to impossible to reckon up the variety of Cruelties and Murders
committed up(...) ^hese poor Innocent Souls; we shall therefore only give a
brief Abstract of some remarkable passages that happened therein.

Upon the seventeenth of April, 1655. whilst the Protestant Deputies were
detained at Turin, and delayed with hopes of redress, some Soldiers were sent
on purpose to fall unexpectedly upon the Protestants, who peaceably attended
the issue of their Petitions, which caused some bustle; for the poor people
being prompted by the Law of Nature stood upon their defense, and the Papists
lost fifty men, the Protestants only two. Wednesday April 22. The Marquess of
Pianessa, the Popish General, came to the Valley of Lucerna, and promised them
there should be no violence offered to them provided they would but quarter a
few Soldiers as a Token of their Obedience, which the well-meaning people
consented to; but no sooner were these Troops entered, but they put all to Fire
and Sword, slaying all they met with that had but the likeness of Mankind, and
that in the most barbarous manner they could possibly devise.

There joined immediately to this Army a great number of Outlaws, Prisoners,
and other Offenders, who thought to have saved their Souls, and filled their
Purses, by killing Heretioks: Six Regiments of French, besides Irish, likewise
helped them in this good work, the Country being promised to the (...) cleared
of Protestants. With (...) other Troops of Highway-men and Vagabonds, by the
License of their General, and the encouragement of Popish Priests and Monks,
the most unheard of Villainies were committed upon the poor Protestants: So that
there was nothing to be seen through the Protestant Valleys but Churches
burning, Towns smoking. Houses flaming, Men, Women and Children Missacred and
Murdered; nothing to be heard, but the confused cries of people flying, the
piercing groans of others dying, and the horrid shrieks of others that were
tormented: and indeed so dreadful was their usage, that it is scarce to be
expressed. In one place they most cruelly tormented an hundred and fifty Women
and Children, and afterward chopped off the Heads of some, and dashed out the
Brains of others against the Rocks; they took multitudes of Prisoners, and such
of them who were fifteen years of Age and upwards, if they refused to go to
Mass, some of them were hanged up, others had their Feet nailed to Trees, with
their Heads hanging down, all which they constantly endured. A Franciscan
Friar, and another Priest, set fire to all the Churches and Houses at S.
Giovanni, La Toure, and other places, so that they left not one standing.

In these Desolations the Mother was bereaved of her sweet Child, the Husband
of his dear Wife, those that were richest among them (...) to beg their Bread;
yea, they lay weltring in their own blood, and the pretense for all those
bloody Massacres and Cruelties was, that they were Rebels to their Princes
Commands, in not performing an absolute impossibility, by immediately departing
from their Habitations in so short a time; and likewise for their frequent
Petitioning to the Duke to take pity upon them.

The truth is, the Cruelties which were executed would exceed the belief of
man, but that they are so fully proved by the Attestations o^ Eyewitnesses, by
the woeful cries of so many poor desolate Wretches who have been miserably
robbed and despoiled of their Relations, Friends, Lands and Houses: yea one of
the chief Commanders of their own Army that acted these cruelties, made a
formal Oath of the reality thereof, and Signed it with his own hand before two
sufficient Witnesses, and likewise the voluntary confession of one of the
Soldiers who told some of his Fellows, that during the heat of the Massacre,
he had diverse times surfeited with eating the boiled Brains of Protestants.

The barbarous cruelties following, which were exercised upon those poor
people, are likewise attested by diverse Persons of Honor and Integrity, who
were for the most part eye or ear-witnesses of the same.

One Sarah V^gues, about threescore years of age, was commanded to say her
prayers, and because she refused to say Ave Maria, they ripped her up alive, by
putting a Sickle into her privy parts, and so slit up her Belly; after which
they dragged her about, and at last cut off her Head.

Other Women had their Breasts, Noses, Privities and Hands cut off, and so left
to perish miserably; another they stabbed in the soles of his feet, then cut off
his Privities and fried them, giving them their Comrades to eat as a delicate
Dish; then they seared his Wounds with flaming Candles, cut off his Ears, and
tore off his Nails with burning Pincers, to make him renounce his Religion; but
he still continuing constant, they tied one of his Legs to a Mule, and so
dragged him about the Streets till he was almost dead: and after all this, they
bound a Cord about his Head, and twisted it with a Stick till his eyes and
brains burst out, and then cast his body into a River.

One Peter Simond of Angrogna they bound hand and foot, and then flung him down
a dreadful Rock, or Precipice; but he happened in his fall to hang upon the
stump of an old Tree, where he continued alive several days in a miserable
languishing condition before he died, not being able to help himself, and the
Precipice being so high, that no other could come at him.

They cut the body of an old man of ninety years of age into small pieces, and
then cut off his head. Others had their bodies torn and cut in pieces, and
their limbs strowed in the Highways, and hung upon Hedges. An old Woman had her
Hands and Nose cut off, and so was left alive. The body of another Woman was
found in a Cave, with all the flesh sliced from the bones, and chopped like
minced meat. These bloody Papists took many little children, and tender
Infants, and threw them down the steep Rocks, whereby they were dashed to
pieces.

They took a Gentleman's Daughter, and put a long Stake in her body, and then
carried her upon their shoulders, till at last being weary, they struck the
Stake into the ground, and so left her as a miserable Spectacle. Andrea
Michalin being taken Prisoner. (...) strangely, having first se^^ (...)
Children torn limb from limb, and the fourth and youngest had its brains beaten
out against the Rocks. They woefully tormented others, by fleying off their
skins alive in long slices, of which they made Points.

The Daughter of one Peter Fontana, a beautiful Girl of about ten years of age,
being surprised by some of these lecherous Bruits, because they could not
ravish her in an ordinary way, they so inhumanely abused her, that they left
her for dead. The Daughter of one Moses Long they spitted upon a Pike, and
roasted her alive, with a fire made upon a broad stone. One Jacob Michelino
they took, and binding his hands to his Privities, hanged him upon a gate, and
there left him in exquisite torments in that shameful manner, as they likewise
did by many others in the same kind. Four Brothers, and a man and his Wife, all
at one time had their mouths crammed full of Gunpowder, and so being fired,
their heads were torn to pieces.

The Schoolmaster of Roras being stripped naked, after they had torn off his
Nails with Pincers, and made a thousand holes in his hands with their Daggers,
they dragged him through the Town of Lucerna, and at every turn, one Soldier
cut off a Collop of his flesh from one side, and another, from another, crying,
What say thou, will thou go to Mass, thou Dog? To which with admirable
constancy he answered, Much rather death than the Mass, dispatch me quickly for
the love of God. At last they cut off his head, and flung him into the River.

One Giovanni, with his Wife and Child, were thrown down from a very high Rock,
the Mother holding the Child in her arms, and three days after they were found
dead, only the Child was alive, and clasped so fast in the dead Mothers arms,
that they could hardly get it out. They took another at the same place, and put
out his eyes, and then cut off his Privities, and thrusting them in his mouth,
exposed him some time as a miserable Spectacle, and he being yet alive, they
flead off his skin, and hung it in the Windows of four principal houses in
Lucerna, after they had divided it into four pieces. They took out the Brains
of Daniel Cardon, and frying them in a Pan, eat them up like Canibals, and then
cut open his breast also, that they might eat his Heart, but were frighted by
some Protestant Troops that were marching that way. They burned four Women of
between eighty and ninety years old alive; they cut diverse to pieces, and gave
their flesh to Dogs. In another place, having taken eleven Protestants, they
heated a Furnace, and forced them to throw one another into it, till it came to
the last man, whom they threw in themselves.

They stabbed some with impoysoned Knives in the legs and feet, and so left
them in torment, till they died, One Gros, a Ministers Son, being taken by
them, they cut off his Flesh in small Gobbets while he was alive, and in the
presence of his Wife and Children, whom they murdered likewise before his eyes.
A Woman with seven Children were all barbarously murdered in their Beds: one
Daniel Rambout, because he refused to say, Jesu Maria, or pray to the Virgin
Mary, they first cut off one finger, then another, till they had cut them all
off; then they cut off his hands and arms, till after this manner they had
cruelly manged him to death: Others they shut up between two Stone walls, and
starved them to death. And to conclude, there was no manner of death, no kind
of cruelty or torment, that these Firstborn of Hell could invent or devise,
but they were exercised with the utmost severity upon the poor miserable
Protestants; and it would be almost endless, to give a particular account of
all that were murdered, drowned, burnt, shot, starved, smothered, knoc^^ on the
head, and cut in pieces by these Barbarous Papists.

These horrid and inhumane practices macle the rest of the Protestants fly to
their Arms in the natural defense of themselves, and their Families, against
the rage and fury of these Lions, Tigers and Bears, in the shapes of men: But
those that were so brisk at Massacring and Murdering such as did not resist
them, were mere Cowards at fighting, and the Protestants prevailed against them
with small numbers, and defended themselves against their Cruelty.

But at last by the Mediation of the Switzers, Hollanders, and other
Protestant-Princes, and especially the English, who contributed above Thirty
Thousand Pound to the Relief of their Wants and Miseries, the breach was made
up; but yet so made, that the poor remaining Protestants live under the Tyranny
of their Popish Taskmasters being forbid all manner of Traffic, wronged of
their Estates and Goods, their Ministers Banished, their Virgins Ravished; the
Women affronted, the Men beaten and abused, and the Valleys are become like
Dungeons, in which they are kept as Slaves, and secured by strong Forts and
Garrisons of Papists; so that they are even dying whilst they live, and have
cause to cry out, How long, O Lord, holy and true, d^st thou not judge and
avenge our blood, etc. Rev. 6.10.

The Persecution of the Protestants in Bohemia, Germany, Poland, and Lithuania.
THe Persecutions of the Papists against the Bohemians began very early, even
about 977 years after the death of our blessed Savior: Pope Hildebrand
(otherwise called Hell-brand) was the first that fell upon them, and afterward
Pope Celestine; and Persecution continued upon them for many years, and John
Huss, and Jerome of Prague, were burnt in defense of the Gospel at Constance,
notwithstanding they had the Public Faith of the Empire of Germany given them
for their security.

At a Town called Cuttenburgh there are many deep Metal Mines, into one of
which, in the year 1420. the Papists threw one thousand and seven hundred
persons at one time, for their Religion; into another, one thousand thirty
eight; and into a third, a thousand three hundred and thirty four persons.

In the year 1421. one Pichel, a chief Magistrate of the City Litomeritia,
having taken twenty four of the chie^ Citizens, and among them his Son-in law,
put them in an high Tower, (...) being there almost famished, they were at ^ast
brought out, and condemned to be drowned, their Wives, Children and Friends
following them to execution with crier and tears; yea, the Magistrates own
Daughter came with prayers and tears to her Father, beseeching him to spare her
Husband; but he like a hard-hearted wretch only said, Cannot you have a better
Husband than this? To whom seeing his cruelty, she answered, You shall never
marry me to any but this: And so going along with them, when she saw her
Husband thrown into the River, she leapt in after him, and embracing him,
endeavored to save his life; but being unable to do it, they both perished
together, and the next day she was found with him fast in her Arms, and they
were both buried in one Grave.

A while after a Minister, four men, and four Boys, were all burnt together in
one fire at Prague, because they received the Sacrament in both kinds: and
indeed many and almost innumerable were the murders, torments, and inhumane
barbarities committed both publicly and privately on these poor Christians.

About the year 1523. Martin Luther began to shine as a great light in Germany,
and his Doctrine soon overspread Bohemia, and all the parts adjoining; which so
enraged the Pope and his Clergy that they continually raised very violent
persecutions against them, wherein multitudes of good Christians lost their
lives by means of Ferdinand the First, and Charles the Fifth, Emperors of
Germany. There were no less than two hundred Ministers banished out of Bohemia
at one time, and the Lord of Schanow, because he was a Lutheran, was accused of
a Conspiracy, and laid upon the Rack; but he courageously cut out his own
Tongue, and being demanded the reason of it, he wrote, That it was, lest the
torments of the Rack should make him speak falsely against himself, or others.

In the year 1617. Ferdinand the Second was obtruded upon the Bohemians, who
joining with the Papists raised up a very terrible Persecution against the
Protestants, which was the cause of the Electing of Frederick, Prince Palatine
of the Rhine, to be King of Bohemta, upon which there followed those cruel Wars
and troubles in that Country, wherein many godly Ministers, and other pious,
holy and good men, suffered such barbarities and inhumanities from the Popish
Soldiers, that the Ears of a Christian cannot hear, nor his Tongue relate
them, without the greatest abhorrency and indignation: for some of them were
stoned to death, others hanged upon a Beam, and with a soft fire made under
them were roasted to death, others were cut piecemeal: One Minister they laid
on his back, and ramming his mouth full of Gunpowder, set fire to it, and blew
his head all to pieces: Another they hanged up by the Privy Members, being
seventy years old, and burnt his own Books under him, and at last shot him to
death, after he had endured all manner of torment and pain.

In the year 1621. all the Ministers were banished out of the Kingdom of
Bohemia, and all the Provinces thereunto belonging, never more to return; and
it was made death to harbor or conceal any of them. About the same time twenty
one Ministers were banished from Cuttenburgh: A Popish Captain caused a
Ministers hand first to be stricken off, and then his head, his bowels to be
taken out, and wrapped in his shirt, and his four quarters to be set upon four
Stakes, and his head on another. At the same time likewise fifty of the
Nobility were condemned, some to death, some to banishment, and others to
perpetual imprisonment; twenty seven were executed, who all died with great
constancy of mind, and fervency of spirit, sealing the Protestant Cause with
their blood, the heads and right hands of some of (...) charge, for carrying on
the work: and thus he began with the Sword, that he might end with the Faggot.

The Duke of Saxony, and the Lantgrave of Hessen, stood up for the Protestants,
and were taken Prisoners, in the year 1547. And wherever the Papists got the
better, all sorts of cruelties, murders, racks, tortures, fire and faggot
followed upon the Protestants, so that all Germany was as it were in a flame
and combustion at once, all places being in a lamentable condition, some
flying, and others suffering death on every side for their Conscience and
Religion.

At a Town called Meldorp, they took a godly Minister, named Sutphen out of his
Bed, and forced him to go many miles on foot in Frost and Snow upon the Ice,
barefooted and barelegg'd, beating, cutting, and flashing him, and pricking
him forward with their Halberts, and at last they barbarously roasted him to
death. Many were drowned at Vienna, and put to several sorts of death.

Ladies and Gentlewomen were yokt together like Beasts and so were turned out
into the Woods, where they were ravished and abused, and then had their Hair
and Ears cut off, and disfigured. In Pomeren they forced the people to eat
their own Excrements, and if they refused them, they thrust them down their
Throats till they were choked: They crammed the secret parts of several women
with Gunpowder, and so setting fire to it, most barbarously tore their Bellies
and Wombs.

Diverse were hung up by the privy parts; they plained the faces of others with
Chisels; others they caused to draw on Boots filled with scalding Oil, and so
roasted their legs over the fire: some men they gelt in the presence of their
wives and children: others had their bodies hung up by Cords, and by tying
great weights to their limbs, all the joints of their body were put out of
joint; some had Gags put in their mouths, and had stinking water and piss
poured down their Throats through a Tunnel, till their bellies swelled like a
Tun, whereby they died in most cruel torment: They sawed off the legs of some
alive, and one Minister they bound upon a Table, and placing a great Cat upon
his belly, so provoked the Cat, that she scratcht his guts out of his belly
withher Teeth and Nails, till he miserably died.

At Magdenburg they ravished the Wife and Daughter of a famous Minister before
his face, and then violently snatched a sucking Infant from its Mothers breast,
and stuck it on the top of a Lance; and when they had tormented his Eyes and
Heart with these horrid Spectacles, they brought the Minister into the Street,
and burnt him with his own Books.

Yea, such was their abominable filthiness in Pomeren, that they ravished the
fairest Virgins before their Parents faces, forcing them to sing Psalms the
while: one beautiful young woman they ravished, and then cut to pieces, hanging
up her quarters in the Church: Girls of ten years old, and under, they ravished
and abused, till they killed them; nay, so monstrous beastly were they, that
they committed filthiness with the dead Corpse of those women whom they had
murdered. At Bastl and Friburg they did the like, neither pitying old nor young
men, women, nor innocent Babes, whom sometimes they most barbarously used to
eat, even when other meat might be had, yea such inhumane cruelty they used,
that in many places they left none remaining alive to relate the sufferings of
those that were murdered.

Thus these Massacres and bloody murders defiled the whole Land, and Germany
groaned under the oppression, till the peace of Munster and Osnaburg in the
year 1648. which put a stop to this cruel Persecution, the Papists being
compelled thereto, by Gods bringing in the King of Sweden, who overran Germany
in a short time, and thereby revived the Protestant Cause, which was almost
overborn and d^stroyed by so many thousand violences and miseries, as it had
lain under for many years.

These bloody Tyrants vented their rage and fury not only in Germany, but also
in Hungary, and other Countries, for they committed the same Villainies in all
places where they had power, the Ministers were generally banished, and put to
death, and the same Picture of their cruelties which has been represented to
you in Germany, was acted over again in this Kingdom, which we have not room to
insert, only a new sort of death was invented there; they tied Hens, Geese,
Ducks and Hares to the naked Body of a worthy Minister in that Country, and
then set the Dogs upon him, who tore and rent his Flesh till he dyed.

You have beheld many sad and doleful Spectacles, (and Reader, if thou art a
Christian, thy heart must almost bleed at the relation of them) we will
therefore Epitomize the bloody cruelties of the Papists in POLAND.

All the same things, or worse, if it be possible, which we have related to be
done in other places, were likewise acted in Poland; many thousand Protestants,
and good Christians have been destroyed in that Kingdom, and especially at
Karmin, Dumbuick, Shochy, Carienzin, and Lesna, all which Cities and Towns were
destroyed and burnt to the ground for the cause of Religion.

The City of Lesna was one of the most ancient and flourishing Cities in all
the Kingdom of Poland, which was wholly laid in ashes, being three whole days
in flames ere it was consumed, in which there perished many hundred
Protestants, besides inestimable wealth and treasure, no man resisting or
opposing the fire. Here they pulled off the Noses of some, and put out the Eyes
of others, and cut off the Tongues, Hands and Feet of diverse, giving Quarter to
none, but killing and destroying all that came in their way. They cut off the
Hands of a pious Matron of Lesna, and then murdered three of her Children
before her Face, cutting off their Heads, and laying one at each Breast, and
the other by her side. Another Woman having her Hands and Feet cut off, and her
Tongue cut out, they sowed up in a Sack, and so left her for two days in which
she lived, making a most miserable lamentation.

In the Lower Poland a multitude suffered, whole Families were butchered, and
Men and Women, Young and Old, murdered without distinction. And in the year
1654. there was an horrible slaughter amongst them, the Papists putting to
death all the Protestants they could meet with by most exquisite tortures: One
Mr. Samuel Cardus, a Minister, they used with extreme cruelties, first putting
out his Eyes, and leading him about as a miserable Spectacle; then they pulled
of his Fingers with Pincers, and poured melted Lead down his Throat, and while
he was yet half alive, they put his Neck between two folding doors, and so
violently severed his Head from his Body.

They used the Minister of Dembnick, and another Minister, very barbarously;
for after they had several ways tormented them, they cut their Throats with a
Razor, and while they were breathing, flung them into a Pit, and covered them
with filth and dung.

The same Cruelties the barbarous and bloody Papists acted against the
Protestants in LITHUANIA, in the year 1648. slaughtering all that were not
Roman Catholics, without distinction of Age or Sex. Here many had their Skins
flead off while they were alive, others their Hands and Feet cut off, some
their Bowels taken out alive, others had their Shin-bones bored through; they
poured melted Lead into the wounds of some whom they had cut in the Head, and
other parts of their Bodies: Some had their Eyes pulled out, and those that
were hanged up in all places were such a multitude, that they are hard to be
numbered. It was counted a great mercy and kindness to be shot, beheaded, or
killed outright, without any other torment.

The Wives and Daughters of the Protestants were every where ravished, their
Houses and Goods burnt and destroyed, and their Country, and their Churches
laid waste, so that there was nothing to be seen in every place but Murders and
Massacres; and the Blood of the poor Suffering Protestants ran like Streams
through the Streets of Towns and Cities, and those that were left alive, and
escaped the slaughter, were banished their Country for ever.

The Ministers were chiefly aimed at, and always cruelly tormented. Among the
rest, one Adrian Chilmiskie (who was famous for his great Piety and Learning,
and likewise for his Reverend Age) was by these Barbarous Wretches roasted
alive, and this they did leisurely, with a few Chips and Straw, that he might
be the longer in torment. In another place above forty suffered death by
several-sorts of tortures: Near Vilna, the chiefest City in Lithuania, one
Smolskie, and his Son, both Ministers, had their Heads cruelly sawed off with a
Sickle. Another Minister had his Flesh sliced off by piecemeal, till he died.
And; to conclude this Field of Blood, there were no less than fifteen hundred
poor Protestants, Ministers as well as others, who were bound to Stakes on the
Tops of Mountains in the Winter, and there miserably starved to death with
hunger and cold. In a word, no Age nor History can parallel all the several
tortures and miserable deaths which these poor Protestants suffered from the
hands of bloody Papists, for no other Crime but professing and asserting the
Truth and Gospel of Jesus Christ.

The Persecutions of the Protestants in France; with an Account of the Bloody
Massacre at Paris, and the terrible Famine at Sancerre and Rochel.
ABout the year 1209. There were diverse Learned men in France, the Disciples of
one Almericus at Paris, who being taken notice of, to hold other Opinions than
those commonly heard of at that time; six of them were brought upon
Examination, who freely declared, that they did believe, That God was no
otherwise present in the Sacramental Bread, than in any other Bread; That it
was Idolatry to build Altars to Saints, or offer Incense to their Images; That
it was ridiculous to kiss or worship Relics. They said, That the Pope was
Antichrist, and Rome was Babylon. These being counted horrible Errors in that
dark time of Superstition, they were persuaded to recant; and upon their
refusal so to do, were condemned and burnt at Paris; and the Bones of their
Master Almericus, which (...) been buried in the Churchyard, were (...) up,
and buried in the Fields.

(...) the year 1524. One John Clark set up a Bill on the Church-door, against
the Popes Pardons, and called him Antichrist; for which being apprehended, he
was ordered to be whipped several days, and then burned in the Forehead; His
Mother, a Religious Woman, standing by, encouraged him, saying with a loud
voice, Blessed be Christ, and welcome be these marks for his sake. After this
he went to Metz; and there being some Images without the City which the People
used to worship once a year, the Evening before John Clark abhorring their
Idolatry, went and brake down all their Idols; the next Morning when the Clergy
and People came to their Worship, they found their Images lie all broken on the
Ground, upon which there began a great Tumult, and John Clark was suspected and
taken; who presently confessed the Fact, and gave Reasons for his so doing; for
which he was condemned to a most cruel death, his Right Hand was first cut off,
then his Nose was violently pulled off, and after that his Arms and Breasts
with sharp pincers, all which he sustained with admirable patience, uttering
all the while the words of the 115 Psalm, Their Idols are Silver and Gold, the
work of men's hands. Lastly, he was thrown into the Fire, and burnt to Ashes.

A while after a great number of Protestants at Paris, Melda, Linosin, and
diverse other Cities and Towns in France were burnt, rackt, whipped, beaten, and
other ways tormented to death. At Melda one was burnt for saying, That the Mass
was a plain denial of the death and passion of Christ. He often meditated on
the word of Christ: He that demes me before men, him will I also deny before my
Father. He was burned in a slow Fire, and endured much torment.

One Stephen Brame, being condemned to be burned for the Constant Profession of
his Faith, when the Fire was kindled, a great wind drove away the Flame from
him, so that he stood for an hours space instructing and exhorting the People:
They then brought Oil Vessels, and more Faggots, yet still was the flame driven
from him, whereupon the Hangman struck him on the head with a staff, to whom he
said, I am condemned to be burned, and do you strike me with Staves like a Dog?
After which the Hangman run him through the Belly with a Pike, and then threw
him into the Fire, and scattered his Ashes in the Wind.

Four Protestants were condemned at Roan, and were carried to the Stake in a
Dung Cart, at which they rejoiced saying, Blessed be God we are reputed as the
Excrements of this World, but yet our death is a sweet savor unto God.

Aymond de Lavoy, a Godly Minister was burnt at Bordeaux; and likewise one
Vercote another Minister, who was imprisoned in such a narrow place, that he
could neither stand nor lie down, in which they kept him seven weeks, whereas
before no other Malefactor could endure that Torment above fifteen days without
dying, or growing mad; afterward they cut off his Tongue, and lastly they were
so merciful as to execute him.

One Thomas a young man of Eighteen years old coming from Geneva to Paris,
rebuked one for swearing, whereupon he was apprehended for a Lutheran, and
carried before the Inquisition, who committed him to Prison, and rackt him so
cruelly to confess his Companions, that one of the bloody Inquisitors turned
back his head and wept, yea the Hangman himself was weary; He was then carried
to be burned and was let down into the Fire by a Pully, and afterward pulled
up again, and asked if he would yet turn. To whom he said, He was in his way to
God, and desired them to let him go, and so he quietly slept in the Lord.

The Duke of Guise a great Instrument of Persecution committed many Barbarous
Cruelties upon the Protestants, and among the rest at a place called Vassey, he
murdered several Hundreds of Men, Women and Children who were assembled to hear
a Sermon, mangling their Limbs, and strewing them about the Seats and Galleries
of the Church, and at another Town called Seulis, some were beheaded, some
whipped, some beaten, others sent to the Galleys, the poor women being likewise
made Slaves. Among the rest one Fournia a Minister was tormented by having his
Thumbs strained with a small cord till the blood issued out at the ends of
them, and with another Cord was hoisted up by the Thumbs, and then twitcht down
again, having great Stones tied to his Toes, and so was hanged till his Spirits
failed him, and then they suddenly let him fall with his Face on the hard
floor, with which Barbarous Usage he in a short time died, being near fifty
years old.

In the year 1559, in the Reign of Henry the second of France, there was one
Ann du Bourg, a Noble man, and of admirable wisdom and understanding, who when
the King came one time into his Parliament at Paris, made a bold speech before
him, wherein he gave thanks to Almighty God for moving the Kings Heart, to be
prefent at such a weighty matter as that of Religion, (which it seems was then
to be debated) humbly entreating him to consider well thereof, it being the
Cause of Christ himself, which of good Right ought to be maintained by Princes;
but the King was so far from bearkening to him, that being in raged he
commanded him to be committed to Prison, and protested to him in these very
words, These Eyes of mine shall see thee burnt. And a while after he was
condemned to die. In the mean time great Triumphs were preparing for the
Marriage of the Kings Sister and Daughter, and the day being come, he spent all
the morning in Examining matters against Du Bourg, and some others charged with
the same Doctrines, intending to glut his Eyes with their Execution, and then
went to Dinner; After Dinner the King ran at Tilt near the Prison where Du
Bourg was, and brake many Spears against the Count Montgomery and others, and
all thinking he had done enough, desired him to give over with praise; But the
King being inflamed with their Commendations would needs run another course
with Count Montgomery, who upon his knees begged his Majesty pardon, but the
King being resolved, commanded him to do it upon his Allegiance, Montgomery,
being compelled addressed himself to it, and the King and he meeting, broke their
Spears, and the Kings Helmet falling down at the same Instant, one of the
Splinters of Montgomeries Spear entered just into his right eye, and so pierced
his head, that his brains were perished, which wound being incurable, he died
thereof, within Eleven days after; whereby his great hopes of seeing the Death
of Du Bourg were frustrated; And the Execution of Du Bourg was deferred for six
Months longer, all which time persevering constantly in the truth, he was first
degraded, and then accompanied with six or seven hundred Horse and Foot well
armed, he was guarded to Execution, being first hanged and then burnt to Ashes.

At Amiens in France all the Bibles, Testaments and ^salm Books were burnt, the
Ministers Pulpit, and several Men and Women: At Abbeville they slew the Lord of
Harcourt, and dragged some along the Streets with their their faces in the
Kennel. At Meux above Four hundred Religious Citizens were slain, the Women and
Maids were openly ravished in the Streets and Marketplaces, Men, Women and
Children were Massacred, the very Popish Priests themselves slaying diverse with
their own hands. At a place called Bar, the same, if not worse, Villainies were
committed, for the Papists pulled out the hearts of these poor Protestants, and
most barbarously gnawed them with their Teeth, rejoicing that they tasted of an
Hug^nots heart. At another place seven Hundred Protestants, were inhumanely
massacred, and their naked Bodies thrown into the River; Their Houses and
Church being likewise plundered and Burnt.

At Angies they murdered a Godly Minister and many others, and finding a Fair
Bible gilt, they hung it upon an Halbert, and carried it in procession,
blasphemously crying, Behold Truth hanged, the Truth of the Hugonots The Truth
of all the Devils; behold the Mighty God, behold the Everlasting God will
speak, and when they came to the Bridge, they threw it into the River, crying
louder, Behold the Truth of all the Devils drowned. At Tours an hundred and
forty were murdered and cast into the River, and neither Man, Woman nor Child
spared; nay the President of the City being only suspected to be a Favourer of
the Protestants was first beaten with Staves, then stripped to his shirt, hanged
up by one Foot, his Head in the Water up to the Breast, and whilst he was yet
alive, they ripped up his Belly, plucked out his Guts, threw them into the River,
and sticking his heart on a Lance, they carried it about, saying, This is the
Heart of the President of the Hugonots.

A Poor Woman whose Husband was a while before drowned, having a young Infant
sucking at her Breasts; and a beautiful Daughter of about sixteen years old in
her hand; these bloody Villains drove them to a River, and taking the Daughter
aside, some of the Rascals endeavored to seduce her to Popery, and one of them
who was finer than the rest, promised to marry her, so that the poor Maid began
to doubt, which her Mother who was just going to be thrown into the River
perceiving, she earnestly exhorted her Daughter to persist in the Truth;
whereupon the Daughter cried out, I will live and die with my Mother, whom I
know to be^d Virtuous Woman, and as for your Threats and Promises I regard them
not, do with me what you please: Before the Mother was quite drowned, the
Daughter was likewise thrown in, who making toward her Mother, they mutually
embraced each other, and so yielded up their Souls into the hands of God.

In the same City of Tours, there was a very Religious Woman, who being brought
before the Captain, she there gave an Account of her Faith, which she confirmed
by Scripture, insomuch that the Friars who discoursed with her, could not
return any answer, but only told her, That she was in a damnable condition: It
seems so indeed (said she) being in your hands, And being then committed to
prison, she declared her mind freely, and comforted the other Protestant
Prisoners; she was afterward condemned to be hanged, and the Rope being put
about her neck, she kneeled down, praising and magnifying the name of God in
showing her so much mercy, as by that death to deliver her out of this wretched
world, and that she was so far honored as to die for the Truth, and to wear
Gods Livery, as she reckoned the halter to be; she then brake her fast with the
rest of the Company, and exhorted them to be of good courage and to trust in
the free mercy of God to the end. As she went to Execution one of her kindred
brought her own little Children to see her, and persuaded her to recant and
save her life, to provide for these Innocent Babes: This was a very great
Temptation, and wrought so upon her Motherly affection as drew plenty of Tears
from her Eyes; But a while after resuming her former Courage and Constancy, she
said; I love my Children dearly, yet neither for love to them, nor for any
thing else in this World will I renounce my God, or his Truth; God will be a
Father to these my Children, and will provide better for them than I could have
done, and therefore to his providence and protection I commend and leave them.
After which she went cheerfully to the place of Execution, and having there
prayed to, and praised God, she quietly resigned up her Spirit to him.

A while after the City of Roan was besieged, and two of the Forts taken,
wherein they put all the Protestants to the Sword, and the Queen Mother being
at the Siege, she led the young King Charles the Ninth, who was then but twelve
years old, to show him the Naked Bodies of several poor Women, who weltred in
their Blood; at last the City was taken, wherein all sorts of monstrous
Cruelties were used, massacring all they met with, and diverse English and
Scotch Soldiers were hanged, and the Sick and wounded were cast into the River.

In Valogues diverse Persons of good Quality were massacred, and among the rest,
a Godly Minister whose Body they stripped, and with many scoffs and scorns
dragged it about the House, and at last bringing it into a Room, where he used
to preach, they kicked and spurned his Corpse, saying, Now pray to God, and
preach if thou can; the Popish Priests that were present, stuffed his Mouth
and likewise his wounds with the Leaves of his Bible; crying, Preach the Truth
of thy God, and call upon him now to help thee. In a place called Again many
were massacred, and two young Children were roasted: In the Castle of Rheims
there was great Cruelty used, many young Children being murdered in their
Mothers Arms; and the Mothers also shamefully abused, and afterward killed.
Above five hundred men were hanged upon Gibbets, among whom was a grave
Counselor in his long Gown and square Cap.

In the City of Blois the Murderers hearing there was a Sermon, brake
violently into the House, thinking to have taken the Minister, but being
disappointed, they dragged several Women that were there, by the Hair of the
Head, and beating them severely, threw them into the River, but by the
Providence of God, they had so much skill as to swim safely to an Island, but
presently after some Watermen finding them there, stripped them stark naked, and
threw them again into the River, yet still they endeavored to save themselves,
and swum toward the Suburbs of a Town called Vienne, and were there cruelly
knocked on the Head by the bloody Papists. The French General having taken
several Protestants Prisoners, he hanged most of them, but especially the
Ministers; among the rest there was a Captain, called La Mothe to whom the
General gave diverse stabs with a Dagger, and thrust him thorough with a Sword,
saying, Villain, thou shall die in despite of God; but he proved a Liar; for
the Captain was carried away; and though extremely wounded, yet was wonderfully
cured, and lived afterward.

Many horrible Murders were likewise committed upon the Protestants, and
amongst others one of their Practices was to throw them down from the top of
St. Michaels Abbey, which was built upon an high Rock, under which there ran a
deep and swift River, and by the way there was another Rock which stood far
out, upon which their Bodies falling were dashed and torn to pieces: Among the
rest there was a young man, who seeing they were resolved to murder him,
requested that he might thus cast himself from the top of the Abbey, and if it
pleased God to preserve him in the fall, he might escape with Life; this they
promised, whereupon having made his Prayers to God, he fetched a leap from the
top of the Abbey, and flew so far, that missing the Rocks under him, he fell
into the River, and endeavored to swim out for his Life, but these perfidious
Villains knocked him on the Head, and killed him.

A Captain and his Soldiers entering the House of a Religious Widow, they bound
her with Cords, and then put a Rope about her Neck, whereby she was halled up
and down, till she was almost strangled; they then asked h^^ How often she had
played the Whore with those of her Religion, she answered, That in the
Christian Meetings there were no such Villainies committed. The Captain then
dashed her Head against the Walls till he had almost beaten out her Brains, and
required her to give him Seven Hundred pieces of Gold which she had hidden; she
told him she was a poor Woman, and had only one French penny; this enraged him
the more, and he thereupon applied hot burning Coals to her Armpits, till they
were all blistered, bidding her in derision, to cry to her Father which was in
Heaven. She replied, I will not cry aloud for thee, and yet my God can hear me
well enough, and when his pleasure is, he will deliver me out of thy hand. This
made him Swear and Blaspheme extremely, which more afflicted the poor Woman
than her pains or sufferings; and then he called her Hugonot Whore, saying that
these were but the beginning of her sorrows, and except she fetched him out her
Gold, he would draw her Cheeks and Breasts with Lard, and roast her alive, and
afterward throw her Body headlong from the highest Steeple in the Town; Well,
(said she) if you throw my Body never so low, that shall not hinder my Soul
from ascending into Heaven: This her courage did further inrage him, and
thereupon he opened her Mouth with his Dagger, and crammed Lime down her
Throat, and afterward forced her to drink a Glass of (...) Clubs, and in brief
the Protestants were murdered, without distinction of Age, Sex or Quality,
neither Old, Bedrid, nor the diseased in Hospitals being spared.

In Masion the bloody Papists apprehended an honest Godly Minister, whom they
carried along the Streets, with a Thousand scoffs and scorns, and beating and
abusing him, and then they made Proclamation, That whosoever would hear this
Holy man Preach, should come to the Slaughter House: At which place they abused
him two hours together; He then desired that before his death, they would
permit him to pray to God; upon which a Villain stepped to him, and cut off half
his Nose, and one of his Ears, saying, Now pray as long as thou will, and then
we will send thee to all the Devils: And then this holy man kneeling down,
prayed with such zeal and fervency of Spirit, as drew sighs from some of the
Murderers, and afterward speaking to him that had cut off his Nose, he said,
Friend, I am now ready to suffer what thou have to inflict upon me, but I
entreat you and your Companions to consider seriously of the Mischiefs and
Outrages committed by you against this poor City, for there is a God in Heaven,
before whose Tribunal you must shortly give on Account of these your Cruelties:
Just then a Captain passing by, cried, Send that wretched man to the Devil;
which one of them hearing took him by the hand, pretending to lead him to the
River to wash off his blood; but when he came thither, he threw him into the
water, and then battered him with Stones till he was drowned.

In the year 1571, after the end of the third Civil War in France, great means
were used to draw the chief of the (...) Paris, under the pretense of a (...)
that was between the King of (...), who was a Protestant, and the Lady (...) to
the French King, but in the (...) Protestants were murdered, in the City of
Roan, as they came from a Sermon, which seemed very much to displease the King,
and diverse were Executed for the Mutiny; then were the Articles of Marriage
agreed upon at Paris; the Admiral Coligni was invited to the Wedding, and those
that belonged to the Family of the Duke of Guise, were forbid the Court, which
was very acceptable to the Protestants, as judging it an assured pledge of the
Kings fidelity, since he declared much satisfaction in the Marriage saying,
That it was not so much for the Wedding, as that it was a strong knot of Peace,
and would be for the good of the whole Nation.

The Admiral for his security was allowed to bring with him fifty Gentlemen
armed; and being come to Paris he was honorably received of the King, who
called him Father, and protested that in his whole life, he had not been better
pleased, as judging this day would end all his troubles, and settle firm peace
and quietness in his Kingdom: Notwithstanding this, the Admiral had several
Intimations of some Treachery intended against him, but though very wise, yet
he took little notice of it. The Queen Mother likewise entertained him with
great favor, and the King sent him One Hundred Thousand Franks out of his
Treasury for the loss which he had received in the Wars: And the King to delude
the People, spoke publicly, That he did not give his Sister in Marriage to the
King of Navarr only, but as it were to the whole Church of the Protestants to
join with them in an indissoluble union and as a tie to their peace and safety.

The Seventeenth of August, the King of Navarr, and the Lady Margaret were
married with great Solemnity before the great Church of Paris, on a Scaffold in
the sight of all the People, by the Cardinal of Bourbon, the King of Navarrs
Uncle, and the Wedding was solemnized with Banquets, Dancing and Masks, with
a strange mixture of Protestants and Papists together, after which the Bride
was led into the Church to hear Mass with great solemnity, but the King of
Navarr her Bridegroom, the Prince of Conde, and other Protestant Noblemen
walked without the Church door, till her return, as misliking their Religion
and Ceremonies.

In the mean time the Queen Mother, and her bloody Counselors, together with
the Duke of Anjou and Guise, contrive the Marder of the Admiral, and the
dividing the Protestants.

The Admiral after the Marriage moved the King for his departure home, but the
continual complaints of the Protestants still detained him at Court, and going
some days after thither in his return home, while he was reading a Petition
with diverse Noblemen and Gentlemen about him; He was shot by a Harquebuzie, the
Bullet taking off the forefinger of his right hand, and hurting him in the left
Arm, he feeling himself shat, said, without alteration of Countenance, It came
thorough yonder Window; what kind of Ireachery is This? The door of the House
being br^ke open, they understood that he which shot, presently mounted upon a
Spanish Jennet at a back door, and made his escape, leaving his Gun behind him,
and upon Examination it was found, that the Harquebuz was brought to the house
the day before, by one Chally Steward of the Kings House, and an acquaintance
of the Duke of Guise.

The King having notice of this Villainy, seemed to be extremely concerned,
causing all the Gates of Paris to be presently shut, and swore to the Admirals
Friends, that those that had committed this horrid Fact should not escape: the
Queen Mother likewise seemed much discontented at it. The King went to visit
the Admiral, assuring him of his love and care over him. However the King of
Nava^r, Prince of Conde and other Protestants had private advice to depart
speedily out of Paris, and to look upon this but as the beginning of the
Tragedy which was to follow; but they, trusting to the Kings word, would not go.

The Dukes of Cuise and Anj^u employed some to go to every house and bring them
a Catalogue of all the Protestants, and the King set a Guard of Fifty
Harquebuzies at the Admirals Gate; and abundance of Arms were sent into the
Kings Pailace of the Louvre, and in the Evening of the same day, all the
Papists were in Arms; the Protestants observing all this, many of them
assembled at the Admirals Lodgings, where it was advised that the Admiral
should be Immediately conveyed out of Paris, and the rest should change their
Lodgings, but this was again refused, they still relying upon the Kings word,
who promised them Justice.

In the Evening diverse Protestant Gentlemen offered to watch with the Admiral,
but he refused it, and the same night the Duke of Guise sent for the Captain of
the Switzers, and showed him his Commission to kill the Admiral and the rest of
the Protestants, and exhorted him and his Soldiers to be courageous in
shedding their blood: At midnight the Provost, Sheriffs, and Captains of every
Ward had the same Orders given them, with assurance, that the like should be
Executed upon the Protestants through the whole Kingdom of France and that the
Signal for the General Massacre, would be the ringing of the Bell in the Kings
Palace, which would be about break or day, and that the Murderers should have
a white hand kerchief tied about their Arms, and a white Cross in their hats,
and Candles to be lighted in every house: At the time appointed, the Bell rung,
and the Duke of Guise hasted to the Admirals Lodging with his Cutthroats, and
knocking at the Door, he that opened it was murdered; the Admiral hearing the
noise, got out of his Bed, and there being a Minister in the Room, they both
went to Prayers, and the Admiral fervently commended his Soul to God, and then
said to those about him, It is long since I disposed my self to die, save your
selves, if it be possible, for you cannot save my life, I commit my Soul into
the hands and mercy of God. The Minister and the rest of his attendants got up
to the top of the house, and crept out of the Windows to save themselves, yet
most of them were slain in the next House.

Presently seven or eight men broke into the Admirals Lodgings, and one of them
set his Naked Sword to his Breast, saying, Art thou the Admiral? To whom with a
Christian Constancy, he answered, I am called so, and withal said, Young man
thou ought to consider my Age and the weak condition I am now in, but do
what thou will, for thou can not shorten my life but a very little: But the
Wretch blaspheming God, thrust him through the Breast, and afterward struck him
on the head; another shot him with a Pistol, and a third wounded him in the
Thigh; so that he lay gasping for life; the Duke of Guise was below, and with a
loud voice cried, Have you done? It was answered, Yes; the Duke replied, Our
Chevalier (which was the Kings Bastard Brother) will not believe it, unless he
see it; which being done, his Face was all bloody, which the Duke of Guise
wiping said, Now I know it is he, and then kicked him on the Face with his
Foot, whom all the Murderers of France feared so much when he was alive.

Then the Duke and his bloody Train went into the Streets, crying Arm, Arm, we
have had good success, and a happy beginning, Let us now proceed to the rest,
for it is the Kings Command, which words he repeated often, This is the Kings
Commandment, this is his Will, this is his express pleasure, therefore courage,
my Fellows.

Then the great Bell of the Palace which was the bloody token of the General
Alarm, began to ring out aloud, and presently a Report was spread, That the
Protestants had conspired against the King, Queen and Court, and were just
going to Execute their Design; After this the Admirals head was cut off, and
sent to the King, and Queen Mother, and being by them preserved with Spices, it
was sent to the Pope, and the Cardinal of Lorrain at Rome as a very grateful
present. The Pope when he first heard the News of the Massacre appointed a day
of Public Thanksgiving to God, where Te Deum was sung for joy in the Church of
St. Lewis; He likewise Published a Bull of Pardons and extraordinary
Indulgences to such as should pray for the Heavenly assistance to the King and
Kingdom of France for rooting out of Heretics.

The R^scally Rabble cut off the Hands and Privy Members of the Admiral,
dragging his mangled body besme^^ed with blood and filth, through the S^reets
three days together, and then hanged it by the Feet upon the Gallows; All the
Attendants of the King of Navarr, and Prince of Conde which lay in the Kings
Palace were murdered, and likewise all the Lords and Gentlemen about the
Admiral's Lodgings, and among the rest his Son Teligny, and then through all
the City and Suburbs were the poor Protestants Massacred with all manner of
Cruelties; Nothing was then to be heard but the Terrible noise of Horses and
Arms, Guns and Pistols, mingled with the doleful, sad and woeful Screeches and
miserable complaints of Men Women, and Children, Rich and Poor, crying for
mercy to these bloody Hell Hounds, howling and lamenting at their miserable
Condition, to be thus wretchedly murdered for they knew not what: And all this
interm^xt with the groans of the dying, and the merciless shouts of the Cruel
Murderers, continually crying, Kill, kill, for the King commands it, that it
seemed as if Heaven and Earth had met together, or as if the Heavens had rent
with Thunder.

So that in that night, and the Two next days there was slain in Paris above
Ten Thousand Persons of both Sexes, and all Ranks and Ages, the bloody Papists
not sparing the Children in the Cradle, nor the Infants in their Mothers wombs,
insomuch that the Streets, Marketplace, and Rivers were dyed with Blood, and
the Murderers boasted that they had in a few days put an end to that Quarrel,
that neither Pen, Paper, Decrees of Justice nor open War could accomplish in
Twelve years.

This horrid M^ssacre was committed on St. Bartholomews day, being the 24 of
August 1571. which was the Sabbath day, and is made samous for ever, by the
Effusion of so much precious Innocent blood, as no Age nor time can parallel,
for there were at this time in Paris Threescore Thousand men, with Pistols,
Poinards, Swords, Knives, and such other Bloody Instruments, who ran up and
down, swearing and blaspheming the Sacred Majesty of God, cruelly massacring
all they met; So that the Streets were covered with mangled Bodies, and the
Gates and Doots defiled with blood, the Lords and Gentlemen were Inhumanely
murdered, some in their Beds, others on the top of their Houses, and in all
other places where they were found, and such a multitude of dead Bodies, were
thrown into the River Sein, that the water was dyed Red with their Blood.

In the Heilish Assembly wherein this bloody Massacre was concluded on, it was
debated whether the King of Navarr and Prince of Conde should not be destroyed
with the rest; the Duke of Guise p^euded for it, but others were against it,
and argued how abomi^able it would be to destroy two young Princ^s of (...)
blood, in the Flower of their Age, and one of them in the embraces of his young
Bride and the Kings own Sister, and therefore it was concluded, That they
should be threatued viol^^tly with death and all manner of Torments, if they
would not turn Papists; And thereupon the King commanded them to be brought
into his presence, and told them, That now he had cut off all the Instruments
of the late Civil Wars, which he hoped would prevent future troubles, for by
his Command the Admiral was slain, and all the rest of the Heretics and that
the like should be Executed in all other places throughout the Kingdom, and
that if they would now save their Lives they must turn Catholics, for he was
resolved to have but one Religion in his Kingdom.

The King of Navarr, and the Prince of Conde humbly beseeched his Majesty to
Remember his Oaths, Promises, and solemn Vows and Protestations that they
should have the free Exercise of their Religion, and withal told the King, That
he might do as he pleased with their Bodies and Estates, but their unspotted
Souls were in the hands of God; and that they were resolved to remain steadfast
in their Religion, though with the loss of their lives; which answer so enraged
the King, that he called the Prince of Conde Rebel, and the Son of a Rebellious
Person, horribly threatening him, That if within three days he did not obey his
Command he should die for it, and then with a furious Countenance left them
with these three Terrible Words, Death, Mass, or the Bastile.

Many Gentlemen that were attendants upon them, as likewise their Schoolmasters
and Tutors, were thrust out of the Chamber among the Murderers, that is, among
the Kings Guard of Switzers, who stood in two Ranks with their Swords drawn
ready for Blood and Cruelty. These Gentlemen crying out of the Kings Oaths,
Promises and Fidelity, were yet by the Kings Command, and in his own Sight
unmercifully hewn and cut in pieces.

In this Butcherly Massacre at Paris there were above four Thousand Houses
robbed and plundered, and above Five Hundred Barons, Knights and Gentlemen, who
were chief Officers in the War, with abundance of Noble young Gentlemen,
Ladies, and Gentlewomen Inhumanely murdered, who little expected such a bloody
Fate, for they came from all parts to rejoice, in honor of the marriage of the
King of Navarr, and instead of Jollity and pleasures, they here met with an
untimely death, from Bloody and Cowardly Papists, who murder like Devils, but
dare not fight like men.

The King and his Considents searing that this Massacte would not end the
Quarrel, but rather stir up the Protestants in other places to stand upon their
own defense; He therefore sends Messengers by Post to all parts of the Kingdom,
often shifting Horses for more speed, with express Commands to the Governors
of all other Towns and Cities in France to follow the Example of Paris, and to
destroy and kill all the Protestants which were amongst them; and yet at the
same time, the King writes other Letters wherein he laid the fault of the
murder of the Admiral, and the rest upon the Duke of Guise.

As soon as this Command was published, and that the Kings Letters came, the
Papists fell with all imaginable fury upon all the Protestants at Meaux, Troys,
Orleans, and other places, murdering them without any manner of pity and
Compassion.

And among the rest Monsieur De la Place, President of the Court of Requests
being in his house, a Captain came to him, and told him, that the Duke of Guise
had killed the Admiral by the Kings appointment, and many other Hugonots, but
however he was willing to secure him, but desired to see his Gold; The Lord De
la Place c^^^rving his Impudence asked him whether h^ thought there were a King
or no; the Captain b^aspheming bid him go to know the Kings pleasure; The Lord
De la Place thinking there was danger near, went from him to secure himself,
and the Captain thereupon plundered his House. The poor Gentleman seeking
shelter in three Houses for his life, was denied, and was at last forced to
return home again, where finding his wife very sorrowful, he rebuked her, and
discourst with her of the Promises of God, telling her, That through many
Tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of God; and then calling his Family
together, he made an Exhortation to them, went to prayer, and then read a
Chapter in Job, with Calvin's Exposition, and then praying again, he resolved by
Gods assistance to suffer all kind of Torments rather than to fly for it.

Presently after the Provost of the Merchants comes to his House with many
Archers, and an Order to bring him to the King, and would not admit of any
Excuse, whereupon the Lord supposed what would happen, and therefore embracing
his Wife, he desired her never to forsake the truth of God; And so going toward
the Palace, some Murderers waited for him, and immediately stabbed him with
their Daggers, so that he fell down d^ad, and then stripping him, cast his Body
into the River.

After this, there followed the like Cruclties and Murders upon the Protestants
in the Cities of Lions, Toulouse, Burdeau^, Angiers, where the Protestants were
most barbarously killed and destroyed, as likewise in most other Cities and
Towns, so that in a few Months there were murdered above threescore Thousand
Protestants in France, for no other Crime, but only for being Protestants.

Yet in the midst of these dangers it pleased God to provide some places of
refuge for them, as Rochel, Montalbon, Wismes, Saucerre, Privus, etc. whither
many Protestants fled from other places. In the year 1573. the Town of Saucerre
was besieged by the Lord of Chastre, who with his Cannon played incess^ntly
upon the place, so that the Stones, Pavements, and Splinters of Timber flew
about continually, and yet it pleased God that only one young Woman was slain
thereby, though sometimes the Coats, Breeches, and Hats of the Inhabitants were
shot thorough; The Siege being long, there was great scarcity, insomuch that
the People were forced to eat Horses, Asses, and Mules, which lasted a Month;
afterward they cat all the Dogs, Cats, Rats, Mice and Moles that they could
get; and then they were forced to eat Parchments, Horses, and Beasts-Hoofs,
Horns, Lanthorns, Hasters, Girdles of Leather, Herbs, wild Roots and Furniture
for Horses, this being all spent, and no bread in the City, they made bread of
Linseed, Herbs mixed with Bran, Straw, Meal, Powder of Nutshells; yea Slates,
Sewet, old Ointments, and other Grease served to make Pottage; and therewith
they likewise fried the Excrements of Horses and Men, which they eat, yea the
very filth in the Streets was not spared.

During this Extremity, a labourer and his wife were put to death for cating
the Head, Intrails and Brains of their own Child, a Girl of three years old,
who died with Famine, having likewise dressed the rest of her body to eat at
other times. Those that went out of the City Walls, were forced to live upon
the Spriggs of Vines, Black-berries, Snails, and Herbs; and many of them were
killed by the Enemy. And among other lamentable Spectacles, a poor man and his
Wife were found dead among the Vines and two of their Children crying by them;
the youngest being not above Six weeks old, whom a Charitable Widow took home
and relieved, etc.

Many died of this terrible Famine in their Houses, and others fell down dead
in the S^ree^^; Most of the Children under Twelve years old died, and most
lamentable it was to see their poor Fathers and Mothers lamenting their misery
and yet could not relieve them; yet most of them did wond^rfully encourage
themse^ve^ in Gods help and assistance, as may appear by this strange Example.

A Boy about five years old being famisht for Hunger, running along the
Streets, fell down for dead in the presence of his Father and Mother, who wept
over him, and felt his Arms and Legs, which were as dry as a Stick: To whom the
Child said, Why do you weep to see me die of hunger? I ask you no Bread,
Mother, for I know you have none, but since it is Gods will that I should die
in this manner, I must take it thankfully; Had not the H^ly man Lazarus Hunger;
have I not read it in my Bible? and saying thus, he yielded up his Spirit.

And that which preserved the rest from perishing was, because there were six
Cows kept alive to give Milk to some few Intants, and some Horses of service
reserved for extremity were killed, and their flesh sold, and some little Corn
was brought into the Town by stealth, which was sold for half a Crown a pound.

There died by the War but Eighty four Persons, but the Famine destroyed Five
Hundred, and the rest were brought so low, that they hardly recovered. Diverse
voluntarily went out of the Town choosing rather death than such misery, whereof
some were slain, and others Imprisoned, and Executed.

And now when all humane help failed, the King having sworn, He would make them
eat one another, and the Papists threatening to Massacre them all; it pleased
God strangely to deliver these poor Protestants. For Ambassadors coming from
Poland to fetch the Duke of Anjou the Kings Brother thither, whom they had
chosen for their King; They having notice of this terrible siege, obtained by
their Solicitations, that all the Towns in France which were molested for
Religion should have their Liberty, by which means the poor Saucerreans half
dead with hunger obtained their freedom, and were quietly suffered to depart
with their Arms and Goods, and those that would stay, not to be questioned for
what was past.

About the same time the Town of Rochel was likewise besieged, the Townsmen
often sallying out, and diverse hot skirmishes past; among the rest a young
Gentleman boasted with horrible blasphemies, that he was one of the horrible
Murderers of the Admiral, showing his Sword, which he said he brought from that
exploit, to slash the Rochellers, but upon Trial his heart failed him and he
ran away, and one of the Rochellers pursuing him slew him, stripped him, and left
his body in the Field, and before next morning the dogs had torn his Face.

In one Months space the Papists discharged above Thirteen Thousand Shot
against the Town, and made many assaults, but always came off with loss, The
Siege continued two Months, and the Famine much increased upon them, but by
Divine Providence, when all other Provision failed them, there came a multitude
of small Fishes into the Haven, which were never seen there before, and was a
very great relief to them, who continued during the siege, but presently after
the publishing the Edict of Peace, they went away and were never seen more. A
while after the Rochellers were likewise freed from the siege by means of the
Poland Ambassdors and enjoyed their former Privileges: It is very remarkable
that most of those Persons which were employed in the Massacre of Paris and
other Places, were killed at this siege, for there were slain before this Town
three Masters de Camp, diverse Lords and Gentlemen, above Threescore Captains,
as many Lieutenants and Ensigns, and above Twenty Thousand Common Soldiers.

The next year after, the King himself, who was at least the Countenancer of
all these horrible Massacres, being in the prime of his Youth, not above Twenty
five years old, fell sick of a languishing disease; his Physicians let him
blood, and purged him to no purpose; for he consumed away so strangely, as
astonished many. He long strugled against his disease, but at last betook
himself to his Bed for about fourteen days before his death, and was sore
tormented with a great effusion of blood, which issued from all parts of his
body, and one time, to the terror of those about him, he rouled himself in his
own blood; A while before he died he desired his Mother to pursue his Enemies
to the utmost, repeating the same with great cagerness, and saying, Madam, I
pray you heartily to do it, and so expired, May 30. 1574.

And it was observed that the rest of the Chief Agents were strangely cut off;
The Duke of Anjou the Kings Brother, afterward King Henry the Third was
stabbed by a Jacobine Monk in the same Chamber where he sat in Council for
contriving the late Tragedies. The Duke of Guize was murdered in the Kings own
Chamber, Five and Forty Persons waiting with Swords and Daggers to do it; The
Queen Mother broke her heart, and died the first of January after: And in
short, it has been observed by a good Author, that since the year of our Lord
1560 of a Thousand Murderers that remained unpunished by men, there was not ten
who escaped the Divine hand of God; but came to deserved and wretched Ends,
suitable to their bloody and wicked Lives.

At a Town called Sansay in France, in the year 1593, one Margaret Pieron was
by her maid accused to the Jesuits for not going to Mass, and for keeping a
Bible in her house, who complaining thereof to the Judges, they sent for her,
and said, Margaret, are you not willing to return home to your house, and there
enjoy your Husband and Children? Yes, said she, if it may stand with the good
will of God; Then said they, If thou will do but a small matter thou shall be
set at Liberty; If, said she, it be not contrary to Gods glory and my own
Salvation you shall hear what I will say to it. No such thing, said they, for
all that we require is but this, That a Scaffold being set up in the chief part
of the Town, you shall there crave pardon for offending the Law, and a fire
being made you shall burn your Bible in it without speaking a word. I pray you,
my Masters, said she, tell me, is my Bible a good Book or no? Yes, said they,
we confess it is, only to please the Jesuits, we would have thee throw it in
the Fire; Imagine it to be but Paper, and then you may burn it, and you may buy
another at any time, and thereby you may secure your Life. They spent two Hours
in persuading her that she might commit a less Evil to do a greater good. But
she courageously answered them, That by the help of God she would never do it.
Will not the People say, said she, This is a wretched Woman indeed, that burns
the Bible, wherein all the Articles of Christian Religion are contained? I will
certainly burn my Body, rather tha^ I will burn my Bible. Upon this sh^w^s
committed to Prison, and fed only with b^ead and water, and her Friends forbid
to come to her; but continuing steadfast in the Truth, she was thereupon
condemned to be set upon a S^^ffold, to have the Bible burnt before her Face,
her self to be strangled, and her body to be dragged through the Streets to a
Dunghill, which Sentence she willingly and cheerfully underwent.

In the year 1628. The City of Rochel was again besieged with a great Army by
the French King, whereby the Inhabitants were in such extremity for want of
Victuals, that they ^at Horses, Dogs, Cats, Rats, and Mice, and after that the
poor Protestant's lived two Months upon Cow-hides and Goat skins boyl^d. They
likewise eat old Gloves, and what^ever was made of Leather, yea the poor people
cut off the buttocks of the dead and eat them, young Maids of Fourteen or
Sixteen ^ears old, looked like old Women of an ^undred years old, a Bushel of
Wheat was sold ^r Twenty Pound, a Pound of Bread Twenty ^hillings, a Quarter of
Mutton above six ^ound, An Egg eight shillings, An Ounce of ^ugar Half a Crown,
a dried Fish Twenty ^illings, a Pint of Milk Thirty Shillings. After a while
the City was taken, and some English that were therein, when they came aboard,
looked like Anatomies or dead Bodies.

And since that to this very day the Protestants have suffered very great
hardships and Persecutions in France by having their Churches palled down, by
Fires and Imprisonments and Banishments; by being excluded from all Offices and
Employments of Trust or Profit, and by all manner of discouragements
whatsoever, and that only upon the Account of their Religion; and all this
contrary to Oaths, Protestations, Edicts and Proclamations, which have been
solemnly made, and granted to them for the free Exercise of the Protestant
Religion.

The Persecutions of the Protestants in Italy, Spain, Portugal, and the
Low Countries. With an Account of the Original, Progress, and Cruel Torments of
the Spanish Inquisition.
LET us next proceed to look into Italy, which being under the Inspection of
the Pope, it may well be supposed not to harbor many Protestants, at least
such as dare openly appear to be such, by reason of the Inqui^tim; which was
first Institu^^d against the Moors and Jews in Spain, but is now (...) the
discovery, and Torment^^ (...) Christians: yet notwithstanding (...) have been
diverse who have ewned the (...) in the City of Rome it sel^, and (...) places
in Italy.

For in the time of Pope Adrian the Fourth who was an Englishman, one Arnald of
Brixia came to Rome and preached publicly and boldly against the Corruptions
of the Romish Church; and found great favor among the ^enators and People,
insomuch that when the Pope commanded them to drive Arnald out of the City for
an Heretic, they resisted his command and defended Arna^d, upon which the Pope
thundered out (...) Excommunication against the whole City of Rome; so that
upon the importunity of the Clergy they were forced to send him away; but he
was entertained by the Lords of C^mpan^a, who were subject to the Emperor of
Germany, with whom he remained, and preached the Gosp^^ to them.

The Emperor coming afterward into Italy to be Crowned, the Po^^ disned him
to deliver up Arnald into his honds; whereupon the Emperor seized upon one of
the Lords of Campa^ia, which so ^^rified the other, that he delivered up
Arnald, who being sent to the Pope, he used him most cruelly, and then ordered
him first to be hanged, and then burnt as an^ Arch Heretic; His Chief Heresies
were, That he preached against the Pride and Covetousness of the Monks and
Clergy, that he inveighed against the Errors in the Sacrament, that he
expounded the Scriptures, etc.

In the year 1546. there was one Eucenas or Driander, a Spaniard born, who
being bred up in Rome, yet came at last to the knowledge of the Truth, and
having discovered his dislike of the false Doctrine of Popery, he was betrayed
by his own Countrymen and Acquaintance, and being brought before the
Cardinals, he was committed close Prisoner, and was afterward brought forth to
declare his Judgment where he gave a Notable Testimony to the Truth, upon
which, when he refused to recant the same, he was condemned to be burnt, and
suffered Martyrdom with great patience and constancy.

In the year 1550, One Faninus of Ferrara in Italy being by the Grace or God
and reading of good books converted to the Gospel, and began to instruct others
privately therein, but this coming to the ears of some of the Popes
Bloodhounds, they seized him, and committed him to Prison, where by the
earnest Importunities of his Wife, Children and Friends, h^ was persuaded to
deny the Truth, and w^ thereupon released out of Prison; He had n^ been long at
liberty, but he was extremely troubled in mind, for preferring the Love of his
Relations and Friends before the service of Jesus Christ, neither could he by
any means be free from these Tortures till he had fully resolved to venture his
Life for the Gospel; Being thus inflamed with holy Zeal, he went about the
Country, teaching and Instructing the People wherever he came.

Whereupon he was apprehended and cast into Prison, and was condemned to be
burnt, but he told his Judges, That his time was not yet come, and so it
happened, for he was removed to Ferrara where he continued in Prison for Two
years, and afterward Eighteen Months in another Prison, and was again
condemned by the Popes Inquisitors, but still his death was one way or other
prevented.

His Wife and Sister came to him in Prison, and weeping pitifully entreated him
to remember and consider his poor Family: To whom he answered, That his Lord
and Master had commanded him not to deny the Truth for his Families sake, and
that it was too much that for their sakes he had once fallen already, and
therefore desired them not to solicit him any more in that matter, for he
knew his end drew near, and therefore he commended them to the Lord. In a short
time after the Pope sent word Faninus should be burnt, at which he very much
rejoiced and thanked the Messenger. Being still offered Life if he would
recant, and thereby prevent the misery of his Wife and Children, He said, He
would leave them to a careful and sufficient Overseer; and being asked who that
was, he answered, Even the Lord Jesus Christ a faithful Keeper of all that are
committed to him. As he was going to Execution, one that saw him so merry and
cheerful asked him, what the reason of it was, since Jesus Christ before his
death swate Water and Blood? To whom he answered, That Christ sustained all the
sorrows and conflicts, with Hell and Death, which were due to us, that by his
sufferings we might be free from the sorrow and fear of them all. At the place
of Execution after having earnestly prayed to God, he went patiently to the
stake, and was first strangled, and then burnt.

There was likewise one Dominious a Soldier under Charles the First, in
Germany, who having received the Gospel, grew so much in knowledge in a short
time, that he was able to instruct others, whereupon he returned into Italy,
and taught the People in Naples, Placentia, and several other places: In a
little time after he was apprehended, and readily obeyed the Magistrate,
saying, That he wondered that the Devil had let him alone so long; And being
asked whether he would renounce his Doctrine, He said, That he maintained no
Doctrine of his own, but the Doctrine of Christ, which he was also ready to
seal with his blood; Being therefore condemned to death, he was brought into
the Marketplace, where he most heartily prayed for his Enemies, Instructed the
People, and then was hanged, resting in peace in the Lord.

In the City of Pavia in Italy, one Galleacius Trecius a Gentleman of good
Quality, very rich, and bountiful to the poor, embraced the Gospel, for which
being persecuted he fled from thence, but being afterward apprehended he was
brought before the Lords Inquisitors where he boldly and courageously asserted
the Truth; whereupon he was condemned to be burnt; next morning he was bound to
a stake in the Marketplace, where he continued till noon, to be gazed at by
the People, during which time many of his Friends persuaded him to recant, but
nothing could alter the firm mind of this constant Martyr, and Fire being put
to him, he quietly slept in the Lord. A little before his Execution he heard
there were some Differences between the Bishop and the Mayor of the Town, who
should be at the cost of wood to burn him, but to end the Quarrel he sent them
word he would be at the cost out of his own Goods.

In the year 1553. one John Mollius a famous Preacher was hanged and burnt for
preaching the Gospel, and the next year Francis Gamba was condemned upon the
same account, and because he made admirable discourses to the People, his
Tongue was bored through, and he was first strangled, and then burnt,
undergoing death with great Patience and Constancy. The next year after there
was one Algerius a Student in Padua, a young man of Excellent Learning, (...)
having attained the knowledge of the Truth, he endeavored by Example and
Instruction to bring in others, for which being accused of Heresy, he was
apprehended at Venice, and was afterward sent for to Rome by the Pope, where
many endeavors were used to tempt him to desert and deny the Truth, which not
prevailing, he was Condemned to be burnt alive; which he constantly suffered to
the Admiration of all that saw him.

In the year 1559. John Aloysius a Minister, being sent from Geneva to
Calabria, was sent for to Rome by the Pope, where he suffered Martyrdom, and at
that time James Bovellus, a worthy Minister, was Martyred by the Popes Order at
Messina. Pope Pius the Fourth ralsed in hot persecution against the Protestants
in all he Territories of the Church of Rome, which was the destruction of many
faithful Christians, yea the Persecution was so hot in the Kingdom of Naples
that many Noblemen and their Wives, with diverse others were slain. And a Papist
writing to a Noble Lord about the Cruelties showed to some Christians ^n
Calabria in the year 1560, has these expressions, When I think upon it I
verily quake and tremble, for their manner of putting to death may be fitly
resembled to the slaughter of Calves and Sheep, for Fourscore and Eight of them
being thrust up together in one House as in a Sheepfold, the Executioner comes
in, takes one and blindfolds him, and then leading him forth to a larger place
commands him to kneel down, and then cuts his Threat; and leaving him half
dead, he takes his Butchers Knife and Muffler, all go^e blood, and fetches the
rest, and so one after another, dispatches them all. How sad this spectacle was
I leave to your Lordship to Judge, for my own part I cannot but weep to think
of it, neither were there any Spectators who seeing one to die, could endure to
behold another, But truly so humbly and patiently they went to their deaths, as
is almost incredible to believe: All the Aged Persons went more cheerfully; the
younger were something more timorous, I tremble and shake to remember how the
Hangman held his bloody Knife between his Teeth, and his bloody Muffler in his
hand, and his Arms all gore blood up to the Elbows, going to the Fold, and
taking every one of them one after another by the hand, and so dispatching them
all, no otherwise than a Butcher does his Calves and Sheep.

The City of Venice kept it self free a long time from this Plague of the
Inquisition, so that multitudes of Christians flocked thither from other
places; but in the year 1542, the Pope so far prevailed as to introduce it
there likewise, and then began a Terrible Persecution of the poor protestants
there, and they found out a new kind of death for them, which was to drown them
in the bottom of the (...), in the manner following: when they ^ere condemned
to die by the Inquisitors ^here was an Iron Chain fastened round their waste,
and a heavy stone was tied thereto, then they were laid upon a Plank between
two Boats, and so rowed to an appointed place in the Sea, where the Boats
parting asunder, the Person immediately sunk into the Sea, and was drowned;
notwithstanding which diverse good Christians met together, and had a Minister
who preached the Gospel and Administered the Sacrament to them; but some false
brethren creeping in among them, betrayed them, upon which many of them were
apprehended and cast into the Sea, others were imprisoned at Rome till they
died.

Among others who were condemned to be drowned at Venice, there was one
Seignior Anthony Ricetto; To whom after his condemnation his son of about
Twelve years of Age came, and with Tears beseeched his Father to recant, for
the saving of his own Life, and that he himself might not be left fatherless,
To whom his Father answered, A good Christian is bound to forgo Children,
goods, yea, and Life it self, for the maintenance of Gods Honor and Glory, for
which cause (said he) I am now resolved with Gods assistance to lay down my
Life. When he came to the place where he was to suffer, the Stone and Chain
were fastened to him, whereupon lifting up his Eyes to Heaven, he said, Father
forgive them, they know what they do, Lord Jesus into thy hands I do commend my
Spirit; And so he ended his Life in the Sea.

A while after one Francis Spinola was apprehended and committed to Prison, and
being called before the Inquisitors he boldly reproved the Popes Legate and the
other Judges, in that contrary to their Consciences they persecuted the Truth
of God, and told them they were the Offspring of the Pharisees, etc. Whereupon
he had sentence passed upon him, That he should be drowned as an Heretic; to
whom he answered, I am no Heretic, but the Servant of Jesus Christ, At which
words the Popes Legate bid him be silent, and told him that he lied; The night
after he was conveyed into the Sea, and there drowned, blessing and praising
God with invincible Constancy.

In the year 1595, There was a young English Protestant at Rome, who going into
a Church, and seeing their gross Idolatry, he was so moved that he could not
endure the sight of those impieties, and therefore as the Procession passed by
him, he stepped to him that bare the Host and Sacrament, and plucking it out of
his hands, threw it on the Ground, saying, Ye wretched Idolaters, do ye fall
down to a Morsel of Bread? This so provoked the People, that they were like to
have torn him in Pieces, but he escaped death, and was sent to Prison, and
complaint thereof being made to Pope Clement the 8th. he was so enraged that he
commanded him to be burnt the same day, but his Cardinals advised to have him
kept in Prison and Examined with Exquisite Tortures who set him on; This they
accordingly practiced, tormenting him with the utmost severity, but could get
nothing from him, but these words, Such was the will of God; Then was he
adjudged to be led from the Capitol naked to his middle, and to wear on his
head the form of a Devil, his breeches to be painted over with Flames of Fire,
and so to be carried all about the City, and then burnt alive.

This was Executed upon him, and as he passed through the Streets he was mocked
and derided of the People, but he prayed fervently to God, and at last uttered
something against the debauched Lives of the Cardinals, which so enraged them,
that they gagged him; When he came before the Church where he threw down the
Idol, his Right hand was cut off by the Hangman, and set upon a Pole in the
Cart to which he was tied; Then two Tormentors with flaming Torches scorcht and
burnt his Flesh all the way, so that his body was all over blistered and
bloody, having no part free but his head; then was he taken from the Cart, and
went himself to the stake, kissing the Chains that should bind him. The Friars
urged him to worship an Idol, but he turned away his Face, and showed his
Detestation of it, and when the Fire seized on him, he bowed his head, and
quietly resigned up his Spirit to God.

The same year there was an Ancient Religious man that had lain long in the
Inquisition, who was at last brought forth, and condemned, after which the
Friars brought a Crucifix to him, importuning him to kiss and adore it, He
seeing their importunity, said to them, If you take not this Idol out of my
sight, I shall spit upon it; The Friars hearing this sent him away immediately
to the Fire, where with great Courage and Constancy he resigned up his Spirit
to God.

Of the Spanish Inquisition.
Since mention is often made of the Spanish Inquisition; It may not be amiss to
give a brief Account of the Original and Practice thereof.

Ferdinando and Isabella King and Queen of Spain, having expelled the Moors or
Turks out of the Kingdom of Granada, who had inhabited there Seven Hundred
Seventy Eight years, they resolved to Reform Religion, and granted the
Conquered Moors Liberty to continue there, and enjoy their Goods if they would
turn Christians, and because there were many Jews that had likewise continued
there ever since Titus conquered Jerusalem, they had also leave to remain there
upon the same Conditions, but all that refused were commanded presently to go
out of Spain, Yet afterward observing that those who staid were only
Christians in name, and had submitted merely to save their Estates; instead of
providing Religious men, who with Gentleness and meekness might instruct and
reduce them from their Errors, they by the advice of the Dominican Friars,
erected a Court of Inquisition, whereby the poor wretches, instead of
Instruction, were robbed of all their Estates, and either put to most cruel
deaths; or else suffered intolerable whippings and other Tortures; and spent
the rest of their lives in shame and misery: neither was this only Inflicted
upon such as blasphemed Christ, but for observing the least Jewish or Moorish
Ceremony, or holding the smallest Error in the Christian Religion. But this
Holy Inquisition (as they call it) which was first erected against Jews and
Moors, was afterward turned against the faithful Servants of Jesus Christ, and
for suppressing the Gospel and the True Professors thereof; and thus you have
briefly the Original of it, let us a little observe the Method of their
proceeding therein.

As soon as Information is given against any Person, they do not presently cite
the party to appear before them, but send one of their Informers, who taking
opportunity to meet with him, usually greets him thus, Sir, I was yesterday by
Accident at my Lords Inquisitors, who said that they had occasion to speak with
you about certain Affairs, and therefore they command me to summon you to
appear before them to morrow at such an Hour. The party not daring to refuse
goes to the place and sends in word, That he is come to attend them; and being
called in, the Inquisitors ask him, What suit he has to them, and when he
Answers. That he is come upon Summons; they enquire his Name, ( For (say they)
we know not whether you be the man, but since you are come, if you have any
thing to inform the Court of, either concerning your self or any other, you may
let us hear it, for the discharge of your Conscience. Now in this Case it is
the safest way constantly to deny that he has any thing to declare to them;
For if through simplicity (...) man does accuse himself or any other, they
rejoice, as having attained their desires, and so presently commit him to
Prison.

If any chance to make his escape, they have many devices to fetch him and find
him again, one of them is by making his Picture to the Life, and sending it
about by their Apparitors and Promoters, who are commonly the greatest Villairs
in the Country, and will swear any thing against the Prisoner.

After the Prisoner has been six or eight Months in Gaol, he is brought before
the Inquisitors who tell him that they have deeply considered his case, and
have found that he does not declare the whole Truth, and therefore they are
resolved he shall be rackt, that they may draw from him by force, what by fair
means he will not acknowledge, and then they advise him rather to confess
voluntarily and thereby avoid that pain and danger that attends him; but
whether he confess or not, it is the same thing, for to the rack he must go, to
be compelled to confess more.

Then is the poor Prisoner led into a deep and dark Dangeon under Ground where
the Rack stands, passing through many doors before he come to it, because the
terrible cries and schreiks of the tormented should not be heard. Then the
Lords Inquisitors set themselves upon a Scaffold hard by the Rack, and the
Torches being lighted, the Hangman or Tormenter comes in, all clothed from Head
to Foot in black Canvas, and a long black hood likewise, which covers his
Face, having only two holes in it to look out at, which sight does many times
very much affright the poor Soul, to see one in the likeness of a Devil come to
Torment him.

The Inquisitors being seated near him, again persuade him to confess freely
and Voluntarily, and then with very sharp words command him to be stripped stark
naked, yea though it be the modestest Virgin or chastest Matron in the
Country, whose grief is not so much the pain as to be seen naked by so many
persons, and yet these wicked Villains, without any regard of honesty, will not
by the utmost prayers, or Entreaties of the most virtuous Women or Maidens, be
persuaded to forbear one jot of this barbarous Impudence; As if a Shirt or
Shift could hinder the Rack from cruelly tormenting them.

The party being stripped naked, the Lords Inquisitors signify their pleasure how
they will have him Tormented, and the first kind of Torment is usually the
Gibbet or Pully; First one comes behind him, and binds his hands together with
a Cord Eight or Ten times about, and then his Thumbs in the same manner, the
Inquisitors bidding him every time to bind them harder than other, and then
both hands and Thumbs are fastened to a Pully which hangs to the Gibbet, they
then fasten great and heavy bolts to his heels, and hing upon those bolts
diverse Iron weights, and so hoise the poo^ wretch up from the ground: Having
continued thus for some time they let him down, and hang twice as much more to
his heels, and then hoising him up, they let him slip half way dow^ of a
sudden, which rends and tears Arms, Shoulders, Back, Legs, and all his whole
body out of joint, by reason of the sudden Jirk, and the weights hanging at his
heels.

If the party schreik or cry out, they roar out as fast and call him Heretic
Rogue and Dog, and if in his cruel pangs he call upon Jesus Christ for his aid
and assistance, they mock and deride him, saying, Why call thou on Jesus
Christ? Let Jesus Christ alone, and tell us the Truth, etc. After they have
tormented him about three hours, the Inquisitors ask the Hangman whether the
rest of his Instruments of Torment are ready, who to affright the Prisoner
answers, they are, but he has not brought them with him: they then bid him
bring them to morrow, and so turning to the poor wretch which lies in miserable
pain, the Inquisitors cry, How now Sirrah, how do you like this? well, consider
of it against to morrow; ^r else you die, for what you have felt, is but a flea
biting to what remains behind.

Then the Jailer plays the Bone-setter as well as he can, three days after
brings him to the Rack again when his joints are most sore, and sometimes they
have another Torment with the Trough, where the Person is laid with his feet
higher than his head, bound hand and foot in the Trough, and then laying a
thick Cloth over his Mouth and Nostrils, they pour water thereupon with a long
stream, which falling from on High, drives the Cloth down his Throat, with
miserable Torture and pain, and being drawn out again from the bottom of his
Throat, it draws forth blood with it, and seems as if it tore out his bowels.

They have another Torment with Fire, which is no whit inferior to the former,
and that is by holding the Prisoners Feet over a pan of burning Charcoal, and
that the Fire may have the more force, they baste their Feet with Lard and
Bacon.

If after all these and diverse other cruel Tortures they continue constant,
they are then condemned to death: Then he is clothed in a Sambernetto or long
Garment painted over with ugly Devils; he has on his head a high Crowned Hat,
whereon a man is painted burning in the Fire, with many Devils about him,
plying him with Fire and Faggot; upon his Tongue a piece of cleft Wood is put,
to hinder his speaking, a Cord about his neck, and his hands fast tied hehind
him.

All things being finished, they are delivered by the Inquisitors into the
hands of the Magistrate, who presently conveys him to Execution, where several
Friars swarm about him, earnestly persuading him to deny the Truth, and when
they cannot prevail upon him, he is tied to the Stake, and in an Instant the
Hangman breaks his neck, without being perceived, and then they report among
the Common People, that he recanted at his last hour, and returned to the
Church of Rome, and therefore he felt no pain in the Fire, but took his death
so patiently without any motion, or crying out.

And though by the Terrors of the Inquisition the Professors of the Gospel in
Spain have been but few, they having been so wickedly industrious as to crush
all appearances of Truth in the bud; yet in the year 1545. several Protestants
at St. Lucar, Valedolia, Sevil, and other places in Spain, suffered death, no
less than thirty being martyred at one time, and five years after, diverse more
likewise were put to death, as one Francis Romans, a Merchant; De Cacalla a
man of Excellent Learning, and one Rochus a skilful Graver of Images, who
turned Protestants, and died for the same; also one John Pontio Gonsalvo a
Priest, Juliano, Leon, Arias Losada a Physician; together with a Lady and
several Women and Virgins who were burnt at several times in diverse places, and
twenty others besides who were burnt in one Fire: after they had endured all
the horrid torments of the Rack, the Pully, the Trough, the Barnacle, the
Twisting Cord, and the rest of the barbarous Tortures and Inventions of the
cursed Inquisition. Nay diverse Englishmen being betrayed by the Insinuation of
wicked Informers, were likewise burnt in Spain, as Nicholas Burton. Merchant of
London was burnt at Sevil, and another Englishman with him, and not long after
two more named John Baker and William Burgate, and about the same time William
Burgess Master of an English Ship, was burnt there likewise, and one William
Hooker, a youth of about sixteen years old, was stoned to death for the bold
profession of the Truth.

As Portugal is but a little Kingdom, and the power of the Pope and his Clergy
very considerable there as well as in Spain, they have wonderfully suppressed the
power of the Truth with their Tortures, yet some have there likewise suffered
for the Gospel, and among others William Garaner an Englishman, whom they put
to death with most e^quisite Tortures at Lisbon in the year 1552. for taking
the Host out of a Cardinals hand, and stamping it under his Feet; He boldly
asserting to the King himself, That he did it out of Conscience, as not being
able to endure to see the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper irreverently used
to so great Idolatry; and although all manner of cruelty was used toward him,
yet he died with extraordinary Constancy, singing Psalms in the Flames to the
very last moment of his life.

The Rage and Fury of Papists in the Low Countries or Netherlands was no less
than in other places. For the Inquisition being introduced there, it was
accompanied with all manner of cruelty. At Antwerp one Nicholas an holy good
man was bound up in a Sack and drowned. In Holland a Learned Preacher called
Pistorius was burnt, being carried to the Stake with a Fools Coat on his back.
Wendelmuta a Widow likewise suffered death with much Constancy. Several
Ministers were beheaded, among the rest one George Scherter, who after his head
had been cut off for some time, and his body lying on his belly, he turning
himself on his back, and crossing his right foot over the left, and his right
hand over the left, continued so to the great admiration of the Spectators, and
the Conversion of many.

Several were drowned, others were made away in Prisons, others shut up in dark
and noisome places, and none suffered to come at them; being fed only with Bread
and Water till they were famished: At Lorain several were martyred, some by
Fire, others Beheaded.

There was a very great Persecution all over Flanders about the year 1544. so
that there was hardly a Town or City in all the Country wherein some were not
banished, beheaded or condemned to perpetual Imprisonment, neither was there
any respect either to Age or Sex, but especially at Gaunt many of the chief
Persons were burned for being Protestants, and several others in Brabant and
Artois, insomuch that Two hundred Men and Women were cruelly destroyed at one
time, some of them being drowned, some burned alive, and some privately
murdered, so that the Hangman began to be tired and wearied out with such
continual Executions.

At the Town of Mecklin, Dornick and Delden, several were put to death, and
among the rest two Noble Virgins who were Sisters; and likewise a Mother and
her three Sons who all died, owning the Gospel, and zealously exclaiming
against the Cruelty and Idolatry of the Papists: And about the same time they
miserably tormented one Bertrand for trampling the Host under his Feet, whom
they thrice put to the Rack, and because he would not recant in the
Manket-place of Dornick, they put a Ball of Iron into his mouth to keep him
from speaking, and then crushed his right hand between two flat red hot frons
till the form of it was changed, and then did the like by his foot, which he
endured with admirable patience, then tying him round the waste by a Pully, and
making a Fire underneath, they hoisted him up and down till he was burnt to
Ashes, which they cast into the River.

There were several martyred at Valence, and Lisle, and one of the Judges
pronouncing sentence against these good People, said, This day you shall go to
dwell with all the Devils in Hell Fire.

But the greatest Instrument of the Devil in those Countries was the Duke of
Alva, who was sent by the King of Spain to root the Protestants out of the
Low Countries. This Duke boasted one time at his own Table, That he had been
diligent to root out Heresy; for besides those he had slain in the Wars, he
had put into the hands of the Common Hangman to be Executed within the space of
six years no less than Eighteen thousand Persons.

And to complete this sad Catastrophe, we may also remember that William of
Nassaw Prince of Orange, was shot by a Villain called Joanville, who was
encouraged by a Jacobine Friar to do it; the Rascal was thrust through with an
Halbert, and the Friar was hanged: But this wound not proving mortal, they
hired one Gerard a Burgundian, who standing behind the Pillar in a Room, shot
the Prince dead as he past by.

The Persecutions of the Papists upon the Protestants in Scotland and Ireland.
AS most Kingdoms in Europe felt the rage and fury of Romish Cruelty and
Persecution, so Scotland though in the frozen north was not insensible thereof;
For in the Year 1572. Mr. Patrick Hamilton of an Ancient and Honorable Family,
and called Abbot of Fern, left Scotland and went into Germany, where conversing
with Luther and Melancthon, he greatly increased in godly knowledge and
learning; and returning home he publicly Preached concerning Faith and good
works, and against the Superstitions and Idolatry of the Papists.

This so enraged James Beaton Arch bishop of St. Andrews, that in the absence
of the King, Mr. Hamilton was seized upon by the Bishops Officers, and carried
to the Castle, and the next day he was brought forth to Judgment, and Condenmed
to be Burnt for the Testimony of God; The Articles charged against him, were
about Pilgrimages, Purgatory, Praying to Saints and for the Dead.

After Dinner the Fire was prepared, which some thought was only to terrify
him, but it pleased God to strengthen him against the fear of Death, and so he
was tied to the Stake, giving his Garments to his Servant, and saying thus to
him: These will not profit in the Fire, they will profit thee; After this thou
can receive no benefit by me, except the Example of my Death; which I pray
thee to remember; for though it be bitter to the Flesh, and fearful before men,
yet it is the entrarce into eternal Life, which none shall possess who deny
Jesus Christ before this wicked Generation. And the Fire being kindled, he
cried with a loud voice, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit; how long shall Darkness
overwhelm this Realm? and how long will thou suffer the Tyranny of these men? A
Friar troubling him by crying out, Turn thou Heretic, call upon our Lady, say,
Salve Regina, etc. he replied, Depart from me, and trouble me not, thou
Messenger of Satan; and speaking to one Campbel the chief among them, he said,
Wicked man, thou know the Contrary, and have confessed the contrary to me, I
appeal thee before the Tribunal Seat of Jesus Christ; after which words he
resigned up his Spirit to God; and within a few days after the Friar died in a
Frenzy and Desperation.

The Archbishop of St. Andrews likewise called before him two Gentlemen, David
Straton and Mr. Normand Gomlay: Mr. Straton being accused for Heresy was much
troubled at it, and thereupon frequented the company of Religious men; and
hearing that Text read, He that denies me before men, or is ashamed of me in
this wicked Generation, I will deny him before my Father and his Holy Angels;
he steadfastly lift up his eyes and hands to Heaven, and burst forth into these
words: O Lord, I have been wicked, and justly may thou withdraw thy Grace
f^^^^ me, but Lord, for thy Mercy sake, let me never deny thy Truth for fear of
Death or Corporal pain: Being afterward together with Mr. Norman brought to
Judgment in Holy Rood-House, where the King himself was present, they were both
condemned to the fire, and in the afternoon were first Hanged, and then Burnt,
which they cheerfully suffered.

There was likewise one Dean Thomas Foret, who used to Preach to his
Parishioners every Lords day, out of the Epistles and Gospels as they came in
order, for which being complained of to the Bishop of Dunkeldon, he reproved
him for it, telling him that it was too much to preach every Sunday, since the
People might think they ought to do so likewise; and says the Bishop, Is it not
enough for you when you find a good Epistle and Gospel, to set forth and preach
the Liberty of Holy Church, and let the rest alone. Dean Thomas replied, That
he had read them all over, and knew no bad ones among them; But, said he, when
your Lordship shows me any such, I will pass them by; The Bishop anwered, I
thank God I never knew what the Old and New Testament was, but go your ways and
^^pent of these fancies, ere it be too late: The Dean answered, My cause is
good and just (...) the presence of God, and therefore (...) (...), but he
(...) Cardinal Beton, by whom he was condemned and Burned for an Heretic.

The Year after Jerome Russel, and Alexander Kennedy, who was not above eighteen
years old, ^ere brought before the Archbishop and his Associates, who railed
upon them, and called them Heretics; Jerome Russel replied, This your hour and
power of darkness, now sit ye as judges, and we are wrongfully accused, but the
day will come wherein our Innocence will appear, and ye shall see your own
blindness to your everlasting confusion, go forward and fulfill the measure of
your Iniquity. A while after they were sentenced to die, and as they went to
Execution, Jerome comforted Kennedy, saying, Brother fear not, greater is he
that is in us than he that is in the World; the pain we are to suffer is short,
and shall be light, but our joy and consolation shall never have an end; let us
therefore strive to enter into our Master and Saviors Joy, by the same
straight way which he has taken before us; Death cannot hurt us, for it is
destroyed by him for whose sake we now suffer. And in this manner past reason
they joyfully gave up their Souls unto God in the Flaming Fire.

In the year 1543. Cardinal Beton coming to Edinburgh, caused several Religious
persons to be brought before him, and when he could prove nothing else against
them: He caused four men to be hanged upon suspicion that they had eaten a
Goose upon a Friday. And a Woman with a Child sucking at her breast, was
drowned for refusing to pray to the Virgin Mary. Many others were likewise
Banished and Imprisoned for the Gospel; and among the rest John Rogers a
learned and godly Minister, whom he caused to be murdered in Prison, and then
thrown over the Wall, giving it out, that by attempting to make his escape he
broke his neck.

In the year 1546. Mr. George Wisheart a famous Minister was sent for to appear
before Cardinal Beton and the other Bishops at St. Andrews; where a Priest was
ordered to curse him, who called him Renegade, Traitor, Thief, etc. However,
Mr. Wisheart gave them an account of his Faith and Doctrine, but they not being
able to answer him, immediately condemned him to be Burnt; and presently a Fire
was prepared over against the Castle, and Velvet Cushions were laid in the
Castle-windows for the Cardinal and the rest of the Prelates to see him suffer;
and for fear he should be rescued by his friends, all the Castle Guns were
mounted against the place of his Execution, by the Cardinals order; then with a
Rope about his Neck, and a Chain about his middle, he was fastened to the Stake;
and having earnestly prayed, and exhorted the People, and forgiven his enemies
and persecutors, he said thus: I Beseech you, Brethren, Exhort your Prelates to
learn the Word of God, that they may be ashamed to do evil, and learn to do
good, or else there shall come upon them the Wrath of God, which they shall not
eschew: Then the Hangman upon his knees said, Sir, I pray forgive me, for I am
not the cause of your Death. Mr. Wisheart called him to him, and kissing his
Cheek said, Lo here is a token that I forgive thee, My heart, do thine Office;
and so he was tied to the Stake and the fire kindled.

The Captain of the Castle came to him, and bid him be of good Courage; to whom
Mr. Wisheart said, This fire Torments my Body, but no whit abates my Spirits;
then looking toward the Cardinal he said, He who in such State from that high
place feeds his eyes with my Torments, within few days shall be hanged out at
the same Window, with as much shame and ignominy as he there leans with Pride:
then his Breath being stopped with the Flames, he gave up the Ghost.

This Prophecy was fulfilled in a short time after; for the people being
generally discontented at the Cruelty used against Mr. Wisheart; several
persons conspired against him, and killed him in the Castle, and the Provost
raising the Town, came to the Castle Gates, crying, What have you done with my
Lord Cardinal? where is he? To whom they answered from within, Return to your
Houses, for he has received his reward, and will trouble the World no more.
But they cried, We will never depart till we see him. Then was he hanged out at
that very window, to satisfy them he was dead, and so the people departed.

Shortly after one Adam Wallace was Burned likewise; and Henry Forest suffered
the same Cruel Death upon Account of Heresy. One Walter Will was accused for
Heresy, and being bid to recant, he said, I am Corn and not Chaff, I will not
recant the Truth; and being thereupon condemned to the Fire, and all things
made ready to that purpose, they commanded him to go to the Stake; No, said he,
by the Laws of God I am forbidden to lay hands on my my self, therefore do you
put me in the Fire, and you shall see my resolution. Having then made his
Prayer unto God, he spoke thus to the people; Although I have been a Great
Sinner, yet it is not for that, but for Gods Truth contained in his Word of the
Old and New Testament that I now suffer; and God out of his abundant Mercy does
honor me so far, as to make me among other of his Servants to seal his Truth
with my Blood; Dear Friends, as you would escape Eternal Death, be no more
seduced with the Lies of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, etc. but trust
only in God: After he had thus spoke, he was tied to the Stake, and the Fire
being kindled, he quietly slept in the Lord; and was the last person that died
for the Protestant Religion in Scotland.

In the year of our Lord 1641. there brake forth a most horrid and Bloody
Rebellion and Massacre of the Irish Papists, committed on the English in
Ireland; a Nation famous for the Birth of diverse worthy persons therein, but
none more renowned than that Excellent, Learned and Religious Person, James
Usher, late Ld. Archbishop of Armagh, and Lord Primate of Ireland; who amongst
many other extraordinary Gifts and Graces which it pleased the Almighty to
bestow upon him, was wonderfully endued with a Spirit of Prophecy; from which
among many other things he foretold this bloody Rebellion forty years before it
came to pass, in a Sermon which he preached at Dublin in the Year 1601. where
from Ezekiel 4.6. discoursing concerning the Prophets bearing the Iniquity of
Judah forty days, the Lord therein appointing a day for a Year, he made this
direct application in relation to the Connivance at Popery at that time. From
this Year, says he, will I reckon the sin of Ireland, that those whom you now
embrace shall be your Ruin, and you shall bear your Iniquity: which Prediction
proved exactly true; for from that time 1601. to the year 1641. was just forty
years, in which it is notoriously known that the Rebellion and destruction of
Ireland happened; and which was acted by those Popish Priests, Jesuits and
other Papists which were then connived at.

For the Jesuits, Priests and Friars were the chief Instigators to this horrid
Massacre, by continually incensing and stirring up the Popish Gentry and
Commonalty to show the utmost of their Zeal therein, and this without any
provocation given by the English: for it was observed, that they had all the
Liberty they could reasonably desire, and that there was not any reason for
such Cruel Proceedings against the English, but only for that damnable and
unpardonable sin of being Protestants: And the Popish Clergy the more to engage
the deluded Papists to murder them, every where loudly declaimed, That they
were Heretics, and not fit to be suffered any longer amongst them; that it was
no more sin to kill one of them, than to kill a Dog, and that it was a mortal
and unpardonable sin to relieve or protect any of them. And when their business
was so fixed that they did not fear any miscarriage, the success of this Great
Design was recommended in their Public Prayers, as tending very much to the
advancement of the Catholic cause; and they likewise maliciously represented
to the People the severe proceedings against the Papists in England.

All things being in a readiness, they proceeded to the Execution of this
Damnable Contrivance; but their proceeding therein was various; some of the
Irish only stripping the English Protestants, and turning them out of Doors
naked in the cold and snow, others cruelly Murdering man, woman and child,
without the least compassion; but they all resolved upon this point, that by
all manner of ways and means they would universally destroy and root the
English out of Ireland: Nay the Irish were so inveterately malicious against
them, that they would not endure the very sound of their Language, but punished
those that spoke English and the names of English places they changed, into Old
Irish. In some places they killed the Cows and Sheep, merely because they were
English; and sometimes they cut off their Legs, or a piece out of their
Buttocks, and so left them to live in pain; and in other places those English
Cattle that they could not devour, they killed them, and left them in great
multitudes stinking upon the Ground.

The Popish Priests gave the Sacrament to diverse of the Irish upon Condition
that they should neither spare Man, Woman, nor Child of the Protestants,
saying, That it did them a great deal of good to wash their hands in their
Blood. Some of their Priests Excommunicated all that should from thenceforth
relieve or harbor any English, Scotch, or Welshman, or give them Alms at their
Doors, whereby many were Famished to Death. Yea the Popish Monks and Friars
exhorted them with Tears not to spare the English but, utterly to destroy them;
nay they boasted that when they had made an end of them in Ireland, they would
go over into England, and would not leave the memorial of an Englishman under
Heaven; and their Priests told them, It was as lawful to kill an English man as
to kill a Sheep or a Dog; and that it was no more Pity or Conscience to take
their Estates from them, than to take a Bone out of a Dogs mouth.

The day before this Horrid Massacre began, the Priests gave the people a
dismission at Mass, with full liberty to go out and take Possession of all
their Lands, which they pretended we^^ unjustly detained from them by the
English, a^though they were justly forfeited by their repeated Rebellions and
Treasons against the Government. They further told them, that they might
lawfully strip, rob, and despoil them of all their Goods and Chattels, The
Protestants being (as they said) worse than Dogs, for their were Devils, and
worshipped the Devil, and therefore that the Killing of such was meritorious,
and an Excellent Preservative against the Pains of Purgatory; since the Bodies
of such Catholics as should die in this Quarrel, would not be cold before
their Souls should ascend up into Heaven; so that they need not fear the Pains
of Purgatory: which occasioned some of these Murdering Villains to boast,
after they had massacred many of the English, That if they should die
presently, they should go straight to Heaven.

When this Horrid Rebellion first began, several Irish Gentlemen pretended
great kindness to some of their Protestant Neighbors, and persuaded them to
put their Goods and Cattle into their hands, engaging that they would secure
them from the rage of the Rabble; which made the Protestants so confident,
because of former familiarity, that they gave them Inventories of all they had;
nay, they dug up some of their best things which they had hidden in the
grounds, and put them into their hands, whereby they got vast quantities of
Goods into their hands; and yet like True Papists, they cheated them of it all;
nay, which was more barbarous, they promised the English, that if they would be
contented to lose their Goods, they and their Wives and Children, should
peaceably depart the Country; and yet when they had got all they had, they
inhumanely ^^urthered them.

In one place there was no less than Twenty two Widows, who were first robbed,
and then stripped stark naked, and when in a house they had covered themselves
with Straw, the bloody Papists threw in burning Straw among them, on purpose to
burn them together: And in a while after they brake forth into such abominable
Cruelties, bloody Massacres and Murders, as would make the heart of any
Christian to ache, and his Ears to tingle at the Relation of them.

In the Castle of Lisgol above an hundred and twenty Men, Women and Children
were burnt together: Another Castle was delivered to one of the Popish
Commanders, upon condition their lives should be saved; but as soon as he
entered, he cruelly murdered and destroyed them all without mercy.

At Portendown Bridge, a thousand Men. Women and Children were drowned in the
River; and it was testified upon Oath, that nine days after there was the
Apparition of a Man bolt upright in the Water, breast-high, with his hands
lifted up to Heaven, and that he was seen several times in that posture, from
December to the end of Lent, at which time some of the English Army passing
that way, saw it likewise; after which it vanished away.

One Elizabeth Price made Oath, that she with other Women whose Husbands and
Children were drowned in that place, hearing of those Apparitions, went thither
one Evening, at which time they saw a Woman rise out of the River breast-high,
her hair hanging down, which was as white as Snow, and so was her skin, and
that she often cried out, Revenge, Revenge, Revenge; which so affrighted them,
that they went away.

In Queens County, an Englishman, his Wife, five Children and a Maid, were all
hanged together, and then cut down and put into a hole; the youngest Child,
though it was hanged, was not quite dead when it was put in, but put up its
hands and cried, Mammy, Mammy, and yet these Villains without mercy buried it
alive.

They stripped a Scotch-man, and knocked him down for dead, but he afterward
recovering, went into the Town naked, whereupon they hewed him all to pieces:
They also ripped up his Wifes belly, so that the Child dropped out: They likewise
hanged up diverse other Women with Child, and ripping them up, they gave their
Infants to be devoured by Dogs and Swine. In one place they set a Castle on
fire wherein were many Protestants, and then rejoycingly said among themselves,
Oh how sweetly do they fry!

In one place they burnt two English Bibles, and said it was Hellfire they
burnt; they cut other Bibles to pieces, and burnt them, threatening to do the
like to all English Bibles: And in one place they took a Bible and laid it in a
^uddle of Water, and then stamping on it, said, A Plague on it, this Bible has
bred all the Quarrel. A Papist would have persuaded a man and his Wife to have
joined with them in the Massacre, but they protested, That rather than they
would forsake their Religion, they would die upon the Swords point; then he
would have had the Woman burn her Bible, but she told him, Rather than she
would burn her Bible, she would die the Death; whereupon they were both cruelly
murdered.

These barbarous Villains caused some Children to carry their Aged Parents to
the River, and drown them: some Wives were forced to help to hang their
Husbands; in one Town they caused a young Man to murder his own Father, and
then hanged him up: in another place they forced a Woman to kill her Husband,
and then caused her Son to kill his Mother, and then immediately hanged her
Son: and their cursed malice was thereby shown, that they might as much as in
them lay, destroy Soul and Body together. Yea so detestable was their Cruelty,
that they taught Irish Children to kill English Children, and two Boys boasted
that they had at several times murdered and drowned thirty six English Women
and Children: The Irish Women followed this Army of Murderers, and provoked
the Men to Cruelty, crying out, Kill them all, spare neither Man, Woman, nor
Child; and many of them stoned the English Women and their Children to Death;
and cried, Slay them all, the English are fit meat for Dogs, and their Children
are Bastards. Yea so Implacable was their malice, that one of them was very
angry with her Husband, because he did not bring the Grease of a Fat
Gentlewoman whom they had slain, for them to makes Candles, of which was
commonly practiced by them in other places.

Yea they boasted that the day was their own, and that ere long they would not
leave one Protestant Rogue living, but would utterly destroy every one that had
but a drop of English Blood in him: yea they vowed, they would not leave one
English beast alive, nor any of their breed.

Alas! who can comprehend the Sighs, the Groans, the trembling and astonishment
of these poor Innocent Souls, to sind themselves so suddenly surprised, and
that without remedy; What Schrieks, Cries, and bitter Lamentations were there
of Husbands, Wives, Children, Servants and Friends, howling and weeping,
finding themselves without all hope of deliverance from their present woeful
Miseries and Calamities.

For by these and all manner of Cruelties and Barbarities which Hell it self
could invent, the Irish and English Papists murdered and destroyed in a few
Months, near Three Hundred Thousand Protestants, as it is commonly computed,
without any manner of provocation, but only because they were Protestants;
whose deaths the Divine Vengeance in a short time after recompensed upon
several of the Murderers, many thousands perishing by the Sword and the plague
that followed it, and the rest without doubt, unless they heartily repent, will
receive the reward of their wickedness.

The Cruelties, Plots, and Treasons of the Papists against the Protestants in
England.
AFter having briefly Epitomized the bloody Cruelties and slaughters of this
Monster of Rome, and his Vassals, throughout Europe, let us now return home,
and see if our own Country has escaped betterthan our Neighbors. Englishmen
are generally accounted to be of a merciful nature, and pitiful disposition,
apt to be touched with the miseries of others, and are not in their own natures
bloody, barbarous or Cruel; what then may be the cause of those dreadful marks
of Rage and Fury that have been seen among us? How has this Fair Island been
made an Accldama, a Field of Skulls and Martyrs bones? All this we shall sind
proceeds from corrupt principles of Religion. I doubt not, (says a worthy
Divine) but Papists are made like other men; Nature has not generally given
them such Savage and Cruel Dispositions, but their Religion has made them so;
I am loath to say it, and yet I am confident it is true, that many Papists would
have been excellent Persons and very good men, if their Religion had not
hindered them, if the Doctrines, and Principles of their Church had not spoiled
their natural Disposition. Good God! that any thing that is called Religion
should so presently strip men of all Humanity, and transform the mild and
gentle Race of Mankind into Wolves and Tigers.

It is Popery that alters the Nature of Englishmen, and makes them act like
Turks, Infidels or Barbarians: its principles infect the Blood, and invenom the
Soul; instead of being Meek and humble, it makes them Proud and Arrogant;
instead of performing the Commands of Christ, it makes men obey the Pope,
though never so contrary to Religion. If our Blessed Savior says, Hurt no man,
pray for your Persecutors, submit to Magistrates and Governors; The Pope and
his Doctrines say, Kill every man, that is not of your Religion; Curse those
that disobey your Commands: Kill, Stab, or depose your Kings or Governors.
This is the Doctrine, and these are the Principles and Commands of the Romish
Church.

It is some hundreds of years since this Bloody Beast of persecution began to
show his Fangs and armed Claws in this Kingdom; and it was almost as soon
perceived and testified against by some good men in those times. For in the
Year one Thousand Two Hundred, John of Salisbury declared against the
Corruptions and Superstitions of the Romish Church, and plainly discovered the
oppression of the burden of the Pope and his Ravenous Clergy; and after him
John Grostead Bishop of Lincoln wrote to the Pope, and admonished him, for
which he had like to have lost his life; yet the Pope did only hitherto show
his Teeth, and could not take his full swing in Blood and Murder, which he
afterward attained to.

But since the Papists impertinently urge against us the Newness of our
Religion, and that it was not known before Martin Luthers days, we shall
produce much more early Testimonies against the Errors and Abuses in the Romish
Church^ For we find in the Year 884. John Patrick Erigena, a Britan, who was
ordained the first Reader in Oxford by King Alfred, was afterward Condemned and
Martyred by the Pope, for writing a Book concerning the Sacrament. And in the
year 960. many Ministers and Divines wore the Mark of the Beast in their faces,
being by the Popes order Branded in the Faces with hot Irons, for Dissenting in
many things about the Mass, Purgatory, Monkery, and the like; and for saying,
that Rome was Babylon, and that Cloisters were the Nurses of Sodomy. In the
year 1126. one Arnold an Englishman, and a Preacher of the Gospel, was
Butchered at Oxford, for Preaching against the Pride of the Prelates, and the
wicked lives of the Priests. In the Year 1160 the poor Persecuted Waldenses
came hither for succor, but instead thereof they were Persecuted, Condemned,
Burnt, Whipped, and Stigmatized for their Religion, both at Oxford and other
places.

After which almost in every Year it pleased God to raise up several learned
and worthy men to testify against the Horrid Corruptions of Rome, both by
Speaking, Writing and Disputing against them. As in the Year 1170. Gualo, and
Gilbert Foliot, Doctors of Divinity, and after them Silvester Gerald, Alexander
a Divine, Gualter Maxes Archdeacon of Oxford, Sebald, Archbishop of York,
William Stringham Doctor of Divinity, Roger Bacon Fellow of Merton College, a
divine and Mathematican, John Scotus the Great Scotch-man; and about the same
time Doctor John Wickliff, Jeoffery Chaucer, William Wickham Bishop of
Winchester, and many other Learned men.

All these gave ample Testimonies by their public Writings against the many
Corruptions, evil Doctrines and Superstitious Worship of the Romish Church,
with the hazard of their Lives, Honors, Liberties, Estates and Fortunes; so
that many were persecuted, and some were burnt in the Reign of King Henry the
second, 1174. and in the Year 1380. Utred Bolton, and John Ashwerly endured
Persecution; and a while after John Ashton, Walter Bruce, John Pateskul, and
Doctor Crump, were persecuted; and William Sawtree a Divine of Oxford was
martyred, and William Swinderly was Burnt in Smithfield. In the Year 1407.
William Thorp was Burnt, and Laurence Redman and six others grievously
persecuted. In the Year 1417, the Lord Cobham was Burnt in S. Giles's Fields:
John Purey and Will. White, and Richard White, were burnt. Peter Clark a Divine
of Oxford, for maintaining publicly the Doctrine of Wickliff, was forced to
fly, but was taken beyond Sea, his Tongue cut out, then hanged, and afterward
burnt. Roger Ovely was hanged and Quartered. In the Year 1447. Humfrey Duke of
Gloucester was murdered by the Papists, for being a favourer of Wickliff, and
other Preachers of the Truth; and diverse others were many ways persecuted for
the sake of Religion, before the rising of Luther; God having in all Ages
raised up some to Testify to the Truth, and to maintain the purity of the
Gospel.

And besides these Divines, Learned and great men, there were several other
good men of a meaner quality who openly owned the Truth, and suffered for the
same; and as the number of the professors grew greater, who now began to be
called Lollards, so Persecution grew hotter, and the Rage and Malice of the
Papists increased. In the Reign of King Henry the fifth, 1413. Sir Roger Acton,
John Brown, John Beverly, and Thirty six more, were all put to Death in St.
Giles's Fields; and John Claydon and Richard Turning, Benedict Ulman, and
several others were burnt, and many Imprisoned. In the Reign of King Henry the
sixth, William Tailor, one of Wickliffs followers, was burnt in Smithfield:
Henry Web, and Henry Florence, were Curelly whipped, and about an hundred and
twenty Men and Women suffered persecution, many of them were burnt. William
White was Martyred; and at the same time two were burnt at Colchester; Richard
H^veden a Citizen of London was Martyred for the same cause near the Town, and
several more severely whipped and terribly handled; Thomas Baily and Richard
Wiche, both Ministers, were burnt; one in Smithfield, and the other on
Tower Hill.

In the Reign of Edward the fourth, John Goose was Burnt; and in Henry the
sevenths Reign, one Jean Boughton of Fourscore years old was burnt in Norfolk;
another person was Burnt in Smithfield; several were likewise ^igmatized, and
many did penance. William Tilsworth was Burnt in the Town of Amasham where they
forced his own Daughter to set fire to Faggots that were to burn her Father;
and two Years after, Thomas Bernard, and John Melton, and one Roberts, were
burnt in the same County of Buckingham. Thomas Chase after many Cruel Usages
and Hardships was murdered in Prison. Thomas Norrice was burnt at Norwich and
Lawrence Guest at Salisbury, and a Woman at Chipping-Sadbury, with several
other persons in the Reign of King Henry the seventh.

In the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, the Flames increased very much, and
abundance Suffered in every place. In the Year 1511. William Sweetin^ and John
Brewster were burnt in Smithfield: the same year William Carder, Robert
Harrison, and Agnes Grebel were burnt, they forcing the Husband and Daughter of
the Woman to come in as Witnesses against her: After this one Mr. Style with
his Book of the Revelations, and twenty five more were Burnt; five other
Persons were accused for reading an Heretical Book, which contained many
damnable Opinions; and what should this Book be, but only the Evangelists in
English. In the Year 1514. Richard Hun was murdered in the Lollards Tower, and
afterward burnt; John Brown, John Stileman, and Thomas Man were burnt in
Smithfield; Robert Cousin was burnt at Buckingham, Christopher Shoemaker, at
Newberry; Richard and Robert Bartlet, and John Scrivener were likewise burnt;
and the Children of John Scrivener were forced to set fire to their Father; for
it was usual with them to compel Children to accuse their Parents, and Parents
their Children; Husbands their Wives, and Wives their Husbands; Intimate
Friends, Brothers and Sisters to accuse one another; and many Hundreds were
likewise forced to recant and abjure against their Conscienecs, or else be
Burnt.

There were two things about this time that very much increased the Professors
of the Gospel in England; One was the appearance of Martin Luther in the World,
who boldly owned the Truth, and loudly Declaimed against the corruptions of the
Romish Church; another thing was the Art of Printing, which now began to be
common, whereby the True Religion was the more easily promulgated and Dispersed
through every Country, and in all Languages.

This allarum'd the Pope and his Debauched Clergy, who were afraid to have
their wicked Doctrines and Practices discovered to the people, and thereupon
they began to rage, and bestir themselves, raising Persecution, and making
Destruction and Slaughter in all places throughout the Kingdom against the
Lutherans, as they were now called. In the Year 1519. several Protestants were
apprehended at Coventry, and imprisoned in filthy and nasty Dungeons, six of
whom were afterward burnt: Robert Silkeb and Thomas Harding were burnt shortly
after. One Sigal Nicholson a Stationer at Cambridge, was hung up by the
Privy-members for having Luthers Books in his house; several likewise abj^^ed;
and the Body of William Tracy Esquire; in Gloucestershire, because he had left
nothing for Masses for his Soul, was taken out of the Grave and Burnt two Years
after his Death. Richard Brafield a Monk of Bury, after he had been whipped and
most cruelly handled in Prison, and Gagged, Beaten and Bound, and Degraded
after a very shameful manner, was burnt with much Cruelty in London, continuing
half an Hour alive in the Flames for want of Wood, and when his left arm was
burnt, he rubbed it with his right hand, and it fell down in the Fire; he
continued in Prayer without moving to the last moment: several were imprisoned,
and fed with bread made of Saw-dust; some were set in the stocks with
Horse-leaches on their Legs, ^^d their hands so mangled with Irons, that the
Flesh grew higher than the Irons, and with Iron Collars about their Necks: nay,
many were racked till they were lamed. John Tewsbury, James Bainham, Valentine
Sheaf and his Wife, John Bent, and one Trapnel, were all Burnt about the same
time; three were hanged in Chains for burning the Image or Rood of Dover Court.
John Frith, Andrew Honor, Thomas Benet, William Tindal, John Lambert, William
Leiton and Collins a Lawyer, were burnt, and Robert Packington Murdered; Doctor
Barns, Thomas Garret, William Hieron, were burnt in Smithfield, John Potter was
murdered it. Prison: Robert Testwood, Anthony Parker and Henry Filmer, were
burnt at Windsor. About five hundred persons in and about London either died in
prison, or were burnt in Smithfield. In the Year 1541. Damlip, Dod, Saxy, were
Slain. One Henry at Colchester, Kerby and Clark at Ipswich and Bury were burnt.
In the Year 1546. Mistress Ann Askew, one of the Ladies belonging to Queen
Katherine Parr, because she would not confess any other Ladies, was put upon
the Rack, and the Lord Chancellor himself being more Cruel, he acted then the
Executioner, ordered her to be racked to the utmost; she was afterward Burnt in
Smithfield; and at the same time and place were likewise Burnt, Nicholas
Belerrian a Minister i^ Shropshire, John Adams a Tailor, and John Lacels a
Gentleman belonging to King Henry the Eighth; these beholding the Invincible
Constancy and Patience of Mistress Askew, were thereby much encouraged in their
Sufferings.

About the same time Sir John Blage of the Kings Privy Chamber was falsely
accused to have spoken against the Mass, upon which he was condemned to be
burnt in Smithfield, whereupon the Earl of Bedford begged his pardon of the
King, who Commanded it to be drawn immediately. After his release Sir George
coming to the King, Ah my Pig said he, (for so he usually called him;) Yea,
(said Blage) if your Majesty had not been better to me than your Bishops were,
your Pig had been roasted before this time. Presently after Gardener Bishop of
Winchester and his Confederates set forth a Cruel Proclamation in the Kings
Name, for abolishing the Scriptures and all other English Books that discovered
the Truth to the people; and having obtained this, they very much rejoiced
therein, hoping that they had now for ever suppressed the Gospel, so that it
should never rise again; and to strike the greater terror into men's minds, they
made a diligent search after the Professors of the Truth, of whom they took the
names of some, drove away others, and hereby doubted not but to attain their
ends. But it pleased God that in the midst of these subtle Contrivances, for
the destruction of his Gospel and Servants, to take away King Henry the Eighth
within four Months after the Proclamation; and thereby all their hopes and
projects were utterly disappointed.

King Henry the Eighth being dead, his only Son Prince Edward (our English
Josiah) ascended the Throne, under whom the Protestant Religion was
established, and Popery and Superstition abolished; for he caused all Images to
be demolished, and as Idolatrous, to be taken out of all Churches within his
Dominions; the Learned m^n of his time he encouraged, and commanded them to
open and expound the Scriptures, (...) abolished the Mass, and ordered the
Service to be read in the English Tongue, and the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
to be administered in both kinds to the People.

But it pleased God in a short time to take him to himself: for in the Seventh
Year of his Reign, and the Seventeenth Year of his Age, he was taken with a
lingering sickness; during which time a Marriage was concluded between the Lord
Guilford Dudley eldest Son to the Duke of Northumberland, and the Lady Jane the
Daughter of the Duke of Suffolk, whose mother being then alive was Daughter to
Mary King Henry the Eighths second Sister.

The Marriage being finished, and the King every day more sick than other, so
that he seemed past Recovery, the Duke of Northumberland being ambitious to
advance his Family, persuaded the King that the Church and the True Religion
would be in great danger if he did not choose a pious Successer; and that it
was the part of a good Prince to set aside all other respects, when the Glory
of God and the good of his Subjects were concerned.

The King partly for his great desire to have the Protestant Religion
confirmed, and partly for the entire love which he bore to his Cousin the Lady
Jane, signed Letters Patents under the Broad Seal to appoint the Lady Jane to
succeed him in the Kingdom, although her Title were excluded by the Lady Mary
(who was always a zealous Papist) and the Lady Elizabeth. This was afterward
confirmed by the Nobility and Chief Lawyers of the Kingdom, and was subscribed
to by all the Kings Council, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, who upon
the Death of King Edward, which happened in a short time after, proclaimed the
Lady Jane Queen in London and Westminster.

The Lady Mary being in Hartfordshire, and hearing of it, presently sent to the
Lords of the Council, commanding and requiring them to Proclaim her Queen;
which if they refused to do, she threatened to recover her Right by force of
Arms. The Lords returned answer, That the Lady Jane was invested, and possessed
of the Crown by just Right and Title, both by the Ancient Laws of the Land, and
by Letters Patents signed and sealed by the late King before his death, and
therefore they declared they would adhere to her, and to none other; requesting
the Lady Mary that she would not upon any pretense endeavor to disturb the
peace of the Kingdom, promising her, that if she would carry her self as a
dutiful Subject, they would be ready to do her any service.

The Lady Mary having received this answer, withdrew further from the City, and
the Council being sensible of her stout and unquiet disposition, they raised an
Army, which was commanded by the Duke of Northumberland. The Lady Mary went
into Suffolk and Norfolk, gathering such aid of the Commons as she could, and
kept her self in Framingham Castle, to whom the Suffolk men first resorted, who
being always forward in promoting the Gospel, promised her their aid and
assistance, provided she would make no alteration of the Protestant Religion,
as it was established by her Brother King Edward.

To this she readily agreed, and confirmed it with such Vows and Protestations,
that none could suspect her; whereupon they joined with her: and thus by the
help of the Protestants she vanquished the Duke of Northumberland and his Army,
and was settled in the Kingdom; but she soon forgot her promises, for these
very Suffolk men observing that Popery would be re-established, they Petitioned
to her to perform her word to them; at which she was extremely displeased, and
told them, Forasmuch as you who are Members desire to rule your Head, you shall
one day find that Members must obey, not seek to rule; Yea one of the chief of
these men, Mr. Dob by name, she caused for the Terror of others to be set in
the Pillory several times, and diverse others that presented Supplications to
her not to set up Popery, she caused to be sent to prison.

Queen Mary being settled in the Kingdom, the Lady Jane, her Father the Duke of
Northumberland, and her Husband the Lord Guilford Dudley, were soon after
Beheaded; and the Queen soon discovered her disaffection to the Protestant
Religion, by displacing all the Orthodox Bishops, as Poinet, Ridley, Scorie,
Hooper, Coverdale; and by releasing out of the Tower Stephen Gardener Bishop of
Winchester, whom she made Lord Chancellor of England^ (...) Bonner who was made
Bishop of London. Then the Queen published a Proclamation, that she was resolved
to observe and maintain the Catholic Religion, wherein she was bred up,
requiring all her Subjects quietly to embrace the same.

A while after this, Bonner and Gardener begun a cruel and bloody persecution
upon the Protestants, and made them fall in heaps: For Mr. Hooper, Mr. Rogers,
Mr. Tailor, Mr. Bradford, Mr. Saunders, all famous men, were condemned and
burnt for Heresy. In the Year 1555, Thomas Tomkins (whose hand B. Bonner burnt
in Prison to try his constancy) was afterward burnt in Smithfield; William
Hunter was cruelly handled, and then burnt. Mr. Higbed and Mr. Causton were
burnt in Essex: William Piggot, Stephen Knight, and John Lawrence were examined
before Bishop Bonner, and then burnt in several places in Essex, Dr. Farrar
Bishop of St. David's, was burnt there; and Rawlins White was burnt at Cardiff,
George Marsh at Chester, William Flower at Westminster, John Cardmaker a godly
Minister, in Smithfield, and with him John Warn.

About this time came a Letter from King Philip and Queen Mary to Bishop
Bonner, that Heretics were not prosecuted with such severity as they ought to
be; which easily prevailed with Bonner, who was ready enough for Cruelty, and
thereupon condemned John Symson and John Ardeley of Essex, who were burnt
there: Thomas Hawks, Thomas Watts, Thomas Osmund, William Bamford, Thomas
Osburn, all of Cogshall in Essex, being sent up to Bonner, for not receiving
the Sacrament at Easter, they were condemned and burnt in several places in
Essex. John Bland, Nicholas Shetterden, Humfrey Middleton, John Frankesh, were
all burnt: And a few days after, Nicholas Hall, Christopher Wade, John Harpole,
and Margery Boley, were burnt in Kent. Dirick Carver, John Launder, Thomas
Iveson, James Abbeys, John Denley, John Newman Patrick Packingham, Richard Hook
and John Newman, were likewise burnt for Heretics.

The Prisons were now full in every place, and six men were Condemned and burnt
at Canterbury; and no thing but Cruelty and Oppression was to be seen through
the whole Land: Whereupon the Queens Commissioners for the more quick dispatch
took out ten of the Prisoners, whom they sent to B. Bonner, and being examined
by him about the Sacrament, they constantly adhering to the Truth, were
condemned and burnt in several places. Robert Samuel a Minister suffered
Martyrdom at Norwich; two others at Ipswich; five more in the Diocese of
Canterbury; the famous Ridley and Latimer at Oxford, and Mr. Philpot in
Smithfield.

In the year 1556. their wicked and bloody rage still continued, the Land was
all in a Flame, and Blood and Cruelty reigned in every place: For there were
seven burnt in Smithfield in one fire; four more in Canterbury, and Dr. Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterbury was burnt in Oxford. And to conclude, though the Reign
of Queen Mary was the shortest of any Prince since the Conquest, except King
Richard the Third, yet in her days there was more Christian blood spilt for
Religion than in any Kings Reign whatsoever, since Lucius the first Christian
King established Christianity in this Land; for in the five years of her Reign,
there perished in the consuming Flames, for the Profession of the Protestant
Religion, no less than two Hundred seventy seven persons, of all Ages and both
Sexes: there suffered five Bishops and Archbishops, twenty one Divines, eight
Gentlemen, four Tradesmen, an hundred Husbandmen, Servants and Laborers;
twenty six Wives, twenty Widows and Virgins; two Boys, and two Infants; one in
the Isle of Guernsey who springing out of his Mothers Womb as she was burning
at the Stake, was most inhumanely thrown in again and burnt for a young
Heretic. And besides these, there were sixty four persecuted for their
Religion, whereof seven were whipped, sixteen perished in Prison, twelve were
buried in Dunghills, and many more lay condemned, but were saved by the Death
of Queen Mary.

The Succession of Queen Elizabeth put a stop to the cruel rage of the Papists;
for the Power and Authority of the Pope vanished, and Peace, Rest and Liberty
for all the good People of the Nation ensued.

But the Papists, out of their extreme Loyalty to the Pope, thought it a sin to
live peaceably under an Heretical Prince: Especially when two Popes had
thundered out Excommunications against her, cursing her, and freeing her
Subjects from their Allegiance toward her, and threatening them under danger of
the Wrath of God, not to assist her, but to employ all their Power to bring her
to condign punishment, and promising rewards to all persons who should lay
hands upon this proscribed Woman, which was to be paid out of the Treasury of
the Church, together with a full pardon of all their sins who should engage
against her.

But when the Pope and his Accomplices saw, that all this would not effect
their desires, the Queens Subjects being too faithful to engage in any such
villainous designs, they then proceed to secret Plots and Attempts against her:
As that wherein the Duke of Norfolk and Robert Biddulph were engaged, in the
year 1566. and for which Northumberland Suffered at York, and after that
Leonard Daves designed mischiefs against her with the like ill success. In the
year 1578. the Invasion of Ireland at the great charges of the Pope, was
happily prevented. The next year James Fitz-morris is sent into Ireland, with
Saunders, who carried consecrated Banners to them. The next year after San
Joseph was likewise sent thither with seven hundred Spanish and Italian
Soldiers, and the Popes promise of ten hundred thousand Crowns, to carry on
the work of Rebellion; and to them joined the Earl of Desmond and his Brothers;
but they were all happily defeated.

But these projects likewise failing, they conspire the death of the Queen, and
make several Attempts to murder her; first by one Somervile and Hall, Priests;
and one of them being condemned was found secretly murdered, for fear he should
discover others. After this followed the practices of Mendoza the Spanish
Ambassador here, with Throgmorton and Parry, who had Letters of plenary
Indulgence, Pardon and Remission of all their sins sent them by the Pope, for
killing the Queen; And the same year, Savage made the like vow to murder the
Queen, being instigated thereto by Gifford and Hodgson two Popish Priests.

A while after Babington upon the same principles ergaged to commit the like
wicked act, by the procurement of one Ballard a Jesuit, but being happily
discovered, diverse of them were condemned, and justly executed for the same,
and were registered for Saints and Martyrs in the Romish Calender. Yet by the
means of the French Ambassador one Stafford and Moody were dealt withal to
commit the like Villainy, Moody proposing to lay a bag of Gunpowder under the
Queens Bedchamber.

But this like the rest being happily prevented, the Pope stirs up his Dear
Son, Philip the Second King of Spain, openly to invade England, which he did in
the Year 1588. who though in Queen Marys time he pretended great kindness to
the Queen, yet now in hopes of gaining England and Ireland, which the Pope had
bestowed upon him, he comes to take possession thereof, with a vast and (as the
Pope Christened it) Invincible Armado, consisting of an hundred and thirty tall
Ships, extraordinary well furnished, and containing fifty seven Thousand eight
hundred and eight Tun, wherein were Eight Thousand six hundred Seamen, Twenty
Thousand Soldiers, two thousand Galley Slaves; besides Gentlemen and
Volunteers in abundance; so that there was scarce a Family in Spain, who had
not either a Son, Brother, or Cousin in the Fleet.

There were likewise aboard them two thousand six hundred and thirty great
Ordnance, with Powder, Bullets, Match, Muskets, Pikes, Spears, Swords, and all
things proportionable, with Knives, Daggers, Skeins, Chains and Whips, to
Torment and cut the Throats of the poor English Protestants; and with them came
swarms of those Locusts called Capuchins, Mendicants Jesuits, and other
Officers of the Sacred Order of the Inquisition, as they profanely call it.

And besides all this, there lay in Flanders fifty thousand old Soldiers, and
two hundred eighty eight Vessels, ready to transport them, under the command of
the Duke of Parma; all the King of Spains best Soldiers, even as far as
America, being drawn forth for this Holy War: The whole of this Expedition
having cost the Spaniard twelve Millions of Crowns before their setting forth;
the Pope likewise contributing a Million of Gold to so pious a design. But the
goodness and mercy of God at that time defended England from the gaping Jaws of
destruction, and discomfited this Mighty Armado, and all its mighty
preparations, and sent them home full of shame, loss and confusion; so that of
one hundred thirty four Ships that set sail out of Lisbon only thirty three
returned: the Spaniard losing in this Voyage Eighty one Ships, and above
thirteen thousand five hundred Soldiers, and two thousand more taken Prisoners
in England, Ireland, and the Low Countries, the rest of the Navy being lost and
destroyed by the English, the Dutch, the Seas, Rocks, Sands and Tempests, all
seeming to conspire to the defeating of this proud and Insolent attempt.

But these sort of People will never take notice of Gods Judgments upon their
wicked designs and enterprises, and notwithstanding all this, they shut their
Eyes and will not see that God is against them: for they no sooner recover
breath, but they send over new Commissions, and more cursed Emissaries
disguised in all shapes into England, with new Plots, Contrivances and designs;
Lopez and his Confederates, Cullen, York, Williams, Squire, Hesket, all enter
into a Conspiracy to kill the Queen, being constantly encouraged by the Jesuits
and the Spanish Ministers of State. And these proving abortive, in the year
1599. the Earl of Tyrone is stirred up to make a new Rebellion in Ireland,
having the same Pardons and Indulgences sent them as are usually given by the
Popes to those that go to fight against the Turks. And in the year 1601. the
King of Spain sends a great Fleet of Soldiers to Kinsale in Ireland, for the
assistance of the Rebels. But notwithstanding all these wicked and execrable
designs, this glorious and Heroic Queen of blessed memory, having outlived
Four Kings and Eight Popes, dyed in Peace, and left her flourishing Kingdoms to
her Successor King James.

And now the Papists being thus disappointed of their great hopes and
expectations, by the succession of a Protestant King to the Crown of England,
and thereby uniting into one Body, Scotland, England and Ireland; one would
have Imagined that all their contrivances would have been dashed, since they
could not well think that so long and well settled a Reformation in Church and
State, could very easily be broken and confounded; yet still they give not
over, but encourage one another in their wickedness, and the Pope sent over two
Bulls to deprive King James of the Crown, and sought to raise divisions and
dissentions amongst us.

But God continuing to frustrate all their designs, they now grew as it were
desperate, and entered upon the most barbarous and Hellish Plot and contrivance
that ever was hatched in the Brains or Hearts of men, which is that which we
call the Gunpowder Treason, and which we yearly commemorate upon the Fifth of
November, they designing to act it on that day in the year 1605.

This horrid design was contrived by diverse Jesuits, Priests, and other English
Papists, who by undermining the Parliament House, and planting there Thirty six
Barrels of Gunpowder, intended by firing the same when both Houses were
sitting, to have blown up and destroyed, not only the King as the Head of the
Kingdom, but with him his Queen, the Prince, and all the Royal Issue, together
with the Clergy, Nobility, and the chief of the Gentry of the whole Kingdom;
all should have perished together at one Blow, and have become a Sacrifice to
the enraged Lusts of these Bloody-minded Papists. A Plot and Villainy that no
Age can parallel, no Country ever could produce the like, and which was as
miraculously prevented and detected, at if it were by the immediate finger of
God, who discovered their treasonable practices, even within their dark Vaults
and Cellars, when the very Train was laid, and fire almost put to it: And in
this horrid Conspiracy, Catesby, Piercy, Faux, Digby, Garnet, Hall, etc all
Popish Priests, were considerable Actors and Promoters, and all sworn to
secrecy, with Horrid Oaths and Imprecations, taking the Holy Sacrament, and
engaging themselves one to another thereby, and by their Faith in the Holy
Trinity, never to shrink from the Execution of this their Hellish Intention,
till they had performed the same: They were likewise promised from abroad Ships
and Men, and ten hundred thousand Crowns to carry on their work.

And though this horrid Conspiracy has been sufficiently discovered and made
plain, by the confession of some of the Conspirators who were executed, and by
writings under their own hands; yet according to their usual Impudence, which
they learned of their Predecessor Nero, (who when he had set Rome on Fire,
charged it upon the Christians) the Papists intended to have laid that wicked
Act upon the Puritans; and since this they have endeavored to make the world
believe that it was a Contrivance of King James, thereby endeavoring since
they could not blow up the King with Gunpowder to blast his good Name, and to
make him odious to Posterity.

But three Kingdoms are not so easy to be deluded, neither are we so horridly
impious, to mock God so solemnly with yearly Prayers and Thanksgivings; neither
need we think it so strange since Lies and Impudence are the grand supporters
of the Papal Kingdom, without which such a medly of Nonsense and Foolery would
be hooted out of the world.

And from that time to this very day, the Papists have been and are the Grand
Disturbers of these Nations: And it is sufficiently manifested that they had no
small hand in our late Troubles, since which they have continually sought the
ruin and destruction of all Protestants, by all manner of cursed ways and
methods imaginable.

In the year 1666. Sept. 2. about two a Clock in the Morning, there began a sad
and lamentable Fire in a Bakers House in Pudding-Lane near Fishstreet-hill,
London, which raged with extreme Violence, being accompanied with a strong
North-east wind, so that despising all means used for its extinguishing, it
spread far, and near sometimes with and sometimes against the wind, and so
continued for the space of near four days, till it had burnt down thirteen
thousand two hundred houses, which stood upon three hundred thirty seven Acres
of Ground within the Walls, and sixty three Acres three Roods without; besides
eighty nine Parish Churches, the most spacious Cathedral of St. Paul the Royal
Exchange, the Great Guild Hall, the Custom-House, many Magnificent Halls of
Companies, several principal City Gates, and other public Edifices; which was
accompanied with the loss of vast quantities of rich Household Stuff, and Goods
of all sorts, but especially four or five; that is, Books of which alone were
lost near the value of an hundred and fifty thousand pound; Tobacco, Sugar,
Wiens, and Plumbs, being heavy goods: So that the whole loss is computed by an
Ingenious Person to be Nine Millions and nine hundred thousand pounds; and yet
not above six or eight persons through Gods Providence were burnt in this vast
desolation.

Upon the Eighteenth of September, the Parliament met, and the Commons
appointed a Committee to examine into the Causes of the Fire, and to take
Informations concerning it; and in a short time so many and such very
considerable Informations were brought in, that it was no longer doubtful but
the Papists were the Contrivers and Managers of this dreadful Fire.

For among other things it plainly appeared, that diverse of the Popish Party
were made acquainted with it before it happened: For Mr. Light of Ratcliff
deposed. That being in discourse with Mr. Richard Langhorn (since Executed for
High Treason) in February, before the Fire, concerning Religion, Langhorn took
him by the hand and said to him, You expect great things in sixty six, and
think that Rome will be destroyed, but what if it be London?

A Frenchman told one Elizabeth Styles, in April before the Fire, that the
English Maids would love the French men better when there was not an house left
standing between Temple-Barr, and London Bridge: To which she replied, She
hoped his eyes would never see that: He said, This will happen betwixt June and
October.

Dr. Oats in his Narrative, page 22. says, That in July 1678. being in
discourse with one Strange a Jesuit, Strange told him that they had got
fourteen thousand pound by the Fire of London in 1666. and that they spent
seven hundred Fireballs to effect their Villainy; and that when the
Fire-Merchants were at work, then other Papists both men and women were
employed by them to plunder what they could; that they had a Warehouse in
Wildstreet, where some of their stolen Goods were laid, and other Goods they
concealed in Somerset House, as Hollands, Cambricks, Fine Cloth, and some
considerable quantities of Plate, and a Box of Jewels. Dr. Oats asked Strange,
How the King came to escape (for it seems his death was designed then?) Strange
replied, Indeed they were resolved to have out him off, but seeing him so
industrious about Quenching the Fire, they could not find in their hearts to do
it; Strange said, there were about Fourscore and six employed in it; and John
Grove since Executed for high Treason, told Dr. Oats, that he fired Southwork,
and that the Society of Jesuits got two thousand pounds by that Fire.

Robert Hubert, a French Papist of Normandy, began this Fire in London, being
hired thereto by Stephen Peidelow likewise a Papist; and Hubert observing the
ruin and desolation that followed, could not be quiet till he had freely
discovered the whole matter; Affirming that by Peidelows directions he put a
Fire-ball to the end of a long pole, and lighting it with a piece of Match put
it into the Bakers window, and stayed till the house was in a Flame. A French
Merchant went to Hubert in the White Lion Prison in Southwark, and told him, He
did not believe him Guilty of what he had confessed: Hubert replied, Yes Sir, I
am guilty of it, and have been brought to it by the instigation of Mr.
Peidelow, but not out of any malice to the English Nation, but from a desire of
reward which be promised me upon my return into France. A while after Hubert
was Tried and Executed for this horrid Fact, owning and acknowledging to the
last, his doing thereof by the Instigation of Pildelow.

But this not doing their work, they took diverse other methods for carrying on
their design which they had very near brought to persection in the year 1678.
had not the Divine Providence most eminently made use of Dr. Titus Oats in the
Discovery thereof; who notwithstanding the reproaches of his Popish
adversaries, was liberally Educated in St. John's College in Cambridge, where
he took his Degree, and afterward proceeded Doctor in Divinity at Salamanca in
Spain, no contemptible University. In the year 1672. he was Vicar of Bobbing in
Kent, but the Air not agreeing with him, he left it; and was for some time
Minister near Chichester in Sussex, and afterward came to be Chaplain to the
Duke of Norfolk, with an ample testimony of his sober Life and Conversation;
and whilst he was there, he overheard some whisperings among the Popish
Priests, (who were very conversant in that Family) that there was some Great
Design in hand, but could not learn the particulars. He had heard from his
Protestant Friends, and had read in Sir Hammond (...) History of King King
Charles the First, (...) other Judicious Authors, That the Papists had for many
years carried on a design to introduce Popery once more into these Kingdoms;
which made him desire to know the bottom thereof, and if it were possible to
prevent it: To this end, he more freely conversed with that Party than he
formerly used to do, and seemed dissarisfied in some things concerning our
Church, and desired to discourse with some Jesuits who are accounted the most
Learned Men of the Popish faction.

This upon some Cautions he obtained, and after diverse Conferences with them
(in which he suffered himself to be overcome,) he was formally reconciled to
the Church of Rome: and a while after seeming to aspire to a higher degree of
Persection, he desired to be admitted into the Order of the Jesuits, which
after three days consideration they consented to; and because he was a man of
years, being about Twenty eight, they would not employ him as a Novice, but
made him a Messenger of the Society.

This being the mark he aimed at, they sent him with Letters to Val^dolid in
Spain, which he judging to contain something of their Hellish contrivances,
dexterously opened by the way, and thereby made some discovery of their wicked
Intentions: However, he managed their Affairs with so much satisfaction, that
in a short time they made him privy to their most secret Consultations, and
keeping short Notes of all things of Concernment, he was thereby in a Capacity
to give an account of so many several particulars a he has discovered; which
have had the happiness to be confirmed by other Circumstances and Evidence, and
have not the least contradicted one another, nor those other Papers which have
been found elsewhere, nor differed from the Informations that have been given
in by Mr. (...), Mr. Dugdale, Mr. Jennism, Mr. Mowbray, Mr. Baldron, and
others, whom God has since raised up, further to clear and unmask this
detestable and bloody Conspiracy.

Dr. Oats was resolved, as much as in him lay, to prevent their Traitorous
designs upon his Majesty's Life, though he endangered his own thereby, since he
observed that all their Contriv^n^es were ripe, and there only wanted the Fatal
Blow to destroy the Life of his Sacred Majes^y, and the Religion and Liberties
of these three Kingdoms; and whereas Father Woitebread the Provincial of the
Jesuits, had engaged Dr. Oats (before his last return into England) to
^^^assinate and murder Israel Tongue Doctor of Divinity, because he had
translated a Book Entitled The Jesuits Morals, and had promised him Fifty
pound as a reward for the same, Dr. Oats after his coming over became
acquainted with Dr. Tongue, and finding him to be a person of Trust and
Integrity, he gave him an Account of his Assassination, and likewise some Heads
of the Plot in General. After which they both seriously Consulted together of
the best methods for making this necessary Discovery: since they were sure to
meet with great opposition therein.

At last they concluded to acquaint Mr. Christopher Kirby therewith, as a
person whom for his Loyalty, Courage and Zeal for the Safety of his Majesty's
Person, and the Protestant Religion, they judged very fit and capable to assist
them; and therefore on Monday, August 12. 1678. Dr. Tongue snewed Mr. Kirby
Forty three Articles drawn up in writing, desiring him that without making any
other Person acquainted therewith, he would discover the same to the King; and
Mr. Kirby very generously undertook the same, and accordingly the next morning
in St. James's Park, he humbly acquainted his Majesty, That his Enemies had a
Design against his Life, and humbly beseeched his Majesty to use all Caution
for he did not know but he might be in danger in that very walk. But his
Majesty armed with his Native goodness and Innocence, seemed more surprised
with the strangeness of the News, than with the apprehension of the danger, and
only asked, How that could be? To which Mr. Kirby replied, That it might be, by
being shot at: And gave a part^^cular account, that there were two men, Grove
and Pickering by name, that watched an opportunity to shoot his Majesty, and
that another person was hired to Poison him.

His Majesty ordered further Scrutiny should be made into the business; and a
while after Doctor Oats having written fair Copies of his Informations, upon
the 28. of September, 1678. went to Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and made Oa^h of
the truth and reality thereof; Sir Edmundbury defiring to keep a Copy of the
Informations himself, as having never before perused them, which it may be was
the occasion of his horrid Murder, which soon after followed.

The Plot in General seemed to be by Fire and Sword to subvertand destroy the
Protestant Religion, and established Government of these three Kingdoms, and to
reduce them to Popery: The chief Conspirators being Innocent the 11th now Pope
who in The Congregation for propagating the Faith, held about December. 1677. and
consisting of about 350. Persons, Declared, All his Majesty's Dominions to be
part of St. Peter's ^atrimony, as forfeited to the Holy See for the Heresy of
the Frince and People, and to be disposed of as he should hink sit; And our
English Cardinal Howard wa^ appoint by the Pope to take Possession of England
in his Name, who was likewise made Archbishop of Canterbury, and other Popish
Priests were made Bishops in England, all the present Bishops being designed to
be removed from their Dignities: Johannes Paulus de Oliva, Father General of
the Jesuits was to give Directions to the Provin^ial of the Jesuits in London,
how to manage their Affairs.

Monsieur ^e Chese, a Jesuit, Consessor to the French King, was likewise
concerned; with whom Edward Coleman held correspondence; Also Strange and
Whitebread Provincials of the Jesuits, and the Benedictine Monks of the Savoy
were in this cursed Conspiracy, and the Jesuits and Seminary Priests, of whom
there were at that time in England about Eighteen Hundred.

Diverse Lay Persons of Quality were drawn in, who were to command Forces, and
to execute the Great Offices of the Realm; as the Lord Arundel of Warder was
appointed Lord Chancellor of England, the Lord Powis Lord Treasurer, Sir
William Godolphin Lord Privy Seal, Edward Coleman Secretary of State; and for
the Military part, Lord Bellasi^ to be Lord General, Lord Petters Lieutenant
General, Sir Francis Ratoliff Major General, John Lambert Adjutant General,
Richard Langhorn Advocate General, who had Commissions sent them from Paulus de
Oliva, and directed from Rome to Mr. Langhorn. This was so great and glorious a
work, that the chiefest of the Romish Clergy through Europe were engaged
therein; so that it cannot be said to be the Act or Contrivance of any few
particular Persons, but The unanimous undertaking of their whole Church, and so
to their everlasting Infamy ought to be Recorded.

Now as to the Means whereby this was to be accomplished, the first and chief
was, By Murdering his Sacred Majesty, which was to be accomplished either by
Pistolling of him, wherein Pickering and Grove were engaged; or by Stabbing,
and this to be done by Conyers and Anderton, Benedictine Monks, or four Irish
Ruffians. Or lastly by Poisoning, for which Money was paid to the Undertaker.

2. Another means was by firing London, Westminster and the parts adjacent, and
likewise other Cities and great Towns in England, immediately upon the Murder
of his Majesty.

3. By a General Massacre; to which purpose they had designed to raise an Army,
which was to consist of Fifty Thousand men, to be Listed in and about London:
The Officers to be all Resolute Papists, and for the most part French and
Irish; and these they gave out were enough to out the Throats of One Hundred
Thousand Protestants, especially being taken upon a Surprise, when the Militia
of London was undisciplined and unprovided. Care was taken likewise about
securing Ireland and Scotland to their Interest.

Great sums of Money were provided for the necessary charge of this mighty
undertaking, and it was discoursed, that the Jesuits in England had purchased a
great Estate per Annum for that purpose; and that they had a great Stock in
ready Money; and were to receive Eleven thousand Crowns from Rome, Ten thousand
pound from Spain, and Ten thousand from France, besides several other very
considerable sums, for promoting this vast design. And this is a brief Abstract
of this bloody and Hellish Popish Plot, abundance of other particulars being
omitted; whereby it appears that this Horrid Plot is hardly to be paralleled in
any History, considering that without any provocation so many Thousand
Protestants were designed for slaughter, destruction and Murder, only to
advance and promote the Holy Catholic Religion, as they falsely call that Chaos
of Blasphemy and Cruelty.

Presently after this Remarkable discovery, happened the murder of that worthy
Magistrate Sir Edmundbury Godfry; who, as is before related, having taken the
Depositions of Doctor Oats, which was no more than any Justice of Peace by
Virtue of his Office was bound to do; yet it so enraged the Conspirators, that
they resolved to cut him off, to deter (as may be supposed) all other
Magistrates from intermedling with any A^^ai^s relating to the Plot.

But it pleased God that the Crafty were taken in their own snare, and they
Mortally wounded their own cause; for this bloody Enterprise allarum'd the
whole Kingdom, and left no doubt whether there were a Plot or no. It is not
certainly discovered how many there were in all, who conspired his Death; but
those that are known, are Father Kelly and Father Girald, two Irish Priests,
Robert Green Cushion-man to the Queens Chapel, Laurenet Hill Servant to Dr.
Godden Treasurer of the Chapel, Henry Berry who was Porter of Somersethouse,
and Mr. Miles Prance, a Goldsmith in Covent Garden; these were actually present
at the Murder; two others should have been there, but were not; that is,
Father Lewson a Priest, and one Philip Vernatti, who are since fled. There were
another Party to (...) done it, but did not, namely Pritchard, Le Fair, Welsh,
Keins, all Jesuits, and Mr. William Bedlow.

Of those that effected the Villainy, it is Judged that Vernatti, and some other
Popish Priests undertoo^ it, and that they drew (...) Green, Hill, and Berry
first, and afterward engaged Mr. Prance, telling him. That Sir Edmundbury was
a bitter Persecutor of Catholics, and a particular Enemy to her Majesty's
Servants, (whereof Mr. Prance reckoned himself one:) And that he had lately
examined People against them, and had got Depositions to fix base Crimes and
Scandals on their Religion, and that the Catholics would be ruined, unless ^he
were taken ^ff; and therefore it was necessary for the Glory of God, and good
of the Church, that it should be effected; and that there should be a good
reward given them for it: And when Mr. Prance scrupled it, the two Priests,
Girald and Kelly told him, It was no sin, but a work of Charity, and so far
from being a Murder, that it was a Meritorious work, and be ought to assist in
i.

Having thus resolved of his Death, they consulted several times how to effect
it; but at last, upon Saturday, October. 12. 1678. Hill went to Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey's house in the Morning, but what he said to him is not known, and then
taking his leave, went to Girald and Green, and staid with them hard by,
waiting Sir Edmundburies going forth, which was about Ten or Eleven a Clock;
they dogged him up and down all day, till about seven a Clock in the Evening,
and then Green came to Prances house, and told him that they had set him, but
did not name where, only near St. Clements; and that Prance must hasten down to
the Watergate at Somerset house, where he should find Kelly and ^erry; which
he did, and they three waited there till about Nine a Clock at night, then Hill
came in haste, and told them he was coming, and that they must pretend a
Quarrel, and he would fetch him in; Kelly and Berry began a seeming Quarrel,
and just as Sir Edmundbury Godfre, was passing by the Gate, Hill who was
acquainted with ^im, steps out in a great deal of haste, and entreated him, For
Gods sake to come in, for there were two men a Quarelling, and he was afraid
there would be blood shed: He refuses at first, but the other being
importunate, he consented, and Hill entered the Gate first, after him Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey, and Girald and Green followed just behind. As soon as they
were in, Prance watched at the Watergate that no body came that way, Berry was
to secure the Stairs and pass^ge by the Chapel; but first he and Kelly who
pretended to Quarrel, stood at the end of the rail by the Queens Stables, and
as Sir Edmundbury went down toward them, Green suddenly threw a twisted
Handkerchief, or Cravat about his neck, and presently all four pulled him down,
and throtled him, so as he could make no noise; then they threw him behind the
Rail, and gave him many Violent punches on the breast with their Knees, and
Green with all his force wrung his Neck almost round.

Having committed this Horrid Murder, they removed the body into Dr Goddins
Lodgings, and on Monday to another Room, on Tuesday from thence to another, but
on Wednesday night about twelve a Clock they carried his body toward Hamstead,
about two miles out of Town, and laid it at a place called Primrose-Hill,
Girald having run Sir Eamundbury's own Sword through him, and left it in, and
the Scabbard and Gloves they laid at a small distance from him, that it might
be supposed he had murdered himself.

The death of this worthy Gentleman caused great Consternation among the
People, and his Majesty was graciously pleased to publish a Pro^l^mation
promising 500. l. to the Discoverer. And a while after Mr. William Bedlow, came
in, and gave some Account of the Murder, and likewise of the Plo^ in General;
and upon the 21 of December being in the Lobby of the House of Commons, he
there saw Mr. Prarce whom he knew to be concerned, they two having Viewed Sir
^dmundbury's dead body together at Somerset House, and charging Mr. Prance with
the Murder, he was thereupon committed to Newgate, and a while after confessed
the whole matter as is before related.

Whereupon, Green, Hill and Berry were seized, and upon full Evidence
condemned, and executed; Kelly and Girald fled; there were likewise several
Traitors Tried and Executed for the Horrid Plot; that is, Edward Coleman,
William Ireland, Thomas Pickering, John Grove, Thomas Whitebread, William
Harcourt, John Fenwick, John Gaven, Anthony Turner, and Richard Langhorn.

The Papists being still disappointed in their cursed contrivances, yet
resolved not wholly to desist, but endeavored to stifle the Evidence by
promising them great rewards and encouragements not to discover the whole of
what they knew, or to deny what they had deposed; and upon this account Mr.
Redding, tampered with Mr. Bedlow; Mris. Price and Mr. Tasborough endeavored
to corrupt Mr. Dugdale; Osburn and Lane designed to invalidate the Evidence of
Dr. Oats: But these ill practices being discovered, some of the persons
concerned were Fined and Imprisoned, and others set in the Pillory; after which
the Papists had several other Contrivances to throw off the Plot from their own
party, but all will not do; for certainly he cannot pretend to be a good
Protestant, who (after his Majesty's repeated Proclamations for the discovery
and apprehension of the Plotters, after the Execution of so many of the
Conspirators, upon the clearest Evidence imaginable, and after the Votes and
Proceedings in both Houses of Parliament thereupon) shall in the least doubt of
the reality of this horrid and damnable Popish Plot; as it is fully expressed in
the Vote of both Houses, March 15. 1679.

Resolved, Nemine Contradicente by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons in Parliament Assembled; That they do declare, that they are fully
satisfied by the Proofs they have heard, that there now is, and for diverse
years last past has been, an horrid and treasonable Plot and Conspiracy,
contrived and carried on by those of the Popish Religion, for the Murdering of
his Majesty's Sacred Person, and for Subverting the Protestant Religion, and
the Ancient and Established Government of this Kingdom.

John Brown Cleric. Parliam.

NOtwithstanding the clear and plain discovery of these Popish Intrigues, yet
the Papists and their adherents were still resolved if possible to stifle their
horrid Plot; and many Arts and Tricks were used to suppress it, and several
sham Plots were set up to ensnare and ruin the soberest part of the Kingdom;
For the better managing whereof, witnesses were raked out of Prisons and Jails
to swear against Persons the freest both in reputation and life, from the
suspicion of all such crimes as were laid to their charge, and Juries were
likewise tampered with, so that innocent people were frighted thereat, since
villains were so easily credited, if they swore against any that stood in the
Papists way; upon this account fell the Noble L. Russel, Coll. Sydney, Mr.
Cornish and several others, so that every man was afraid of another, and men
durst hardly converse with each other. After this followed the seizing of the
Charter of London, and diverse others in the chief Cities and Towns in England;
The Bishops were imprisoned for Petitioning; Maudlin College had its legal
Possessors turned out and was filled with none but Papists, and diverse other
outrageous acts were committed against all Law and Right, in order to the
perfecting the great work of converting these three Kingdoms to Popish
superstition, and reducing them to slavery and arbitrary Government; But the
People of England ha^ing suffered these and many other indignities, they at
length were so extremely provoked, that they resolved if possible to free
themselves from the Chains they say prepared for them, and therefore the
principal Nobility and Gentry sent an invitation to his Highness the Prince of
Orange to entreat him to come to their assistance, who accordingly landed in
England and with his preserce only, by the Almightys help, put all our Popish
Enemies to flight and restored to us our former state of happiness and
tranquillity, for which the whole Nation by their Representatives made it their
humble request that his Highness with his Royal Consort would be pleased to
accept of the Crown, and they were accordingly Proclaimed, King and Queen with
all manner of Joy and satisfaction Feb. 13. 1688.

For which unspeakable blessing let us conclude with the Thanksgiving of the
Church of England set forth by Authority upon the discovery of that Hellish
Popish Plot called the Gunpowder Treason in 1605.

NOT unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name be ascribed all honor and
glory in all Churches of the Saints ^roughout all Generations; for thou, Lord,
have discovered the Snares of Death, thou have broken them, and we are
delivered; be thou still our mighty Protector, and scatter our Cruel Enenies
which delight in Blood; Infatuate their Counsel, and root ^^t that Babylonish
and Antichristian ^ect, which say of Jerusalem, Down with it, down with it even
to the Ground: and to this end strengthen the hands of our Gracious King, the
Nobles ^^d Magistrates of the Land, with Judgment and Justice, to ^ut off these
workers of Iniquity, whose Reli^ion is Rebellion, whose Faith is Faction, whose
Practice is Murdering of Souls and Bodies; and to root them out of the
Consines and Limits of this Kingdom, that they may never prevail against us,
and Triumph i^ the ruin of thy Church. And give us grace by true and seri^us
Repentance to avert these and the like Judgments from us. This, Lord, we
earnestly crave at thy merciful hands, together with the continuance of thy
powerful Protection over our Dread Sovereign, the whole Church, and these
Realms, and the speedy confusion of our Implocable Enemies; And that for thy
dear Son's sake, our only Mediator and advocate. Amen.

An Abslract of the late Persecutions and Inhumane Oppressions of the
Protestants in France in 1686, and 1687.
THough the barbarous cruelty and Treachery of of the Romanists is already
sufficiently demonstrated, and the World thereby fully convinced that Popish
Treaties are not to be relled on, yet their new and horrid Barbarities in
France since the Massacre at Paris and those other Violations of the most
Sacred Oaths, and Engagements, may convince the most obstinate that they make
it a point of Religion to destroy Protestants, over whom that Church pretends
to have a Sovereign and Absolute Dominion, of which Thousands of French
Protestants now in England confirm the truth, who having felt the smart of a
severe Persecution in France are fled from thence to avoid the extreme fury and
insupportable violence thereof; But though the generality may have heard much
discourse of the French Persecutions, and have been very bountiful in relieving
these miserable People, yet I suppose few know the particular Barbarities and
Inhumanities which they have suffered from their merciless Enemies; To inform
them therefore I have thought fit to make a brief abstract of some notorious
Villainies committed by the Papists against them, since a large Volume would not
contain the innumerable Cruelties they have exercised upon these innocent Souls.

It is known to all intelligent Persons that for the great Services which the
Protestants performed to Henry the Fourth (called the Great) King of France and
Grandfather to the present King in asserting his Rights to the Crown against
the Papists who were then in Rebellion against him; that great Prince being
willing to demonstrate his gratitude to them, confirmed to them an entire
Liberty of Conscience by a Law called the Edict of Nants, whereby they were to
enjoy all m^nner of Liberty and Privileges both in Religious and Civil matters
with his other Subjects, which he declared should be perpetual and inviolable,
and which was confirmed by his Son Lewis the 13th and likewise by the present
King at their coming to the Crown.

Lewis the 14th was very young when he ascended the Throne, and soon after the
Prince of Conde raised a Civil War in the Kingdom against him, being assisted
by the Papists, but the Protestants by their Signal Loyalty to him overthrew
the designs of his Enemies, and settled that Crown on his head which he wears to
this day, and of which he pretended then to be so sensible that he made a
public Declaration of it at St Germains in 1652. And every one endeavored to
proclaim loudest the merits of the Protestants, the Queen Mother her self
acknowledging, That they had preserved the State; Though to show the little
faith is to be given to men of that Religion, the Kings Ministers instilled
into his mind, That since the Protestants were so potent to set up the King,
they night likewise upon another occasion remove him again; From this
Diabolical reasoning it was resolved they must be suppressed and ruined, and
therefore when the Kingdom was settled in peace, three Protestant Towns Rochel,
Montauban and Millan which had showed the greatest zeal (...) the Kings
Service, were plundered by the Soldiers, and otherwise impoverisht; These were
the forerunners of that general destruction designed against these inno^ent
People which were every day succeeded by others ^n order to their utter
extirpation. They first condemned their Churches and Exercises of Religion by
establishing Commissioners, who pretended the Protestants had exceeded the
grants that were allowed them, though their Proceedings herein were so very
unjust that the Judges often received order to condemn them, when by the great
evidence of their right they declared they could not in Conscience do it; Yea
in civil affairs and controversies about Lands, Houses, or Debts, Religion was
always urged, the Monks, Priests and the rest of that Crew crying out in Courts
of Justice, I plead against an Heretic, against an Enemy to the State, and to
the Kings Religion, whom he would have to be destroyed; So that the Judge durst
not declare in their favor, though never so much wronged, lest he should be
counted a Favourer of Heretics; And upon complaint, the Protestants were told,
You have your remedy in your own hands; why don't you turn Catholics?

After this succeeded Processes to all the Cities, Towns, and Parishes in
France, to empower the Curates and Churchwardens, to inquire exactly what had
been said or done, for twenty years past by the Protestants, about Religion or
any other matters, and to inform the Justices of the place, who were to punish
them with the utmost severity, whereby the Prisons were soon fill^d, there
being no want of false witnesses, and which was most horrible, though the
Judges were very sensible they were perjured villains, yet they countenanced
and encouraged them in swearing things that they knew were absolutely false,
whereby many innocent and virtuous persons were whipped, and sent to the Galleys
for Slaves; But the Ministers suffered most thereby, who seldom preached a
Sermon but that a Troop of Priests and Monks were present as Informers, and
Observators, who charged them with things they never thought of, by turning
them into a contrary meaning; Yea pretended to divine their thoughts and make
them criminal; For if a Minister spoke of Egypt, Phara^h, the Israelites, or of
good and bad people; These Spies report that by Egypt and the wicked, they
meant the Catholics, and by the Israelites the Protestants; Yea the Judges and
Ministers of state encouraged these Rascals, so that they filled the Jayls with
poor Protestants where they were kept whole years together, and sometimes
suffered corporal punishment.

They then proceeded to deprive Protestants of all Public Offices and
Employments, directly contrary to the Edict of Henry the great, who made an
express Article to the contrary; Yea to hinder them from excercising several
Arts and Trades whereby to maintain their Families; This was in 1669, and in
1680, and 1681. all Lords and Gentlemen were ordered to discharge all their
Protestant Officers and Servants; Nay they would not suffer any Protestant
Mid-Wives to do their Office, but expressly ordained that no Women should
receive any assistance in that condition but from Popish Mid-Wives; by these
strange and unheard of Methods many thousand Persons and Families were reduced
to misery and ruin. But because some could still sustain themselves, there was
an Order of Council that the New-Converts, as they call them, that is, those
who turned from Protestants to Papists, should not be obliged to pay their
debts in three years, which fell heavily upon the Protestants who were
generally concerned with them, and hereby they found the secret to recompense
the Apostates at the charge of those who continued, constant, who were likewise
prohibited to sell or alienate their Estates to support themselves, the King
making void all contracts of that kind; Yea to add to their misfortunes, they
were forbid by diverse Edicts under severe penalties not to go out of France to
get their Bread in other Countries, which reduced them to the horrible necessity
of dying with hunger in their own Country.

Their Cruelty ceased not here, for they laid unreasonable and severe Taxes
upon the Protestants, so that he who before was charged at Forty or Fifty
Livers was now raised to seven or eight hundred, which if not instantly paid
they quartered Dragoons upon them till they had discharged the utmost farthing.
In 1681 an Edict came out that Children at seven years of age might abjure the
Protestant Religion, forcing their Parents to give them yearly allowances above
their ability, which occasioned the seducing of many young people, and brought
ruin to a multitude of Families, yea they took Children from their Parents and
put them into Covents with strict charge not to let their Fathers or Mothers
see them, even Persons of the best Quality were so ^^ed, the ancient Duke De la
Force having seven of his Chil^ren taken from him the eldest not exceeding
twelve years, and the like was done to other Noblemen; a barbarity never heard
of in the most Savage Nations. They prohibited the Protestant Ministers to be
Schoolmasters and suppressed three Universities which were absolutely granted
by the Edict of Nants. They forbid Papists to marry Protestants, or Ministers
to hinder their people directly or indirectly from embracing the Roman
Religion; These and a murtitude of Grievances more they groaned under, when the
Elector of Brandenburgh being pleased to intercede on their Behalf, the King
assured him, He was very well satisfied with the behavior of his Protestant
Subjects, and that so long as he lived no wrong should be done them; And yet at
the same instant, according to the usual perfidy of that party, he gave order
for demolishing several of their Churches, and shut up others, imprisoning
their Pastors, and using diverse manifest injustices against those he pretended
to protect.

Yea in 1682. When they had much advanced the work of their destruction, the
King declared, That he had not the least intention to infringe the Edict of
Nantes, but would most religiously observe it; Though at the same time he had
treacherously resolved in Council to Ruin and Destroy it. And accordingly in
1684. He absolutely concluded to cancel and make void that Edict, and to banish
all their Ministers out of the Kingdom, yet still declaring, That other
Protestants might live peaceably till it should please God to enlighten and
convert them; Which was only designed to ensnare and amuse them at present,
till they had by degrees incensed the Mobile against them to diminish the
horror they naturally have to Cruelty, to which end several young Priests were
sent about the Kingdom to inflame the multitude in their Sermons and Orations,
and by publishing Scandalous Satyrs and Lies against them; And for those of
greater Quality some Volumes were written against Calvinism and the
Reformation, one of whom affirmed highly, That the Catholic Faith must be
planted by Fire and Sword, alleging for proof thereof, the example of a King
of Norway, who converted the Nobles of his Country by threatening them, to slay
their Children before their eyes if they would not consent to have them
baptized, and to be baptized themselves.

The Protestants were very sensible of these things, and that further mischief
was designed against them, and therefore presented frequent Addresses to the
King, wherein they exposed their grievances with all humility and submission,
the last-being presented to the King himself by their Deputy General in March
1684. Expressed in Terms most capable of moving pity, yet produced no other
effect but the hastening what they had long before resolved on, which was the
using of open force to accomplish their ruin, which was effectually done some
months after in a manner so terrible and violent that there are few in
Christendom who have not heard the report of it. At first they quartered
Soldiers in all the Provinces almost at the same time, but chiefly Dragoons,
the most desperate Troops in the Kingdom; Terror and Dread marched before them,
and all France was filled with the news; That the King would no longer suffer
any Protestants in his Kingdom, and that they must resolve to change their
Religion, or else suffer the utmost cruelty that could be inflicted upon them.
They first summoned the Cities and Commonalties, and affembling the Inhabitants
of the Reformed Religion, told them, It was the Kings pleasure they should
without delay become Catholics, and if they would not do it freely they must
force them. The poor people surprised at the proposal answered, They were ready
to Sacrifice their Estates and Lives to the King, but their Consciences being
Gods, they could not in the same manner dispose of them.

Such answers immediately brought the Dragoons who were near hand upon them,
who instantly seized on all the Gates and Passages of the City, where they
placed Guards who came off with their Swords in their hands crying, Kill, Kill,
or else be Catholics; They lay upon the Protestants at free quarter, strictly
forbidding any to go out of their Houses, or to conceal any of their Goods or
Estates under great penalties, and the Papists were fordid to receive or any
way relieve them; the first days were spent in consuming all the Provisions the
house afforded, and Robbing them of Money, Rings, Jewels or any thing of Value;
After this they seized of all their goods in general, inviting the Papists to
come and buy them; Lastly they fell on their Persons, wherein they forbore no
wickedness nor Villainy to oblige them to change their Religion. Amidst a
thousand hideous cries, and blasphemies, they hung Men and Women up by the hair
of the head, or by the Feet, to the Roofs of their Chambers, or else to (...)
Hooks within the Chimneys, smoking them with w^^ps of wet straw till they were
no longer able to bear it, and when they were taken down, if they would not
recant their Religion, they immediately hung them up again; They threw them
into great fires purposely provided, and pulled them not out till half roasted:
They tied Ropes under their Arms, and plunged them up and down into Wells from
whence they would not take them till they had promised to turn Papists; They
tied them as Criminals to the Rack, and with a Funnel poured Wine down their
Throats till the fumes of it deprived them of their reason, and then made them
say they would be Catholics. They stripped them stark naked, and after a
thousand indignities they larded or stuck them with pins from head to foot.
They cut them with Penknives, and plucked them by the Nose with Red hot Pincers
and dragged them about the Rooms till they promised to be Catholics, or that
for weariness they let the poor wretches go; They beat them with Staves and
dragged them all bruised to the Churches, where their forced presence was
reckoned their abjuring the Protestant Religion. They kept them from sleeping
seven or eight nights and days together, relieving one another to keep them
waking; They threw buckets of Water on their Faces, and tormented them several
ways, by holding kettles over their Heads turned downwards, whereon they made a
continual noise till these poor creatures had even lost their senses; If they
found any sick in bed they had the cruelty to bring several Drums sounding an
Alarm about their beds for whole weeks together without intermission, till they
had promised to recant. In some places they tied Fathers and Husbands to the
bed-posts, and ravished their Daughters and Wives on the bed before their eyes;
In other places Rapes were publicly permitted for many hours together; They
plucked off the Nails from the hands and toes of others with most intolerable
pain; They burnt the feet of others. They blew up men and women with bellows
even till they were ready to burst.

If after these horrid Usages any refused to turn, they imprisoned them in
Close, Dark and Stinking Dungeons, exercising on them all manner of inhumanity;
In the mean time they demolished their Houses, destroyed their hereditary
Lands, cut down their Woods, and seized their Wives and Children, to imprison
them in Monasteries. When the Soldiers had consumed and destroyed all in the
House, the Tenants of their Lands furnished them with subsistence, to whom they
likewise sold the Lands; If any endeavored to escape by flight, they were
pursued and hunted in the Fields and Woods, and Shot at like Wild Beasts; The
Justices and Magistrates rode about the highways, stopping all without
exception, and using them like Prisoners of War; Neither fell this Storm only
on the common sort, Noblemen and Gentlemen were not exempted from it, who had
Soldiers also quartered on them, that plundered their houses wasted their
Goods, razed their Castles, cut down their Woods, yea their very Persons were
exposed to the insolence and barbarity of the Dragoons as well as others; which
to avoid, many Ladies and Persons of Quality hoped to find some retreat in
Paris, or at the Court, not imagining the Dragoons would come to seek them so
near the Kings presence; but they soon found their mistake, for immediately
there was an Order of Council, commanding them to leave Paris in fifteen days,
and return without delay to their own dwellings, prohibiting all persons to
entertain or lodge them in their houses; And some addrossing to the King with
complaints of such cruel usage, and beseeching his relief, had no other answer
but being sent Prisoners to the Bastile.

It is observable that usually in the head of these infernal Dragoons there
Marched a Squadron of Bishops and Priests to see that the Soldiers executed
the full Vengeance they desired upon the Protestants, who upon all occasions
did provoke and stir up the Soldiers to cruelty and barbarity, if they found
they had the least compassion and pity toward these poor Innocents. If at any
time the Master of an house had signed what they required, in hope to get rid
of the Dragoons, yet he was not freed from them for all this, if his Wife
Children or the meanest of his Servants did not do the same; and when any of
them fled, they continued to torment the Master or Father till he forced them
to come back, which being often impossible for him to do, the change of his
Religion did not at all avail him; When the poor Souls fancied they should be
at rest by signing a form of abjuration of the Protestant Religion, yet a while
after these cruel men made them sign another, which threw many into the very
depth of despair; Nay, after all these barbarous Usages and Compulsions they
forced these wretched people to acknowledge, That they embraced the Roman
Religion of their own accord, without being induced thereto by any violent
means; Though all these Frauds, violences and cruelties, and infinite numbers
more have been acted toward the Protestants in the face of the Sun, and before
Millions of eyewitnesses, and are notorious to all Europe; Yet this is another
method that their Persecutors have taken to shelter themselves from public
condemnation, by denying the Fact, and persuading the World, That force and
violence have had no share in the Conversions, but that they were Soft, Calm,
and Voluntary, and that if there were any Dragoons concerned therein, it was
because the Protestants themselves desired them that they might have a handsome
pretense to change their Religion; Was there ever so much impudence seen or
heard of, what will they not deny who are arrived to such a height of boldness?

The revoking the Edict of Nants (which was the M^gna Charta of the
Protestants) formerly resolved on, was put in Execution, Oct. 8. 1685. Whereby
all their Ministers were banished out of France being commanded to depart the
Kingdom in fifteen days, and supressing all Protestant Books whatsoever; It Is
said the Chancellor of France showed extraordinnry joy at the sealing this
Edict, but it lasted not long, this being the last thing he did, for as soon as
he came home from Fountain Bleau he fell sick and died in a few days; By this
Edict the King declares; That he had resolved upon this design ever since his
coming to the Crown, but had been hindered by his Wars against the Enemies of
the State, but being now at peace with all the Princes of Europe he wholly gave
himself to unite all his Subjects in the Catholic Religion, commanding that
all the Protestant Churches should be plucked down and demolished; That those
who will turn Papists shall be rewarded, and preferred; That no Children shall
be educated in the Protestant Religion; That those who are fled shall have four
months to return and recant, if not, their Goods and Estates to be confiscate.
That no Protestant presume to depart the Kingdom under the penalty of the men
being sent to the Galleys, and the women to forfeit their Bodies and Goods.

The very day this was published in Paris they began to demolish the Church of
Charenton, and the chief Minister was commanded to leave the City in twenty
four hours and the rest in fifteen days, but were neither permitted to dispose
of their Estates, nor to carry any of their effects with them, nor to take
along with them Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, or any of their kindred,
though many were infirm, decayed, and poor, and could not subsist but by their
means, yea they denied them their own Children if above seven years old, nay
some they took from them under that age; yea those that hanged on their Mothers
breasts, refusing to allow Nurses for their new born Infants to whom the
Mothers could not give suck.

Soon after, the former barbarities, or greater, if possible, were revived, of
which I shall give some few instances amongst many others, and so conclude this
dismal scene of sorrow. The Dragoons that quartered with Monsieur Solignac at
Montauban made his dining room a Stable for their Horses, though the furniture
thereof was valued at a thousand Livers and forced him to turn the Spit till
his arm was almost burnt by their continual throwing Wood on the fire; They
beat an old man almost to death, to force him to go to Mass, whilst the
constant Martyr to his last breath cried, He would never do it, and only
requested they would dispatch and make an end of him. Monsieur de Garrison one
of the chief men of the City, and an intimate Friend of the Intendant, went and
cast himself at his feet, imploring his protection, and conjuring him to rid
him of the Troopers, that he might have no force put upon his Conscience,
adding, That in recompense of the favor he begged of him, he would give him
all he had, which was to the value of about a Million of Livres, but all his
entreaties were so far from prevailing, that he ordered him for terror to be
worse used than the rest, by dragging him along the Streets.

Some of the lustiest Soldiers took their Landlords or others in the house,
and walking them up and down, continually tickled, and tossed them about like a
ball from each other, without giving them the least intermission, and keeping
them in that condition three days together, without Meat, Drink, or Sleep; When
they were so faint as not able to stand any longer on their Legs, they laid
them on a bed continuing to tickle and torment them as before, and when a
little recovered, forced them to rise again, lashing them with Rods, to prevent
their sleeping; When one party of these cursed Tormentors were tired and
wearied out, their Companions relieved them, by which infernal invention many
became distracted and mopish, and so continue; Isa^^ Faim a Citizen of
Negreplisse was hung up by the armpits, and tortured a whole night, by pinching
and tearing off his Flesh with Pincers, though thereby they were not in the
least able to shake his constancy. The Wife of one Roussion a Joiner, being
violently dragged by the Soldiers along the Streets to force her to hear Mass,
died of this cruel and inhumane treatment as soon as she reached the Church
Porch. They made a fire about a Boy of ten years of age, who continually with
hands and eyes lifted up to Heaven cried, My God, help me; And when they saw
the Lad resolved to die rather than renounce his Religion, they snatched him
from the fire when he was at the very point of being burnt.

In diverse places they have endeavored to tire out the Patience of the poor
Protestants, and overcome their constancy by applying red hot Irons to the
hands and feet of men, and to the Breasts of Women; At Nants they hung up
several Women and Maids by the feet, stark naked, and others by the armpits,
exposing them to public view which is certainly the most exquisite suffering
to the modesty of the fair Sex, and which touches the most tender part of
their Soul. They bound Mothers that gave suck, to posts, and let their little
Infants lie languishing in their sight without being suffered to suckle them
for many days, and all this while left the poor babes crying, moaning, and
gasping for life, and even dying for hunger and thirst, thereby to vanquish the
constancy of their tenderhearted Mother; Swearing they would never permit them
to give suck till they promised to renounce the profession of the Gospel.
Children of four or five years old were kept from Mea^ and Drink till they were
ready to famish, and were then brought to their Parents by the Dragoons who
swore bloudily, That except they would recant they must prepare themselves to
see their Children languish and die in their presence; If it happen that any by
their patience and courage stand out, the Soldiers go and acquaint their
Commanders, That they have done all they could, but without success, who in a
barbarous and surly tone answer them; You must return upon them, and do worse
than you have done, the King commands it; Either they must turn, or I must
burst and perish in the attempt; These are the pleasant flowery paths whereby
Papists allure Protestants to return to the Bosom of their Church.

Thirty two Companys of Foot with an Intendant, and the two Bishops of Again and
Periguex entered the City of Bergerack, and sending for two hundred of the
principal Citizens before them, told them, That the Kings express will and
pleasure was they should all go to Mass, and that in case of disobedience they
had order to compel them to it; To which the Citizens unanimously answered,
That if they were so resolved they had nothing else to do but to prepare
themselves to receive the punishment they should inflict; Whereupon thirty two
Troops more of Horse and Foot marched into the Town, who were all quartered
upon the Protestants, with express command not to spare any thing they had, and
to exercise all manner of violence upon them till they had extorted a promise
of conformity to their wills; These Wolves thus encouraged flew instantly upon
these Innocent sheep, rending and worrying them in such a manner as the
relation thereof cannot but strike horror and amazement; Whole Companys were
ordered to quarter upon one Citizen, and and when their Money was gone, they
sold their Horsehold-stuff for little or nothing; They bound and fettered
Father, Mother, Wife and Children, four Soldiers standing continually at the
door, to hinder any from succouring them, keeping them in this condition five
or six days together without Meat, Drink or Sleep; On one hand the Child cries
with the languishing tone of one ready to die, Ah my Father! Ah my Mother! What
shall I do, I must die I can endure no longer; The Wife on the other hand
cries, Alas! my Heart fails me, I faint, I die; Whilst their cruel Tormentors
are so far from being touched with compassion that from thence they take
occasion to torment them afresh, and to renew their tortures, affrighting them
with their Hellish Threats, accompanied with execrable Oaths and Curses,
crying, Dog, Bougre, what will thou not be converted, will thou not be
obedient? Dog, Bougre, thou must be converted, we are sent on purpose to
convert thee; And the Clergy who are witnesses of all these Cruelties, (with
which they feast their eyes) and who hear all their infamous and abominable
speeches, which ought to cover them with horror and confusion, yet only make it
a matter of sport and laughter.

A young woman was brought before the Council in order to oblige her to abjure
the Truth, which she boldly and manfully refusing was remanded back to Prison,
where they shaved her head, and singed the hair from other parts, and stripping
her stark naked led her through the Streets of the City, where many a blow was
given her, and Stones flung at her; After this they set her up to the neck in a
Tub full of Water, where when she had been a while they took her out, and put
upon her a Shift dipped in Wine, which as it dried and Stuck to her sore and
bruised body, they snatched off again, and then had another ready dipped in Wine
to clap upon her; this they repeated six several times, and when by this
inhumane usage her body was grown very raw, and tender, they demanded of her,
Whether she did not now find her self disposed to embrace the Catholic Faith?
As they term their Religion; But she being strengthened by the Spirit and love
of him for whose names sake she suffered all these extremities, undauntedly
answered; That she had before declared her resolution to them, which she would
never alter; and that though they had her body in their power, yet she was
resolved never to yield her Soul to them, but keep it pure and undefiled for
her heavenly Lover, as knowing that a little while would put an end to all her
sufferings, and give a beginning to her enjoyment of eternal bliss. Which words
further inraging them, and despairing of making her a Convert, they fastened
her to a Gibbet by the feet stark naked, with her head downward, and there let
her hang in that ignominious posture till she gave up the Ghost.

There was an old man in the City who having been long kept Prisoner in a deep
dungeon for the Protestant Profession, where his companions were darkness and
horror, and filthy creeping things, was brought at length before the Judges
with Vermin and Snails crawling upon his mouldred garment, who seeing him in
that loathsome condition, said to him, How now, old man, does not not your heart
begin to relent, and are not you willing to abjure your Heresy? To which he
answered, As for Heresy I profess none, but if by that word you mean my
Religion, you may assine yourselves that as I have thus long lived, so I hope
and am resolved by the grace of God to dye in it. With which reply they being
incensed, grew rougher with him; Do thou not see, said they, that the worms
are ready to devour thee? Well since thou art so resolved, we will send thee
back again to the loathsome place from whence thou came, that they may
dispatch thee, and consume thy obdurate heart. To which he replied in the words
of holy patient Job, I know that after worms have eaten this body, that in my
flesh I shall see God; And having so said he was remanded back to his Jail,
where he still continues if death has not put a period to his miseries. Some
Dragoons quartered with a Person whom they could not pervert who upon a time
being well filled with Wine, broke their Glasses at every health they drank,
and covered the floor with the fragments, and being in a merry humor would
needs go dance, telling their Host he must be one of their company, but that he
must first pull off his Stockings and Shoes, to move the more nimbly; in short
they forced him to dance barefoot upon the sharp points of Glass, which when
they had continued so long as they were able to keep him on his Legs, they laid
him on a Bed, and stripping him stark naked, rolled his body from one end of
the Room to the other upon the sharp Glass till his Skin was stuck full of the
fragments, and returning him to his bed sent for a Surgeon to take out all the
pieces of Glass out of his body which was not done without frequent incisions
and horrible and extreme, pain. Another having the unwelcome company of these
Villainous Soldiers, and having suffered extremely by them with the utmost
constancy, one of them looking earnestly on him, told him he disfigured himself
with letting his beard grow so long; who answering, That they were the cause of
it who would not let him stir out of doors to go to the Barber; The Dragoon
replied, I can do that for you as well as your Barber, telling him he must
needs try his Skill upon him; and so fell to work, but instead of shaving him,
flead all the Skin off his face. One of his Companions coming at the cry of
this poor sufferer, and seeing what he had done, seemingly blamed him for it,
and said he was a bungler, and then said to his Host; Come your hair wants
cutting too; and thereupon begins in a most cruel manner to pluck the hair,
Skin and all off his head, and flead that as the other had done his Chin; Thus
making a sport and merriment of the extreme sufferings of these miserable
wretches.

By these inhumane and more than barbarous means they labor to overcome the
most resolved patience, and to drive people to despair and faint-heartedness by
their Devilish inventions, refusing to give them death, which they desire, and
only keep them alive to torment them till they have v^^^^isht their courage,
telling them; The King will have obedient Subjects, but neither Martyrs nor
Rebels, and that they have order to convert them, but not to kill them. Let us
conclude with a prayer used by these blessed Souls in the agony of their
Spirits.

O great God, who from thy heavenly Throne do behold all the outrages done to
thy people, haste thee to help us! Great God whose compassions are infinite,
suffer thy self to be moved by our extreme desolation! If men be insensible of
the Calamities we suffer! If they be deaf to our cries, not regarding our
groans or supplications, yet let thy Bowels, O Lord, be moved, and affect thee
on our behalf. Glorious God, for whose names sake we suffer all these things,
who know our innocence and weakness, as well as the fury and rage of our
adversaries, and the small support and help we find in the World, Behold we
perish if thy pity do not rouse thee up to our relief; It is thou art our Rock,
our God, our Father, our Deliverer; We do not place our confidence in any but
in thee alone; Let us not be confounded because we put our must in thee; Haste
thee to our help make no long tarrying, O Lord our God and our Redeemer, Amen.

An Abstract of the Persecutions of the Protestants in Piedmont and Savoy in
the years 1686 and 1687.
NOtwithstanding a perpetual and inviolable Law was ordained and solemnly
confirmed to the Protestants for the free exercise of their Religion, in
Piedmont, by the several Dukes of Savoy, in the years 1638, 1649, 1654, and
1655. as you read before in the Persecution of the Waldenfes, yet the old Maxim
of the Romish Antichristian Church, That no Faith is to be kept with Heretics,
prevailed so much, that the most solemn Oaths and Protestations were
insignificant; For after that bloody Massacre in 1655, which seemed to have
irrecoverably destroyed the Waldenses, yet many escaped the fury of these
Butchers and defended their lives with such undaunted courage that they
defeated in several Rencounters a considerable party of their Enemies, and by
the mediation of several Protestant Princes and States a solemn Patent was
granted them, confirming all their privileges forever; Yet soon after the
Spanish Inquisitors violated the most essential points thereof, which since
they only opposed by petitions and complaints, their Implacable adversarys
believing they could oppress them without resistance; in 1663. they employed
Fire and Sword once more against them. The Waldenses knowing by experience that
to stand in their own defense was the only way to save themselves, were
constrained to take up arms, and defended themselves so well that they
reestablished their affairs again the same year; and in 1664 another solemn,
perpetual and irrevocable Patent was past and enrolled in the Senate, but was
executed with no better Faith than the former, yet not absolutely broken till
the year 1685; For though they had rendered the Duke of Savoy very considerable
services the year before, in the War of the Banditi of Mondavi; Yet now the
Governor of the Valleys of Piedmont published an order which forbid all
Foreigners to inhabit there, or stay above three days without permission,
under severe penalties; The Waldenses had already heard of the violences used
in France to compel people to change their Religion, but never believed it
would have been their own case till the Duke published an order, Jan. 31. 1686,
prohibiting the exercise of their Religion on pain of Death, and confiscation
of goods, and commanding all their Churches to be demolished, their Ministers
banished, and their Children to be educated in the Romish Religion, under the
penalties that their Parents should be sent to the Galleys; containing almost
the same things with the French Kings Declaration that annuals the Edict of
Nantes. It is impossible to express the fears and grief, wherewith the
Waldenses were seized at the sight of an Order so surprising, so unjust and
rigorous, whereby they were utterly deprived of their Liberty of Conscience,
yet judging this order was gained by surprise they present four Petitions to
the Duke of Savoy for revoking it, but found no r^^^ess, yea saw their
misfortune without remedy; when they understood, that the French King who had
hitherto protected them, had obliged the Duke to publish it, and caused his own
Troops to advance into Piedmont for the execution of it, and therefore they
resolved to defend themselves, and preserve their lives from the danger that
threatened them.

Mean time the Protestant Cantons of Switzerland being informed of this Order,
thought they ought not to abandon a People Persecuted for their Religion, and
therefore sent Ambassadors to the Duke, to know the reason thereof, who
returned no other answer but, That the engagements wherein he had entered with
France opposed the success of their Negotiation, whereby he had obliged himself
to extirpate all the Protestants out of his Country; Hereupon the Waldenses
fortified themselves the best they could to prevent the entry of French Troops,
yet afterward the Duke published an Order that if they would voluntarily depart
they should carry away what goods they pleased, but without firearms; But the
Waldenses having had such woeful experience of Popish Treachery, and being
satisfied that this Edict was nothing but a snare to entangle them, resolved
not to accept of it, and sent the Switzer Ambassadors, by whose mediation this
Edict was procured, their Resolutions in the matter, who used all imaginable
diligence to procure them more certain and advantageous conditions, but were
told That as long as the Waldenses were in Arms they could agree to nothing;
and the Protestants being persuaded that they would not disarm them, but that
they might the easier destroy them without trouble or resistance, would by no
means yield to it, but resolved to defend themselves if they came to attack
them.

The Duke of Savoy came into his Camp some days after the Edict, to strike
terror into the Waldenses by his presence, and joining his Troops with those of
France he resolved to attack the Protestants, and April 22. 1686 was the day
appointed; The French Army commanded. by Cativat Governor of Casal marched two
hours before day, by torch light to engage them, but found suchs stout
resistance that they lost above 500 of their men, with several Officers of
Note, the Waldenses having only two men killed; but at length the force of the
Enemy was so much increased that the Protestants not being able to make
resistance, yielded to lay down their arms and depart the Country according to
the Edict, since no time was prefixed, but the French heated with their loss,
massacred them without distinction of Age or Sex, putting all to the Sword that
fell into their hands without respect to Women or Children; yea old and sick
people had the same treatment.

In another part of the Country the Duke himself having burnt all the houses
in his way, came to storm a Fort of the Waldenses who received him so warmly
with their Muskets and Stones that they killed the Enemy 300 men, and lost only
five; but being at length overpowered with number, and hearing the French were
coming to assist the Duke, they treated with Don Gabriel the Dukes Uncle, who
promised positively on his part and their own, that they should be absolutely
pardoned if they would yield themselves to his elemency; But the Waldenses
making some difficulty to confide in this promise, Don Gabriel sent them a note
written with his own hand in the name of the Duke to this effect; Lay down your
arms immediately and submit your selves to his Royal Highnesses clemency; in so
doing assure your selves that he will pardon you, and that your Persons and
those of your Wives and Children shall not be touched.

Notwithstanding which assurance, when the Waldenses laid down their Arms,
relying on this promise, yet all that yielded were made Prisoners, and carried
to the City of Lucerne under pretense of being led to make their submissions to
the Duke. And a multitude of others who yielded upon the like deceitful
promises, had their lives taken away, and above twelve Thousand taken
Prisoners. After this manner the light of the Gospel has been extinguished in
a Country where it has shone so bright for so many ages; the perfidiousness
and treachery of the Inquisitors having triumphed over the true Faith to the
extirpation thereof; But for discovering what Spirit their Persecutors were of,
we will conclude with a few instances of the horrid outrages and Cruelties they
have committed on these occasions. The French Soldiers entering the Valley of
St. Martin massacred many old Men, Women and little Children, and ravished the
young Women and Maidens, whom they afterward constrained to march stark naked
at the head of their Army, to serve for Guides; yea they were so monstrously
diabolical as to satiate their infamous lusts on the bodies of those they had
slain. They would have defloured Margaret Marande not fourteen years old, and
because her Parents made some opposition they inhumanely butchered them; Two
others they slew for refusing to comply with their Villainy. They put an old man
into an house and burnt him in it; Four Women and three Children were murdered
in a Cave where they had hid themselves; An ancient woman of fourscore they
tumbled down a Rock, for not going fast enough. A great number of Women and
Virgins striving to secure themselves in the Woods, were dispatched with
Muskets; The ways were strewed with the dead bodies of little Children cut to
pieces, and naked Women Massacred with Swords; In the valley of St. Martin six
men, twenty Women and some Children surrendered themselves to the enemy upon
promise of safety, but the men were instantly shot to death in the presence of
their Wives; Some they tied to horses tails, and dragged them along till they
expired. They hung up a blind old woman before her own house.

Some Soldiers having used their utmost endeavors to flea Daniel Pel^ne
alive, and not being able to pull the Skin off his Shoulders, laid him on the
ground with a great Stone upon his Belly where he gave up the Ghost; Margaret
Sabrajote being stripped stark naked was run through with a dagger in several
parts of her body, yet before they cut her throat, these Ruffians mortified her
little daughter about seven months old before her face, and dashed her head
against the Rocks till her brains flew out; A Virgin of Body was tied stark
naked Cross a Mule with her Nudities exposed to public view and in this
condition led through the Streets of Lucerne; The Soldiers having found a
Woman named Jaimonate in a hole in a rock on the Mountain of Carbonieres
brought her to their Colonel a Savoyard, who demanded how long she had been
there, and wherewith she sustained her self? who answered, she had been there
eight days, and that she nourished her self with a little milk of a she Goat
which she took along with her; At length they would force her to discover
others who were hid, but she protesting she knew nothing of them, they put
Matches to her Fingers, and tied her Feet to her Head backward, and in this
posture threw her down a Rock, but as she stopped in falling, they threw Stones
and Brickbats at her till her Bowels dropped out of her Belly To pass over an
inunite number of examples of barbarity of the like nature, I shall close with
the death of the worthy Leidet, which equally deserves pity and admiration; He
was Minister of Prabe, and had hid himself some time among the Rocks, but being
taken was brought to the Palace of Lucerne where the Duke of Savey then was,
and being carried to the Tower was put into the Stocks, not being able to lie
down, and fed with Bread and Water; They often threatened him with death unless,
he would turn Catholic, who replied, That though he well knew they could not
put him to death with Justice, since he was never in arms, yet he was prepared
for death, esteeming himself most happy to s^ffer for the name of Jesus Christ.
At length the Monks and Friars found out Judges (though many refused to be
concerned) who were willing enough to condemn him to death; The day he was
executed, his Sentence was pronounced in the presence of many Monks, which he
received with a Christian resignation, without any emotion, fear, or trouble in
his countenance; The Monks would not leave him, though he often desired them, but
accompanied him to the Scaffold, where he made an excellent Prayer, and died so
edifying a Death that they themselves were forced to avouch he died like a
Saint.

In fine, all the Heathenish and Popish Barbarities of former Ages were revived
and acted over again upon these blessed Martyrs, that it is scarce possible to
believe those who bear the name of Christians should be so inhumane, whereby
above Eight Thousand Persons have expired, and a multitude more, even all the
Protestant Inhabitants of those once flourishing Valleys of Piedmont driven
into banishment, though kindly received by the Switzers and those of Genev^ who
with Christian compassion treated them with all manner of kindess and
tenderness. Let us all who have been so lately delivered from the like
treatment which was designed for us, never forget so wonderful a Salvation, but
be truly thankful to God, and our most gracious King and Queen, whom the
Almighty has been pleased to make the glorious Instruments of our redemption
from Popery and Slavery; To which let all good Protestants and Englishmen say,
Amen.

Gods Judgments upon Popish Persecutors, discovered in some eminent Examples.
1. FRom the First plantation of the Christian Religion in this Nation under
King Lucius, there was never any King or Queen of England in whose Reign so
much Christian blood was spilt, as in four years space during the Reign of
Queen Mary; But as she was prodigal of the Lives of the best of her Subjects,
and a Persecutor of the Gospel, so it pleased God to follow her with Plagues
and Judgments all her life; for nothing prospered which she took in hand; of
which we shall give some few Instances. The fairest and greatest Ship she had,
called the Great Harry, was burnt by Lightning from Heaven, the Christian World
at that time not affording such another. Then she would needs marry Philip King
of Spain, thereby Subjecting England to Strangers, yet with her utmost
endeavor, she could never set the English Crown on his head. Then did she
attempt the Restitution of Abbey Lands, and had all the assistance that the Pope
could give her therein, yet she was utterly crossed also in that Design. Then she
lost Calice in France, which had been in the possesion of the English during
the Reign of eleven Kings, that is, from the Reign of King Edward the third;
with which loss she was so afflicted, that she told some of her Courtiers, If
they opened her body when she was dead, they would find Calice written in her
heart. She was reported to be with Child, but it came to nothing. Her beloved
Husband left her, in whom she placed her greatest felicity and content. So that
now she could neither enjoy him, nor marry another. About the same time the
Land was grievously afflicted with horrible Tempests, Famines, Plagues, mortal
Diseases and burning Agues, so that between October and December, there died
seven Aldermen in London that had been Lord Mayors; and the mortality was so
great, that much Corn was lost in the Fields, for want of men to gather it;
whereby great scarcity ensued, and many poor people lived upon Accorns. And
lastly, she was struck with a lingering and pining sickness, whereof she died;
having only reigned Five years and Five month^, a shorter time than any of the
Kings of England enjoyed since the Conquest, Richard the Third only excepted.

2. In the next place, let us consider Gods Judgments upon some other
Instruments of Cruelty; and among the rest, Stephen Gardener, who was a most
Cruel Persecutor of the Protestants; In King Heary the Eighths time he was a
great stickler for the divorce from the Lally Katherine of Spain, and was
therefore made Bishop of Winchester. In King Edward the sixths time he seemed a
Friend to the Gospel, and preached it up; but in Queen Mary's days he was the
greatest and most inveterate enemy against it, and the professor thereof, and
continued so to his dying day; For the same day that Bishop Ridley, and Bishop
Latimer were burnt at Oxford, the old Duke of Norfolk came to dine with
Gardener: The Bishop deferred his Dinner till about four a Clock in the
Afternoon, at which time came one of his Servants posting to tell him, that
fire was put to these Servants of God; which when he was certified of, he came
out rejoyeing to the Duke, and said, Now let us go to dinner; The Table was
presently set, and the Bishop began to eat merrily, but as soon as he had earen
a few bits, he was on a sudden struck very sick, and being carried from the
Table to Bed, he there continued in such intolerable Anguish and Torment, that
he could void nothing either by Stool or Urine. His Tongue was black and swollen
so big that his mouth could not contain it, and his body violently Inflamed. In
this sad condition he lay fifteen days, and then ended his miserable life. In
the beginning of his sickness, Dr. Day Bishop of Chichester coming to see him,
began to speak to him about the merciful Promises of God, and free
Justification by the blood of Christ. To whom he answered, What, my Lord, will
you open that gap now? then farewell all together; Open this window to the
People, and farewell all together; And being by another Person put in mine of
St. Peter's denying his Master, and that he ought not to despair; He answered, I
have denied Christ with Peter, but I never repented with Peter.

3. Bloody Bonner, though he died in his bed, yet lay under the Spiritual
Judgment of Impenitency, and as he had been a Persecutor of the Light, and a
Child of Darkness, so in darkness and at midnight his Carcass was tumbled into
the Earth; And as himself had been a Murderer, so was he laid among Thieves and
Murderers, a place by Gods Judgment fitly appointed for him.

4. Dr. Whittington Chancellor, having condemned a Godly Religious woman to be
Burnt at Chipping Sadbury, a multitude of People came to see her Suffer, and
among the rest Whittington himself. At the same time there was a Butcher in
another place of the Town, killing a Bull, who was fast bound with a Rope ready
to be knocked on the head; the Butcher missing his stroke, the Bull broke loose
just as the people were coming from the Execution of this Holy Martyr; the
people seeing him coming severed themselves, and made a Lane for him; the Bull
passed through them without hurting man, woman or child, till he came to the
place where Whittington was, against whom he ran very furiously, and thrusting
his Horns into his belly, ran him quite through; and tearing out his Guts with
his horns, he trail'd them about the streets, to the great astonishment of
those that saw his wretched end.

5. One Burton Bailiff of Crowland in Lincolnshire, seemred in King Edward the
Sixths days to be a zealous Protestant, but as soon as Queen Mary came to the
Crown he turned Papist; and being forward to set up the Mass, he went to
Church, and the Curate being then reading the English Service, he went to him
and said, Sirrah, will you not say Mass, buckle your self to it, you knave, or
by Gods Blood I Will sheath my dagger in your shoulder; The poor Curate being
affrighted betook himself to the Mass. Shortly after, this Burton and a
neighbor riding together, a Crow flew over his head, and voided her Excrements
upon his Nose, which ran down his beard, and yielded such an horrible stink,
that it caused him to vomit in a most violent manner, whereupon he got home to
bed, but could eat nothing, the stink and vomiting still continuing, which made
him with dreadful Oaths and Execrations curse the Crow that had poisoned him,
and so he continued in extreme pain till he died.

6. Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury having silenced many faithful Protestant
Ministers; by Gods just Judgment had his Tongue swelled so big in his mouth,
that he could neither speak, eat nor drink for several days, and so died of
Hunger: after he had starved many poor Christian Souls, and burned their bodies
to ashes.

7. One James Abbes was burned for a Martyr; and as he went toward the Stake,
some poor People met him, begging Alms from him; and because he had no money,
he plucked off his Clothes, even to his shirt, and distributed them among them,
and withal earnestly exhorted them, To be strong in the Lord, and as faithful
followers of Christ, to stand steadfast in the Truth of the Gospel, which with
Gods assistance (said he) I will now in your sight seal with my Blood. But
whilst he was thus speaking, one of the Sheriffs men who stood by, and heard
him, cried out and exclaimed aloud against him to the People, saying, Good
People believe him not, he is an Heretic, and a mad man, and out of his wits,
believe him not, for it is Heresy which he speaks; And as Mr. Abbes
continued his Exhortation, this wretch constantly exclaimed against him all the
way as he went to the stake, at which this Faithful Martyr was burned. But as
soon as the Fire was kindled, the fearful stroke of Gods Justice fell upon this
wretch, who immediately before all the People fell mad and distracted,
wherewith he had a while before charged that blessed Servant of Christ; and in
a furious manner pulling off his Clothes, he said, Thus did James Abbes, the
True Servant of God, who is Saved, but I am Damned; And so he ran about the
Town, still crying out that James Abbes was a good man, and was saved, but he
was damned: Upon which his Master caused him to be clothed and bound, and to
be kept in a dark Room; but as soon as the company were departed, he tent off
his clothes again, continually roaring and crying out, James Abbes was the true
Servant of God, and is saved, but I am Damned; and thus he continued to his
Death.

8. David Beaton that bloody Archbishop, and Cardinal of Scotland, who amongst
others had condemned and burned one George Wisheart before mentioned, was
shortly after assaulted by some Persons, who broke into his Castle, and
murdered him in his Bed, he crying out, Alas, Alas, slay me not, I am a
Priest; When he was dead, he lay seven Months unburied, and at last like a
Carrion he was buried in a Dunghill.

9. One Pavie Town Clerk of London, was a very cruel Enemy to the Protestants
in King Henry the Eighths Reign, and swore a great Oath, That if he thought the
King would set forth the Scriptures in English, he would rather tut his own
throat than live till that time; But (says the Author) he broke his promise,
for instead thereof he shortly after hanged himself.

10. Foxford Chancellor to Stokesly Bishop of London, a Bloody Persecutor, and
common Butcher of the Servants of God, died suddenly sitting in his Chair, his
Belly bursting, and his guts falling out before him.

11. Doctor Story a bloody Persecutor in Queen Marys days, when Queen Elizabeth
came to the Crown, could not forbear to curse her daily in his Grace at Table,
and was deservedly hanged for his Treason therein.

12. One Rockwood who was a great stirrer up of Persecution against the
Protestants, suddenly fell sick, staring, raging, and crying out, I am utterly
damned; And being exhorted to ask mercy of God, he cried and roared out, It is
now too late, for I have maliciously sought the Death of many Godly Persons,
and that against my own Conscience, and therefore it is now too late; And thus
he continued to his Death.

13. John Martin a great Enemy to the Waldenses, used commonly to threaten,
That he would slit the Nose of one of their Chief Protestant Ministers; but a
while after he was assaulted by a Wolf, which bit off his Nose, whereupon he
ran mad, and died.

14. Before the great and dreadful Persecution of the Protestants in Bohemia,
it pleased God to give them warning thereof, by diverse Wonders and Prodigies;
In several places diverse Suns were seen together; At Prague the Sun seemed to
dart out balls of fire; likewise a flying a Dragon flaming horribly, was seen
through all Bohemia and Silesia; A Spring flowed with blood for a whole Month
together; as Fish Pond was wholly turned into Blood for the space of three
days. A great flock of Crows and Daws fought together for the space of a whole
day, muldtitudes being slain; At Prague it rained Brimstone, and the Image of
the Crucifix being set up was struck down with a Thunderbolt; the Gates of
some Cities opened of their own accord; many Bibles being thrown into a great
fire were untouched, only the Margin a little scorched: It pleased God likewise
eminently to show his Judgments upon diverse of the Romish Persecutors; One
Vomited out his ungodly Soul with his blood; Another ran mad, and cast himself
down from the top of his house, and fearfully roaring, breathed his last;
Another shot himself to death with his own Pistol; Another ran mad, and fell
into such a Disease that none could come near him for the stink, and at last
was choked with vomiting up abundance of Blood; Another being taken with a
sudden Disease, grew as black as a coal, and uttered his Speech like the
barking of a Dog, and within three days died with terrible pains; which
happened according to what St. Paul writes, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7. It is a Righteous
thing with God to Render Tribulation to them that trouble you; and to them that
are troubled, rest.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultrey near
Cheapside.
History.
I. ENglands Monarchs: Or, A Compendious Relation of the most Remarkable
Transactions, from Julius Caesar to this present; Adorned with Poems, and the
Picture of every Monarch from King William the Conqueror, to the Third year of
K. William and Q. Mary. With a List of the Nobility; The Knights of the Garter;
The number of the Lords and Commons, who have Votes in both Houses of
Parliament: And many other useful particulars. Price One Shilling.

II. THE Wars in England, Scotland and Ireland; containing a particular and
Impartial Account of all the Battles, Sieges, and other Remarkable
Transactions, Revolutions and Accidents which happened from the beginning of
the Reign of K. Charles I. 1625. to His Majesty's happy Restoration; The
illegal Trial of K. Charles I at large, with his last Speech at his Suffering.
And the most considerable matters till 1660. With Pictures of several
Accidents. Price One Shilling.

III. HIstorical Remarks and Observations of the Ancient and Prisent State of
London and Westminster; showing the Foundations, Walls, Gates, Towers, Bridges,
Churches, Rivers, Wards, Halls, Companies, Government, Courts, Hospitals,
Schools, Inns of Courts Charters, Franchises, and Privileges thereof; with an
account of the most remarkable Accidents, as to Wars, Fires, Plagues, and other
occurrences, for above 903 years past, in and about these Cities, to the year
1681 Illustrated with Pictures, and the Arms of 65 Companies of London, and the
time of their Incorporzting.

Price One Shilling.

IV. ADmirable Curiosities, Rarities and Wonders in England Scotland and
Ireland; or an account of many remarkable persons and places; and likewise of
the Battles, Seiges, prodigious Earthquakes, Tempests, Inundations, Thunders,
Lightnings, Fires, Murders andother considerable Occurrences and Accidents for,
many hundred years past. Together with the natural and artificial Rarities in
every County in England, with several curious Sculptures. Price One Shilling.

V. THE History of the Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland, containing, 1. An
Account of the most Remarkable Transactions and Revolutions in Scotland for
above 1200 years past, during the Reigns of 68 Kings, from 424. to K. James the
first in 1602. 2. The History of Ireland from the Conquest thereof to this
time; with the Miraculous Persons and Places, Strange Accidents, etc. And a
List of the Nobility and Great Officers of State in both Kingdoms. Illustrated
with several Pictures of some extraordinary Observables. Price One Shilling.

VI. THE English Empire in America, or a prospect of his Majesty's Dominions in
the West Indies, namely, New found-land, New England, New York, New Jersey,
Pensyivania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina, Bermuda's, Barbuda, Anguilla,
Monserrat, Dominica, St. Vincent, Antego, Mevis or Nevis, St. Christophers,
Barbados, and Jamaica; with an Account of their Discovery, Situation and
Product; The Religion and manners of the Indians, and other excellencies of
these Countries; To which ^ Prefixed a Relation of the first Discovery of this
New-World, and of the Remarkable Voyages, and Adventures of Sebastian Cabot,
Sir Martin Frobisher, Captain Davies, Capt. Weymouth, Capt. Hall, Captain
Hudson, Sir Thomas Cavendish, the Earl of Cumberland, Sir Walter Rawleigh, and
other English Worthies to diverse places therein. Illustrated with Maps and
Pictures of the strange Fruits, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Insects, Serpents, and
Monsters found in those parts of the World. Price One Shilling.

VII. A View of the English Acquisitions in Guinea and the East Indies. With an
Account of the Religion, Government, Wars, strange Customs, Beasts, Serpents,
Monsters, and other Observables in those Countries. And among others, the Life
and Death of Mahomet the Grand Impostor, with the Principal Doctrines of the
Turkish Religion as they are displayed in the Alcoran. Two Letters, one written
by the Great Mogul, and the other by the King of Sumatra in the East Indies, to
our K. James I. of an unusual and extravagant style; The cruel Executions in
those Parts; With the manner of the Women's burning themselves with their dead
Husbands. Together with a Description of the Isle of St. Helena; And the Bay of
Souldania where the English usually refresh in their Voyages to the Indies.
Intermixed with pleasant Relations, and Enlivened with Pictures. Price one
Shilling.

VIII. THE English Hero: or, Sir Francis Drake Revived. Being a full Account
of the Dangerous Voyages, Admirable Adventures, Notable Discoveries, and
Magnanimous Achievements of that Valiant and Renowned Commander. As, I. His
Voyage in 1572. to Nombre de Dios in the West Indies, where they saw a Pile of
Bars of Silver near seventy foot long, ten ^oot broad, and twelve foot high.
II. His incompassing the whole World in 1577. which he performed in Two years
and Ten months, gaining a vast quantity of Gold and Silver. III. His Voyage
into America in 1585. and taking the Towns of St. Jago, St. Domingo,
Carthagina, and St. Augustine. IV. His last Voyage into those Countries in
1595. with the manner of his Death and Burial. Revised, Corrected, very much
enlarged, reduced into Chapters with Contents, and beautified with Pictures. By
R.B. Price One Shilling.

IX. TWo Journeys to Jerusalem, Containing first, An Account of the Travels of
two English Pilgrims some years since, and what Admirable Accidents befell them
in their Journey to Jerusalem, Grand Cairo, Alexandria, etc. 2. The Travels of
14 English Merchants in 1669. from Scandcroon to Tripoly, Joppa, Ramah,
Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Jericho, the River of Jordan, the Lake of Sodom and
Gomorrah, and back again to Aleppo. To which is added, a Relation of the great
Council of the Jews assembled in the Plains of Ajayday in Hungary 1650. to
examine the Scriptures concerning Christ. By S.B. an Englishman there present:
With the notorious Delusion of the Jews, by a countersen Messith, or false
Christ at Smyrna in 1666 and the erent thereof, Lastly, The Extirpation of the
Jews throughout Persia in 1666. Epistle of King Agbarus to our Savior with our
Savior's Answer; Beautified with Pictures. Price One Shilling.

X. EXtra^^ dinary Adventures of several Famous Men; with the strange Events,
and signal Mutations and Changes in the Fortunes of diverse (...) lestrious
places and persons in all Ages, Being an Account of a multitude of ^^opendi^^s
revolutions, acciden^^ and ob^ervable matters in diverse States, and Provinces
throughout the whole world. With Pictures. Price One Shilling.

XI. THE Ru^^y of the Nine (...) of the World; Three whereof were Gentiles;
(...) Hector Son of ^riamus King of Troy 2. Alexander the Grcat King of Macedon
and Conqueror of the World. 3. Juliu^ Caesar first Emperor of Rome. Three Jews.
4. (...) (...) General and Leader of ^^ael into Canaan. 5. David King of (...).
6. (...). M^^abeus a Va(...) Jen^^h Commender against the T^ranny of
Antio(...). Three Christ^^^. 7. Arthur King of Britain, who courageously
de^ended his Country against the Sa^^^es. 8. (...) the (...) of France and
Emperor of Gomany; 9. Godsrey of (...) King of Jerusalem. Being an account of
their (...), Worthy Actions, renowned Victories and Dear^s. Illustrated (...)
and the Picture of each Worthy. By R. B. (...) ^hilling.

XII. FEmale Excellency or the Ladies Glory, Illustrated in the Worthy Lives
and Memorable Actions of Nine Famous Women, who have been renowned either for
Virtue or Valor in several Ages of the World: As, I. (...) the Prophetess. II.
The Valiant Judith. III. (...) (...) IV. The Virtuous Susanna. V. The Cha^^
^^^^retia. VI Voadicia Queen of Britain in the reign (...) of Kome. Containing
an Account of the (...) inha^^tants of Britain. The History of Danaus and his
Fifty Daughters who murdered their Husbands in one night; Of the arrival of
Brute. Of the Two Gian^s Corineous and Gogmagog; Of King L^ar and his three
Daughters; Of Belin and Brennus who rook the City of Rome; Of the manner of
Julius Caesar's invading Britain, and of the Valor of Voadicia under whose
^^nduct the Britains slew seventy thousand Romans, with many other remarkable
particulars. VII. Mariamne Wife to King Herod. VIII. Clotilda Queen of France.
IX. A^degona Princess of Spain. The whole adorned with Poems and Pictures to
each History. By R.B. Price One Shilling.

XIII. Wonderful Prodigies of Judgment and Mercy, discovered in above 300
memorable Histories, containing, 1. Dreadful Judgments upon Atheists,
Blasphemers, and perjured Villains. 2. The miserable ends of many Magicians,
etc. 3. Remarkable predictions and presages of approaching death, and how the
event has been answerable. 4. Fearful Judgments upon bloody Tyrants, Murderers,
etc. 5. Admirable Deliverances from imminent dangers, and deplorable distresses
at Sea and Land. Lastly, Divine goodness to Penitents, with the Dying Thoughts
of several famous Men, concerning a future state after this Life. Imbellished
with diverse Pictures. Price One Shilling.

XIV. Unparalled Varieties, or the Matchless Actions and Passions of Mankind;
displayed in near 400 notable instances and examples; Discovering the
transcendent effects; 1. Of Love, Friendship and Gratitude, 2. Of Magnanimity,
Courage, and Fidelity. 3. Of Chastity, Temperance, and Humiaty, And on the
contrary, the Tremendous Consequences. 4. Of Hatred, Revenge and Ingratitude.
5. Of Cowardice, Barbarity, and Treachery. 6. Of Unchastity, Intemperance and
Ambition. Imbellished with proper Figures. Pr. 1. s.

XV. THE Kingdom of Darkness: Or the History of Demons, Specters, Witches,
Apparitions, Possessions, Disturbances, and other wonderful and supernatural
Delusions, Mischievous Feats, and Malicious Impostures or the Devil. Containing
near Fourscore memorable Relations, Foreign and Domestic, both Ancient and
Modern. Collected from Authentic Records, Real Attestations, Credible
Evidences and asserted by Authors of Undoubted Verity. Together with a Preface
obviating the common Objections and Allegations of the Sadduces and Atheists of
the Age, who deny the Being of Spirits, Witches, etc. With Pictures of several
memorable Accidents. Price One Shilling.

XVI. Surprising Miracles of Nature and Art, in 2 parts containing, I. The
Miracles of Nature, or the wonderful Signs, and Prodigious Aspects and
Appearances in the Heavens, Earth and Sea; With an Account of the most samous
Comets, and other Prodigies, from the Birth of Christ to this time. II. The
Miracles of Art, describing the most Maguisicent Buildings, and other curious
Inventions in all Ages, as, the Seven Wonders of the World, and many other
excelient Structures and Rarities throughout the Earth. Beautified with
Pictures. Pr. 1 Shilling.

XVII. THE ^carlet Woore, or the wicked Abominations, and horrid Cruelties and
Persecutions of the Pope and Church of Rome displayed. Being a brief Rela^ion
of their Bloody Practices, and Inhumane Tor^ures inflicted upon Protestants for
many hundred ^ears past to this present, in all Countries where they had
Authority and Dominion; namely, in Piedmont, Bo^^mia, Germany, Poland,
Lithuania, France, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Holland, Scotland, Ireland, and
Engand; Containing among many other particulars; The Original and Practices of
the Spanish Inquisition; The Massacre at Paris; The bloody Massacre in Ireland
1641. wherein above two hundred Thousand innocent Protestants were barbarously
murdered, and the Prophecy thereof by Archbishop Usher Forty years before it
happened; The Spanish Invasion; The Gun-powder-Treason, with the several Plots
and Contrivances of the Priests and Jesuits for Extirpating the Protestant
Religion, till the time of our Glorious Deliverance from Popery and Slavery, by
the Accession of their most Excellent Majesty's King William and Queen Mary to
the Throne of these Kingdoms. With an Abstract of the Cruel Persecutions lately
exercised upon the Protestants in France and Savoy, in the years 1686, and
1687. Together with a short Account of Gods Judgments upon Popish Persecutors.
Published for a Seasonable warning to all Protestants, to inform them what they
must expect from that bloody Generation of Antichristians. Price One Shilling.

Miscellanies;
XVIII. DElights for the Ingenious, in above Fifty Select and choice Emblems
Divine and Moral, Ancient and Modern, Curiously Engraven upon Copper Plates;
with Fifty delightful Poems and Lots, for the more Lively Illustration of each
Emblem; Whereby Instruction and good Counsel may be promoted and furthered by an
honest and pleasant Recreation, To which is perfixed, An incomparable Poem
entitled Majesty in Misery, or an Imploration to the King of Kings written by
his late Majesty, K. Charles 1 with his own Hand during his Captivity in
Carisbrook Castle in the Isleof wight 1648. With a curious Emblem. Collected by
R.B. Pr. 2 s. 6 d.

XIX EXcellent Contemplations Divine and Moral Written by the Magnanimous and
truly Loyal A.L. Capel Baron of Hadham; Together with some Account of his Life,
and his affectionate Letters to his Lady the day before his Death, with his
Heroic Behavior and last Speech at his Suffering; Also the Speeches and
Carriages of D. Ham. and the E. of Holl. who suffered with him: With his pious
Advice to his Son. Price 1 s.

XX. VVInter Evenings Entertainments in 2 Parts Containing, 1. Ten Pleasant
Relations of many Rate and Notable Accidents and Occurrences; with brief
Remarks upon every one. 2. Fifty Ingenious Riddles, with their Explanations,
and useful Observations; and Morals upon each. Enlivened with above 60
Pictures, for illustrating every Story and Riddle. Excellently Accommodated to
the Fancies of Old or Young, and useful to cheerful Society and Conversation.
Price One Shilling.

XXI. DElightful Fables in Prose and Verse, none of them to be found in Aesop,
but collected from diverse Ancient and Modern Authors; with Pictures and proper
Morals to every Fable. Several of them very pertinent and applicable to the
present times. Published as a means which in all Ages has been found for
pleasure and likewise for instruction in the prudent conduct of our Lives and
Actions. By R. B. Price Bound One Shilling,

Divinity.
XXII. THE Divine Banquet, or Sacramental Devotions, consisting of Morning and
Evening Prayers, Contemplations and Hymns for every day in the Week, in order
to a more Solemn Preparation for the worthy Receiving of the Holy Communion,
Representing the several steps and degrees of the Sorrow and sufferings of our
blessed Savior, till he gave up the Ghost; As, 1. His Agony in the Garden. 2.
His being betrayed by Jud as. 3. His being falsely Accused, Smitten, Buffeted
and Spit upon before Caiaphas the high priest. 4. His Condemnation, Scourging,
Crowning with Thorns, and being delivered to be Crucified by Pontius Pilate. 5.
His bearing his Cross to Golgotha. 6. His Crucifixion and bitter Passion. 7.
Our Saviors Institution of the Blessed Sacrament. Together with brief
Resolutions to all those Scruples and Objections usually alleged for the
omission of this important Duty. With Eight curious Sculptures proper to the
several parts, with Graces. Imprimatur. Z. Isham, R. P. D. Hen. Epis. Loud. a
Sacris. Price One Shilling.

XXIII. A Guide to eternal Glory: Or, Brief Directions to all Christians how to
attain Everlasting Salvation: To which are added several other small Tracts; As
I. Saving Faith discovered in three Heavenly Conferences between our Blessed
Savior and 1. A Publican. 2. A Pharisee. 3. A Doubting Christian. II. The
Threefold state of a Christian. 1. By Nature. 2. By Grace. 3. In Glory. III.
The Scriptures Concord, compiled out of the words of Scripture, by way of
Question and Answer, wherein there is the sum of the way to Salvation, and
Spiritual things compared with Spiritual. IV. The Character of a True
Christian. V. A brief Directory for the Great, Necessary and Advantageous Duty
of Self-Examination, whereby a serious Christian may every day Examine himself.
VI. A short Di^^ogue between a Learned Divine and a Beggar. VII. Beams of the
Spirit, or Cordial Meditations, Enlivening, Enlight^ing, and Gladding the Soul.
VIII. The Seraphick Souls Triumph in the Love of God. With short remembrances
and Pious thoughts. IX. History Improved or Christian Applications and
Improvements of diverse remarkable passages in History. X. Holy Breathings in
several Divine Poems upon diverse Subjects and Scriptures. Price One Shilling.

XXIV. YOuths Divine Pastime; Containing Forty Remarkable Scripture Histories,
turned into common English Verse. With Forty Pictures proper to each Story;
very delightful for the virtuous employing the vacant hours of Young Persons,
and preventing vain and vicious Divertisements. Together with several Scripture
Hymns upon diverse occasions. Price 8 d.

XXV. THE Young Man's Calling or the whole Duty of Youth, in a serious and
compassionate Address to all young persons to remember their Creator in the
days of their Youth. Together with Remarks upon the Lives of several excellent
young Persons of both Sexes, as well Ancient as Modern, who have been famous
for Virtue and Piety in their Generations, namely, on the Lives of Isaac and
Joseph in their youth. On the Martyrdom of seven Sons and their Mother. Of
Romanus a young Nobleman, and of diverse Holy Virgins and Martyrs. On the Lives
of King Edward. VI. Queen Jane, Queen Elizabeth in her youth, Prince Henry
Eldest son of King James, and the young Lord Harrington, etc. With twelve
curious Pictures, Illustrating the several Histories. Price 1. s. 6. d.

XXVI. THE Vanity of the Life of Man represented in the Seven several Stages
thereof; With Pictures and Poems exposing the Follies of every Age. To which is
added, Verses upon several Subjects and Occasions. Containing, The History of
the cruel Death of Cassianus Bishop and Schoolmaster of Brescia in Italy, who
suffered Martyrdom for the Profession of the Christian Faith by the hands of
his own Scholars in the Bloody Reign of Dioclesian an Heathen Emperor of Rome;
With diverse other Poems compiled by Mrs. Ann Askew and Mr. John Rogers whilst
they were Prisoners in Newgate, and afterward burnt in Smithfield, In the
bloody Reign of Queen Mary. By R B. Licensed and Entered. Price Eight Pence.

XXVII. MOunt Sion, or a Draught of that Church that shall stand for ever.
Together with a view of that World which shall be broken in pieces and
consumed. By William Dyer, Author of Christ's Famous Titles, and a Believers
Golden Chain. Price One Shilling.

XXVIII. DIstressed Sion Relieved, or, the Garment of Praise for the Spirit of
Heaviness. A Poem. Wherein are Discovered the grand Causes of the Churches
trouble and misery under the late dismal Dispensation. With a complete History
of, and Lamentation for those Renowned Worthies that fell in England by Popish
rage and cruelty, from the Year 1680 to 1688. As the Lord Russel, Colonel
Sydney, Alderman Cornish, and diverse others; With a Relation of the cruel
proceedings, of the late Lord Chancellor Jefferys in the West. Together with an
account of the late Admirable and Stupendous Providence which has wrought
such a sudden and wonderful Deliverance for this Nation, and Gods Sion therein.
Concluding with the Trial and Condemnation of Mystery Babylon the Great Whore;
and diverse Hymns of Praise and Thanksgiving: with Sighs for Ireland. Humbly
Dedicated to their Present Majesty's. By Benjamin Keach, Author of. Book
called, Sion in Distress, or the Groans of the True Protestant Church. Price
One Shilling.

XXIX. ANtichrist Stormed, or the Church of Rome proved to be Mystery Babylon
the Great Whore, Revel. 17. by many and undeniable Arguments Answering all the
Objections of the Papists, and all others. Together with the Judgment of many
Ancient and Modern Divines, and most Eminent Writers about the Mystical Numbers
in Daniel and Revelations, concerning the rise and final ruin of the Beast and
Babylon, proving it will be in this present Age. Together with an Account of
the Two Witnesses, who they are, their Slaying, Resurrection and Ascension,
with the probability of their being now upon their Rising; showing also what
their Ascension is, and the glorious Effects thereof. With an Account of many
strange Predictions relating to these present Times. By Benjamin Keach. Price
One Shilling.

XXX. THE Devout Soul's Daily Exercise in Prayers, Contemplations and Praises,
containing Devotions for Morning, Noon, and Night, for every day in the week;
with Prayers before and after the Holy Communion: And likewise for Persons of
all conditions, and upon all occasions: With Graces and Thanksgivings before
and after Meat. By R.P. D.D. Price bound Six Pence.

XXXI. SAcramental Meditations upon diverse select places of Scripture, wherein
Believers are assisted in preparing their hearts, and exciting their affections
and graces when they draw nigh to God in that most awful and solemn Ordinance
of the Lords Supper. By Jo. Flavel Minister of Christ in Devon. Pr. 1. s.

XXXII. JACOB Wrestling with GOD, And prevailing: Or a Treatise concerning the
Necessity and Efficacy of Faith in Prayer: Where^, diverse weighty Questions and
Cases of Conscience about Praying in Faith, are stated and resolved: For the
comforting and satisfying of weak and scrupulos, Consciences: The Conviction of
formal Hypocrites, awakening of all Saints, both weak and strong, great and
small, to this great duty of Prayer. By Thomes Tailor formerly at Edmunds-Bury,
now Pastor to a Congregation in Cambridge. Price One Shilling.

All Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultrey near Cheapside.

FINIS,

