The CASE of several Italian Merchants settled in London.
THE Trade to Italy, and all other Places is equally free to Natives and
Aliens, only with this Difference, that the Aliens pay greater Duties to their
Majesty's.

Thrown Silks being very scarce in England, by reason of the Difficulty of
bringing them out of Italy at this time of War with France,

The Weavers petitioned the Honorable House of Commons, for Liberty of
importing fine Italian, Sicilian and Naples Thrown Silk over Land. Whereupon a
Bill was brought in, and passed that Honorable House, and lies now before your
Honors.

There is a Clause in the said Bill, which restrains the said Importation over
Land to the Subjects of this Kingdom only, and for their proper Accounts, and
no other whatsoever.

It Is humbly hoped that your Honors will take this Matter into your serious
Consideration, and be of Opinion, that if this Clause passes, it will be a kind
of monopolizing that Silk Trade in the Hands of two or three English Merchants
dealing therein, who procured this Clause. Whereas it has always been taken for
a certain Rule, That Trade should not be restrained, but Traders encouraged;
for the more of a Commodity comes in, the cheaper it must be sold to the
Subject, and the more Customs will accrue thereby.

Besides that it is most humbly conceived, that your Honors will not think it
reasonable, That these Merchants, who are by Law at liberty to import Goods
directly over Sea from Italy, should not be suffered to import the same Goods
over Land.

There are several English Merchants settled in diverse Ports of Italy, who may
reasonably fear in case this Clause passes into a Law, that those Governments
may return it upon them, by forbidding all but their own Subjects to import the
English Manufactures into Italy, instead of the continuance of the kind
Treatment which the English Merchants meet with there, as is notoriously known
to all that ever traveled into those Countries. Joseph Cagnony, Angelo
Corticelly, Joseph Como, and Anthony Francis Magnony are Italians, who have
lived in England, and traded as Merchants several Years; their chief Trade has
been with their Country, and have from time to time exported great Quantities
of the Woollen Manufactures of this Kingdom in return of the Goods they
imported out of their own Countries.

They most humbly hope your Honors will think fit to reject the said Clause,
that Trade may have its free Course, conformable to the respective Treaties of
Commerce between this and all other Trading Nations.


