THE CASE OF SIR RICHARD TEMPLE About the Breach of Privilledge, upon the
REPORT.
Palms, and Sr. Richard were equally Complainants against each other, for a
Breach of Privilledge; supposed to be committed by their respective Agents,
Servants, or Tennants; which was to be decided against either of them,
according as the Possession should fall out to be, at the meeting of this
Parliament. Nevertheless at the Hearing, Sr. Richard's Bailiff and Attorney,
(viz.) Thorpe and Gallaway, because they were named in his Complaint, were
rejected: And Mr. Blackall, Mr. Palms's Bailiff, who with Twenty Men, made a
forcible Entry and Riot, on Sr. Richard's Possession; of which number all the
rest of his Witnesses were, (though equally complained of) admitted.

Palms's Council, that Sr. Richard had a Morgage of Inheritance upon the
Estate, which was ready to be produced; and both by Council and Witnesses. That
he was in quiet Possession from November 1686. till the Death of Mrs. Danby in
June last; and had received three half Years Rent before her Death, and all
that was insisted upon, of any change or interuption of that Possession, until
the Disturbance on the Fourteenth day of March last; was a pretended Attornment
by some of the Tennants, to Mr. Palms's Agent, in July and August following:
But the manner of that Attornment was not other ways proved, but by a Paper
given in, all Written by one hand, Purporting no more than a promise of paying
their Rent to Mr. Palms; but not expressing that there was any actual
Possession given upon the Ground, nor have they in the least proved, that any
of the Tennants (except Peter Hood) was in Possession of the Middle Field, or
any part thereof, which was the only Place in question, after their taking off
the Cropp, until the day of the Disturbance; being the Fourteenth of March
last, when they entered with Twenty Men and Seven Plows, to Plow it forcibly.

Richard Temple, has clearly proved, that none of the Tennants mentioned, to
have Attorn'd to Mr. Palms, or Rented any part of those Lands in Dispute ever
since Lady Day 1688. (except Peter Hood, aforesaid) who took a new Bargain of
Lands; laid out by a new allotment, under a new Rent; the four Fields being
reduced into three, and that the Old Tennants were discharged at Martlemas
1687, to leave at Lady Day 16^8. when their Leases ended, and did accordingly
quietly leave all the Meadow, Pasture, and Fallow Field; and only had leave to
take off their Cropp; afterward according to the Custom of the place, paying
for the Out-stands thereof, and that the new Tennants to whom it was let,
quietly enjoyed their Bargains, till the Disturbance which happened the
Fourteenth of March 1688.

Reply, they have declined to maintain the Possession to all the rest, but as
to Peter Hood; and that if the Attornment were good by him, being both an Old
Tennant, and a new one, yet as to the other five Tennants, there was a clear
forcible Entry, and Breach of Privilledge committed by Mr. Palms's Agent, upon
Sr. Richard.

Richard Temple does insist, that the pretended Attornment of the Old Tennants,
whose Estates were determined, was absolutely Void, and could not change the
Possession; and likewise, that the pretended Attornment of Peter Hood was Void,
for that Mr. Palms having no Estate in Law; but an Equity of Redemption, after
a Mortgage of Inheritance, is not capable of taking any by Attornment, or
acquiring any Possession thereby.

Lastly, The disturbance given to Peter Hood, was because, that, that Field was
to have layen Fallow by the new Agreement, which was to the Damage of the
Tennants, nor was there more done, than only to hinder his Plowing there, nor
was his Possession disturbed in that, nor any of the rest, he Enjoying it
quietly to this day.


