A DIALOGUE Between two Church of England-Men Concerning Matters of RELIGION, As
set forth in the PULPIT.
Francis. HOw now, Neighbor William, you have put on a very Solemn Face this
Morning; pray, what makes you so Sober?


William. Oh! I have had my Head full all this Night of nothing but Fire and
Faggots; and when I awaked this Morning, I could not persuade my self to open
my Eyes, or stir Hand or Foot, thinking I had been fastn'd to a Stake in
Smithfield. And the cold Sweat is not off me yet.


Fran. This was a very Unseasonable Dream, considering the Peace we now enjoy.
But what should raise these Fancies in your Head at this time of the day?


Will. I cannot tell, unless it was the Relics of a Sermon I heard the last
Sunday, in which were made several severe Reflections upon the Papists; they
were not named, yet every Body knew the meaning. And I believe this has raised
all the Frightful Notions, and horrid Ideas I had in the time of the Popish
Plot. And to tell you the Truth, these thoughts have been the subject of my
Meditation for these Two Hours, and I cannot tell how to get them out of my
Head.


Fran. Fie, fie. All this in a Dream was pardonable; but Awake and Serious, and
still to go on with these Phantoms, reflects upon your Judgment. Can you fear a
Thunderbolt, when there is never a Cloud to be seen in the Sky?


Will. Ay, but the Gospel must be fulfilled. Don't you consider, that our
Ministers preach to us the Gospel? And have not they, these many years, been
showing unto us, with the Bible in their Hands, the Cruelty and Bloodiness of
the Papists, their Secret Conspiracies, and Open Violence, their Treacheries
and Falsehood, their Murders and Assassinations. And when I reflect, that at
this day, we have so many Papists on every side of us, Papists in Power,
Papists Counselors, Papists Commanders, Papists Justices, so many Papists
Soldiers, every one a Sword by his side; and what is worst of all, such a
Number of Plotting Jesuits walking the Streets, all in Disguise, that no Body
can tell how or when to get out of their way: how can I think of this without
trembling? Well, I shall certainly never dare to go to bed again without a
double Guard at my Door: And whenever I lie down, I must expect to rise with
my Throat cut.


Fran. You begin to raise the vapors in my Brain: And now you have put into my
head, what the Papists are even according to our Gospel, I cannot tell how to
think my self safe amongst them. If any one should have told us Seven Years
ago, that within so short a time we should have come to be under their
Government, could we possibly have survived the News? Would not this voice of
Terror and Death have left us without Spirit or Life? We were then, I remember,
afraid of the very Name and Shadow of a Papist; and could we imagine it
possible for us at any time to live in Peace and Safety, with their Hand, and
Sword over our Heads?


Will. No certainly, if there was any Truth in our Gospel, this could not be
possible.


Fran. Ay; but now I think on it; there is no Gospel to be believed contrary to
our Senses. And therefore since we See and Feel our selves in Peace and Safety
amidst so many Papists; we must not take those Sermons in a Literal Sense,
which told us so much of the Bloodiness of the Papists, and that there could be
no Peace expected for Protestants under such a Government.


Will. This would be some Relief to an afflicted Soul, were this Doctrine a
Church of England Doctrine. But I fear you have a mind to flatter me into a
little Comfort, by some vain imagination of your own.


Fran. No, you may rely upon what I tell you; I have heard it from Dr. Stilling
fleet, Tillotson, Tennison, Sherloc, Pellin, and the rest of our Ministry, that
when any thing in the Gospel contradicts our Senses and Reason, it is not to be
taken in a Literal Sense. And do you now apply this Principle to our present
Circumstances, and see how far it may work upon you. Have not we been under a
Prince of that Persuasion for above Two Years? We have had so many Papists in
Office, as you contemplate; so many Papists Soldiers, and such a number of
Priests and Jesuits on every side of us; and yet have we not all this while
enjoyed our Liberty? Have we not possessed our Estates in quiet? Has any force
been used upon our Persons? Has any ones Property been invaded? Have our
Throats been in danger from their Swords; or our Houses from Fireballs? Have
we been oppressed with Taxes, or wasted in Wars? Call in your Eyes and Ears,
your Hands, all your Senses and Reason to witness, and if these declare to you
the Truth of what I tell you; what disturbance can all the Sermons you have
formerly heard, and now hear, cause in you; since from the Information of your
Senses, you are assured, that those Terrors and Prophetic Threats of Misery and
Slavery, contained in them, are not to be understood Literally; but in some
other Sense, which I believe Scholars and Politicians can give a better account
of than I?


Will You give me some ease: Death withdraws it self from before my Eyes; my
Heart begins to dilate it self, and my Blood returns into its Vessels. But pray
Neighbor, now you put it into my Head, what should be the meaning then of all
those Sermons we have heard from our Pulpits, concerning the Papists? When I
come out of Church, I cannot imagine the Papists to be any thing but Fools and
Idiots, Monsters of Impiety and Barbarity. And yet in my Conversation and
Contracts with them, I find them to be like other Men: And now, as you say, we
have more fully experienced, in the Reign of our present Sovereign, that in the
enjoyment of our Liberty, the Peace and Welfare of the Nation, we have as great
Blessings to expect from a Papist, as from any Protestant Prince whatsoever.
How are these things to be reconciled?


Fran. You put me upon a very Ungrateful Subject. But for the relief of your
troubles and mine own, I Will lay before you some Observations I have made upon
the Pulpit, I hope no body ever-hears us.


Will. No, no danger. Pray go on, and by a charitable Discourse perfect your
Cure; for if you leave me as I am, I fear on the next Sunday the Noise of
Popery will make me Relapse.


Fran. I Will tell you then: About Seven Years ago, I took a resolution of making
a Collection of all such Sermons as should come out in Print: For thought I,
when I have them by me, I shall be able to read them at leisure; I can with
more seriousness apply my self to that Divine Study, and from their
Information, as from the Gospel, learn Truth and Falsehood, what to embrace and
what to fly. As I had resolved, so I did; intending by them to steer my Life,
my Judgment, and my Conversation. But Four Years were not well over, when I
discovered my mistake, and found that all was not Gospel, which I had taken for
Gospel.


Will. Let not this be told in Gath, nor mentioned in the streets of Ascalon.
Pray what do you mean? Is it not the Gospel then, we hear from the Pulpits?


Fran. The Text is out of the Gospel; but for what follows, it depends upon the
Preacher; and requires the Consideration of the Auditory before it be trusted.
You know we are often advised from the Chair, Not to go Blindfold, nor take
things upon Trust; and this (as I find) they intend should be understood of
their Sermons, as well as of other things, that are proposed to us. However,
one thing I have observed in the perusal of my Collection; that when Preachers
in their Sermons treat of Morality, directing their Flock to the Observance of
a Good Life, teaching them to love their Neighbor, to be at Peace with all
men, to Forgive Injuries, to be Merciful, Patient, Humble, and Sincere, to do
no wrong, etc. In this case, besides their Text being Gospel, the Word of God
generally spreads it self throughout their whole Sermon, and they are to be
heark'ned to like to an Angel of God. But when you hear them begin to talk
aloud of Parties and People, of Papists, Jesuits, Dissenters, Plots and
Designs, when you hear them usher in a Discourse with, There are a sort of
People in the World, etc. Then stand upon your Guard; for at this time they
begin generally to leave the Gospel; the Auditory is to consider and believe
them as far as they think fit: but for their Bibles, they may put them up in
their Pockets; there being nothing of all this to be found there.


Will. This is a good Observation, and I hope will secure me against all
Relapses. For now when I go to Church, I shall know when to believe, and when
to suspend all belief; I shall be able to distinguish, what is to sink into the
Heart, from what is to pass no farther than the Ear. Hitherto I confess. I have
been so Inconsiderate, as to take all for Gospel, that I heard from the Pulpit:
and this has been unhappily the occasion of my Misfortune and Trouble; it has
filled me with Fears and Jealousies, and made my Life uneasy. And indeed I
could not well avoid this mistake, seeing that I scarce ever heard any Parson,
whether upon a Moral Subject, or upon Plots and Jesuits, but he seemed to read
all alike out of his Bible.


Fran. Yes, but you are to consider the difference between the Pulpit-Bible,
and the Pue-Bibles. Those, which the People have in their hands, contain
nothing but the Pure Word of God, without any Addition. But those, which you
see held forth from the Pulpits, have a great deal more in them, than ever was
writ by the Evangelists, or others of the Sacred Penmen. They have Notes in
them of every man's own writing. Could you ever imagine that all that you have
heard in Sermons of the Popish Plot was writ or known by the Apostles?


Will. How could I tell, but They being favored with the Spirit of Prophecy,
might foresee what was to come in our days: and by some hint or Mystic
Expressions give directions to our Preachers, how to behave themselves, when
such things should happen. And, if I am not much mistaken, I have heard it
proved in a Sermon, that Oats and Bedloe were foretold by the Scripture; and
that any one that had but a competent Spirit of Interpretation, might easily
discover, that These were the Two Witnesses mentioned in the Apocalypse.


Fran. I cannot tell, but it might be in some of the Minsters Bibles at that
time; but I question whether it be there now. For as I told you, Their Word of
God is not always the same, it changes and alters according to Times and
Seasons, especially when the Subject is Plotting. But as for the Peoples Bible,
I dare be bound 'twas never in any of them. Did you ever find it in yours?


Will. I took always the Preacher's word for it, that 'twas Authentic
Scripture; but, I confess, I could never read it so in mine. There might be so
much difference in the Edition, as there is in other profane Books, for all as
I know. But indeed, one thing I have all along observed, which hits very well
with your Remark, that whilst the Ministers are discoursing upon Morality and a
Good life, the People sit very Serious and Demure, but something Dull, as if
they were hearing a Repetition of what they had often read themselves, in their
own Books; but still with their Bibles in their hands: But when the Ministers
turn from that Subject, and enter upon Jesuits, or Phanatics, or upon Plots;
then the People begin to perk up themselves, to stand up Brisk and Attentive,
lay aside their Books; as if what they were then hearing, were something New;
such as if they did not make it their own, whilst 'twas dropping from the
Pulpit, might be lost, and could no where be found in their Bibles at their
return home.


Fran. You are in the right on it, for there is nothing of all this to be found
in the Bible. Nay, many times, it is so far from being the Word of God, that it
has no relation to it; but is built on no better Foundation, than a Narrative
of some Knight of the Post, a Popular Rumor, or some Uncertain History.


Will. What! And yet pass for a Sermon?


Fran. For a Sermon? I Will warrant you, I can show you hundreds of Sermons, that
have been preached before the Gravest Assemblies in the Nation, and influenced
them in as good earnest, as if the Holy Ghost had been the Mover; and yet had
no better Text to prove what they delivered, than the Word of Villainous Man,


Will. You confound me quite. What the Word of Men delivered for the Word of
God; and of Villainous Men too!


Fran. Yes, of Perjured Villains, of Miscreants. So that I can name you several
Eminent Men, after they have taken their Text, as they must do, out of the
Bible, fall presently to their Dividing, Expounding, Proving, and Application,
and in these, follow so closely Oats and Bedloe, that a Man would take These
Doctors for the only Commentators upon the Text. And I believe it must be These
Sermons, that have filled your Head thus with Stakes and Faggots.


Will. I doubt not, but these have been greatly the Occasion of my Distemper.
But You are my Physician, and I hope you have pretty well cured me. However, I
think I had best stay from Church Three or Four Sundays, for fear if I should
go there and hear again a Noise of Popery, I might be surprised, and take all
for Scripture, that is delivered with the Bible in hand, and so my Distemper
should return upon me. People that are newly recovered, ought not to be too
venturesome. What think you?


Fran. Never fear: Remember, but the Directions I have given you, and go upon
my account. If you are the worse for it, I Will undertake to cure you for nothing.
I have only applied to you a General Remedy as yet, and you are the better
for it. But I have other Particular Receipts far beyond all you have had hitherto.


Will. Well, I Will observe your Directions; but if I hear any thing there, and
am the worse for it; you shall be sure to hear of me again.


FINIS.

