DAFFY'S Original and Famous Elixir Salutis: THE CHOICE DRINK OF HEALTH, OR,
Health-bringing Drink. BEING

A Famous CORDIAL DRINK, found out by the Providence of the Almighty, and (for
above wenty years,) Experienced by my self and diverse persons (whose names are
at most of their Desires here inserted) a most excellent Preservative of
Mankind.

A SECRET Far beyond any Medicament yet known, and is found so agreeable to
Nature, that it effects all its Operations, as Nature would have it, and as a
virtual Expedient proposed by her, for reducing all her Extremes unto an equal
Temper; the same being fitted unto all Ages, Sexes, Complexions and
Constitutions, and highly fortifying Nature against any Noxious humor,
invading or offending the Noble Parts.

Never Published by any but by ANTHONY DAFFY; And now by me ELIAS DAFFY his Son.

Reader beware of Counterfeiters, for they swarm. And that you may know the
Truth concerning Hind, pray Read the Epistle.

London, Printed with Allowance for the Author, School.

Courteous Reader,
Having by the Providence of the Almighty obtained the True Composition,
together with the Secret of Right preparing and making this famous Elixir, or
Choice Drink of Health; and having for Twenty years last, downwards to this
time, found the same (to admiration) successful in the perfect Cure of Most of
the torturing and painful Distempers and Maladies incident to humane Bodies; as
will be abundantly testified by sundry credible persons in this City, and else
where, upon their own happy Experiences of my Elixir's admirable and almost
incredible Effect and Virtues; the enumeration of whom would be to tedious here
to insert; yet particularly (amongst many others) my Elixir was about nine
years since, found succesful under God in the perfect cure of one Thomas Hind,
most sadly afflicted with the Stone, and other distempers, after five years use
of the best means he could procure, either from Learned Physicians in this
City, or the Wel's as by the said Hind's Certificate under his hand, and there
testimonies, may fully appear. He, the said Hind, soon after his Cure, did by
subtle suggestions of great Travels by him pretendedly undertaken, and crafty
insinuations into my favor, obtain from me a Direction unto some (though but
few) of my Elixir's Ingredients, so far only as to prevent his Relaps into his
late Distempers; or to recover him, if relapsed by change of Air, alteration of
Climates, or therwise: Which said Hind having thus (as be thought) accomplished
his Ends, did soon after (like a juggling Don Quixos) by the Letters T. H. G.
Midwife by stealth, a Libellous Pamphlet crawling into the world, yet keeping
it self in dark corners as a Moon blind Brat, demurely counterfeiting my
Elixir, under the varnished and specious Appellation of his Famous and
Wonderful NEVER-FAILING CORDIAL DRINK's OF THE WORLD, etc. to be sold only
within Aldersgate at the Picture-shop, and at one place more, in York City;
audaciously making use of, and misapplying the substance of my Bill of
Directions by me published in Print above thirteen years since; and also
Ape-like imitating my own Expressions, which he had from time to time heard me
declare of my own, and my Patients manifold Experience of my Elixir's virtues,
with much impudence imposing them upon the World, as if they were his own many
years Experiences of the virtue of what he calls his Never-Failing Drink, etc.
though it is well known to me, and many other in this City, that he himself was
(within this 10 years last) a stranger to my Elixir, and to the Names of those
few Ingredients in it which now he pretends to know. Diverse of my Patients, in
this Book, viz. Mr. Ben. Hope, Mr. William Crawley, and others, having been
cured by me above 16 years since, and to this time remaining living Monuments
to God's Praise of my Medicine's virtues. It is here very remarkable, that this
Hind, though stored with so great a stock of Confidence of the infallible
Effects of his Never-Failling Drink; yet he boggles at the publication of the
Names and Places of Abode of such Patients of his, as have been cured of any
one Distemper, by that this NEVER FAILING Cordialy or of the time or times when
such Cure (if any) were m^de, By which sinister and indirect practice of this
Hind, it being observed, that sundry People of most Ranks have been
egregiously beguiled, their Health endangered, and my self injuriously abused.
AND though in the forenamed Tho. Hinde's lifetime, this JOSEPH HIND was
unwilling to stand the Test of those many Falsehoods which his Brother had
fomented, and his Mother did affirm, because he knew them to be untrue; yet
(for filthy lucres sake) now owneth all, and makes himself the Successor of his
Brothers Impudence.

I have in the faithful discharge of my Conscience unto God, and in love to the
public Good some time since published in Print two Advertisements, for
undeceiving the deluded world, unto which I never received one syllable of
answer from this Hind, I shall therefore leave the Consideration of the whole
Matter to the Judgment of the Impartial Reader.

Qui vult decipi, decipiatur.
ANTHONY DAFFY.

ELIXIR SALUTIS: OR, The Famous Choice Cordial Drink of Health.
THE Excellent uses and transcendent Virtues of this Inestimable Jewel, proved
by the happy and successful experiences of many Credible Persons, being now
living and Healthful Monuments to God's Praise, hereunder named and described,
are amongst diverse others, (in so small a Volum not Comprizeable) these, viz.

The Gout.
THis Choice Preservative (if duly prepared, which no man can do but my self)
effectually and perfectly cures the Gout, as has (through God's blessing) been
happily experienced, and will be testified amongst others by Benjamin Hope of
Camerwell in the County of Surrey, having been very sorely afflicted with this
Torturing Malady. For, this my Drink stifles the Gout in its Birth, and kills
it in its strength; extracting out of all parts of the Patient's Body those
crude and viscous humors, which are the spawn and nourishing cause of this
grievous Disease, and frees the Joints of all other Diseases and pains to
Admiration.

A Person of Honor also, to wit, Leonard Gray, Esquire Son of the late Right
Honorable Henry Earl of Stamford, having for the space of twelve Years and
upwards, been so deeply afflicted with the Gout, that he was necessitated
(during that time) to make use of Crutches, has for four Months last been so
Cured by the Means of this my Elixir, that he now walks with ease, having only
a Cane in his Hand; and desires, for the encouragement of others, that his Name
be thus made public, this 22. of February, 1678.

For the Gout and Dropsy, Mr. Athie, who may be heard of at the Feathers, under
St. James's Market-house, has also found my Elixir happily successful in his
Cure: besides many hundreds more, that are not free to be made public.

The Stone and Gravel in the Reins, or an Exulceration in the Kidneys or Mouth
of the Bladder.
THis Drink dissolves, and perfectly cures the Stone and Gravel, and has been
by God's blessing found an effectual Remedy against it in Men, Women, and
Children. It wonderfully cleanses the Reins of all foulness and imperfections,
forcing urine, never failing to cure the Gravel in the Reins, Kidneys, or
Bladder, though ulcerated, and the Patients Urine like blood These excellent
virtues of this my drink have to admiration been found eminently successful by
very many Persons in diverse Countries, and this City: As, for instance, by Mr.
William Crawley of Luton, in the County of Bedford, who was cured Eleven years
since, and may once a Fortnight be found at the Three Broad Arrows in Golding
Lane London; who by Gods blessing upon this my Drink, voided above an hundred
Stones; whereof the first, as big as the middle part of a Tobacco-Pipe, (...)
^out an inch long, and so foft at its coming away, that one might (...) between
the fingers; most of the other Stones smaller, some (...) bigness of an
Horse-bean, some as little as a Pea, all rendered soft, (...) of a crumbling
nature.

Also the said Thomas Hind deceased, who had his Drink sold at the
Picture-Shop within Aldersgate, when all other Means and Physicians (from one
to another) in five years sore affliction, proved unsuccessful to him, either
for help or ease; Nine Spoonfuls, or three Doses of this my Drink (as I
prepared it) did by the Lord's blessing, bring him to void a Stone
three-forked, like the upper end of some Tobacco stopper, about the bigness of
an Horse-bean, which has been seen by sundry persons of Note in this City, and
elsewhere. And of his Cure by my Drink I have his Certificate (ready to show,
if need require.) Many more living Testimonies might be named of the incredible
and excellent virtues of this Drink, bringing away the Stone, Sand and Gravel,
when congealed, the Sand and Gravel brought away as soft, as Meal or Flower
under the finger: and if the same be congealed, it sometimes brings it away on
a sudden, hard as a Pibble, as the aforesaid Mr. Crawley has experienced. Mr.
Robert Goodson, at the Red Cross in St. Martins le Grand, having also lately
been sorely racked with this torture, found this Elixir under God a speedy and
effectual remedy in voiding with much ease a Stone, of the bigness of a small
Bean, since which he ha^h been very well, and so remains to this day.

These are to Certify, That with the taking of 7 Half Pint Bottles of Mr.
Anthony Daffy's Elixir, Mr. William Clarke, of the City of Gloucester, Mercer,
being 77 years of age, did in the year last past, in making of Water, void the
quantity of a Gallon of Slimy-Ropy-Matter, which came away from him at several
times; which has given him very great ease, and may be said to be a Cure of
that Distem per, he now making clear Water.

In Testimony whereof, the said Mr. William Clarke has hereunto set his Hand
December the First, 1675. Per me, William Clarke.

Against Languishing and Melancholy.
IT raises Languishing Nature, and Melancholy drooping Spirits, it fails not
of curing the Hypocondriack-Melancholly, and most powerfully opposes all black
and mixed humors (as Natures grand Enemy) continually drawing them out of the
Veins and Arteries into the Stomach, and from thence sends them away; and after
their expulsion Nature rejoices.

Shortness of Breath, Colic, Griping in the Guts.
THis Drink does, by the Lord's blessing, suddenly help bad Digestion,
stoppage of the Stomach and shortness of Breath, causing a good appetite, and
defending the head from all vapors ascending from the Mother and Spleen. It is
found a most certain Remedy for the Colic; and any Griping of the Guts, and
stays Vomiting; which Virtues have been successfully experienced by the
aforesaid Benjamin Hope of Camerwell, and my own Family.

And many others will also testify, that the same takes away all pain from the
Heart, and perfectly cured them, when they were sorely stopped with Phlegm, yea
when they feared Choking, and were accustomed in their steep to be near
stifling for want of Breath.

The Phtisick.
IT gives much relief and ease to Aged People, afflicted with the Phtisic but
perfectly cures such as have strength of Nature, and are not too far spent in
that sad Distemper.

This harmless and pleasant Cordial is so good a friend unto Womankind in all
conditions, and has been so experienced, that they cannot treasure up a richer
Jewel by them, or have a more acceptable gift presented them, the virtues of it
being found effectual in clearing them of all obstructions.

The Green Sickness.
IT also certainly and speedily cares the Green Sickness (of any kind or nature
whatsoever,) not failing to bring Virgins to their Maiden blush, rendering
painting altogether out of fashion, making the Face well colored, the Breath
sweet, and the Body lusty.

Against Surfeits.
IT pursues Surfeits, from one place to another in the body, yea, though the
body be swollen up, it does by God's help speedily raise the Patient from a bed
of Languishing; as has been happily experienced by one Mr. De Hewes, a
Glass-maker, in Winchester yard, Southwark, who found the same admirably
successful in his speedy and complete Recovery from that dangerous Distemper;
and (among many others more) Mr. Matthew Bush, a Workman Brewer at Mr. William
Collins his Brew House, over against St. Giles's Church, desires that his Name
be here inserted for the encouragement of others, to the Praise of God, for his
signal Blessing upon this means, in his Recovery from a very dangerous Surfeit,
which brought his life into great peril.

Scurvy and Dropsy.
THis Cordial Drink wonderfully acquits the Body of the Scurvy, root and
branch; and has also been found (to Admiration) successful in the perfect cure
of the Dropsy, and other Distempers, accompanying the same as has been
happily experienced by the aforesaid Mr. De-Hewes, and others (too many here to
mention.)

Coughs, Wheesings, Consumption and Agues.
IT has been found, through God's blessing, an effectual Remedy against Coughs
of all sorts, yea in the height of extremity. It also removes and takes way the
Causes of all Wheesings, and has to Admiration cured Consumptive persons,
Nature being not too far spent. It has been in February 1672. found successful
in the Cure of an Apptientice, by name Geo. Amblin, who was sorely afflicted
with a Quotidian Ague the young Man may be spoken with, or heard of at Captain
Chilidine's Coffee-House, called, the Leaden Hall Coffee-House near Leaden
Hall, and since that Hundreds more.

Mother and Spleen and Fitts of the Mother.
THis Cordial Drink admirably frees the Liver and Spleen of all Obstructio^s,
and is a proper Expedient and effectual Remedy against the Fits of the Mother,
as was happily Experienced on the Wife of Mr. Edward Brandereth a Tailor in
Plow-stable-Alley, by little Lincolns-Fields, who having been in a very sad
manner extraordinarily afflicted with very sore, Fits, is now by the Blessing
of the Lord upon this Elixir, Cured and Freed of that Distemper.

It is also of excellent use for Wet Nurses, cleansing their Blood, and
rendering their Milk wholesome and nurtive to the sucking Babe.

Against Rickets.
IT cures the Rickets, and other distempers in Children, by opening and
removing Obstructions in them.

It keeps a clear passage between the head and heart, not admitting of any
Noxious humor, that annoys those Noble parts. It had Cured Hundreds of hot
Rheum in their Eyes, by cleansing the Optic Nerves, and cleanses the sight to
admiration.

It admirably keeps off frightful fears and griefs from seizing on the heart,
by removing those noxious and sharp humors that occasion the same.

It also takes away the Cause of, and cures the extreme burnings in, the
bottoms of the feet and palms of the hands, which sorely afflict the Heart.

Finally, it highly exalts the Generative virtue, and restores Radical
Moisture, cleansing and strengthening the Seminal vessels in both Sexes,
fitting and preparing them for Conception.

It retains its full Virtue 7 years, this I can prove, which is some years
before either Hind, Witherden, or any of the Counterfeits knew their Liquors,
or what they were good for.

It, is good for the Relief and Cure of those afflicted with the
aforementioned Distempers, which have occasion to take long Voyages, for it
operates as well by Sea as on Land, and as well beyond or under the Line, as on
this side: This I have had Experience of, by those that have taken it in the
East and West Indies, Barbados, New England, and Guiney.

And after the Waters, if you take a Bottle according to your Directions, it
will cleanse the Body and leave it in a very settled condition. It is also
excellent to cleanse the Body after the Measles or Small Pox, for it carries
off the relics of such Distempers, which being not carried off, prove
dangerous to the Patient. And for those that used to Drink Scurvigrass-Ale in
the Spring and Fall, by Experience this my Elixir has been found much more
effectual.

It has been found an admirable Virtue against Worms of all sorts, many that
have taken it against the pains of the Stomach, have by taking of 2 or 3 Doses,
voided thousands of small white Worms, and they have been freed from their pain
in two days time. Also for long Worms in 3 times taking of this my Elixir, some
have voided 19 Worms, some of them 3 quarters of a yard long, and some have
voided Worms as Skins, or Slime, to admiration. And without any danger, it may
be taken by Women when with Child. if they are two Months gone, as safely as if
they were not with Child, for it carries off the Distempers of the Mother, so
that the Child thriveth the better.

In a word, amnogst all the diseases and distempers incident to human Bodies,
which, I have heard or read of in these parts of the world, whether of Men,
Women, Children, or Babes I do in the Presence of God, upon my long experience
of the virtues of this Cordial Drink affirm, There is not one Disease able to
withstand; but is, through Gods blessing subject unto this my Drinks innocent,
powerful, and miraculous operation (Gods appointed time for the Pains
Dissolution being not come.)

You have in this Sheet (as the parties desires) published the Names and
Habitations of some persons, who have by Gods blessing, experienced the
successfulness of this my Inoffensive Cordial, in their Cures or Distempers,
(herein specified) which shall for brevity sake suffice, many hundreds of
other, Cured also by this my Cordial (which might be particularly expressed) I
shall omit as in a small Volum not comprizeable.

I might without ostentation, or any vain glory (if brevity were not designed)
give instances of persons that have (by Gods blessing upon the seeming
improbable means of this my Drink) been cured of the Pestilence, some of Agues;
and of others, that by this Drink have been cured of the King's evil, (so by
its common Symtoms generally judged of:) these Persons applying to me, may have
full satisfaction.

And I do in the presence of the Almighty Searcher of Hearts affirm, and
faithfully promise, That this my pleasant inoffensive Drink, with much
carefulness and integrity duly prepared by me; so that I have (through the
Lord's Goodness) successfully given the same unto my Wife (lying in) and unto
Babes (in the Month) (so qualified, as in my Directions; for taking the same is
particularly expressed.) And I do assure you, that there is nothing of a Mineral
nor Chemical Extraction in it, as some have suggested, on purpose to weaken its
Esteem among people.

Moreover, for prevention of fraud, each Bottle of this my Elixir shall be
sealed with my Coat of Arms, according to its Impression in the Title; the
London price being but Five Shillings the Pint, or Two Shillings Six Pence the
Half-pint Bottle; and the same is (for the better and more convenient
Accommodation of persons living at a distance from me) to be sold at the places,
and by the persons hereafter named, which are all that in London, Westminster,
or Southwark, do vend the same for me, viz. Mr. Benjamin Billinsley at the
Printing-Press, In the Royal Exchange under the Piazza's. Mr. Samuel Crouch, at
the Corner of Popes-head-Alley over against the Royal Exchange. Thomas
Harrison, Bookseller and Stationer at the South-West-end of the Royal Exchange
in Cornhill. Mr. Daniel Scot, Sadler at the lower End of Coleman-street. Mr.
Christopher Conningsby at the Turks-head over against St. Dunstans-Church. Mr.
Playford, Bookseller next the Temple Church, in the Inner Temple. Mr. Henry
Daintry, a Cane-shop at the Cock without Temple Bar. Mr. Abraham Cotterell. at
the Sign of the Cock in Catharine-street, and by him at the Sign of the Cock,
at Charing Cross Tobacconist. Mr. Loyd at Loyds Coffee-House near
Northumberland-House in the Strand. Mr. John Barnes Bookseller at the Sign of
the Crown over against St. Albans Street in Pallmall. Mrs. Low Strongwater-shop
at the Corner of Green-street near Leicester Feilds. Mr. Bynns at Bettys
Cossee-House in German-street near St. James Church. By Mrs. Johnson at
Johnson's Coffee-house, near St. James's Church. Mrs. Bently, Bookseller in
Covent Garden. Mr. John Bignal Grocer, at the White-Lyon in Russel Street in
Covent Garden. Mr. Henry Wyndham at the Sign of the Hand and Pen in
Russel Street in Covent Garden Milliner. By Mrs. Smart a Potter, near St.
Giles's Church. Mrs. Mary Powell, Semstress, at Greys-Inn-gate in Holbourn. In
St. Martins, by Mr. Minacin, a Stationer at the King's Head. In Hounds-Ditch, by
Mr. John West, a Meal man near Gun-yard. Mr William Seaton Distiller next door
to Sir. John Friend's Brew House in the Minories. At Battersey, by William
Stubbington. At VVansor, by Mr. Robert Ludwell, Carpenter near the Pound. And
at my own House in Prujean's Court, in the Great Old Bailey, nigh Ludgate Hill,
London.


At which several places abovementioned, all Persons that are desirous of this
Cordial Drink, may (together with a Bottle of the same) receive one of the
printed Books, sealed with my Seal, and printed Directions for the use and
application thereof, proper to each Distemper, and the Pa^ient's condition, and
strength of Body.

And it having pleased God so highly to own my Endeavors, and crown my
Medicine with so eminent and incredible success, in the Cure of diverse People
afflicted with the Distempers (herein specified) some malevolent and mercenary
Persons do endeavor the counterfeiting of it, to the great prejudice and peril
of sundry people: these are therefore to give notice, That whosoever in this
City or Suburbs, or elsewhere (not named in this Book) shall undertake the Sale
of any Cordial Drink, called by my Drink's Name, and the Bottles and Books not
sealed as this Book, the same I do aver to be a Counterfeit, though the Name of
my Drink, and my own and others many Years Experiences of the Virtues of it be
impudently stolen nigh word for word.

DIRECTION Given by me (ANTHONY DAFFY, Student in Physic.) For taking my safe,
innocent and successful CORDIAL DRINK, ELIXIR SALVTIS; Proper to the Cure of
each Distemper (in the Printed Sheet of its Virtues mentioned,) and suited unto
the Patients several Ages, Sexes and Constitutions.
The first general Observation.
FOr such persons as are oppressed with Chronical Distempers whether the Gout,
Stone, Colic, Ptissick, Dropsy, etc. and have (diverse Years) been tortured
and bowed down under the burden of them: I say, for Distempers habitual to, and
radicated in the Body; it cannot rationally be expected that this (by any Means
under Heaven) may on a sudden effect their Cure, any more than that a small
shower of rain (after a long season or Summers drought) should presently revive
the parched and dying flowers and herbs of the field, and restore them to their
lively verdure and greenness: To persons therefore infected with these
Chronical Distempers, and disposed to use the means of this my Drink, I give
this advice, that they take the same according to the ensuing particular
Directions, and patiently wait upon the Almighty. Physician of Soul and Body
for his Blessing, and I doubt not, but they (as well as others have done) will
find very much releif, at least by ease of their pains, if not the perfect cure
of their disease; which some Aged persons have happily experienced. Moreover,
let not the Patients (having taken this Drink) impatiently expect its operation
or working with them, on a sudden; for experience has found that on some
Bodies it is 6 hours, on some 8, and on some 12 hours, before it works: and in
most Distempers, its operation is so gentle and moderate, that the Patients may
(with safety) follow their business and occasions, either at home, or abroad.

The second general Observation.
LEt the Patient afflicted with any of the Distempers, in the Book of my
Cordials Virtues mentioned, have a due regard to the state and condition of his
or her Body (if the Body be Costive as most generally persons under such
distempers are,) let the first dose (if the age, and strength of nature will
permit) be three Spoonfuls at the Patients going to Bed, and the like Dose at
the up-rising in the Morning: But in case the Body be Laxative, then let the
first dose overnight be one Spoonful, and another at the up-rising in the
Morning, and so let the Dose be increased by one Spoonful each time if the
Patients strength may admit, till it comes to three Spoonfuls, which (without
good advise) none is to exceed. In taking the same, let the Patient use as much
exercise and stirring, as strength of Body may admit. Here likewise observe,
the Patient ought to avoid Melancholy, and keep a good Diet; and it is
convenient to take a mess of Broth, or something warm, an hour after the
Mornings Dose, which is found more proper than Posset-Ale.

The third general Observation.
THis Drink has been many Years experienced so innocent and sure in it is
operation, that it may be safely taken at any season of the year, for neither
heat, nor cold can obstruct its beneficial operation on the Body. Moreover this
Drink will retain its Virtue, though kept two years together (as diverse persons
have found) but I suppose it may be kept much longer: Another Virtue and innate
propriety of this Drink (distinguishing it from all other Physic whatsoever)
is, that at the Patients leaving off the same the Patients Body remains not
Costive, but in a very good healthful temper and lightsome condition.

The GOVT.
LEt the Patient (having competent strength of Nature) take three Spoonfuls of
this Elixir in the Morning fasting and the like Dose last at Night; the which
course must be followed so long as the Patients strength of Body will bear it,
and especially if the Pains be found to move from one joint to another: I
advise the Patient to be active, and use as much stirring exercise, as
conveniently may be: Here note, That after four Doses, or twelve Spoonfuls
taking, the Patient may (if the same be found to work five or six times in a
day) intermit a day, and then return to the Drink; taking then two Spoonfuls in
the Morning, one spoonful an hour before Dinner, and two Spoonfuls last at
Night; but let not the Patient, finding not his expectation answered on a
sudden lay aside the further use of this Choice Remedy; for although some have
been Cured of this torturing malady in taking out of one half-pint Bottle of
this Drink, yet some require a Pint, and others more, according as the Disease
has more or less seated and riveted it self into the Body.

The Stone or Gravel in the Kidneys.
IF the Patients pain lie most, either in the Reins or the Flank it is an
Indication, whereby he or she may conclude, the Malady is the Stone or Gravel
in the Kidneys; then the Patients age and strength of Nature admitting, let him
or her take the first Dose, or three Spoonfuls last at Night, and first in the
Morning, and presently after it use as much stirring exercise, as may be; and
although Riding may at that time be burthensom, yet it would prove very
profitable and advantageous; for by using extraordinary exercises and
agitations of the Body, diverse have been far sooner discharged of this
tortucing Distemper, as has been experienced by Mr. Crawley (in the printed
Sheet of the virtues of this Drink) who by taking but three Spoonfuls of this
Drink, and riding ten Miles upon it, voided three Stones, each as big as a
Horse-bean, (as he himself testifies.)

STONE in the Bladder.
LEt the Patient afflicted with the Stone in the Bladder, consider the bigness
of it, and take the full Dose of three Spoonfuls last at Night, and the like
first in the Morning, continuing the same for three days; then intermit two
days, and return to it, then taking only two Spoonfuls last at Night, and the
like Dose first in the Morning, which course let the Patient observe, and by
the Lords Blessing the Stone will be found to wast gradually, and in
conclusion, to come away; but Patience is to be exercised, for although Thomas
Hind voided away the Stone in nine Spoonfuls, or three Doses taking; yet that
great Stone voided by the said Mr. Crawley was nigh 12 Months in wasting,
before it could come away, and was then rendered so soft, that it crumbled away
between the fingers.

Exulceration of the Kidneys.
For the Exulceration of the Kidneys, rendering the Patients Urine like Blood:
let the Patient keep to the direction of the Second general Observation, and so
first open and cleanse the Body for two days; and then for two days, Night and
Morning, take one spoonful or two (according to the Measure of strength) and
then intermit two days, and after, take one Spoonful at night, and one in the
Morning, and one an hour before Dinner; This method in taking the same, has by
the Lords Blessing been found eminently shccesful in the healing and cleansing
any Exuleeration of the Reins or Bladder.

Colic and Griping in the GVTS.
LEt the Patient (at any time of pain) take three Spoonfuls, which may ease or
mitigate the pain; and if he or she be not discharged of the Pains, let him, or
her, take three spoonfuls more, five hours after; but if the Patient be a
costive, or a corpulent Body; let such a one take a Dose of 4 Spoonfuls during
the Gripes, and (if the pain continue) four Spoonfuls more six hours after; for
this Distemper is usually sadly violent, and must be followed close; yet this
means (thus taken) fails not, by the blessing of Almighty God to become Master
of this sad Malady. Afterward (for cleansing the Body of the dregs of it) let
the Patient lessen the Dose, according to directions of the general Observation

PTISSICK.
LEt the Patient weigh and consider the three general Observations, and
(according to direction thereof) open and cleanse the Body, for four days; and
after that, take only half a Spoonful, when the Cough is perceived coming upon
him or her, and one Spoonful, an hour before Dinner; and this course (followed)
will by degrees gain power over, and waste the Distemper; yea, and strengthen
Nature against it; and this course may be taken even in Winter, when the
Distemper is predominant and strongest upon the Patient; by which means, he or
she will (by the Lords Blessing) find the Breath free, and the Cough
exceedingly abated, if not taken away. But as to youthful Persons, that are not
far gone in this sad Malady, a Pint of this Drink in the Spring, and as much in
the Fall (taken as before directed) will (by Gods Blessing,) not fail of their
perfect Cure. And unto aged People, afflicted with this Distemper, it does so
far aid Nature, and strengthen them, as in the following Winter to render their
lives pleasant to them; provided always, that the Patient be moderate in
drinking, and have a care to prevent taking cold, and keep a good Diet.

DROPSY.
IF it be predominant upon the Patient (known by the bigness of the Belly,
swelling of the Limbs and Face) let the Patient take four spoonfuls first in
the morning, and the like Dose last at night, for four days together, then
intermit two days, and afterward keep two orthree spoonfuls at night, and the
like Dose in the morning.

SCVRVEY.
THe Scurvey, known by knots in the flesh, and blew spots in the skin, let the
Patients keep to the directions in the three general observations, having due
regard to the strength of their bodies, and take the drink two days,
intermitting two days, for the space of a month, and then take only one
spoonful in the morning, and another an hour before dinner.

SVRFEITS.
LEt the Patient take the ordinary Dose of 3 Spoonfuls at night and three in
the morning, for six times without intermission; and there is no doubt but (by
the Lords Blessing) the same will be found succesful to his or her Relief and
Cure, though the height of the distemper had brought the Patient very low, and
nigh the gates of death: And I would advise others, and particularly such as
are apt to drink much Wine (bad and sophisticated Wines being very frequent and
fatal in this City and elsewhere) that they do upon the least illness and
indisposition of Body, apply themselves unto this choice Remedy, either the
same night, or the next morning, or both; for this Drink is experienced a
choice Antidote for preventing of Surfeits (insensibly stealing upon men) and
expelling out of the Body that malignant Matter, which is the occasion and rise
thereof.

PESTILENCE.
LEt the Patient, when first smitten with his Visitation or with Illness,
accompanied with any symptom of the Distemper (regard being had to the
direction of the three general Observations) take three spoonfuls, or less, of
this Drink (according to the Patients strength or weakness of Body) and so
proceed as occasion shall require; and I question not, but (through mercy) the
same will be found an effectual means, as well for overcoming the Distemper, as
for strengthening Nature, and restoring Health (unless the Patients Visitation
be the Messenger of Death) which Benefit has been happily experienced, and will
be attested by diverse persons in my own and other Families, which stayed in the
City in the time of the last great Visitation, and were Visited, and yet
through God's goodness do still remain in the Land of the Living.

Fits of the Mother, and Vapors from the Spleen.
LEt the Patient (having regard to the direction of the general Observations)
begin with one, or with two Spoonfuls of this Drink, and so continue or raise
the Dose, according to what the Patients strength may admit, remembering that
the greatest Dose prescribed is not to exceed three Spoonfuls, and let the
proper Dose be taken at any time whatsoever, when the Fit is found to be
coming upon him or her.

WHen Women, either by reason of taking Cold, or any other accident, find an
Obstruction of their Courses, though it be in Childbed, give them three
spoonfuls of this drink, at any time (either of night or day,) and through Gods
Blessing; they will find all in good order again; of which excellent virtue in
this Drink, diverse Women, and my own Wife (when in Childbed) have found
comfortable experiences, and will attest the same to others.

GREEN SICKNESS.
LEt the Patient duly observe the direction of the three general Observations,
using as much stirring Exercise, as strength will permit; and in four days
time, she will, by the Blessing of God, find her Distemper diminish, and in
taking of an half pint Bottle, the Cheeks and Lips will return to their former
Rose-colour.

CHILDRENS Distempers.
FOr CHILDRENS DISTEMPERS, whether the Worms, Rickets, the Stone, Convulsions,
Gripes, King's Evil, Joint Evil, or any Distemper proceeding from Wind or
Crudities, engendered by means of undigested Matter (the effect of their cold
and weak Stomachs,) which is the grand and original cause of these their
distempers: The way of administering this drink must be in this manner; to a
Babe of a month-old, give (in time of its affliction) half a Child's Spoonful
thereof, mixed with double the quantity of small Ale, not exceeding this Dose,
nor oftener than once in 12 hours time. To a Babe of half a year old, let the
Dose be half a middling spoonful o^ the Drink, with double the quantity of
small Ale. To one of a year old, one spoonful, with the likequantity of small
Ale. To a Child of four years one spoonful of the Drink alone. To one of seven
years old, two spoonfuls; and to one of 12 years old, two spoonfuls and an
half, in any of these Distempers, not exceeding one Dose in 12 hours, except
only in the Gripes, and then, one Dose every five hours; where observe, that in
most of these Distempers, it has pleased God so to bless this means, that two
Doses have been found successful to Babes and Children: Here note, that the
strength of the Child, and of its Distemper, will be a more sure Guide for
proportioning a proper Dose, than the Child's Age.

The Stone in Babes and Children.
ANd if the Distemper be the Stone observe the same directions in administering
this Drink to Babes and Children, of all Ages, as is above prescribed for those
under other Distempers; except only that Distemper of the Gripes; and this
Drink gradually wastes the Stone, and turns Stones to Gravel, bringing them away
as soft as Meal, and brings away Worms, as skins; it also brings away a flimy
substance, some black, some green (the cause of these Distempers, which
manifold experience has fully confirmed.

Convulsion-Fits.
Moreover it has also been experienced that unto a Child of seven years old
(afflicted with the Gripes or Convulsion Fits in extremity) there has been
found necessary the same Dose, as for a Man, being three spoonfuls, and five
hours after, the like Dose.

Consumptions, bad Digestions.
LEt Consumptive Persons, of either Sex, take one spoonful of this Drink an
hour before Dinner, and another such Dose, an hour after Dinner; for many weak
Consumptive Persons have (through the Lords Blessing) experienced the same very
successful in strengthening weak Nature, converting their food into good
nourishment, and instrumental in restoring their strength.

Agues.
LEt the Patient (an hour before the expected time of the Fit) take three
Spoonfuls, being at what time soever; and two spoonful, six hours after: (which
done,) let the Patient observe the Directions of the second general Observation.

Piles.
LEt the person afflicted, diligently follow the Direction in the second
general Observation, it having been lately found to be successful.

FINIS.

