THE CASE OF Robert Weston, NOMINATED By the Commit, as Register and Clerk of
the Court of Conscience, for the Division of the Borough of Southwark, and
Parishes adjacent.
Robert Weston an Inhabitant within the Borough of Southwark, being a Person
well known to Sir Peter Rich, Knight. and John Arnald, Esquire Burgesses for the said
Borough, to be fitly qualified for Register and Clerk of the Court of
Conscience, for the Division of the said Borough and Parishes adjacent: And he
being recommended for that purpose by several Hundred of the Inhabitants there
(some of whom did formerly Expend considerable Sums of Money, in order to the
obtaining a Court of Conscience there;) and he having prepared a Bill for a
Court of Conscience there only; and since this Bill brought in by another Hand,
for the settling Courts of Conscience in the City of Westminster, and other Out
Parts of the City of London (and in which, to ease the Charge, a Court of
Conscience for the said Borough was included.) The said Robert Weston having
attended this Honorable House, and the Committee, on behalf of the Inhabitants
of the said Borough, in order to procure some Alterations and Amendments in
the said Bill, which the Committee judged reasonable, and agreed to. Sir Peter
Rich and Mr. Arnold, together with rest of the Committee, to whom the Bill was
committed, have Named him therein as Register and Clerk of the said Court of
Conscience.

It is now Humbly requested, That you will be pleased to agree to the Bill, as
to that particular; and continue him therein, he being capable of Executing the
said Place of Register and Clerk, being brought up to the Law, and having so
behaved himself from his very first beginning, that not only his Clients and
Neighbors, but others, to whom he is known, will give this Honroable House as
ample a Testimony for him (if it shall be required) as ever any Man of his Age,
or Profession yet had.

He will likewise, to avoid any Color of Clamor, Pay a proportionable Part of
all such Charges as have been truly Expended in the procuring this Act.


