INFORMATION For the Master of STAIR.
HIS Majesty's Commissioner having thought fit to Communicate to the Parliament,
the Report, with the Evidences and Instructions taken and adduced before the
Commission of Glencoe, and the Master of Stair's Friends conceiving that he is
mightily Prejudged by that Report, which notices particular Sentences or
Periods of certain Letters of His, suppressing or not expressing other Material
Periods of the same Letters, and from whence Consequences are drawn, which
cannot follow upon a due consideration of the whole.

The Masters Friends had no Opportunity to see these Letters, or know the Tenor
of them, till they were read in Parliament, and then being satisfied that they
do not answer to the Rumors and Commentars that are spread abroad upon them, it
was earnestly desired that the Letters might be Printed for the Masters
Vindication, which was not obtained, nor doubles allowed to be taken; but the
Grounds of the Report only allowed to be seen in the Clerks Hands.

There has been so much discourse about Glenco, that little needs to be said to
state the Case: Its known they were very ill Men, Rebels, Papists, Robbers and
Theivs, which did not justify any Inhumanity in their Execution, but did
expose them more to legal Severity than other Subjects.

His Majesty being justly displeased, that many Rebels had despised two
Indemnities, did resolve in the next place, to apply the severity of the Law,
and none were found more fit to fall under it than those of Glenco.

To that end His Majesty granted Instructions to Sir Thomas Livingstoun, on
the 11th. January 1692, whereof the first runs in these Terms, You are hereby
Ordered and Authorized to march our Troops which are now posted at Inverlochie
and Inverness, to act against these High-land Rebels, who have not taken the
benefit of our Indemnity, by Fire and Sword, and all manner of Hostility, to
burn their Houses, seize or destroy their Goods, Cattle, ^lenishing and
Clothes, and to cut off the Men: And the fourth Article bears, That the Rebels
may not think themselves absolutely desperate, We allow you, to own Powers, to
give Terms and Quarters; But We are so convinced of the necessity of Severity,
and that they cannot be reclaimed, That We will not allow you, to give any
other Terms to Chistans, Heretors or Leaders, but to be Prisoners of War,
whereby their Lives are saved; But for all other things they must surrender on
Mercy, and take the Oath of Allegiance. And the fourth Article of additional
Instruction the 16th. of January 1692 bears, "If Mckean of Glenco, and his
Tribe can be well separated from the rest, it will be a proper Vindication of
the Public Justice to exstirpat that Sect of Theives.

The Highland Rebels, who had not accepted of the Indemnity, might lawfully
have been cut off without Quarters, but His Majesty molifies that Rigor, by
allowing Sir Thomas Livingston to give Terms and Quarters, yet Glenco was by
these Orders to ly nearest to the just Vengeance of the Law.

Old Mckean of Glenco, did not take the Oath in due time, but six days after,
he prevailed with Arkinglass to Administer the same, which Arkinglass did, and
desired that his Case might be represented to the Privy Council. But the rest
of his Clan, and Followers did not take the Oaths at all, yet upon his taking
the Oath, he and his People did look upon themselves as secure, and Glenlyon,
and his Company was Lodged among them in a peaceable manner, from the 1. to the
13. of February, and it appears against the Rules of Hospitality and Humanity,
that he with his Company, and others, did Barbarously Murder, five and Twenty
Men, and a Woman, and particularly his own Landlord, and many aggravating
Circumstances, do clearly appear, particularly that men of great Age, and a Boy
of Fourteen years were cut off, and that Captain Drummond was very forward in
that cruel Execution.

The Parliament has considered his Majesty's Instructions, and the Execution,
and have voted that the Instructions contain a Warrant for Mercy to all who
offer to take the Oath of Allegiance, and come in upon Mercy without exception,
though the Diet prefixed was elapsed; and that the same contained no Warrant
for the Execution of the Glenco men, made in February thereafter.

It was also Voted, that the said Execution, as it was represented in
Parliament, was a Murder.

It was further Moved, That the Parliament should proceed to Consider the
Persons guilty of the said Murder, and the Report does load the Master of
Stair, as if his Letters had given the Occasion of it.

In the first place, the Report of the Commission is noways to be reguarded to
I^fluence any Member of Parliament, being privately done, without access allowed
to any Party that might be Interessed, but the Grounds and Instructions upon
which it is Founded, are only to be considered.

If the Parliament shall proceed to Consider the Instructions and Probation
adduced, the first and most Natural Point to be considered, is, who were the
Executors; for if these Executors had no suffficient Warrant for what they did,
or if they did that which no Warrant could Authorize, then certainly; as they
were the Executors, so they ly nearest to, and most justly under the Censure of
the Nation. And the Probation as re-presented to the Parliament bears, that
Glenlyon, Captain Drummond, Lieutenant Lindsay, and others being most peaceably
Lodged and Quartered among the Glenco men, from the first of February, and
being civily received and entertained for the space of 13 days, they got access
in a friendly manner, to come in to old Glencoe's Chamber, where he lay and
killed him treacherously behind his back, and that Glenlyon's Landlord was
killed by him; and that old men superannuated, two Children, and a Woman were
killed.

This Execution was so Barbarous, that no Warrant could authorize it, the Laws
of Humanity being the strongest of all Ties, and whatever Obligations may ly
upon Soldiers under Pay to execute Commands without disputing, yet they are
rather obliged to give up their Commissions than to fly in the face of Nature.
2. Though the Command of Superior Officers be very absolute, yet no Command
against the Laws of Nature are binding, so that a Soldier retaining his
Commission, ought to refuse to execute any Barbarity, as if a Soldier should be
commanded to shoot a Man passing by inoffensively upon the Street, no such
Command would exeem him from the Punishment of Murder. 3. There is no pretense
of any warrant for killing of Women or Children under age, neither did Glenlyon
so much as ever remonstrat to the giver of the Order, that he and his men were
under the confidence of Hospitality, which the giver of the Order might not
have considered so well, as he who received it was bound to do before the
Execution.

The Parliament having found the Kings Order legal, and the Execution illegal,
so soon as the Executors are found to have exceeded either their Warrant or the
Laws of Humanity, the Work and Design of the Parliament is done.

But because the Master of Stair has been named in the Matter, for his
Vindication, it is to be considered. First, That there is a great difference in
the Circumstances of Affairs betwixt the time and the Supposition upon which he
wrote, and what fell out about the same time, or shortly thereafter.

Glencoe and his Son had been obstinat R^bells, forefaulted in the Parliament
1690, irreconcilable to the Government, he himself a Murderer, all his Tribe
hereditary Thieves, he and they had slighted two gracious Indemnities, the King
was resolved to make an Example of Justice, as many had been made of his Mercy;
And it was thought that the same could be no where exercised more fitly to the
Terror of others, and two of the Master of Stairs Letters, the first and third
of December 1691, do expostulate that these Men were deluded by hopes of Better
Terms and longer Dyets, whereby they would fall into the Net, which was a
sufficient Warning to beware, yet they did not embrace the Indemnity.

2. All the Secretaries Letters were wrote upon the supposition that they were
still obstinat and irreconcilable Rebels, and no man can reasonably say, that
Rebels in such Circumstances might not be cut off, for an Example of public
Justice, neither was that Severity so much the Secretaries proper Sentiment, as
that his Endeavor to bring in the Highlanders without Blood was misconstructed
as flowing from Good Will and tenderness to the Jacobite Party, whom he would
not have disabled from their old Interprizes, and it was loudly discoursed at
that time, that this Opportunity should be taken to rid the Nation of the
Barbarous Highlanders.

The Masters Project not taking full Effect; and many rejecting the Offered
Mercy, such as obstructed the Negotiation were ready to mis-represent his
Measures to the King; and there being Resolution to make an Example of Severity
on these very People, the Mr. was obliged to enter in it the more frankly,
because the Persons to whom the Letters were directed, and had the Trust of
Execution, had not been favorable to that Negotiation: and if he had appeared
indifferent in that matter, he might have lain under greater Censure another
way-

3. As the Master did not know that Glencoe had taken the Oaths, even after
the Diet elapsed, but looked upon all the Tribe as in open Rebellion, so much
less did he know that the manner of Execution would be by a man lodged as a
Friend thirteen Nights in their Bosom, or that they would kill Women or
Children, in which the Inhumanity does really consist, for suppose the case
that they all had been standing out obstinat Rebels, and never taken the
Oaths, nor so much as offered Submission, and that in such Circumstances,
Military Forces had gone in and destroyed them all, no man can say there was
any thing illegal or cruel in that, and it was the Opinion of all who advised
the King, and it was His Majesty's Pleasure it should be so, and the Variation
of Circumstances without the Masters Knowledge, did not alter the case as to
him.

The Circumstances that altered were two, the one, that old Glencoe took the
Oath after the Diet, which should have prcoured him Mercy, and next the manner
of Execution by Soldiers lodged in the Place, both were altogether unknown to
the Master.

No Body loads the Master with the last and great Circumstance, which relates
to all the Persons slain: but the other Circumstance of Old Glencoes having
taken the Oath, is alleged to have been known to the Master, and the Report of
the Commission is not positive in that Point, but it says that it appears the
same was known.

To this its answered. I. That if it can be instructed, that the Master did
know of Old Glencoes taking the Oath, whether legally or not legally at the
time of writing any of the Letters preceding the Slaughter, whereof the last
is dated the 30. of Jan. 1692. in that case the Master would be willing to
forefeit his Reputation, Life, and Fortune: so that it is still positively and
peremptorly asserted, that the Master was wholly ignorant of that Circumstance.

The Evidence upon which the Report of the Masters Knowledge of that
Circumstance proceeds, is the same Letter of the thirtieth of January, bearing,
I am Glad Glencoe did not come in within the time prescribed, etc. from whence
it is inferred, that he knew of Glencoes coming in after the time elapsed,
which is a very wide Consequence, First, The embraceing the Indemnity, supposes
the coming in, in due time, and the Indemnity being in his view, he had no eye,
nor Consideration of what followed.

2. That Letter could never be the Warrant of Sir Thomas Livingstons Order,
upon which the Execution followed, because Sir Thomas his Order is upon the 23
of the said Month, seven days preceding.

3. His Letter of the same date direct to Colonel Hill, bears in the
beginning, that he doubted not the Colonel would make the best use of the
present Circumstance, and where Glencoe is mentioned, it is said he is fallen
in the Mercy of the Law, and shortly after he adds these false People will do
nothing, but as they see you in condition to do with them, by the first and
last of which Clauses, which afterward will be more largely related, it is
evident that the Master leaves all to the Collonells Management, to whom the
Order was also directed; and by the middle Clause, that Glencoe was still
considered as in the mercy of Law, which clears that the Master did not
understand him to be under any Security by taking the Oaths, neither can these
Letters be reckoned peremptor, because all is thereby left to the Discretion
and Management of the Persons to whom they are directed.

And whereas it has been further said, that whether the Master knew of
Glencoes taking the Oaths or not, yet his Letters are more peremptor than the
Kings Instructions, in so far as the Kings Instructions are qualified, and bear
power to give Terms, and several of the Masters Letters are peremptor for the
Destruction of Glencoe, without mentioning the Quality which the Instructions
do contain, and even the most peremptor Instruction against Glencoe, bearing,
that if they could be well separat from the rest, it would be a proper
Vindication of publict Justice to exstirpat that Sect of Theives, does not take
off the Quality, that they might be received upon Mercy.

It is answered, 1. Though the Masters Letters were more Peremptor than the
Kings Instructions; yet if they were within the Terms, and not exceeding the
Rigours which the Law allows, the Master could never be quarreled upon these;
for either they were to be considered as writ by the Master of Stair a private
Person, in which case they could afford no Authority, or Warrant to Impair or
Extend the Kings Instructions: and these to whom the Instructions were
directed, were bound to obey them, and not private Letters; Or if the Masters
Letters were considered as flowing from the Secretary of State, the Kings
Authority is presumed to be there. And none can quarrel any Expression in these
Letters, except the King himself, unless the Kings Authority were used to a
thing in it self unlawful, which could not be pretended; in so far as the
Glencoe men being understood to be forefeited obstinat Rebels, they were
absolutely in the mercy of Law to be Cut off, or destroyed by Military
Execution, without any mercy.

2. Et separatim, It is positively asserted, that there is not one Circumstance
in the Masters Letters beyond the Kings Instructions, but all the Letters do
bear Qualities in them, whereby they are to be constructed suitable and
agreeable to the Instructions in all Points.

For clearing of this Point, its to be considered. 1. That nothing can be
founded upon Letters posterior to the Fact, whereof there are two; One of which
bears, that the Execution was neither so full nor so fair, as it might have
been, which blames and disapproves of the manner. And any Expression of these
Letters that may be Interpreted a justifieing of Severity, is rather to be
considered a covering of an Error and Escape, than an Approbation of what had
past, and many things will be excused when they are done, that a reasonable man
would not advise nor practice; neither can it be supposed, that the worst of
the Circumstances were known, such as the Murder under Trust.

2. Nothing can be founded on the two Letters the thirtieth of January, though
these do preceed the Execution; because no Direction or Instruction followed
upon the Letters of the 30th. In so far as Lieutennant Colonel Hamiltons
Orders, both from Sir Thomas and Colonel Hill were not only before these
Orders could come to hand, but dated the 23d. of the same month of January,
seven days before the Masters Letter, and their was no posterior Orders
directed upon Receipt of them, neither did these Letters exceed the Kings
Warrant: in as far as they bear still a Reference to the prudence and
management of these to whom they are directed. And the Letter to Sir Thomas,
contains a Clause after several particulars mentioned, viz, In these you can
only be advised, but must be left to prosecute them as the State of Affairs
will allow And thereafter, desires him to communicate these Particulars to
Colonel Hill, and that he would not be too far engaged with his Neighbors in
Treaty, before he had heard of the Surrender of these two places, which were
forgot in the Instructions: and the Words in relation to Glencoe, are not
Commands but Advices. First, he says I hope what is done may be in earnest:
Again, I think to herry their Cattle and burn their Houses, would render them
desperate Lawless men to Rob their Neighbors: But I Believe, ye will be
satisfied. It were an advantage to the N^tion they were rooted out, which are
not words of Command or Direction, nor in the least excluding the prudent
Management which the King reserved to Sir Thomas: and they are not so peremptor
as the Words of the Instruction, bearing, That if they could be separated from
the rest, they should be Exstirpated.

In like manner, the Masters Letter of the same Date to Colonel Hill, bears, I
doubt not you will as the Circumstances will allow, make the best use of them
that may be; Therefore at a Distance, you cannot receive further Directions,
than what you have under the Kings Hand; And thereafter he says, when any thing
concerning Glencoe is resolved, let it be secret and sudden: better not to
meddle with them, than not do it to purpose, to cut off that Nest of Robbers
who have fallen in the mercy of the Law. And thereafter he says, These false
people will do nothing but as they see you in Condition to do with them. And
thereafter he says, they play fast and loose, as they find themselves pressed:
therefore all I can say, is better get their Houses and their Strength, than
all Assurance we can have from them; Deal with them as you find their
Consternation and your Circumstances allows; but by all means be quick, that
nothing remain till the Summer that they can have help.

The whole Tenor of these Letters clear, that the Master was far from designing
to restrain Sir Thomas or the Colonel from the management of the Affair
committed to their care, or excluding the Rebels from the benefit of His
Majesty's Bounty allowed to be extended to them, in case of their offering
Submission to Sir Thomas.

The next Point to be cleared is, That none of the Letters preceding the Date
of Sir Thomas's Order, did exceed the Terms of Law, or the Kings Instructions.
This does appear from the Terms of the Letters which the Master wished to have
had Printed. The preceding Letters are seven in number, whereof the first two
Direct to Lieutennant Colonel Hamilton on the 1st. and 3d. of December 1691,
contain nothing but Expostulations. That these unhappy men deluded themselves
with the hopes of better Terms and new Dyets, and that they would get off
without taking the Oaths, and foretelling that the Macdonalds would fall in the
Net, and in the mercy of Law, and blaming such as did Obstruct their
Submissions, and no bad Commentar can be made upon these.

The next Letter is of the 7th of Janaury direct to Sir Thomas Livingstoun,
when the diet was elapsed, and advertising him that the Rebels would be
prosecuted, and that powers would be given to him, which he assures would be
full enough (...) and hopes that the Soldiers will not trouble the Government
with Prisoners, and that the slighting of mercy, and depending upon Foreign
asistance will justify all the severity can be used against them, and adds I
know well, they are cheated with the hopes of prolonging the diet, and having
the benefit of Indemnity without Oaths, and more money, but in all these they
are deluded, and we must make sure of them before they can get these Supplies
from France they depend on, In all this there is nothing amiss but an evidence
of great Loyalty, and affection and a just zeal against obstinat Rebels, who
every season put the Nation under the haza^d of an Invasion by a cruel and
powerful Enemy.

The next Letter is the 9th direct to Sir Thomas, and to the same purpose in
which he says, I do not see how new Treaties and Terms can be entered into,
which can only be to preserve them till help be had, Then he adds toward the
end, I think it just that powers be lodged with you, who I know will use them
discreetly for the Common-well, and adds that if they got not encouragement
from others than the Master or Sir Thomas, not one man would have stood out.

This Letter relates to Instructions to be made, and promised that Powers would
be Lodged with Sir Thomas, which was accordingly done by the fourth Article of
the first Inst^uction.

The next Letter is of the 11th. of January, of the Date of the first
Instructions, This is one of the chief Letters founded upon in the Report which
does only notice this Clause that the Earl of Argyle has just now told me that
Glencoe had not taken the Oath at which I rejoice; It Is a great work of Charity
to be exact in Rooting out that Damnable Sect the worst in all the High-lands:
but the Commission takes no notice of the other Clauses of the same Letter
which Demonstratively clear that nothing of that Letter was designed to Cut off
Sir Thomas's power to manage according to discretion in as far as it bears, I
have sent you the King's Instructions Super and subscribed by himself, I am
confident you will see there are full Powers given you in very plain Terms, and
yet the methods left very much to your own Discretion and thereafter another
Clause bears, it is necessary you own that you have Power, and then proceeds to
advise how he should Treat and Manage these Powers.

There remains only two Letters dated the 16th. which are of the date of the
last Instructions, bearing that if Glencoe could be ^ell separat from the rest,
it would be a proper Vindication of Justice to exstirpat that Sect; The words
chiefly noticed by the Commission in that Letter are these, I entreat you that
for a just Vengeance and public advantage, the Thieving Tribe of Glencoe may
be Rooted out to purpose: But st^ll the Tenor of the Letter and Clause clearing
the Design are Omitted, neither is that very Clause severer, than the Terms of
the Instructions, to exstirpat that Sect of Thieves for the Vindication of
public Justice, but further to testify that the said Clause did not exclud
mercy and power to manage according to discretion; The Letter to Sir Thomas
Livingstone of that date is relative to the Additional Instructions in the
beginning of it. 2 It bears, the King does not at all incline to receive any
after the Term but on Mercy, nor will he alter the Terms of the Indemnity, for
that is to make people always Dodge and Hope for better Terms than these who
obeyed and came in within the day, therefore, that is left entirely to your
discretion according to Circumstances, but by no means leave any standing that
may Encourage or invite the French to send thither Succors in the Spring, and
in his Letter of the same date to Colonel Hill, he likewise relates to the
Instructions directed both to him and to Sir Thomas; Then adds I know your
Sentiments will be the same but none knows what power the King has given you
Then follows a Clause in these Terms it were to be desired that these who stood
out till the Diet was Elapsed might be made Examples for their Folly, and that
these should not have the same Terms or better then these who in time did obey,
and these Rebels Estates may be made a perpetual Fond for the Charge of the
Garrison. I am not for pun^ilios to endanger a Disgrace to the King's Forces,
etc.

So the whose tenor and strain of these Letters do clear, whatsoever rigor was
designed for Glencoe. either by the instructions, or the Master of Stairs
Letters. yet all was in the terms of Law, and with reservation to be used by
Sir Thomas, and Colonel Hill, according to discretion and Circumstances.


