THE CASE OF Robert Blackburne.
APril 2d. 1696, the said Blackburne was Committed to Newgate, and the
September following, putting in his Prayer, was admitted to Bail at the
Sessions House in the Old Baily, and no Information coming against him, he was
at the ensuing Sessions discharged from his Bail, and absolutely Acquitted. By
this his Chargeable Confinement having Contracted several Debts, and his
Creditors being very pressing upon him, he resolved to go for Flanders, where
he had some Relations, from whom he might reasonably expect some Assistance;
and in order thereunto, he put himself on Board an Oftend Man of War, but not
being able, for want of Money, to procure a Pass, he was by Capt. Nash, His
Majesty's Searcher, brought back to London, as a Suspicious Person, and
Committed to the Custody of one Davis, a Messenger; where, when he had remained
for 3 or 4 Days, he, by his Solicitor, represented his Case to Sir William
Trumball, then Secretary of State; upon the Consideration of which, Sir
William, as the said Blackburne was informed by his Solicitor, was inclined to
discharge him; but he was still delayed, till the Parliament being about to
pass a Bill for continuing the Imprisonment of one Counter, and others, which
Bill having passed the House of Commons, and the sad Blackburne's Name not
mentioned therein, Davis, the Messenger, knowing that he had formerly been
Confined with the said Counter, and (although legally Acquitted, as aforesaid,)
made it his Business to get his Prisoner, the said Blackburne, also included in
the said Bill, that he might be Recommitted, and continued in Prison with the
said Counter, etc. by the Act that was then ready to pass the House: And
accordingly, though no farther Information appeared against him, when the Bill
passed the Lords House, they, in their Amendments, incerted the said
Blackburne; whereupon, he was Recommitted to Newgate without ever being
Examined; where he was kept two Years under so Strict and Rigorous a
Confinement, that no Friend was suffered to speak to him, nor could he take any
Measures to set forth the Hardship of his Case, or obtain any Redress.

He humbly believes his Case to be Particular, in that he was never Acquainted
with any one of those Persons who have been put to Death for the late
Conspiracy; nor did he so much as ever know any, or either of those whom he is
in Prison with, until their Confinement. And besides, he desires it may be
observed, That he is not one of those Persons for whom a Thousand Pounds was
paid for the Apprehending.

Midd. ss.
AD Deliberat' Gaol. Dom. Regis de Newgate tent' pro Com' Middlesex, apud
Justice Hall in le Old Baily in Suburbiis Civit. London, die in Cur' Scil. nono
die Septembris, Anno Regni Dom. Gulielmi tert' nunc Regis Angl. etc. Octavo.

Robertus Blackburne tradit. in Bal. in Cur' for' De^iberat' etc.

Per Cur' Harcourt.
Vera Copia Exact.

Per Matthew. Smith. Cler' etc.




