THE deplorable State of the Kingdom of Ireland, and the just apprehensions of
a new Massacre from the Papists there, have forced many thousands of Families
to fly over into England, who coming away on the sudden, and being obliged to
abandon their Houses and Estates, that they might have their Lives for a Prey,
are reduced to the greatest Straits imaginable; many of them wanting the
necessary Supports of Life, and not a few thousands who some Months ago lived
in great Plenty, are now upon the point of Starving, if they are not speedily
and vigorously relieved; Besides that great Numbers are daily coming over, and
like to do so, as long as the Kingdom of Ireland continues in this distressed
Condition. This has wrought so much on the Charity and Piety of their
Majesty's, That they have issued out their Letters Patents for a General
Collection over the whole Kingdom, of which a Copy is herewith sent you. And We
who are among many others appointed by the Brief to take care of the Execution
of it, have thought it incumbent on us to write to you, (No way doubting of
your great Zeal for carrying on so good and so necessary a Charity) to Move you
to use all possible Care and Diligence for the Advancement of it; Hoping you
will represent to the People, that as these our Distressed Brethren are driven
from their Houses and Possessions by the Enemies both of our Religion and
Country: So if we have any Regard either to the Name of an Englishman, or a
Protestant, We must be deeply affected with their Misery. It is not long since
we our selves had the dreadful Prospect of being forced to abandon our Country,
and of choosing a Voluntary Exile. But God of his great Mercy has preserved us
from those Miseries, into which he has suffered these our Brethren and
Countrymen to fall. We hope therefore you will endeavor most effectually to
persuade your respective Charges, to show that liberal Charity to their
distressed Fellow Christians upon this great occasion; which they would have
wished others would have shown to them, if themselves had fallen into the like
Calamity; and that they will stir up all Men to consider what a grateful
Acknowledgment it will be to Almighty God, who has delivered us from the Hands
of our Enemies, to show a most extraordinary Compassion to those who are fallen
into this great Distress. And how justly such as can harden themselves against
such Objects, may expect to fall under Extreme Misery, and to find none to pity
them. And in particular We do desire that every Minister after the reading of
the Brief, will also read this Letter to his Congregation. And that on the
Sunday before he begins to gather this Charity, he will at the Conclusion of
his Sermon earnestly exhort his Parishioners to an extraordinary Liberality
suitable to the pressing Necessities of so great a Number, in so great a
Distress. And all this We most earnestly recommend to your Care, not doubting
but you will so far charge your own Consciences with it, as becomes Men of your
Holy Profession. And We think fit to acquaint you, that for the public
Satisfaction there will be Printed and Published an exact Account of the Moneys
that are Gathered in every Arch-deaconry, and every Parish thereof, together
with an Account of the Distribution of all the Moneys that are received upon
this Brief Attested by the Commissioners therein mentioned. We are

Your Loving Friends, Tho. Ebor. H. London. P. Winchester. W. Asaph. Gi. Sarum.



