THE UNGRATEFUL BEHAVIOR OF THE PAPISTS, PRIESTS, AND JESUITS, Toward the
Imperial and Indulgent Crown of England Toward them, From the Days of Queen
Mary unto this present Age.

LONDON, Printed for James Magnes and Richard Bentley, in Russel Street in
Covent Garden, MDCLXXIX.

Omnibus Christi Fidelibus, Vt Causae Regis magnae Britanniae, Franciae, and
Hiberniae verae Antiquae and Apostolicae Fidei Defensoris ejusque
Parliamentorum Justicia toti Orbi Christiano Innotesceret.
THough it has not been deemed prudent, that Legislators should in their Acts
and Sanctions render their reasons of them; lest by so doing, they might happily
invite and court contradiction from some ill-affected thereunto, which might
prove derogatory unto their Supreme Authority, by giving occasion to the
governed to wrestle with their reasons rendered and alleged; and if they should
think (though erroneously) that they have resolved or confuted them, they would
then also think that they have taken all virtue and efficacy from the very Laws
themselves: Yet it has ever been esteemed acceptable and good Service to
Government it self, that Subjects should defend the just Laws of their Princes,
and especially those wherein Religion is concerned. And Religion being, or
ought to be, the grand concern of every Individual, I hope I shall not be
thought to wander inconsiderately out of my own Province, whilst I endeavor to
justify the late Act of Parliament for preventing dangers which may happen
from Popish Recusants. I must confess that I dare not adventure my Salvation or
Damnation on blind obedience, or Implicit Faith, or on any Deputies, Proxies,
Popes, Priests or Friars, nor take their bare word without express warranty
from Scripture, especially being commanded to search them, and thereby to try
them that say they are Apostles and are not, and being pre-cautioned, lest by
good words and fair speeches the Hearts of the simple be deceived, Romans 16.17.
In which kind of Arts the Papalins are most expert.

I have exposed this Treatise to the consideration of all Christians, but more
especially of all Kings, Princes, and Governors, not to implore their
Countenance or Protection of any error, that happily may be found herein; that
were not only unmannerly, but injurious to Majesty it self. If what is here
written cannot be justified by its own truth, and effort of sound reason, let
it fall to the ground, and be obliterate for ever: For no error or falsehood, or
any false equivocating reasonings can ever be pleasing to the God of Truth, and
therefore ought not to be supported or countenanced by any sublunary Majesty
whatsoever. Justa ratio sapientem non possit offendere. The chief aim and great
design in this Publication, is to justify to all the Christian World His
Majesty's great Title of Defender of the Faith truly Ancient Catholic and
Apostolic by his ready compliance with His great Council, his Two Houses of
Parliament, to put away the evil from this our Israel by this His Act; that
both this and future Ages, perceiving it to have been grounded both on great
reasons of State, and true grounds of Religion, all the World may be the better
satisfied, and his own Subjects may hear and fear, and do no more so
presumptuously.

It is the great duty of every individual Christian for Truth and Conscience
sake, but more especially of Gods Lieutenants on Earth, even for necessity, and
reason of good government also, nay, even out of duty to him by whom they reign
to maintain and preserve Religion in its purity. For this very end God has
ordained Kings and Queens to be his Vicegerents on Earth, and conferred
greatness and Majesty upon them to make them Defenders, nursing Fathers and
nursing Mothers of his Holy Church; in which Calling the greatest of them can
never give a good account of this their Charge and Stewardship, except it be by
a constant watchful care in matters of Religion. As it is not prudent in civil
Politics for any Prince to receive a great succor from a more puissant
Empire; so it is as imprudent for any temporal Prince or Power to indulge or
countenance any Sects that own any dependence on a Foreign Head, Ecclesiastical
or Civil, especially if Sworn to advance that Head and promote his Interest.
And such a Head is the Pope, who claims to be superior to all Princes, to be
exempt from all Control, and exempts his Ecclesiastics from their subjection
and obedience unto their natural Princes, and whom (if you will believe them)
they cannot chastise, though they are rebellious; that he has Power over all,
and can deprive Kings of their Kingdoms, that in any difference between the
Ecclesiastical and Secular, the judgment appertains to the Ecclesiastical as to
the more worthy: And as is the Pope, so are his Papalins. The same Hour they
become his Proselytes, they also become his sworn Vassals and Advocates.

Can it be other than an infinite prejudice done to the Authority of Sovereign
Princes, if they should but supinely permit, or be constrained to change, or
but to suspend their own Laws at the Beck, and Pleasure of another State or
Interest, passing from one Law to another; or tacitly by conniving only to
acknowledge, that he borrows from any other any power of governing in matters
Civil or Ecclesiastical, and therefore but just and reasonable for Princes to
secure their own power by wholesome Laws, preventing all Popish influencies,
that happily by some Wiles or politic Stratagems might oppose them, or interfere
with them, in order to gratify and support their own interest, contrary to the
interest of those Princes whose Subjects they are.

The main Bane of true Church power has been the great opinion that the
Ancient and first converted Emperors had of the Abilities, piety and devotion
of the Ancient Fathers Ecclesiastics, which confidence begat in them supiness
and negligence of their own power, and that gave occasion and encouragement to
the Popes and their Ecclesiastics to usurp and encroach upon their Authority,
whilst they little regarded their own power, which God had fairly stamped upon
them; consequently neglecting their duty, as if they were to render no account
to God for themselves or their Subjects, as if the care and defense of Religion
and Piety were the least of their concerns, tolerating for their own interest
the people to be deceived, by suffering the Pope to set up new Orders and Rites
under the umbrello of Religion, but in reality for his own Empire and profit,
without considering that such Orders and Customs by tract of time carry along
with them their own warranty, and so secretly invite belief, which at length
become merely serviceable to the interests of those that manage them ( viz. the
Popes) and consequently disserviceable and disadvantageous unto Princes, and
all temporal Governments: And such Orders being received and continued by the
present Princes, are no small obligations to their Heirs and Successors to
continue them by reason of that former Authority engraven upon them by Custom,
and their Predecessors. Now, what does this Act do? give a stop to the open,
and public profession of the true Ancient Catholic and Apostolic Faith, as
the Romanists bespatter and give out. Nothing less! It only discountenanceth
the public and open Profession of the Romish Tridentine Faith, which (in those
Articles wherein they differ from the Protestants) is neither True, nor
Ancient, nor Catholic, but is an entire Apostasy from it, and doubtless is
the most Catholic, and greatest Heresy in the Christian World. A Religion,
that upon due examination, and chioce, no Man can embrace without reproaching
his Maker, and his Redeemer, by renouncing his reason, nay his very outward
senses wherewith God has endued him. A Religion, that by the same reason that
they endeavor to justify Transubstantiation (I instance in this, because I
find more do wave the observance of the Act on the account of the Declaration
and Subscription, than of the Oaths therein) a Man may as well believe every
Hobbyhorse to be a Barbe or Courser of Naples, or the picture of every Bruit
on a Sign-post to be really the Bruit it self: Nay to doubt, or deny that ever
there was such a person as Jesus Christ upon Earth, or that, he or any of the
Saints which slept, did rise from the dead after him; or that the Graves did
open, or that the Vail of the Temple was rent, or that there was darkness over
the whole Land from the sixth hour to the ninth, etc. I appeal to all the World
if ever God declared either by word or practice, that he would make use of
arts praestigiariae, Juggling Arts, by deceptio sensuum, or otherwise. Nay,
has not his practice ever been clearly contrary in all the Miracles that he or
his Son ever wrought? And the learned of the Romanists would infinitely oblige
us if they would demonstrate unto us, which of Christ's Body it is, that is
Corporally in the Sacrament, whether his glorified, or not glorified Body, and
clear it of all the monstrous absurdities that opinion is guilty of.

The Ancient Catholic and Apostolic Faith partakes not of their fopperies,
nor of their absurdities, (for their concealments and spunges are no better)
needs no captious reasonings, no equivocations; requires no implicit, or blind
faith or obedience, uses no knaveries: No, no, pure Religion, and undefiled, is
of a better Brood, of a more Noble Extract, of a more Divine Origin: The
profession thereof joined with Holiness and Righteousness, ennobles every Soul,
scorns to obscure any Truths, needs no prohibition of Gods Word, no Indices
expurgatorii, has superlative privileges, the greatest ornament any Sublunary
Majesty can have, scorns to use any indirect Artifices to Create Subtilities,
or Coin Evasions, to conceal or adulterate any of her Truths from ignorant, or
learned, or to abuse any of our Senses, as if we could not distinguish Bread
from Stones, or Fish from Serpents. What have we from without us common to all
Mankind so infallible as our Senses to cause Belief, that Jesus Christ lived
upon the Earth, was Crucified, Buried, and Rose again? The only Argument that
Christ himself used to convince diffidert St. Thomas to Believe, was by his own
Senses of seeing and feeling, John 20.25, 27. And if the Senses of all
Christians in all Countries have been deceived above these 1600. years since
Christ's death in one Point, why may not we by the same reason question and
suspect the Senses of all those that lived contemporary with him in more
Points, as whether any of these things were so or no. So happy, I confess, are
the Papalins in their Disputes against Protestant Religion, that many of their
Arguments by retortion only are as strong against their own Religion, and,
indeed as strong against all Religions as against ours. Light is come into the
World, but these men love darkness rather than light: And why? because their
Deeds are evil; every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to
the light, lest his Deeds should be discovered; but he that does truth comes
to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in
God, 3 John 19.20, 21.

Take but a short view but of Four of their Opinions that are so Diametrically
contrary to Scripture, that nothing but loud and bawling Impudence can deny,
and in which the meanest capacity cannot be mistaken, no, not those Lucifugae
Scripturarum that are only most blind, not because they cannot, but because
they will not see, nor yet understand, though as directly opposite to
Scripture, as light to darkness, truth to error.
God and Scripture.
GOd in the Second Commandment 20. Exodus forbids the very making of any graven
Image, or the likeness of any thing. 2. Forbids the very Bowing down to them.
3. He Commands them to take good heed unto themselves, for that they saw no
manner of Similitude on the day that the Lord spoke unto them in Horeb out of
the Fire, lest they corrupted themselves and make a graven Image, the
similitude of any figure, the likeness of male or female, etc. 4.15, 16, 17.4.
He Cautionates them not to forget the Covenant he made with them, viz. that
they make not a graven Image, or the likeness of any thing which the Lord the
God had forbidden. 5. He minds them that he was a Jealous God, and would
nothave his Glory imparted to another. 6. He was a consuming fire, able to
revenge all disobediences, 23.7. He curses the very man that makes any graven
or molten Image an Abomination to the Lord, Deuteronomy. 27.15.

Pope and Popish Doctrine.
NOtwithstanding all these solemn Prohibitions and Reasons delivered so
dreadfully on the Mount by God himself in Fire, with Thunder and Lightning,
thick Clouds and Smoke; so that the whole Mount quaked greatly: Yet so
Super-omnipotent is Dominus Deus vester Papa, that he does not only dare to
leave this very Commandment out of the Decalogue, but Commands (even under
Anathema's) and practices the clean contrary. And it is justified and averred
to be constants Theologorum etc. The constant judgment of Divines, that the
Image is to be honored and worshipped, with the same Honor and Worship
wherewith it is worshipped, whereof it is an Image^^ Jor. Azor^^s the Jesuit,
Institut, mor. tem. 1. lib. 9. cap. 6. And Tho. Aquin. Concludes, that the same
reverence is to be given to the Image of Christ, and to Christ himself; and
because Christ is to be Adored with Latria (or Divine Worship) that his Image
is to be Adored with the Adoration of Latria. Tho sum. part 3. q. 25. Art. 3.
And Friar Pedro de Cabrera on that place Concludes, 1. That it is simply and
absolutely to be said, that Images are to be worshipped in Churches, and out of
Churches, and the contrary is an Heretical Doctrine. 2. That Images are truly
and properly to be Adored, and out of an Intention to Adore themselves, and not
only the Samplers that are represented in them. And this, he says, is the
Doctrine not only of Thomas, and of all his Disciples, but also of all the old
Schoolmen, and he there reckons up Twenty of them, viz. Cajetan, Capreolus,
Paludanus, Ferrariensis, Antoninus, Soto, Alexander of Hales, Albertus Magnus,
Bonaventura, Richardus de Media Villa, Dyonisius Carthuganus, Major, Marsilius,
Tho. Walder sis, Turrecremata, Angestus, Clichtoveus, Turrian, and Vasquez. And
Zacharias Boverius the Spanish Friar in his Consultation directed to K.
Charles, (of ever Blessed memory) when Prince, says, That the Images of Christ,
and of the Saints should with pious Religion be worshipped by Christians, Part.
2. reg. 1. p. 189. Edit. Matrit. Anno 1623. And Styles that glorious Martyr
spes Anglicanae Ecclesiae, The hope of the English Church, Part. 1. reg. 4. p.
58. And princeps futura orbis faelicitas. The future felicity of the World.
Part. 2. reg. 2. p. 196. Thus impudently Sacrilegious are they, though the
Prophet pronounces all them Confounded that worship graven Images, and boast
themselves of Idols, Psalm. 97.7.

Take but the judgment of one of your own Church, even of that incomperable
Servite, who lived and died in the same Communion: At the end of the Confession
of his Faith, (whereof he has made 54 Articles, much more Orthodox than those
of Trent,) concludes thus, viz. Quemadmodum credimus de ceremoniis
sacramentorum quod nomini fas sit eas immutare, sic etiam credimus de lege dei,
nulli mortalium hic licere quidquami Innovare, detrahere aut adjicere; quia
scriptum est, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Ne addite ad verbum illud quod praecipio vobis neque
detrahite de eo.

Homini itaque Christiano fas non est detruncare Decalogum, quod tamen fecit
Pontifex Romanus, cum propter commodum suum expunxit praeceptum de non
faciendis Imaginibus ne plebs persentisceret imagines ejus atque Idola a Deo
esse prohibita, f. 255.

As we believe concerning the Ceremonies of the Sacraments, that it is lawful
for no man to alter or change them, so we believe concerning the Law of God,
that it is not lawful for any Mortal to innovate, detract, or add any thing;
because it is written, Deuteronomy 4.2. Ye shall not add unto the Word which I command
you; neither shall ye diminish ought from it, etc. Therefore it is not lawful
for any Christian to dock the Decalogue, which notwithstanding the Roman
Pontiffs have done, when for their Coffers they expunged the 3d. Comandment of
not making Images, lest the people should perceive, that Images and Idols were
prohibited by God.

God and Scripture.
CHrist, when he instituted the Blessed Sacrament, gave to his Disciples both
Bread and Wine, and to whom he gave the Bread, he said, Take, Eat, to whom also
he gave the Cup, saying, Drinking ye all of this Cup, Mat. 22.26. and they all
drank of it, Mark 14.23.

And St. Paul, writing to the Church of God which was at Corinth, and to them
that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, with all that in
every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord both theirs and ours, 1
Cor. 1.2. says to them all, (without distinguishing the Priest from the
People) as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show that
Lords death till he come, Chap. 11.26. Wherefore whosoever shall eat this
Bread, and drink this Cup etc. Verse. 27. Whereby it plainly appears, that all
indefinitely are both to eat of the Bread, and drink of the Cup: And there is
not the least shadow or color of any pretense or practice, that ever this
Sacrament was to be administered or taken in one kind only by any person
whatsoever; and yet such is the impudence of Roman Heretics, as contrary to
their own Knowledge and Confession, even in the Body of the Canon it self, to
order and decree, That Priests that say Mass shall communicate under both
kinds, but the Lay-persons shall communicate under the species of Bread only,
though the contrary was practiced for above 1000 Years: And yet such Brows of
Brass have they to boast of the Antiquity of their Tenets.

The unquestionable Conclusion is, Let a Man examine himself, and so let him
eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, 1 Cor. 11.28.

Pope and Popish Doctrine.
THe Council of Constance held Anno 1415. Sess. 13. has declared, defined and
decreed with a non obstante Gods Ordinance, even Christ's own Institution; and
although acknowledged by them to have been the constant practice of the
Apostles, and of the primitive Christians to Communicate under both kinds, That
they that celebrate this Sacrament should participate both of Bread and Wine,
and the Laiety of Bread only, and does command under pain of Excommunication,
that no Presbiter do communicate the people under both kinds.

Likewise that pact Conventicle of Trent declares and teaches, Sess. 21. c.
1. That the Laiety and Clergy which do not celebrate, are by no precept of God
bound to receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist under both kinds. And further
declares c. 2. That although at the beginning of Christian Religion the
communion of both kinds was very much used, yet the Holy Mother Church has
decreed, That it shall be accounted for a Law, and has confirmed it with
(accursed) Canons, viz. Can. ^. If any man shall say, that by the Commandment
of God, or of necessity all and singular the faithful of Christ ought to
receive both kinds, Let him be accursed; and yet Leo was of another mind, when
he declared it was a Taken of an Heretic, not to receive in both kinds. What
is this less than matchless Antichristian impudence? that whilst themselves
Confess, both that Christ instituted it under both kinds, and also that he, his
Apostles, and the Primitive Christians Religiously observed the same, that yet
we that practice according to Christ's constat, must be accounted Heretics for
so doing, and be punished by the Bishop, his Officials and Inquisitors: And
that they should boast so much of Antiquity, and of the conformity of their
Creed to that of the primitive Church, and yet so openly and palpably renounce
both in this so chief and principal a Point.

God and Scripture.
SEarch the Scriptures, forin them ye think ye have Eternal Life, and they are
they which testify of me, John 5.39 The Scriptures are able to make wise unto
Salvation through Faith which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 2.15. All Scripture is
given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works, Verse. 16.17.

The Boereans were esteemed more Noble than those of Thessalonica, in that they
received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily
whether those things were so, Acts 17.11.

St. Paul's Epistles to the Romans, Corinthians, Thessalonians, Galatians,
Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians were all written to all the Brethren in
general in a language vulgarly understood with a charge to be read unto them
all; so far were they from concealing any of Gods Word from any body whatsever.

Christ rather than all people should not understand his Gospel, endued
miraculously his Apostles with other Tongues, that every Nation under Heaven
might hear and understand the wonderful Works of God, his Laws and Precepts in
their own Tongues; and St. Paul has written the whole 14. Chapter of the 1 Cor.
demonstrating the impossibility of Edification with out understanding; and why
the Laiety may not read the Bible, as well as have it taught them by the
Priest, is past all understanding but Romish.

Pope and Popish Doctrine.
THe Pope exalting himself above all that is called God, forbids the use of the
Bible to Laics; and their Prayers, Offices and Hours to be in a Language
vulgarly intelligible, witness their Breviaries, Missalls, and Hours in Latin.
And the Bible is placed in the front of prohibited Books, and Books to be
expunged (whereof there are Seven Indices extant.) And Bellarmine can produce
no such prohibition before that of Pius Quartus, who lived but in the time of
the Council of Trent, (they had need brag of the Antiquity of their Doctrins)
and forbad the Translation of the Bible into vulgar Tongues, and cites for it
the Council of Trent, 22. Sess. c. 8, and 9, Canon; and also the Fifth General
Rule before the Indices expurg. viz. Cum experientia docuerit ex permissione
Sacrorum Bibliorum lingua vulgari plus inde ob hominum temeritatem, ignorantiam
aut malitiam detrimenti quam utilitatis oriri pro hibentur Biblialingua vulgari
extantia cum omnibus earum partibusimpressis aut manuscriptis, etc. prohibentur
pariter Horae earumque differentiae lingua vulgari ut patet in Catalogi tertia
class verbo Horas.

Seeing Experience has taught, that through the rashness, ignorance, or malice
of men, more detriment than profit has risen by the permission of the Bible in
vulgar Tongues, let Bibles in such Tongues be forbidden with all their parts,
printed or in manuscript. And they account all Languages vulgar but Hebrew,
Greek, Latin, Caldean, Syriack, Aethiopick, Persian, and Arabic.

The like for their Horary, and other Devotions; what are these Popes that thus
turn their Spirits against God? and make themselves wiser than the Almighty?
and that let such Decrees pass sub annulo Piscatoris? And what are his
Jannizaries, that call the Scriptures a Dumb Judge. Pighius de Hier. Eccl. A
Black Gospel: Inken Divinity Eccius; and that if the Scriptures were not
supported by the Authority of the Church they were of no more value than Aesops
Fables? Vide chemnitij Exam. de S. Can. p. 47. And that the people were
permitted to read the Bible, was the invention of the Devil. Peers. de tradit.
par. assert. 3. What is this less than by craft to call Christ and his Apostles
Devils.

God and Scripture.
ST. Paul, Romans 12.1. recommends unto us reasonable service, as Holy and
acceptable unto God.

Pope and Popish Doctrine.
THe Romanists recommend unto us Ignorance, as the Mother of Devotion, and a
blind Obedience, and Implicit Faith to believe, as the Church (1. as the Pope)
believes, without farther Examination.

Licet praeceptum praelati sit irrationale and pro tali merito quandoque haberi
petit, tenetur tamen subditus illud observare. Joh. de Rada part. 2. Theol.
strou. inter Scotum and Thom. and Tho. St. 20. ar. 2. Conclus. 6. Though the
command of the Prelate be unreasonable, yet the inferior is bound to obey it.
And according to Ignatian Doctrine, If the Church affirm that to be Black, which
our own Eyes judge to be White, we ought also then to declare that it is Black.
Siquid quod occulis nostris apparet Album, Nigrum illa esse definierit, debemus
itidem quod Nigrum sit pronunciare. Ignat. Exercitia spiritualia apud finem,
regulae aliqnot servandae ut cum Orthodoxa Ecclesia vere sentiamque Reg. 13.
and this is not to be questioned, being strongly ratified by the Bull of Paul
the 3d. 1548.

I find that the Popes are told, Quod onnia possint, and sic, quod facerint
quicquid liberet, etiam illicita and sic plus quam deus. Card. Zabar. de
Schism. inter Germ. script. p. 703.

They could do all things, and might do any thing, were it never so nnlawful,
and by that means they could do more than God, that they might dispense against
the Law of Nature, c. 15. q. 6. Authoritatem in glossa, against the Old
Testament. Extra. de conces. prebend. pro ponit in Gloss. and against the
Apostle Paul. Ibid. De justicia facere possint justiciam, They might make wrong
right. Ibid. Et in his que vellent, iis esse pro ratione voluntatem. Ibid. They
might do as they list, and none might say, Domine cur ita facis? Sir, why do
you so? Such power was rarely well calculated for Pope Joane; Foemina vult,
quia vult stat pro ratione voluntas, haec ratio quamvis sit rationis inops.

Si homicidium Sampsonis quod ex se malum est, interpretamur quod instanctu
divino fuit factum, multo magis omne factum sanctistimi Patris interpretare
debemus in bonum: and fiquidem fuerit furtum, vel aliud ex se malum
interpretari debemus quod divino instinctu fe. test Joh. de Parisiis de
potestate regia and papali c. 23. If we impute the slaughter which Sampson made
of the Philistines, to an inspiration of Gods Spirit, much more are we bound to
interpret in the best part whatsoever the Holy Father the Pope does, if it be
Theft, or any other thing, which of it self is evil, ( as for Example, Murder
or Adultery dict. 40. non nos in blossa) we must likewise impute that to the
inspiration of Gods Spirit. Episcopos Romanos ne peccata quidem sine laud
committere. Massonus de verb. Epic. lib. 3. in vita Johan. 9. I could furnish
you with such unreasonable Doctrins usque ad nauseam; But I forbear, leaving
every unbiassed reader to judge how inconsistent with reasonable service those
Doctrins and Teachments are. Now whether it be better to obey God than these
Men, judge ye, Acts 5.29.

I have now done, concluding, that it is high imprudence, nay very destructive
for any Christian Governors to hearken or have recourse unto the Advisoes and
Councils of any that own another Head or Authority, Periculosum Principi habere
consiliarios Papisticos. Molinaeus Gregorio Capucino in Enchirid. Eccles.
impress. venetus 1588.
or indeed that have not one and the same Joynt-interest in Religion and State
with themselves: And that the Governors ought to be very vigilant in care
themselves, and to forbid, or at least discountenance all Councils and Things
which may in any respect hurt, or but disorder a good Government, lest the
Subjects thereof should be caught with any guile, or seduced to embrace any
opinions, which may be repugnant, either to good Government or sound Religion.
And I hope this Nation will never again be so infatuated, as ever to put power
into their Hands, who have so often given such palpable Demonstration and
Testimony how they have used it already, and such pregnant presumptions how
they would use it again, could they obtain it Even they that run may read what
the Papists, like Jehu, drive so furionsly at, even to make England once more
Issachar like, to couch and carry the Saddle Vah Papae -- shall it ever be
again the style and reproach of England; Glorious England! that is situate
among the Rivers, whose Rampart is the Sea, and whose God is the Lord to carry
the Saddle again? God forbid! But if so unhappy, so unfortunate, I Will
prophecy, that not the Pope only, but the Devil will ride her. Pardon these
Expressions; I have encouragement from St. Jerome, Neminem volo patientem esse
in causalaesae fidei, and from Moses the Mirror of meekness, who knows no
patience in Isreal's Idolatry, Numb. 12.3. Exodus 22.19, 26, 27.

Idem manens idem semper facit idem.
THE REAL MERITS OF THE PAPISTS.
SUch has the Confidence of the Papists of these latter times been; as to
claim a Right unto the Kings Majesty's favor for a tolleration of their
Religion upon the account of their great Merits, as having best deserved of His
Majesty, because of all, they were the most faithful to him and his Father. The
purport of this has not only been averred by the generality of them in their
ordinary discourses; but also set out in print by several of them, P. W. R. P.
J. S. H. M. and others. At which confident Assertion of theirs, when I consider
how boldly, and feircly the contend for meritorious works; nay, for works of
super-errogation, even with God himself; I do not so much wonder, that such
Merit-mongers broach it so confidently now, as that they have not done it all
this while.

He that is first in his own Cause seems just, but his Neighbors comes, and
searches him, Prove. 18.17. Which that we may the better do, we will only a
little look back into our own Chronicle, without cloying the Reader with like
Foreign Stories, which would fill Volumes, and first see how true, and trusty
Trojans the Papists have been to the Kings of England, no Protestants, but
Papists; and if they shall be found to have been neither true, nor trusty, but
Traitors, and Rebels to the Kings of their own Religion; can it then ever be
believed, or hoped, that they ever will be Loyal and Faithful to Protestant
Princes, when a neat opportunity offers the contrary, and that Maugre all Roman
Mandates to the contrary? what Prince, or other Sovereign, foberly considers
the new founded Society of Jesuits, erected by Pope Paul the 3d. about 1540.,
(who, although at first but 10 in Number, yet so wonderfully increased since,
that they bragged not a few years ago, that they were 1300010. they lived in
Colleges, and places of residence, besides those that trotted up and down,
that they had 359. Colleges, or Schools; 18 Domus professae; 40 Domus
probationis; 8 Seminaries; 1010 Residentiaries. Vide speculum Jesuiticum.
Runninge Register.) And what their Principles and Doctrins are, and what their
practices have been for the destroying of all Princes quacumque Art, that will
not become Vassals to the Sea of Rome, and and acknowledge a Spiritual Monarchy
in that Roman Chair paramount all temporal Crowns and Scepters; and how strict,
and of what extant their vow of Obedience is to the Roman Bishop;and how it is
decreed by several Popes, that the Institutions and Doctrins of the Jesuits
must not be contradicted, or disputed by any Ordinary, Delegate, Judge, or
Magistrate; and how vastly that society is enlarged, both in their Clergy and
Layety, since these great brags of theirs will be sufficiently convinced, that
neither their persons, or their Kingdoms, can ever be secure, where either one
sort or other are suffered to flourish.

Let us now see matter of Fact. Did not Pope Alexander the 3d. by violence and
tyranny, force King H. the II. to surrender his Crown Imperial into the hand of
his Legate, and afterward be content with a private Condition for a while, to
the great regret and Indignation of his Subjects? Did not Innocent the 3d. stir
up the Nobility and Commonalty of this Kingdom against King John, and gave the
Inheritance and Possession of all his Dominions unto Ludovicus the French King?
What were those 52 000. but Papists, that rebelled against Richard the I. Anno
1196. And all those that rebelled against Edward the II. Anno 1316, 1317, 1321,
1322, and 1326. Amongst whom was Robert Baldock, Bishop of Norwich, and Lord
Chancellor of England. And all those that consented to the Murder of Edward the
Third's Father, and fought to kill john of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, Edward the
Third's Son, Anno 1330.1372.

And those in Richard the Third's time, Anno 1381. Annimated by John Ball a
Priest, who at his Execution refused to ask the King forgiveness, and despised
him; so peremptory was he, Jack Straw, confessing, that when he sent for the
King to Black Heath, they purposed to have murdered all Knights, Esquires, and
Gentlemen that should have come with him; and when they had got sufficient
force, they would suddenly then have put to death in every County and Lords and
Masters of the Common people, in whom might appear to be either Council or
Resistance, (one Argument used by some of the late Protectorians, for the death
of our Glorious King and Martyr) that he was too knowing, and too intelligent
to be suffered to live) and especially they would have killed the Knights of
St. John, and all Men of any Possessions, only Begging Friars should have
lived, that might have Administered the Sacraments throughout the Realm; and
lastly, the would have killed the King himself, and made Kings in every Shire.

Thomas Arrundel, Archbishop of Canterbury, traitorously practiced the
deposing of the said Richard his lawful Sovereign.

It were no very mild conjecture to Divine, that our late Generation of
Levellers, Major Generals, Quakers and Phanaticks were spawned from them, and
that they are still but Badgers, plotting and digging Holes for Romish Foxes to
lie couchant and covertly in for their more subtle contrivances.

What were those but Papists that rebelled against H. the 4th. designing to
Murder him under the color of Justinge and other pastimes pretended 1399. And
also those who raised Arms against him; among whom was John Madelyn a Priest,
who had been Chaplain to King Richard, and impudently personated the King. They
were Priests and Friars that suborned a False Richard, whereof 8 being Miners
were hanged at Tyburne. Oswald, Bishop of Galloway, was the chief Plotter
against Richard the 2d. in the Year 1403. A Priest of Warwick, and also Walter
Waldock a Prior of Laud in Leichestershire, and one Richard Freseby, a Dr. in
Divinity, was Executed in his Religious Habit and Weed, and not long after 10
Gray Friars were executed all for Treason. In the year 1404. Tho. Percy Earl of
Worcester with others Rebelled. in the year 1406. Henry Percy, Earl of
Northumberland, R. Scroope, Archbishop of York, with others, Rebelled, and
were Beheaded in the Year 1414. Sir. John Beverley, an Anointed Priest, with
others, conspired the death of H. the 5th. other Conspiracies there were in the
Year 1416. and 1417. against the same King by the like Generation of Men. And
by such also several other Rebellions were raised against H. the 6th. in the
year 1433. 1442. 1447. 1450. and 1451. and so against Edward the 4th. in the
Year 1461. 1472. 1478. his Two Sons were after his death murdered by the
contrivance of Sir James Tyrrel, by the appointment of the Duke of Gloucester
their Uncle; who then procured himself to be Crowned King by the name of Rich.
the 3d. but both the Duke of Gloucester, Sir James Tyrrel, and Miles Forest,
one of those that smothered the Innocents, came all to untimely and shameful
deaths, according to Psalm. 55. The Blood-thirsty and deceitful Men shall not
live out half their days. King Richard himself Slain in Battle, hacked, hewed,
and hurried on Horseback dead, most ignominiously being tugged, torn and
dragged like a Dog. They were Priests and Friars that 1. Ed. 4 conspired with
Jasper Earl of Pemhrooke, for which they were Executed. There were likewise
several Treasons and Conspiracies against H. the 7th. in the Year 1494, 1497,
1498, and 1499. Asa, a Priest of Ireland, was a chief Complotter against the
union of the Two Roses: So Two Priests, Greenwell and Garnet would have
destroyed that Blessed Union in King James. During the Reign of H. the 8. many
were executed for several Treasons, as 29 April 1536. The Prior of the
Charter House at London, the Prior of Bevall, the Prior of Exham, Reignolds a
Brother of Sion, and John Hail Vicar of Thissleworth were Condemned, and
Executed the 4th. of May following. 18 Junii Three Monks of the Charter House
at London, named Exmew, Midlemore, and Nidigate were Executed for Treason, and
that without any exclamation in those days that they were executed for
Religion; a late trick taken up only since the days of Queen Elizabeth, though
no more reason for that Calumny now, than was then.

There were also Two Rebellions raised in the North the same year against the
King, and one in Lincolnshire 1537. for which Twelve were Executed 29 March,
whereof Five were Priests, one Abbot, a Suffragan Dr. Mackerel the Vicar of
Louth in Lincolnshire, and Two Priests. In the Year 1538. there was another
rebellious commotion in Somersetshire. Lawrence Cook, a Prior of Dancalfe,
William Horn a Lay-Brother of the Charter House, with six others, were
Executed for Treason. The same Year there was a new Rebellion in Yorkshire.
Many more such good Works have we done, for which of them will you stone us, or
deny us a tolleration, or liberty to do more.

By this short Survey witout traveling beyond Seas, which would fill Volumes
of like Presidents, its abundantly apparent to all that are not wilfully blind,
that Papists themselves, even before Jesuitism was hatched, made it their usual
practice to Rebel against their Princes, though of the same Faith and Religion
with themselves, and can it then be reasonably expected, that they will ever be
Loyal and Faithful to Protestants (in their account Heretic) Princes,
especially now Jesuitisme is founded, established, nay vastly increased and
advanced? so that indeed they are the only great Apolloes in the Sea of Rome,
whose Doctrine it is to Excommunicate, depose, nay destroy Princes quacumque
art, and that uncontrollably for that several Popes have decreed, that the
Jesuits are Immediate Subjects only to the Sea of Rome, free and exempt from
all other Jurisdictions whatsoever, and that the Institutions and Doctrins of
the Jesuits must not be oppugned nor contradicted directly or indirectly, no
not by way of Disputation or otherwise. Spec. Jesuit. 27. However let us see
what have been their practices since Jesuitisme first sprung up, wkich was
about the 31. Year of of H. the 8th. in whose time several Papists submitted to
death, rather than they would quit the Popes Supremacy, and acknowledge the
Kings: which yields certain demonstration of the impossibility of such so
principled, being faithful Subjects to Protestant Caesar's, that own the Pope to
be his and their Superior.

In the Reign of King Edward the 6th. which was very short, and he himself a
Minor, there were Rebellions and Commotions in Somersetshire and Lincolnshire;
for which many were Executed, then in Cornwall and Devon, where above 4000 were
Slain and taken Prisoners by John Lord Russel, Lord Privy Seal. Then they
Rebelled in Norfolk and Suffolk, against whom Sir John Dudley, Earl of Warwick,
went with an Army, and slew above 5000. and took their Ring Leader. About the
same time 3090 rose in Rebellion in the North and Eastriding of Yorkshire, but
were suppressed by the Lord President. Amongst those Western Rebels Humphrey
Arundel was Chief Leader, who amongst others, with 8 Priests, were taken and
Executed therefore.

What were those but Churchmen, that by their Doctrine in the Pulpit, and
subscription of Hands to Traitorous Decrees, Embassed the Two Daughters of H.
8. both before and after the death of Ed. 6. for satisfaction to the Pride and
Ambition of an aspiring Humor?

In the days of Queen Mary, though there were few Treasons committed, yet was
there much Innocent Christian Blood shed: Concerning which I shall make this
Observation and Comparison between the Marian and Elizabethian days

In Queen Elizabeth's days the Papists put out many traitorous, infamous and
lying Libels in sundry Languages, and reported in other Princes Courts, that
she put a multitude of persons to torments and death, only for professing the
Roman Catholic Religion, when in truth none of them were questioned for
matters of Religion, but justly by order of Laws openly condemned as Traitors,
for treasonable practices against Her Person and State, maintaining, and
adhering to the Pope, the Capital Enemy of Her Majesty, Camb. 213, 214.
and her Crown, who was not only the cause of several Rebellions in England and
Ireland, but in one of Ireland did manifestly maintain at his own charge
Commanders and Soldiers, under the Banner of Rome, against the Queen, so as no
Enemy could do more, and that not not by force of new Laws, either for
Religion, or against the Popes Supremacy, as the slanderous Libellers would
have it seem to be; but by the Ancient Laws of the Realm made in Edward the
Third's time, about the Year 1330. above 200. Years before, even when the Popes
were suffered to have some Authority-Ecclesiastical in this Realm, as he had in
other Countries.

They gave out also, that they dyed because they would not acknowledge Her the
Supreme Head of the Church, which was a most apparent untruth, visibly to be
contradicted by the very Acts of Parliament.

For at the beginning of Her Reign, that very Title was omitted in Her Style.
And to make the matter seem more horrible and lamentable, they printed the
particular names of all the persons, which by their own Catalogue did not
exceed 60. to the Year 1583. whereof not above 30 Priests, nor above 5
Receivers and Harbourers, and for Religion not any one Executed: whereof not
any one at all, till about the 12th. Year of Her Reign. And J. W. their own
Martirologist for Her whole Reign, (which was above 44 Years) does not reckon
above 180. whereas in the short Reign of Queen Mary, which was little above 5
Years) there were by Imprisonment, Torments, Famine and Fire almost 400
destroyed, besides such as were secretly murdered in Prisons; and of that
number above 20 that had been Archbishops, Bishops, and Principal Prelates or
Officers in the Church lamentably destroyed, and of Women above 60, and of
Children above 40, and amongst the Women some great with Child, and one, out of
whose Body the Child by Fire being expelled alive, was yet most barbarously
thrown into the Fire again and burned: Examples Cruel beyond the Cruelty of
Heathens.

It is further observable, that they which suffered in Queen Mary's days,
though they dyed constant unto, and professing the Protestant Religion, yet
were there no traitorous Machinations nor Assassinatious laid to their charge,
nor did they ever at their deaths deny their lawful Queen, or maintain any of
Her open and Foreign Enemies, or procure any Rebellion or Civil Wars, nor did
Sow any Sedition in secret Corners, nor withdrew any of her Subjects from their
obedience, as the Papists (being sworn Votaries to the Pope) did continually do
against Queen Elizabeth, countenancing and avowing the Popes Excommunications,
Bulls, and other public Writings, denouncing the Queen not to be Queen,
charging, and upon pain of Excommunication commanding all Her Subjects to
depart from their Duties, and natural Allegiances, encouraging also, and
authorizing all persons of all degrees in both Kingdoms to Rebel; and upon this
Antichristian Warrant (contrary to all the Laws of God and Man, and nothing at
all agreeable to a pastoral Officer) they sought by all ways and means to
justify, and to put in Execution that traitorous Warrant of the Popes Bull.
And yet of these kind of Offenders, as many of them as after their
Condemnations on second and better thoughts were contented to renounce their
former traitorous Assertions, so many were spared from Execution; such was Her
Majesty's Clemency and unwillingness to have any Blood spilt without very
urgent, just and necessary cause proceeding from themselves.

I must make this further observation, Merits of Papists by their own
Confession.
That in the days of Queen Eliz though the Jesuits and Secular Priests fell
strangely foul one upon the other with black Pens and Mouths, with Language
scarce to be match at Pitchbatch or Billingsgate; yet the Seculars commended
highly the Queens clemency, and justified her proceedings against the
traitorous Jesuits: Avowing, That they themselves, knowing what they did know,
how under pretense of Religion the life of Her Majesty, and subversion of the
Kingdom was aimed at, if they had beeen of Her Highness Council, they would
have given their consent for the making of very strict and rigorous Laws, to
the better suppressing, and preventing of such Jesuitical and wicked
designments. Important Considerations, etc. f. 57. They did also complain even
to the Pope and Cardinals, That the Jesuits were the Firebrarnds of all
Seditions: That by right or wrong, they did seek simply and absolutely the
Monarchy of all England: That they were the causes of all the discords in
England: That Fa. Holt did not only intend, but would indeed give wreteched
England in Conquest to himself, and his Favorites, and many other Complaints
there were of this nature, Extracted out of the Memorials, and other Letters
dated at Rome, 8. November 1597. Relation of the faction at Wisbich 74 Though I
say the Seculars were so violent against the Jesuits, and such stout Assertors
of the Queens moderate dealing with the Papists; yet were some of them found
guilty of like traitorous practices; so little are any of them to be trusted,
for that though they have Mel in ore, yet have they Fell in Cord. Call to mind
the great and serious Protestations that Watson the Priest made in his
Quodlibetical Questions; That albeit he differed in Religion from that which
was professed in the Church of England; yet if either Pope or Spaniard should
seek by hostile means to invads his Country, he would willingly spend his
substance; nay, his dearest Blood against any such as should attempt it: Yet he
himself, with Clark his fellow Seminary, were the first that I read of that
came to the Gallows for violating it; which considered together with what they
confessed upon their apprehension, viz. That the Jesuits continually negotiated
with Spain, preparing for a Foreign Aid, leavied great Sums of Money, bought
Horses, Powder, Shot, Artillery, etc. and conveyed them secretly to their
friends, wishing not to stir, but to be quiet till they heard from them, etc.
These things, I say, considered, do argue, that Secular Priests and Jesuits,
and those that favored them, were all Traitors in Heart, though their malice
one toward the other made them discover, and rayl, and libel each other both
at home and abroad; which Queen Eliz. wisely considering, would not confide in
them, notwithstanding all their books and promises, but by her Proclamations
banished both one and the other: For in truth both Seculars and Jesuits, were
in this like Sampsons Foxes, though they differed in many other things very
bitterly, yet in this they joined their Tails, their main Ends, to be
Firebrarnds to kindle dissension, and withdraw her Subjects from her obedience,
and to reconcile them to Rome: So as Joab kissed Abuer, whilst he stabbed him,
and as Judas kissed our Savior, whilst he betrayed him to the Pharisees: So
these men pretended Loyalty by their Tongues and Pens, and yet acted
traitorously by their Plots and Contrivances. What could they print more than
they did? viz. We are fully persuaded in our Consciences, and by Experience,
That if the Catholics had never sought by indrect means to have vexed Her
Majesty with their designs against her Crown: If the Pope and the King of Spain
had never plotted with the Duke of Norfolk, who was to have been the head of a
Rebellion, if the Rebels in the NOrth had never been heard of, if the Bull of
Pius Quintus had never been known, if the Rebellion had never been justified:
If neither Stukeley nor the Pope had attempted any thing against Ireland. If
Gregory the 13th. had not renewed the said Bull and Excommunication: If the
Jesuits had never come into England: If the Pope and King of Spain had not
practiced with the Duke of Guise for his attempt against her Mafesty: If
Parsons, and the rest of the Jesuits, with other our Contrymen beyond the
Seas, had never been Agents in those traitorous and bloody designs of
Throckmorton, Parry, Cullen, York, Williams, Squire and others: If they had not
by their Treatises and Writings endeavored to defame their Sovereign, and
their own Country, laboring to have many of their Books translated into
diverse Languages, whereby to show their own disloyalty: If Cardinal Allen and
Parsons had not published the Renovation of the said Bull by Sixtus Quintus: If
thereunto they had not added their scurrilous and unmanly Admonition, or rather
most profane Libel against Her Maj sty: If they had not sought by false
persuasions, and unghostly Arguments, to have allured the hearts of all
Catholics from their allegiance: If the Pope had never been urged by them to
have thrust the King of Spain into that barbarous Actions against the Realm: If
they themselves, with all the rest of that Generation, had not labored greatly
with the said King for the Conquest and Invasion of this Land by the Spaniards,
who are known to be the cruelest Tyrants that live upon the Earth: If the Pope
had not ordered Ridolphi to distribute 150000. Crowns to advance the attempt,
whereof some was sent to Scotland, some to the Duke of Norfolk, and alias. And
King Philip to send the Duke of Alua and his Forces into England to assist the
Duke of Norfolk. If in all their whole proceedings they had not from time to
time depraved, irritated and provoked both Her Majesty and State with those and
many other such like their most ungodly and unchristian practices; there had
been no Speeches amongst us of Racks and Torments, nor any cause to have used
them, for none were ever vexed that way simply, for that he was either Priest
or Catholic; but because they were suspected to have had their hands in some
of the said most traitorous designs. And most assuredly the State would have
loved us, or at least born with us, and we had been in much better condition
than now we are. Important Considerations, etc. fo. 39, 40, 41. printed 1601.
Furthermore, another in answer to a Letter of a Jesuited Gent. by A. C. fo. 89.
complains of the Jesuits, averring, That Her Majesty is an Heretic, an
Excommunicated Princess, and consequently to be deposed: What Jesabelling of
her have I heard them used? What questioning whether no Jehu have subdued her?
why yet she prospers? why yet she Reigns? why yet she lives? what defaming
her? what throwing Soil at her Picture? what avowing her Rohal Lions and
Flower-de-luze no better worth than to serve for Signs to Baudy-houses? Thus do
the Jesuits, and Jesuited use Her Majesty to my express knowledge, and worse,
which for good manners I omit, fo. 90. nay, they sent one to me in the nature
of an Engineer from beyond the Seas to persuade my assisting his firing the
Queens Navy throughout England against the next years coming of another Spanish
Armado, f. 90.

Was it not Fa. Parsons and Fa. Creighton, F. 9.
That with much vehemence and bitterness contended for the disposing of the
Crown of England, the one for the Lady Infanta, the other to his King of
Scotland? Were they not Jesuits which plotted with the Duke of Parma for
surpriseing, or stealing awayof the Lady Arabella, and sending her into
Flanders? who employed the Messenger into England about that affair but Fa-Holt
Jesuit? who but the same Jesuit was consenting with Sir William Stanley to the
sending in of Richard Hesket for soliciting Ferdinando Earl of Darby to rise
against Her Majesty, and claim the Crown? was it not the same Jesuit that
entertained York and Young in the Plot of firing Her Majesty's Storehouses?
that set on work Mr. Francis Dickinson, and others, to persuade Watermen to fly
with Ships and all into the service of the Spaniard? f. 93. their Conspiracies
were not confined to England only? but they were extended also to Scotland;
whereupon were the Three Catholic Earls Angus, Arrol and Huntley convicted of
High Treason by Act of Parliament about 1593. if not upon certain plots laid by
Fa. Creighton, Fa. Gourdon, and upon hopes given them of succor from Spain?
Why was the Lord of Fentry Executed but for the same designs imparted to him by
Fa. To. Abereronii a Jesuit? Was it not the principal cause of Fa James Gordons
travel to Rome about the same time to solicit the Pope and other Princes to
assist the King of Scots, if he enterprise any thing either against England, or
in his own Country, 93, 94.

And yet these matters will not be believed at this day by the Papists, though
it be their own voluntary confession in several of their printed Books yet
extant, Priests and Jesuits each deservedly accusing other of Treasons and
Conspiracies against the Queen, Her Person, Crown and Dignity, with this
difference only, that the Priests mostly, the Jesuits seldom acknowledged the
Queens great favors and lenity toward them, the Queen had great reason to
believe them both, not barely because they peached one the other, but because
thereof she really found the sad effects: And indeed because she and her
Council did very wisely consider, that Papists some Centuries of Years before
ever Jesuits were thought of, did universally incline unto and side with the
Pope against their temporal Princes, usurping many great and exorbitant
authorities and privileges over them, whereof Histories are full; and
therefore it was but high time that the Queen should by wholesome Laws inflicting
moderate pains and mulcts provide against both one and the other.

This is no small Bedrall of Treasons, Conspiricies, provocations, Vide
Important consider. f. 16, 17, 18.
etc. and yet as many more they might have urged; nay to do the Secular-priests
right, they have done it particularly sparsim both in this and diverse others
their Books, and also made large, very large acknowledgments of the Queens
Bounty, Moderation and Clemency toward those Papists that were quiet and
faithful, (a gratefulness that I have not found in any of the Jesuits) and in
so doing they did the Queen but right; for from the year 1. Eliz. unto 11.
Papists came to our Church and Service without scruple? so that for 10 years
they made no Conscience, nor Doubt to Communicate with us in prayer: But when
once the Bull of Pius Quintus (often called by the Queen Impius Intus) was
published, wherein the Queen was accursed and deposed, Eliz. as if evident by
the very Acts of Parliament) is not for for Religion, but in an acknowledgment
of the Popes power, which was little regarded here, our famous Kings being
never afraid of Popes Bulls, no not in the very midnight of Popery, as Edward
the Confessor, Henry I. Edward I. Rich. II. Henry IV. Henry V. etc. And in the
time of Henry VII. and in all their times the Popes Legate never passed
Callais, but staid there, and came not to England until he had taken a solemn
Oath to do nothing to the detriment of this Crown or State, (so Jealous were
our Kings even in those days.) A shrewd sign, and a plain demonstration what
their judgment is concerning the right of the Prince in respect of Regal power
and place, there being nothing in our Liturgy that a Conscientious Papist might
justly except against out of the Word of God; but because the Pope had
Excommunicated and Accursed, therefore forsooth, be it lawful or unlawful, they
must obey the Pope, and disobey the Queen their incomparable Liege Lady. Now by
reason of this Bull (the very bringing in whereof by a subject was adjudged
Treason in the time of Edward the I.) the very foundation of all the ensuring
Treasons, Rebellions, etc. And in Edward the Third's time the Abbot of
Tavestock was fined at 500 Marks for receiving a Bull from Rome, wherein were
but aliqua verba regi and Coronae suae prejudicialia. One main Article in
Parliament enforced for the the deprivation of Richard II. was, that he had by
admitting Bulls from Rome inthralled in Crown of England, which was free from
the Pope, and all other Foreign popwer. In Edward the Third's time there was a
seizure of all the Temporalties of the Bishops of Ely and Norwich for the
publication of a Bull against Hugb Earl of Chester. And the Bishop of Ely was
Condemned of Felony by a Jury at the King's Bench, notwithstanding his bold
challenge to be unctus Dominit Frater Papae. The state of Romish Recusants
became very miserable, being thereby ensnared in a lamentable Dilemma; for
either they must be executed for Treason against the Queen if they did resist,
Bull, (which for ought I know is in force to this very day; for if the Pope
will say, that it was not directed and intended against the Queen only; but
that its force and efficacy extends still to her Successors, I am sure it must
go for good Doctrine with them, if they will be true to their Oaths, Doctrins
and Principles) he quickly found out a means to extricate them out of that
miscrable Condition wherein they were thereby involved, viz. A Dispensation
from himself, which was afterward reinforced by Gregory the 13th. that all
Catholics here might show their outward Obedience to the Queen, Ad redimendant
vexationem and ad ostendendam externam obedientiam; but with these cautions and
limitations, Rebus sic stantibus, things so standing as they did. 2. Donec
publica Bullae Executio fieri possis; until they might grow into strength,
until they were able to give the Queen and unavoidable Check-mate, that the
public execution of the said Bull might take place: And so much was consessed
openly at the Bar by Garner, as before he had done under his own hand, for the
better execution whereof the Pope granted Faculties to Rob. Persons and Edmond
Campion then ready to go for England 14. April 1580. which Heart also confessed,
Perfida Gens! A strange Generation of perfidious Men, whom no favors can
oblige to be quiet and loyal. It was observed by Sir Edw. Coke Attorney General
at the Trial of the Powder Traitors, that since the Jesuits set foot in this
Land, there never passed 4 Years without a most pestilent and pernicious
Treason, 11. b.
tending to the subversion of the whole State: And was there ever any Prince
that would endure, or not execute such persons within their Dominions as should
deny him to be lawful King, or go about to withdravv his Subjects from his
Allegiance, or incite them to assassinate, or to resist, or rebel against him?
and vvithall endeavoring to justify it by their pens: Nay, by their deaths
with strong presumption of meriting thereby? What possible hopes can there be
of such Men enslaved to such Principles? nay, what Prince under Heaven can
think his State secure so long as every pettish Pope may without rhyme or
reason pick a quarrel with him, whence a Citation, thence a Sentence, which
either neglected, or not satisfied, infers Contumacy, which deprives the
supposed Delinquent of that right which God gave, Conscience avovvs, and
consent of Ages, and successive Generations has fortified; and being declared
an Heretic, the Croysade is published? The Words of the Canon strongly bent
against the Crown Impereal of Hen. 4. are not many, but very heavy and very
fatal, and extensive to all Princes, and in English thus: We observing the
Statutes of our Holy Predecessors, do absolve those that are bound by Fidelity
and Oath to persons Excommunicated from their Oath, and do forbid them to
observe or keep their Fealty toward them quousque ipsi ad satisfactionem
veniunt, till they come to yield satisfaction.

In this case I appeal to the judgment even of the Priests themselves, who
confess, That in all the Plots against Queen Eliz none were more forward than
many of the Priests were, but how many of them were so inclined and addicted
the State knew not: In which Case, say they, there is no King or Prince in the
World disgusting the Sea of Rome, and having either force or metal in hin,
that would have endured us, but rather have utterly rooted us out of his
Territories as Traitors and Rebels to him and his Country; and therefore we
may bless God that we live under so merciful a Prince, which had she been a
Catholic, might be accounted the mirror of the World. Import. Consid. so. 16.
There were sparks of Ingenuity in these their Acknowledgments; but much more
saucily writ those Emperor-like (Quaker-like, say I) Jesuits, Parsons and
Creswel; who in one of their Books spoke thus to Her Majesty. In the beginning
of Thy Kingdom Thou did deal something more gently with Catholics, none were
then urged by Thee, or pressed either to Thy Sect, or to the denial of their
Faith. All things indeed did seem to proceed in a far milder course: No great
Complaints were heard of: There were no extraordinary Contentions or
Repugnancies: Some there were, that to please and gratify you went to your
Churches, etc. Ibid. f. 6. And yet did Queen Eliz. not only not call into
question Thousands that were capitally guilty of the pains of her Laws, but
favored many known Papists, professing Loyalty and Obedience to Her Majesty:
None of which sort were for their contrary opinions in Religion prosecuted, or
charged with any Crimes, or pains of Treason; nor yet willingly searched in
their Consciences for their contrary opinions that savoured not of Treason, and
many even of those that were Executed would she have pardoned, if they would
but have owned Her Regality, and defended Her Majesty against any Foreign
Force, though coming, or procured from the Pope himself; An Example of Royal
Clemency never to be matched in Queen Mary's time.

And John Lecey, in defense of the Petition Apologet. presented to King James
in July, 1604. confesses, That Queen Eliz. both in person, and by Her
Embassies abroad, did aver, That Her Will and Intention was not to punish Her
Subjects for their Religion and Conscience, fo. 13.

It is also observable, That after the Sanguinary Laws were Enacted, that no
Priest or Jesuit remaining here that had before these Acts taken Orders beyond
Seas, and lived quietly, was ever called in question for his Religion. In all
the Laws, though extorted from the Queen by so many Rebellions and Treasons,
there was nothing that did reflect upon an old quict Queen Mary's Priest, or
any that were Ordained within the Land by the Romish Bishops then surviving; so
they were not over active, and busy in Treasons and Conspiracies. This also
was such another Example of Royal favor as was not to be paralleled in Queen
Mary's time. And yet its very remarkable, That the chiefest of all these, and
the most of them had in the time of Hen. 8. and Ed. 6. either by preaching,
writing, or arguing, taught all people to Condemn, yea to Abhor the Authority
of the Pope; for which they had also yielded to both the said Kings the Title
of Supreme Head, etc. and many of their Books and Sermons against the Popes
Authority were printed both in English and in Latin, to their great shame and
reproach to change so often; but especially in prosecuting such as themselves
had taught and established to hold the contrary: A sin near to the sin against
the Holy Ghost. Just. Brit. f. 4, 5.

The Priests themselves confessed, that such of them as upon examination were
found moderate, were not so hardly proceeded with in so much as 55. by the Laws
liable to death, were in 1585. (when great mischiefs were in hand) only
banished. A Regal Favor not to be paralleled in Queen Mary's days. Import.
Considerations, f. 29, 30.

Having seen how Faithful and Loyal Papists have been to Princes of their own
Religion; and also to Edw. 6. and Queen Eliz. Princes of a different
profession, let us now see how faithful they have been to King James and his
posterity.

Such were the deep, malicious, and early Councels and designs of Papists
against our protestant Princes, and Reformation it self, (in the bud as they
would have it) that they were not content by all open and secret Councels,
Powers and Artifices imaginable, that Rome, France, Spain, Catholic Princes,
Priests and Jesuits could contrive or possibly suggest to Assassine and destroy
that incomparable Princess Queen Eliz but in her days laid such a found ation
and groundwork for future disturbances, ruin and destruction even to all her
Successors, and to this Nation, and to the Protestant Religion, that hitherto
it has wrought, and is still working by undermining powers and policies, the
effect whereof we feel even to this day, and so like to continue to all
successive Generations, as long as the Seminaries and Jesuitism continue, whose
Trade and Business it is to encourage themselves and others in mischiefs, and
to Commune among themselves how they may privily lay snares. In the Year 1568.
The English fugitive Priests assembling themselves at Doway by the design of
William Allen of Oxon (the most learned amongst them) did Collegiate together
in a common Colledge-like Discipline, Vide the Hope of Peace 20.
to whom the Pope assigned a yearly pension. Afterward being banished the
Netherlands by Don Lewis Requesens the King of Spains Deputy: A like Seminary
was erected at Rheims by the Guises the Queen of Scots Kinsmen; Camb. 216.206.
and another at Rome by Gregory XIII. And afterward another founded at
Valledolid, that there might never want a successive Generation of Men of
corrupt Minds, Heady, High-minded, despisers of Dominion, Idolatrous and
Traitorous Priests to poison England with their false Doctrines, and traitorous
principles.

In these Seminaries it was quickly defined, That the Pope has by the Law of
God fullness of power over the whole World, as well in Ecclesiastical as
Temporal matters; and that he out of his fullness of power may Excommunicate
Kings, and being Excommunicate, depose them, and absolve their Subjects from
their Oaths of Allegiance. Then were diverse Priests well instructed in such
Principles and Doctrins sent into England. This done, diverse traitorous
Combinations and Conspiracies both Foreign and Domestic were plotted, as here,
so elsewhere is related. Then the Jesuits on one side, Camb. 297.
and the Fugitive Noblemen and others on the other side, with different
affections suggested unto Mary Queen of Scots such dangerous Councels, that the
Seculars afterward charged the Jesuits, as procurers and Instruments of her
death. And the Jesuits, when they saw there was no hope of restoring the Romish
Religion either by her, or King James her Son, began to forge a new and feigned
Title in the succession of the Kingdom of England for the Spaniard, (so
wonderful faithful were they to King James) and they sent into England (as
Pasquire says) one Saimer, a Man of their Society, to draw a party to the
Spaniards, and to thrust the Queen of Scots forwards to diverse dangerous
practices, by telling her, that if she were refractory, neither she, nor her
Son should Reign, (mjost faithful Men still) and by exciting the Guises her
Kismen to new stirs against the King of Navarre, and the Prince of Condey, that
they might not be able to aid her. This their faith fullness (such as it was)
lasted not only before King James came to the Crown, but afterward, as will
e're long appear. Did not Fa. Parsons in Spain contest bitterly with Fa.
Creighton, Parsons to settle the Crown on the Infanta, and Creighton on the
King of Scots? Did not Fa. Parsons, with Sir William Stanley, thrust on Hesket
to persuade Ferdinando Earl of Darby to Claim the Crown? Did not he persuade
York and Young to fire Her Majesty's Storehouses? Did not he persuade Fr.
Dickenson, and others, to tempt Watermen to fly with Ships to the Spaniards?
as has been intimated before Dialogue 93.

Thus you see how many several Titles did they seign, and set up to set by Q.
Eliz. from the Crown, and to set up M. Q. of Scots, whom they prompted and
annimated unto so many Concrivances of dangerous Consequences that brought that
Princess unto that sad Catastrophe, and consequently were the occasion thereof,
and so confessed in print by themselves? they left no stone unturned. Paul and
4th. would not acknowledge her, and why? Because, forsooth, this Kingdom was
held in Fee of the Apostolic See; that she could not succeed being
Illegitimate, and that it was a great boldness to assume the Name and
Government without him, and therefore refused to hear Sir Edward Kerne her
Ambassador.

All this, and more, was pretended to have been done in favor of that
Admirable person M. Qucen of Scots. But what think you would they have done, if
the Tables had been turned? And Q. Eliz. had been an Illegitimate Papist; and
M. Q. of Scots a Legitimate protestant, would you then have been so zealous and
industrious for the Q. of Scots? Certainly not! which is demonstrable by their
Actings and Endeavors to hinder King James from the English Crown. And it is
plain that it was not Bastardy, but Heresy, i. e. for being Protestant, that
made their malice so implacable, and this is apparent by the Bull of Pope Pius
V. Dated 25. Febr. 1570. in which there is not the least mention of Bastardy.
No, No, Illegitimacy is not so monstrous a Gudgeon, but that it will easily be
swallowed at Rome. Gregory XIII. had a Bastard, James Buon Compagna, and to him
he gave Ireland, and empowered Stewkely with Men, Arms and Money to Conquer it
for him. And England he gave to Don John the Emperors Bastard, (both admirable
Catholics without all peradventure) and gave him leave to Conquer it for
himself. Christ's brave Vicard give that which was none of his own, or had any
thing to do withal. But that perverse Queen had no occasion to part with
either on such ridiculous Nods. And his Successor Sixtus Quintus took no Notice
at all of King James, proceeded against her with all his Italian Scarcrows,
cursed her afresh, and published a Croysade against her, and gave all her
Dominions to Philip II. King of Spain, but forgot to give his Benedictions of
Craft and Cunning to get them, and so they still remain vested in the hands of
the right owners, and long may they so do, even till time shall be no more.

Now, if Romish zeal for Qu. M. of Scots had had its Rise and Original from her
more rightful Title to the Crown of England, then it would have continued unto
King James also; but their Actings being Diametrically opposite and contrary,
it was visible to all the World, that it was Popery, not the Title that they
contended so furiously for. And it was the common voice amongst the Jesuits of
those days, That if King James would turn Catholic, they would follow him; but
if not they would all die against him. Watson Quodlib. p. 150.

The mtual love and amity that was between Queen Elizabeth and King James,
Jesuits, and such kind of Men, the Execution of Graham of Feutre, the
forwardest of all those that affected the Spanish party, the granting of
Supreme Authority in matters Ecclesiastical to the King by the States, and the
assotiations against the Papists did so quash all hope of restoring Popery in
England and Scotland, that some of them in England which most of all favored
his Mothers Title began to project how to substitute some English Papists in
the Kingdom of England, when they could not agree upon a fit man of their own
Number; they cast their Eyes upon the Earl of Essex, (who never approved the
putting of Men to death in the cause of Religion) seigniug a Title from Thomas
of Woodstock, King Edward the Third's Son, from whom be derived his Pedigree.
Indeed rather for any Body then for King James, who they foresaw, would be
Malleus Hereticorum; such was their faithfulness to him; as also witness the
designs of Gordon, Creighton, Abercromy Jesuits, and others, plotting the ruin
of King James of Scotland. And also the Two Breues sent by Clement the 8th. to
exclude King James from the Inheritance of the Crown of England; unless he
would take an Oath to promote the Roman Catholic Interest. But the Fugitives
favored the Infanta of Spain, although they feared lest the Queen and the
States would by Act of Parliament prevent it by offering an Oath to every one,
and they held it sufficient, if they could set the King of Scots and the Earl
of Essex at Enmity.

To which purpose a Book was Dedicated to Essex under the Counterfeit name of
Doleman, but wrote by Par2ons, Cardinal Allen, and Sir Francis Inglefeild, as
was believed.

In this Book despising the right of Birth, they project, that the Ancient Laws
of the Land concerning Hereditary Succession to the Crown of England, are to be
altered, that new Laws are to be brought in concerning Election; That no man
but a Roman Catholic, 14. b.
of Blood soever they be, is to be admitted King.

And was not this another piece of meritorious service to King James, like the
rest no doubt, of those that went before, and of those that will follow?

They traduced most of the Kings of England as wrong possessors, and all in
England of she Blond Royal, as either Illegitimate, or incapable of the Crown.
The most certain right of King James to the Crown of England they most unjustly
sought to overthrow, and did by forged Devices most falsely Entitle thereunto
the Infanta Isabella of Spain, because she was a Roman Catholic: Yea, they
proceeded with that violence herein, that they compelled the English in the
Spanish Seminaries (it they themselves are to be credited) to subscribe to the
forged title of the Infanta therein set down, and exacted an Oath of the
Students in the Seminaries to maintain the same brave Blade! They rested not in
their Pens and Tongues, but prosecuted the same by Actions.

For Thomas Winter, as he himself confessed, and Jesmund a Jesuit being come
into Spain from Garnet, and others of them privily plotted to cast off Queen
Eliz. and exclude James King of Scots from his most just Title to the Crown of
England.

Yet not long after, when King James was proclaimed, this Impudent Parsons,
James wrong,

As in the Year 1592. Patrick Cullens Treason, who was incited by Sir William
Stanley, Hugh Owen, Jaques Frances,) a base Laundress Son, who said, That
unless Mrs. Elizabeth be suddenly taken away, the State of England is, and will
be so settled, that all the Devils in Hell will not be able to prevail with it
or shake it: (Hitherto a true Prophet, I hope will be so still.) And Holt the
Jesuit (who resolved to kill the Queen) was accompanied with a Book called
Philo-pater, written for the abetting and warranting of such a Devilish Act in
general by Creswel the legicr Jesuit in spain; so was Tesmunds Treason
accompanied with Two bulls or Breues from Pope Clement the 8th. when the Queen
was full of days, and infirm, one to the Clergy, the other to the Laiety unto
H. Garnet superior to the Jesuits in England, which as they were sent privily,
so were they kept very closely, and Communicated unto very few. The tenor and
purport of them was, that they should admit no Man how near soever in Blood for
King after the Queens death, unless he would not only tolerate the Roman
Catholic Religion, but also promote the same with his whole might, and
undertake by Oath, according to the manner of his Ancestors to perform the
same, which in true understanding was directly to exclude King James and his
Family from the Crown. These Bulls came forth upon the aforesaid negotiation of
Tho. Winter in Spain, at what time an Army should shortly after have been sent
to Invade the Land, and this was to be put in execution Quandocumque
contingeret miseram illam feminam exhac vita excedere, 16. b.
when ever it should happen that that wretched Woman (so pleased the
High Priest of rome to call the Queen the greatest of Women, cujus memoria
semper erit in benedictione) should depart this life. Of these Bulls also
within Two Years after was begot that dreadful roaring Monster, the Powder
Treason. Their Force and Virtue was not confined with Tweed, but extended it
self also into Scotland. For the Sword was prepared there also at the same time
by the Rethuens Brethren, to take away King James's life; who boiling with
revenge for their fathers death, the Earl Gowry by Law in the Kings nonage, by
a Wile enticed the King (to whom they were much engaged) into their House most
wickedly appointed him to the slaughter, had not God the Protector of Kings
prevented it by the help of John Ramsey and Thomas Areskin, and turned it upon
the heads of the Authors.

Having thus summarily declared the good intentions, and faithful Service the
Papists performed toward James 6th. King of Scotland, whilst he stood the next
and undoubted Heir apparent to the Crown of England, before he came to be king
thereof. I will now show you one other great Platform and design of theirs,
for the ruin of this Nation, and then proceed to show you how faithful they
were to King James after he came to be King of England, and have been since
unto his Son and Grandson.

The Seminaries being thus founded and established in diverse places, Vallodolid
by the procurement of Parsons, that Arch-Traytor, who for his uncessant Romish
Contrivances had by this time got great Interest in Rome and Spain, that in
them they might consult and act how to bring to pass their grand design of
erecting their universal spiritual Monarchy for Rome, Spain and Jesuitism, and
a seeming Title being made out by his Book of Titles, or Succession of the
Crown of England to the Infanta: He then in another Book, called A Memorial for
Reformation, or High-Courtor Council of Reformation of England, written at
Sevil 1596. (of which he was so fond, that he kept it like a precius Jewel, An
Answer to a Jesuited Gent.
as close in his bosom as the Dukes of Florence are said to keep Tully de
rebublica, which not all the World have but themselves, and labored all he
could to have it read in the Refectaries at Rome, he there lays a secret Snare
for our ruin by a Platform, to work insensibly the Alteration of our
government, by bringing it to a popularity, (and how near it was brought to
effect in these late times by Papists, (as some Write) under the Title of
Levellers, Agitators, Independents, Fifth Monarchy Men, Quakers, etc. who are
but Badgers, Working Holes for the Foxes, the Jesuits) will be obvious to
every intelligent Reader. In this Book it is designed, that no Religious Order
should resort into England, or be permitted to live within its Dominions, but
Jesuits and Capuchins. That all Abbey, and Church Lands, and those of
Colleges, Parsonages, Bishops, Vicarages, 16 b.
Monasteries, Nunneries, Frieries, etc. must be no longer in their Hands, but
must be brought into a public Exchequer, four Jesuits, and Two Secular Priests
to be chosen by the General and Provincial Jesuits, who were to allow the
Bishops, Parsons, Vicars, etc. Stipends and Pensions as Bishops, Suffragans,
and Mont Seigniors had in other Catholic Countries, all the rest must be
employed in Pious Uses, pro ut, etc. without rendering an Account. They
prescribed Rules of Living for the Lords Temporal, and other the Nobility and
Gentry, what Retinue they would keep, how much should be allowed them to
spend yearly, and what diet they should keep at their Tables: That Magna Charta
should be burnt, the manner of holding Lands in Fee 2imple, Fee-tail,
Frank-Almanige etc. by Kings Service, Soccage, or Villenage, should all be
brought into Villainy, Scoggery, and Popularity; the Common Laws to be wholly
annihilated and destroyed; and Caesar's civil Imperials brought into this
Vtopian Spiritual Monarchy. Quodlibets 92, 95. And the Reasons are given in
these Quodlibats, viz. For that the state of the Crown and Kingdom by the
Common Laws is so strongly settled, as whilst they continue, the Jesuits see
not how they can work their Wills. he has also set down a Course how all men
may shake off Authority at their pleasures: And this Stratagem is, how the
Common people may be inveigled and seduced to conceit to themselves such a
liberty and prerogative, as that it may be lawful for them, when they think
meet, to place and displace Kings and Princes, as Men may do their Tenants at
Will, Hirelings; or ordinary Servants.

Having thus acquainted you with the Platform laid long since deep in Council
for our Ruin; I leave to all Contemporaries of these late Rebellious
Anarchical times, to judge how much of this Train has taken Fire, and how much
of the substance of this Plot has been put in Execution, and how near the
whole design was like to have taken Effect, when the Assembly Elected only by
the Army Officers on the 20th. of August 1653. (as the Diurnals printed) they
ordered there should be a Committee felected to confider a now Body of the Law,
for the Government of this Common Wealth, who were to new mould the whole Body
of the Law. and is not this according to T. F. Parsons Platform? He that would
know more of it must read the Book it self, (which is still in great esteem
amongst them) or because that is rare, he may read a Book of the same Parsons,
Entitled, A manifestation of the folly and bad spirit of the secular Priests;
wherein this Memorial is owned by him, and Analyfed and Excused from f. 55. to
64. or W. Clark a Roman Priest his Answer to the Manifestation, Entitled, A
Reply unto a certain Libel, lately set forth by Fa. Parsons p. 74, etc. or
Watsons Quodlibets, p. 92, 95, together with a Reply to a brief Apology, and
several other Books, which above 60 Years ago the Priests wrote against the
Jesuits, and the Jesuits against the Priests, whereby the Reader may in
transitu, besides all this, perceive that there be as many, and as great
differences between them, as among Protestants. Smiths Preface to the Apology
f. 12. See also Contzen the Mogentine Jesuit. f. 2 c. 18. of his Politics and
Campanella in his Monarchia Hispan, The Jesuits now seem to drive another
design all the World over, viz. as they have one Ecclesiastical or Universal
Monarch; so to set up a temporal universal Monarch, which Eul. Postellus
attributes to Terra sancta, cui Gallia ob primariam orbis nomen and jus
substituitur eo quod Ambae toti orbi legem sunt daturae.

I now proceed to show you how faithful the Papists were to the Crown of
England, after King James came to it.

The first Meritorious Act toward King James was to calumniate him with a
breach of promise, as made to some of them before he came into England for a
Tolleration of their Religion, which now he did deny to perform, which had this
intended double mischief in it, viz. That it should bring an Odium upon him
from the Protestants for making such a promise, and the like from the Papists
for the breaking of it. And unto whom should this promise be made but unto that
Arch-traitor Percy, and to that false Priest, Watson, both afterward found in
other Treasons, for which being condemned, Watson confessed to the Earl of
Northampton (purposely sent by the King to examine him who was the first first
Author of that false report) at Winchester, a day or Two before he was
Executed, 17. b.
(at which time no man is presumed to lie) that he never could receive any
spark of Comfort touching ease of Counscience to Catholics from His Majesty,
how unjustly soever the World had made him Author of that Scandal; though
withal he added, how unwilling he had been to declare to his Fellows how
averse the King showed him in his own Words, lest over great discouragement
might render them desperate. The like did Percy (another desperate Traitor)
aver after his return out of Scotland, both before and after the Queens death,
that in the point of Conscience he found the Kings intent, and final purpose to
be peremptory. Proceedings against Traitors, 182. A. 6. and 45.6.46.

The like slander and Scandal was raised upon the King by the Lord of
Belmerinoth his Scottish Secretary, by sending the Pope Word the King James
would become his obedient Son, who afterward being Arraigned, acknowledged his
offense in devising Letters, and sending them to Rome, which himself got
cunningly Signed in shuffling them in amongst others; His Majesty being utterly
ignorant of the Contents. Speed. 917.

Another faithful service toward King James his Person, Crown and Posterity,
was plotted by Watson and Clark, Two Secular Italianated Priests, who drew
others of the Nobility and Gentry into their Hellish Confederacy, as Lord
Cobham, Lord Gray, of Wilton, Sir Walter Raleigh, Lord Warden of the
Stanneries, Sir Griffin Markeham, Sir Edward Parham, George Brook, and others;
their design was to have surprised the Kings person, and his Son Prince H. to
have kept them prisoners in the Tower, or in Dover Castle, and there by
violence to obtain their Ends, viz. A Tolleration of Religion, and a removal of
evil Counselors, or to put some other projects in Execution, and then to
obtain their Pardons. Watson to have been Lord Chancellor, Lord Gray
Earl-Marshal of England, George Brook Lord Treasurer, Sir Griffin Markham
Secretary, etc. Thus did they divide the Bears-skin, which is not yet caught,
though the same Generation in all probability be still in hot pursuit of the
same Quarry, viz. A Tolleration and Change of Religion in the transferring of
all Crowns from Protestant to Popish Princes and Government, according to
Parsons and Campanella's Platform. Of those Confederates only Sir William
Parham was acquitted, and Three only Executed, viz. George Brook, Clark, and
Watson, who had taught equivocating; and to avoid his other solemn
protestations both by Word and Writing, that the Act was lawful, being done
before his Coronation, for that the King was no King before he was Anointed,
and the Crown solemnly set on his Head.

By this we may conclude, that there is no trust to be reposed in Papists of
any Order. What Man in the World could profess and publish to all the World in
Writing more obedience and faithfulness to a Prince than Watson did to Queen
Eliz. most fiercely and bitterly blaming the Jesuits for their iterated and
re-iterated Treasons and Rebellions against her, and for creating disturbances
in all the states of the World where they are. As he lived to see, so I hope he
lived to repent of his 2in and error; for he left this brand and suspicion on
the Jesuitical Order at his death, that they in revenge had cunningly and
covertly drawn him into this Action, which brought him into this shameful End.

What shall I say more? 18. b. 31.
Vox faucibus haeret. I am now come to that monstrum horrendum, Inform, Ingens
cui Lumen Ademptum, unto Guy Fawks and his dark Lanthorn, that never to be
paralleled Gunpowder-Treason, in which I will say with the Grave Senator,
repertum est hodierno die facinus quod nec Poeta fingere, nec Historia sonare,
nec Minus Imitare poterit. This plot of plots is yet so fresh in memory, and so
well known all the World over, that I will not enter into the particulars of
it, though there are some so desperately Jesuited, that either out of
simplicity, or Impudence will not confess the truth thereof, others extenuate
it, by saying, they were only a few discontented persons, desperate in Estate,
or base, or not settled in their Wits, without religion, Habitation, Gredit,
Means or Hope, and as our Apologizer for Catholics f. 5. A few Desperadoes.
But most certain it is, that they were Gentlemen of good Houses, of excellent
parts, and of Competent Fortunes. Besides that, Percy was of the House of
Northumberland, Sir William Stanley, (who principally employed Fawks into
Spain) and John Talbot of Graston, both of great and Honorable Families;
others say, That there was never a Religious Man in this Action, which is no
truer than the other. Whoever yet knew a Treason without a Romish Priest? In
this there were many, Three of them Legiers and Statesmen, Henry Garnet alias
Waller, superior of the Jesuits Legier here in England, T. F. Creswel Legier
Jesuit in Spain, Fa. Baldwin Legier in Flanders, as Parsons at Rome, besides
their Itinerant or Cursory Men, as Gerrard, Oswald, Tesmond alias Greenway,
Hamond, Hall, and other Jesuits. Proceedings 27, 18. Prosperum Scetus virtus
vocatur, would have been a good Axiom then; such Hellish Actions being of their
Nature and Number, quae non Laudantur nisi peracta. Now against whom was this
Hellish Plot contrived (not to name Parliament, Council, Nobility, Gentry,
etc.) but against King James, that peaceable obliging Prince, who had sought
all Mild and Royal means possible to have reduced them unto a quiet, peaceable,
and Loyal Temper, and yet even 1 Jac. when His Majesty used so great lenity
toward Recusants in that by the space of a whole Year and Four Months, he took
no penalty due by Statute of them. For at the time of Watsons Treason, when
some of the greatest Recusants were convented at Hampton Court, and not found
Participes Criminis, were presently dismissed, with encouragement, favor and
promise, that those mean profits which had accrued to His Majesty, since His
coming to the Crown, for their Recusancy, should be forgiven to those who had
kept themselves free from all Conspiracies: Nay, so far was His Majesty from
severity, nay from discriminating, that he indifferently Honored all with
Advancement and favors. And were they at all Reclaimed by this? Nothing less;
for at that very time they gave out, That the King would deal rigorously with
them, designedly to keep up the Hearts of Catholics against him, for that end
indeed they had more Treasons then hatching against him before they saw his
Face in England, and all grounded on those Two Papal Breves? 19. b.
For in March 1603. Garnet complained to Catesby, That the King had broken his
promise with the Catholics: And in September following, Catesby making a
grievous complaint to Thomas Percy, That contrary to their Expectations His
Majesty both did hold, and was like continually to run the same course which
before the Queen had held, Percy presently breaks forth into this Devilish
Speech, That there was no way but to kill the King, which he would undertake to
do; but Catesby cunningly replied, No Tom; Thou shall not adventure thy self to
so small purpose: If thou will be a Traitor, there is a Plot to greater
advantage; and such a one as can never be discovered, viz. thereby meaning the
Powder Treason.

How impudently soever this is now Extenuated, nay denied by some Papists; yet
Johannes Barclaius a French Catholic, wrote the History of it, under the Title
of Conspiratio Anglicana, the very same Month it was discovered, viz. November.
1605. where he thus brands it. Ingens, Atrox, horridum facinus, quale nec
Antiquitas vidit, and aegre posteri credent: Denique velut omnium flagitiorum
compendium in hanc diem fortuna contulit. So matchless and horrid a villainy,
that our Forefathers never saw the like, and which future Ages will hardly
believe, it being the very Quintessence and Compendium of all the villainies
that the Sun yet ever saw; (Christ's passion excepted.)

Which History he improves to this Axiom. Saepe Divinitatis opera haec sunt ut
Furias in ipso jam successu securas subito vitio excipiat: Ne vel unquam
improbis timor, vel spes absit calamitosae virtuti. When they shall say peace
and safety; then sudden destruction comes upon them, as Travel upon a Woman
with Child, and they shall not escape, 1 These. 5.3. Neither does God ever leave
the wicked without fear, nor distressed righteous without hope. This pitiful
politic device of theirs is so improbable, and looks so Jewish, that I can
resemble it to no other. Though Pilate by the Advice of the Chief Priests and
Pharisees, made the Sepulcher wherein Christ's Body was laid sure, by stealing
the Stone, and setting a Watch and Guard of Soldiers, lest His Disciples
should come by night and steal Him away; and though His Resurrection was made
unquestionable by an Earthquake, and by the rolling back of the Stone from the
Door by an Angel descending from Heaven, and sitting upon it, whose Countenance
was like Lightning, and his Raiment White as Snow; so that for fear of him the
Keepers did shake, and became as dead men; yet when some of the Watch had
showed unto the Chief Priests all the things that were done, yet so hard of
belief were they, that they assembled with the Elders, and having taken
Council, they gave large Money unto the Soldiers, to say, His Disciples came
by night and stole him away whilst we slept, and if this come to the Governors
Ears, we will persuade him, and secure you; so they took the Money, and did as
they were taught, Mat. 28.
which saying is commonly reported among the Jews until this day. And if Brows
of Brass, and Brazen Faces can prevail, the 5th. of November shall no more be
believed by them another Age, than Pope Joane is now.

Had these kind of Men had any spark of Loyalty, or Gratitude in their Hearts,
it had been impossible they should ever have plotted, and conspired so
desperately against so mild and gracious a Prince as King James was, and who
had sought their quiet and safety by many obliging means. Did not he bestow
many Honors on many Catholics? Did not he allow them free Access both to his
Court, and to his Person, not only on just occasions, but for their comfort,
and at their pleasure, though he was not ignorant, that the Jesuits had been
tampering with the Catholics, as well to dissuade them from the Acceptance of
His Majesty at his first coming, alleging, that they ought rather to die, than
to admit of an Heretic (for so they termed His Majesty) to the Crown: And that
they might not under pain of Excommunication accept of any but of a Catholic
for their Sovereign: hands upon due proof made of spoil, without further
command of any other Contribution or Taxation than the Laws limited? Did he not
give order for the punishing of Informers and Messengers, that preyed upon the
prostrate Fortunes of Recusants, with harder measure than the Justice of the
State Warranted? Was he not pleased in the General Pardon granted at the close
of the Parliament; that Priests and Jesuits should be comprised in the List,
and among them both Garuet and Greenwell, who in recompense whereof were
shortly after pleased, that so Royal a Dispenser of Grace and Bounty toward
them, should be blown up by their Bontefeaux? Had they not greater freedom than
formerly in their own Countries, and to serve what Prince or State abroad that
they pleased, to travel when and where they pleased, without yielding an
account at their return? 20. b. 35.
Did ever any Magistrate in cold Blood proceed against a Priest, that for want
of means to procure a pardon had been kept in prison since the time of the
Queens decease? By all which, and much more that might be said, it fully
appears, That King James was no hard Master, reaping where he had not sowed,
and gathering where he had not strowed; nor yet Revengeful, who though he was
to have been blown up after all these Favors and Liberties conferred on them,
still continued, I might say increased them, (notwithstanding that horrid and
matchless Conspiracy) even to his dying day, with as much Indulgence and
Favor as he could without Offense or Scandal to the tender Consciences of his
own Church, which as he ought, so he did chiefly regard.

Neither were King James his Favors confined to the Papists of Great Britain
only, Ireland; For he resolved not to take any advantage of great Forfeitures
and Confiscations, which he was most justly Entitled unto by Tyrones Rebellion;
but out of his Royal Bounty restored all the Natives to the Intite possession
of their own Lands, in hope this would for ever have engaged their Obedience to
him and his at least, if not unto the Crown of England: And yet he had not
Reigned 6 Years e're the Earl of Tyrone, (not long before obliged by the Queen,
with Titles of Honor, great store of Lands, Commands of Horse and Foot in her
pay) was designing afresh the raising of another Rebellion, into which he
easily drew the whole Province of Vlster then entirely at his Devotion: But his
Design being prevented, he with his chief Adherents fled into Spain, (from
whence he never returned) which impious and ungrateful Act of his, and his
Adherents, rendered them justly suspected to be Irreconcilable to a Protestant
Prince, which forced the King to cause their persons to be attainted, their
Lands to be seized, those Six Conntries within the Province of Vlster to be
Surveyed, etc. And the same course to be taken likewise in Lemster, where the
Irish had made Incursions, and violently repelled the Old English. And though
the King was by due course of Law justly Entitled to all their whole Estates
there; yet was he graciously pleased to take but part of their Lands, which
coming to British undertakers, made them to flourish with costly Buildings,
21. b.
and with all manner of Improvements; so that the very Irish seemed to be very
much satisfied with the flourishing, and peaceable Condition of the whole
Kingdom, and yet could not Acquiesce therein; but Rebel they must against King
Charles the Son, who besides many other Favors and Connivances, had so far
gratified the Natives Anno 1640. that he grants unto the Commissioners, then
sent unto him out of Ireland, the Act of Limitations, (so vehemently desired by
the Natives) and the Act for the rilinquishment of His Majesty's Right and
Title to the Four Counties in Connaught: Besides, at this time the Papists
privately enjoyed the exercise of their Religion throughout the whole Kingdom
by the Indulgence, and Connivance of the late Governors, they having their
Titular Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Abbots, etc. who all lived freely, though
obscurely, yet without control, and exercised a voluntary Jurisdiction,
Multitudes of Priests, Jesuits and Friars returning out of Spain and Italy,
where the Irish Natives that way devoted were thither sent for Education, and
now returned, lived in the chief Towns and Villages, and in the Houses of the
Nobility and Gentry, exercising their Religious Rites and Ceremonies, none of
the severer Laws being put in Execution, whereby great penalties were to be
inflicted on Transgressors in that kind.

Were they ever the more faithful for these great Indulgencies? nothing less!
For in August 1641. (after about forty years peace) the Popish party in both
House of Parliament then sitting in Dublin, grew so insolent, as being scarce
compatible with the present peaceable Government, they were forced to adjourn
for 3 Months, before which time, viz, 23. October. 1641. they brake out into that
detestable and desperate Rebellion, as is not to be matched in any Story,
wherein, in less than Two Years they murdered in cold Blood above 200000.
English Protestants, they threatened to burn Dublin, destroy all Records and
Monuments of the English Government, to make Laws against speaking English, and
that all names given by English to places should be abolished, and the ancient
names restored. And was not this also a great demonstration of their
Faithfulness to the King and Crown of England.

Let every man judge as he sees cause how faithfully they requited King Charles
the first for his favors toward them, which were many and great, which I will
not here enumerate, it being super-abundantly done already in print in diverse
Pamphlets, though I fear with no good intention toward that glorious Martyr,
but rather to raise an Odium toward him from some of his weaker Subjects,
willing happily for other ends to be so seduced, many whereof I hope have lived
to see and consider that his pious life and death gave a just contradiction to
those false Imputations and Jelousies. And yet I must not forget one remarkable
kindness of his (who loved not to punish scrupulous, peaceable Consciences
sanguinarily) toward Papists, who being sent unto by both Houses of Parliament
Anno 1640. for the Execution of John Goodman, a Condemned Priest, did in answer
to them 3. Febr. 1640. own that he had reprieved him not without giving them
great reasons for his so doing, viz. For that neither his Father, nor yet Queen
Eliz. did ever avow, that any Priest in their times was Executed merely for
Religion; and therefore did remit this particular cause to both the Heresies,
cautionating them withal, That happily his Execution might seem a severity in
other States, 22. b.
and might draw inconveniences on his Subjects in other Countries, and
therefore held himself discharged from all inconveniences, that might ensue
upon his Execution. And this did he notwithstanding the Popes Directions unto
the then Superior of the Catholics in England, Anno 1638. were expressly to
command them suddenly to desist from making such offers of Men toward the
Northern Expedition then under consideration, as we hear they have done little
to the Advantage of their Discretion, and that they be not more forward with
Money, than what Law and Duty enjoins them to pay.

Such was the kindness and faithfulness of those Irish Papists to the King and
Crown of England, that indeed they did rise, I must needs say, most Catholickly
in Rebellion against both from all parts of the Kingdom, designing thereby to
monopolize the whole Government of that Kingdom into their own hands,
(exclusive of the King, if several Oaths are to be credited, published by the
Kings Warrant) to enjoy the public profession of their Idolatrous Religion,
and to Expel all the English, by whose protection, countenance, favors and
purses that Kingdom was so beautified and enriched, as it then was, and is at
this day, though now by them miserably pejorated by that Intestine War raissed
by themselves in the midst of their happy enjoyments, and that without any
provocation, ground or color against the King, as himself expressed under his
Great Seal: To this give Testimony those early instructions privately sent over
into England by the Lord Dillon of Costeloe, presently after the breaking out
of the Rebellion by the Remonstrance of the county of Longford pretended about
the same time to the Lords Justices by the same Lord Dillon, as also by their
frame of their new Commonwealth found in Sir John Dungans, house not far from
Dublin, and sent up thither out of Connaught to be communicated to those of
Leinster, the sum of which, and other such like, is summed up, and may be seen
to have that purport in the Irish Rebellion, written by Sir John Temple, f. 80,
81, 82.

Indeed if the Irish Papists had been so Loyal and Faithful, English and Irish
Engaged by Articles to Transport their Armies to England for His Majesty's
Service; the English did it, the Irish only pretended they would do it when the
English were gone, and then according to one of their old Maxims Nulla fides
servanda cum Haereticis, they plotted and attempted the ruin of the small
Remnant of English left behind in Munster, where the Lord Inchiquin commanding
by the Kings Commission, and the English with him were necessitated to stand on
their own defense against the Popish Army, Orery 25.

Though in the Year 1645. the Earl of Glamorgan gave as Adventageous terms as
they could ask, and condescended to such hard and dishonorable propositions on
the Kings part, as the then Marquess now Duke of Ormond in Justice and Honor
neither could nor would condescend unto; and though the Commissions of the
confederate Catholics solemnly engaged the public Faith for the performance
of them; one Article whereof was, 23. b.
That they should send 10000. to serve His Majesty etc. yet did they not in due
time perform their plighted Troath herein, which was a great disservice to His
Majesty: England more irreconcilable to His Majesty, that so that War might be
kept up, that they might the better gain by Fishing in those troubled Waters;
so that they well hoped to give Law to both.

It was the constant observation of the Protestant Army there, that the lower
and more unfortunate the King was in his successes in England, the higher were
the demands of the Irish; for the Truth is, how Loyal and dutiful soever their
pretenses were toward the King; yet their design was to set up for the Pope,
and the establishing the Romish Religion, and erecting its Spiritual Monarchy
at least, if not a Temporal with it.

The Archbishop of Iuum was a principal Agent in the Irish Wars, and of the
Supreme Council of Kilkenny. He attended the Army about this time to visit his
Diocese, and to put in Execution an Order for the Arrears of his Bishopric
granted to him from the Council at Kilkenny, which Order, together with the
Popes Bull, and several other Letters of Correspondence between him and his
Agents from Rome, Paris, and several parts of Ireland were found about him,
whereby it did appear, that the Pope would not at the first engage himself in
sending of a Nuntio for Ireland, Irish Agents had fully satisfied him, that the
Establishment of the Catholic Religion was a thing feaseable and attainable in
that Kingdom; in which being satisfied, he was content to solicit their cause
with Florence and Venice etc. and also to delegate Farmano his Nuntio to attend
the Kingdom, who after some delays in France, was at last posted from thence by
express Order from the Pope, and he arrived at the River of Kilmore in a
Friggot of 21 Guns in October, with 26 Italians of his Retinue, Secretary
Belinges, and diverse Regular and Secular Priests, and also with great Supplies,
(for the service of the King no doubt) as 2000 Muskets, 4000 Bandaliers, 2000
Swords, 500 Petronells, and 20000 l. of Powder, all which arrived at
Brooke-Haven the same Month, together with 5 or 6 Deskes or Small Truncks of
Spanish Gold; how far all those Popish Auxiliaries conduced to the Kings
service; and the Protestant Interest, I leave to all Contemporaries to judge.

As in the year 1645. so in that Year 1646. after a peace concluded with them
they treacherously attempted to cut off the Lord Lieutenant, and his Army with
him, who marched out of Dublin on security and confidence of that peace. 24. b.
The same year the Council and Congregation of the Confederate Catholics of
Ireland obliged their General Preston by a solemn Oath to exercise all Arts of
Hostility against the Lord Marquess of Ormond, Lord General, and Vlster,
employed in the same Expedition.

In the Year 1647. from Kilkenny 18. January, the General Assembly of the
Confederate Catholics of Ireland employed Commissioners to Rome, France and
Spain, to invite a Foreign power into Ireland. To Rome they sent their Titular
Bishop of Ferns, and Nicholas Plunket Esquire; (Knighted there by the Pope for his
good service therein) to declare, that they raised Arms for the freedom of the
Catholic Religion, which are their own words in the Third Article of those
their Instructions. (Orerey) This is consonant to the Oath framed the same Year
with some Addition to what had formerly been taken by the said General
Assembly, and pressed on all sorts of people under pain of high Treason, which
Oath enjoins the maintenance of these ensuing Propositions. 1. That the Roman
Catholics, both Clergy and Laiety in their several Capacities, have the free
and public exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion and Function throughout
the Kingdom, in as full luster and splendor as it was in the Reign of Hen.
VII. or any other Catholic King, his Predecessors Kings of England, and Lords
of Ireland, either in Ireland or in England. 2. That the Secular Clergy of
Ireland, viz. Primates, and other Dignitaries; all other Pastors of the
Secular Clergy, their respective Successors shall have and enjoy all, and all
manner of Jurisdictions, Privileges and Immunities in full and ample manner as
the Roman Catholic Secular Clergy had or enjoyed the same within this Realm at
any time during the Reign of the late King Hen. VII. sometimes King of England,
and Lord of Ireland, any Law, Declaration of Law, Statute, Power or Authority
whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding. 3. That all Laws and Statutes made
since the 20th. Year of Hen. VIII. whereby any restraint, penalty, or other
restriction whatsoever is or may be laid upon any of the Roman Catholics,
either of the Clergy and Laiety for such their free Exercise of the Roman
Catholic Religion within this Kingdom, and of their several Functions,
Jurisdictions and Privileges may be repealed, renewed, and declared void in
the next Parliament, by one or more Acts of Parliament to be past therein. 4.
That the Primates, Archbishops, etc. of the Roman Catholic Secular Clergy,
and their respective Successors shall have, hold and enjoy all the Churches,
and Church Livings, in as large and ample manner as the late Protestant Clergy
respectively enjoyed the same on the first day of October 1641. together with
all Profits, Emoluments, Perquisits, Liberties, 25 b.
and other Rights to their respective Sees and Churches belonging, as well in
all places now in the possession of the confederate Catholics, also in all
other places that shall be recovered by the said confederate Catholics from
the adverse party within this Kingdom, saving to the Roman Catholic Laiety,
their respective rights to the Laws of the Land.

But to return to the said Instructions, it is Recorded in another part of the
said Third Article, that they intend to insist on such Concessions in matters
of Religion, and for the security thereof as his Holiness shall approve of, and
be satisfied with.

And in the Ninth Article, they were instructed to make application to his
Holiness for his being Protector of Ireland, (wherein they were before the
Phanaticks in England) and by special instance to endeavor his acceptance
there etc. Nay, their Commissioners then sent to France and Spain, were
required in case of the Popes refusal of being their Protector to offer it to
either of those Kings, nay to any Popish Prince (from whom to use their own
words) they might have most considerable aids. Orerey. Faithful and Meritorious
Servants still, if they may be their own Judges, though they desired and
designed the Pope; nay any King or Prince rather than the King of England
ratified to be their Liege Lord for so many successions of Princes together.

Neither was it in those Treaties only that they showed themselves such Loyal
and Faithful Subjects; Anno 1648. wherein they forced and compelled the King to
yield unto such unreasonable condiscentions, that nothing but pure necessity
could ever have extorted from him, or his Lieutenant. 18th. Article a
Papal-like preclusion of all offenses to be committed or done after their date,
they then thnking themselves sufficiently authorized and pardoned for all or
any new Crimes by a pardon of much more force than of one from their Holy
Father the Pope; they were not long e're they began to vilify and disobey the
Kings Lord Lieutenant of Ireland; in pursuit wereof they sent to the Lord
Lieutenant in April 1650. desiring him to leave the Kingdom, and to commit the
Government thereof to one that they should choose, and might confide in, and
this without so much as acquainting his present Majesty with it. And in very
deed they had good reason so to do; or else how was it possible for them to
compass their main design, viz. The Atchieving of the Government into their own
hands and power, that so they might have a Native King of their own, and
extirpate the English, Root and Branch.

Though herein they were disappointed by the Piety, Honor, August following,
by their public Declaration, they did therein manifest to the people, that
they were no longer obliged to obey the Orders or Commands of the Marquess of
Ormond, whereby they did evidently break these Articles, and declare their
power paramount to His Majesty's Orerey, Excommunicate not only the Lord
Lieutenant, but all that should feed or adhere to him; (a great Bugbear I must
confess) but it being solemnised Glave Errante it scared not his Grace, nor any
of his Adherents from their duty, and so it mist of their desired end; however
this showed their good will to have preserved His Majesty's Regal Authority, by
bereiving his Lieutenant of it. All Meritorious and our best Friends still.

The Rump, that Infamous Rump (Infamous as for many other abominations, so most
superlatively for their High-Court of Injustice) was much more beholding to
them than the King was; for they made Petitions and Supplications unto them, as
unto the Supreme Authority of the Nation, Entitling them the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, wherein they did readily subject and put their
Consciences, Lives and Fortunes as in a secure Sanctuary under the Protection
thereof: (they are their own words) And herein vaunted, That several of them
were able to make appear their constant good affection, and adherence to the
Rump, (their own words still) and prayed a competent time to be allowed them
for making out the same. Vide the Petitions of Sir Ra. Talbot Baronet, and
Garret Moore Esquire; who were not herein private, but public persons, and so
owned in the Title of their Petitions, being for the behalf of others, for whom
they were Sollicitors, Agitators, or Trustees, Irish Papists until of late
days) which is more than ever they would do to King Charles I. or King Charles
II. for they treated with their Majesty's upon the Swords point, upon as great
terms of defiance, as if they had treated with the Turk, and not with their
Liege Lord Vide Orerey, fo. 14, 15. Of which sit liber Judex, the Articles of
the Treaties. They went yet further congratulating with them, by acknowledging,
That their withered hopes, and former confidences were a fresh revived by the
Rumps return to the management of the Government, under which their propensions
to peace and quietness were so great, that they willingly acquiesced in their
transplanation; albeit it was not executed by any Legal power, as not being
derived from their Honors.

What could they submit more than they did, Consciences, Lives, Fortunes? Nay,
their Transplantation they accepted cheerfully; nay, Petitioned for it? would
they yet but acquiesce in that their Transplantation only, (as they bragged
unto the Rump, that they did to them) it would be some manner of Expiation for
their Crimes past, and encouragement to His Majesty more securely to confide in
them for the time to come, and be a means to remove many Fears and Jealousies,
and would make way for future Graces.

But they are yet so far from doing any thing of this Nature, that they contend
Tooth and Nayl, both by Pen and Interest, for the performance of those
Extorted, and Inglorious Articles made 1646.

Articles, Articles that themselves broke and set at naught, Gallway after the
Articles of 1648. Treat with the Duke of Lorraine to be Protector of Ireland?
Did not Waterford deny a passage to the Lord Lieutenant and his Army? Nay,
sought they not his life afterward, or to deliver him to the Usurpers, had be
not suddenly and secretly withdrawn and secured himself?

Their General Assembly styled themselves His Majesty's Loyal and Faithful
Subjects, and to manifest it the Enacted: That no Temperal Government or
Jurisdiction should be assumed, kept or executed in Ireland, or in any Province
or County thereof, other than of what should be approved or instituted by their
General Assembly. If this be not professing like Saints, and doing like Devils
I do not know what is; profess Loyalty, that they might have the better
opportunities to perpetrate their wicked designs; Kiss and Betray with Judas,
Salute and Honorably present with Ehud, and at the same time thrust a Dagger
into the Kings Bowels: Hosanna on the tips of their Tongues, and Crucifige in
the depths of their Hearts: And yet so Impudent as to style themselves the
Kings best and most saithful Subjects.

They Addressed their Petitions to the Supreme Authority of this Nation the,
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England. First Moderator f. 59. They
affirmed, that they had generally taken, and punctually kept the Engagement. 2.
Moderator f. 41. They promised, that if they might enjoy their Religion, they
would be the most quiet and useful Subjects of England. 1. Moderator f. 31.
They proved it in these words, viz. The Papists of England would be bound by
their own Interest (the strongest obligation amongst wise Men) to live
peaceably and thankfully in the private Exercises of their Consciences, and
becoming gainers by such Compassions, they would not so reasonably be
distrusted as the Prelatick party that were loosers, 1. Moderator f. 36.

I have dwelt the longer on the practices and designs of the Papists of
Ireland, for that there was clear demonstration in point of fact of their
Affection and Adherency to the Pope before; nay, against their rightful King
and Sovereign, which has been evidenced by their public Acts and Monuments,
(of which for a Test take a part of one Translated, viz. Urban. 8o. ad futuram
rei memoriam. Having taken into our serious consideration etc. Orerey f. 59,
60.) by their often Treaties, their Acts of their General Assembly, and of
their Council, by their Instructions to their Engineers to their Foreign
Princes etc. All which are excellently, and much more largely Anatomized and
descanted on by the Earl of Orerey in his answer to P. W. Into whose hands many
of the Originals having fallen, cannot be gainsaid; and if they had not, yet
their Catholic and open rising in Arms, and fighting on every occasion against
His Majesty's Armies and Commands, is a demonstration evident as the Sun at
noon, that they were Rebels to the height to all intents and purposes; for it
was begun, continued, and ended by Papists only, (not one Protestant among
them) both Secular and Regular; the Pope himself, the Head of their Church in
the person of his Nuntio Rinuccini generalissimo of all their Forces both by
Sea and Land, with all his Tribe of his Ecclesiastical Orders, contributing all
assistance and encouragement imaginable thereunto: Whereby it is most manifest,
that the horrid Rebellion was not only a Crime of some in their Church, but
even a Crime of their Church.

I now pass to the Papists of England, concerning whose Actions and Affections
it cannot reasonably be expected, that I should so clearly discover their more
secret. Designs and Machinations, Papists fighting under the Popes Banner,
Countenance and Encouragement against Protestants, as they did in Ireland: But
Protestants (Jesuitically in that point principled) against a Protestant King
and his Liege-men that were more loyally minded and principled, and so were
never Embodied together apart and by themselves; and therefore could never
Assemble and Confederate together either in Battle to fight, or in full and
open Council to design and plot, but what they did covertly and in the dark, by
fomenting dissentions and Intestine Wars according to Cotzen the Moguntine
Jesuit, in the Second Book of his Politics Chapter 18. and to Campanella's design
de Monar. Hisp. Chapter 24. p. 204. etc. I am vero ad enervandos Anglos nihil tam
conducit quam dissentio and discordia inter illos excitata perpetuoque nutrita,
quod cito meliores occasiones suppeditabit, and that by putting the Parliament
upon it, ut Angliam in formam Reipublicae reducant ad Imitationem Holandorum
and how near it was brought to this by our late Republicans is most notorious;
So confident were the Jesuits of their Plots and Designs taking effect, that
Campian in his Book printed 1583. at Trevers, declares, thus concerning the
English in the name of his Holy Order, viz. Our Will is, That it come to the
knowledge of every one so far as it concerns our Society, that we all dispersed
in great numbers through the World, have made a League, and Holy Solemn Oath,
That as long as there is any of us alive, that all our Care and Industry, all
our Deliberations and Councils shall never cease to trouble their quiet and
safety, we shall procure and pursue for ever their Ruin, the utter destruction
of their Religion, and of their Kingdom.

It is long since we have taken this Resolution with the hazard of our lives;
so that the business being already well begun and advanced, 29. b.
it is impossible that the English can do any thing to stop our design, or
surmount it. Faithful Men still no doubt they are yet unto the Miter and
Red-Caps of Rome only; but nothing less unto the Crown and Diadem of England.
And shall we after all such demonstrations dis-believe their own Protestations,
and not take their own Words for it?

Besides, if we may guess at the Body of Hercules by his foot, we may then by
tracing some of the Footsteps of our English Catholics as have casually come
to light, discover the main design of them, and especially of those of their
Clergy to have been for the ruin of the King of happy memory, and of the
Protestant Religion: Yet I would not be mis-understood herein, as if I meant
every Individual Papist; for some of them, and those of Noble Families and
Fortunes, as also others of them of meaner rank, ventured both Lives and
fortunes very gallantly for their Sovereign; but it was still against a
Protestant, not against a Popish party; however I wish they may continue
heartily Loyal against all parties, and that all of that Religion were so
minded, which though I may wish, yet can never rationally hope to see, whilst
they continue true to Romish Principles, which oblige them to set up another
Supreme Head within those His Majesty's Dominions in derogation of this
Imperial Crown and Scepter.

I shall not trouble you with the repetition of many store of the disguised and
dark Actings of the Papists against the King and Crown of England, they being
already extant in several Treaties, viz. In hidden works of darkness brought to
light. Jus Patronatus. Mr. Prinne his Speech in Parliament, his Memento, his
Epistle to a reasonable and legal vindication etc. Quakers unmarked. In which,
and other Books, many particulars may be seen of their secret undermining
Actings

In the Year 1638. (when the Kings had great need both of Men and Money, and
the Hearts of all his Subjects, and their contributions, whether Popish or
Protestants) his Holiness gave directions to his Catholics in England, whereof
these following were part, viz. You are to command the Catholics of England in
general, that they suddenly desist from making such offers of Men toward his
Northern Expedition, as we hear they have done little to the advantage of their
direction. And likewise it is requisite, considering the penalties already
imposed, they they be not forward with Money more than what Law and Duty
enjoins them to pay without any Innovation at all, or view of making themselves
rather weaker Pillars of the Kingdom than they were before.

Declare unto the best of the Peers and Gentry by word of mouth, or Letters,
that they ought not at this time to express any averseness in case the High
Court of Parliament by called, nor show any discontents against the Acts, which
do not point blank aim at Religion, being in general the most sundamental Law
of this Kingdom.

Advise the Clergy to desist from the foolish, nay rather illiterate and
childish Custom of distinction in the Protestant and Puritan Doctrine, and
especially this Error is so much the greater, when they undertake to prove,
that Protestanisme is a Degree nearer to the Faith-Catholick: For since both
lie without the verge of the Church, it is a needless Hypocrisy, yea it begets
more malice than it is worth.

All busy Inquirers are defended, but especially into Arcanes of State.

It is affirmed by -- in a printed Speech before a great Assembly 4. September
1654. p. 16, 17. That he knew very well, that Emissaries of the Jesuits never
came over in those Swarms as they have done since these times. That diverse
Gentlemen could bear witness with him, that they had a Consistory, and Council
abroad, that Rules all the Affairs of the things of England. That they had
fixed in England in the limits of most Cathedrals (of which he was able to
produce the particular Instruments) an episcopal power with Archdeacons and
other persons to perver^^ (...) the midst of all our sad Distractions.

And I presume it will not be denied, Inde quod nuper veteres comgravere Coloni.
that very many of them have been sent or come over from Foreign Seminaries
into England under the disguises of Converted Jews, Physicians, Chyrurgians,
Independants, Quakers, Fifth Monarchy Men, Agitators, Mechanics, Merchants,
Factors, Travelers, Soldiers, that they might the more unsuspectedly have an
Influence on the Committees, Agitators, and Officers of the Army. It was
confessed to one of the English Nobility at Rome by the English Provincial
there, that they had then above 1500. of their Society in England able to work
in several professions and Trades, which they had there taken upon them, the
better to support and secure themselves from being discovered.

Who ever considers the forementioned Platform laid subtly by F. F.
Parsons, and oaths, to work insensibly our Ruin. Vide Smiths Preface fo. 12.
the Swarms of Papists here ready to join Heads, and Hands, and Hearts on all
occasions and opportunities to bring it to pass, the new printing (about the
time of that horrid matchless Murder) of their Dolman, that Infamous and
Traitorous Libel against our Kings under a new Title of several Speeches,
delivered at a Conference concerning the powers of Parliaments to proceed
against their Kings for mis-government, together with what is averred for
truth, and offered to be justified (when ever called thereunto) by that learned
and worthy Divine Du Moulin in his Vindication Se. 58, 59, 60. etc. will easily
conclude, that their Merits have not been of that Nature, as to be used as
Arguments for a Tolleration, no nor yet for the least of kindness, viz. When
the business of the late bad times are once ripe for an History, and time the
bringer of Truth to light, has discovered the Mysteries of Iniquity, and the
depths of Satan, which have wrought so much crime and mischief, it will be
found, that the late Rebellion was raised and fostered by the Arts of the Court
of Rome That Jesuits professed themselves Independent, as not depending on the
Church of England; and Fifth Monarchy Men, that they might pull down the
English Monarchy, and that in the Committees, for the destruction of the King
and the Church, they had their Spies and their Agents.

The Roman Priest and Confessor is known, who when he saw the fatal stroke
given to our Holy King and Martyr, flourished with his Sword and said, Now the
greatest Enemy we have in the World is gone.

When the News of that horrible Execution came to Roan, a Protestant Gentleman
of good credit was present in a great company of Jesuited persons: When after
great Expressions of Joy, the gravest of the Company, to whom all gave ear,
spoke much after this sort. The King of England at his Marriage had promised us
the re-establlshing of the Catholic Religion in England, and when he delayed
to fulfill his promise, we summoned him from time to time to perform it; we came
so far as to tell him, That if he would not do it, we should be forced to take
those courses which would bring him to his destruction: We have given him
lawful warning, and when no worning would serve, we have kept our Word to him,
since he would not keep his Word to us.

That grave Rabbis Sentence agrees with this certain Intelligence, which
shall be justified whenever Authority will require it: That the Year before
the Kings death, a select number of English Jesuits were sent from their whole
party in England, first to Paris to consult with the faculty at Sorbon, then
altogether Jesuited, to whom they put this Question in writing: That seeing the
state of England was in a likely posture to change Government, whether it was
lawful for the Catholics to work the change for the advancing and securing the
Catholic Cause in England, by making away the King, whom there was no hope to
turn from his Heresy? which was answered affirmatively. After which the same
persons went to Rome, where the Question being propounded and debated, it was
concluded by the Pope and his Council, That it was both lawful and expedient
for the Catholics to promote the alteration of State. What followed that
Confultation and Sentence all the World knows, and time the bringer forth of
Truth will let us know. But when that Horrible Paricide, committed on the Kings
Sacred person, Pope commanded all the papers about the Question to be gathered
and burnt. In obedience to which order a Roman Catholic in Paris was demanded
a Copy which he had of those papers; but the Gentleman, who had refused to
consider and detest the wickedness of that project, refused to give it, and
showed it to a Protesant Friend of his, and related to him the whole carriage
of this Negotiation, with great abhorrency of the practices of the Jesuits.

In pursuance of that Order from Rome for the pulling down both of the Monarch
and Monarchy of England, many Jesuits came over, who took several shapes to go
about their work, but most of them took party in the Army. About Thirty of them
were met by a Protestant Gentlemen between Roan and Deipe, to whom they said,
(taking him for one of them) That they were going into England, and would take
Arms in the Independent Army, and endeavor to be Agitators.

A Protestant Lady living in Paris, in the time of our late Calamities, was
persuaded by a Jesuit going in Scarlet to turn Roman Catholic: When the dismal
News of the Kings Murder came to Paris, this Lady, as all other good English
Subjects, was most deeply afflicted with it; and when this Scarlet Divine came
to see her, and found her melting in Tears about that heavy and common
disaster, If that be your Religion, I have done with you for ever.

Many Intelligent Travelers can tell of the great Joy among the English
Convents and Seminaries about the Kings death, as having overcome their Enemy,
and done their main Work for their settlement in England, of which they made
themselves so sure, that the Benedictins were in great care that the Jesuits
should not get their Land: And the English Nunns were contending who should be
Abbesses in England.

An understanding Gentleman visiting the Friars of Dunkirk put them on the
discourse of the Kings death, and to pump out their sense about it, said, That
the Jesuits had labored very much to compass that great Work: To which they
Answered, That the Jesuits would engross to themselves the Glory of all great
and good Works, and of this amongst other Works; whereas they had labored as
diligently, and as effectually as they. So there was striving for the glory of
the Atchievment, and the Friars showed themselves as much Jesuited as the
Jesuits.

In the height of Olivers Tyranny Tho. White a Priest, and a right Jesuit in
all his Principles about Obedience, set out a Book Entitled, The Grounds of
Obedience and Government; wherein he maintains, That if the people by any
Circumstance be devolved to the state of Anarchy, their promise made to their
expelled Governor binds no more. That the people are remitted by the evil
mannaging, or insufficiency of their Governor to the force of Nature, to
provide for themselves, and not bound by any promise made to their Governor,
that the Magistrate by his miscarriages abdicateth himself from being a
Magistrate, and proves a Brigand or Robber instead of a Defender; that word
Defender he writes with a great D. that the Reader may take notice whom he
means. His Book is full fraught with Argumentations of this Nature. All in bar
and prejudice to His Majesty's Restoration. Of the same opinion was F. F.
Bret, when at St. Malo he was earnest with those Gentlemen that had so
gallantly defended the Castle of Jarsey to take the Engagement; from which they
ought to be freed by the Articles of their Rendition, maintaining, that they
were not to acknowledge any Supreme but the prevailing power. Du Moulin Ibid.

Having dwelt thus long on this unpleasant Theme, it is now time to wind up
this Botton, and therefore, Admit the Papists had merited in these late
troubles, as much as they pretend they have, from the King and his Father; yet
does it not follow, that they ought therefore to be rewarded with a Tolleration
of their Religion, or with any Mitigation of our Laws prohibiting the exercise
thereof, no more than it was fit Joseph, for the good service done to his
Master, should be be gratified with the company of his Masters Wife. Neither
did his Master think this reasonable, though he acknowledged the extraordinary
good Service of his Servant, much less did Joseph expect it. In like manner the
Papists must first satisfy us, That the Tolleration of their Religion is not
Tolleration of Idolatry, which the Scripture calls Spiritual Adultery, nor yet
the exercise of a World of Impieties under the Mask of Religion, before they
can convince us (whatever their Loyalty may otherways be) that it is either
lawful or reasonable for Magistrates (whom the Scripture styles Gods, and who
standing in Gods stead ought to be as jealous of his Honor in that case as a
Husband would be of his Wife; Nay, as much as in them lies, even as God
himself, who professes himself to be a Jealous God) to Authorize or connive at
the Exercise of such a Religion, or as to account very strict Laws too severe
in that Case, for which there is both Precept and Example in the Word of God.

It is a very great Truth, That Kings neither can, nor ought to give permission
or allowance of any things, which in their own Natures are evil, and opposite to
the Salvation of Men's Souls, and which though they should permit them, would
nevertheless continue and remain sins, and exclude them that do and practice
them from obtaining Salvation. And of such a Nature are many Popish Doctrins
etc. And certainly those Princes are most worthy of the praise of God and Men,
that endeavor to remove such Abuses, and all things forbidden by God, which
remaining make it impossible for men to be saved, or if saved, yet so as by
Fire, very difficultly. But in things not repugnant to the will of God, all
Princes have liberty to do that which the good and weal of their State requires.

I appeal to all the Caesar's in the World; nay to all mankind, if it be
reasonable, that the requital of the good Services of particular persons should
be gratified with the vacating, or but suspending those Laws which are our
strongest security, or should be debarred from making yet stronger Laws against
But chering and Idolatrous men and Principles. This State seeks not your Blood,
it only desires to be secured and safe from those destructive dangers,, unto
which Popish Doctrins, practices, and principles do most manifestly expose it;
against which no perfect security can possibly be given, but by as public
condemnation and detestation of them, as they are ratified by, (1) by Popes,
Councils. Decrees, great and learned men, Abjurations, and the like.

And I appeal yet further to all the World, if our Popish Traitors here have
not in defiance of our Laws, and for their Justification, Honor and
Encouragement been rewarded at Rome with Honors and Offices, made Holy
Martyrs, Canonized for Saints, and their very Bones kept for Relics: Mighty
Motives I must confess to persuade us to reward and tolerate such men, and
such a Religion. A Religon that no Protestant (I might go farther) can embrace
without becoming worse than brutish, by unreasoning themselves out of their
own reasonable Souls, yea their very Senses, according to Jer. 10.8, 14, 23.
They are altogether brutish and foolish: Their Stock is a Dostrin of Vanities:
Every Man is brutish in his knowledge: Every founder is confounded by the
Graven Image; for his molten Image is falsehood, and there is no Breath in them:
Nay, the Pastors are become Brutish, and have not sought the Lord And what
are they but brutish that will not know, that will not understand and that
hare reproof? Now let all the Romish Doctors and Jesuits show if they can, if
the Doctrines of the Popes power to Excommunicate, Depose and Murder Emperors,
Kings and Princes, and to absolve their Subjects from their Oaths of Obedience
and Allegiance to them: And if the Extravagant, de Majoritate and Obedientia,
and that other of unam sanctam be not in as full force and virtue now at Rome
as ever, only the most Christian King did cudgel Clement the 5th into better
manners, and made him to expound that Extravagant of Boniface the 8th. in
favor of him and his Subjects by another of Meruit de privilegiis. And did not
Paul the 5th. Innocent the 10th. and Alexander the 7th of later days ratify
these monstrous opinions with a particular respect to the case of His Majesty's
Subjects of Great Britain? And shall we after all these demonstrations of their
rancour and malice toward us, and our Religion, mitigate or suspend our Laws
that secure us? or ought not they rather to repent and amend their lives, their
Religion and their Doctrins? I appeal to all unbiassed persons if they have not
incapacitated themselves of all possibility of ever giving any probable
security to a prudent State, whilst they remain in the Communion of that Church
by becoming Votaries to Rome by their Vows and Oaths, except they will abjure
them, and imbosom themselves in our Church. And shall we then fear to
Countermine such destructive bloody principles and practices by moderate and
cautionary Laws preventing them? or by any precautions to disappoint the
mischiefs designed against us, and which if they should fall upon us were never
to be repaired by any future Laws or punishments how severe soever? Let God and
the whole World be Judge between us.

I must confess my self so little discerning, that I cannot perceive any
difference between the Idolatry of the Jews, and that of the Papists. The Jews
were reasonable Creatures, had the same senses and faculties inward and outward
as Papists have; and can it then reasonably be imagined, that the Jews after
they were come out of Egypt, and had themselves broken off the Gold Earrings
which were in the Ears of their Wives, of their Sons, 32. Ex.
and of their Daughters, and given them to Aaron to Make a Golden Calf withal:
Should yet be such Changlings, so void of all sense and reason as to think,
That that very Calf made but Yesterday by Aaron, should be the very God that
brought up them and their Fathers out of the Land of Egypt so many years
before. It is true they said, These be thy Gods O Israel that brought thee up
out of the Land of Egypt, and accordingly built an Altar, proclaimed a Feast
unto the Lord, (not unto the Calf) offered burnt Offerings, and brought peace
Offerings, and sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play; i. e. to
Idolatrize, 1 Cor. 10.7.1. To play the fool, by thinking to please God by
making a representative of him; for they could only mean, that the Calf
represented that God (not that it was the very God) that brought them out of
Egypt, leading and defending them by a Cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by
night.

Those Athenian Idol-worshippers, whose Altar inscribed to the unknown God,
Acts 17.23. argues, That their Sacrifices and Devotions did not certer and
terminate in the Idols they worshipped, but had respect to the true God though
unknown to them, whom therefore they did ignorantly worship, (whereby it is
manifest, that their worship had respect unto God) Paul did declare unto them
to be him that made the World and all things therein, etc. Verse. 24, 25, 26.

Is Romish Idolatry less, or other? I doubt not. Jehu riding in pomp in his
Chariot, bragged and boasted of his zeal toward God as much as Papists, Come
see my zeal for the Lord, 2 King 10.16. and pretended worship to God when he
worshipped representatives, 1 Cor. 10.18, 20, 21. Psalm. 106.37. Deuteronomy. 32.17.
Golden Calves, nay Devils, 2 King. 10.29. 2 Chr. 11 15. By which it is plain,
that their worship did not terminate in the Calves, but had a farther prospect,
even a respect to God himself. Is not Romish Worship the same? where is the
difference? Crux Legati a dextris collocari debet, quia ei debetur Latria. If
the Legates Cross must be placed on the right hand for that very reason because
Latria, (which is the same Worship and Reverence which is due to the one only
God.) Graece servitus dicitur quae quantum ad Religionem attinet, non nisi uni
and soli Deo debetur, Vide Isid. 12. lib. Vide August. contra Faust. Manich.
lib. 20. c. 21 Vide Aquin. 1, 2. q. 130. Art. 3. is due unto it. I for my part
must acknowledge my self so thick Scull'd as not to discern any difference
between the Jews worshipping the Calves, and the Papists worshipping the Cross,
their Breaden God, or any Pricture, Thing or Representative, though Vasquer be
so bold as to ascribe Worship even to a Wisp of Straw. Tho. Aquin. sum. part.
3. Quest. 25. Artic. 3. Concludes, Sic sequitur quod eadem reverentia
exhibeatur Imagini Christi, and ipso Christo; cum ergo Christus adoretur
adoratione Latriae, etc. That the same Reverence is to be given to the Image of
Christ, and to Christ himself; and by consequence seeing Christ is adored with
the adoration of Latria also; which induces me to believe that that in
Jeremiah, chapter 10. is as truly applicable to the now Romanists, as to the Jews
of old.

All which seriously considered, and that though Supreme Magistrates have power
moderately, and in measure, by wholesome Laws (not by Fire and Faggot, Tortures
and Inquisitions) to compel, and to secure the true Religion and undefiled, and
their Realms professing the same; yet I find no warrant in Bibliis Sacris for
any power to tolerate and indulge any false Religion in their Dominions.

Concerning which I shall say thus in general, That though no mortal man has
rightful power to forbid Christ's Spiritual Duties. the Worshipping of God,
Preaching his Word and Truth; yet I say first, that no Indulgence ought to be
given by the Magistrate to any Sect whatsoever, whose Doctrins and Principles
are not known, and therefore none to Quakers or Enthusiasts, whose Rule is not
the Scripture, but the Light within them, which is darkness to others, if not
to themselves, and it may be Hosanna to day, and yet Crucifige to morrow. Then
the Principles, by which other Sects do worship, being known, the legislative
Magistrares, whether Monarchs, or Free States, are the Judges of them, how
consistent or inconsistent with Gods true Religion and Worship, and with the
peace and welfare of their own Dominions and Subjects, and accordingly may, or
may not Indulge or Tolerate their Religion and Worship.

And therefore Princes ought to use great Caution, and to be very wary and
circumspect herein, for that sins committed by others through our Example,
Instigation, Connivnace or Tolleration, become ours by just Imputation. In
Naboths death, the Judges and false Witnesses were the next Agents, Jesabel the
Plotter only, and Instigator, 1 King. 21.7, 13, 23. Yet she is punished for
shedding Naboths Blood, though her hand was not upon him: Even in Courts of
ordinary Justice it seems just, and is so in our Law, that not only the
Executioner, but the Plotter, Abettor, Instigator, and Concealer of Treason, be
punished with death: Yea, see how far a less degree of participation brings
guilt upon our Souls: The Rulers amongst the Jews that but tolerated the
breach of the Sabbath, are charged to have profaned the Sabbath, Nehem.
13.17.18. Yea the least Countenance given to Idolatry, makes culpable of
Idolatry, 1 Cor. 10.18, 21. To this agrees the Prohibition of St. Paul,
Communicate not with other Men's sins, 1 Timothy 5.22. And that command, Lev.
16.17. Thou shall rebuke thy Neighbor plainly, and not suffer him to sin. It
is a Gospel-Principle that Gods Children ought to be careful not only to
eschew evil in their own persons, but also to prevent it in othrss A notable
Example we have in the people of Israel, who (well knowing that God was a
Jealous God, Deuteronomy. 4.24. Isa. 42.8.
and would not have his Glory communicated to others, nor his praise unto
Graven Images) out of their abundant caution, minding the concerns of their
Brethren as their own, when they heard Tidings how the Rubenites, Gadites, and
half Tribe of Manasseh, had Erected an Altar, not for Worshipping, (as they
truly protested) but for Memorial; so fearful they grew of Gods Wrath, that
they presently dispatched an Embassy to their Brethren to prevent their sin.
And see how pithily they deal with them: Is the Iniquity of Peor too little for
us, from which ye are not cleansed to this day, that ye also must depart from
following the Lord, Josh. 22.17. Thus they in a show only and appearance of
evil, which we are commanded to abstain from, 1 These. 5.22. and to resist unto
Blood striving against sin, Qui non vetat peccare, quum possit Jubet.
Heb. 12.4. The Conclusion is strong, What sins of others we labor not within
our Province, Power, and Compass to prevent, are ours in the guilt, as well as
those of our own personal Commission. The Reasons are many, 1. We hazard our
selves to infection, 1 Cor. 5.6. A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. 2.
Unto wrath, Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins,
and that ye receive not of her Plagues, Apoc. 4.3. We hazard the Delinquents to
obstinate impenitency. We blemish our own fame and sincerity. 5. Quantum in
nobis, we encourage others to like exorbitancy in sinful Worship, even in our
common Laws; it is held maintenance, when a great person only by his presence
countenanceth a Cause. Saints of old were regularly scrupulous and abstemious
in this kind, I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with
dissemblers: I have hated the Congregation of evil doers, and will no sit with
the wicked, Psalm. 26.4, 5. Jer. 15.17. I sat not in the assembly of mockers,
nor rejoiced. Did not Elias sharply reprove King Ahab, and the Commons of
Israel for that error? He did not say, Why permit you not those that will to
serve the Lord, and those that list to serve Baal? But, How halt you between
Two Opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him; but if Baal, then follow him, 1
Kings 18.21. Since it is confessed both by Protestants and Papists, That there
can be no God save the Lord, Psalm. 18.31. and he never meant to surrender any
piece of his Glory, Isa. 48.11. but is so jealous of it, that he will be
served, and only served with all our Heart, and with all our Soul, Deuteronomy. 10.12.
I reckon, it cannot stand with a Magistrates Duty to reverse this Heavenly
Decree, Thou shall Worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve,
Mat. 4.10. Dent. 6.13 with establishing Two Religions in the Realm. And the
first precept forbiding more Gods than one, barreth all other services of the
same God, save that which himself has appointed for himself? His commands
relating to his own Worship are very severe, very strict. He that is born in
the House, and bought with thy Money, must needs be Circumcised; i.e. Observe
the whole Law, Genesis 17.12. So the charge of keeping the Sabbath is laid upon
the Father of the Family for all that are within his Gate, Exodus 20.10. The
Lord Commands, That if any person, Brother, Son, Daughter, the Wife of thy
Bosom, or thy Friend, which is as thy own Soul, shall entice to Idolatry, or
any City shall set up a new Worship, the one shall be killed, the other
destroyed, Deuteronomy. 13.6, 9, 12, 15. To this belongs that precept, To separate
the precious from the vile, Jer. 15.19. and this, viz. Not to sow the Field
with diverse Seeds, nor to wear a Garment of diverse things, Lev. 19.10. So
Moses, Deuteronomy. 22.10, Thou shall plough with an Ox and an Ass together; which
St. Paul thus expounds, 2 Co. 6.14. Be not unequally yoaked with unbelievers.
All which places are generally and promiscuously applied as well unto
Superstitious and Idolatrous Wedlock, as to tolleration of Superstitious and
Idolatrous Worship, which the Apostle demonstrates to be as absurd and
monstrous, as that righteousness should have fellowship with unrighteousness,
or light to have communion with darkness, or that Christ can have Concord with
Belial, or that the Temples of God can have agreement with Idols, and such
Temples are all good Christians whom Legions of Lusts and Devils do not
pre-possess, Verse. 14, 15, 16, 17. Besides, it cannot be denied, but that they
may, and will be Snares and Traps, if not Scourges in our sides, and Thorns in
our Eyes, John. 23.13 God foresaw it, and foretold it, and therefore made
such strict commands against such Medly-mungril-mixtures, as to Swear by the
Lord and Melchom, to hear as Protestants, but believe as Papists, to cry the
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, boasting of the high Privileges
the Gospel has and does afford us, and yet not to walk by the Rules, and
Precepts thereof, which in plain English is to talk indeed like Saints, but in
truth to do like Devils Why then should we hazard the Eternal welfare of our
precious immortal Souls upon nice points of Logic, upon peradventures, and
come at last, and when it is too late, unto an, Had I wished? Remember Nehem.
13.23, 26. Did not Solomon King of Israel sin by these things? yet amongst many
Nations was there no King like him, who was beloved of his God, and God made
him King over all Israel, nevertheless even him did strange Women cause to sin.

Moreover, it has been the practice of the Church in all Ages to cast out the
Leaven of contrary Doctrins and Profession In the time of Enos before the
Flood, the Servants of God began to worship God by themselves apart from the
profane Generation of Cain. Ishmael was cast out of Abraham's House, because he
was a scorner of Isaac; Jacob reformeth his House, and puts away the
strange Gods, Genesis 35.2. Joshua makes the Gibionites hewers of Wood, and
drawers of Water for the House of God, Josh. 9 13, David expels the
Idolatrous Jebusites out of Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 5 8. Asa put Maacha his Mother
from her regiment, because she was an Idolatress, and brake down her Idols, 2 Chronicles. 15.16. Josias put down the Chemarins a Sect of Idolatrous Priests, 2
Kings 23.5. Zerubbabel would not suffer the adversaries of Judah to build the
Temple with them, but refused their service, which they offered, Ezech. 4.3.
This was the Law, Thou shall make no Covenant with them, nor with their Gods,
they shall not dwell in the Land, lest they make thee sin against me, Exodus
23.32, 33. Deuteronomy. 7.2, 3, 4. The Graven Images of their Gods shall ye burn with
fire: Thou shall not desire the Silver and Gold that is on them, nor take it
unto thee, lest thou be snared therein; for it is an abomination to the Lord
thy God.

Neither shall thou bring an abomination into thy house, least thou be an
accursed thing like it; but thou shall utterly detest it, and thou shall
utterly abhor it, for it is a cursed thing, Deuteronomy. 7.25, 26. Neither shall thou
set up any Graven Image which the Lord thy God hates, Deuteronomy. 16.22. Where Gods
Ark is, there Dagon shall be thrust out of his place, and fall down before it,
1 Samuel 5.

One kind of vile and base Idolatry, when Men Worship their own Fancies; (as
Papists, Quakers and Enthusiasts amongst others now adays do) observing, that
for a Religion, which their deceived minds imagine; then may not Princes wink
at corrupt and vicious Religion, which is an inward and ghostly worship of
Idols, seeing no man; and therefore no Prince can serve Two Masters, Mat. 6.24.
Luke 16.13. And the Service that Princes yield Christ in respect of their Royal
vocation, consists in making Laws for Christ, which if they do, likewise for
Antichrist, it cannot be salved, but that they serve God and Mammon, or rather
cease to be Servants of Christ, in that they renounce their Master, by serving
his Adversary: And they cannot but know, that silence provokes, and sufferance
imboldeneth their Subjects to forsake God, and his Church: Even as in civil
Affairs the slacking of Justice does maintain disorder; the life of the Law is
penalty when duly executed; wherefore the great Lawgiver to his own Israel
uses such enforcements. Every state and Kingdom has Refractories, whom
nothing restrains but penalty, indeed penalties executed do scarce reform, yet
is Treacle made up of such Vipers, for preserving others.

All Israel shall hear and fear, Deuteronomy. 17.13
and do no more presumptuously; Servility is much in men of best inclination;
they are not always led by the Spirit of Ingenuity, Psalm. 51.12. Draco his Laws
are yet extant, their severity is deemed over rigorous, providing death for
least offenses; lenities in some enormities is no less blamable, whilst
Adultery laughs at the white sheet, or secures it self of redeeming that shame,
with purse or power, As offenses grow though but in circumstances, so ought
Penalties, Number. 30.32.35. Maxima peccandi Illecibra est impunitatis spes; There
is no greater encouragement or enticement to sin, than hope of Impunity. Some
wise Men begin to think, as that Sage Politician spoke by occasion of Nerva's
remissness in Government: Praestat vivere ubi nulla, quam ubi omnia sint
licita. It Is better to live in that state where nothing, than where all things
are lawful, David was so far from suffering the worship of any strange God
within his Realm, that he protests, Their offerings I will not offer, neither
make mention of their names within my lips, Psalm. 16.4. When would he, think
you, confirm their Honor and Service with his Royal Authority, that thus
disdained them common civility, he had a more Ennobled Spirit, more Divine
Principle, and would show it by the sublimity of his Actions, Quo major suum eo
plus laborabo as the Sun. Josh. 23.7. Deuteronomy. 12.3. Number. 32.38
scorned to know wicked persons,, or to let them tarry in his sight; he was
engaged to do something more than ordinary, being called to be Gods own
Anointed, and that the observation of Gods Laws was the noblest Ornament of His
Majesty, and that the Law was express against it. Make no mention of the names
of other Gods, neither let it be heard out of thy mouth, Exodus 23.13.

The good Kings of Juda were favored and blessed of God, for walking in the
Ways of David their Father, and purging the Land from all Sacrifices and
Ceremonies not prescribed by Moses's Law: Contrariwise Solomon was rejected for
admitting other Gods to be served within his Dominions, besides the God of
Israel; though this tolleration was granted, in respect of his own Wives that
were strangers, Nehem. 13.36. Jerohoams politic devise to Worship the same God
in Dan and Bethel, after a new manner, turned to the destruction of himself and
his Posterity: Therefore Jehosaphat reproved by Jehu, visited his Kingdom from
Beersheba to Mount Ephraim, and brought his people back unto the Lord God of
their Fathers, 2 Chronicles. 19 2, 3. That the false Priests and Prophets did so
over-bear the true Prophets of God, Jeremiah, Ezechiel, etc. to the ruin of
the City and Kingdom, was the fault of Jehoiakim and Zedebiah. And at this day
it is the fault and folly of Christian Kings that suffer the grand Seignior of
Rome to impose upon them, and that the Church of Rome is not either reduced to
her primitive truth, and purity from which she is degenerated and brought to
better conformity with the truly Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church, or
else demolished as the Jewish Synagogue was.

Gratian at his first entering finding all places full of Arrians, and the Laws
of Valence his Uncle making for them, fearing some general Tumalt, if he should
prefently destroy so many, gave leave, That every Religion might have Churches
and Oratories with Freedom and Immunity. But being once settled and joined with
Theodosius, he commanded that all Heresies should keep silence for ever, as
interdicted by the Law of God and Man, That none should any longer teach or
learn profane Doctrine. Cod. 1. Tit. 5 lege emnes.

The same prohibition did Arcadine and Honorius continue with great severity:
Let all Heretacks understand, that all places must be taken from them as well
Churches as other places, and of private Houses also: In all which let them be
debarred from senvice, both by night and by day; the Lord Deputy to be fined
100 if he permit any such thing in sight or in secret. Ibid. lege cuncti.
Theodosius the younger, and Valentinian his Cousin, comprising a long Bed-roll
of sundry sorts of Heresies, appointed, That no where within the Raman Empire
their Assemblies or Prayers be suffered, and that all Laws made to prohibit
their meeting should be revived and stand good everlastingly. Ibid. lege Ariani.

The Papists in the time of Queen Elizabeth wrote diverse Books, and used many
Arguments against the Oath of Supremacy, and for a Tolleration of their
Religion; alleging the Examples of other Countries; and admonishing Her
Majesty, that she must answer to God, not only for things done by her command
and knowledge, but for whatsoever is done unjustly by her Name and Authority,
though she never knew thereof; but Her Majesty (respecting her duty, and
account that she was to make to God of all things done in the flesh, whether
they were good on evil) denied to bear the burden of their wicked abuses, and
poisoned errors; which no civil Magistrate are can avoid, that permits their
sinful Masses, and licenceth their wicked Rites, because the seeing and
suffering their Impieties (having power to suppress and hinder them) is a plain
consent, and in a manner an open Communion with their unfruitful works of
darkness. The downfall of Ely, a dear Servant of God (once a Judge in Israel)
for Connivence only, and foolish Pity, (where even Bowels of Nature might seem,
if not to dispense with severeties, yet to excuse his lenity) Scriptures have
Registered for our warning and terror. And if Religion be not as mere a Fable as
any in Aesop, the greatest Governments in the World will one day be called to a
most severe Account for their so doing.

That other Countries and Kingdoms otherwise affected in Religion than
themselves, were nevertheless contented to suffer their service within their
Dominions, prevailed not with Queen Eliz. she well considering, that their
doings could be no warrant nor discharge for her who was not to imitate the
Vices, but the Virtues of Princes. Besides that in such tolleration they did
well, ought first to be proved before their Examples should be urged, as they
were in her days. It being the duty of every Prince to consider and do what
every Prince ought to do by Gods Law, and not regard what other Princes please
to do what seems best in their own Eyes. And Her Majesty for so refusing to
countenance their Religion deserved more countenance and protection with God,
and praise with Men, for that in guiding her people she rather embraced
Christian Piety, than irreligious policy, and chose rather to walk by Gods
Precepts, than by the ill Example of other Princes. Besides, Her Majesty well
knew, that amongst the Germans and Helvetians (Examples in their Writings
urged) many Dukes, Landtigraves, Marquesses, Counts, yea Bishops, Barons,
Abbots, and Gentlemen had Regal Jurisdiction within their respective precincts:
And it is no news to see diverse Laws under diverse Lords, and diverse Religions
under diverse Regiments. As for any other Countries or Kingdoms (as Polonia,
Hungaria, etc.) not able without (Blood and War to reduce their Countries to
the profession of the true Faith; neither may we reprove them as negligent, nor
the Papists allege them as warrantable Examples, since not their own fault,
but other men's force keeps them from attempting any redress by their Princely
power, which the Nobles restrain, and the Commons receive with this Proviso,
that their accustomed freedom of Conscience be no ways prohibited, nor
interrupted. Other Examples of Turks, Pagans, Arrians, and the like, are unfit
for Christians. David, Josiah, and other Kings of Judah, are to be imitated in
this not Sarazins. Moses and other Holy Writers are very plain and positive
against this dawbing with untempered Mortar, Exodus 23.13, 32, 33. Deuteronomy. 12.2,
3. Deuteronomy. 13.6. Jer. 15.19. Deuteronomy. 12.10. Come out from among them, and be ye
separate, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, and will be
a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters says the Lord
Almighty, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. Levit. 36.12. Isa. 52.11. Was not the Church of
Thyatira (otherwise beautified with many Graces) highly blamed for suffering
the false Prophetess to teach, and to seduce. I know thy Works, and Charity,
and Service, and Faith, and Patience, (all excellent Graces) notwithstanding I
have a few things against thee, because thou suffer that Woman Jezabel,
which calls her self a Prophetess, to teach and to seduce servants to commit
Fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto Idols, Rev. 2.19, 20. which
fearful Effects made Constantine to decree, That all Temples of Heretics
should without any denial be overthrown, and in no place public or private
should their Assemblies be suffered. Jovinianus refused to govern those that
were not found in Faith. Socrat. lib. 5. c. 1. The privateness of the place
when the fact is ill, acquitteth not the doer from sin; nor excuses the
permitter from negligence. No Corner so secret, no Prison so close, but their
Impieties there suffered do offend God, infect others, and confirm their own
frowardness.

Private permission of error is unlawful as well as public, if Popish Religion
be good. Why should it lack Churches? If it be naught why should it have
Corners? St. Paul has put in a Caviat against that slight of permitting, which
in truth is consenting, Romans 1. Ely reproved his Sons, yet was sharply punished
of God for his Indulgency, which is all one with Connivance, 1 San. 2.22. St.
John says, He that receives into his house; or bids an Heretic God speed,
is partaker of his evil deeds. Ephesians. 2, 1011. How then can Kings bear with your
Sacrilegious profaning of the Lords Supper, and forbidding Gods own Word to be
read, and license the rest of your Impieties, and Blasphemies, and hope to be
free from your plague? When Valentinian the younger was requested to wink at
the renewing of an Altan for the Pagans in Rome; St. Ambrose dissuaded him in
these words. All men serve you that be Princes, and you serve the Mighty God.
He that serves this God must bring no dissimulation, no Connivance, but
faithful zeal, and devotion; he must give no kind of consent to the worship of
Idols, or other superstitious or profane Ceremonies, for God will not be
deceived nor mocked, who scarcheth all things, even the secrets of our Hearts.
Ambrose lib. 5. Ep. 30. Now what account will God exact for his Name
blasphemed, his Word exiled and wrested, his Decalogue dockt, his Sacraments
curtal'd and profaned? And what answer must be made for the ruin of Faith,
harvest of sin, murder of Souls consequent always to the public freedom of
Idolatrous and Superstitious Worship and Heresies, which ought to be fully
considered, and wisely prevented by Christian Magistrates, who must as well as
the meanest of their Vassals give an account of their Stewardships when called
thereunto at the day of their Account.

When Mary (afterward Queen of England) earnestly besought her Brother King
Ed. 6. both by her own Letters, and by the mediation of the Emperor, That she
might have the free use of Mass in her Family, alleging her Conscience for it,
that her House was her Flock, etc.: The King by his Council made answer, that
it was well liked, that her Grace should have her House or Flock, but not
exempt from the Kings Laws and Orders; neither may there be a Flock of the
Kings Subjects, but such as will hear and follow the voice of the King their
Shepherd: God disalloweth, Law and Reason forbids it, Policy abborreth it,
and her Honor may not require it: However, at her earnest entreaty and desire
made in the Emperors Name, thus much was granted, and no more, that for his
sake, and hers also, it should be suffered and winked at, if she had the
private Mass used in her own Closet, for a season, until she might be better
informed, whereof was some hope, having only with her a few of her own Chamber;
so that for all the rest of her Household the Service of the Realm should be
used, and no other. After this was granted in Words, the Emperors Ambassador
desired some Testimony of the Promise under the Great Seal, which being denied,
he desired to have it by a Letter; which was also denied, but not without
showing sound reason, that he perceiving it to be denied with Reason, might be
the better contented with the answer. But when there was ill use made of this
Indulgence and Connivance, her Chaplian taking too great a liberty by public
Celebration of the Mass out of her Presence, was sent for by the Council,
imprisoned etc. for whom, though her Grace mediated by many earnest Letters,
both to the King and his Council; yet did his Majesty signify to her by a
Letter dated 24. January 1550. That though he had for a while connived, that
she might be brought as far toward the Truth by Brotherly love, as others were
by Duty, and in hope of her amendment; yet now if there be no hope, why should
there be sufferance? Alleging also, That his charge was to have the same care
over every man's Estate, that every man ought to have over his own: And that in
her own House, as she would be loath, openly to suffer one of her Servants,
being next her, most manifestly to break her Orders; so must she think in his
state, it would prejudice him to permit her so great a Subject not to keep his
Laws, that her nearness to him in Blood, her greatness in Estate, and the
condition of the Time made her fault the greater. The Example is unnatural,
that our Sister should do less for us than our other Subjects, the Case
slanderous for so great a person to forsake our Majesty. And therefore 24. Aug.
1551. He sent Commissioners to signify to her, That His Majesty did resolutely
determine it just, necessary and expedient, That her Grace should not in any
ways use or maintain the private Mass, or any other manner of service than such
as by the Law of the Realm was authorized and allowed. So resolute was this
young Josiah, this Noble pious Prince, though his dear Sister, and the next
Heir of the Crown, had diverse times offered her Body at the Kings Will, rather
than to change her Conscience.

Queen Eliz. as in other things, so in Religion, was according to her assumed
Motto semper eadem, never suffering the least Innovation thereof; and
therefore, as in the first Year of her Reign, she took great care that those,
Protestants which then began to frame a new Ecclesiastical Policy, being
transported with a humor of Innovation, should be repressed betimes, and that
but one only Religion was to be tolerated, lest diversity of Religions amongst
the English (a stout and Warlike Nation) might minister continual Fuel to
Seditions: Angli Bello in trepidi nec mortis sensu deterentur.
So in the Second Year of her Reign, when the Emperor and Catholic Princes by
many Letters made earnest intercession, that the Bishops and other
Ecclesiastics displaced for refusing the Oath of Supremacy (which
notwithstnading most of them had Sworn unto and taught in their Sermons, and
writ in defense thereof in the Reign of King H. 8. might be mercifully dealt
withal, (there being, as themselves had written and calculated, above 9400.
Ecclesiastical preferments, and not above 189. displaced, whereof 14 were
Bishops) and that Churches might be allowed to the Papists by themselves in
Cities; she answered: That although those Popish Bishops had insolently and
openly repugned against the Laws and Quiet of the Realm, and did still
obstinately reject that Doctrine, which most of them under H. 8. and E. 6. had
of their own accord with heart and hand publicly in their Sermons, and
Writings taught unto others, when they themselves, were not private Men, but
public Magistrates; yet would she for so great Princes sakes deal favorably
with them, though not without some offense to her own Subjects: But to grant
them Churches wherein to celebrate their divine Offices apart by themselves,
she could not with the safety of the Commonwealth, and without wrong to her
own Honor and Conscience; neither was there any cause why she should grant
them, seeing England embraced no new or strange Doctrine, but the same which
Christ commanded, the Primitive, and Catholic Church received, and the ancient
Fathers with one Mind and Voice approved, and to allow Churches with contrary
Rites and Ceremonies; Besides that, it openly repugned the Lawsestablished by
Authority of Parliament, were nothing else but to sow Religion out of Religion,
to distract good Men's minds, to cherish factious Men's humors, disturb
Religion, and the Commonwealth, and mingle Divine and Humane things, a Thing,
Evil in Deed, but in Example worst of all, to her own good Subjects hurtful,
and unto themselves, to whom it is granted, neither greatly commodious, nor yet
at all safe: She was therefore determined out of her natural Clemency, and
especially at their request to be willing to heal the private insolency of a
few, by much Connivance, yet so as she might not encourage their obstinate
minds by her Indulgence.

When Sussex treated with the Emperor Maximilian on the Articles of Marriage
between Archduke Charles his Son, and Queen Eliz. both Father and Son did
require, That a public Church might be allowed, wherein Divine Service might
be celebrated to him and his, after the Romish manner: When this would not be
granted, then that in some private place in the Court he might peaceably use
his Service of God, (as was permitted to Popish Princes Ambassadors in their
Houses) and that with these Conditions, That no English Man should be admitted
thereunto, and neither he, nor his Servants should speak against the Religion
received in England, or favor those that did speak against it: That if any
displeasure should arise in respect of Religion, he should be present with the
Queen at Divine Service, to be celebrated after the manner of the Church of
England. Unto this the Queen answered, That if she should grant this, she
should offend her Conscience, and openly break the public Laws of her Realm,
not without great peril both of her dignity and safety. The same Princely,
Pious, and immovable Resolution she held, when in the like Treaty of Marriage
between her and the Duke of Anjou, where Tolleration of the Roman Religion
being much pressed and insisted on, both by the Queen his Mother, and by
Charles the 9th. King of France, his Brother, Queen Eliz. (though it were
suggested, that the Romish Religion was not deeply rooted in the Dukes mind,
being but young, and for that he was Educated under Carnlette, a person not
averse from the Protestant Religion, and that by degrees he might be brought to
the Protestant profession; and many other and great advantages would thereby
accrue to the good of the Reformed Religion) answered, (as well became Gods
Vicegerent in her Dominions) That although the outward Exercise of Christian
Religion might happily be tolerated with different Rites and Ceremonies amongst
the Subjects of one and the same Kingdom; yet a different, yea a flat contrary
Exercise between the Queen (who is the Head of her people) and her Husband,
might not only seem perilous, but also altogether absurd; she prayed them to
consider with equal Balance, on the one side her own hazard, and on the other
side the Duke of Anjou's Honor: By Tollerating his Religion, she should break
the Laws established, give offense to her best Subjects, and encouragement to
her worst; which things would certainly over-weigh the Duke of Anjou's Honor:
If the Duke would water more plentifully the Seeds of the purer Religion,
already sown, and suffer more to be sown, he should soon see, that it would be
unto him a most high Honor. At length it came to this Issue, That if so be the
Duke would be present with the Queen, at the Celebration of Divine Service, and
not refuse to hear and learn the Institutions of the Protestant Religion; she
would assent, that neither the Duke nor his Family should be constraned to use
the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, nor molested for other
Divine Rites, not openly and manifestly repugnant to Gods Word so as it were
done in a certain private place, and no occasion given to the English to break
the Laws established. Foix stuck at the Word, the WOrd of God; for whose
satisfaction the Queen commanded instead of Gods Word to put in Gods Church,
which when it liked him worse, and for it would have had to be put in the
Catholic Church; the Queen flatly and stoutly refused it, and so by degrees it
cooled. Her religious care herein was also so great and steady, that Walsing
ham her Ambassador had secret Instructions, That if the Duke of Anjou should be
content to omit in that Treaty that point concerning Tolleration of Religion,
yet would the Queen bind him in such sure caution, that he should not require
it at any time after.

Of the same opinion was King James Anno 1596. in the Case of Huntley Angus,
and Arrol, Popish Lords, who though they would have betrayed the Kingdom to the
Spaniard; yet the King being willing afterward to have them return, (though
Guilt had made them Fugitives) and being returned, the King writ thus to
Huntley, viz. My Lord, I am sure you consider, and do remember, how often I
have incurred Skaith and hazard for your cause; therefore to be short, resolve
you either to satisfy the Church betwixt that day that is appointed, without
any more delay, or else if your Conscience be so Kittle, as it cannot permit
you, make for another Land betwixt this and that day, where you may use freely
your own Conscience, your Wife and Barnes shall in that Case enjoy your Living,
but for your self look never to be a Scottish Man again; deceive not your self
to think by lingering of time your Wife, and your Allys, shall ever get you
better Conditions: And think not, that I will suffer any professing a contrary
Religion to dwell in this Land.

Afterward when His Majesty came to the Crown of England, which was May 14.
1602. he declared to his Parliament there 19. May 1603. Li. c. p. 1
That the popish point of Doctrine is that Arrogant and Ambitious Supremacy of
their Head the Pope, whereby he not only claims to be Spiritual Head of all
Christians, but also to have an Imperial civil power over all Kings and
Emperors, dethroning and decrowning Princes with his Foot as pleases him, and
dispensing and disposing of all Kingdoms and Empires at his appetite. The other
point which they observe in continual practice, is the Assassinates and Murders
of Kings, thinking it no sin, but rather a matter of Salvation to do all
Actions of Rebellion and Hostility against their natural Sovereign Lord, if he
be once accursed, his Subjects discharged of their fidelity, and his Kingdom
given a Prey by that Three Crowned Monarch, or rather Monster their Head.

Which Positions of theirs the Gun-powder-traitors, within Two Years after made
good, after which time be was not only willing, whilst he lived, that we should
pray to God as was done in the days of Great Eliz. that he would keep us from
all Papistry, and that he would preserve us from the Pope as well as from the
Turk in as much as the Pope labored to dethrone Christ, as well as the Turk
did; but he required further of us: That we should pray God to strengthen his
Hands, and the Hands of his Nobles and Magistrates in the Land to cut off the
Papists, In the Prayer to be made 5. November. for the Gun-powder-treason.
to root them out of the Confines and Limits of the Kingdom; protesting in
Parliament, that he could not permit the increase and grown of Popery, without
betraying the liberty both of England and Scotland, and of the Crown in his
posterity, and did declare in his Speech in Parliament 1605. That none of those
that truly know and believe the whole Grounds and School-Conclusions of their
Doctrins can ever prove good Christians or good Subjects. Vide his Works 504.
Nay farther, in the Second Year of his Reign ter' tr' upon a false rumor being
spread, that His Majesty intended to grant a Tolleration to Papists; he
commanded all the Judges, with diverse of the greatest Nobility, viz. Lord
Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, and to Assemble in the Star Chamber to receive
their opinions upon these and other points; at which time the Lords severally
declared, how the King was discontented with the said false Rumor, and had made
but the day before a protestation unto them, that he never intended it, and
that he would spend the last drop of Blood in his Body before he would do it:
And prayed, that before any of his Issue should maintain any other Religion
than what he truly professed and maintained, that God would take them out of
the World. Vide Sir George Crokes Reports part. 2. ter. tr. Anno 2 Jac. Reg. in
Banco Regis.

When a Match with Spain was propounded to King James for Prince Charles, and
there with an Article desired for a Tolleration of the Popish Religion, which
when King James had propounded to the Archbishop of Canterbury, 1623. the
Archbishop did write his Sentiments to King James; in which Letter He besought
His Majesty to take into his consideration, what your Act is, and what the
Consequence may be by your Act; you labor to set up the most Damnable and
Heretical Doctrine of the Church of Rome, the Whore of Babylon. How hateful it
will te to God, and g rievous to the good Subjects, the professors of the
Gospel, that your Majesty, who has often disputed, and learnedly written
against those, should now show your self a Patron of those wicked Doctrins,
which your Pen has told the World, and your Conscience tells your self, are
Superstitious, Idolatrous and Detestable. Besides this Tolleration which you
endeavor to set up by your Proclamamation, cannot be done without a
Parliament, unlessl your Majesty will let your Subjects see that you will take
unto your self ability to throw down the Laws of the Land at your pleasure,
etc. prout. King James not long after, viz 23. Ap. 1624. returns this Answer to
a Petition of his Parliament touching Recusants, viz. What my Religion is, my
Books declare, my profession and my behavior do show; and I hope in God I
shall never live to be thought otherwise; sure I am, I shall never deserve it:
And for my part I wish that it might be written in Marble, and remain to
posterity as a mark upon me, when I shall swerve from my Religion; for he that
does dissemble with God, is not to be trusted by Man. My Lords, Ip rotest
before God, my Heart has bled, when I have heard of the increase of Popery;
and God is my Judge, it has been so great a grief unto me, that it has been
like Thorns in my Eyes, and Pricks in my sides, so far have I been, and ever
shall be, from turning any other way. And my Lords and Gentlemen, you all shall
be my Confessors, if I knew any way better than other to hinder the growth of
Popery I would take it, and he cannot be an honest man, who knowing as I do,
and being persuaded, as I am, would do otherwise.

The Romish Catholics for want of this liberty and tollerance in the time of
Queen Eliz. and since have made and written many bitter Complaints and
Invectives against the Rigor of our Penal Laws etc. Rex Talionis.
I could requite them by commemorating the flames they kindled in England to
burn their Brethren to dust: How Pius Quintus conferred England on Philip II.
King of Spain, and approved as an Act lawful by Azorius. Instit. Mor. part. 2.
lib. 11. c. 5. And how many Princes they have displaced, poisoned and murdered.

The Holy House which the Friars have planted in Spain, resembling the Torments
of Nero his Garden, the Massacres of Provence, Piedmont of old, and of late,
and of Paris, where they murdered Men, Women and Children by Thousands, against
the very Grounds of all Equity, Piety, Charity, and Humanity, without
Convicting, Accusing or so much as Calling them before any Judge, to hear what
was misliked in them. And when was any of this put in Execution, some of it,
even the 24 Aug. 1572. the very Year that Charles IX. the French King
pretending great kindness to the Protestants, had in Testimony thereof desired
a Confederacy at Blois with Queen Eliz. and the Princes of Germany in favor of
them, whom notwithstanding he had secretly and treacherously designed to the
slaughter: For no sooner were the Articles of Confederacy agreed on, (which was
the 11th. of April) and confirmed by Oath by the Queen at Westminster 15. May
in the presence of Montmorency, styled the first Christian Prince, and
accounted the most Noble Family of all France; who also again earnestly
solicited the Marriage with the Duke of Anjou; but f or that they could not
agree about the Exercise of Religion, he hasted into France to the Marriage of
Henry of Navarre, and Madam Margarite the French Kings Sister. To this
Marriage, in pursuance of the said Bloody Design, were invited the Queen of
Navarre, and all the choicest of the Protestants, and also Burleigh and
Leicester out of England, (pretending Honor to them) and the Palatine
Elector's Sons out of Germany, that being brought into the snare, both they,
and with them the Protestant Evangelical Religion, might with one stroke, if
not have had their Throats cut, yet at least receive a Mortal Wound: For no
sooner was the Marriage Solemnized, but that barbarous Massacre of Paris, and
the Bloody Butchering of the Protestants throughout the Cities of France, upon
men of all Estates, was cursedly put in Execution, and that within Two days
after. Mota: Fennelon the French Ambassador had propounded the Marriage between
Queen Eliz. and the Duke of Anjou at Kenelworth. Camb. Elisab. 162. Which
considered, I cannot but wonder to hear you thus complaining at the Fatherly
Chastisement wherewith this Realm seeks your amendment, and sucketh not your
Blood. Compare the penalties which you fret at, with the Laws of former
Emperors, and you will see how easy they are in respect of their ancient
Edicts; which restrained such as did forbear to communicate with the Church of
Christ from buying, selling, disposing, bequeathing Goods or Lands by will or
otherwise, yea from receiving any Legacies, or enjoying their Fathers
Inheritance, the place where Schismatical Service was said, Chapel or House to
be forfeited, and the Bishop and Clergyman to pay 16 l. weight in Gold, or to
be banished. Cod. l. 1. Tit. 5. Mamcheos Ibid. 8. Cuncti. St. Augustine Ep. 48.
When it was expected, by reason of the goodness of his Nature, that he should
mediate for some of these penalties to be released, gave this quick and smart
answer: Nay, marry let Princes in Gods Name serve Christ in making Laws for
Christ.

It was, in the days of Queen Eliz. objected, That for want of the Exercise of
a Religion, many sorts want things necessary to Salvation, and many are forced
to things which Bring Damnation. Sol. We do not know what those things
necessary to Salvation are, which this Realm wants. Receive with meekness the
Word that is grafted in you, which is able to save your Souls, 1. Jam. 21. So
long as we refuse no part of the Gospel, which is the power of God for the
Salvation of every Believer, Romans 1.16. all other Wants signify little. St.
Paul does warrant us, That the Scriptures are able to direct and instruct
Salvation by Faith in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16. less we believe not, more
we need not, dream you what you list of Salvation and Damnation. The Comfort of
the Scriptures shall nourish our Hopes, Romans 15. It is you, not we, that keep
back half the Communion one of the Commandments, and the public use of the
Scripture, the very Rule and Guide to Salvation.

It grieves you sore, that any of your Tribe should be invited against their
Wills to frequent our Sacraments or Service, As lawful for Protestants as
Papists to compel.
and that any man's Conscience should be forced: Then why did you force Numbers
with extreme violence to recant, and forswear the persuasion of their Faith?
What Reason can you bring that you may compel others, and none must compel you?
Where got you that exemption? or if Compulsion be lawful for both sides alike:
Why storm ye so much at our easy penalties, and those seldom or never put in
execution, when your selves are justly charged with many cruel, and unchristian
Butcheries and Tragedies? your Inquisiting, your Burning, your Murdering of
Thousands, without any respect of Innocent or Ignorant, is indeed very
lamentable. This kind of compelling which Queen Eliz. used, and our Laws still
prescribe, cannot be denied to be Charitable, and to be resembleable to that
Coaction, which the Scriptures commend in Josiah, which the most virtuous
Emperors followed in the Primitive Church, and which St. Austin, upon deep
debating the cause, found allowed by God himself as the chiefest point of that
Service which he requires of Christian Princes. As much as they are troubled
with Compulsion, when it is used against themselves, yet they can glory in it
when they use it against others; Witness Peter Damesius the French Kings
Ambassador to the Council of Trent, who in his solemn Oration to that Synod,
vapoured, that the Kings of France had never suffered any Sect in any part of
France, nor any but Catholics; yea, have procured the conversion of Strangers,
Idolaters and Heretics, and have constrained them with pious Arms to profess
the true and sound Religion, (rectius Heresy.) He showed how Childibert
compelled the Visigothes (who were Arrians) to join themselves to the Catholic
Church; and how Charles the Great made Wars 30 Years with the Saxons to reduce
them to Christian Religion. Cons. Tr. 186. Our Sacraments, Service and Sermons,
are reformed according to the Constat of Christ's Will and Testament, and
therefore ought to be used and frequented, and persons may be compelled to
frequent them.

To come yet nearer home, and unto our own days; What are the persecutions of
the Hugonots and Hungarians at this day, but Compulsions, and those contrary to
several Edicts, Agreements and Sanctions of their Princes, which thereby
(besides their just right derived from God himself) become their just due, and
ought as Inviolably to be kept as well on the Princes as on the Subjects part.
God never brake his Covenant made with his people; and Princes ought as
solemnly in this to Imitate their God, and their Lord, whose Vicegerents they
are, and ought not to transgress or go beyond their Commission. Nothing of this
kind can ever be claimed from, or objected justly against our Protestant Kings
or Parliaments. I will not look far back, nor mention those solemn cursed Oaths
some of our European Princes have taken to destroy and extirpate Heretics, i.
e. Protestants Root and Branch.

I shall here only call to mind the Edicts of Nantez made by H. 4. as a
particular Irrevocable fundamental Law. In pursuance whereof Commissioners were
sent into all Provinces to execute the same, which being done in due form, the
Commissioners returned the Execution thereof into the Hands of the King to
serve as a Rule and Standard in all future Debates which might happily arise on
that Subject. Now to tell of all the violations of this Edict at the
Instigation of the Jesuitical Clergy would fill a Volume, therefore I shall
stint it to a few of many.

New Commissioners since 1660 being Commissioned, are commanded to Execute the
Acts of Council made in Consequence of that Edict, which are no other than so
many violations of the same. The Council Anno 1662. past an Act, that the
Protestants shall not be admitted before the Commissioners to prove the right
for the Exercise of their Religion by Inquests or Witnesses, even although the
Witnesses be Roman Catholics, whereby they have lost near Three parts of Four
of all their Churches.

Provence, which had 15 or 16. Churches, is now reduced to 4. Grex which had 23
Churches has now but 2. In all Bretaigne remains but 2. High and low
Languedock are reduced to half their Number. Poictu which had 61 indisputable
Churches, is now reduced to 13. by an Act of 6. August 1665. and so of diverse
other Provinces.

By which means the Protestant Religion suffers more than by any Parisian
Vespers: The Protestants being necessitated either to live without any public
Exercise of their Religion, or through infinite dangers and inconveiencies to
wander 50. or 60. Miles distant from them.

One Act of Council has robbed them of the liberty of praising God by
forbidding singing of Psalms, even privately in their Hhouses. May 6. 1659.
March 17. 1663.

Another Act has deprived them of the comfort of paying their last duty to
their Dead with any convenience; compelling them to bury clandestinely, and in
the night. In humanity beyond that of Heathens. 7. Aug. and 3. November. 1662.

Another has divested Protestant Magistrates, what ever be their charge or
quality of the privilege of presiding in their Courts. Soct. 1663.

Another has taken away all means of Instructing and Educating cheir Children,
leaving them at most (and that only in some places) the smaller Schools, where
is only taught to Write, Read, Count; as if study of Religion were incompatible
with the study of Humane Sciences. 26. Eeb. 1663.

Another has restrained the liberty of Printing any Book in favor of the
Religion without obtaining an Imprimatur from the Kings Council, and how likely
they are to obtain that is not hard to guess. 29. Jan. 1663.

Another ordains Parents to give Pensions to their Children who turn Papists,
although the Children will not dwell with them. Declaration 24. Oct. 1663. and
Acts of Council 30. Jan. 1665. As if paternal Authority were nulled by
Childrens Apostasy; forgetting, that Christian Religion does not absolve Slaves
from their Subjection to their Masters, yet Dominus Deus vester Papa can
discharge Children of their obedience which they owe to their Parents of the
Protestant Religion.

Another prohibits the Exercise of Charity toward their Brethren, who have no
sufficiency of their own for their livelihood. 5. Oct. 1663.

Another discharges payment of Debts by those of the Commonalty who shall turn
Papists. The very Heathens never pretended that those Christians who did but
Apostatize to them, should be discharged from payment of their Debts.

Another prohibits Ministers to preach without the place of their residence,
thereby depriving them of the benefit of Annexation, i. e. the privilege of
one Ministers supplying Two Churches, which singly are not able to afford a
complete maintenance. 22. Feb. 1664.

Another gives liberty to Priests and Friars to enter their Houses, and come
unto their Bed-sides when sick or dying to solicit them to change their
Religion 18. Sept. 1664. and 12. May 1665.

Another makes it criminal in Ministers to style themselves Pastors or
Ministers of the Word of God. Nay, they have regulated the very Garments of
Ministers; forbidding them to wear a long Garment, that they may have no
Character of distinction from the peasants. 30. Jan. 1663.

In the Declaration of pretended Relapses 1663. ratified in Parliament 7. Jan.
1663. It is ordained, that those of the Religion who have once embraced the
Popish Religion shall never again return unto it under pain of perpetual
Banishment. A thing plainly contrary to the Edict: Yet they have given it a
retrospective and retroactive power to execute it against persons who became of
the Religion long before the Declaration was in being; and accordingly have
proceeded against some whom they have imprisoned, compelled to do penance (by
going Barefoot and Bare-headed through the streets with a burning Torch to the
place of Justice, or person offended, and there to ask forgiveness) and then
Banished the Kingdom.

I could cloy the Readers with like severities usque ad nauseam, but I forbear,
having no other design by this brief Narrative but only to give a taste of the
difference of severities, which we use here, and which are used against us
abroad in our Neighbor Nations, without going farther into Germany, Hungary,
Poland, and other Popish Countries. Vide the Memoirs of the King of Sweden to
the Emperonr.
Let William Watson the Secular Priest conclude for our Justification, viz.
That all the sufferings brought upon the Papists here in England,, was the due
reward for their own demerits: Which Axiom is as completely true now, as it
was in his days.

Now, what hope can we have to speed better than our Neighbors, who only want
power to do as much for us? but I proceed.

As in the days of Queen Eliz. so now they begin to play their old tricks over
again, and would fain persuade us, that there is a Generation of them that are
faithful and dutiful Subjects to this Crown, (whatsoever others of the same
Communion are) and therefore plead hard for Indulgence and Tolleration above
their Fellows; F. 5.
As that they disown the Paramount and Omnipotent Powers attributed to the Pope
in many particulars, and look upon it as a grievance, rather than a right
belonging to him, and complain and wish for remedy; that they will stand with
the King, his Crown and Regality in some Cases by them named, F. 6.
and in all others in all points to live and dye with them. They farther
conceive that it is the right of every National Church to provide for the
particular concerns thereof, and yet confesses, that it is not for her safety
to receive those who do not believe as she does. It is there owned, F. 7.
( yet not without a Peradventure) that the Church of England has preserved
the face of a continued Mission, and un-interrupted Ordination, that her
moderation in Doctrine is great, that her disciple preserves Episcopal
Government, that she abhors Phanaticisme, and the wild Errors of a private
Spirit, that though she hold the Scripture to be the Rule of Controversy, yet
holds withal, that it is not of private interpretation, and that she is for
Vincentius Lyrinensis Rule, quod ab omnibus, quod semper quod ubique that the
Papists upon many occasions have been found as faithful to the State as any of
their fellow Subjects. At last this Diologist P. takes per, F. 15.33.
that the seasonable discourse accounts the Protestant Religion excellent, and
the Popish full of stupedity, which though granted, yet he argues, may we not
therefore be permitted to say our Prayers in private, which is all the
Indulgence allowed us? and that sure it is no part of the Protestant Church to
hinder others from being as good as they can, and the worse our Religion is,
the more need we have of praying to make us better.

A great Courtier I must confess, and has complemented us highly to his own
ends and advantage, yet with little Injury to us; which though I cannot so
courtly return in its own kind without flattering; yet I modestly wish, that
all the Papists were no worse minded: And yet if they were, I do not know that
this State were the more secure. This very Scene was acted in Queen Eliz. days,
as I have showed before, and their own Books, which are very numerous, and very
full of such acknowledgments and disclamours; and yet some of the same Leaven
for their unfaithfulness to her and this Crown came with the first unto
untimely ends, and that deservedly. I will hope better of these of this
Generation, presuming they will take warning by other men's harms. However, I
presume this State will be as wise now as they were in her days, and trust to
neither, for that the more secure we are of the one, the less safe we are from
the other. The Seculars and Regulars in her days confessed much more, viz. That
though they disliked the severity of her Laws, yet could not but acknowledge,
that the State hd great cause to make such, except they should have showed
themselves careless, and though the Laws were very extreme, yet the occasions
of them were very outrageous; and likewise, that the Execution of them was not
so Tragical as many did write and report. Import. Consider. f. 11. A Letter
from a Jesuited Gent. f. 65, 66. Dialogue between a Secular Priest, and a Lay
Gent. sparing discovery, and others, sparsim.

In Queen Eliz. days such of the Papists who though they did not forbear to
profess Loyalty and Obedience to Her Majesty, and were ready to resist any
Foreign force, though Authorized from the Pope himself, (as this Dialogist
pretends now to do:) None of this sort were for their Religion prosecuted, or
charged with any crimes or pains of Treason. And this I shall demonstrate in
point of fact, by instancing of some few of very many of the better sort, (for
of the more ordinary sort they were sans nombre) not unfit to be taken notice
of; as by name Dr. Heth, that was Archbishop of York, and Lord Chancellor of
England, in Queen Mary's days, who at the first coming of Queen Eliz. to the
Crown, showing himself a faithful and quiet Subject continued in both the said
Offices, though in Religion then manifestly differing, and was not restrained
of his liberty, nor deprived of his proper Lands and Goods; but willingly
leaving both his Offices, lived in his own House very discreetly, and enjoyed
all his purchased Lands, and disposd of them as he pleased at his death: An
Example of Clemency not to be paralleled in Queen Mary's time. The like did Dr.
Poole Bishop of Peter-borough: Dr. Tunstall Bishop of Duresme: Dr. White and
Dr. Oglethorpe Bishops, the one of Winchester, the other of Carlisle, who was
so inclined to dutifulness to the Queen, that he did the Office of Consecration
and Coronation of Her Majesty: And Dr. Thurleby, and Dr. Watson, the one of
Ely, the other of Lincoln Bishops; and so Turbervile Bishop of Exeter; all
which lived at their own liberty, without being charged with any Capital peine,
though they maintained the Popes Authority against the Laws of the Realm: Some
Abbots did the like, as Mr. Fecknam: Some Deans, as Dr. Boxall, Dean of
Windsor: Dr. Cole, Dean of St. Paul's: Dr. Reignold, Dean of Exeter, and many
others, having born offices and Dignities in the Church, and that had made
profession against the Pope, which they only began in Queen Mary's time to
change; yet were these never troubled nor deprived of their proper Goods and
Livelyhoods; but only removed from their Ecclesiastical Offices, which they
would not Exercise according to the Laws, and most of them, and many others of
their sort, for a great time were retained in Bishops Houses very civily and
courteously, without charge to themselves or their friends, until the time
that the Pope ( Phalaris like) sent out his roaring Bull, dated 5. Catend.
Mart. 1569. 5. Papatus Pij Quint. and his bellowing Messages to trouble this
Realm by stirring Rebellion about the same year, being about 11 Years after Her
Majesty's coming to the Crown. Besides these Ecclesiastics, there were also
very many Laymen of good Fortunes and Families that were manifestly seduced by
their Priests to hold wrong opinions in Religion for the Popes Authority, and
none of them were ever impeached of Treason, or of low of Life, Member, or
Inheritance, for such their opinions in Religion, or for the Popes Authority
alone, as our most impudent Adversaries have often published, F. 5.
and yet some of them were well known to hold opinion, That the Pope ought by
Authority of Gods Word to be Supreme, and only Head of the Catholic Church
over the whole World, and only to rule in all Causes Ecclesiastical; and that
the Queens Majesty ought not to be Governor over any of her Subjects in her
Realm, being persons Ecclesiastical; which opinions are nevertheless in some
part by the Laws of this Nation punishable in other Degrees; yet for none of
these points were any persons prosecuted with the Crime of Treason, or brought
in danger of life, but enjoyed their Religion in private with Connivance,
though not with Tolleration and Abetting, and so they have done ever since even
unto the very day this Dialogist writ his Dialogue, with as much freedom and
liberty: Nay, with more, than have our other dissenting Brethren, (who differ
in Discipline and Ecclesiastical Government only, not in Doctrine) without
having their Consciences raked into by Six bloody Articles, or any Oaths: And
if any thing of more than ordinary severity has lately befallen them, they may
thank their own most implacable and restless Spirits for it: And if any of the
same Communion being of more quiet, and moderate Temper and Humor, and better
principled, do suffer thereby, they ought in all Justice to do as the Seculars
in Queen Eliz. days did, and place the blame on the fiery tempers of that
Crudele genus of some their own Colleagues that have brought this upon them,
and not to blame us or our Laws, who in all prudence ought to provide for the
safety and quiet of our selves and of our own Religion by wholesome Laws, be
displeased therewith who will.

Now were Papists in Queen Eliz days the quieter or better Subjects for those
12 Years Indulgence, Connivance, Favors and princely Graces? or the Queen in
any manner the more secure in her person, or quiet in her Dominions? Let be
Judge that Bull of Pius Quintus, together with the Popes Commission granted to
Dr. Sanders as Legate, (who before his passing into Ireland openly by writing,
Impudently avowed that Bull against Her Majesty to be lawful, and which for
ought I know is in force to this day against all her Successors, (if any Pope
please to have it so) and together with the Faculties granted by the Pope unto
P. P. Robert Parsons, and Edmund Campion at Rome, 14. Apr. 1580. then going for
England, and together with the Confession of Heart, who (being Condemned with
Campion) did the last of December 1580. confess, That the Bull of Pius Quintus
(for so much as is against the Queen) is held amongst the English Catholics
for a lawful sentence, 25. Feb. 1570.
and a sufficient discharge of her Subjects fidelity, and so remains in
force; but in some points touching her Subjects it is altered by the present
Pope. For where in that Bull all her Subjects are commanded not to obey her,
and she being Excommunicate and Deposed, all that do obey her are likewise
innodate and Accursed, which point is perilous to the Catholics; for if they
obey her, they are within the verge of the Popes Curse; if they disobey her,
they are in the Queens danger; therefore the present Pope to relieve them has
altered that part of the Bull, and dispensed with them to obey or serve her
without peril of Excommunication, which Dispensation is to endure but till it
please the Pope otherwise to determine. We thank his Holiness. This Bull did
Import, 1. That Her Majesty was not the lawful Queen of England, the first and
highest point of Trason. 2. That all her Subjects are discharged of all their
Oaths and Obedience; another point of high Treason. 3. All warranted to disobey
her and her Laws.

This was the proper and natural product of 12 Years Indulgence and Connivance
with much moderation, and many favors; and from this Root sprang all the
subsequent Treasons (in Queen Eliz. days, and since, and will be again if not
prevented) of Northumberland, Westmoreland, Parsons, Parry, Throgmorton,
Somervile, Stewkeley, Saunders, cum multis aliis. A special Argument and Motive
I must confess (and well becoming P. the Dialogist, when he has no better) to
persuade King and Parliament to give new and fresh Indulgence to the Papists,
that they might with the better Grace, and more Authority impune peccare.

As to this pitiful begging Argument of this P. viz. That because many of them
deny much of the Popes Authority; therefore they should have Tolleration now; I
shall only apply matter of Fact, viz. the chiefest and most of them that I have
named, had in the times of H. 8. and E. 6. either by preaching, writing,
reading or arguing, taught all people to condemn, yea to abhor the Authority of
the Pope; for which purpose they had many times given their Oaths publicly
against the Popes Authority, and had also yielded to both the said Kings the
Title of Supreme Head of the Church of England, next under Christ, and yet they
refused to allow Queen Eliz. the Title of Supreme Governor, though to gratify
them she omitted the very Title of Supreme Head at the begin of her Reign, and
this is demonstrable by many of their Books and Sermons against the Popes
Authority printed both in English and Latin to their great shame and reproach
to change so often, but especially in persecuting such in Queen Mary's days,
whom themselves had taught and established to hold the contrary in H. 8. days;
a sin bordering on the sin against the Holy Ghost, scarce to be forgiven. And
shall we be gulled again by such Sophisters. Was Queen Eliz. ever the more safe
in her person? or her Dominions the more secure from Troubles, Insurrections,
or Rebellions, because some few protested Loyalty? Let all Impartial Histories,
and their and our own Memories be Judge. Come out of their fellowship, and you
will not partake of their plagues; else they that will ship themselves with the
Devil must Sail with him

But why trouble I my self, or the Readers with this frivolous Argument, when
it cannot be the least dust in the Balance to persuade? That upon this
Dialogist, Warrant, or only Intimation rather, he and his Seculars (and who
those are we know not, and not possible for us to distinguish) shall use loyal
and peaceable behaviors; nay, what if they should be as good as their Word,
deny the Popes Exorbitant powers, and swear Allegiance maugre the Popes
Mandates to the contrary? Is this an Argument prevalent enough to persuade us
to nurse and nuzzle up the Popes Imps, (whose Seeds-men and Legates are both
Priests and Jesuits) and suffer him that has already cursed Her Majesty's
person, and in her all her Successors, removed her Crown, discharged her
Subjects, invaded here Dominions, In the days of H. 8. the Earl of Desmond
proffered Ireland to the French King, (the Instrument whereof yet remains upon
Record in the Court at Paris) and the Pope afterward transferred the Title of
all our Kingdoms unto Charles the 5th. which by new Grants was confirmed unto
his Son Philip in the days of Queen Eliz. with a resolution to settle this
Crown upon the Spanish In. fanta.

Bishop Ushe S Spech at Dublin, f. 12.


and given them away to others, and now to suffer them to steal from our Kings
and Queens their peoples Hearts, and reconcile them to that Mother of
Abominations, that dares call light darkness, and darkness light, dock
Communions and Decalogues, and worship Idols, whose Brow is Brass and whose
Heart is harder than the nether Millstone, that hearing, will not hear, and
seeing, will not see, nor understand; charm the Charmer never so wisely, never
so sweetly, and all this under the vizard of Catholic Religion, and feigned
Devotion, which in truth is nothing less, but is superstitious, Idolatrous and
Abominable, the Tolleration and Allowance of which cannot possibly be Indulged,
without manifest breach of Gods Law (against which there is no plea or excuse
to be allowed) joined with the subversion of the Crown and Royal State. For how
is it possible that light should agree with darkness, God and Belial, Christ
and Antichrist? the same Moment any persons is reconciled to Rome, the same Mom
ent he is become a sworn Votary and Vassal to Rome, subject to another head.

Were this humble Petition and desire only for Earthly and not Heavenly things,
and did it not concern Christ's Glory, but the Indemnity of our Kings and
people, what a pitiful toy is it for a few Friars well versed in the Arts of
Equivocation to think themselves meet Pledges and Hostages for the security of
so great a Prince and people. Submission to God, and your Prince would be more
preswasive and authentic, and would better become you. It is not enough to
renounce the exorbitant powers claimed by the Pope, except withal you renounce
the Idolatrous Worship of Rome, and her Doctrins of Infallibility, and of
probability, of Transubstantiation; Demy-Communions; praying in an unknown
Tongue; debarring the people the use of the Bible, and a thrave of other false
and Heretical Doctrins and practices; having only loud and bawling Impudence
for their Justification, without either Sense, Reason or Scripture.

The most Honorable and Grave Sages of this Nation understand you so well,
that I believe you find they will not easily be cheated with kanting words or
specious pretenses, made use of only to obumbrate and shadow the clearness of
their long and grounded Experience, purchased by clear demonstration, and
matter of Fact at the dearest rate and expense of Blood and Treasure. I do
heartily join Issue with this Dialogist, and believe as he does, That it is not
for the safety of our Church to receive those who do not believe as we do. In
this we are good Friends; but I doubt he will be as angry with me, as with the
seasonable discourser, for accounting the Popish Religion to be Superstitious,
Idolatrous and Absurd; and the Protestant to be the True, Ancient, and
Apostolic Religion: Neither shall I much differ with him in some other of his
Concessions, viz. That it is the right of every National Church to provide for
the particular concerns thereof, and (and without his Peradventure) that the
Church of England has preserved the face of a continued Mission, and
uninterrupted Ordination, (which is impossible for the Romanists t do, their
Doctrine of Intention being allowed for current) that here moderation in Doctrine
is great, that her Discipline preserves Episcopal Government. He concludes, may
we not therefore (because the Popish Religion is accounted stupid) be permitted
to say our prayers in private, which is all the Indulgence allowed us, and that
sure it is no part of the goodness of the Protestant Church to hinder others
from being as good as they can, and the worse our Religion is, the more need we
have of praying to make us better.

. As it is no part of our Doctrine to hinder prayers and devotions, ( that are
in truth so according to Christ's Constat) or men to be as good as they can; so
it is no part of our practice, and it looks too like a slander to intimate it;
and it is our belief, that the worse the men and their Religion are, the more
need they have of their own and other men's prayers to make them better, but
then they must be made to God, and his Son, and not to Pictures and Images, nor
yet to Stocks and Stones, and those in a Language to themselves Intelligible.

It is is indeed the desire and design of our Souls, that being converted our
selves to strengthen our Brethren and to hinder some scabbed Sheep from
infecting the rest of the whole Flock, to hinder the traficking of your private
Idolatrous Masses, or the feeding His Majesty's best Subjects with Fragments of
Communions, or to mock the weaker Brethren with prayers not understood, or
weary them with ridiculous Gestures, and to hinder the giving the Glory that is
due to God unto Stocks and Stones; Prayers understood or not understood to
Saints, Pictures, and Idols, Ave Mary's and Beads, Agnus Dei's, and such
Abominations which will never prevail with God for Blessings, but will rather
pull down his Curses and Judgments upon you. Prayers to God and his Son are by
God commanded, and are acceptable to him without dispute; to Wafers, Saints and
Pictures, are not so; it being indisputable Idolatry to give Divine Honor to a
Creature, to a Wafer-God, that Dogs, Mice and Rats may eat.

Do but what our Savior undeniably did, viz. break and give to all, Mat.
26.26, 27, 28.
that all may be partakers oe Bread, 1 Cor. 10 16, 17. Divide the Cup that all
may drink thereof: Do that which he commanded to be done, who first ordained
this Mystery: Do that which St. Paul received of the Lord, and delivered to the
Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25. Do that, I say, which the Primitive
Church of Christ always did, and you need not doubt of public Allowance, nor
of public places and oratories. Do not make your selves wiser than God
himself, by putting a Padlock on the Scriptures which Christ has commanded
every man to search, for in them ye think to have Eternal Life, and they are
they which testify of me, John 5.39. and which was taught Timothy from a
Child, and are able to make wise unto Salvation through Faith, which is in
Christ Jesus, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for
instruction in Righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto all good Works, 1 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. Do not go about to rob God
of his Glory, by denying the Work of his own hands, and the Redeemed of his own
Blood, the Efficacy of the Scriptures, with the assistance of his Spirit; nor
us of our Senses, as if we could not distinguish Bread from Flesh, or the Juice
of the Grape from the Blood of Christ; Do not substract from Gods own Decalogue
one of his own Commandments; under the pain of Eternal Damnation add 14 new
Articles to the Apostles Creed, which squint more at belief in the Pope and
Papal Definitions, than toward God and his Word, lest ye Incur the plagues
denounced against such Arithmetic, and your part in the Book of Life be taken
away, Rev. 22.18, 19. Neither be of those many which corrupt the Word of God;
but as of sincerity; but as of God in the sight of God speak and write in
Christ, 2 Cor. 2.17.

These few of many are sins so gross, that they go open before to Judgment, and
are as manifest as the Deeds of the Flesh, which are Adultery, Fornication,
Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Murders, Revelings, etc. Gal. 5.19, 20,
21. which both God and Nations abhor and make Laws against, and Prohibitions;
so that none can be deceived, but such as are given up to a reprobate sense,
and unto strong delusions to believe Lies, 1 These. 2.11.

It is true, you have reconciled some Proselytes unto your Church, (which has
made both King and Parliament so Industrious, to preserve the rest from
Infection and Seducements) and by so doing you have made them two fold more the
Children of Hell than they were before, mere Samaritans, Worshippers of they
know not what; whereby we have lost little, and you hve not got much: For
indeed it matters little what Religion Men profess, if they live not according
to to the Decalogue. It is neither Circumcision nor Uncircumcision, Gal. is: 9.
but a new Creature that avails, Gal. 6.15. For no man either knows or
believes in God otherwise than the Devils do, that does not keep his
Commandments: And God knows the love of men toward him, only by their keeping
of his Commandments, and by abstaining from that black Catalogue of sins
Recorded Gal. 5.19. and without Holiness it is impossible ever to see the face
of God with comfort. I know no medium between a Saint and a Devil, nor any
Purgatory bktween Heaven and Hell. As the Tree falls so it lies, Heaven and
Hell will divide the whole World at last.

As it has been the unhappiness of former Ages, so of this also, that they
that depart from evil make themselves a Prey; and they that live Holily,
Godlily and Righteously in this present evil World are jeered, and accounted
but the off-scowring of the World, Penitentiarii Asini, Formal Fops. But I fear
when the King of Terrors shall Attacque the Copyholds of such Flowters, and
Magor-Missabib, Fear and Terror shall be round about them, and when they are
drawing near to the Chambers of Death, that then their Groans will be like the
Groans of a deadly wounded man, and their Hopes like the giving up of the
Ghost; and that then the'l wish that both their lives and their deaths had been
like those Formal Fobbs. Therefore my hearty desire is, That both this
Dialogist, and all the perverted reconciled Proselytes to Rome would return
from whence they are fallen, and repent, and come out of that Enchanting City,
and Sink of sin, (that has spawned more false Doctrins of a Scarlet Dye, than
all the Christian Churches in the World) and be separate, and no doubt but this
Church will receive them, and our Kings and Queens will be their nursing
Fathers, and Mothers, and you will become their Sons and Daughters; else, What
fellowship can righteousness have with unrighteousness? what Communion can
Light have with Darkness? What Concord can Christ have with Belial? and what
agreement can the Temple of God have with Idols? Wherefore come out from among
them, and be ye separate, and God and this Church will receive you, and God
will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be his Sons and Daughters, 2 Cor. 6.14,
15, 16, 17, 18.

Reasons are as strong and convincing against Tolleration, if the case be
considered upon a Politic Account and Interest, as well as upon a Religious;
for to draw away Subjects to depend upon a Foreign Prelate or power from their
Natural or Lawful Sovereign, is in a Politic Consideration as the defiling of
the Kings Bed, and debauching of his Consort from him; and this is that which
makes Popery Intolerable on a Politic Account; neither can any Merits render
it tolerable or reasonable.

Notwithstanding their pretensions of Merit are so high, that they are not
content with connivance and safety, (which they enjoy without grudging, and
with more freedom, and less trouble than many non-assenting Protestants, nor
yet with Honors, (which they have had also in great measure) nor yet with
power and trust, of which they have had their shares also) and yet are not
contented: Lords Paramount they must be, or else restless, and clamorous they
will be. Such is their Nature, that it must devour or trample down all before
it, or else it will never rest satisfied. Such is the unsatiableness of this
Scarlet Lady, so often drunk with the Blood of the Saints, that no Blood could
yet satisfy, but that she still cries, Give, Give.

In all Histories from Generation to Generation, they that run may read
prodigious Examples of Exorbitant Papal Claims and pride over Kings, Emperors,
Princes, and Free States, even against right reason, and to the Indignation of
all Mankind, and these justified by their Popes, Councils, Decretals, Canons
and Divines of the first Magnitude, ascribing to the Pope power of deposing
Kings, if Heretics, and they are all so, when his Holiness pleases so to
term them by as good Logic as the Foxes Ears are Horns, if the Lion please to
call them so.

And if yet there be any Papists that in Word, or Writings do disown such
Doctrins as the Seculars did in Queen Eliz. days, (of whom notwithstanding it
is observed, That they never discovered any traitorous design until it was
first discovered by others, and that in several Treasons, though many of the
Seminary Priests were active and forward) yet they are as little to be confided
in, as those that own and justify them; for that by so doing they contradict
and disclaim the very Faith they own and profess; and unto which they are
sworn, thereby forsaking their Popes, Councils, Canons, Divines, and Decretals;
nay, their Doctrins of Supremacy, of believing as the Church, i. e. as the Pope
believes of Infallibility and Probability of Equivocation, of no Faith to be
kept with Heretics, etc. all Doctrins of the Church of Rome, which alone are
in their esteem, of power sufficient to warrant and justify their blind
obedience, and to null all the security that can possibly be given between
Prince and People, whether Oaths or Laws, Civil or Ecclesiastical, nay Divine.

And if we may prognosticate of practices to come, by practices past let the
said Experience of former Ages, and of all Countries, and of ours in
particular, rise up in Judgment against them, that they never have been, never
will be Loyal Subjects to our Protestant Princes the Reasons are strong, for
that they are ever incited to such evil Machinations and practices by the
strong impulse and impetuous zeal of their own Doctrins and Superstitions, and
all proceeding from causes pecular unto Romish Religion and Principles, which
they have not in the least as yet changed, nor disclaimed, nor yet their
Interest.

Besides, if the Papists of England have merited any thing from the King and
his Father in these late troubles, it is no thanks to their Religion; and
therefore no reason they should be gratified in their Religion; for had it
proceeded from the undoubted principles of their Religion, it would have held
as well in Ireland as in England; nay, it would have held as well in Queen
Elizabeth's, and King James his time, as in the time of King Charles Father and
Son. Postscript to an Answer to a Jesuited Gent. and also in a sparing
Discourse.
It being confessed by themselves, that none of them have in all the times of
persecution dyed expressly for Religion, but all for Treason. Answer to a Letter
to a Jesuited Gent. f. 45.
And that Irish Papists would have been as little Loyal to Queen Mary as unto
Queen Eliz. But the continual Plots against the Life and Crown of that Queen;
and that horrid Gunpowder Plot against King James, and all his Race and
Nobles; and the late Rebellion in Ireland against King Charles do demonstrate
the contrary, and their Religion, where that and the Pope are concerned,
teaching the contrary; but they thought not their Religion in that case
concerned, if they had, then it would have appeared, whether their Loyalty
would have born up against it or no, more than it has done in former times.
Therefore if any such Merits have been, they have been only personal, and so
may be, and no doubt so have been, and will be requited with personal favors,
but in no case, with such as may tend to the advantage of the Popish, and
consequently to the disadvantage of the Protestant Religion, Power and Interest
of our Princes.

But let us a little examine what in truth have been the Merits of the Papists
in the late Wars. To say the Papists were the Formal Causes of the late War
upon what has been before written, were happily not quite besides the Cushion.
However, the former matter and grounds administers good Reasons to believe, and
affirm that they were great occasions both of the rise, growth and continuance
of our late Wars. Some, and those not a few, of the wisest and most sober
Cavaliers thought that the Papists did look upon the War as their great
Interest and Hahvest, either by opening unto them occasions to pretend
something in favor of their party in case the King prevailed; or otherwise by
fomenting of the War between Protestant and Protestant, they should have gained
an Interest through their divisioos, when they had weakened one another, and
that by fishing in troubled Waters they should gain some advantage by the
confusions, which (as the Law stood) in a settled State of Affairs they could
not expect.

. However, if the Papists did not design those divisions, and the breaking in
pieces of the Ancient Government of this Kingdom, and that wherein they hoped
to find their Interest; it is certain they were great occasions thereof; for
what on the one hand with their Negotiations before the War by Seignior Con,
and other the Popes Agents, and the State tampering with the Pope and King of
Spain about the INfanta, not yet out of the Minds and Memories of his Subjects;
and their boldness upon the favor they might happily expect from the Kings
Mother, and the Clemency which they found from his Father, (no way desirous to
have the Sanguinary Laws Executed upon them) and what by the Rebellion of those
of that Religion in Ireland, they created so great Jealousies in the minds of
the Protestant party in England, that it rather weakened the Royal party than
fortified it, and made the Adverse party so numerous and so successful as a
long time it was. And it may be truly said there was never a Papist in the
Kings Army, but it lost him the Hearts of many Protestants; and as it cannot be
supposed, that they brought a Blessing on the Kings Armies, so it is certain
they brought a very ill reputation upon them; and where one fought against the
Kings party upon a serious Examination of the State of the Quarrel, Hundreds
took the other party, because they saw so many Papists on his side; and
possibly things had never grown to that height, as to have broken out into a
War, had it not been for the Jealousies which were partly given, and partly
taken from the Insolent Carriage of that party both in England and Ireland. And
yet for all this, and that they were so much concerned to quench the fire, that
had so far contributed to the kindling of it, we shall find as little ground
for their Wroks of Super-errogation in this matter, as in point of Religion; if
the number of them that were slain, or suffered for the King or his Father be
compared with the Protestant profession: Neither were they so Instrumental to
the restitution of the King as those of the Protestant profession, no not as
very many of those that had formerly been of the contrary side, and even where
Interest might seem more to sway them another way, and that in all probability
might have promised themselves more favor under the powers that then prevaled;
for that is also considerable in that matter, (which was pleaded by many of the
Papists to obtain favor from the powers that were from time to time uppermost,
when they were so) that could they have lived quietly in their own Houses, they
had never repaired to the Kings Garrisons. But the War being held forth (to
gain more credit to the party) to be against Papists and their Adherents
chiefly, though all sorts of gther opinions found some Indulgence, yet the
Papists (professing themselves Papists) could not be admitted upon any terms,
though happily they were admitted; nay favored under disguises of Quakers, and
the like; and therefore no marvel if they were on the Kings side, that they
might play their Game the better on both sides, when they could not be on the
other side professedly.

The Truth is, prudence and necessity together, with their Loyalty, made them
serve the King in his Wars, they well knowing that the Parliament was
professedly and desperately bent against them; and therefore could have little
hopes of comfort from them, which Induced them to adhere to the Kiug, who was
Pater Patriae, and from whom they might justly challenge protection, as
Subjects, though not as Papists, in which capacity His Majesty received them;
neither did he ever own their assistance, but as Subjects, and as justified by
necessity.

And now that the differing parties being weary of endless Broyls, were willing
to come to a Closure; those that had done so much to occasion the War, and so
little to make it successful, and less to bring about His Majesty's happy
return, and union between him and his people, would make such a virtue of
necessity, as to deserve such Indulgences and Rewards, which neither can be
expected with modesty, nor granted with a good Conscience toward God, no nor
yet with safety to the Crown, if the Intrinsic Interest thereof be justly
weighed and considered, and without all Color or Ground of Reason, Conscience
or prudence: For indeed all things, principles and practices considered, I
cannot Imagine what good and indefeasable security they can possibly give to
any Protestant Prince or State, that they will be and continue Loyal and
Faithful Subjects: Therefore until they reverse and nullify their Oaths and
Principles of Obedience to the Sea of Rome, their claims and pretensions of
Jurisdiction over Temporal Princes, their Doctrins of Infallibility, and of
blind Obedience; nay, their Doctrins of probability also they must excuse me,
if I differ in opinion with them, and make it an Article of my Creed, and
believe, that no protestant Prince or State can ever be undoubtedly secure of
the Loyalty and Fidelity of their Popish Subjects, if the Pope command the
contrary: It being according to their Doctrine of probability, a Maxim amongst
them, that that which 1, 2. or some few Roman Catholic Doctors say is lawful,
may (in the Judgment of Papists) be done without mortal sin.

This is Mr. Knots Charity maintained c. 4. Sect. 25. as also Valentias,
Vasques, Lessius, Euriques, Sa, Cellot de Hier. l. 8. c. 16. p. 714.) But not
only one but many Popish Doctors; nay, Popes, Cardinals and Councils say, That
it is lawful to murder or depose a Supreme Magistrate that is guilty of
Heresy, or suspected of it, and such according to their Tenets are Protestant
Princes. Nay, J. E. in his Book Entitled, The Right and Jurisdiction of the
Prelate, and the Prince, printed with the License of Superiors, 1617. maintains
the same not only by the opinions of very many doctors, but also by the Popes,
and the Authority of General Councils, as that of Lateran under Innocent the
Third, Anno 1215. c. 3. and that of Lions c. 5. de homicidio in 6. and another
General Council of Lions, Anno 1245. and affirms, That many other Councils he
could allege for the same, as Bellarmine and Schulkenius have done, Ergo,
Cavete Principes Conclusionem. Princes beware your Crowns, beware your Heads,
and of giving any Indulgence, Countenance, and power to that Generation of Men,
who are Sworn Vassals to the Bishop of Rome, and make it a part of your Letany,
viz, from such ill kind of Men Libera nos Domine.

Having thus Summarily manifested to all the World, that will read and
understand the Doctrins and practices of Papists to be so desperately
pernicious and destructive to our Protestant Kings and Kingdoms; and withal
will consider what most precious Golden Aples England, Scotland and Ireland,
with all their Foreign plantations and Dominions, are to gratify Cardinalisme,
Nepotisme, or any incestuous Brood of any Donna Olympia. It is very reasonable
to believe, That what they have done, that they will re-iterate again and
again, if not wisely and timely prevented; were it not then admiral discretion
in us to give this Generation of Men yet more power and liberty (the only
things they want) to put the same practices in Execution again, when they have
given us from Age to Age successively such Demonstrations and Assurances, that
they will do as they have done when ever they have power, a neat opportunity,
and are so commanded by their universal Monarch?

But I Conclude, That if we have any love or regard for that Religion, which is
pure, peaceable, undefiled, and which is truly Ancient, Catholic, and
Apostolic; or any abhorrency to that Enchanting City full of all pollutions
and uncleaness, Idolatry, Superstition, Blasphemy, what not? or any concern for
the safety of His Majesty's person, for liberty of our Consciences, property
and freedom of our Estates, and lastly any care to preserve King and Kingdom
from Parisian Vespers, Inquisitions, Fire and Faggot, and from a
Six-knotted-whip of Articles; it will wonderfully concern us by all wholesome
Laws and means to prevent the growth of this Crudele Genus, by paring their
Nayls only, that otherwise would crack our Crowns, and seek our lives, unless
we will quantum in nobis, sacrifice once more all that is near and dear unto
us, unto Romish Tyranny.

I shall yet further Conclude, That if Protestant Princes will but rightly
consider that they (like Gods own Sabbath) were ordained for Kingdoms, and not
Kingdoms for them, and that if they will follow but the very Dictates of right
Reason, and the very light of Nature, they cannot (without being felones de se)
establish, or tolerate by Law Popery in their Protestant Dominions: For as
self-preservation by the very Law and Light of Nature is the Suprema lex of
every Individual, and consequently of every Prince considered only as a single
person: So Salus Populi, (wherein the Prince himself is also included and
involved) even politically, and in respect of Magistracy considered is the
Suprema lex also; And the first and principal thing Magistrates are to look
after, is to preserve Magistracy, and the Authorty they are entrusted withal
for the good of the Governed, in its full power and prerogative: And for this
great reason also it is wonderful absurd to suppose a Magistrate obliged to
tolerate any thing destructive to the very being of the persons, and Authority
of him and his people, for whose welfare he is entrusted: And of such a Nature
is Popery, and is the design of Papists, and no pretense of Conscience
whatsoever is in such a Case to be hearkened unto; or endured, it being against
the very Light of Nature, and in truth nothing else but to pretend Conscience,
the better to enable them to destroy not Religion only, but even Protestant
Mankind: For the very Light of Nature abandons all such principles from the
leost Tolleration, they making men cease to be true Subjects to the State, or
good Common-Walthsmen in relation to others.

Though I have thus justified the Act of Parliament by the confessions of
Papists themselves, by matters of Fact, Reasons of State, and warranty of
Scripture; yet I can give no Vote or Encouragement for Sanguinary Laws, merely
for matters of Religion abstract from treasonable and capital crimes and
practices; nor yet to imitate our Adversaries in Inquisitions, fleaing with
Stripes, starving with Hunger, Cold and Nakedness, plunging into loathsome
Dungeons, full fraught with stinking Natines, and with Toads, Serpents, and
other venomous Creatures; nor yet for unnecessary pecuniary Mulcts. And I am
confident, that such true English generous Blood runs in the Veins of English
Parliaments, that they naturally pity the distressed, and abhor cruelties, that
they will not use Extremities, not put in Execution the utmost of the Penal
Laws, but will mould them as gently as the peace and safety of the Nation will
bear and permit. And I am verily persuaded, That if their over busy and fiery
Priests had not been over Active, the Review and Revival of any severities
against them had never been thought of, and if any new Acts do ensue, it is but
what they have brought upon themselves, and for which none may be blamed but
themselves, and their Layety only, because they suffer themselves to be led
blindfold by their Noses by them who have no Authority so to do, for which
they are much, very much to be commiserated, there being a vast difference
between the Seducers and Seduced.

But if any more severe Laws than other ought to be put in Execution, certainly
they ought to be inflicted on Idolaters and Blasphemers. That the Papists are
Idolaters has been demonstrated by many Pens; and that they are Blasphemers is
as evident: For accordin gto the Notion of Blasphemy, even in the New
Testament: He that assumes and appropriates to himself a property Divine, is a
Blasphemer, and in truth a setter up of more Gods than one; and of such a
Nature is their Doctrine of Infallibility. this is most Evident from Luke 5.20,
21. when the Jews Taxed Christ himself for speaking Blasphemy, who did not
rayl, but only said to the Paralitick Man, They sins are forgiven thee. Yet
they (not acknowledging him to be God) did account it Blasphemy in him to take
upon him to forgive sins, (which is a property merely Divine) For who (said
they) can forgive sins but God alone? so Rev. 2, 9. I know the Blasphemy of
them that say they are Jews, and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan. Much
more he that says he is Infallible, ( a property Divine) when he is not. So
John. 10.33. For a good Work we stone tee not, but for Blasphemy, because thou,
being a Man, make thy self God. What was this blasphemy? even because he
said, I and my Father are one, v. 31. Whereby it is apparent, that the Popes
assuming to themselves a property Divine make themselves guilty of Blasphemy,
and indeed of making more Gods than one, which is undeniable Idolatry: To which
if their Luciferian Dogma's be added, it will not mince the matter at all, viz.
Credere Dominum Deum nostrum Papam non potuisse statuere prout statuit
Haereticum censetur. Extravag. Johan. 22. cum inter nonnullos, gloss. ibid.
declaramus. Idem est Dominium Dei and Papae. Augustus Ambonitanus. q. 45, and
35. Dominus Deus noster Papa. Clement. in proem. in Gloss. ibid 121. Rex Regum,
Dominus Dominantium. Extravag. de Majoritat. and obedientia. But let these pass.

In the Church of Rome the Popes were the first Preachers of force and
violence, and that their St. Dominick was one of the first that I read of, that
preached the Doctrine of Death and Tortures for opinions in Religion. He was the
founder of the begging Order of Friars preachers; and therefore in Honor of
him the Inquisition is entrusted only to the Friars of his Order. And if they
will believe their own Legends, his own Mother the night before he was born
dreamed that she was brought to bed of a Mastiff Dog with a Firebrand in his
mouth. The Hieroglyphick whereof I leave to every Reader to make. Only his
deportment toward the Albigenses is storied to be as mad as that of Dogs; so
that one says of him, Aeo quidem ut Centum Haereticornm Millia ab Octo
Millibus Catholicorum fusa and interferta fuisse perhibeantur.
That a Hundred Thousand of them were put to flight, and slain by 8000
Catholics, and of those who became Captives 180 were burnt to death; the first
Example that I find in the Church of Rome of putting dissenting Brethren to
death for Religion.

Though my particular Confession engages me Experimenta per mortes Agere; yet I
abhor to be of the College of Blood-suckers, whose Bellies like those Canes
Sepulchrales of the Romans are never satisfied with the Blood of Saints. I have
learnt better things from Isa. 27.4. Fury is not in me. And from Psalm. 11.5.
Him that loves violence his Soul hates; lest God should return Blood upon me
in fury and in jealousy, Ezekiel. 16.38. I Conclude with St. Cyprian. Quid facit
in pectore Christiano Luporum feritas? and Canum Rabies? and venenum Serpentum?
and cruenta saenitia Bestiarum? Gratulandum est cum tales de Ecclesia
separantur, ne columbas, ne Oves Christi Soeva sua and venenata contagione
praedentur. What has the fierceness of Wolves? The madness of Dogs? The venom
of Dragons and the Bloody Cruelty of Wild Beasts to do in a Christian Breast?
There Is joy and gladness when such are separated from the Church, lest the
gentle and innocent Doves and Sheep of Christ be made a prey to their cruel
Jaws and Venom.

May our King live for ever, and may there never want a man of his Race to sit
on his Throne, Ruling in Righteousness, fearing God and hating evil; and that
there may be a highway of HOliness throughout his Dominions, that wayfaring
men, though fools, may not err therein, Isa. 35.8.

Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob; neither is there any Divination
against Israel, Numb, 23.23.

Rara temporum faelicitas sub Nerva and Trajano ubi sentires quae velles and
dicere quae sEntires.

FINIS.
A Postscript, showing the purport of Pius Quintus his Bull against Q. Eliz.
and also a form of Indictment of such Papists as were Executed for Treasons in
her days, that all the World may be the better satisfied, that not one of them
dyed for any point of Religion: and this is as a Supplement to what is so
particularly set down in Horae subsecivae.
PIus Quintus Pontifex Maximus de Apostolicae potestatis plenitudine, 25. Feb.
1570.
declaravit Elizabetham pretenso Regni Jure, necnon omni and quocunque Dominio
Dignitate privilegioque privatam: Itemque proceres, subditos and populos dicti
regni ac caeteros omnes qui illi quomodocunque juraverunt a Juramento hujusmodi
ac omni fidelitatis debito perpetuo absolutos, i. e.

Pius Quintus the great Bishop of the fullness of Apostolic power has declared
Elizabeth to be bereaved of her pretended right of her Kingdom, and also of all
and whatsoever Dominion, Dignity and Privilege; and also the Nobles, Subjects
and people of the said Kingdom, and all others, which had sworn to her any
manner of ways, to be absolved for ever from such Oath, and from all Debt or
Duty of Fealty etc. with many threatening cursings to all that durst obey her
and her Laws.

And for the Execution hereof, to prove that the Effect of this Bull and
Message was flat Rebellion; mark what Dr. Sanders, the Popes Firebrand in
Ireland, writes in his Book de visibili Monarchia. Pius Quintus Pontifex
Maximus, Anno Domini 1569. Reverendum presbyterum Nicolaum Mortonum Anglum in
Angliam misit, ut certis illustribus viris Authoritate Apostolica denuntiaret,
Elizabetham quae tunc rerum potiebatur hereticam esse; ob eamque causam omni
dominio and potestate excidisse, impuneque ab illiis velut Ethnicam haberi
posse, nec cos illos legibus aut man. datis deinceps obedire cogi: i. e. Pius
Quintus the greatest Bishop Anno Domini 1569. sent the Reverend Priest Nicholas
Morton an English man into England, That he should denounce or declare by the
Apostolic Authority to certain Noble Men Elizabeth, who then was in possession
to be an Heretic; and for that cause to have fallen from all Dominion and
power, and that she may be had or reputed of them as an Ethnic, and that they
are not to be compelled to obey her Laws or Commandments.

Thus you see an Ambassade of Rebellion from the Popes Holiness, by an old
doting Protestant, a Fugitive and Conspiriator unto some Noble Men, which were
the Earls of Northumberland and Westmoreland, Heads of the Rebellion that
followed, the success whereof he declares, viz. Qua denuntiatione multi nobiles
viri adducti sunt and de fratribus liberandis cogitare auderent, ac sperabant
illa quidem Catholicos omnes summis viribus affutnros esse: Verum etsi aliter
quam illi expectabant res evenit, quia Catholici omnes nondum probe cognoverant
Elizabetham Haereticam esse declaratam, tamen laudanda illorum Nobilium
consilia erant: i. e. By which denuntiation many Noble men were induced or
lead, that they were emboldened to think of the freeing of their Brethren, and
they hoped certainly that all the Catholics would have assisted them with all
their strength; bu although the matter happened otherwise than they hoped for,
because all the Catholics knew not that Elizabeth was declared an Heretic,
yet the Councils and Intents of those Noble Men were to be praised. This want
of Information was soon after diligently and cunningly supplied by sending
multitudes of the Seminaries and Jesuits to inform the people, as a Supplement
to amend the former error.

Though Dr. Sanders has thus written, yet it may be said by such as favored
those Two Noble Jesuits To. Parsons and Ed. Campion, that Dr. Sanders Treason
is his proper Treason in allowing and justifying of the said Bull, and not to
be imputed to Parsons and Campion; who notwithstanding had by special Authority
charge to Execute the Sentence of this Bull, which may appear by the subsequent
Writings taken about one of their Confederates immediately after Campions
death, who in his life time would not be known of any such matter, whereby may
appear what trust is to be given to such Peudo-Martyrs.

Facultates concessae P. P. Roberto Parsonio and Edmundo Campiano pro Anglia,
die 14. Apr. 1580.

Petatur a summo Domino nostro Explicatio Bullae declaratoriae per Pium Quintum
contra Elizabetham, and ei adhaerentes, quam Catholici cupiunt intelligi hoc
modo, ut obliget semper illam and haereticos, Catholicos vero nullo modo
obliget, rebus sic stantibus sed tum demum quum publica ejusdem Bulle Executio
fieri poterit. Then follows many other Petitions of Faculties for their
farther Authorities, not needful here to recite in the Close; the Pope Answers.
Has praedictas Gratias concessit Summus Pontifex patri Roberto Parsonio and
Edm. Campiano in Angliam profecturis die 14. Aprilis 1518. present Oliverio
Monarco assistente.

Faculties granted to the Two Fathers Robert Parsons and Edmund Campion for
England the 14. day of April 1580. by Gregory the XIII.

Let it be asked or required of our most Holy Lord the Explication or meaning
of the Bull declaratory, made by Pius Quintus against Elizabeth, and such as do
adhere or obey her; which Bull the Catholics desire to be understood on this
manner, that the same Bull shall always bind her and the Heretics, but the
Catholics it shall by no means bind, as matters now stand or be; but hereafter
when the public Execution of that Bull may be had and made. Then in the Close
was added. The highest Pontiff or Bishop granted the aforesaid Graces or
Faculties to Father Robert Parsons and Edmund Campion, who are now to take
their Journey into England 14. April 1580. being present the Father Oliverius
Manark assistant.

By this it is apparent, how all the Catholics in General did desire to have
the said Bull (which is still in force against all her Successors, when ever it
shall please his Holiness so to declare it) to be understood, viz. against the
Queen, but yet to be free themselves; which is made more demonstrable by the
Confession of Heart, one of their own Fellows, and Condemned, but not Executed
with Campion, who ult. December. 1580. Confessed, That the Bull of Pius Quintus,
for so much as it is against the Queen, is holden amongst the English
Catholics for a lawful Sentence, and a sufficient discharge of her Subjects
fidelity, and so remains in force, but in some points touching the Subjects
it is altered by the present Pope. Greg. XIII.
For where in that Bull all her Subjects are commanded not to obey her; and she
being Excommunicate and Deposed, all that do obey her are likewise Innodate and
Accursed, which point is perilous to the Catholics; for if they obey her, they
be in the Popes Curse, and if they disobey her they are in the Queens danger:
Therefore the present Pope to relieve them has altered that part of the Bull,
and dispensed with them to obey and serve her without peril of Excomunication:
which dispensation is to endure but till it please the Pope, otherwise to
determine.

By the same reason that one Pope may receive and dispense with a former Popes
Bull, and ratify one Paragraph thereof, and make another void, and make what
Interpretation thereof he pleases pro re nata, to serve a turn: He may also by
the same Reason declare the same Bull to be still in force; and may at this
very Nick of Time, and Juncture of Affairs dispense with all our Catholics by
any ways or Arts to evade this last Act, and where are we then? and how the
more secure?

Edmund Campion, that Arch-Traytor, deeply designing, and covertly as well as
diligently preparing for the perpetrating of his Treasons against Queen Eliz.
most cunningly before he came from Rome procured Tolleration for such other
prepared Rebels to keep themselves Covert under pretense of temporary and
permissive obedience to her Majesty, the State standing then as it did; but so
soon as there should be sufficient force whereby the Bull of her Majesty's
deprivation might be publicly Executed; they should then join altogether with
that force upon pain of Damnation, ex pede Herculem. By this you may guess,
what kind of Obedience and Allegiance Papists swear to Protestant Princes, viz,
temporary and permissive, i. e. during their will and pleasures of their Lord
God the Pope, or until they shall be strong enough to cut our Throats, whose
Nails desire to pare.

It is likewise observable, that her Majesty's Ministers in their Examinations
of Papists, suspected Traitors (and those only which were first known, and
evidently probable by former Detections, Confessions, etc.) had a full purpose
to follow the Example of the Queens most Gracious Disposition, and never
tormented any Innocent, or extorted Confessions at adventure upon
uncertainties; nor ever demanded any question of their pretended or supposed
Conscience, as what they believed in any point of Faith or Doctrine, as of the
Mass, Transubstantiation, etc. but only with what persons at home or abroad;
and touching what Plots, Practices and Conferences they had dealt about
attempts against her Majesty's person, or to alter the Laws of the Realm for
matters of Religion; and how they were persuaded themselves, and did persuade
others touching the Popes Bull, and pretense of Authority to depose Kings, and
namely for deprivation of her Majesty, and to discharge Subjects from their
Allegiance civily, without mentioning or meaning therein any right that the
Queen, as in right of the Crown, had over persons Ecclesiastical, being her
Subjects.

In all which Cases Campion and the Briant, Sherwin, Kirby, Cottam, Richardson,
Fords, Short, Lewis, Filhee, Bosgrave, and others.
rest never answered plainly, but sophistically, deceitfully and traitorously
restraining their confession of Allegiance only to the permissive term of the
Popes Tolleration. As for Example, If they were asked, whether they did
adknowledg themselves the Queens Subjects, and would obey her, they would say,
Yea, for so they have leave for a time to do; but being more narrowly
interrogated, if they would so acknowledge and obey her any longer than the Pope
would so permit them, or notwithstanding such Commandment as the Pope would or
might give to the contrary; then they either refused so to obey, or denied to
answer, or said they would not answer to those Questions without danger; which
Interpretatively was a plain Acknowledgment, that they would be no longer true
Subjects, nor persuade others to be so than the Pope gave them License so to
be. And yet such was their Impudence, that at their very Arraignments they
would (ad captandum populum) cry out that they were to dye, not for Treason,
but for matter Faith and Conscience in Doctrine, touching the Service of God
without any attempt or purpose against her Majesty, and that they were true
Subjects, and did and would obey and serve her Majesty; whereas in truth there
was not the least Syllable in their Indictment of Faith or Doctrine; and
consequently not possible to be Arraigned, or be Executed for any such thing:
And to try whether such their Hypocritical and Sophistical Speeches and Answers
did extend to a perpetuity of their obedience; or to so long time only as the
Pope so permitted or no; they were immediately and publicly, even in the very
place of their Arraignment, asked by her Majesty's Council, whether they would
so obey, and be true Subjects, if the Pope commanded the contrary; they plainly
discovered themselves in their Answers; saying by the mouth of Campion, that
this place (thereby meaning the Court of Her Majesty's Bench) has no power to
inquire or judge of the Holy Fathers Authority, and other Answer they would not
make.

For the better satisfaction of all people, and that they may the better and
more plainly understand how, in what manner, and for what all the Papists dyed
in Queen Eliz. days; who most falsely have since been reported to have dyed for
Religion, when in truth they dyed for Treason, and nothing else. Hereof take
one Example and Instance for all, the Indictment and Arraignment of William
Parry, that wicked, perfidious, faithless, ungrateful Traitor; sworn Her
Majesty's servant Anno Domini 1570. And as was his Indictment, so were all the
other Indictments Mutatis Mutandis. Superlatively wicked in that he became
twice reconciled to Rome, and in that he boasted, That for 22 Years past he
having been a Catholic, had never received the Communion; and yet before he
traveled beyond the Sea at Three several times within those 22 Years, he
voluntarily take the Oath of Obedience to the Queen, made 1. of her Reign:
Faithless and ungrateful in that after many obligations conferred on him by
loan of several Sums of Money, and otherwise, by Hugh Hare of the Temple, he
contrived his death by breaking open his Chamber, assaulting and wounding, and
leaving him for dead; for which being Convicted of Burglary, and Condemned to
dye, the Queen most graciously pardoned, for which he most gratefully requited
her according to the old Proverb, Save a Thief from the Gallows, and he will cut
your Throat.

He was Indicted of Treason 22. Feb. 1584. by Commission of Oyer and Terminer
held at the King's Bench Westminster before Sir Christopher Wray, Lord Chief
Justice of England and others, where Miles Sands Esquire; then Clerk of the Crown
read the Indictment, viz. William Parry, thou art here Indicted by Oaths of
Twelve good and lawful Men of the County of Middlesex, before Christopher Wray,
and alias, for that thou as a Traitor against the most Noble and Christian
Princess Queen Eliz. the most Gralious Sovereign and Liege Lady; not having the
fear of God before thine Eyes, nor regarding the due Allegiance, but being
seduced by the Instigation of the Devil, and intending to withdraw and
extinguish the hearty love and due obedience which true and faithful Subjects
should bear unto the same our Sovereign Lady, did at Westminster in the
County of Middlesex 1. Febr. in the 26. Year of Her Majesty's Reign, and at
diverse other times and places in the same County maliciously and traitorously
conspire and compass not only to deprive and depose the same our Sovereign Lady
of Her Royal Estate, Title and Dignity, but also to bring her Highness to death
and final destruction, and sedition in the Realm to make, and the Government
thereof to subvert, and the sincere Religion of God established in her Highness
Dominions to alter and subvert. And that whereas thou William Parry by thy
Letters sent unto Gregory Bishop of Rome, did signify unto the same Bishop
the purposes and intentions aforesaid, and thereby did pray and require the
same Bishop to give thee Absolution, that thou afterward, that is to say, the
last of March 26. Year aforesaid, did traitorously receive Letters from one
called Cardinal de Como, directed unto thee William Parry, whereby the said
Cardinal did signify unto thee, that the Bishop of Rome had perused the
Letters, and allowed of thine intent, and that to that end he had absolved thee
of all thy sins, and by the same Letter did animate and stir thee to proceed
with thine Enterprise, and that thereupon thou the last day of August in the
said 26. Year at St. Gyles in the Fields in the same County of Middlesex, did
traitorously confer with one Edmund Nevil Esquire; uttering unto him all the wicked
and traitorous devises, and then and there did traitorously move him to
assist thee therein, and to join with thee in those wicked Treasons aforesaid
against the peace of our said Sovereign Lady the Queen her Crown and Dignity.

Which being Read, and William Parry being asked, whether guilty of these
Treasons, whereof thou stand here Indicted, or not guilty? He confessed that
he was guilty of all that is therein contained, both in matter and form as the
same is set down, and all the Circumstances thereof: Which being Recorded, and
though confessed willingly by Parry, yet because the Justice of the Realm had
been of late very impudently slandered, That such like Traitors were Executed
for Religion, and not for Treason, the Justice of that Court deemed it
necessary to satisfy the World more particularly; that though his Confession
in Court served sufficiently to have proceeded thereupon to Judgment, yet
Parry's Confession, (taken the 11, and 13. Feb. 1584. before the Lord Hunsdon,
Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, and Mr. Secretary) and Cardinal de Como's letter, and
Parry's Letter to the Lord Treasurer and Lord Steward should be openly read; to
which also Parry himself agreed so readily, that he offered to read them
himself for the better satisfying of the people. All which Letters, and his own
voluntary confession written and subscribed with his own Hand he acknowledged
to have Confessed freely, without any constraint, and that it was all true, and
more too. And that there is no Treason that has been sythence 1 Eliz. any way
touching Religion, (saving receipt of Agnus Dei, and persuading others wherein
he has not much dealt) but he had offended in it: And that he had demanded his
opinion in writing, who ought to be Successor to the Crown, which he said to be
Treason also.

All which Letters and Confession being first showed to him Leaf by Leaf, were
openly and distinctly read by the Clark of the Crown.

Which done, Parry having obtained favor of the Court to speak in discharge
(as he pretended) of his Conscience, assuring them that he would not go about
to excuse himself, and that he intended to utter more; He said my Cause is
rare, singular and unnatural, conceived at Venice, presented in general Words
to the Pope, undertaken at Paris, commended and allowed of by his Holiness, and
to have been Executed in England: I have committed many Treasons; for I have
committed Treason in being reconciled, and Treason in taking Absolution; and
yet never intended to kill Queen Eliz.

Which said, Mr. Vice-Chamberlain retorted upon him, in that he both in Court
and else where under his Hand voluntarily confessed, That he did mislike Her
Majesty, for that she had done nothing for thee; how by wicked Papists and
Popish Books thou were persuaded, that it was lawful to kill Her Majesty; how
thou were by reconciliation become one of that wicked sort, that held Her
Majesty for neither lawful Queen nor Christian? and that it was Meritorious to
kill her? And did thou not signify that thy purpose to the Pope by Letters,
and receivedst Letters from the Cardinal, how he allowed of thine intent, and
Excited thee to perform it, and thereupon did receive Absolution? And did
thou not conceive it, promise it, vow it, swear it, and receive the Sacrament
that thou would do it? And did not thou there upon affirm, that thy Vows
were in Heaven, thy Letters and Promises on Earth to bind thee to do it? And
that whatsoever Her Majesty would have done for thee, could not have removed
thee from the intention or purpose, unless she would have desisted from dealing
as she has done with the Catholics, as thou calledst them. And did thou not
confess, (besides that which thou did set down under thine own Hand) that
thou had prepared Two Scottish Daggers fit for such a purpose?
Notwithstanding all these and more Demonstrations of his Bloody Intentions
against the Queen by Sir Christopher Hatton, Lord Hunsdon, and others of the
Lords Commissioners; he thereupon in a furious manner cried, I never meant to
kill Her, I will lay my Blood upon Her and you before God and the World, and so
fell into a great rage and railing. Which madness of his the Lord Hunsdon thus
rebuked. This is but thy Popish pride and ostentation, which thou would have to
be told to thy Fellows of thy Faction, to make them believe that thou dyedst
for Popery, when thou diedst for most horrible and dangerous Treason against
Her Majesty and the whole Country.

Thus you see what little Faith is to be given to such, who flatter with their
Lips, and dissemble with their double Hearts.

These things rightly considered, I do not doubt but that all good Subjects
will clearly see; and all deluded and wavering persons will perceive, how they
have been seduced to wander out of the right way; and that all strangers,
especially Christian Princes having Sovereign Estates, being hereby acquainted
with the true, just, and necessary Grounds and Reasons of His Majesty's late
Act of Parliament for preventing dangers which may happen from Popish
Recusants, made purely for the defense of His Majesty's Crown, Religion and
People, and for prevention of Intestine Jars, that otherwise might be
occasioned through different Religions, Religions as discrepant as light and
darkness; good and evil, which naturally occasions disputes, and sometimes
btows; that all the World perceiving upon how great Reasons of State, and
Grounds of Religion that Act was made, may be satisfied that no prudent State
could do less; especially the concern of Religion being a considerable
Ingredient therein, which often sets variance between nearest Relations. And I
cannot doubt but that this His Majesty's just Act will have the like happy
entertainment and success, as had King James (of ever blessed memory) his
Monitory Preface unto his Apology; upon the coming forth of which Book there
were no States that disavowed the Doctrine of it in the point of the Kings
power; the Venetians justified it both by Pen and Practice; the Sorbons
maintained it; and Bellarmine and Suarez their Books to the contrary were burnt
in France with scorn and disdain.

Passus damna semel cautior esse solet.
Romam vade liber -- sed
Nescis, Heu nescis Dominae fastidia Romae
Mujores nusquam Ronchi, Juvenesque Senesque
Et pueri Nasum Rhinocerotis habent.
I, fuge, sed poteras tutior esse domus.
ERRATA.
PAge 11. Line 16. r. potest, l. 21. r. sentiamus, p. 2. l. 19. r. that, p. 18.
l. 4. r. Domini and, p. 29. l. 2. r. against, p. 37. l. 12. r. if it had taken,
p. 44. l. ult. r. Houses, p. 58. l. 15. r. stories, l. 31. r. discretion, p.
74. l. 3. r. thou shall not plough, p. 112. l. 3. r. likes of one bread, l. 28.
r. and add 14 new. p. 127. l. 5. for Confession r. profession.

FINIS.

