The Devil of Deptford. Being a true Relation of the strange Disturbances,
Ludicrous Feats, and Malicious Pranks of an Evil Spirit in the House of Mr. G.
living in Back-Lane at Deptford near London, in April and May, 1699.
The Truth whereof is known, and can be attested by a great number of the
Inhabitants of that Town.
Published to prevent false Reports.
THough the Sadduces and Atheists of this Age have the confident vanity to deny
the Being of Spirits, and affirm that all the Stories concerning them, and the
Feats performed by them, are either Fabulous, or else are to be ascribed only
to Natural Causes; yet this fond Opinions have been undeniably confuted by
several Learned and Ingenious Men.

And as the Examples of former Ages, so the Prodigious Accidents that have
happened in these, and some of our Neighboring Nations, make it evident beyond
contradiction, that there are Evil Spirits of Devils, which do infest this
lower World;and of which we have a fresh convincing Argument in the following
Instance: All the particulars whereof were acted, not in the Dark, or at
Midnight but at Noonday in the face of the Sun, it the Sight of a great many
Persons; and the effects thereof were felt by diverse of the Family.

I will not pretend to give an Account of every little Accident that happened,
but only relate thoe that were most observable, and occurred to the Memory of
the Parties concerned therein; which take as follows.

Upon Saturday, April 25, 1699. at the House of Mr. G. a Gentleman well known,
living in Back-Lane at Deptford in Kint, about Twelve a Clock at Noon, a Stone
was thrown against the Parlour Window next to the Street, which breaking the
Glass came into the Room. The Boys that were in the Street were charged with
doing it, but they all denied it; when instantly another Stone was thrown,
which broke the Glass likewse, and fell into the Room: Soon after for many days
together a great number of Stones were thrown against the back and side Windows
next the Garden, seeming to come from the Fields behind; which battered the
Glass and Lead in such a strange manner as if torn and rent with a storm of
Wind or Hail. The Stones still continuing to be thrown, the window shutters
were put to; but then the battery seemed to the renewed with more fury, and one
of the Shutters was shattered to pieces with a great Stone. At length they
nailed up strong deal Boards on the outside of the broken Windows; after which
the Disturbance ceased from without, but began within the House. One time all
the China Cups and Glasses were removed from the Mantle-piece in the Parlour,
and set on the Floor, At another time several Earthen Plates and Dishes were
broken to shievers, which being laid together by the Gentlewoman were thrown at
them with great force, so that they were obliged to carry them out of the
House: Several Pewter Plates were seen to come out of the Kitchen, below
Stairs, into the Parlour of themselves: An Iron heater moved up Stairs into the
Bedchamber, and was thrown at the Gentlewomans head, striking her under the Ear
so hard that the Blood came; and while she was surprised at the blow, it rose
again from the Floor, and struck her on the other side of the Head. After this
the Maid carries it into the Garden, and about an hour after they being at
dinner, the same Heater was seen by the Gentleman to come in at the Parlour
door, and struck his wife the third time upon her Collar-bone, which pained her
a considerable time. A small Runlet or Barrel of about 4 Gallons came out of
the Cellar, to the Stair head; a Gentleman being ^^^^e, kicked it down again,
but the Maid going down soon after, me the Cask coming up again, with the Head
uppermost; and the Cask was seen to move by the Gentleman of the House, and
another after it came up: A Candle and Candlestick being left in the Dining
Room, which was locked, was thrown up Stairs, and they looking out at the noise
found it there, and yet the Door continued locked as before: A large Book was
thrown down 2 Pair of Stairs: Part of a Loaf of Bread was conveyed from its
place, and after long fearch was at last found hid under a Kettle in the
Cellar: Some Butter in a Pan was thrown into the Dirt, and the Pan broke to
pieces: A little Book came of it self out of a Drawer in the Chamber, and
crossing the Room about two foot from the Ground, however all the way as if
blown along, fell at the Gentlewomans feet; who carried it back to the same
place, but saw it immediately come out of the Drawer again and approach her.
This was repeated 5 times successively, she carrying it back, and that still
returning again; till at length it was gone out of the Drawer she knew not how
nor where; but sometime after found it in the Corner of a Closet. A Hat and
Hatcase likewise marched about the Room without Human aid: A small stool rise
from the ground and fell upon a Chest of Drawers, and after some time jumpt off
again, and stood upon the feet as before: Candles, Tobacco Pipes, and an
Head-Block were likewise moved about visibly without hands: And some Sausages
or Links being carried up stairs for security, on a sudden began to be on their
march down Stairs; a young Maid seeing them stir, cried out, Stop the Links,
and strove to catch them, but they were too nimble for her, and became
instantly invisible; but upon strict search were found in a corner of the
Cellar all over dirty; however being well washed and fried, the Gentleman and
his Wife made their Suppers on them, and found no inconvenience; though they
were dissuaded therefrom since it was not known through what infernal hands
they had passed: The Gentlewoman one time opening her Trunk where her Clothes
lay, something seemed to heave them up, as if a Cat had been underneath: The
like accident happened to the Maids Trunk and Clothes, though nothing was to be
found. The Linen likewise in the Chest of Drawers was often rumpled, though laid
never so smooth; and one day the whole Chest of Drawers was turned with the
bottom upwards. The Beds, though made in the morning, would be disordered, and
the Cloths thrown off 2 or 3 times in a day, and the Pillows carried down
Stairs.

The Gentleman walking in his Garden with his hands behind him had a Stone
thrown therein; and the Gentlewoman seeing a Stone coming toward her caught it
with her hand: They were often struck with the Stones, but without much damage.
It is computed there were no less than a Thousand Stones thrown into and about
the House, within the Month wherein this Disturbance continued. They set
watches about the Streets, Fields and Gardens adjacent to observe whether any
person was seen to throw them, but they could perceive none; and yet at that
same time the Stones were seen to fly against the House as fast as before.

At first the Gentleman got some Friends to sit up all Night, Praying and
Reading; but in a few Days they observed that the Noise ceased every Night
about Eleven a Clock, and began again about Eight Next Morning, so that nothing
disturbed their Rest. They also found in the Day time, that the more Company
they had the less they were troubled.

Some Reverend Divines were there to enquire into the particulars of this
strange Disturbance, and were fully satisfied that it could be only the effect
of an Invisible and Supernatural Power, and altogether unaccountable to Humane
Reason.

This Disturbance began about Ten Days after one Person came into the Family,
who continued there about five weeks, and then went away; the very same day all
the Disturbance ceased, and all has continued quiet, without the least noise or
trouble ever since.

If any desire to be satisfied of the Truth of this Account, the whole Town of
Deptford, almost, will be Vouchers for the reality thereof; and the Ruins that
this Infernal Battery has made on the Windows are still visible to any that
will please to visit the House.

And what can we now imagine our Witty Infidels will object against this plain
matter of Fact, or how can they deny Invisible Powers, when the Effects of them
are so apparent. We may therefore conclude that they only pretend to the
Unbelievers in their own defense; and since their Lewd Lives make them doubtful
of obtaining Eternal Happiness, they strive to fortify their Minds against all
the Arguments offered toprove a future Judgment: And because they live like
Brutes, only gratifying their sinful Lusts and Appetites, they hope, and would
persuade themselves they shall likewise Die like Beasts. But let them remember
there is nothing more certain than, That for all these things God will bring
them into Judgment.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultrey, 1699.


