The Deplorable CASE OF THE Poor Sufferers, by that Army Disbanded by the Four
Commissioners, in the Year 1679.
WHich is the sad Case, Condition and Cry of many Fatherless and Widows, and
many who are sadly distressed in Prison; with many others who are in great
Misery, and under very commiserating Circumstances, being ready to perish for
want of that Money which is due unto them, upon Disbanding the Army, which was
Raised by Act of Parliament in 1677, for an Actual War (as by the Act appears)
against the French King; And after the Treaty at Nimeguen, (being sent for
Over) was Disbanded by another Act of Parliament in 1679, by Colonel John
Birch, Colonel Roger Whitley, and others, Commissioners, who (upon stating the
Accounts) gave Debentures, and (thereby) the Lords Commissioners of His
Majesty's Treasury gave Orders on the Exchequer (being enjoined thereunto by
the said last Act) for Payment thereof: But the Money given by Act of
Parliament (by reason of paying Interest and Gratuities to the Soldiers
according to the said Act) falling short what was due, some were paid, and
others who had as much Right were not paid.

It is humbly offered to Consideration as follows.

First, That this is a Debt occasioned by Act of Parliament, and had there been
Money enough raised by the Disbanding Act, it had been paid; and it is not to
be doubted in the least, but the Honor and Wisdom of Parliament will pay what
is the Kingdoms Debt, that so for the future there may be Encouragement given
for Credit on the like Account if Occasion shall require.

Secondly, Being some have been paid already, it is humbly hoped it will be
esteemed but equal Justice to pay others who have as much Right, and have had
Debentures, and Orders given them, by the same Authority as others received
their Principal and Interest, upon the Credit of that Act for Disbanding.

Thirdly, If a way was endeavored the last Parliament to pay Widows and
Orphans what is due to them from the Chamber of London, It is humbly hoped that
this Honorable Parliament will not be less kind to the Concerned in this Case,
but first to find out some way (in this sad and direful Condition) to pay what
is the Kingdoms Debt, for want whereof several have already, and many more are
like to perish.

Fourthly, And in regard the Money upon the Disbanding Act was raised by a Land
Tax, and fell short to answer the End thereof, It is most humbly submitted to
Consideration, Whether it may not be raised so again; And then it is certain (by
the Report made by a Committee the first Session of last Parliament, there
being but 108588 l. due, and a Resolve of the House, (Nemine Contradicente)
upon reading the Report, to take it into Consideration next Sitting after the
Recess) that 4 d. per Pound for a Year on Land, to be paid 1 d. Quarterly; and
2 s.on 100 l. Stock to be paid 6 d. Quarterly, will pay it. But if it be not
thought convenient to raise it this way, Then a reasonable Imposition on
Foreign Iron, Salt, Oils, Soap, Drugs, Raisins, Indico, and Dying Wood, for two
Tears will do it; and if any thing be over, it may be paid to the KING.

And now, with grief of Heart, having showed the misery of the Concerned
herein; the Cause of it, for want of raising Money enough on the Disbanding
Act, and the means (with all humble Submission) how to help them:

Your Compassion, and utmost Assistance herein, Is humbly prayed by the
Concerned, that thereby they may be Relieved, and kept from utter Ruin;

And so they shall be ever bound to pray for your Honors Health and
Prosperity, etc.

