THE DISCOURSES OF CLEANDER AND EUDOXUS UPON THE PROVINCIAL LETTERS.

By a lover of Peace and Concord.

Translated out of a French Copy.

Printed at Cullen MDCXCIV.

A TABLE OF THE DISCOURSES.
I. DISCOURSE. THE subject and occasion of these Discourses. page 1. II.
DISCOURSE. An examen of the Jesuits Policy according to Pascal's systeme in the
fifth Provincial Letter. page 27. III. DISCOURSE. Of the Doctrine of Probable
Opinions. page 70. IV. DISCOURSE. About the same subject. page 123. V.
DISCOURSE. An examen of the fourth and fifth Provincial Letters. page 171. VI.
DISCOURSE. An examen of the first Provincial Letter, about the Purity of
Language, style and rules of Dialogues, etc. page 232. An examen of the sixth
Provincial Letter.
VII. DISCOURSE. An examen of the tenth Provincial Letter, concerning Pascals
reproaching the Jesuits, for teaching that the Love of God is not necessary for
Salvation. page 308. Examen of the distinction between Probable in Practice,
and Probable in Speculation; relating to the seventh, and thirteenth Provincial
Letters. page 352. Examen of the Doctrine concerning the direction of Intention,
relating to the seventh Provincial Letter. page 369. Examen of the Doctrine of
Equivocations and Mental Reservations, relating to the ninth Provincial Letter.
page 379.

THE DISCOURSE OF Cleander and Eudoxus UPON THE PROVINCIAL LETTERS.
The First Discourse.
THE Character of the persons speaking in these Dialogues, as just and natural
as it is, is not very common in this Age. They are two men perfectly neuters,
in a controversy wherein the world is infinitely divided: their main care is,
to watch against all prejudices, that might incline them more to one party,
than to the other: And they continue in this right disposition of mind, in this
evenness and equality of temper, till their own strict inquiries, sagacity and
judgment, with an exact discussion of some decisive points of fact turn the
scales, and determine them to join with those that have the truth on their side.

The matter before them is, what men ought to think of the Provincial Letters,
that famous book so esteemed, so decry'd; so commended, so detested; so useful
to Christianity, say some, so pernicious and so scandalous say others. The
subject well deserves attention: And that both the Jesuits and their
Adversaries, and those also that have declared for, or against either party,
should interest themselves in the examination of an affair hitherto so little
cleared, or made plain.

Many men of great quality having, for some years past, made that which is to
be the subject of these Dialogues, the subject of their conversations, I might
have introduced, without any improbability, or injury to truth, real persons,
whose names are equally known and illustrious; but the gust or relish of our
age, in this very different from that of old Rome, and old Greece, where the
Crassus's, the Catta's, the Socrates's, and the very authors themselves under
their own names used to be brought in speaking in such kind of works, obliges
me to take another method: and therefore tho they are the thoughts, reflections,
reasonings and decisions of Mr........... and Mr.......... which are here set
down, yet must it be under the names of Cleander and Eudoxus, that they are to
be understood to speak.

A book published three or four years ago was the occasion of their first
discourse about the Provincial Letters: this book is called, Le Paralelle des
Anciens and des Modernes: but they were hindered, at it is first coming forth,
from reading it, by a long voyage they had made out of the territories of
France: as soon as they had read it throu', having made, as they went along,
several reflections according to their usual custom upon all new books, that are
worth the while, Cleander put Eudoxus in mind of a passage, that had startled
them, the discussion of which they had put off to the end, because it was like
to be long, and that they had a mind, once for all, to satisfy themselves
fully upon that chapter. It was the passage in the second tome, where the
Provincial Letters are mentioned, and where all the persons in the Dialogue
conspired to give those Letters the greatest commendation that ever was, or can
be given of any work; Paralelle des Anciens and des Modernes. Tom 2. page 121.
here are the very words Mr. Perrault makes them speak.

The President. You see then that Lucian and Cicero, who you acknowledge are
able men, have made Dialogues; what men of this age will you compare to them?


The Abbot. I coud compare with them many authors, who at this day are
excellent in this way of writing. But I will content my self to make one only
enter the lists with them: that is the illustrious Mr. Pascal with his eighteen
Provincial Letters, which have been read by a million of men without ever
tireing, I can assure you, any one of them, but for a single moment.


The Knight. I have read them above ten times; and notwithstanding my natural
impatience, the longest always pleased me most.


The Abbot. In the language there is nothing but purity, greatness in the
thoughts, solidity in the reasoning, finess in the raillery; and all over such
a grace as one shall hardly find elsewhere.


The President. I own that these Letters are very pleasant and diverting: but
will you compare eighteen small, loose, flying papers, with the Dialogues of
Plato, Lucian and Cicero, which make several great volumes?


The Abbot. The number or bigness of the volumes signifies nothing; if in these
eighteen Letters there be more wit, than in all the Dialogues of Plato; more
neat and delicate raillery, than in those of Lucian; but raillery inoffensive,
never transgressing the Rules of decency and good manners; if there be more
strength and more art in his reasonings, than in those of Cicero: lastly, if
the art of Dialogue be found there whole and entire, ought not the smallness of
the volume to be a commendation rather than a reproach? to speak truth, we have
nothing better in this kind of writing; have you read the latin translation of
them?


The President. I have, and it is very fine.


The Knight. Did it please you as much as the original?


The President. Full as much.


The Knight. I am very glad on it. You know that in Greek Lucians Dialogues are
admirably witty; but in Ablancourts translation, dull and insipid: and as to
the Provincial Letters you say the French and Latin do equally divert you.
Confess that I have caught you napping in the point of prejudice or
prepossession.


Most certainly, said Eudoxus, either this encomium is excessive, or else this
book is a masterpiece of the wit of man: for not only the style is pure, the
thoughts noble, the reasoning solid, the raillery neat; but There is nothing
but exactness, greatness, solidity, wit and grace. In one word, All the art of
Dialogue is there whole and entire. They cannot more expressly free them from
all sorts of faults, nor more fully include in them all manner of perfections.
Mr. Perrault's Abbot has sometimes without doubt the faculty of tasting and
judging well; I am only afraid for him and Mr. Pascal of hyperboles. That a
million of men should have read the Provincial Letters, is certainly one,
answers Cleander, which our language allows him: for the arithmetic of
Grammarians is not so exact nor so scrupulous, as that of merchants and
bankers. But for that which he adds, that among this infinite number of readers
not one was wearied, he ought at least to have excepted the Jesuits, who I am
confident had no great pleasure in reading them.

Why so? replies Eudoxus: I have seen many of 'um, who told me they had found
that book very agreeable and diverting: not indeed, that they believed all that
was there set down was true: for they pretend that his Railleries always decent
and civil, as Mr. Perrault styles them, are gross and infamous calumnies: but
yet, like men of wit they distinguished the turn and manner of expression,
which pleased them, from the things themselves, which vexed them.

That in good earnest is a pleasant fancy, and I love them for it, says
Cleander, that while all the world is made merry at their cost, they themselves
should share in the diversion; after the example of Socrates, who laughed as
well as the other spectators, at Aristophanes's Comedies, where he himself was
played upon, and made the subject of the sport. And yet after all I believe if
Pascals Letters had no other judges or approvers but these Fathers, they would
run a great risque of losing part of their reputation. For which reason I think
we should do well to take other rules for criticizing on this occasion: and
that, generally speaking, the best that we can follow, in examining the works
of Pascal and his friends, and in examining the Jesuits books, is not to give
too much credit either to the one or to the other. There is good reason for
exceptions against both; and more especially in the affair in hand, rather than
any other. This is like one of those knotty suites in law, wherein, by the
number of justifications, recriminations, replys, and rejoynders, there appears
nothing clear of either side. The public was never more divided: half the world
have declared that the Jesuits are guilty of loose morals: the other half look
upon the Jansenists as detractors and calumniators, for decrying so
considerable a body of the church, in revenge to the zeal they have shown
against their novelties and their errors. Those who have only read the
Provincial Letters are of the first opinion: those that have read but the
Jesuits answers are of the other; but for my part, who have read both, I know
not yet what to think. Let us begin there, if you please: this is the chief
point, or almost the only one we have to examine: for as to the politeness, the
elegance, the wit and the purity of the language, I believe we shall both be of
Mr. Perrault's opinion.

What, says Eudoxus, briskly interrupting him, I am not at all satisfied with
you, at the very moment you caution against prejudice, and show the evil of it,
do you your self give into it; and immediately, without hesitation, subscribe
to the most extraordinary panegyric that ever was made of any book written in
our language? the greater, the more pompous, and the more unrestrained the
commendation is, the more it ought to be suspected: and I do own, that it would
be a sensible pleasure to me, to find some spots in this Sun, which they would
have me look upon as the pure fountain of light.

When the prepossession becomes general, replys Cleander, it ought no longer to
pass under that name; at lest in the ill signification which is commonly given
to the word. There is nothing but truth, evident truth, that can make it is way
throu', and be acceptable to all the world. And you your self do agree with me,
that there are none, not excepting even the Jesuits, that do not do Pascal
justice; upon the point, wherein I desire your concurrence.

The maxim you advance, answers Eudoxus, how true and general soever it may
seem, admits of some exceptions, most especially in works of the understanding.
I allow that no book coud ever have an universal and constant approbation,
which was not extremely well writ. The case of that, and of the Preachers of
the Court and of the City, is one and the same: a talent that is but common and
indifferent, by whatever faction or party it may happen to be cried up and
supported, will most certainly, early or late, fall to the ground: on the
contrary, a vogue or reputation, followed with a crowd of hearers, and
increasing, instead of diminishing, with the length of time, is a manifest
conviction of an extraordinary merit, but as there are several degrees of
excellence, I presume that a work, excellent in the main, being once supposed
to be such, may afterward, by the strength and power of prejudice and
prepossession, pass for most excellent and incomparable. How many old authors
are there, whose very faults are esteemed, and even their negligences admired
rather than censured? has not this been observed by our author of the Parallele
des Anciens and des Modernes, and by some critics a little bolder than the
rest? and how do we know that this is not the good fortune of the Provincial
Letters, and that Mr. Pascal being once allowed to write well, and that in his
work there was art, close transitions, neat expressions, a great deal of wit,
and a great deal of ornament, men took not up an opinion, That there is nothing
but purity in the language, nobleness in the thoughts, finess in the
railleries, and all over such a grace as is hardly to be found elsewhere: that
the art of Dialogue is there preserved whole and entire; and that there is
nothing better extent in this kind of writing. Indeed I would not willingly
engage my self to show you faults in every page, nor make a list of all his ill
expressions, as long as that which the author Des entretiens d' Ariste and d'
Eugene, sometimes since made, of those found in the translation of Thomas a
Kempis De l'imitation de Jesus Christ; another pretended masterpiece, every
where preached up for a model of the purity of our language; but perhaps as we
go along I may find enuff to make you abate somewhat, in these very points, of
the high thoughts you have of these Letters.

You coud not do me a greater pleasure, replys Cleander, and I freely confess
the fault I have committed against our main maxim; and to make use of the
author of the Parallele's expression, in the passage we have just now read, you
have surprised me In the very fact.

It is so natural, says Eudoxus, to suffer our selves to be carried away with
the stream, that it is not without much difficulty and reflection, that we can
master our inclinations to rash judgment; we are naturally prone to judge of
every thing, and at the same time to hate that application which is necessary
to do it well; and so fond are we of truth, that we immediately leap at, and
almost never fail to take any thing for truth, which has but the least shadow
or appearance of it. But you must know, that there never were more cunning
contrivances, nor more traps laid to catch men, than there have been in this
very matter: both sides cry out, have a care of prejudices, judge of the things
only by pure reason, by experience, and the matters of fact.

My dear reader, says Wendrock, in the preface to his latin translation of the
Provincial Letters; I beg the favor of you that you would come prepared to read
this book with a pure and unprejudiced mind; and to judge of it rather by your
own insight and reason, than by the knowledge and understanding of any other;
give me leave only to advertise you, that, in case you have suffered your self
to be prepossest against these Letters, by the clamors of the Jesuits, it is
but just, that before you begin them, you should lay aside all your prejudices,
as every prudent reader ought to do.

On the other hand, the Jesuits Apologist cries as loud as he can in his readers
ear. My dear reader, let not the writer of these Letters surprise you; or if he
has already done it, let him no longer abuse your credulity; which advice I
think my self obliged to give you.

That is to say, says Cleander interrupting him, that both sides, by much
exclaiming and adviseing against prejudices, do all they can to fill us with
prepossessions; and by seeming to give us an antidote against poison, endeavor
to make us swallow the poison it self.

Very right, answers Eudoxus, and in such occasions as these both parties
seldom fail of gaining their ends, when either of them is heard without the
other.

But I foresee, says Cleander, that to judge of the present matter, with that
equity, and exactness you pretend, we shall have need of more than one Library.
For I have not in mine, nor I fancy have you in yours, Escobar, Fagundez,
Della-Cruz, Vera-Cruz and all the rest, whose very names so frightened
Montaltius, that he had much a do to believe they were Christians.

We shall have no want of that, answers Eudoxus, I have a friend, a Jansenist,
who has all the Casuists of the Society, and who will be delighted to show them
to us. But I do not believe we ought to begin there: before we come to the
discussion of the passages in the Jesuit Divines, there are some general
points, upon which we may argue without the help of a library. One of which, is
Pascal's System of the Jesuits policy, to make themselves masters of the
people's consciences, not for the greater glory of God, but for the greater
glory of the Society. It is an article of large extent, and many things depend
upon it: and in the Provincial Letters great care is taken, that the readers
should never lose it quite out of sight: and if we take Wendroks word, this is
properly the business, and the subject matter of these Letters: this you may
see by the title he has given his latin translation. Lewis Montalt's Provincial
Letters, of the Ies^its moral and political doctrine.
Ludovici Montaltij Litterae Provinciales, de morali and politica Jesuitarum
disciplina. Let us, I pray you, this week, read with care and attention the
Provincial Letters, and the Jesuits answers, and every thing relating to this
subject; that we may afterward communicate our reflections to one another;
which done, we will, if you please, descend to particulars; to the end that
once for all, we may choose our sides. With all my heart, says Cleander, and
you may depend upon it, that I will do it with all possible exactness, and all
the care imaginable.

It must be acknowledged, answers Eudoxus, that these Letters have given the
Jesuits reputation a terrible wound; and that they have debauched and drawn
away from them a vast number of their friends, in Court, City and Country. Nor
has any thing more increased the number of their adversaries: never was there a
diversion made to better purpose, nor with greater effect than this. That book
alone has made more Jansenists, than Jansenius's Augustinus, and all Mr.
Arnauld's books together.

This book has yet done more, adds Cleander; it has made in France a kind of a
third party, which shall be mine, in case Montaltius be not found to impose
upon the Jesuits: it is of those, who abhorring novelties in the dispute of
Grace, and in all other controverted points, submit themselves sincerely to the
Church, without wrangling by the unsincere distinction of Fact and Right; and
who likewise cannot bear the relaxation of morals, wherewith the Jesuits are
reproached: and upon my word this party is almost as numerous as the other two.

Without doubt it ought to be very numerous, says Eudoxus, and I look upon it
to be somewhat like that, which was in France in the beginning of Henry the
IV's. Reign, whilst he continued a Hugonot. The Zeal of Religion on one side,
and the unjust pretensions of the Leaguers on the other, made an infinity of
persons stand neuters, and hindered them from declaring either for the League,
or for the King, before he embraced the Religion of his Ancestors. But I much
doubt whether the conversion of the Jesuits would have as good an effect for
them, as that of the King had for himself; and whether their innocence, if
fully cleared, would wholly turn that party to their side. The indifferent, and
the well minded honest people would do them justice: but how many are there who
follow this third party, either because they were not considered, nor courted
by the Jansenists, nor by the Jesuits; or because, how nice soever they are
about the article of faith, they are not so in the article of charity?

How many think you are there, who without examining, as exactly as we intend
to do, the accusations against the Jesuits, have no other ground, nor other
reason for the disadvantagious judgments they pass upon their doctrine, but the
authority of the Provincial Letters; or the authority of some persons, who have
taken no more pains than they, to inform themselves of the truth? how few in
the world have taken care to defend themselves from being surpised in this
matter, either by reading the Jesuits answers, which they have not so much as
looked into; or by examining and comparing the passages, which these Fathers
maintain were altered, mangled and transposed; or by certain reflections natural
enuff, which ought to have hindered them from precipitating their judgment, in
things of this nature and importance? believe me, that men, who in the same
kind of offices and employments emulate or strive to outdo each other, men who
in the Schools maintain and defend contrary opinions, and men who being of the
same community or society, do greatly love it is fame and reputation, and wish
it might outshine and excel all others, are very prone to pass a rash judgment
on the affairs of such, as may stand in their way, and give them any jealousy,
or obstruct their glory or advancement. They are neither the rules of prudence,
nor of the strictest morals which are then always followed: but however it be,
the Jesuits will for a long time, feel the effects of the blow the Jansenists
have given them.

It is certain, answers Cleander, that the Gentlemen of Port Royal showed
themselves Masters in the art of policy and cunning: they were very near their
ruin; the doctrine of Jansenius had been condemned at Rome; the condemnation
received with all possible submission, not only in France, but likewise over
all the Catholic Church; and the King, by an express Declaration, directed to
all the Prelates of the Kingdom, had commanded the publication and execution of
it: he had sent the Popes Decree to the Paris Divines in Sorbonne, and an order
in writing by Mr. de la Mothe Hodencourt, the then Bishop of Rennes, that they
should take care, for the time to come, that nothing, tho never so little
deviating from this rule of Faith, should be taught or advanced, either in
Theses or Lessons by the Doctors or Batchelers of their Society. Upon this
order, they made a decree, prohibiting all Doctors and Batchelers from teaching
or defending any of the propositions condemned, upon pain of being expelled the
University. The Clergy of France, then assembled at Paris, had written to Pope
Innocent the X. upon the conclusion of this important affair, Letters of thanks
and congratulation, signed by Cardinal Mazarin and all the other Prelates. The
distinction of Fact and Right, which seemed to be the parties last ressource,
was, sometimes after, detested, by another Assembly of the Clergy, as a wicked
evasion, and pernicious artifice of the Port-Royal's, to reestablish,
insensibly, their errors. Nor could there possibly be any thing better done, to
confound and break all this party's measures, than the circular Letter written,
upon this occasion, by the Bishops of this Assembly, to all the rest of the
Bishops of the Kingdom; and their Letter, which, presently after, they sent to
the Pope, to acquaint his Holiness with this new difficulty and contrivance.

Mr. Arnauld's proposition, That the Gospel points us out a just Man in the
person of Saint Peter, who upon an occasion wanted Grace, wherein it cannot be
said that he did not Sin: after several consultations in Sorbonne, was condemned
and declared rash, wicked, blasphemous, already anathematized and heretical: he
himself turned out of Sorbonne, with disgrace, his name blotted out of the
Catalogue of Doctors, and by the same decree, all that should come into their
assemblies, and all the Batchelers, that, for the future, should hold Divinity
acts, were obliged to subscribe to this censure and condemnation. In a word,
there never was any party more scurvily handled and run down, than this was,
both by the Ecclesiastic, and by the Secular powers. When these cunning men,
all on a sudden, altering the Scene changed the whole face of things; and at
the same time that some pitied, others blamed, and not a few affronted them,
and rejoiced at their condition, they fell upon acting a Comedy, that made the
Spectators forget all that had newly past; they started a fresh game, and put a
tric upon the Public almost without their perceiving it; and made them hunt the
Jesuits, upon whom turning short they fell with violence, fury and cunning;
having at first made a show, as if their design had been to run down the
Sorbonne; they put them upon the defensive, and pushed them home so briskly,
that they got ground, and gained the applauses of many, who a little before had
no thoughts for them, but of rage and indignation. Infine many, after they had,
for some time, looked upon them as corrupters of the faith, were insensibly
drawn in, to consider them as the great defenders and restorers of Christian
Morals, and the discipline of the Church.

As, far as I perceive, replies Eudoxus, you are well instructed in this
history.

I was that year at Paris, answers Cleander, where I finished my Studies in the
Law. I had some friends among both parties, which made me improve, more then
ever, the curiosity I always had to know what passes in such kind of disputes.
I knew a great deal of the intrigues of both sides, and I could at that time
have written admirably well the history of Jansenisme.

Since it is so, said Eudoxus, recollect I pray you the particular history at
least of the Provincial Letters, and tell me all the circumstances of that
whole affair. This perhaps may not be unuseful toward instructing us in the
cause now in hand. With all my heart, answers Cleander, I remember them very
well, and can satisfy you immediately.

Mr. Arnould perceived, that all the serious Apologies he could make for
Jansenius and himself, could never miss of being seriously examined; he was
likewise well satisfied, whatever good opinion he had of his own abilities;
that having the Pope upon his back, the King, the Chancellor of France, the
Assemblies of the Clergy, the Sorbonne, all the Universities, and all the
Communities (for Jansenisme was every where anathematized) he coud not be long
able to support the cause. It is hard for a man to have so many accusers, to
except against so many judges, to lose his cause in so many Courts, and yet all
this notwithstanding to persuade the world that he is still innocent. Being
then upon the very point of falling into a more grievous misfortune than ever
he had met in all his life, that is, of being driven out of the Sorbonne, with
the qualities of a dangerous fellow, a disturber of the public, an opiniator
and a heretic, he framed a design, not to put by the blow, this he saw was
unavoidable, but to make it matter of sport to himself and friends; and to
contrive things so, that the public might laugh at it; in hopes that the people
weary of the difficult questions, which, for a long time, had busied the
Sorbonne, they might perhaps willingly take that occasion to divert themselves;
and that then possibly the farce might blot out all the impressions the
precedent serious Scene had left. And this it was, that occasioned the
publishing of the first Letter to the Provincial: who was not a Jack of Lent, a
man in the clouds, as many believed, but a real person Mr. Perier by name,
Counselor in the Court of Exchequer at Clermont in Auvergue.

I know what he was, says Eudoxus interrupting him, it was he, that made the
famous experiment of the quicksilver upon the Mountain Puy de Damme, at the
entreaty of his brother-in-law Mr. Pascal.

The very same, answers Cleander; but although there are eighteen Letters, under
the title of Letters to one in the country, and which at this day pass under
the name of Mr. Pascal, yet were they not all written to that one and the same
man: nor is it certain, as some will have it, that they were all writ by Mr.
Pascal. You your self may remember, that only the first ten are directed to the
Country Gentleman. The six which next follow, were written to the Reverend
Fathers the Jesuits, and the two last to Father Annat.

I know that, says Eudoxus, but I am surpised at what you tell me, that it is
not certain, that all the eighteen Letters are Mr. Pascal's. You see that Mr.
Perrault, in his Dialogues, makes him the author of them all without any
exception. It is, says he, the illustrious Mr. Pascal with his eighteen
Provincial Letters. And he that writes the seventeenth Letter declares himself
the author of the preceding sixteen. Wendrok also in his latin translation
seems, every where to suppose, they were all the products of one pen; what then
can make you doubt it?

I have seen, answered Cleander, some Manuscript memoirs, by which it appears,
that the three first Letters were Mr. Arnauld's; and where it is also added,
that this Doctor having sent them to Mr. Pascal, tho at that time there was
some little misunderstanding between them, Mr. Pascal judged it not
advantageous, to carry on the raillery farther in such abstracted subjects, as
were treated of in those Letters: that in order to engage, or amuse the public,
it was necessary to find something more material, and more intelligible: that
the Casuists decisions, was a much fitter subject for such kind of
pleasantries, and that it was not difficult, to expose and bring them into
play. Whereupon he proposed to him, in general, a Scheme how the work might be
carried on: which was so very pleasing to Mr. Arnauld, and all the Port Royal,
that they wholly left to him their interests, as well the manner and conduct,
as the execution of this affair: so that in a little time after, that is to
say, about the end of February 1656, the fourth Letter under the former title
appeared; which was the first of Pascal's, according to this account, which I
will not warrant, considering the testimonies you have produced, of Mr.
Perrault, of Wendrok, that is to say, of Mr. Nicole, and of the seventeenth
Letter. And indeed the very style of the three first Letters determins me to
follow the common opinion: for there is in them too much lightness and humor,
to come from Mr. Arnauld, and too much gall and bitterness, to fall from the
pen of this Doctor.

However it be, it is also pretended, that notwithstanding the great success of
this fourth Letter, the Knight of Meree advised Pascal to lay aside absolutely
the matter of Grace, which was also handled in this, although in reference to
Morals, and to give himself a greater latitude, than that subject would allow
of: an advice, which he willingly followed to the Jesuits cost; whom he made
answerable, in spite of all they could say in their own defense, for the most
odious and most extravagant things in point of Morals, contained in the Satyr
against the Casuists.

These indeed are considerable particularities, says Eudoxus, and of which very
few are informed. I have yet more curious and more certain ones to acquaint you
with, continues Cleander, you know what our writers of Comedies do commonly
practice, before they expose their works to the judgment of the Public; they
have their friends and approvers, who are sure to cry them up; among whom there
is, commonly, some Lady of the first rank for wit and quality, who takes upon
her self the fate and setting off of the play: and points out before hand to
her friends, all the several places they are to clap and admire. It was
concluded very fit and convenient, not to neglect this innocent kind of
artifice, to help forward the success of the Provincial Letters. Nevers house,
now the Palace of Conti, was then the meeting place of the wittiest persons
and the most accomplished in Paris, invited thither, by the extraordinary
civility, genteelness and magnificence of Madam du Plessis Guenegaud the
Secretary of State's Lady. The Gentlemen of Port Royal, with whom this Lady
entertained a great correspondence, pitched upon her to bring the Provincial
Letters into reputation, even before they were published. Those who oftenest
waited upon her, were the Abbot of........ who at that time was very remarkable
for his wit and merits, but yet had not then thought of writing a book Of the
duties of a Monastic Lise. Mr......... and Mr......... both afterward
Counselors of State, and famous for their superintendencies, and their
Ambassys. Mr......... then a Hugenot, Joucquet the superintendent's favorit,
and some others. To these she read the sixth Letter, which had been sent to her
in manuscript, and did not forget as they came in her way, to make them take
notice of all the excellencies she her self had before observed in it.

You will easily believe, that these Gentlemen did not refuse to give in their
suffrages, not one of them was wanting in his duty on this occasion. The
praises they every where gave this Letter made all the world impatient to see
so great a masterpiece; which soon after appeared; and from Paris quickly
spread it self over all the Provinces of the Kingdom; where it made such a
clutter, such a hurly burly as put the Fathers of the Society into no small
consternation.

The Post never had so good a time on it, said Eudoxus interrupting him: copies
of it were sent to all the Cities of France: and although I was very little known
to the Gentlemen of Port Royal, I received from them a great packet, post paid,
in a City of Britany where I then was. I imparted the contents to my friends,
and we read the Letter with a great deal of pleasure.

They took almost the same method for the following Letters, answers Cleander;
the seventh by that means, got as far as into Cardinal Mazarin's hands, who, as
all others did, laughed at it very heartily. The eighth came not out till the
following month, on purpose, it seems, to have it wished for: for every thing
relating to this matter seemed to be carried on with great art, care and
circumspection. Very few knew for certain the hand from whence these Letters
came: all others did but guess at the Author. The honor of them was given to
Mr. de Gomberville, and this report was spread all over Paris: but he freed
himself from it, by a letter he writ to his friend, Father Castillon, at that
time, Rector of the Jesuits College.

In the mean time this mighty success did not hinder a great many, after their
sport and fit of laughter was over, from making some very serious reflections;
nor from being scandalized at the outrageous manner wherein the Jesuits were
railed at, and the reputation of a Society torn to pieces, which till then had
not only passed for men of exemplary lives and good manners, but also of
eminent and orthodox learning. The very Marchioness of Sable tho at that time
very much in the interests of the Port Royal, could not one day refrain from
asking Pascal, if he were very certain that all he had written in his Letters
was true: for if all there said be not true, with what conscience, says she,
can you publish them, and every where decry so considerable a body as that of
the Jesuits? Pascal answered her, that it was their business who furnished him
with the memoires to take care of that, and not his, who did but order and put
them together.

I know this particular point to be true, continues Cleander, from two very
worthy persons of good credit to whom the Marchioness of Sable her self
recounted it, more then once, in the later years of her life.

It seems to me, said Eudoxus, that in reality Pascal did not act very
conformably to the principles of severe Morals: nor do I know, that he could
find any one, in those principles he calls loose or relaxed, which, in an
affair of this nature, would have allowed him to depend upon, or govern
himself, by the eyesight and fidelity of another: especially knowing full well,
that those, who gave him the papers, were declared enemies to the Jesuits.

As to the rest, answered Cleander, after the tenth, the following Letters were
not altogether pure attacks: for by this time Pascal was obliged to put himself
upon the defensive: because the Jesuits pretended, they had convinced the
Port Royal of a great number of falsifications and impostures, upon which, it
would not have consisted with their honor, to have been altogether silent. Mr.
Nicole, under the name of Wendrok, soon after runs in, to their succor, or
rather was put on, or let loose by the party, to finish and complete the ruin
and defeat of the Jesuits. He begun, in a very loud and high tone, the latin
commentaries, which he added to his translation of the Provincial Letters; and
in them treats the Jesuits like a company of sad and miserable wretches. In a
word, the whole contrivance succeeded, even beyond the contrivers own
expectations. And thus you have a brief account of all I know, concerning the
history of the Provincial Letters: of which, nothing more was at that time
farther said.

Cleander took his leave of Eudoxus, and they did not, as they had agreed,
begin to speak any more of them for some days after; that they might have time
to read over, and consider what had been written, on both sides, upon the
subject of the Jesuits Morals.

The Second Discourse.
CLeander being come to Eudoxus's house, to begin their Discourses touching the
matter proposed, found him in his Closet, still busied in turning over several
books, for and against the Jesuits; wherein he had made a great many remarks,
and laid them altogether upon his table. Ho then said he coming in, what think
you now of the Jesuits polities, and the reflections Pascal has made upon this
article? have you at last found the first part of Mr. Perrault's panegyric of
the Provincial Letters true? Is there nothing but solidity in his reasonings?
for this is a point of reasoning: and it is an effect of Mr. Pascal's sagacity,
to have discovered mysteries till then so cunningly concealed: it is also much
for his honor, that he has opened the eyes of the world, in a matter of so
great importance.

Several things, says Cleander, make me suspect this System: it is indeed a
System, as you very well call it: the question is, whether what he has there
asserted, be solidly and strongly proved and made out; or whether, at the
bottom, it be nothing but a pure hypothesis; which being proposed in a
plausible manner, made the reader at first sight say, that this might very well
be: and which being continued, and always supported, by the same kind of
artifice, does so manage the understandng, that he is at last persuaded, it is
a most certain truth.

This, in reality, is the main point of the difficulty, answered Eudoxus, and
nothing could be better stated. But let us look into the book: it is at the
beginning of the fifth Letter, that Pascal lays open the policy and mysteries
of the Jesuits: out of which Cleander read these words.

See here Sir what I promised you: these are the first draughts of the good
Fathers, the Jesuits Morals: of those eminent men, for learning and wisdom, who
are all guided by the Spirit of God, which is more certain then all Philosophy;
perhaps you think I am in jest: but I speak seriously, or rather, it is they
themselves that speak in their book, entitled Imago primi saeculi; I do but
copy their own words in this part of the encomium, as well as in that which
follows. It is a society of men, or rather of Angels, who were foretold by
Isaias in these words, Go forth you Angels light and nimble. Is not this a very
clear prophecy of them? they are the Spirits of Eagles, a company of Phenixes,
for an author has lately discovered, that there are more birds of this kind,
than one, at a time: they have changed the whole face of Christianity: you must
needs believe it, since they themselves affirm it; and you will quickly
perceive it, by the sequel of this discourse, which will inform you of their
maxims. I was very desirous to be fully instructed in them; and would not trust
to what my friend had said of them, but resolved to see them with my own eyes,
but I found he had told me nothing but truth: I believe he never tells a lie:
you will see that by the account of our conferences. In one that I had with
him, he told me such strange things, that I could hardly believe them; but he
showed them in these Fathers own books: insomuch that I had nothing to say in
their defense, but that they were the opinions of some of their particular
Divines, and therefore that it was unjust, to impute them to the whole body:
and I assured him, I knew some of 'um, as severe, as those he had quoted were
loose and remiss. Hereupon he discovered to me the Spirit of the Society, which
is not known to all the world: and perhaps you will be very glad to understand
it, which take in these his own words.

You think, said he, to do them a great favor, by showing that some of their
Fathers, are, as conformable to the maxims of the Gospel, as others, of them,
are the contrary: and thence you will conclude, that the large opinions are not
to be charged upon the whole Society. I understand you very well, for if they
were to be charged upon the whole, they would never have suffered, that any of
their Society should have published so different opinions. But since they have
also some among them, who maintain licentious doctrins, you ought likewise to
conclude, that the doctrine of the whole Society is not that which is strictly
Christian: for if that consequence were to be made, they would never have
tolerated such loose opinions in any of their Fathers. And what, answered I,
could then be the design of the whole body? it is without doubt that they have
no certain formed design, and that every one has the liberty to say, at all
adventures, whatever he thinks upon any subject. That cannot be, answered he:
so great a body could not subsist, by so rash and inconsiderate a conduct; nor
without a Soul, that directs and governs all it is motions. Besides that, they
have an order to print nothing, without the approbation of their Superiors. But
how, said I, can those very Superiors consent, to Maxims so very different?
That is, replied he, what I would have you understand. Know then, that their
intention, is not, to corrupt men's manners; no, no, that is not their design:
but neither it the reformation of them, their only aim: that would be a piece
of bad policy: but you may see what their thoughts are. They have so good an
opinion of themselves, as to believe, that it is both useful and necessary for
the good of Religion, that their credit should reach every where, and that they
should govern all men's consciences: and because the Gospel and severe Maxims
are proper for some sort of persons, they make use of them, as often as occasion
requires. But because these Maxims do not agree with the design of the greatest
number of men, they lay them aside, when they have to do with any of this last
sort; that they may have wherewithal to please and satisfy all the world. For
this reason, having to do with persons of all sorts; of different tempers,
conditions, and countries, they judged it necessary, to have Casuists suited to
this great diversity. From this principle, you will easily judge, that if they
had no others, but Casuists of loose Morals, they would ruin their chief
design; which is to get all the world into their own conduct and management;
because, that those, who are truly pious and devout, would endeavor to seek and
find out a more certain way. But since there are but a few of this sort, they
do not need many severe Directors to guide them: they have a few severe ones,
for the few devout; but a vast number of the loose ones for the crowd and
multitude of those that seek for relaxation.

It is by this obliging and accommoding conduct, as Father Petavius calls it,
that they open their arms to all the world: for if any one comes to 'um, who is
resolved to restore his ill gotten goods, you need not fear that they will put
him by. On the contrary, they will commend and confirm him in so holy a
resolution: but if another comes, that would have absolution without
restitution; it will be hard, if they do not find means to do it, which they
themselves will warrant. By this course they keep all their friends, and secure
themselves against their enemies: for if they be reproached, with the looseness
of their Morals, they immediately produce their austere Directors, together with
some books they have made of the rigor and severity of the Christian law: and
the simple people, and such as do not look into the bottom, the depth of
things, are contented and put off with these kind of proofs.

Thus they are furnished for all sorts of persons, and answer so well,
according to what is demanded, that when they are in Countries, where a
Crucified God passes for folly, they suppress the scandal of the Cross, and
preach Jesus Christ a glorious, not a suffering Savior; as they have done in
the Indies and in China; where, they have allowed Christians, even the practice
of Idolatry, by the subtle invention of making them hide under their clothes
the Image of Jesus Christ; to which they teach them to direct, mentally, the
public adorations, which they make to the Idol Chacim-choan, and to their
Keumfucum; as Gravina the Dominican objects against them, and as the Spanish
Memorial presented to Philip the IV King of Spain, by the Franciscans of the
Philippine Islands, reported by Thomas Hurvado in his book of Christian Martyrs
page 427, does witness: insomuch that the Congregation of Cardinals, De
propaganda fide was obliged to forbid the Jesuits, in particular, under pain of
excommunication, not to suffer the adoration of Idols upon any pretext
whatsoever; nor to hide the mystery of the holy Cross from those they
instructed in Religion: Commanding them, expressly, not to Baptize any that were
ignorant in this point; and injoyning them, to expose openly in their Churches
the Image of the Crucifix; as is at large set down in the decree of this
Congreation dated 9th. July 1646, signed by Cardinal Caponi. You see now, how
they have spread themselves over all the earth, by the help of the doctrine of
probable opinions, which is the spring and ground of all this irregularity and
corruption.

It cannot but be acknowledged, said Eudoxus, crying out as soon as he had done
reading, that all this is admirably well said. These little bits of Imago primi
saeculi, are well brought in, and applied the best in the World: that plain
short style he begins with; those little jesting reflections, in two words, by
way of parenthesis; Is it not a clear Prophecy of them....... I believe he
never tells a ly; are, at once, both enlivening and diverting. In that natural
plain way of relating a thing, that cunning artifice to prepare the readers
mind, by finding ways to remove all obstacles, which might hinder what one is
about to say from being believed; there is not a word, that does not answer his
end, and serve to disarm the Jesuits before hand. This particular fact, of the
Idolatry in China, mentioned as it were but by accident, or by the by, and,
without any seeming affectation, recounted in few words, but yet without
omitting one single circumstance that might contribute to it is being believed
as soon as spoken.

It Is no small prejudice to the Jesuits, said Cleander interrupting him, that
they do not own this thing, and that they pretend to have undeniably refused
the imposture. That Is no matter, pursued Eudoxus: I find my self persuaded by
this, almost in spite of me; and I am of opinion, that a great many others
ought to be so too. But observe how Pascal, in a few pages, has comprised and
prepared all that was necessary for his chief design; which is to make all the
Jesuits writers faults and mistakes to light upon, and be imputed to the whole
body: say what you please, this is a bit they cannot swallow or digest; this
little piece, this particular instance, is not to be answered. As to the rest,
continues he, let that go for nothing: For I see you ready, in your turn, to
accuse me of being prepossessed in favor of Pascal: all that I pretend to say,
is, that he has given this passage a delicat turn; expressed it so very finely,
that nothing could be more persuasive, or at least more seducing.

Whatever you would say of it, answered Cleander, I see plainly, that the
Jesuits are not very safe in your hands: and that without any great force upon
your self, you could stand up stiffly in defense of what I have just now read to
you, in case you should not see it fully and perfectly refuted.

Not so fast, replied Eudoxus, do not I pray distrust my equity. I have newly
vowed, to be indifferent and stand neuter, between both parties, and nothing is
able so to dazzle me, as to make me mistake the truth. It Is with the same
disposition of mind, answered Cleander, that I am resolved to tell you,
plainly, and without exaggeration, what may be said in favor of the Society.

The end and policy of the Jesuits, said he, is, to make themselves Masters of
all men's Consciences; now there are two sorts of Christians; some that are
truly pious, who seek for a sure way; for whom the Jesuits have taken care to
have some severe Casuists; but a few for the few; whereas they have a multitude
of loose Casuists, who present themselves to the multitude of those that seek
for liberty and relaxatien. Then he adds: See how they have spread themselves
over all the earth, by the favor and assistance of the doctrine of probability,
which is the source and basis of all this irregularity and corruption.

You might have added the direction of intention, said Eudoxus interrupting
him, together with the doctrine of equivocations: for these also, as Pascal
tells us, are main points of the Jesuits Morals.

That Is true, replied Cleander, but these points, as great and general as they
are, may be looked upon, but as particular points, which we may examine at
leisure: and it seems to me, that, for the present, we ought to dive and sift
into nothing but their politics: the wonderful intelligence they have among
themselves for one and the same end; and which makes them, by concert and
contrivance, act, so effectually, for the glory and grandeur of their Society:
and the admirable partition of the rigorous and the relaxed doctrine between
their Doctors; of whom, some are enjoined to make the best of the first, and
others of the second: all aiming, tho by so contrary means, By the favor and
assistance of the doctrine of probable opinions, at one and the same end. To
have discovered this, if you believe Pascal, Is, to have found out the Spirit
of the Society, which is not known to all the world. This is, in reality, the
most curious part of this whole affair: and if the discovery of the partition
be real and not chimerical, if this particular, single point, be very certain,
all that he afterward says of the Jesuits, may very well be believed. I
shoul'd be no longer shocked or offended at Wendrock's invectives against these
Fathers, nor at the horrible injuries, wherewith he treats and oppresses them.
But I declare to you, that I cannot easily conceive, nor seriously believe,
that such a project could have been formed, or carried on so long; that is to
say till Pascal's time, or at least till the birth, or springing up of
Jansenisme, without any body's perceiving it; or that, during all the wars and
disputes the Protestants have had with the Doctors of the Church of Rome, and
wherein the Jesuits were always the first assaulted, not one of their obstinat
enemies, should have thought of attaching them on that side: and that a
thousand men should have set themselves, industriously, to examine, to meditate,
to criticize upon, to decry their institute, to study their conduct, and to
search into the secrets of their pretended politics, and yet not to make this
discovery, is a thing, which, really appears to me, incredible, and morally
impossible.

For, let us reason and argue a little, and sound, if it be possible, into the
depth of this policy. By what person, I pray you, could this strange design be
conceived and brought forth? was it by their founder Saint Ignatius? can we
see, I do not say the scheme, but the shadow or least idea of it in their
Constitutions? do any of the decrees of their General Congregations carry a
tendency to this end? can we point at any one of their Generals, from Saint
Ignatius downwards, to this day that has plotted this conspiracy, so fatal to
the Gospel, and the purity of our Savior's Morals? was it not think you Father
Caraffa, he, who without dispute was one of the holiest men of our age, and
who, after he had governed for some years, died, but just as Pascal had
attributed so good and laudable an intention to the Society? for, infine to
carry on a project fixed and determined after this manner, and such as Pascal
proposes it, the execution of which depends upon the whole body, or, at least,
upon a great number of particular members, who must have the same prospects and
designs, there must be one conductor and one soul, with whom all these several
particulars must have a correspondence, to guide and influence the motion. When
Titus Oats and Bedloe, some years since, made a scheme of a plot in England,
which cost Viscount Stafford, Mr. Coleman, and the five Jesuits their lives,
they did not forget a seeming probability and show of truth. They made the
General of the Jesuits, by the Pope's permission, to dispatch all Commissions
for the war, and dispose of all Offices of the Crown. The witnesses swore, they
had seen a patent sealed with the Societies seal, by which my Lord Arundel was
constituted Lord high Chancellor of England, by another, my Lord Powis was made
Lord high Treasurer; by a third, my Lord Bellasis was declared General of the
Army, that was to be raised against the King: of this army, my Lord Petre was
appointed Lieutenant General, all signed by Joannes Paulus Oliva General of the
Jesuits. In this manner things were particularly resolved upon and specified:
the pretended head of the plot, and all the other conspirators, were very well
known; and all this was believed by the common people of England, and God knows
what horrid things were then said of the Jesuits politics. I would fain see
something like that, in this other conspiracy, of which the Jesuits are
accused; especially, since Pascal gives us to understand, as he does in the
fifth Provincial Letter, that this great abuse, and total subversion of our
Saviors Morals, is, not the effect of hazard, nor of an extravagant fancy, but,
a settled concerted matter; which although it be not the Jesuits end, their
principal end, it is, however, a mean agreed and resolved upon among them, and
of which without any new deliberation they daily make use, every one in his
way, to bring about their main purpose and design.

It is pleasantly done of you, said Eudoxus interrupting him, to compare Mr.
Pascal with Oats and Bedloe; those two gallant fellows, whose equally gross
and infamous proceedings had so incensed Mr. Arnauld, Tom. 1. page 292.
that in his Apology for the Catholics, he could not forbear calling them
rogues and villains. As to the rest, I do not very well know, what answer Mr.
Pascal would have made you, if the question had been put to himself: but I
know, that in the place we have newly read, he seems to have obviated the
objection, and answered it before hand. For being desirous to establish that
principle, which makes so great a part of all his Letters, that this
contrariety of severe and remiss Casuists, which is to be seen, as he says, in
the Society, was not the effect of chance, nor of a liberty, that every one in
it might have, of following his own caprice or wild fancy, in the choice of his
opinions, this is the manner he speaks in.

Ho what could there be, answered I him, the design of the whole body? it must
needs be, that they have no certain fixed and determinate design, and that
every one has the liberty to say, at all adventures, whatever he thinks fit.
That cannot be, replied he; so great a body could not subsist with a rash,
inconsiderat, conduct, or without a soul, that ruled and governed all it is
motions. Besides they have a particular order, not to print any thing, without
leave from their Superiors. But how then, said I to him, can the Superiors
consent to Maxims so very contrary? that is the thing I am to acquaint you
wirh, answered he. Know then, etc.

This is again repeated in the ninth Letter, as a point of the last importance.
And do you not know, says his Jesuit, that our Society is answerable for all
the books of our Fathers? I must needs instruct you in this matter, for it is
very fit you should know it: there is an order in our Society, by which all
sorts of Printers and Booksellers are forbid to sell any of our Fathers works
without the approbation of the Divines, and the permission of the Superiors of
our Society.......... Insomuch, that our whole body is responsable, for all the
books of every one of our Fathers: whence it comes to pass, that no work of
ours, which has not the spirit of the Society is ever published, and thus have
I told you, in few words, what I judged was convenient for you to know.

By this you see, continued Eudoxus, Pascal supposes, that this policy resides
in the Superiors of the Society; and that it is, by concert and agreement with
them, that the inferiors do act, in bringing about this design of the whole
body; and he does not only suppose, but also farther endeavors to prove it, by
observing and setting down, what is very true, that they have a particular
order to print nothing without their Superiors permission.

It is of these cunning words, replied Cleander, you would now discourse,
words, which are thrown in, as it were by the by, without any seeming
affectation, and which yet notwithstanding make the deepest impression upon the
readers mind. Upon the coming forth of the Jesuits Apologies, they never failed
to make a great noise of this their rule, to print nothing without the
General's consent. But this week, as I was looking over all these matters, I
was very desirous to satisfy my self in this point, as well as in the others.
To which end I went ere yesterday to visit a Jesuit of my acquaintance, a man
of wit and consideration; and put him upon this subject. I told him, that this
particular order, known to be among their rules, of printing nothing without
their Generals leave, was, by their adversaries, made use of to their
prejudice, and, by virtue of it, all the faults of particular persons were
attributed to the whole body.

I see then, said he to me, that you also have been so good and easy, as to
suffer your self to be trapand, drawn in and caught in this net, as before you,
several others have been. You call this a particular order, as if it were not
common to us, with almost all communities and bodies of men where there is any
regularity and subordination; and yet notwithstanding it is but against us
only, that it is objected and improved. But the manner alone, adds he, of
executing this order, will convince you, of the weakness of the arguments our
enemies draw from this topic: it is true, that we have this rule or order, to
print nothing without our Generals permission, but it is not to be supposed,
that the General himself reads and passes his own judgment upon all the books
printed by the Jesuits in every part of the world. If that were so, his whole
business would only be to read books: for there has been a General, under whose
government there were volumes enuff made, upon the single controversies with
the Protestants of Germany, Flanders, France and England, to have taken up and
employed the whole time of his Generalship. But for your farther satisfaction,
you are to know, that the ordinary method of licencing books is after this
manner.

The General gives the Provincials power, to approve of all the books in their
own districts. But you must not fancy, that the Provincials themselves do read
these books; no, no, their other employments do not allow them leisure for such
a work: but they name three persons to do it, upon whose suffrages, they either
give or refuse their approbation, and these three persons in passing their
judgments are obliged to follow, not their own particular notions and
prejudices, but (especially in matters of Divinity) the opinions commonly
received in the Catholic Schools and Universities. This is usually the rule
they follow, wherein a great many other very good ones are included. This is
the way ordinarily taken for this business, and it is impossible it should be
done otherwise. So that you see, there is little difference between a book
printed, upon the approbation of three Doctors of Sorbonne with reference to
the whole house of Sorbonne, and a book printed, upon the approbation of three
Jesuit Divines, with reference to the whole Society of Jesuits.

After the Father had thus entertained me upon this subject, he put me in mind
of the persecutions, raised against the Society in Father Coton's time, and the
beginning of their establishment in France; occasioned by books, brought from
Italy and other places, to make the French Jesuits guilty of treason against
the state, or to be looked upon as enemies to the liberties of the Gallican
Church, and how the Court and Parliament, in those days, notwithstanding their
prejudice, and the suspicions that were continually suggested against them, did
always, in that affair, hearken to, and perfectly govern themselves, by reason.

Now the matter being thus, continued Cleander, and in reality not being
possible to be otherwise, does it not appear to you, that the system of the
Jesuits politics, which Pascal has built upon this weak and ruinous foundation,
is false and malicious? and this being allowed, would not the comparison I
made, without pretending that it was very exact, be a little more so, than you
thought of first? what a pleasant argument is this? the Provincial of a
Province in Spain approves a book, upon the suffrages, or votes of three
Spaniards of the Society; this book then being approved by the Superior,
contains or comprehends the spirit of the whole society. Now the Jesuits having
several different opinions, in their books, about one and the same matter, this
diversity among their Divines, which is every day to be found, must be an
effect of the General's politics, who presides over all, and who takes care for
the glory and benefit of the Society, to make and keep up this diversity of
opinions, at no less a price to the Church, than the subversion of
Christianity, and the destruction of the Gospel: these are things, which a man,
upon the least reflection, would be ashamed to have once thought, or but even
suspected.

Eudoxus satisfied with this account of Cleanders, said to him: you have indeed
hit the nail on the head, and this simple explanation you have made of the
matter, discovers, by it self alone, the weakness, the essential weakness of
all Pascals Letters. But however, do not value your self too much, upon the
honor of this my confession: for I my self, for a long time, have had some
scrupules about this fine system, in spite of the dazzling manner it is
proposed in: he includes, or supposes certain paradoxes, which are highly
improbable, and too remote from the common ordinary notions and ideas: for,
according to what Pascal pretends to teach us of the Jesuits government, all
those, who have had any share in it, must needs have been, and still are, not
only great politicians (a commendation which I my self know for certain,
several of 'um do not deserve) but also most wicked profligate wretches, and
the most resolved, and incorrigible libertins, who had absolutely renounced all
piety, and Religion. But let me yet ask you, once more, what, according to
Pascal, is the matter in dispute? nothing less, than the overturning and
confounding the whole Gospel, the introducing Morals, perfectly carnal, instead
of those taught us by our Savior, the profaning our greatest and most august
mysteries; and that in cold blood, by previous agreement and methods, by
measures expressly resolved on, marking out, to every man, the part he was to
act in this execrable conspiracy; wherein, some were to appear harsh and
severe; others, gentle and accommoding. So that, not only the Superiors, but
all their Divines, all their Confessors, all their Directors must engage in so
damnable a plot; that is to say, two thirds of this great body: for, excepting
the young men, who are not in holy orders, all, or almost all, some, more, some,
less, are employed in conducting and guiding of Souls. Now, to come to the
matter of fact, I am very confident, that neither you, nor I, nor any person in
Paris, nor in any other parts of France, nor even those they call Jansenists,
will ever believe, that any Jesuit, of their acquaintance, is capable of such
and excess of impiety. I never yet saw the man, that said to me, of any one of
them in particular: I know this Jesuit, to be a libertin, an Atheist, a man
without conscience, and one, that would sell his Soul, for the glory and
interest of his Society: on the contrary, they give them, in general, the honor
of certain vertu's, which can, as little, subsist without faith and the fear of
God, as faith and the fear of God can, with the principles of this damnable
policy. The Jansenists, from time to time, do make some common places in their
books, in favor of their own patty, which sometimes the Jesuits, finding them
made to their hands, may, I hope, be allowed to apply to their own use. As for
example, that which is said in a little book called Le Pere Bouhours convaincu
de calomnie, and which may serve for a handsome pithy conclusion to all I have
said on this subject.

He must be very corrupt himself and rotten at heart, in the words of that
author, who imagined his neighbor could be guilty of such desperate wickedness
and corruption; and none, but a man extremely fond of the esteem of the world,
could fancy that others, by a formed design, would be willing to buy, at the
price of their faith and of their Salvation, a vain name and reputation; or
rather the mad foolish pleasure of being talked of, no matter whether for good,
or for evil.

I will not examine, continued Eudoxus, the truth of this reflection, but
supposing it very probable, in reference to any one particular; it ought to
appear much more so, in reference to the Superiors, Confessors, Directors and
Missioners of the whole Society taken altogether; and it would be in my
opinion, a less wonder, to see, among the Jansenist Doctors, one or two
hypocrites, libertins in their hearts, than to see this great number of
Jesuits, without God, without faith and without conscience.

But what do I say, their Superiors, their Directors, their Missioners? After
Pascal had unvailed and discovered all these pretended mysteries, and that the
Provincial Letters had been read by all the Jesuits; after that, by virtue of
these Letters, so many people believed they had a right to accuse them of their
loose Morals; would none of all those young Jesuits, from whom till then they
had hid the secret of their order, and who for the most part do not want wit,
have opened their eyes, and abhorred to continue members of so corrupted a body?
what desertion ought we not to have seen, by the favor of a motive so specious
and so reasonable as that? for it is not the same thing in this, as in other
orders: here is always a door open, or at least one that is easily opened to
those who are fully resolved to be gone. What fairer pretense could any such
have had, to color their baseness, or their inconstancy? and as for such, as
are sometimes turned out of the Society, for their misbehaviour and ill
conduct, could they have had a more sure, and a more easy way to be revenged,
than to publish and reveal this mystery? or have the Superiors of the Society,
over and above their politics, the art to infatuat and bewitch men, or, at one
bout, to make so great a number of persons, Atheists, that have entered into
their order, for no other end, but to secure themselves, against the corruption
of the world? now from what I have already said, it is clear, this policy of
the Jesuits, could be no longer a mystery, to any of themselves; and not being
a mystery, it would be a miracle, without example, if none among them should
have been scandalized at, and afterward discovered this so abominable and so
horrid an impiety.

It would be yet a much greater prodigy, answered Cleander, to see men of such
colors or characters, as the Jesuits are sometimes painted in, strive for, and
unanimously tend to the glory of their Society, by ways so different and so
unequal, as are the employments of this Society. Some are seen in Courts, in
credit and in reputation, respected, applauded, and honored with the kindness
and confidence of Princes; whilst, at the same time, a very great number die, of
cold and hunger, in the forests of Canada: others go, with all imaginable joy
and cheerfulness, to ruin their healths for the remainder of their lives, in
the Isles of south, America; where of thirty, there are not found two, that in
time are not destroyed by the very malignity of the air; not to speak of those,
that have been hanged in England, burnt or buried alive in Japan, the common
fate of a great number of their Missioners. For you must understand, Morale
pratique pref. du a. tom.
that it is plainly said, and publicly printed, that the Jesuits, in those
Countries, are not one jot better, than those of France. And let them say as
much as they please, of their trading and enriching themselves in those far
distant Countries, it is putting too great a value upon traffic and commerce;
and I know none, how greedy soever of gain, that would be Merchants upon such
terms. These good Fathers then will go, with great content and satisfaction, to
have themselves roasted and eaten alive, by the Iroques and wild Americans, and
to pass the winters, in the woods, with savages, without any other places of
retreat, than a poor hut, or a cabane made of the bark of trees, where the
smoke blinds and choaks those that are forced to retire thither, to defend
themselves against the extremity and bitterness of the cold; and all this,
forsooth, only to have the honor of establishing, over all the world, their
loose Morals, and enlarging the glory of their Society; and to give to the
Secular Preachers, sometimes invited to Preach upon Saint Ignatius's day, an
occasion to compliment the Jesuits of Paris, for their zeal, their functions,
and their Apostolic labors. If this be so, I do not despair, but that we may
live to see, some time or other, a Society of highway men spring up, who, all
joining together in the design of robbing, plundering and killing, will agree
among themselves, that some, of them, shall peacably enjoy their booties, and
the fruits of the others labors, without ever exposing themselves to any
danger; and that these, after they have sufficiently robbed and plundered,
without enjoying any profit or advantage by all their labors, will give
themselves up to be hanged and broken alive upon wheels, only for the
interest, and the security of the rest of their companions.

Self-love, said Eudoxus, is, in truth, too much self-love, to devote it self
so absolutely and so entirely to the public good; such a kind of Man, is, in
Morals, a chimerical whimsey, and it were mere madness to think, there could be
found a man, who, out of zeal to the common interest, would wholly forget or
deny himself, and sacrifice his ease and quiet, his pleasures, his satisfaction
and his life, to the glory of the body, whereof he is a member, without once
thinking of his own particular. I would say to him, and to all like him, what a
Protestant Minister some years ago said to a Jesuit he met travalling toward
China. He asked him what he had got from the Pope to engage himself in so long,
so troublesome, and so dangerous a voyage: nothing, answered the Jesuit. Ho,
said the Minister in his Dutch latin, Been stulti estis vos. You are a company
of silly fools. Let. ^n P. Verbiest.


That would be, without doubt, answered Cleander, a very refined piece of
vanity, and an act of pride, of a very particular nature: it is very rare to
see, but two men of the same rank and quality, the same age, and, as near as
possible, of equal wit and merit, agree without falling out, or without hurting
or injuring one another upon occasion, if they be but never so little touched
with vainglory, or possessed with the spirit of pride: and yet one may see
thousands of men, the vainest that ever were, if you will believe the author of
the system we are examining; of which the greatest part have wit and learning,
and who, naturally speaking, ought to rival one another in employments; I say,
one may see them, accept of, and do their duty without murmuring, in posts that
are most extremely unequal, and between which there is as much difference, for
the conveniences of life, for diet and for lodging, for conversation, for
employment, and for all the natural satisfactions of the mind, as there is
between the fairest and greatest Citys of this Kingdom, and the wildest and
most dreadful Deserts of America and Monomotapa. Certainly, if this be the
effect, either of vanity, or of policy, one may very well call it, a most
extraordinary and incomparable Masterpiece. So that whatever the author of the
Paralelle des Anciens and des Modernes thinks of it, I will deduct, out of the
panegyric he has made o the Provincial Letters, his Solidity of reasoning, or
arguing, at least upon this first and most principal article. I can, in this
point, compare at best Pascal's cunning but to the artifice of skilful painters
in perspective, who produce and expose pieces, which, at first view, pleasantly
deceive and inveigle the lookers on, to make rash and false judgments; but such
indeed, as are easily and soon corrected, by reason and reflection. Nothing,
said Eudoxus, can be better, more full, and more expressive than this your
comparison.

I have something yet to say, answered Cleander, of greater force, and much
more to the purpose; and which comes so naturally into a man's mind, who reads
the Provincial Letters with never so little attention, and without
prepossession, that, certainly, it could not have escaped your own thoughts and
reflection. Pascal does not at all keep his word with us. He undertakes to give
us the character of a policy particular to the Jesuits, as the most subtle and
crafty, that ever was invented or contrived by the wit of man: he promises to
make us see into it is inmost recesses, and find out the finest and most delicat
parts of this mystery; but how, I pray, does he go about it? no doubt one would
think very learnedly and profoundly: but alas! after all, he makes the Jesuits
choose, very wisely, means to arrive at their ends, which, generally speaking,
are common to theirs, with all other orders; with all other communities, and
with all Universities: and by consequence either do not prove, that these
Fathers are more subtle than others, or else, that others are, full as cunning
as they.

And to make plausible this diversity of Directors, of which some are easy and
complesant, others rigorous and severe, he has made the Jesuits the inventors
of the doctrine of probable opinions in Divinity; by which, says he, the
contrariety of decisions is not only permitted, but also made useful and
necessary.

That is not an ill thought, said Eudoxus, and this diversity of Directors, of
whom some determine severely, others loosely, seems very like truth, and
probable enuff according to the doctrine of probabilities, by which, very often
some do, in reality, decide the cases proposed, in a contrary manner to what
others do.

That is true, answered Cleander; but as ill luck would have it for Pascal, it
is too well known, that this doctrine is much older than the Jesuits: and that
it is so far, from being peculiar to them, that before it was decried and run
down, by the horrible, friteful figures, wherein it was represented, that is to
say, till within these thirty or forty years, it was taught every where, in all
the Schools of Christendom. Insomuch, that the Jesuits, Quaestio ^acti.
to free themselves from the imputation, have shown, by a book expressly
written, that this opinion, whatever it be, is no more an opinion of theirs,
than it is of the Divines of Sorbonne, or of those of Louvain, of the
Dominicans, of the Franciscans, and of all others; maintaining, and, in my
opinion fully proving, that they never taught any thing in this matter, but
what was taught, by the chief, and almost all the Doctors of these several
Schools and Universities. I will show you this book, whenever you will: for the
proof of this matter of fact, which is most certainly true, would carry us too
far away from our present business. In the mean time, give me leave, to make
this conclusion: that, if the doctrine of probable opinions, be, the secret and
essential point of the Jesuits politics, the Dominicans, the Franciscans, the
Augustins, the Sorbonne, the University of Louvain and all others, are to the
full, at least, as knowing as they, in matters of policy: and that, on one
side, they do the Jesuits too much honor, in giving them more wit and more
learning, than to all these famous Societies; and on the other, the greatest
injustice in the world, by making them, under this pretense, the sole authors
of the real or pretended corruption of Christian Morals.

To which I will add; that you shall not only find, in all these several
bodies, this wonderful foundation of the Jesuits policy, I mean the doctrine of
probable opinions, together with all that depends upon it; but I will also show
you, and, in the same way, that Pascal has made use of, with so much wit, and
so much charity to the Jesuits, that among the Divines of Sorbonne and of
Louvain, among the Dominicans and other Religious orders, the two sorts of
Directors, he mentions, the severe and the easy ones, are, without controversy,
to be found; and by substituting the names of these communities, instead of the
Jesuits, I will prepare you, by the fifth Provincial Letter, to hear their
panegyric, exactly like or equal to that, which Pascal has made for the
Society. I may perhaps retrench out of it, the story of John d'Alba, that of
the probable box on the ear at Compiegne, some strokes and touches of Imago
primi saeculi: but searching on a little farther, I shall not miss of enuff and
to spare, to make amends for this retrenchment. And I shall find very near as
much to divert my self upon this subject, as Pascal has done. I will make my
self the same sport, and with the same series of collections, out of several
authors, heaped up together, and disposed according to my own fancy; I will
draw the same consequencies, make the same comparisons, the same invectives,
and the same applications; and I will end with an address to the Dominicans, or
to others as Pascal has finished his thirteenth Letter with one to the Jesuits,
in these words. Let us then conclude, my Fathers, that since your probability
makes the good opinions of some of your authors unuseful to the Church, and
only useful to your politics, they serve but to show, by their contrariety,
your double heartedness, the insincerity of your dealings, which you have
plainly discovered by declaring to us, that you have some of your Divines, on
one side against murder, and that, on the other, you have many more eminent
Casuists for it: to the end you may have two ways to offer men, destroying
thereby the simplicity of the spirit of God, who curses all double minded
people, who provide for themselves two paths to walk in, Ve duplici cord, and
ingredienti duabus vijs.

The Jesuits, answered Eudoxus, have long since in their Apologies made this
observation, which effectually and irrefragably proves, if it be true, what you
intended to make out, that Pascal's way of arguing in this matter is not solid,
taking the word solid in it is common ordinary notion and acceptance. But it
seems the author of the paralelle has formed of it to himself a notion of much
greater extent or latitude. Perhaps as a member of the Academy he may have, or
pretend to have, a right over the signification of words. How weak soever the
arguments we treat of may be in themselves, the wit which made use of them has
given them some strength. Is it not to think and in some manner to write
solidly, to get directly to his end, and to know how to guide and conduct his
readers to it; to engage them in his interests, to inspire them with what
thoughts he pleases, and to make them say their author is in the right, and
that his adversaries are for certain in the wrong? has not Pascal got what he
aimed at; and obtained his design? he has made his book to be read by all the
world, and be believed by many; he has made, almost, every thing he has said in
this matter plausible and current. Exact truth was not the rule he followed; at
least in the point we now speak of. Christian charity, a word much made use of
in the Port Royal books, has a little suffered by it, and nothing can be
plainer, than that in this he has not acted by the strict laws of severe
Morals. But it has produced at least the effect he intended: for my part, I Will
call this being solid, if it were but to pleasure or compliment Mr. Perrault.
But to come to the point, the bottom of the matter, continues he, do you think
that Pascal was in earnest, and had a mind to be believed in all he said?
surely his only thoughts were to gratisy his friends, and gain himself a
reputation: this it was without doubt which made him so very desirous to divert
both himself and the public.

Pardon me, said Cleander interrupting him, you do not fully consider what
Pascal had in prospect: see what Wendrok says of it. Whereupon he opened and
read him the latter part of his first note upon the eleventh Letter, wherein he
speaks after this manner. To believe that Montaltius had no design in these
Letters, but merriment and sport, or to make men laugh at the Jesuits cost, and
divert the world by his witty writings, is to make an unjust and false judgment
of them. He proposed to himself a more serious, and a more holy end, and aimed
altogether at the Church and the Jesuits advantage.

Ay marry Sir, this is fine, good indeed, and very likely, answered Eudoxus
laughing, as if I did not know Wendrok and his friends, and understand their
meaning; 'twas, no doubt, for the good and benefit of the Jesuits, and in mere
charity to 'um, that they writ the Provincial Letters, and sent them about to
every body; that they first presented them to their Proselits for a fifth
Gospel; and that since, within these two years, their friends, the Religious of
**** ordered them to be read in the Pensioners Refectory; that they published
six or seven tomes of their practical Morals; and that in the Seminary of the
Diocese of **** this book was formerly recommended, to such as were to enter
into holy Orders, for their Spiritual Lectures; that they got all sorts of
libels against the Society to be sent from Japan and from China, from the
Philipine Islands, and from Paraquay; that they made the Jesuits Theater the
maddest, and as is said, the most extravigantly slanderous piece, that ever was
seen, pass under the name, and for the work, of a most holy and illustrious
Spanish Bishop; and that they still daily give themselves, upon every occasion,
a loose against these Fathers, endeavoring any how to destroy and subvert their
reputations; railing and inveighing bitterly against them, in their books, and
in all companys, and conversations. Saint Paul, in his enumeration to the
Corinthians of the effects of Charity, has forgot to make mention of any of
these kinds; which makes me often doubt, whether Jansenist Charity be of the
same species, or kind, with Christian Charity. And to speak my thoughts freely,
I never saw any thing more od, not to say more sacrilegious, than the union
they make of the charity inspired by the Holy Ghost, with that gall,
bitterness, and animosity, which, on all occasions, they show and express; and
which they endeavor to inspire into all mankind, both in private and in public.
I do assure you, that this very reflection, alone, would have hindered me from
closing with this party, from being drawn in, dup'd, or made one of their
cully's: and I am surprised to think, how men of wit could hope, or expect,
long, to blind or dazzle the world by this method. For, though it be mightily
corrupted, it has yet judgment enuff left, to discern and distinguish, whether
some things proceed from the spirit of God, or from malice and passion.

And as for me, adds Cleander, I never saw this admirable secret, of
sanctifying the most grievous injuries and invectives, practiced, on a hundred
occasions, by Mr. Arnauld and his friends, without being moved to laughter. I
am persuaded if Moliere had but brought a second Tartuffe upon the stage, he
would have given him this character; and, thereby have diverted the spectators
as much as by the first. But I plainly perceive, continued Cleander, that we
are fully agreed about the idea we have formed to our selves, of the scheme
Pascal has drawn of the Jesuits politics. You pardon Perrault his having called
it solid, since the author has obtained his end, and that he had the skill,
according to the design he had framed to himself, to make all he said pass for,
or, at least, appear, like truth; and at the same time to give the reader so
much pleasure and diversion, as to hinder him from reflecting upon the weakness
and vanity of his system: this I would have you pass by and allow me.

You will also grant me, that looking narrowly into things, this policy, so
particular, so mysterious, and, at the same time, so execrable, is a mere empty
fantome; which, taken out of the fine and advantageous cloths he had dressed it
in, has nothing in it even of probability; nor can have any, except in England
or in Holland, where a Jesuit and a wizard or a conjurer passes, among the
generality, for one and the same thing.

Your thoughts and mine, answers Eudoxus, do perfectly agree: but this being
supposed, cannot we now make, at least, upon this particular article, the same
reflections that the Marchioness of Sable did, of which you spoke in our former
conversation; and ask, with what conscience Pascal could divert himself and the
world, by a notion or idea, which however empty and groundless it appears, and
really is, to any one, that gives himself but a little trouble to examine it,
leaves notwithstanding a most frightful impression on the minds of the greatest
part of his readers? by what principle of charity, or honesty, has he
endeavored, in the following Letters, to fortify and strengthen this impression,
till he has given this idea root and footing, and made it familiar to all
people; and, afterward taking it for an undeniable truth, he has made use of
it, to enable him, to tear in pieces most unmercifully the reputation of so
considerable a body, as that of the Jesuits: for, as you very well observed a
little while ago, Pascals pleasanteries got more ground and credit, than
several at first thought they ever could or did deserve. From this hypothesis
or supposition of the Jesuits Plot to aggrandize their Society, he claims a
right, to say whatever he pleases; and makes them sacrifice all things even to
the very Gospel, to bring it about he makes use of it, to have this Society
looked upon, as the plague of the Church, and to make every thing they either
say or do be suspected. Upon this principle a case is ill decided by a Divine
of this Society, must not be allowed, as in another man, to be an effect of
human weakness, but a wilful crime, and a premeditated attempt against the
doctrine of Jesus Christ. They may pretend, but all in vain, that twenty of the
most eminent Divines of the Society were of a contrary opinion; that was
ordered, and done on purpose, for no other end, but to establish his system, of
the division of directors into two sorts, the one rigid and severe, the others
soft and complesant. Whatever course the Jesuits take to defend themselves,
Pascal still renews his attacks against them, and reinforces all by this common
place.

That is to say, adds Cleander, that this false system, which is taken for
granted in all the Provincial Letters, and from whence all that is besides
contained in them, derives it is force, is a most horrible calumny, and an
imposture carried on, and continued from one end to the other.

Why did not the Jesuits, answered Eudoxus, make this be perceived, when those
Letters were first published? this foolish notion, which upon the first serious
reflection falls to the ground, having been once removed, all the world after a
fit of laughter would have entertained no thoughts, but of indignation against
this Champion of severe Morals, and against those that had relaxed them,
perceiving plainly that their actions were quite contrary to the maxims which
they preached. Before the Jesuit went about to convince him, as they under took
to do, of his nine and twenty particular falsehoods and impostures, they ought
to have begun with this general and essential imposture. And this being once
proved, than which nothing was more easy, all the world would have been
prepared to receive the rest as they deserved: it would have ruined beforehand
the whole strength of Pascals replies, all which turn upon this hinge, as well
as his first accusations. The Jesuits not having soon enuff chased away this
sprite or phantome, it became a bugbear, to friten from them an infinity of
persons: and I confess to you, that, with this prepossession, I my self should
have found very little difference, between the direction of Jesuits, and the
direction of Antichrist

And it appears to me, that those who believed Pascal have not done enuff: for
upon supposition of a discovery made, of such a correspondence, and such a
plot, actually on foot among the Jesuits, against the Morals of our Savior,
they ought, every man of ^um, to be drowned, or treated, as convicted and
obstinat Jews are treated by the Spanish Inquisition: fire and faggot for such a
crime, well and clearly proved and made out, would have been by far too small a
punishment.

What a sentence is this you pronounce? says Cleander laughing: God defend the
Jesuits from falling under the hands of a true downright Jansenist, so severe
as you in his opinion. I am satisfied, you would not be long about the work, or
do it at twice, but be of the good Religious Spaniards humor, who, even while
Saint Ignatius was alive, said very unkindly, Vie de S^ Ignace.
That all the Jesuits from Perpignan to Seville ought to be burnt. Pascal was
not willing to carry things so far; it is true, that he said, very plainly, and
without mincing of the matter, that the Jesuits had plotted and concerted among
themselves, the destruction of Christian Morals, to the end their Confessionals
and their Churches might be well filled: that this was a settled premeditated
design; and that for the execution of this fine project, their Doctors and
Directors had, every one, their several parts marked and pointed out: but he
easily foresaw, that, upon his word alone, the work would not be presently
undertaken, he did not expect that this, at first, would be believed like an
article of faith; it was sufficient for his purpose, to make the thing
probable: and but only to doubt, or suspect it, was enuff, in the minds of many
honest Men, to produce the effect he aimed at: which was, to make them first
mistrust the Jesuits, and afterward to banish them their companies. More was
not necessary, for an infinity of people, who have no great good will for them,
to engage them to declaim aloud against the public disorders, or to bemoan, in
soft whispers in their friends ears, the general depravation of manners,
occasioned by the relaxation and corruption of the Society: and believe me,
those very declamations and bemoanings, alone, are sufficiently powerful, to
prepossess and fill peoples heads with groundless fancies, and obstinat
opinions; which was all that Pascal proposed to himself, or, at least, the
party by his means. After whom comes Wendrok, not raillying, like him, but
speaking, against the Jesuits, the most frightful injuries, malice could
invent; and persuading many, by the confidence alone of his assertions, to
believe that all he had said was true. As for my self, I have seen a well
governed community at Paris, and at Court a certain Lord, very pious and very
conscientious, suppose as a matter of fact, of which there could not be the
least doubt, that the Jesuits Morals, were loose and corrupted Morals: a truth,
say they, plainly shown and made out by the Provincial Letters, and by Wendrok.
Father ****, a very inwardly devout and good Religious man, has always
entertained me in this manner upon this subject. Mr. ****, a most virtuous and
Saintlike Priest, advised me to break off all commerce with the Jesuits.

What does all this prove, said Eudoxus, interrupting him, and almost angry,
but that Pascal is the most skilful, the most malicious, and the most dangerous
of all impostors? and that, by imposing upon the Jesuits a crime, as black and
grievous, as it is chimerical and morally impossible, he had wit enuff to make
plausible, so extravagant a calumny: and that he is guilty of all the false and
rash judgments, that have been, already, and still are, daily, made upon this
subject.

Although my thoughts, upon this whole matter, are almost the same with yours,
answered Cleander, yet would I not willingly declare them so plainly, and
without reserve. Pascal an impostor! that is an expression seldom made use of
toward him: he is commonly called, the illustrious and the admirable Mr.
Pascal.

Very well, replied Eudoxus, but yet this illustrious, this admirable Mr.
Pascal, whom you are somewhat shy and unwilling to call an impostor, was
treated in the Court of Justice, just as impostors are used to be. His
Provincial Letters were publicly burnt with infamy, by the judgment and order
of the Parliament of Province, declaring Them full of calumnies, falsehoods,
suppositions, and defamations: these are the express words of the sentence,
which you may read at the end of the Jesuits answers to the Provincial Letters.
You may also see at the end of the small collection made after the judgment of
the Parliament of Aix, the commendations given by the Archbishop of Mechlin to
those Letters; Approb. des Repons aux Provinc.
which he calls injurious, scandalous, and deceitful impostures, and graces
their authors with the title of insolent detractors and calumniators. I
remember, added Eudoxus, that turning over, lately, some old papers, I found
one concerning this subject, and lo here it stands upon this shelf; it is the
judgment given of the Provincial Letters, and Wendrok's notes upon them, by
certain Bishops of France and Doctors of Sorbonne, who, by the Kings command,
had had the examination of them.

We, the undernamed persons, appointed, by the order of the King, to give our
judgment, of a book, called the Provincial Letters of Lewis Montaltius, etc. do
certify and declare, that having carefully, and diligently examined this book,
we find Jansenius's heresies, condemned by the Church, contained and defended
therein: and that, not only in these Letters, but In the Notes also of William
Wendrok, and in the Disquisitions of Paulus Ireneus, thereunto annexed. That
this thing is so evident, that it cannot be denied, by any, who have either
read or understood this book: or, which is yet worse, who do not hold for
heretical, what the Popes, the Gallican Church, and the Paris Divines have
declared and condemned for heretical. We do further testify, that slander and
insolence are so natural to these three authors, that excepting the Jansenists,
they spare no body whatsoever: neither Popes, nor Bishops, neither the King,
nor his Ministers of State, neither the Divines of the University of Paris, nor
Religious Orders; and therefore we judge, that this book does deserve all the
punishments, appointed by law, for defamatory and heretical libels:

dated at Paris the 7th. of September 1660. HENRY DE LA MOTTE Bishop of Rennes.
HARDOUINE Bishop of Rhodez. FRANCIS Bishop of Amiens. CHARLES Bishop of
Soissons. CHAPELAS Curat of Saint James's, MOREL, BAIL, NICOLAI, GRANDIN,
SAUSSOY, DE GANCY, CHAMILLARD, DE LESTOCQ.


What say you to this, continues Eudoxus? I am of opinion, that if Pascals
friends had not been as kind to him, as he was to them, Pascal, the impostor,
would not have been an expression so much out of fashion, as it is at this day.
And I cannot but admire, that the good Fathers, the Jesuits, can suffer that
all this should be forgotten by the public.

Pascals friends, answers Cleander, do give out, that all these orders,
judgments, and censures were obtained, purely, by the credit, interest, and
intrigues of the Fathers of the Society.

They must of necessity say so, replied Eudoxus; what else could they possibly
say? but are we, I pray you, bound to believe them? although there had been no
other thing, in the Provincial Letters false, but this one fundamental article,
which of it self falls to the ground, the order of the Council of State, and
the decree of the Parliament of Province, and the Bishop of Mechlin's censure
would have been most just and equitable: and this very thing alone would have
been a strong prejudice against all the rest.

Nothing of prejudice, I beseech you, said Cleander, interrupting him: be but a
little patient; you seem too much disturbed: we have hitherto judged by pure
reason, and not by passion; let us continue to do so still. The Jesuits
politics, in this respect, is a mere chimera, a foolish fancy: Pascals system
has nothing in it of likelihood, or probability; if the Jesuits have corrupted
our Morals, it was not by concert or agreement with one another; and Pascals
Jansenist has not done prudently, in declaring, so strongly, in the fifth
Provincial Letter, against what they said to him, that the diversity of
decisions, among the Jesuit Divines, did not proceed so much, from a plot and
conspiracy, as from too great a liberty they all took, of saying whatever came
into their thoughts: he should have reserved for himself this loophole in case
of necessity: but, in spite of his teeth, notwithstanding all his evasions he
must have recourse to that at last. Let us then examine whether he be not more
sincere in the remainder, and whether the Jesuits cause be as good, and as easy
to be defended in the other points, as in this. Let whatever Pascal has said,
upon the empty and idle supposition of two kinds of Directors, go for nothing:
this is a childish fancy, and a perfect jest, without the least appearance of
truth. Let us not suffer our selves to be surprised, by these malicious and
artificial trics, which, having no solid foundation, subsists but in the air,
in the brains of whimsical men. Behold my Fathers, a further effect, a greater
secret, of your politics, and a more pernicious consequence of your wicked
designs; together with a hundred more such like discourses; all this is but
whipped cream, a fantastical bubble, which is far from being solid, and
signifies just nothing. Let us, if you please, begin first with the examination
of the article of probable opinions, the foundation and groundwork if you will
believe Pascal of the Jesuits policy. With all my heart, said Eudoxus: but the
matter is difficult and curious, and I know not whether we shall be able to
compass it, without the help and assistance of some others.

The Third Discourse.
CLeander, coming to Eudoxus's house, where they were to go on with their
conferences, found there the Abbot of *** a learned man, but free, openhearted,
and exceeding upright, about fifty years old, and one, who, in all his life,
could never endure to see men tric and deceive others: he could not comprehend,
how men could possibly be insincere, and could easily pardon all faults, but
that of double dealing; which astonished and vexed him so much, that he was
often tempted, with Molier's man-hater, to renounce and quit the world, to
avoid the vexation and displeasure of hearing a cheat and a liar commended, and
applauded at the expense of truth. Pascal had the honor of being esteemed by
this Gentleman for such a person. The wit, the quaint expressions, and the
facetious raillery, which he liked very well in other works, did not at all
move him in the Provincial Letters: he could not bear hearing them commended;
and he was wont to say, that the only praise the authors deserved, was such as
ought to be given to a skilful poysonner, who knew how to mix and prepare his
poison so artificially, that all the world should find the tasting of it
pleasant.

Eudoxus, who used to be sometimes very much delighted with the Abbot's zeal
for sincerity, had almost upon Cleander's coming in, put him into that humor:
he had only shown him the second tome of the Paralelle des Anciens and des
Modernes, and asked him, whether he had ever read that piece; he looked upon
the title, and having opened it at a place that was marked, he hit upon the
panegyric of the Provincial Letters; of which he had no sooner read three or
four lines, than he threw it down, saying, he neither had, nor ever would, read
that book: is it possible added he, with indignation, that the public will
never be revenged on these Letters, for their insolence, and the affronts they
put upon the Sorbonne Divines, our Religion and it is defenders; and that, after
this book has been condemned to the fire, both by the Ecclesiastic, and the
Secular tribunals, any one should dare, publicly, to give it such extravagant
praifes?

Cleander, who could not forbear laughing at the emotion and vexation wherein
he saw the Abbot: saluted him, and told him, that his resolution could not but
be very obliging to them two, who were then actually busy in drawing up an
indictment against the person he was so angry at. Eudoxus further telling him,
that he would do them a singular pleasure, to assist them with his notions and
knowledge in a matter, wherein they had great need of his help. But we love,
says he, to examine things calmly, without heat or passion: and therefore we
entreat you would a little moderate that zeal which has so much transported you.

What do you trouble your selves about? replied the Abbot briskly: moderation
is indeed necessary in Judges; and I perceive you two have a mind to make your
selves such in this cause. But as for my self, I am already fixed in the
matter. I have chosen my part, and have long since known, what I ought to
think, both of this book, and of it is author, and from this moment I do declare
my self the accuser and prosecutor both of the one and of the other: and a
little warmth in acting this part, will not perhaps be very unbecoming

This is the best in the world, answered Cleander; but, turning himself to
Eudoxus, he added: let us be upon our guard, and not suffer, that the esteem we
have for the Abbot, should make us too favorable to the Jesuits, or too averse
to Pascal.

I esteem the Jesuits, replied the Abbot; but it is not their interest which
encourages me to this undertaking, but only the love of oppressed innocence and
truth; and the consideration of the strange prepossession men have, in favor of
this book; wherein means are daily used to confirm thousands, who would quickly
come off, and quit their good opinion, if they would but reflect upon the
causes that produced this masterpiece of calumny. All the world knows, that
this work, is a work of recrimination. The Church had declared the Jansenists
heretics; it was afterward necessary they should make their adversaries
appear, at least, the corrupters of Morals. But tell me I pray what piece of
this large subject were you upon? we have yet met, but once, about this matter,
answered Eudoxus; and we have already done the Society justice, in a point of
great importance: it is about the liberty Pascal has taken, to make himself and
others sport with the system he has framed of the Jesuits politics; founded
upon a conspiracy between the Casuists, Directors, and Superiors of this
Society, against the Gospel and the Morals of our Savior, for the glory and
establishment of their Society, at the price of their own damnation, and the
damnation of an infinite number of other Souls. You may therefore reckon upon it,
that neither Cleander nor I, are to be dup'd, or foo^'d, upon Pascal's word,
into the belief of so incredible a thing as that, which has not appeared to us
to carry along with it, even the least shadow, or resemblance of truth.

How, replys the Abbot, do you think that ever Pascal himself believed it? or
that even Mr. Arnauld did? although that, by an excess of honesty, this Gentleman
always seemed, almost in all his books, to take for granted the truth of this
matter of fact, the most chimerical and fantastical, that ever was invented?

That which we are now to examine, continued Eudoxus, is the article of probable
opinions; which Pascal has made the foundation of all the Jesuits policy, and
which he calls the A, B, C, of their Morals. It is by that, he endeavors to
give some color to that pleasant division of accommoding and severe Directors:
in which point, if you will believe him, they are agreed among themselves.
Nothing is now spoken of but the doctrine of probability; this is the common
subject of prattle and discourse among the devotes and among the libertines.
Some rage and storm against it, others make a jest of it, and very few dare
defend it. The very Curat, of my little Village, spent lately above half the
time of his Homily or Sermon, in arguing against the doctrine of probable
opinions. In a word, the storm and outrage against it, is grown, in a manner,
not only violent, but universal: and all the faults, that are found, all the
ills, that are said of it, are commonly put to the Jesuits account; who, in the
mean time, are silent, and say nothing: you would do us no small pleasure to
tell us your thoughts of this matter.

What I think of it, answers the Abbot, is, that a man, who is never so little
skilled in this thing, needs but know how to make use of the first principles
of common sense and reason, to see, clearly, the great dishonesty of Pascal,
the injustice he has done his adversaries, and the ill ways he has taken, to
obtain the end, he drove at, which was to decry and run them down, and make
them odious to all the world.

What terrible propositions are these you advance? said Cleander. If I do not
prove them, answered the Abbot, I am content to be accounted by you, and by all
honest men, for a knave and a calumniator: and if you can justify Pascal in
this point, I do engage, notwithstanding the war, to go away to morrow morning,
to search for Mr. Arnauld, in Flanders or in Holland, that I may, before him,
solemly profess and declare my self a Jansenist. In the mean time will you but
hear me make out what I have asserted?

After, that Cleander and Eudoxus had a while jested, with the Abbot, about his
voyage to Flanders and Holland, he began, in earnest, to prove, what he had
advanced.

The injury, said he, that Pascal has done the Jesuits, does not consist, in
the reproaching them with the doctrine of probable opinions: it is chiefly in
this, that he charges that doctrine upon them alone, although they have said
nothing in it, but what has been said by other Societies, even before their's
was instituted, or ever thought of. For what can one think, when they see a
man, by printed writings, spread, not only in Paris, but also all over France,
citing and dragging the Jesuits before the public Tribunal, and crying out for
judgment and justice, against them, in particular and by name; assuring us that
he has discovered the source and secret of all their pernicious Maxims; and
pretending to convince the Divines, the Directors and Superiors of this body,
of introducing, teaching, and practicing a doctrine, which authoriseth the most
excessive irregularities; suffers men to enjoy and gratify, freely, the most
brutal of their appetites and passions; and which turns the pure laws of
Christianity into the filthy sensual Religion of Mahomet: calling them to an
account, in a most pathetic manner, for the many souls they corrupt and damn
every day: and, lastly, speaking of these terrible opinions, as the particular
and specific doctrine of the Society; and beating, every where, an allarum
against the Jesuits, and with so great a hubbub, that one could not but think,
that all the Doctors and Divines, in Christendom, were to be encouraged to a
Croisade, a war of Religion, against the most dangerous and most destructive
enemy of Christianity. What idea, what character was there then given of the
Jesuits? what honesty and what justice was there in all this proceeding; if it
be true, that the Jesuits are as innocent as all other Orders and Divines; or
if these are full as much, or more criminal than the Jesuits?

Although the doctrine of probable opinions were as pernicious as Pascal pretends,
and as he has persuaded a world of people to believe, by the false glosses and
expositions he has given of it in his Letters, yet would the Jesuits crime have
been very much lessened, if the reader had been advertised, that this doctrine
was not particular to them, but the common doctrine of all the Catholic Schools,
of the Divines, both of Louvain and of Paris. The world, upon this single
advertisment, would, perhaps, have suspended their judgments concerning even
the quality of this doctrine: and seeing it painted in such horrible colors,
would have been first fully satisfied, before they gave their opinions, of the
sincerity of him that drew it is picture, or made the report. And, without
doubt, men could not have been so unjust, as to suffer that all the curses,
which so abominable an error had deserved, should fall upon the Jesuits alone.
They would not have laid the whole burden on their backs, but at least have
given others their share; and, perhaps, would have favored, if not pardoned
them, for having sinned but by the example of those, whose rank, profession and
learning, had gained them the title and quality, of Doctors and Masters. But
that, in the language of Port Royal, the loose Morals, and the Jesuits Morals
should become synonimous expressions, and signify one and the same thing to an
infinite number of people: that the Libertins and heady obstinat Devotes, and
often the envious and interessed, should so understand them in their
conversations, in their books and in their pulpits; and, lastly, that the cabal
should obtain their end, of distinguishing their own doctrine, and giving it an
extraordinary luster, by opposing it, to that of all the Catholic Divines,
whose footsteps the Jesuit Fathers have but trod in, is in truth an injustice
one cannot see, without horror and indignation.

Mr Abbot, said Eudoxus interrupting him, no body can agree better than you do;
but the proposition you lay down, must be clearly proved; if what you say be
true, that the Jesuits doctrine is no other, than what has been taught in all
the Catholic Schools of the Church, not only Pascal, is very unjust, in making
all the blame of it light upon the Jesuits, but also, as you have very well
observed, the notice, or previous knowledge of that alone, would have made men
think, that this doctrine in it self, is not so bad as he endeavors to make the
world believe; but this is a matter of fact, for the making out of which, we
shall have need of a complete library.

If I had foreseen, replied the Abbot, this occasion of defending so good a
cause, I should have brought in my pocket all the library we shall have use
for; which is but a small book of forty or fifty pages, entitled Quaestio
sacti, which plainly shows, that the doctrine of probability, is not a doctrine,
particular to the Jesuits. The author recounts, and runs over all the most
famous Universities of Europe, as well as the Schools of all Religious Orders;
and there shows, that of all the authors, not Jesuits, who had treated, or
touched, even by the by, the question of probable opinions, of whom he makes a
very long list; he shows, I say, that to the year 1659, when he made this small
piece, there was but one of them all, by name Antony Perez, who went a little
astray in one point, from the common doctrine of all others; of which very
point, in particular charity to the Jesuits, they would fain give them alone
the whole honor. He further adds, and proves it admirably well, that the most
learned Divines of the Society have, by common consent, restrained this
doctrine; which some preceding Doctors seemed to have extended too far: and at
last quotes a Jesuit author Comitolus, for the only man, who had attacked and
fallen upon the opinions of all other Divines in the several parts of this
matter: and from whom he pretends, that Wendrok has taken his strongest
arguments, for the refutation of the doctrine of probability.

From all which, the author, of this little work, concludes two things: the
first, that it is against all the laws of equity, to oblige the Jesuits to
justify and make good an opinion, which was common to them, with all other
Divines: the second, that if it be a glory, to have absolutely declared against
this doctrine, this glory, till then was particular, and only due to the
Jesuits: and he complains of Wendrok, that being so much obliged to this
Comitolus, he did not do him the favor, when he quoted him, to give the reader
notice, that he was a member of the Society. You are very lucky then Mr. Abbot,
said Cleander, for I have in my pocket this little book you so much value; and
having spoken of it to Eudoxus, in our former conference, I have now brought it
with me to show him: and here it is.

The Abbot immediately took the book into his hands, and running it over with
Eudoxus, he presently counted nine or ten Bishops, that is to say, almost all
of this character, who have handled these matters, since the time of Saint
Antonin, who is comprehended in this number: and he also read him the passages,
and the names of the books, and the number of the pages, whence these things,
relating to this subject are taken. Afterward he made him read the opinions of
three famous Doctors of Sorbonne, who have published whole bodies of Divinity.
Mr. Gamache, Isambert, and Dural; to whom this author has added Mr. Bail, a
Doctor of the University of Paris, and subpenitenciary of the Cathedral Church
of that City; and at last he showed him in the following chapters the unanimous
agreement upon this point, of all the Thomist Doctors, Dominicans, and of the
Scotist Franciscans, and other Religious Orders, together with the Universities
of Louvain, Salamanca and Alcala, etc.

If it be so, said Eudoxus, there never was any doctrine, less particular to the
Jesuits, than this doctrine of probable opinions. But Mr. Abbot, added he, have
you your self seen all these passages and quotations confirmed? and have you
compared them with the text in the original authors quoted?

As to this, answered the Abbot, I will say three things: the first, that the
author of this little treatise is Father Dechamps, a Jesuit, a very exact and
sure writer, a man honored for his virtue with the esteem of the most
illustrious persons of the Kingdom, and of such of the very Jansenists
themselves, as know him: the second, that nothing has been written to prove
these quotations false, now for above thirty years, since the book was
published, which I am very confident would not have been omitted, had the
author given the least ground for it. I know but one Divine, a Dominican,
called Father Baronius, that objects, weakly enuff, to Father Dechamps some
circumstances, which signify nothing to the main essential point in hand,
concerning the manner wherein it is proposed and maintained by this Jesuit; the
third is, that of this great number of passages, I my self have examined and
found at least thirty of them true, of which I can speak with certainty and
assurance. I will show them you, when ever you will, in two or three librarys
belonging to some communities in Paris; where we shall also find some part of
those which have not yet fallen under my hands.

Eudoxus having in his library the three Paris Doctors and some Thomists, they
immediately without further delay fell to the examining the first, every of them
taking one of them in hand to search for the passages quoted in this little
book.

The Abbot, having read them very often, knew the precise pages, therefore
opening that volume of Isamberts, where he treats of Saint Thomas's Prima
secundae, showed them the question of probable opinions, handled from page 133
to page 140, there this methodical Divine gives first the definitions of the
terms, and tells us what a probable opinion is, and what a more probable
opinion: after which he puts the question in the second article; Whether it be
lawful to follow a probable conscience, or a probable opinion: which question
he himself thus answers. When our conscience tells us, that it is probably
lawful and honest, to do a thing, we cannot by doing that thing be guilty of
any sin: this, adds he, is the common opinion of all Divines: and then he
propounds a second proposition. When there are, says he, two opinions, equally
probable, touching the lawfulness of doing any thing, one may safely follow
which of the two he pleases.

In the following article he himself makes this objection of these two
opinions, one is, that the thing is forbidden, the other, that it is permitted:
the first is safe, because one cannot sin mortally by following it; but the
second is not certain. I answer, adds he, that it is lawful to follow the least
sure: and I prove it thus.......

See the title of his fourth article. When there is a dispute about the doing
or not doing of a thing, and that there are two probable opinions thereupon, is
it lawful, to quit that which is more probable, and to follow that which is
less probable? he thus resolves this question.

When there are two such probable contrary opinions, that the one is more
probable than the other, it is lawful to leave the more probable, and follow
that which is probable.

After this he propounds some difficulties, and in particular this rule of law.
That in doubtful cases one is to take the surest side. He answers, That one
must distinguish, and not confound doubt with opinion, and directs his reader
to the precedent article, where he made a more full explanation of the sense,
wherein that maxim is to be understood.

Lastly in the sixth article, number. 8. When there are, says he, two opinions,
one probable, the other more probable, and that this also is more safe, and the
other less safe, about my obligation of doing a thing that relates to my self:
I am not obliged by the charity which I ow my self, to act by the more probable
and more safe opinion; but I may without sin, quit the more safe opinion, and
follow that opinion which is probable, tho less safe; as before I have shown.

Certainly, said Eudoxus, after he had read this passage, Father Dechamps has,
not only, not made Isambert say too much, but has even forgot a great deal of
what he had written.

This is not yet all, answered the Abbot; let us see what this Doctor says,
upon the consequences or dependances of the doctrine of probabilities. Whereupon
he read the fifth article: where the author demands; whether a Doctor,
consulted in a case of conscience, may answer according to the probable
opinion, and not according to the more probable, although he himself were of this
last opinion: after he had cleared and expounded the several senses or
meanings, wherein this question might be taken, he answered. That a Doctor thus
consulted, was to consider the circumstances of the matter, which may happen to
be such, that he may not only answer according to the less probable opinion,
against the more probable, but that also it might be imprudent to do otherwise.

Let us go on a little further, continued the Abbot, and read the eighth and
ninth article. The title of the first was. Is it lawful to act against ones own
opinion, and follow that of others? the meaning of this article is, etc.
Isambert adds. Those that hold, that this is lawful, of whose opinion I am, do
follow the common doctrine, which is not that of Adrian, but is the opinion of
almost all Saint Thomas's Interpreters.

The title of the ninth article is. Whether a man be sometimes obliged to
follow the probable opinion of others, contrary to his own, which also is
probable.

The answer is, that there are some cases, wherein it is not only lawful, to
act, against one's own opinion, but also where a Man is bound in conscience, to
act according to the probable opinion of another, contrary to his own, tho this
also be supposed probable? and such may be the case of a Confessor, that hears
the confession of a penitent, whose probable opinion, upon some points of his
confession, is contrary to his own: and that also of an inferior, commanded by
his superior to do a thing probably lawful, but which, in the opinion of the
inferior, is not probably lawful. The Confessor is obliged, according to
Isambert, to follow the opinion of his penitent, and the inferior, that of his
superior.

And take notice, adds the Abbot, that Isambert quotes Saint Antonin for his
opinion, only with this restriction, that if the Confessor be the penitent's
Pastor, he is obliged to comply with the penitents probable opinion, and
absolve him; but if the penitent be not of his flock, one of his parish, he may
then refuse to give him absolution.

That which you now say, answered Eudoxus, seems to me a little hard: but the
authority of Saint Antonin, and the reasons with which Mr. Isambert supports
his opinion, persuades me, at least, to believe, that it is not so easy, as one
may think, to give a positive judgment in these matters. As far as I see,
continued he, if Pascal had but taken the fancy in his Provincial Letters, to
make Mr. Isambert speak in the name of the Sorbonne, instead of the good Jesuit
that speaks in the name of the Society, he would have found matter enuff to
have made him act the same kind of part.

He might have made, replied the Abbot, if he had had a mind to it, even Saint
Thomas himself say as ridiculous things, as those he has put into the Jesuits
mouth: for this, it would have been enuff to have only propounded, and
handsomely put into order, several points of this learned Saints doctrine, as he
has done the Jesuits: without setting down the proofs, the restrictions, the
explications, and the necessary precautions for making the practice of them
lawful. But I will yet further suppose, that if a libertin would make a
collection of all the false propositions, that have slipped from the holy
Fathers, and give besides to some of their other expressions, the ill sense of
which they are capable, mangle and dismember some passages, and leave out, or
put in, here and there, a few words, he might make a book of them, much bigger
than the Provincial Letters: and might as justly entitle it. The Religion and
Morals of the Fathers as a certain book was formerly called, The Moral Divinity
of the Jesuits, of which the Provincial Letters are but extracts, enlarged
upon. And another of a much greater extent which has been since published under
the name of The Jesuits Morals. And which was also publicly burnt at Paris, in
the year 1670, upon the testimony of several of the Doctors of Sorbonne, for a
scurrilous defamatory libel, full of impostures, calumnies, falsifications and
heresies, etc. it was, as is said, the work of the deceased Doctor Perrault,
Brother to your Perrault the author of Parallele de anciens and des Modernes.

I am no longer astonished, said Cleander, that the Provincial Letters should
have put this man into such raptures and extravagant fits of enthusiasme: both
the Brothers were I perceive possessed and animated by the same kind of spirit.
But let us I pray, said the Abbot, return to our business. The question, at
present, is not whether the doctrine taught by Mr. Isambert, be good or bad
doctrine: the merit and reputation of this great Divine ought, at least, to
oblige us to suspend our judgment a while. The point we are now upon, and, by
what you see with your own eyes, is most certain, is, that the Sorbonne, as
learned and as Catholic then as at this day, heard, without horror, a doctrine,
daily instil'd from their chairs which being found in the Jesuits books they
would make pass for a dangerous and cursed doctrine. But give me leave, and I
will, in a moment, find the places you seek for in Mr. Du-val and Mr. Gamache.

I have found this in Mr. Gamache, said Cleander; it is in the 155 page, and
not in 153 as Father Dechamps Printer has placed it.

His first assertion is. That in the court of conscience a man is not obliged
to follow the more probable opinion, it is enuff to follow an opinion
absolutely probable, approved by learned men, till such time as the Church
declares against it, or that the Divines reject and banish it from their
Schools. Navar. Medina. But, in the mean time, one must take care, not to give
scandal to the weak, by his exterior actions and must likewise have a regard to
custom.

Who are these weak, said Eudoxus interrupting him, are they not the
Jansenists, who are so much scandalis'd at this doctrine? O my God answered the
Abbot, the Pharisaic scandal, which in Divinity they oppose to the scandal of
the weak, is, much more to be feared for them. You are always severe and ill
humor'd toward the Jansenists, replied Cleander, but suffer me, I pray you, to
make an end of this passage, there are but two words more in it.

His second assertion is. That the Confessor, whether the proper Pastor, or one
deputed by him, may absolve his penitents against his own opinion, when they
are of an opinion both less certain and less safe; provided it be a probable
opinion and backed with the authority of some Catholic and learned authors; and
in this case, he not only may, but is also bound to give them absolution.

Here is certainly enuff of this, said Eudoxus, let us see, whether Mr. Du-val
will say as much. Here I have the place ready; it is in his treatise of human
actions. q. 4. a. 12. p. 115. in the paragraph entitled quid agendum sit in
conscientia opinativa. Where he has, almost word for word, the same expressions
which Mr. Gamache has made use of.

The second conclusion is, that in the Court of conscience a man is not obliged
to follow the more probable opinion, but it is sufficient to follow one, that
is probable, and approved by able and learned persons, although contrary to the
sense of other learned men; which yet is to be understood with some
restriction: that is to say, that this opinion is no more to be followed, if
the Church determine the contrary, or the Divines banish it from their Schools.
It is the opinion of Medina and Navar in cap. siquis de paenit. Where they
positively teach, that there is no obligation, to follow the more safe opinion,
and that it is enuff to follow an opinion which is safe.

Whilst Eudoxus, with Cleander, was reading the remaining part of Du-val's
doctrine, about probable opinions, the Abbot meeting with Mr. Bail's book de
triplici examine spoke to them in these words. Let us, I pray you, do this
Doctor of Paris also the honor of consulting him, he was subpenitentiary of our
Lady's Church, a man, much valued, and very fit for his employment; thus he
writes upon this subject. Although many do universally teach in all parts of the
Church, that one may, in conscience, safely follow the less probable opinion;
it seems to me notwithstanding that this doctrine ought to be limited and
restrained to the matter of precepts, and not extended to the matter of
Sacraments. These words are in the 47 page of his fifth edition de examine
paenitentium. You understand what he would be at. He pretends, that a man may
not follow the less probable opinion, in a doubt relating to the matter of
Sacraments, for some particular reasons, but only when the matter doubted of,
relates to precepts, or commands, or to the knowledge, whether such or such a
thing be lawful or not lawful.

But let us see what he says in the foregoing page, where he speaks like a wise
man, who perceived, that this doctrine might be mistaken and do mischief, by
accounting an opinion probable, that was not probable; but who, at the same
time, shows himself persuaded, that an opinion, when certainly probable, may be
followed: For which cause, said he, it seems to me, that the doctrine of
probability, which is become the common doctrine, has not been yet cleared and
disentangled from difficulties, as much as the importance of the matter does
require and deserve. I wish some able Divines would take the pains, to consider
and resolve all the intricacies and objections which attend it. Not that I am
not persuaded, but that he who follows a probable opinion, go's a sure way, how
convenient soever it may appear: for that way is sure, which makes us avoid
sin, and any opinion, which is truly probable, tho the less probable of two,
will notwithstanding secure us from sin. I do hold, and am persuaded, that a
man is freed before God from sin, by following a probable opinion, and that he
cannot be thereby guilty, even, of a venial sin. What say you now to this?

That which I say to it, answered Cleander, is, that, most certainly, Pascal
and those who furnished him with memoirs studied only among the Jesuits, and
had read no other but their Divines. Besides Mr. Arnauld could not possibly
have seen the Provincial Letters before they were published. For with what
conscience could he suffer the Jesuits to be defamed, for the authors of a
doctrine, he himself saw publicly taught in Sorbonne, by the Professors of his
own time? but for his having since endeavored, as he still daily does, to make
these Letters gain credit, be more and more valued, and their contents
improved, to the prejudice of the Jesuits, there must surely be some strong
reasons we are ignorant of: for extraordinary persons, who exceed the common
rate of men, and are engaged in mighty matters, as the heads or leaders of a
great party, whose reputation they are to support, may possibly have, for
themselves, some particular rules of conscience, which all the world have not a
right to follow.

What, said the Abbot, after such evident matters of fact, as these we have
read, will you not plainly own as I do, that Pascal, Arnauld, and all other
heads of the party who in this, and things of like nature, cannot sin through
ignorance, are downright cheats and perfect hypocrites, that abuse the public
credulity, malicious and envenomed men against their adversaries, who spare
nothing they can think of, to destroy their reputation? to what end are all
these shiftings, does not the thing speak of it self, and do not I plainly
perceive what your thoughts are?

One must not always say what he thinks, answered Cleander, and Eudoxus has yet
said less of the matter than I.

I am almost angry, replied Eudoxus, at this wicked Abbot: who has turned all
my notions topsie-turvie; I was in a very good humor, and well disposed to make
you and my self some sport with these good Fathers, the Jesuits, upon the
subject of probabilities; and now I begin to feel some remorse of conscience,
for the rash judgments I formerly made, a thousand times, of them.

I have not yet done with you, said the Abbot. I have still matter enuff to
show you, to increase your scruples: but before I come to that, or make you see
that the Thomists, the Scotists, and almost all other Divines, speak upon this
point, the language of the Sorbonists, and have, with them, and the Jesuits, an
equal right, to share in the fine title of the corrupters of Morals. I will
read you an admirable and remarkable passage of Wendrok upon this occasion, in
his notes on the Provincial Letters. You know, that these notes were read,
corrected and approved, by Pascal himself; reach me down I pray you Wendroks
book.

The Jesuits, continued the Abbot, made loud complaints of the injustice done
'um, by designing to make them, alone, answerable, for all the real, or
pretended relaxations in Divinity. Them I say, who taught nothing in Morals,
but the common doctrine, and who, being the last comers, did but tread in the
paths traced out, by those that went before them. wendrok in proloquio.
Upon this Wendrok makes a large common place, and pronounces this fine
sentence. That having partners does not excuse a crime: and afterward adds.
Pascal would have been well employed indeed, and spent his time to good
purpose, in gathering together, and reading so many impertinent books, to find
out, whether the Jesuits only were wicked and infamous fellows, An soli
Jesuitae flagitiosi fuerint. So Mr. Nicole expresses himself in latin. Although
the Jesuits, continued he, had taken their relaxations from some others, yet
notwithstanding, in reason, they ought to be reputed the authors of them. Why?
because, that these pernicious doctrins had layn hid in some corner of a
library, known to very few, and, by consequence, could not do much hurt: but
the Jesuits have drawn them out of their lurking holes, and preached them upon
the house tops; introduced them into Princes Courts, to private men's houses,
the Courts of Judicature and the Magistracy. Behold, added the Abbot, the
writings of an infinity of Divines put into the number of impertinent books,
and the Doctors and Professors of Sorbonne, accounted men of no value or
consideration: their Divinity School compared to that of the Jesuits, is but
like a small Village in comparison of Paris, and what their famous and most
illustrious Doctors have taught, both by word of mouth, and by prints, is like
a chip in pottage and does neither good nor harm.

Let us proceed to other things, said Eudoxus interrupting him: this is really
very insolent and extravagant.

The Abbot said no more upon this article, but contented himself with this
first victory, in favor of truth, and a right sense of things, in opposition to
calumny and a foolish obstinat opinion. For Eudoxus, as naturally just as he
was, was still a little headstrong and the more, that Cleander, who had read
the Divines, and perceived that the Abbots reflections might stand them in good
stead, in the examination they had undertaken to make, judged fit to take the
advantage of it. Mr. Abbot, said he to him, we must not stand still in so fair
a road: let us go on I pray, and tell us your thoughts and all you know of this
matter.

With all my heart, said the Abbot, and I will propose to you a second matter
of fact, for the truth of which, I will, upon the hazard of my honor, be
answerable; it is, that Pascal and his friends have made of probable opinion a
mere scarcrow, a man of straw, for the pleasure and the ease of fighting it,
with the greater advantage, and of making the Jesuits father a monstrous
opinion which never was their own.

For at last, by the favor and assistance of these opinions which Pascal
combats, Let. 5.
One Doctor, if people will believe him, may turn and wind men's consciences,
Let. 6.
backwards and forwards, just as he pleases, Let. 5.
and always securely: make new rules of Morals. A Christian may without any
hazard estrange himself from the rules, wendrek in not. ad epist. 5.
which the Scripture, the Councils and the Fathers have prescribed us; and an
infidel and a heretic may safely continue in their false Religion. This,
without doubt, is very horrible, and cursed be the poisoned fountain of a
doctrine, so fatal to Christianity. But who does Pascal and his translator aim
at? for I pray observe, what are the two general conditions, that the Jesuits
do require, to make an opinion probable, and that a Divine may hold it for
such? first, it must not be contrary to the rules of faith; nor, in general,
contain any thing opposite to the truths received by the Church, nor be contrary
to evident and right reason. In the second place, it must be supported with
good reasons, and not lightly undertaken to be defended, against the common and
ordinary opinion of Doctors. These certainly are bounds, which limit and
restrain a Casuist, if any one should happen to desire it, from being able to
make New rules of Morals. How is it possible for men, that take for a rule this
notion, which the Jesuits give in their definitions, of a probable opinion, To
go astray without danger from the maxims, which the Scripture, the Councils,
and the Fathers have marked out for us? how can a heretic or an infidel
continue safely in his false Religion? are the truths, received, and allowed of
by the Church, different from those, which the Scripture, the Fathers and the
Councils teach us? or can any men, respect, or set a value on the first,
without taking the second for a rule?

If they should say, that the Jesuits have not observed these rules, nor
followed their own definitions, and could prove their having done so, without
cutting off and falsifying their passages, or stiching several of them
together; which, being joined, seem to signify just contrary, to what they
really signify, when they are severally read in their proper places; I should
be one of the first to oppose and condem them. But let them not say, that their
principles are monsters, which bring forth other monstors: nor from the silly
things, that Pascal has made his Jesuit speak, in his fifth and sixth Letters,
draw, as he does, conclusions, as impertinent and as extravagant, as they are
false and wicked.

Eudoxus did, in this also, approve the Abbot's reasoning; but yet desired, he
would prove the definition he had given of a probable opinion: for Wendrok,
says he, disputes the thing, and very few in the world are persuaded, that the
Jesuits principles in this matter, are so restrained, limited and narrow.

The reason is, answered the Abbot, because most people read only the
Provincial Letters, and the translator of these Letters, and that either they
will not, or commonly cannot consult the Jesuits books. An other reason is,
they do not know, that Wendrok, in disputing this matter of fact, is, not
sincere; and I will immediately convince you of it. I have in my closet some
extracts, upon this subject, drawn by my self, out of the most famous Jesuit
Divines: I Will step home and fetch them.

The Abbot, who dwelt hard by, being gone out, Cleander and Eudoxus began to
make many reflections. With all our love for truth, said Eudoxus, I know not,
whether we should have been able, without the Abbot's help, to have got over
all these rubs; since Pascal and Wendrok have so imbroil'd and perplexed
things, and that the matter it self is so hard, to be clearly discussed, and
that the too strait-lac'd and overstrain'd Morals are supported, by such
plausible and specious maxims; when on the contrary, the truly Christian Morals
are built upon maxims, of which some appear very strange and unfit to be
followed or received before they are well weighed and considered, which is hard
to be done by common understandings: these Gentlemen knew very well, how to
take the advantage, by the opposition they have made between the one and the
other. Moreover, they speak with so bold and confident an air, that one is,
almost, afraid to doubt of what they say: and they have so trained up, and
accustomed a world of people to talk as they do, that their most unlikely and
improbable paradoxes are, almost, become the public common opinion.

It was not only, answered Cleander, the difficulty of the matter, nor some
outward appearances, which they knew how to improve, that gave them so much
advantage over the Jesuits. These Fathers did, in truth, make answers which
were sufficiently strong and solid; but so flat and ill put together (I speak
of those which came out first) that there was no comparison between one of
Pascals Letters, and the First answer to the Jansenists Letters. He got thereby
such a superiority over them, that he no more looked upon them, as adversaries
he was still fighting with, but as despicable people, baffled, foild, and
thrown to the ground, trampling them under foot with equal scorn and contempt.

It is very true, said Eudoxus, that the Gentlemen of Port Royal gained
wonderfully by this weakness: but is it possible, that the Jesuits of those
days had no body that could write?

Father le Moyne, answered Cleander, was still living, and I am surpised, they
did not oppose him to Pascal: this Father had an excellent fancy and a world of
wit: and his way of writing, was lively, smart and florid: he had, besides, a
good reputation among the most ingenious and best accomplished persons: and the
apologetic manifest, which he writ several years before against the book,
called La Theology Morale des Jesuits, was as much in vogue, as his
Curry-comb for the Jansenist Pegasus.

Perhaps, replied Eudoxus, the Society did believe, he was not like to outdo or
equal Pascal's style, at once so easy, and so delicat. For Father le Moyne's
great fault was, that his words were not well chosen, or very proper, that he
used not to dress, set out and embellish his thoughts, with various, neat, and
quaint expressions: that he was always witty, but never endeavored, to express
himself plainly, or familiarly: and it may be, he himself did not think, he was
an equal match for him, in this kind of combat, and therefore was not willing
to engage. But whatever the matter was then, it is plain the Jesuits do not, now
want, store of good writers, and that they knew how to be gainers by their
first defeat. Within ten or eleven years after the Provincial Letters were
published, there came forth a Letter to a Lord at Court..........

The author of that is known, said Cleander, interrupting him, and the man of
the world the Society ought, at that time, to have set up in opposition to
Pascal. He understood raillery very well, and would not have been troubled or
vexed as the Jesuits then were; but would have given him as good as he brought,
a Rowland for his Oliver, and have answered him in the same tone and language.
Had this been done, the people would, at least, have compared the Letters and
the Answers: whereas in those days they hardly regarded what became of the
Jesuits. But for these nine or ten years past, they have both defended
themselves and attacked their adversaries, with vigor: La Detense des noaveaux
Chrestiens and des Missionnaires do la Chine.
and without speaking of The defense of the new Christians and the Missioners
of China, which gave the party a wound that still bleeds: you may remember that
upon the subject of The Philosophic sin, there were four or five small books
made, in behalf of the Jesuits, which were extremely well received, and with
good reason: Peche Philosophique.
for they fell upon Mr. Arnauld, and his friends just where they should, where
they lay most open, caught them fast, and would not let go their hold, but
still pursuing their advantage, they did not only fully disprove them, but also
took them up roundly, and told them their own to some purpose: bringing them
always back to certain unanswerable points: as for example, to the submission
which they ow, but do not pay, to the lawful powers, and to some notorious
palpable falsifications, of which they were convicted, beyond the possibility
of a reply. All this is inconvenient for these Gentlemen, who love not to be
upon the defensive, and who find it much easier to attack others, than to
defend themselves. But now concerning the Jesuits, who ventured to write
against Pascal, what think you of Father Annat; the author of the book called
Jansenist sincerity, La bonne ^oy des Iansenistes.
and to whom the seventeenth and eighteenth Provincial Letters are directed?

Father Annat, answered Cleander, was, in my opinion, an excellent wit: and the
Jesuits have published nothing better, than what was written by him, upon the
matters which were then in dispute. This honest good man (who besides these two
virtues, possessed that also of modesty, in the highest perfection possible)
had a tallent for writing, even in French, if he had a little more applied
himself to the study of our language; there fell from his pen, from time to
time, as fine, as lively, as pleasant and agreeable strokes as ever I saw in my
life.

I am of your opinion, said Eudoxus; and without saying any thing of his
virtue, which I have heard commended, even by this very party, I have found
him, as you have done, very exact in his judgment, and sometimes to express
himself with great quaintness and raillery, which, let me tell you, is a thing
very rare and extraordinary for a School Divine.

Cleander and Eudoxus were entertaining one another in this manner, when the
Abbot returned: and took out of his letter case, a piece which justified the
matters of fact he had asserted. This was a collection, of passages, concerning
the doctrine of probable opinions, extracted out of the books of several Jesuit
Divines, and, especially, out of those which Pascal in his Letters treats so
very scurvily.

My paper, says he, begins very properly with reference to the business in
hand: it is out of Layman, whom Wendrok quotes in his notes upon the fifth
Provincial Letter, to show, that the Jesuits were in the wrong, when they
complained that their doctrine was altered, on purpose to make it odious: he
ought to be satisfied, that we govern our selves, in this matter, by the
testimony he himself gives us, of the matter of fact. These are this Jesuits
own words.

A probable opinion, according to the common notion, may be defined. Layman.
tra. 1. cap. 5. parag 2. number. 6.
An opinion which is not certain, but which, notwithstanding, is founded upon a
considerable authority, or upon some important reason: and an opinion ought to
be judged, supported by a considerable authority, when it is, at least, the
opinion of a learned, and an honest man. Wendrok cites only this place in
Layman, to show, that the Jesuits had no reason to complain of the consequences
drawn from their principles: from whence it was concluded; That a Doctor may
turn and overturn men's consciences as he thinks fit, and make new rules of
Morals: that by this means a Christian may estrange himself without fear of
punishment, from the rules prescribed us, by the Scripture, the Councils, and
the Fathers.

Although Layman should have said no more than this, answered Cleander,
interrupting him, Wendrok's arguments would have proved but weak and silly: for
by giving this Doctor, as Layman has done, the quality of an honest and a
learned man, it is clear, that, morally speaking, he would not have gone astray
in his decisions, either from the doctrine of the Scripture, or the Church. One
ought to presume that he, who is learned, cannot be ignorant of this doctrine;
and that he, who is a man of probity, would not corrupt it: and if, of my self,
I am not capable to judge of the matter, supposing he has these two qualities,
I act prudently in following his decision.

This is the very reflection, replied the Abbot, that Layman made, and that
Wendrok should have made when he read him. Layman ibid.
It is nevertheless necessary, adds Layman, that this Doctor should not have
taken up this opinion rashly, or inconsideratly, but after weighing and
examining the reasons for the contrary opinion, and this is, what others, and
especially those who are unlearned ought commonly to suppose.

Hold, said Eudoxus, I have here the case of conscience of Mr. Sainte-Beuve;
who, if I well remember, said expressly, that regularly speaking, and without
having a particular reason to do otherwise, a man ought, without doubting or
hesitation, to follow the decision of a person of this character. It is in the
first tome, page 517, and the 169 case. Where this question is put; Whether one
runs the hazard of his Salvation by depending upon the judgment of a learned
and a pious man: which he thus answers. That one may with a safe conscience,
stick to the resolutions of a man, known to be learned and pious; unless he
have some particular reason to doubt the truth of his decisions. I will mark
this passage, adds he, that I may some time or other show it to Mr. Nicole.

But Layman stops not there, continued the Abbot: for see what he adds, for
those that are capable of judging the opinions of Casuists. But one ought not,
said he, to call that, a probable opinion, which one or more Doctors have
invented, contrary to the common opinion; and which others, upon examination,
have unanimously rejected, as an improbable and particular opinion; induced
thereunto by good reasons, or by the decrees of the higher powers, which the
first either had not heeded, or could not solidly answer. One may see what
Saint Thomas, Sylvester and Navar say upon this point.

In the second place I say, that an opinion is probable, when it is supported
by such a strong reason, as is persuasive enuff to make it to be believed,
conformable to truth; and this is to be understood in reference to a learned
man, who understands the matter, and has well weighed and considered the
principles of the contrary opinion, (tho by others commonly received) and fully
refuted them. Vasquez, Sanchez, and Azor..... do teach this doctrine. But,
notwithstanding, it must be limited and restrained by this condition: that
other Doctors, coming afterward to examine this particular opinion, should not
look upon it, as improbable, and an erroneous opinion.

Certainly, said Eudoxus, nothing can be wiser, better circumscribed, or more
restrained than this: and with these conditions I see no manner of danger in
this proposition. That the authority of one grave Doctor may make an opinion
probable.

This is not all, answered the Abbot: before these restrictions are applied to
any matter of this kind, which, like all other Moral matters, are subject to be
abused, and as subject also to contempt, as to calumny, because it is necessary
to have regard to a thousand little nice circumstances, the omission, or
addition of any one of which, is, sometimes, sufficient to render this doctrine
odious: before all this, I say, Layman, at the beginning of the same page, had
laid down this principle.

But, Valentia ^. 2. disp. ^. q. 12. ^. 5. q. 1.
said he, from the moment, that one of the two opposite opinions appears
evident, by reason, or certain, by the rule of faith, the other can, by no
means, appear any longer probable; as Valentia has very well observed, who
also, said the Abbot, was a Jesuit.

I leave you to think, continued the Abbot, if a probable opinion, which
according to the Jesuits, ceases to be probable, and becomes improbable, as
soon as it appears contrary, to what we are ascertained of, by faith, can
destroy the Morals of the Scripture, the Fathers and the Church: or, if the
principles, and definitions of a probable opinion, from which Pascal draws so
many fine consequences, are the principles and definitions of the Jesuits: and
whether Wendrok ought to have chosen Laymans's doctrine, for an example of loose
Morals in this kind; or to show, that these Fathers had no reason to complain
of Pascal's unfaithfulness, in reporting their opinions: for, even in the two
lines, which he cites, mangled and disjoynted as they are, there is enuff to
justify this Divine, and to refute all the ridiculous conclusions he sets down,
as natural consequences of this principle. At the same time Eudoxus and
Cleander read Wendrok's note upon the place, and being surpised at his
impudence and falsehood, could not forbear shrugging up their shoulders.

The other quotations are shorter, said the Abbot: who immediately read them the
passage in Suarez; where this Divine requires two conditions, for the making an
opinion probable. Suarez tract. 3. in 1.2. disp. 12. sect. 5.
The first, that it be not repugnant to the authorities received in the Church,
nor to any evident reason; and that it be not rashly taken up, contrary to the
common and ordinary opinions of Doctors. The second, that it be built, upon
some certain and solid foundation.

Let us now see what Azor, another Jesuit, says, concerning the choice a man
ought to make of opinions. One may consider them, says he, two ways: either
with reference to the exterior court, or with reference to the interior court
of conscience. I will first speak of the choice one ought to make of opinions
in the exterior court; and I will afterward explain, what opinion one ought to
follow in the interior court of conscience.

The first rule is, that, from the moment there is any judgment, or definition
of faith made, in clear and express terms, whatever may be said to the
contrary, by the gravest Doctors, the opinion that is founded upon this
judgment, or definition of faith, or comes nearest to it, is to be held
altogether true and certain, without giving themselves any trouble, on account
of those Doctors opinions.

That is very positive, said Eudoxus, and this rule secures the doctrine of
faith, and the Morals of the Gospel. But observe, that according to your text,
this Jesuit speaks there of the choice of opinions in the exterior court; and
the main question between us is, about the choice of opinions in the interior
court of conscience.

A little patience, and you shall soon be satisfied, answered the Abbot. After
Azor had set down several other rules concerning the exterior court, in the
beginning of the sixteenth chapter he thus speaks. Let us now see, in a few
words, what opinion one may choose in the interior court of conscience: it is
first demanded, whether the rules given from the ninth to the thirteenth
chapter, ought also to be observed in the court of conscience; and answered;
the three first, to wit, those set down in the ninth, tenth and eleventh are to
be kept in the court of conscience also; because they there take place, and are
as useful as in the exterior court, which is a thing clear of it self.

The rule that I have now read you, continued the Abbot, is the first in the
ninth chapter. Let us read Filiucius.

He is one of the four and twenty old men, said Cleander laughing.

Yes, answered the Abbot, and one of those, to whom Pascal does the honor to
name and quote, to prove the disorders which follow the doctrine of probable
opinions: however, let us read what he says upon the matter before us.

It thence follows, that to the end, Filiucius tract. 1. de Decal. cap. 4. number.
163.
an opinion may be probable, it must be generally esteemed to contain nothing
erroneous, nor to be contrary to any Canon, or Decree of Superiors. Reginald.
lib. 13. cap. 2. number. 103.
Let us also look upon Reginaldus who does but transcribe Azor.

We have already seen enuff on this point, said Eudoxus; but I would be glad to
know, whether the Jesuits have transgressed the bounds prescribed by themselves.

Hold; we are not yet come so far, said the Abbot interrupting him in some
anger: and before we get thither, you must own, that your Pascal, and his
second, have made the world believe so; when seeming to explain the doctrine of
the Jesuits, which they rather ought to have called, the doctrine of all
Catholic Divines, who till then had written upon this subject, they conceal all
the modifications and restrictions of this doctrine, on purpose, that they might
draw from it, most dreadful consequences; which they not only do, but also have
the impudence to assert, that by the doctrine of probabilites, and by the
latitude the Society gives to probable opinions, they have banished out of
Moral Divinity the Gospel and the Canons, to substitute in their place, the new
notions and ideas of the Schools of these times.

The Jesuits had in general defined, a probable opinion, An opinion backed, and
supported by considerable authority, or by some important reason, against which
there was nothing convincing to be offered. And, as if they had been Heathens,
who did not reckon the authority of Scripture and the Councils in the number of
convincing things, they reproached them, as if they had not made the Scripture,
the Councils or the Fathers the rule of their decisions, but governed men's
consciences by caprice, by wild and extravagant fancies, and the vain
subtilties of their Doctors.

Yes, I dare say it, continued the Abbot somewhat incensed, and I will justify
it too: that, according to the common, ordinary method of the Jesuit Divines
(out of which number I except some few Compilers, and some Abridgers, who have
another end than the authors themselves whom they abridge) there is not one
decision, of any case of conscience, that can have the Scripture, the Councils
and the Fathers for a rule, where these sort of arguments do not lead the Van,
or are not first to be seen before all others: or where the passages of
Scripture, the Canons of Councils, the Decretals of Popes, and the Civil Law,
when pertinent to the point, do not make their main essential proofs, or at
least the subject of their dissertations, when under any difficulty; and that
never any authors went further, or waded deeper in the pure springs and
fountains of Morals, than the principal Jesuit Divines. Witness Azor, Suarez,
Vasquez, Layman, Lessius, and Thomas Sanchez. You need but open their books, to
show the falsehood and the vanity of all these foolish impostures; of which
there is no other proof, than the sayings and invectives of their calumniating
Adversaries

There is some pleasure Mr. Abbot in angring of you, answered Eudoxus laughing:
and it is the Jesuits interest, that we should sometimes provoke you: you have
told us wonders. And I cannot but own my self convinced, that, in reality,
things have been outragiously exaggerated: that the author of the Provincial
Letters has run too fast, and that the good simple Jesuit, who speaks in them,
had no Letter of Atturny, no authority, from the Society, to say and grant all
the impertinences, which Pascal has put into his mouth.

That is not a sufficient satisfaction for Mr. Abbot, said Cleander, he would
have things called by their proper names, a spade a spade: you agreed with him
a little while ago, that it was a mere calumny, to impute to the Jesuits, as a
crime, their teaching a doctrine, that had been taught by all the Bishops, who
treated of that subject, and before they were in being, by all the Professors
of Sorbonne, who have printed any books of Divinity, by the Thomists, the
Scotists, the University of Louvain, and almost by all Divines. He also
pretends, that it was yet a greater piece of malice, to disfigure and
misrepresent this doctrine; to have given such a false and horrible idea of it;
and to have lamed, or falily interpreted the definitions, for no other end, but
that they might draw from them the most dreadful consequences imaginable. You
call this to exaggerate, and he pretends that it is to corrupt, to poison, to
ly and to calumniat.

Mr. Abbot, answerds Eudoxus interrupting him: this is but a dispute about
words. We both think the same thing, and so does Cleander too: this ought
therefore to satisfy you, and encourage you, to communicate, what you farther
know in this matter, since you see we have profited so well by what you have
already told us.

I might yet make you a great many remarks upon this subject, said the Abbot:
but I profess to you, that I have much ado to hold, when I see Pascal and
Wendrok treat, unworthily and unhandsomly, upon this occasion, under the name
of Casuists, so great a number of persons, famous for their learning, and for
their virtue, honored in their time, and respected by the most eminent, and the
most holy men, that were in the Church of God. In vain, to make themselves less
odious and better believed, do they pretend to have no design, but against the
Jesuits, whose destruction they aimed at, and against a few others, whom they
were not solicitous to treat with respect. In epist. ^ sect. 6.. 5.
In this cloud of Casuists, as Wendrok expresses it, and insolently compares
them to that multitude of frogs, which covered Egypt, when Pharao was King, of
whom the Jesuits were but the smallest number, and to whom the paths were
beaten out, by persons, whose character in the Church was always venerable to
all true Catholics: I mean, the most learned Bishops of their time, the most
remarkable Doctors, and the most famous Canonists: among whom is to be seen
Saint Antonin Archbishop of Florence; who, in the point of probability, is just
of the same opinion with others, notwithstanding all the falsehoods Wendrok is
guilty of in this article, which so much disturbs and confounds him; and all
the artifices he makes use of, to disguise the contempt he himself has, and
which he would have others have, of this holy Divine.

And if some Jesuits, as Suarez, Vasquez, Sanchez, Lessius, etc. are sometimes
quoted in the writings of Divines, together with other eminent men, it is not,
because that in their books, There is neither piety nor learning, Wendrok loco
citato.. 1.
as they have impudently given out, but because, that piety and learning are
joined with as much clearness, solidity and order, as in the works of the most
able Doctors. But for this, we must not take either Pascals or Wendrok's words,
nor theirs, who have not read the works of these Jesuit Divines; but we may be
assured, that the most learned, and most sound part of the Sorbonne Professors
will own this truth; and that it will also be acknowledged, by all those of
Louvain, except the Disciples of Baius and Jansenius: by the most learned
Prelates of this Kingdom, by the grave experienced Penitentiarys or Confessors,
who to their great advantage, have frequent recourse to them; and by the Popes,
who have given great elogiums and commendations to several of them. But we may
in the last place refer our selves, to the testimonies, formerly given, by
their own Body, of their virtue and their sanctity; testimonies so much the
less to be suspected, that no body then foresaw, or could guess, that Doctors
so Catholic, and commonly so exact, and so solid as these, should ever be
attacked for the corrupters of Morals by a Pascal, or a Wendrok.

For I pray you, continued the Abbot, let us quite lay aside all prejudices,
and impartially consider, what is this Pascal and what is this Wendrok, in the
matters we are now upon. Wendrok has published some Moral Essays, Pascal
understood some parts of Mathematics, and was polite. These two, oppose, in the
same peremptory tone, the Fathers, to the Morals of the Jesuits, to the
decisions of the Church, and to the determinations of the Sorbonne. The first
had never seen, or read the Fathers, but with the eyes of the chief of
Port Royal, and the other, is so very weak, that he is really to be pitied,
when he offers at any point of Divinity. The first wins upon his readers, only
by his talent of buffoonry, of jesting and fooling: the second imposes upon
some, by his confidence and his boldness: but, indeed, it is strange he should
be able to impose upon any, considering that he never, almost, expresses
himself, but like a furious madman.

They endeavor to make Religious Saints, whose piety was never before suspected
by any person, pass for wicked and ungodly men; and to have learned men, who
always had a great and equal reputation for wisdom and learning, and who
solemly profess to follow no other doctrine, but that which is commonly taught,
in all Catholic Schools, to be reputed whimsical and extravagant. These two
witnesses, who swear against them, were the forlorn hope of a revolted party
against the Church, sent out, by Mr. Arnauld, to fall foul upon the Sorbonne
and the Jesuits. They bring down several passages, out of several books and
several authors: they order and dispose them as they think best for their
purpose: they mix them here and there with their own reflections, and with the
impertinences which they make a very od man speak, brought upon the stage, for
that very purpose; and, of all together, they compose a horrible, friteful,
piece of work: whereas the greatest part of these passages, carried back to the
places from whence they were taken, and joined, to the assertions from which
they were divided; taken and understood according to the restrictions and
modifications there set down, have, commonly, nothing but what is wise and
agreeable to sense and reason, nor any thing, but what is conformable to the
principles of sound Morals. I say, commonly, because, none yet are so foolish,
as to pretend, that the Jesuits have more of the gift of infallibility, than
other Divines, or than even the Fathers themselves have had.

Mr. Abbot, said Cleander interrupting him, if you can give us as good an
account of these passages, and these particular matters of fact, as you have
done of those we have been upon to day, we shall be of your side; and hiss and
laugh at the author of the Parallele des Anciens and des Modernes, for his
article of the Provincial Letters.

That I will do when you please, answered the Abbot. But I was insensibly the
cause of a long digression about matters of fact, concerning which you had,
perhaps, no design to busy your selves.

These matters of fact, replied Eudoxus, are in this affair essential; and
sufficient to defend the Jesuits, and condem their adversaries: nor are they
altogether unuseful toward judging and deciding the dispute and matter of law.
You made me take notice, as we went along, of some things, which persuade me,
as I have already told you, that it is not so easy to determine or be positive
in this matter, as it is generally thought; and really the more I have of late
examined it, the more difficulty have I found to choose what side I would be of.

I am my self, almost, as unresolved as you; said the Abbot. I am convinced of
the falsehood of some articles, but in suspense for others. The next time we
meet, He tell you all I know, and all I think, and then leave you to judge.

The conversation about probable opinions went no farther; but they discoursed
for some time after of the Provincial Letters. The Abbot, who is very quick and
sagacious, and knows, perfectly well, how to distinguish, in any book between
what is real and solid; and what is glittering and shewish: and between some
rambling extravagant maxims, by which men daily supply the want of reason and
justice, in the cause, they defend; made his two friends several important
reflections.

In the first place, he made them quickly sensible, that there never came out
any book, that ought more to be distrusted than the Provincial Letters; whether
one regarded the fource, from whence this work was derived, or the occasion of
it is being made, or the memoires which were followed, or the manner wherein it
was composed, or that, wherein it was published, or the judgment of those, who
examined it, and whose duty it was to examine it to the bottom. And also plainly
showed them, that this book was made by men, who were then, at least, suspected
in matters of faith: that the Sorbonne's censuring Mr. Arnauld's doctrine, was
the occasion of it: that the Paris Divines, and their doctrine, in a point they
judged essential, to justify the decisions of the Church, was in it turned to
ridicule, and their assemblies, represented as so many farces and interludes of
merriment and foolery, without any respect, for the most illustrious persons of
the Kingdom, who by the King's command made a part of them: and, lastly, that
these Letters were but a kind of comedy to entertain people at the expense of
the Jesuits, because they were believed to have contributed most to the
condemnation of Jansenius's five propositions.

In the second place, he made it appear, that there never was a book, wherein
some general and specious maxims were more abused; maxims, that were proper to
surprise either superficial or lazy men, who would not take the pains to examine
whether their application was either just or sincere: that it was therein all
along said, that Christians could have no other rule of Morals, but the
Scripture, the Fathers, and the Councils; and that the fancys, or imaginations
of modern authors, if it were but for their novelty, ought to be accounted and
pass for dangerous.

The Abbot enlarged himself, fully, upon this article, which he excellently
well cleared from all objections and difficulties. I would be glad to know,
said he, for example, how a Curat, who had got all the Bible by heart, and had
also got into his head the seventeen tomes of the last edition of the Councils,
together with all Saint Austin, Saint Hierom, Saint Chrysostom, and the rest of
the Greek and Latin Fathers, but had never read any one of the Casuists; how, I
say, could this Curat take upon him, to hear Confessions, and resolve all the
cases of Conscience, which his Parishoners might propose to him: or whether he
could understand, from the works of Saint Austin against the Pelagians, or from
those of Saint Prosper, how to determine all the difficulties, which relate to
the impediments of matrimony; how to distinguish, between that, which makes it
null, and that, which renders it only unlawful: or, how could he there find all
the expedients he ought to make use of, in these matters, to avoid scandal,
divisions, quarrels and destruction of families? what might, or ought to be
tolerated, or permitted, or hindered in regard to certain, nice, and tender
circumstances and conjunctures? how this Curat, whether in City, or in Country,
could be able to answer about the validity, or the nullity, the justice, or
injustice of some contracts, and about the doubts, which a thousand different
circumstances may occasion, even in such contracts as are least disputed? how
should he behave himself, in matters of restitution? wherein one rule, whether
it be of the law of nature, or of the positive law, often seems to destroy
another. How many difficulties, in matter of censures, irregularities, and
dispensations, do daily arise, which the Councils could neither foresee, nor
regulate, and of which experience, only, gained by hearing Confessions, gave
occasion to treat, to clear, and decide them? a man may, almost, say the same
things of every part of Morals; the Divine law, which is comprised in the holy
Scripture, and the Ecclesiastic law, which is comprised in the Councils, are
they not also, as well as the Civil law, the instruments God makes use of, to
regulat the manners, the disputes, and the differences of men? and are they not
likewise, at the same time, the sources, and springs, of an infinite number of
difficulties and troubles? having these holy rules, say our reformers, what
need have we of Casuists, and of all their great volumes, which fill whole
libraries? and, I demand of them, since there are so many and so good laws, why
are there such a number of Lawyers in the world, and so many commentaries upon
those laws? and why, notwithstanding all this, are there still so many suites,
wherein the Judges, who best understand all these laws, and all these
commentaries, are, sometimes, hard put to it, much imbarrass'd and perplexed in
giving their Judgments?

The Council of Trent declares to all penitents, that they are obliged in
confession to tell the number of their sins, and their different kinds: the
Confessors are obliged to explain to them those different kinds, to know them,
and to make a judgment of them: are the means of doing all this exactly and
prudently, which go very far and suppose no small skill in several sorts of
learning, in School Divinity, in Moral Divinity, and even in Logic, to be found
in the Scriptures, in the Councils, or in the Fathers? and without reducing
things to the method that these Divines, so much despised, have done, into how
many scruples, and difficulties would this decree of the Council put both the
penitents and the Confessors?

No, no, one must not oppose the doctrine of the Scriptures, the Fathers, and
the Councils, to the doctrine of Divines, and the greatest number of Casuists;
no more then they must the Commentators and interpreters of the laws, to the
laws themselves. One may indeed examine, whether their consequences are well or
ill deduced; or whether the Fathers, in such circumstances, and in those
particular cases, would have decided as they did: or whether, they swerved from
the right way, or went astray by ignorance, by wilfulness, or by malice. The
Ecclesiastic Superiors have a right, to provide and take care in this matter:
but it is also the Christian readers duty, and they are in charity bound to it,
not to believe Pascal upon his own word, nor trust his extracts, even when he
quotes the books, the chapters, and the pages: the respect due to the persons
he attacks, is a strong prejudice against him: and the judgment any one should
make, upon his testimony or assertion, would certainly be too rash and too
foolish. The most men ought to do, when they read him, is but to doubt, whether
as declared an enemy as he is, he may not, possibly speak truth: but not to
conclude all those guilty, whom he condems, and for no other reason, but
because he is pleased to say, they are ignorant in the Church learning,
occasions of scandal to Christianity, the corrupters of the Gospel, and the
Morals of our Savior; and that as soon as they appeared, they banished the
Scriptures, the Councils, and the Fathers.

I am as much persuaded as you, answered Eudoxus, that this Curat, you speak
of, with all his knowledge in Scripture, Councils, and Fathers, would be often
very much puzzled how to solve all his Parishoners difficulties, whether put to
him, in Confessions, or in consultations, if he had not some special and
particular rule to assist him, in the application of those general rules: and
his fate would be the same with some Lawyers, who have the Institutes, the
Code, and the digests almost by heart, and yet are not able to advise, or
counsel aright one of their farmers, or tenants in a suit against his neighbor,
about the bounds of his lands, his close, or fields, I know more than one
Curat, or one Doctor, who declaim and thunder out aloud against the Jesuits
Morals, and yet, in their closets, Cardinal Lugo, Lessius, Sanchez, Layman and
Azor are the advocats they consult, and by whose determinations they often gain
a great deal of honor.

You are in the right, replied the Abbot, and it is without doubt for this
reason, that Saint Charles Borromeus, in a little treatise he has made about
true Confession, does expressly enjoin his Curats, diligently and constantly to
read, Manibus continue terant, the Classic authors, so he calls them, who fully
treat of cases of conscience.

Saint Francis of Sales shows he was of the same opinion, in a little piece
which he directs to his Priests, entitled, Avertissement aux Confesseurs.
an Advertisment to Confessors, wherein, after several advices about the method
they ought to observe in hearing Confessions, he thus concludes. Father
Valerius Reginaldus, a Jesuit, reader of Divinity at Dole, (observe that this
is one of those, whom Pascal treats most rudely) has newly published a book, Of
the prudence of Confessors, De la prudence des Confesseurs.
which will be greatly useful to all that read it. Here you see, my dear
brethren, the five and twenty articles which I thought fit to propose to you,
etc.

I have also seen a latin letter from the same Saint to Father Lessius, which
was not printed with the rest, but was published elsewhere, the original of
which is at Antwerp, wherein, after he had signified the great esteem he had
for the Societies works, and for his in particular, he adds. I read some years
since a very useful piece, de justitia and jure, which you published, where you
solve, with much solidity and clearness, and better than any Divines I have
seen, all the difficulties of this part of Divinity. Pray observe, adds the
Abbot, that this book, with which Saint Francis of Sales is so much taken, and
commends so much, is that very book, for which Lessius has deserved from
Pascal, the title of the Favorer and Patron of Murderers, of Bankrupts, broken
Merchants and Usurers, etc.

You there touch upon a point of some consequence, said Cleander, and without
all doubt, the authority and testimony of Saint Charles Borromeus, and of Saint
Francis of Sales, ought not to be of less weight, than that of Pascal and
Nicole. And if we add to this, answered the Abbot, The Bishop of Meaux
that one of our most famous Bishops, in his Synodal, or Diocesan Statuts, has
very lately mentioned among other books which he advised his Clergy to read,
the better to enable them to hear Confessions, Tolet and Azor, both Jesuits,
the last of whom had the honor to be one of Pascals heroes of the loose Morals,
perhaps the Jesuits may have occasion to flatter themselves into a belief, that
all the world do not blindly run into his opinion or suffer themselves to be
deluded, or trapand into Port Royal nets.

As the Abbot was going on with the Jesuits Apology, for which he was furnished
with very good memoires, Eudoxus was called away by a letter of consequence
which required an immediate answer. But Cleander made the Abbot promise he would
be present and make one at the meetings and discourses which Eudoxus and he
resolved to have about the Provincial Letters. They agreed to go next day to
one of the librarys in Paris: to see, whether the Thomists, the Doctors of
Louvain, and the rest, had taught the Doctrine of probable opinions, as the
Jesuits and the Professors of Sorbonne had done. And also to confront and
compare, exactly, the passages he had shown them, to prove that Pascal and
Wendrok had altered and disguised the Jesuits principles. And likewise
promised, if that appeared true, they would without difficulty forgive his
calling them both impostors and calumniators: and that they would afterward go
on, to the examination of the particular passages, which, the Jesuits publicly
say, were, for the most part, maimed, or falsified, or wrongfully transposed:
after which the Abbot and Cleander took their leaves of one another, and parted.

The Fourth Discourse.
THE Abbot came the next day, at the hour appointed, to take up Eudoxus and
Cleander, whom he carried to the Fathers of **** whose library, he knew, was
very well furnished with the books they wanted. There he made a new conquest in
favor of truth: it was over a young Bachelor of quality of Eudoxus and
Cleander's acquaintance, who, by chance, happened to be in the library: and
who, having saluted them, and understood the occasion of their coming, could
not forbear laughing: he asked them how they came, at this time of day, to have
any scruples about a matter, that for so many years past no body had
questioned. To make a doubt, said he, whether the doctrine of probable opinions
be the specific doctrine of the Society, of which the Jesuits were the
inventors, and the only, or, almost, the only defenders, having of their side
but a Caramuel, or a Diana, at most, is to doubt, whether there be such a City
as Rome in the world, or a Grand Vizir in the Ottoman Empire.

Hereupon the Abbot spoke, and told him, that in such matters as these, there
was nothing better, than for a man to see things with his own eyes; and that he
would do them a pleasure, to help them to find out, what might, at last,
confound a Jesuit, whose confidence the Public had a long time suffered to go
unpunished: that this Jesuit had been so bold, above thirty years since, as to
make all the Religious Orders, a number of Bishops, the most famous
Universities of Europe, and even the Sorbonne, in the sight of her own Doctors,
accomplices of the extravagancies of the Society, in matter of Morals: that this
was done, by a book licensed and printed at Paris: wherein, without entering
into the matter of Right, or examining, whether the doctrine of probability be
good or bad, he confines himself to the matter of Fact, that for near a hundred
years, and until the year 1660, when his book was printed, this doctrine was the
common opinion of all the Bishops, all the Orders, all the Universities and all
the Doctors: that for one, that had opposed it, he could easily reckon ten,
that had defended it: and that, of the three or four, at most, who had quitted
it in some points, two were Jesuits. You see what his paradox is, added the
Abbot, seeming to speak very seriously. And this author, continued he, to put
his design in execution the more methodically, has reduced the whole doctrine of
probability, to two propositions, which in effect contain it wholly: the first:
That, of two probable opinions, one may follow the less safe. The second: That,
of two probable opinions, it is lawful to sollow the less probable. The two
Monsters which Pascal and Wendrok have fought with, as sprung from the damnable
politics of the Jesuits: and in this little book (which at the same time he
drew out of his pocket) it is boldly, I say, affirmed, that these two
propositions were taught, either separatly, or both together, by this crowd of
non-Jesuit Divines, which are all named, and their passages quoted. What
insolence is this if it be not true?

The young Batcheler, after he had, for some time, railly'd at the Jesuits
pretention with Cleander and Eudoxus, who affected to seem as incredulous as
he, said, he would willingly share in the unnecessary trouble the Abbot had
resolved to give himself. Hereupon they fell immediately to work, to the turning
over the books, which the library keeper put into their hands, as fast as they
called for them: they followed the order of the chapters, and begun with the
list of Bishops.

They presently read, in Saint Antonin, the first proposition, expressed in
these words. Eligere viam tutiorem consilij est, non praecepti. To choose the
safer way, is matter of counsel not command. And because Wendrok, who was
gravel'd at this passage, had answered, that Saint Antonin spoke there, only of
the choice of conditions, or states of life, and that he meant no more than
this, that tho it were safer to become Religious, than to live in the world, it
was, notwithstanding, not a command to become Religious, but only an advice:
they read what the Jesuit Author had writ upon that text, to refute Wendrok's
explication. This Saint speaks there of an action, of which there is a doubt
whether it be a sin or not a sin, which in reality is the ground of the
question treated of, in this whole paragraph. Here are Saint Antonin's own
words.

It is said in the third chapter of Ecclesiasticus, 1 p. tit. 3.. 10.
He that exposes himself to danger, shall perish therein: from whence Saint
Thomas and others do infer, that he, who does an action of which he doubts
whether it be a mortal sin or not, does commit a mortal sin; because, that
thereby he exposes himself to commit a mortal sin. When therefore in a matter
of Morals, there happen to be different and contrary opinions, he that follows
the larger seems to expose himself to the hazard of committing a mortal sin, it
being possible, that this opinion may be false, and the other true.

But to this it is answered, that he, who knowingly does a thing, wherein he
doubts there may be a mortal sin, does commit a mortal sin, if while he does
it, he continues in his doubt, even although the action, in it self, were not
sinful: and here the word doubt is taken in it is most strict and proper
signification; when, because of equal reasons on both sides, one does not
incline more to the one than to the other: but when the doubt is light, and but
by way of scruple, as a man doubts, when sticking to one opinion, in a matter
wherein he is afraid the opposite opinion may be the true opinion; by acting
with this doubt he does not sin, when he follows the opinion of some Doctor,
and that there are probable reasons for this opinion, more than for the
contrary, although the opinion, which is followed, should be false, provided, that
it be not against the manifest authority of the Scripture, or the
determinations of the Church. And the reason of this is, that he who acts in
this manner, does not act, with the doubt of a mortal sin, but in his action is
guided by a probable opinion.

The Batcheler could not easily agree to this doctrine, or comprehend how a man
could act with a doubt, and yet not offend God. The Abbot said, that, according
to the principles of Saint Antonin, and those Divines who followed him, one
must, in this matter, distinguish between a practical and a speculative doubt:
that they hold, that the one does not necessarily follow the other, and that
one may act with a speculative doubt, although it be not lawful to act with a
practical doubt. But in a word, continued he, the question here, is not of the
Right, but of the Fact; nor whether Saint Antonin was in the right, or in the
wrong; but only, whether the Jesuits do fully prove, that his opinion was the
same with theirs.

At least, answered the Batcheler, Saint Antonin seems to say, that in allowing
the less safe to be followed, one is obliged to follow the more probable
opinion.

The Jesuit, replied the Abbot pretends to no more: his drift is, only, to show
that Saint, Antonin held, at least, that one might follow an opinion which is
but probable; and that, of two probable opinions, one may follow the less safe;
although there should be still danger, that it might be false. If we were to
dispute the thing, we should, by this single principle of Saint Antonin,
overturn all Pascal and Wendrok's Divinity on this subject.

The next, they called for, was Didacus Alvarez, that man, so famous for his
dispute de Auxilijs, when Dominican, and who was afterward Archbishop of
Trani, in the Kingdom of Naples. They looked for the title of the dispute 80 to
wit. Ad. 1.2.
Whether, of two probable opinions, a man may follow that which he shall judge
most convenient, and leave even that which he believes the more probable. This
Divine, after he had brought down the opinion of Cajetan, and of some other
Thomists, which seem to hold that one ought to follow the more probable, speaks
thus.

The second opinion is contrary to this, Number. 4.
and holds that every body may follow that opinion, which he judges probable.
This is held by Master Medina, and with him by many other learned Thomists.

Afterward, he sets down a third, to reconcile the two others, by the
restrictions wherewith it allows the less probable opinion to be followed,
which are, that neither our neighbor, nor our Religion be concerned therein,
and that there be not in it, any particular circumstances, to offend the honor
of God: he also adds some suppositions. First he lays down as a thing not to be
doubted of, that, when two opinions are equally probable, or, that there is
very little difference in the point of probability, one may choose which of the
two he pleases: secondly, that when a penitent has followed a probable opinion,
for example, that which says, such or such a contract is lawful, his Confessor
ought to absolve him, although he should believe it more probable, and even
certain, that the contract is unlawful: Because, says he, that the penitent, in
following this probable opinion, has not sinned. Number. 9.
After which he declares himself of this third opinion, and answers the
arguments of Cajetan, which, for the most part, do only prove, that one ought
to make use of the forementioned restrictions, and which all the Jesuits, who
taught this doctrine never failed to prescribe. Upon which the Abbot in a few
words made these two reflections.

First, that nothing can be more clearly taught, than that, on several
occasions, It is lawful to follow the less probable opinion, although that, at the
same time, it should be the less safe. And in the second place, that the single
testimony of Alvarez may save them the labor, of turning over Medina, and the
other learned Thomists; to satisfy themselves that the doctrine which was
attributed only to the Jesuits was common to them with the most able Divines of
Saint Thomas's School.

These reflections, which began to put the Batcheler a little out of
countenance, made Cleander and Eudoxus smile, who, by the former day's
discourse, were prevented from being surpised, as he was, at the things that
were shown them.

The Abbot went on, and showed the following proposition in Quaes. de Cons.
difficult. 8.
Joseph Anglez, Bishop of Bozano in Sardinia, in In praxi poenit. ca. 22. qu. 3.
Thomas Zerola, and in Edit. Venetae 1559. in l. 2. q. 19. disp. 86.
Malderus Bishop of Antwerp. When the penitents opinion is probable, although the
Confessors opinion should be more probable, he neither can, nor ought to refuse
him absolution. And this in Tract. de poenit. sacr. diffi. 1^. p. 731. edit.
Salman. 1585.
Bartholemew Ledesma, an other Bishop of the Dominican Order. This conclusion
is against Adrian, who says, that one is obliged to follow the more safe
opinion, even supposing that the contrary opinion is also probable. But
notwithstanding our conclusion is very true, and this conclusion is, that it is
lawful to follow the less safe and the less probable opinion.

They opened a second time Loco citato.
Malderus Bishop of Antwerp, to show this assertion in express terms. It is
sometimes lawful to follow the less probable opinion, and to reject the more
probable, although this should be the more safe opinion. Tom. 2. dis. 2. q. 4. p.
9.
Bonacina was found to be of the same opinion. We may, says he, without sin
follow a probable opinion, and leave the more probable and more safe opinion.

Tom. 1. col. in lib. 2. Decret. p. 408.
Barbosa Bishop of Vgentio, the great Canonist, was also in his turn consulted,
and found to be of the number of the approvers of this doctrine.

At last when they came to Caramuel, I durst not said the Abbot propose him to
the Jesuits adversaries for a Judge: for tho he were a Bishop, they have
treated him so ill, and the Jansenists have given such an idea of him, and of
Escobar, that men cannot hear their names pronounced, but they presently fall a
laughing. Besides, perhaps, he extended this matter too far. But without
regarding his opinion, may we not, at least, hear him as a witness of a matter
of fact, wherein he was very well versed. This opinion, says he, Number. 302.
here in his Moral Divinity, which he dedicated to Alexander VII, is, at this
time, the common opinion of all the world, that men may, with a safe
conscience, follow the less probable opinion. The common opinion, adds he, is,
that it is lawful to follow the less probable and the less safe opinion, and to
reject the more probable and the more safe opinion.

See now, continued the Abbot, eight Bishops, besides Caramuel, all men
particularly distinguished, and remarkable for their learning and their piety,
who hold the first part of the doctrine of probability, and seven, that hold the
whole, pure and entire. What an honor is this for the Jesuits, that all these
learned men are accounted as nothing in respect of them? and that, in a common
cause, they should be regarded as the chief, who alone deserve to be attacked,
and that all these Prelates should not be thought worth the trouble of being so
much as named?

They are in truth Bishops, said Eudoxus laughing, but they are but Italians,
Spaniards, or Flemings; and if I were a Batcheler of Sorbonne, as this
Gentleman is, two of their Doctors would weigh more with me, than all those
people, who, perhaps, might have been disciples of the Jesuits. In that point,
said he to the Abbot, it were well, if you could justify the quotations of your
Father Dechamps: as for Cleander and me, who are not so much concerned in the
matter, we will still go on to make the Thomists ready for you.

The mischief on it is, said the Abbot, that some of these had quitted the world
before the Jesuits were come into it: and that others had printed this doctrine,
before any Jesuit had written in Divinity. The rest were either Dominicans, or
Doctors of Louvain, and appeared very indifferent for the interests, or the
doctrine of the Society. But I will willingly refer my self in the matter to the
Doctors of Paris. Hereupon they took Isambert, Du-val, Gamache and Bail, quoted
by Father Dechamps. Wherein, were read to the Batcheler these plain
propositions, which were the day before shown to Endoxus and Cleander. That one
is not obliged to follow the more safe opinion: and that one may in conscience
follow the less safe, and less probable opinion and quit the more probable and
more safe opinion.

He was very much surprised, and said he would see no more; but how then, added
he, comes it to pass, that all the world say it is the peculiar doctrine of the
Jesuits, the secret and foundation of their corrupted Morals, and of their
Politics? and how happens it, that Pascal and Wendrok, quitting all others,
fall only upon them? and that they speak of these Fathers, and of their
opinions in this matter, as the scandal of Religion, saying, that the heretics
ought not to judge of the Church's doctrine, by the doctrine of the Jesuits, and
that the Catholic Universities, the other Communities and Religious Orders do
not partake in their errors? you fill my head witha world of scruples, said he
to Eudoxus and Cleander; I my self, upon this account, have a thousand times
exclaimed against, and run down the Society: the matter passes for a thing
evident and certain by the charity and the care of the Jansenists, and is
become so public, that I did not believe I was guilty, in this, of rash
judgment, nor of detraction, or calumny.

I am well pleased, answered Eudoxus, that you have so tender a conscience: but,
after all, is not Pascal, Wendrok, Mr. Arnauld, and all their friends of weight
enuff to hinder and secure your judgment from being rash, although it should be
false? believe me, that if you would unburden your conscience of these sins,
you ought to go and confess them to Mr. Curat of ****, however severe he be in
other matters, he will not refuse you absolution on this account; but let me
advise you to tell him the case with all it is circumstances: for if you speak
to him of rash judgment, or of detraction, in general, with reference to the
doctrine of some Divines, he will believe you speak of Mr. Arnauld, or of
Jansenius, and that will not be for your advantage. Tell him it is of the
Jesuits, and he will comfort you; he will enlarge your conscience, as if you
had been a weak scrupulous person; he will inform you, that it is not always
any great crime to speak little trifling things of one's neighbor; and that,
when they happen to be said of the Jesuits, they may sometimes have a very good
effect.

The Batcheler hereupon having taken leave of them, they stayed sometime longer
to compare many passages with the texts of the authors cited, which they found
very exact. But beginning to be weary of a labor, which was not at all pleasant
or agreeable, they only chose five or six more of the most positive, to verify
them, and especially those of the Dominican Divines. They pitched upon these
Divines rather than any others, not only for the reputation their School is in,
but also because there have been, of late, some particular persons of their
Order, very ill instructed, without doubt, in the opinions of their Doctors,
who affected to make all the inconveniences, real, or pretended, of the doctrine
of probable opinions fall upon the Jesuits alone.

But before the other passages were compared, the Abbot desired Eudoxus and
Cleander to take notice of what Father Dechamps asserts in his book, Quaestio
facti.
to wit, that the Dominican Divines, who had handled this matter for near these
hundred years, had all agreed, in teaching these two propositions together.
That one is not obliged to follow the more safe opinion, and, that it is lawful
to follow the less probable and less safe, and quit the more safe and more
probable opinion. Insomuch, says this Father, that I have not found one of
those I have read, nor of those quoted by the authors I have read, who has
given the least ground to believe, that he was of a contrary opinion.

The first, of all the Thomists he begun with, was Bartholemew de Medina, whom
Antony of Siena, in his Bibliotheca, qualifies with the title of the complete
and excellent Divine, distinguished as much, by his probity and his piety, as
by his learning. q. 19 a. 6. c. 3.
These words are to be seen in his commentaries upon Saint Thomas's prima
secundae, printed many years before any Jesuit had handled this matter. From
thence arises a great question, to wit, whether a man be obliged to follow the
more probable opinion: and after he had proposed the contrary opinion, he thus
determins. My opinion is, that if the opinion be probable, it is lawful to
follow it, although the contrary opinion should be more probable: which he
afterward proves at large.

Cleander having read, among the remaining authors, the name Dominic Bannes,
desired he might be consulted: he was, said he, a man of some weight and value,
and one of the Directors of Saint Teresa: they opened his works, and found in
his treatise upon prima secundae these words. There are two sorts of opinions;
q. 10. a. 11. dub. 3. c. 4.
for some relate to actions, for example, to know whether such a contract be
lawful or not. Others concern the things themselves, to know whether a thing be
so or so: whether this house belongs to me, or to another: I say then for the
first kind, that men may follow a probable opinion, and reject the more
probable.

By this it is plain, said Eudoxus, that the Holy Teresa's Director is, like the
rest, of the loose Morals; and for which there is no remedy: for the
Inquisition, which bore with this doctrine, would never have suffered a
Port Royal in Spain, nor the publication of Pascals Letters. Witness, said the
Abbot, what happened the last year. A Religious man undertook to get the
Provincial Letters, translated into Spanish, to be printed at Madrid, that they
might, as was said, be sent into the Indies; to give the Christians, there, the
same kind of character and idea of the Jesuits, as was endeavored to be given
to the Catholics of France. But what is worse than ill luck? the Inquisition got
notice of it, and cited the Religious man; who, being questioned about this new
book, found about him, answered, he knew not what it was: that it was directed
to him, without telling him from whence it came. But the printed leaves
appearing still fresh, he was convicted and shut up till farther orders.

Cleander asked him if the Jesuits knew this story? they know it, answered the
Abbot, and would be very glad, they had not so much cause as they daily have to
complain of such kind of proceedings. After this, they read, in the little
book, the rest of the Thomists quoted, without taking the pains to search into
their own particular works, out of which, no doubt, the passages are most
faithfully extracted.

Gregory Martinez. First conclusion. Tom. 1. in 1.2. ad quaest. 19. art. 6.


It is not only lawful to choose, of two opinions equally probable, that which
one pleases, but it is further lawful to follow the less probable, and to quit
the more probable. This second part is contrary to Sylvester and Cajetan, but
yet it is the common opinion.


Peter Ledesma. It is more probable, In sum. part. 2. tr. 8. ca. 22.
and it is conformable to the law of God, and the law of nature; that it is
lawful for a Judge to reject the more probable opinion, and to follow that
opinion which is probable. This is the opinion of Master Medina, of Orellana
and several other Doctors, and chiefly of Saint Thomas's Scholars upon the 2.2.
q. 67. a. 4.


Ho! for this bold stroke, said Cleander, the Jesuits will reform the
Dominicans Morals: for I very well know, that upon the chapter concerning
Judges, the direct contrary is commonly taught by the Society: and that their
principal Doctors Suatez Vasquez, Valentia, Sanchez, Tannerus, Becanus, Conink,
Granado, Salas, Filiucius, Layman, Reginaldus, Gotdonus, ^. etc.
have declared against this proposition. And they bring for it very strong and
good reasons; and do solidly show the difference there is between these, in
particular, and other cases, where neither the interest of our neighbor, nor
the honor of Religion is concerned.

There followed in the list of Dominicans, To. 1. disq. mot. disq. 3. art. 20.
Vincentio Candido Master of the sacred Palace. Ad. 1.2. dis. 208. frag. 1.:
nu. 549.
Ildefonsus of Saragosa whose works were printed at Rome, by order of the
General Chapter of Dominicans; a circumstance, upon which one may argue
strongly, and which Pascal would not have forgot, if the treatise of Divinity
of any Jesuit, who had taught the doctrine of probable opinions, Page 182.
Controv. 14.
had been published by order of a General Congregation of the Society. This
list ended with Paul Blanchis and John Haquet.

The Abbot further proposed the justifying or proving some passages of the
Doctors of Louvain, quoted by Father Dechamps. But Cleander and Eudoxus said
they were abundantly satisfied. They only took the pains to count the Authors
of the other Orders, and the Doctors of all the Universities mentioned in the
following chapters: the number was about threescore: but they read,
attentively, and with pleasure, the reflections made by Father Dechamps in the
last chapter of his little book, which really are very much to the purpose.

The first is, that which the Abbot had before made them, and which, as one may
say, does, naturally, present it self to their and every body's eyes. To wit;
whether there be the least reason, or the least equity to attribut to the
Jesuits, as their particular and peculiar opinion, a doctrine, largely spread in
the writings of the Divines of all Religious Orders, and of the Doctors of all
Catholic Universities: and above all, when Mr. Isambert writes in France, that
it is the common opinion of the Doctors. Ita communiter Doctores; that Bonacina
writes the same thing in Italy: Ita communiter Theologi; that others say it in
Spain, and others in Germany. Haec sententia est communis in Scholis. Navar, Io
Caram. Ep. Misiensis.
Illa sententia est hodie omnium.

The second reflection is, that, it is yet more ridiculous and more unjust, to
make the Jesuits authors of an opinion, taught by so many able Doctors before
they had a being. It is the most common opinion of Divines, said Peter Navar in
the year 1597 This opinion is supported by the greatest number of Doctors, by
the greatest authority, and by the strongest reasons, said Salonius, an
Augustine in the year 1592.

The third is, that the Jesuits have applied themselves, above all other
Divines, to limit and restrain this doctrine, which certainly may be abused more
than any other Moral principle, if it should not be taken as it ought to be;
and which, in reality, was stretched too far by some Doctors, before it was
treated of by the Jesuits. For this reason, Suarez, Vasquez, Sanchez, and other
the most learned Divines of this Society, have plainly demonstrated, and
convinced all the Divines of their time, that this doctrine ought not to take
place in reference to Judges in their Judicatures, nor to Physicians in the
application of their Medicines, nor to Professors of Divinity, in the choice of
the opinions they ought to teach: and these last, in particular, are bound in
conscience, according to the Morals taught by the Jesuits, to follow the most
safe opinions in matters of Religion, and such as are conformable to the common
practice of the Church, and morally certain in the matter of the Sacraments.

Lastly the fourth reflection, which, by the way, they had touched upon in the
precedent discourse, is, that from the time this doctrine was in vogue till the
year 1660 there had been but one Author who attacked it in it is full extent,
and that this Author was an Italian Jesuit, Comitolus, from whom Wendrok had
taken the best part, of what, with any color of reason, he had said upon this
subject, but very disingenously, without acquainting his readers that this
Comitalus, whom he had cited, was a Jesuit.

They were going to leave the library, after the Abbot had shown his two
friends in the books of several Jesuits the definition they give of a probable
opinion, together with the restrictions added to it, by Layman, Suarez, and
their other Divines, the extracts of which he had shown the day before: and had
thereby made an end of convincing them of Pascal and Wendrok's unfaithfulness,
who give a very false notion, and make a very wrong scheme of this doctrine, to
no other end, but that they might have an occasion to calumniat the Jesuits.
Just as Cleander, casting his eyes, by chance, on the 33 page of Father
Dechamps book, which lay open, saw there the name of Father Morin, the
Oratorian: what, said he, laughing aloud, do the Jesuits bring to their
succor, even the very Oratorians, upon the chapter of Probability?

Because that is an extraordinary thing, let us see, said Eudoxus, what Morinus
says to the business. In his eighth book of Penance chapter 4. nu. 19. these words
are to be found. Franciscus Suarez tra. 3. ad 1.2. disp. 12. sect. 6. nu. 10.
prudenter mihi videtur circumscribere casus, in quibus necesse est opinionem
certam praeferre probabili, and probabiliorem minus probabili: mihi enim
videtur certum and evidens, aliquando probabilia certis praeferri posse: quibus
igitur indicijs and argumentis haec dignoscemus? quando, scilicet, inquit
Suarez, ex justitia vel charitate tenemur vitare damnum, quod re ipsa subest,
vel periculum ejus, etc. Suarez seems to me to determine very prudently the
cases wherein one ought to prefer a certain to a probable opinion, and the more
probable to the less probable: for it appears to me certain and evident, that
sometimes a probable opinion may be preferred to a certain one: how shall we
come to know when this is to be done? that is, says Suarez, when either
justice, or charity does oblige us, to prevent the damage that may happen by
the thing it self, or the danger of it, etc.

Let us go, said Eudoxus, the Jesuits have carried the cause and they will
carry it before any impartial judge: any man of sense, who will but hear and
examine it, as we have now done. They went abroad to take the air a little
wearied by the application their curiosity had given them, but mighty well
satisfied they had cleared and disintangled the truth of things, from all the
clouds and obscurities, wherein it had a long time layn industriously concealed
and folded up.

The following part of the fourth Dialogue.
AT their return from taking the air, they alighted at the Abbot's lodging,
where, after they had, for some time, talked of indifferent things, being at a
stand, and the conversation fallen, Eudoxus thus briskly took it up again. But
what think you, in the main, Master Abbot, of the question of probable
opinions? let us lay aside the matter of fact, and the sense of others, and
tell us your own thoughts of the thing it self.

I should be hard put to it, answered the Abbot, if I were obliged to declare
my self in this particular. It Is a matter wherein it is as easy to destroy all,
as it is hard to establish any thing: where the extreme, and directly contrary
opinions, seem to have insupportable consequences; and where the middle, which
some are willing to hold, seems not possible to subsist, without reestablishing
the foundations of the two opinions, which they pretend to destroy.

This is a very strange proposition, said Eudoxus: but if it be true, the
positive, magisterial air, which some certain people put on, and affect in this
matter, is not to be endured.

The greatest part of these men, answered the Abbot, have dived very little
into the business, but suffered themselves to be carried away with the stream
of the party, they first met; or to be dazzl'd with outward appearances, which
have in them nothing that is solid; or else to be shunned with the clamors and
out-crys raised, by concert or agreement, in Flanders and in France, and which
have been ecchoed and heard as far as to Rome. But here they move more slowly,
and walk with a graver pace, and are not in so much have, nor very forward to
decide in so nice and tender a point. All that I can say to you, is, that I
cannot bear Pascal and Wendrok's opinion, and that I do yet suspend my own
judgment, concerning the opinions of other Divines.

It looks well notwithstanding, said Eudoxus, to say, that one is obliged
always to follow the more safe opinion, tho it should be the less probable. Has
not Wendrok said wonders in his first note upon the fifth Provincial Letter,
where he proposes his system, and fights with all his forces that of his
adversaries, represented by the single body of the Jesuits? For these Fathers
are there brought to answer for all the Thomists, all the Scotists, all the
Doctors of Salamanca, Alcala, Louvain and Sorbonne; for all the Canonists, and
all the Bishops you have named to us, and to whom had they spoke to them in
their proper persons, it would certainly have been very rude, to have offered
so many injuries, and said so many contumelious things, as he has done.

All that is admirable, answered the Abbot; and above all this fine principle,
upon which all the rest depends, that no probable opinion is safe, and that it
does not excuse from sin, if it be not true; Sect. 4. paragr. 1.
opinionem probabilem securam non esse nisi vera sit. Insomuch that any
judgment upon which I lean, whether it be to govern my self, or to direct
others, that consult me; this judgment, I say, how probable, and how well
soever founded, if it be false, makes me a criminal and guilty before the
tribunal of the divine justice. It is, without doubt, this extravagant and
erroneous principle, of which the absurd consequences are easily known, that
has contributed most to make this opinion fall to the ground.

For, notwithstanding, all they could do, the Doctors and Directors, most
zealous for the reformation of Morals, were not able to make it serve their
turn in spite of all that was most specious in this severity, and of the honor,
and reputation it would have brought to their direction and advice, and
notwithstanding the inclinations, and the interest they had to give into the
notions of one kind of devotes, by declaring loudly and universally for the
more safe opinion, they are agreed, that there is no solidity in this doctrine,
and convinced by reason and by experience that it is both impertinent and
impracticable.

Not to be able to quiet the conscience, but by evidence, which is wanting
often and almost always in moral things, to reduce all the Judges even after
they have done their duty exactly to doubt (I speak of well grounded doubt, and
not of a scruple) whether they do not make themselves liable to go to the Devil
almost by all the judgments they pass. For the most just and impartial are
daily divided amongst themselves; that is to say, that necessarily the one, or
other of them in this opposition of opinions, judge and decide the contending
parties differences upon false principles, or by misapplying true ones, and
that thereby they do an act of injustice, which neither their application, nor
their examination of the affair, nor the care they take to follow that, which
seems to them the more probably true, nor the authority of the most able
Lawyers, can excuse since that after all this they lay hold on a false opinion,
and which at the same time is contrary to justice. To throw into the same
uncertainty, by the same reason, all Lawyers, Advocates, Procters and
Atturneys, almost for all the causes they take in hand, among which it is
certain there are very few that have as clear a right of their side, as there
is truth in a mathematical demonstration; and all those that have litigious
rights and causes, for all the suits they bring and maintain. To give the same
kind of trouble to all Directors, and all Confessors in an infinity of
decisions, especially, in the matter of restitution, where it is as little
safe, to oblige as not to oblige to restitution, and where it is equally
dangerous, on both sides, to offend, or sin against justice: and to all
Merchants, in, I know not, how many circumstances, of their trade and dealings,
and generally to all men, in an infinite number of conjunctures, where the daily
commerce of life does engage them, and wherein they are governed by probable
opinions only: all this appeared very intolerable.

Besides this other principle, which Wendrok farther supposes, for the
establishment of his doctrine, that invincible ignorance does not excuse from
sin, is a principle, whatever efforts are made in it is favor, that reason
cannot admit, and which is repugnant to the notions, all men have, of the
goodness of God, and which of late, was also censured at Rome, and which, in
effect reestablishes some of the condemned propositions of Jansenius, and
undermines the foundation of some of the most important doctrins of the Council
of Trent.

After all, the ineffectual remedy for all these great inconveniences, and the
only one suggested by Wendrok, is, to address ones self to God, as if a man
could be certain, every moment, of a particular revelation from on high.
Notwithstanding these reasons, they were, I say, obliged to quit this fine
piece of Divinity. But it does not appear, that either Wendrok, or his friends
were much troubled for it. The opposition that was then made to this specious
severity, together with the pretended looseness of the Society's Morals, served
well enuff to decry and run down the Jesuits; this was all these Gentlemen
aimed at, and they had all the reason in the world to be satisfied with the
event.

I very lately puzzled, said Cleander, upon this subject, a Doctor of the
severe Morals by a difficulty I proposed to him, concerning the contracts for
incomes upon the loon of money. It is certain, said I to him, that these kind of
contracts can be justified, only by probable reasons. They have been in use,
or, at least, well warranted, but within these two or three last ages. In the
beginning they were accounted, by several Doctors, usurious contracts, and
altogether unjust, whereby twice as much money was repaid as was at first
received; since it will plainly appear, by redeeming, at the end of twenty
years, the agreed for sum of a thousand pounds a year, after the rate of five
in the hundred, and cleaving for the whole time the arrears, that the money
first borrowed with just as much more was fully paid back. This business was
then disputed, with so great variety of opinions, that even to our days the
dispute of the three contracts was still kept on foot. It is also certain, that
this kind of contract is to be justified by a good intention, which men have to
purchase, by parting for ever with the principal, not a certain sum of money
yearly paiable, (for money is not to be bought with money) but a right of
exacting, every year, a certain sum from him, to whom the principal was given.
This is a very nice and tender point. He ought to have answered, said Eudoxus
interrupting him, that two Popes, Martin the fifth, and Callixtus the third,
did tolerate, or approve these sort of bargains, in the Decretals they made
upon this subject.

He gave me this answer, replied Cleander, but I thus pursued my argument;
besides said I to him that the Popes can neither derogate from, nor destroy the
law of nature, to which, many Doctors do affirm and maintain, that, this
contract is as opposite and contrary, as is the most formal kind of usury.
Besides this, many of those, we know, who hold that the most safe opinion is
always to be followed, do not hold, that the Pope's authority is sufficient, to
make an opinion certain, if it were before doubtful; and that these two Popes
do not approve of this contract, but on two conditions, not to mention some
others, which they do also require. The first is, that the rent or incom should
be in the manner of a mortgage, and settled upon some certain, fixed, fund, of a
nature to produce a revenue, for example, upon an estate in land, or upon a
house. The second is, that, this fund failing, the rent should be no longer
paid: conditions which made easy the greatest difficulties the Doctors had
raised upon this kind of contract.

But in France, these conditions are not observed, he that borrows money binds
all his estate, in general, and his own person into the bargain; that, if his
estate should fail, the person should always remain bound. Pius the fifth,
since these two Popes, and the Council of Bourdeaux, held in the last age, say,
that these two conditions, which I have mentioned, are necessary. Whence it is
evident, that it is more safe, not to have, not to make, or receive such kind
of contracts, or bargains, at least, after the manner they are made in France.
For to examine this business well to the bottom, they have not found, for these
two or three hundred years, any new demonstration to justify this contract,
more convincing, than the reasons at that time proposed to support it; nor a
more solid refutation of their arguments who condemned it; that is to say in one
word, that there is but a great probability to justify this kind of bargain or
contract.

This probability then is not an assurance, that it is conformable to the law
of nature, however it may be allowed of, by custom and by reasons, which seem
very probable, to honest good men, and to the greatest part of the learned. But
if these learned men, who are but Schoolmen, Canonists, or Casuists, be
deceived in a matter, so subject to error, what shall become of an infinite
number of Christians, of all estates, conditions, and employments, who daily
either give, or take money, at this kind of interest? What shall become of us in
France? where the conditions are not observed, which the Popes believe
necessary, to hinder this contract from being dangerous, and with which many
Doctors did not yet judge it safe enuff, and without which abundance of others
accounted it unsupportable. It is manifest, that in this, all follow the
probable and less safe opinion. I assure you, added Cleander, that my man was
so puzzled, he knew not what to answer.

I do not at all wonder at it, said the Abbot, any man of sense cannot but see,
that these arguments are unanswerable, and plainly demonstrate, what a folly it
is, to build on certain general maxims, which, at first, seem clear, tho they
are indeed but dazzling, and the application of them, in an infinite number of
occasions, absolutely impossible. A thousand such like arguments, as you have
told us might be made, upon this subject, and which can never be answered. I
know continued he, that in the first heat of the pretended reformation of
Morals, Cas de Conscience de S. Beuve tom. 1. p. 583.
this case was proposed: they drew themselves out on it, as well as they could;
but upon every little difficulty, and dissatisfaction found in their answers,
by those who consulted them, they were forced to acknowledge, that men were not
obliged always to follow the more safe opinion. But, in a word, when once any
doctrine makes an universal trouble and disorder in civil affairs, that very
disorder ought to pass for a moral demonstration that it is false; and that it
is against the order of Divine Providence, and, by consequence, against the
eternal verities, of which common sense and reason are but the expressions
which make part of the rules, God has given us for our conduct. And thence it
is, that such a doctrine has so short a duration, the common fate of all
extravagant and unreasonable opinions.

But is what you affirm certain, said Eudoxus, that this opinion is laid aside?
for I still meet, every day, men, who, in speaking of these matters, do
generally declare, that we must always follow the more safe opinion. This being
most favorable to the law, as they express themselves, and most contrary to
concupiscence, that this was the method of all true Christians, and that the
doctrine of probability was never known, or taken, in any manner, by the Fathers
and the believers of the first ages, for a rule of the manners, and conduct of
the Disciples of Jesus Christ.

How easy it is, answered the Abbot, for a man, to make himself a Doctor of the
severe Morals, such a degree, or Doctorship, requires neither study nor
learning; there is no more necessary for it, but a little confidence to
determine positively in company, and to condem, or dam all the world; I do not
speak of these sort of men, when I say Wendrok's doctrine, upon this point, is
out of date. I speak of the most able Confessors, and Directors of the best
credit of this age; who do not, at all, follow it, either in their practice, or
decisions; because they have found it is principles false, and it is consequences
extravagant, and who, in these days, commonly hold for a maxim, that when two
contrary opinions meet, the less safe becomes very safe, by the strength of the
reasons whereby it exceeds it is opposite; I speak of the Divines, who, for
several years past, have in their writings treated of probability, and, who,
except two or three, that are obliged to swallow a hundred absurdities, and to
engage themselves in a thousand contradictions, do confine themselves to the
refutation of this doctrine, that one may follow an opinion, which is both the
less probable and the less safe opinion, and to prove, that one may not follow
the less safe, but when it is the more probable opinion; but nothing is more
false, than what these pretended Doctors of Wendrok's character, as little
skilful in Divinity, and full as bold as himself, have had the confidence to
advance, that the doctrine of probability was never acknowledged in any manner
by the Fathers or believers of the first ages for a rule of manners.

They stand very much upon it, notwithstanding, said Cleander, and, build a
great deal upon this negative argument. It is true, answered the Abbot, that it
was not then disputed in the Schools, whether a probable opinion might be
followed, when it was the less safe; but it is also true, that, in practice,
the most holy men did govern themselves by it without scruple, when they met
with difficulties, which could not easily be determined by the chief and
inviolable rules of our manners, the Scripture, the Canons, and the laws and
constitutions of Ecclesiastic superiors; and when there was any dispute about
the sense and meaning of these very rules, Let not him that cateth not despise
him that eats and let not him that eats despise him that eats not.
in some circumstances, and the opinions were divided, every one took what side
he pleased, and said with Saint Paul Qui non manducat manducantem non spernat,
and qui manducat, non manducantem non spernat. This puts me in mind, continued
he, of a very nice conjuncture, of the Christians, in the time of Julian the
Apostat, reported in the Ecclesiastical history, and which will serve for an
example and proof of what I say.

This Emperor, Baro. ad ^n. 362.
among the acts he made use of to engage his subjects in Idolatry, gave order,
that all the victuals, exposed to sale in the market of Constantinople, should
be defiled by pagan superstitions; and particularly directed, that all, there
to be sold, should be first offered to Idols. The Christians of this great City
did believe, that, in conscience, they ought not to buy any thing in the
market, insomuch, that as long as this order was in force, they only fed upon
the corn which the rich had in their granaries, and which, without grinding,
they got dressed as well as they could.

The same Prince published, and put in execution, such an other edict at
Antioch; but the Christians there, were of a different opinion from those of
Constantinople; they bought, and, after their usual manner, eat of what was
publicly sold. The Church, which was much edified by the conduct of the
Christians at Constantiople, was not at all scandalized, at the Christians of
Antioch; and Theodoret, who reports this matter, does approve and justify it,
by a passage of Saint Paul, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, Whatsoever
is sold in the shambles, Cap. 10.
that eat, asking no questions for conscience sake. Those, of Constantinople,
knew this passage of Saint Paul, as well as those of Antioch; but they
understood it in a different manner; which occasioned two probable opinions, of
which the more safe was that of the Christians of Constantinople, and the less
safe that of the Christians of Antioch.

Here is the usage of probability, said Eudoxus, established, as much as
possible, by the contrary practices, and behavior of the Christians of these
two Citys; and by that of the Church in reference to those of Antioch, for,
without doubt, Theodoret, by approving the fact, did not believe they were
obliged to follow the more safe opinion.

The very Scripture it self, answered the Abbot, L. 1. Macha. c. 2.
can furnish me with examples of this nature, about the decision of the great
case of conscience proposed in the Jewish Church in the time of the renoun'd
Antiochus viz, whether it were lawful to fight upon the Sabbath day, the Jews
had, then, neither the Ark nor the Prophets to consult, but debated the matter
in a council of war, and concluded, they might fight upon the Sabbath day; this
was the less safe opinion, which seemed contrary to the law, and to all the
former presidents of that nation in matter of Religion.

If Wendrok, said Eudoxus interrupting him, had been of this council of war,
and had read in it his dissertation upon the fifth Provincial Letter, Mathatias
and Judas Machabeus would have been, infallibly confounded and turned into
ridicule.

No doubt on it, answered the Abbot, but to return to the Christians of the
first ages; when I reflect upon the manner of their conduct, it seems to me,
that men were never more governed by probable opinions, than they were at that
time; nor ever practiced more the maxim, which teaches, that one may in
conscience follow the opinion of a Doctor of reputation for probity and
learning; that a Bishop, a Priest, and a Deacon having gained the people's
esteem and good opinion, their judgment and sense of things were received as
Oracles, and blindly followed, in such matters, as the Scriptures, or the
Councels had left undetermined. Whereby you may see, that Wendrok, and all his
adherents are much out in their account; for after this, how can it be said or
maintained, that there are no footsteps of probability in the Scripture, or in
the holy Fathers, or in the practice of the first ages of the Church?

As concerning the Fathers, said Cleander interrupting him, I Will tell you a
pleasant adventure, of which some days ago I was a witness, and comes now into
my mind properly enuff. I was at the Bishop of **** 's house; where there was a
great deal of good company, and, among others, a Jansenist Abbot, who turned
the discourse to the Morals of the Jesuits; of whom he talked wonders,
especially touching the article we are now upon. The Prelat, being a man of wit
and judgment, and not an opiniator, growing weary of his too tedious discourse,
said laughing, I must tell you, Mr. Abbot, of a decision lately made in the
Indies, by the principles of probability; but, upon condition, that you will get
it inserted in the eighth tome of La Morale pratique before it be finished by
Mr. Arnauld. I do promise, answered the Abbot very readily, that, if you judge
it worthy, it shall have there a very good place. You your self, replied the
Bishop, shall be the judge; the matter of fact is this.

A French Merchant, who had a very handsome wife, was shipwrack'd in the Indies,
and saved himself in a City belonging to the Spaniards, being a stranger, he
was carried before the Governor, a violent brutal man, who, at first sight,
fell desperately in love with the woman; the Merchant had notice of it, and,
being very much disturbed and uneasy, went to the College of that City, and
desired to speak to a Casuist and a Divine; he told them the difficulty he was
in; saying that he knew from good hands, that the Governor was so passionatly
in love with his wife, that he would gladly Marry her, if she were not already
Married. For he does not yet certainly know, says he, that she is my wife;
persons well informed of the matter do assure me, that he is resolved to have
me murdered, in case he finds me to be her husband; or that I should oppose his
Marriage. And, on the other side, if I suffer him to Marry her, he will give me an
employment, that will make amends for the great losses I have sustained by
shipwreck. I can very well conceal my Marriage, there being no body here
acquainted with it, and make her pass for my kinswoman, and relation, as she
really is, and so near, that I was forced to get a dispensation to Marry her. I
am sure she will do any thing I shall bid her; but I would not willingly offend
God. I have had a thousand times the benefit of his Divine protection, and,
even now, he seems to inspire me with some confidence, that he will hinder the
execution of the Governor's ill designs against my wife.

Hereupon the Divine, who spoke first said, that he very much pitied his case,
and declared to him there was nothing else to be done, but to give an heroic
proof of his faith, by offering up his life, a Sacrifice to Almighty God; for
if he were asked, whether the woman were his wife, and he should answer she was
his kinswoman, this must needs be, either a ly, or an equivocation; neither of
which is lawful: but the greatest evil of this business was, that he could not
advise his wife to conceal her being so, and to say she was but his relation,
without visibly exposing her to commit adultery, and making himself a complice;
that, if he had so great a confidence in the Divine succor, he ought still to
hope, and rely upon the goodness of God, for delivering him from his present
danger, by some particular way he could not foresee; but to believe that God
should change the Governor's heart, in reference to his wise, or preserve her,
from the crime to which she her self would consent, could not but be a most
damnable presumption. This was not a Jesuit's decision, said our Jansenist
Abbot.

Have a little patience, continued the Prelat; the Casuist too spoke, in his
turn, and declared to the Merchant, that he was of another opinion: that as to
the first point, in saying this person was his kinswoman, he should not tell a
ly; he should indeed thereby conceal the truth, but not say any thing that was
false; wherein there is nothing of evil: and, as for the act of adultery, to
which his wife was exposed, this could not be imputed to him for a fault; that
by praying to God, and trusting in his goodness he satisfied his duty; and if
to take this course was to tempt God; to presume that he would save his life in
a conjuncture wherein his death was morally inevitable, would be to tempt him
much more. But in going this way, he was to take care, not to have the precise
intention to avoid death thereby, but withal he ought to be ready, as he said
he was, to do any thing rather than offend God.

Ho there spoke the Jesuit, answered the Jansenist, and if the other also were
one, here is directly Mr. Pascal's division, of the Jesuit Directors, of which
some are severe, and others loose even to excess.

Without donbt, said the Bishop, the Divine's opinion was the more safe, and
the more probable, and the Casuists, the less safe and the less probable. Most
certainly, answered the Jansenist, who earnestly desired to know, whether the
matter of fact was true, which he approved as excellent for the Morale
Pratique. The Bishop, perceiving him caught and drawn in, said to him
laughing, indeed, Mr. Abbot, what I have told you, is but a Parable, of which I
will now tell you the meaning. The Merchant's case is, in reality, that of
Abraham, to which you are not a stranger; who, to avoid the danger of death,
adviz'd Sara to say to Pharoo's people, and to Abimelech's, that she was his
Sister, Epist. 3 ad Olympiad.
without saying that she was his wife. The Divine was Saint John Chrysostom;
who plainly condems Abraham, as a man, who consented to the adultery of his
wife; who delivers up the sheep to the wolf; who deceiv's, and who is an
example to the greatest Saints, to let them see what they are capable of,
notwithstanding all their Sanctity. But the Casuist is Saint Austin, Lib. 22.
contra Faust. c. 33. and seq.
who said in express formal terms, that Abraham, in saying Sara was his Sister,
had done no ill; because he only concealed part of the truth, and told nothing
that was false, Tacuit aliquid very and non dixit aliquid falsi.

That is not yet all, continued he, the action of Abraham, said Saint Austin,
looks, at first, like that of a husband, who gives up his wife to commit a
crime; but it will not appear so to any, but to those, who know not how to
distinguish, by the light of the eternal law, between good and bad actions.
This Patriarch, persued the Father, did not consent to his wife's adultery....
but, by concealing she was his wife, and saying she was his Sister, his
intention was, that these strangers and ungodly men should not kill him, least
that after his death they should treat her like a captive. He adds the
circumstances, and the reasons mentioned in the exposition of the case of
conscience, and in the Casuist's answer; and above all, that Abraham was in
hopes, that, whatever happened, God would protect his wife. Where you see,
concluded the Prelat, that Saint Austin makes good use of the direction of
intention; and that he decides, at last, the case of conscience like a Doctor
who believed one might follow the less safe opinion, as Abraham himself had
done. It is certain, neither of them reasoned very well, if they did not judge,
that this less safe, was, at the same time, the less probable opinion; and if
they believed it such, we must say they were, of the same opinion with those,
who hold, that the less safe opinion may be followed, even when it is the less
probable.

Our Jansenist, continued Cleander, was a little surpised; and the trouble he
was in; diverted the company very much; he stiffly maintained, that nothing like
this could ever be shown him in Saint Austin. The Bishop of *** hereupon
reached down the sixth tome of this Father, and showed him, at large, the case
and the decision in the 22th book against Faustus; giving him also to
understand, that it was not in conscience safe, nor so much as probable, that
they might run down their neighbors, with that passion and madness, wherewith
his good friends the Jansenists seemed possessed, in declaming eternally
against the Jesuits: and that it would be much more edifying to practice,
without preaching, the severe Morals; than to preach them, every where, and yet
practice directly contrary to what they preach. This advice, answered Eudoxus,
seems to me to be very wisely and seasonably given; and, if those who speak so
disadvantagiously of the Jesuits Morals, would but reflect, upon the memorials,
and the testimonies by which they are induced to speak of them, after that
manner; and upon the reasons they might there find to believe the contrary of
what is said, upon the motives that there present themselves to make a man
distrust the sincerity, or the knowledge of those, that decry them most, perhaps
they would believe, that this, at best, was but the less probable opinion; and
that it was lawful to speak thus, and to believe all that their enemies had
published of them. But alas it is but too true, that the men, most zealous for
severe Morals, do, as often, as there is occasion, dispense with their most
essential rules.

And what do they now think at Rome, asked Cleander, of this fine maxim, that
men are always obliged to follow the more safe opinion? they there condem it
answered the Abbot; at least Alexander VIII passed his censure upon this
following proposition, That it is not lawful to follow a probable opinion, even
the most probable, among all those, that are probable, Non licet sequi
opinionem, vel inter probabiles probabilissimam, this proposition, is the
immediate consequence of the other; for, if a man be obliged to follow the more
safe, it thence evidently follows, that it is not lawful, to follow the
contrary opinion, how probable soever it may be.

That is manifest, said Eudoxus, let us here then take our leave of Wendrok,
with his mad extravagant Morals; but, continued he, I cannot however easily
give into the opposite opinion; which teaches, that one may follow the less safe
opinion, even when, at the same time, it is the less probable: why rather
should they not hold the middle opinion, according to which, men, may take the
less safe, only, when it is the more probable.

I am of your mind, answered the Abbot, and have all the inclination possible
to follow this middle opinion; and a great many of our present Divines desire
it; but, having very well examined the whole matter, I find, that the Doctors,
of this mitigated probability, are altogether as hard put to it, as the others.
It requires an entire book to show you all the trouble given them, by those,
who hold the doctrine of the less probable opinion, and that which they
themselves also, in their turn, give to those, who follow this opinion. I have
at my house some volumes that might instruct you in the business, in case your
curiosity and your patience could carry you so far.

I do not intend it, replied Eudoxus, and in all appearance, I shall content my
self in this matter, with the plain, naked, notion, you have given me of a
probable opinion, which, if I well remember, is an opinion not contrary to
faith, nor to the principles of faith, nor to any evident reason, that
plausibly answers all the arguments of the contrary opinion, and is, besides,
supported by one, or more, important reasons, that is to say, reasons capable
to make an impression upon a wise man, so far, as to satisfy him, that the
opposite opinion is not certain.

You take the thing very rightly, said the Abbot, but you must also observe,
that all these conditions ought to agree, even to the opinion they call the
less probable. For all the Doctors of different Nations, different
Universities, and different Orders, who have so unanimously taught, that the
less safe opinion may be followed in conscience, have always supposed, that the
less probable opinion, was truly probable; and that if the contrary opinion be
so evident, and certain, that it takes from it its probability, it will no
longer come within the state of the question. Insomuch, that those among them,
who say one may follow the less probable opinion, do only say, that an opinion
may be followed, which constantly has, and even by the very confession of
those, or, at least, the greatest part of those who oppose it, all those
conditions, as well negative as positive, as they are commonly called. By
which, as you may see, the doctrine of the Fathers, of Tradition, and the
Councels is secure; since the first precaution of these Divines, is to set down
all this, as an inviolable rule, and to declare improbable, every thing, that
is contrary to it, from the very moment it becomes contrary.

Although this doctrine, thus explained, said Cleander, should not be true, it is,
at least, evident, that it is not extravagant, nor impious, nor abominable; and
although it should not have been embraced, by so many learned and illulustrious
persons, as it has been, for so long a time, I would not look upon it as such.
This is the only thing, answered the Abbot, that I pretend at present to make
you conclude; and by this alone, I carry the cause against Pascal and Wendrok,
in favor of the Jesuits, and, an infinite number of other famous Divines.

As for me, said Cleander, till these disputes he, once for all, determined, I
would, in the mean time, be glad there were a rule made, whereby all men should
be prohibited from declaming, and roaring out against this doctrine, of the less
probable opinion; and against the other propositions that relate to it; under
penalty, that any one that did, should be obliged, in practice, to follow the
contrary opinion which in words he holds and maintains, That will never be
done, said the Abbot; there are too many concerned to suffer it; the very
Directors themselves would oppose it. What for example would Mr. **** say, if
one of his she penitents, reflecting upon part of her fortune, and doubting
whether it were well or ill acquired, should not in the matter refer her self
to him, upon pretense, that one single Doctor cannot make an opinion probable,
much less safe, and that she should therefore require him to produce the
opinions of a dozen Doctors under their hands and seals?

What would Mr. Abbot of **** say, if, because the opinion, which allows the
plurality of Benefices, to a man already possessed of one of a considerable
value, is, by consent of all the world, the less probable, and the less safe
opinion; he should in that point, be obliged to quit in practice, the doctrine
of the less probable opinion; against which notwithstanding he fly's out, and
furiously runs it down in all places?

What are you in good earnest, said Eudoxus, and does the opinion, which holds
the plurality of benefices lawful, pass for the less probable opinion? most
assuredly answered the Abbot, and it is really so. Never any probable opinion,
compared with its contrary, was more certainly the less probable opinion, than
that is. Those who talk otherwise, either do not speak seriously, or else do
not understand the right notion of probability. Sess. 24. c 17. Quod lib. 9. a.
25.
The manner of the Council of Trent's expressing it self, and what Saint Thomas
argues upon the subject, and what the Casuists, loose as they pretend them, say
of it, evidently show, that, commonly speaking, all, or most of those, who
enjoy plurality of benefices, are secured, but by the favor of the less
probable opinion; of whom, hardly, any are to be excepted, saving those, whom
the Ritual of Alet does, in effect except, to wit some good Churchmen, who,
with a well directed intention, and for want of fit persons, Hold several
Livings longer than otherwise they would....... who cannot easily rid
themselves of them, knowing the ill use that is often made of them..... and
who, in the mean time, do all they can, to hinder men from being scandalized at
their example.

I understand you, said Eudoxus, but in truth, if I should govern my self by
prejudices, what you tell me, touching plurality of benefices, would be
sufficient to convince me, that one might in conscience follow the less
probable and less safe opinion. For how many Bishops, Abbots, and Regulars, do
we hear lowdly preach and cry up severe Morals, and yet possess more benefices
than one good one? Besides, abundance of 'um have their Confessors and
Directors, in the famous Seminaries of Paris; where nothing is so much talked
of, as the severe Morals; and where some, even of those who possess pluralitys,
do actually dwell or reside. It must therefore needs be, that the Confessors of
these beneficed persons, and the Confessors of their Confessors, and the
Superiors, and most considerable in their Seminaries, do believe, that they may
in conscience, follow the less safe, and the less probable opinion. After this,
the Jansenists must surely be very impudent, to attack the Jesuits upon a point
they are so far from abhorring in practice.

The Jesuits, answered the Abbot, would be very happy, if certain persons of
some Seminaries, would not make them criminal, for a doctrine, which they
themselves do so publicly follow, and justify by their practice. But this does
not at all hinder them, from instructing, at the very beginning, or, at least,
from very easily permitting, the young Abbots there educated, to cry out
against, and, on every occasion, run down the Morals of the Jesuits, and to
ridicule them, for their doctrine of probable opinions; and for an excellent
model of this charitable rallery, the Provincial Letters are often put into
their hands, together with Wendrok's elegant notes upon them. You may assure
your self, that I do not speak at random of this matter; but am very well
informed of all their proceedings; what is there done and what is said upon
this subject.

But let us I pray you, said Eudoxus, return to our Abbot of **** so zealous
against probable opinions: no doubt, but this Gentleman, with all his Priories
and Abbeys, must needs have chosen his side, and concluded that it was worth
going to the Devil for fifty or sixty thousand livers a year. For, after all,
it being certain, according to the Casuists themselves, that the only
ressource, for those who hold pluralities, is the doctrine of the less probable
opinion, I dare not condem those, who believe, in good earnest, that it may be
followed: but as for this man, whose zeal, or rather fury, startles, at the
very sound of probability, I would fain know, how he understands the thing? Is
it not to pronounce the sentence against himself? and can there ever be a
person to whom God may with more justice say, Ex ore tuo te judico serve
nequam? Out of thy own mouth I condem you thou wicked Servant.


I do expect, said Cleander, that the first time I meet this Abbot, he should
tell me by what Morals he ordinarily governs himself in this matter; and I will
propose to him before witnesses, one of these three things; the retractation of
all he has hitherto said against this doctrine; or the quitting one of his three
livings; or the renouncing the share he pretends to in paradise. But, in a
word, continued Cleander, turning to the Abbot, you have undertaken no small
task, and are very well employed indeed to defend the Jesuits in this their
favorit doctrine, as its commonly said to be.

I know not how you understand the matter, answered the Abbot; but their
conduct and proceeding in it, seems to me very clear, and the most reasonable
in the world. When their Doctors first entered the Universities and the
Schools, they found this, the common, ordinary doctrine, and the most followed
of all others, particularly by Saint Thomas's disciples; could they have acted
more prudently, than in conforming themselves to it? some of them did not agree
to it, but taught the contrary opinion, not only in the Classes, and in the
Schools, but also in their public printed books; they did it, without
opposition, and with their Superiors approbation.

Since the violent exclaming and flying out against this doctrine, far from
doing themselves the honor of protecting it, every man, among 'um had the same
liberty he enjoyed before; of late, they taught the contrary to it in their
College at Paris; and I am very well informed, that the same thing was done at
Lions, and Tolouse, at la Fleche, and at Rome. They have, lately, maintained it
in public Theses, in their College at Paris, of which I my self was an eye
witness. Others have taken the resolution, I have done, to decide, or affirm
nothing positively in this matter. The books within these few years written by
the Society, in favor of this opinion, were not so much to defend it, for an
indisputable doctrine, as to show, that it had been poisoned and painted in such
horrible colors, to no other end, but that their Doctors might pass for the
great corrupters of Morals. They modestly represented to the public, that if
there was any evil in this doctrine, they did 'um wrong, who endeavored, to make
them answerable for it; they being neither the first, nor the only persons who
had taught it; and that it was the utmost malice, to single out and distinguish
them, on this account, from a crowd of Bishops, Doctors, and Divines, with
whom, and after whom, they had but joined in opinion.

Their adversaries seemed to think they had a mind to condem and banish it: I
do not believe they had, or ought to have any such intention; for being
propounded and taken, as in reality it is and ought to be, with the usual
precautions and restrictions, and such, especially, as the Jesuits, among
others, have added, and, having besides been maintained, by this infinite number
of learned Doctors, of whom I have shown you the list, it has nothing in it,
that could make it deserve to be condemned and exploded. The Jesuits do abhor
it, as their adversaries have represented it; they condem both its principles,
and its consequences; but under this disguise they disown it to be theirs. In a
word, let but the Church speak, or the lawful powers declare themselves, and,
then notwithstanding the numbers, and the merit of the Doctors, who, for these
hundred and fifty years, have defended it, they would condem it, and their
Superiors would, I am certain, forbid its being any longer taught, in all their
Colleges. They have always challenged and defied their adversaries, in the point
of submission and obedience. Let but the Church declare her self upon the
arricle of probability, as she has done upon the doctrine of Jansenius; and then
the Jesuits would not afterward be seen, to stick and boggle, nor to have
recourse to the distinction of Fact and Right, nor to any such like pitiful,
and trifling shifts, and artifices.

The Jesuits have, of late years, condemned theses and positions, and disowned
certain propositions, too lightly advanced by some particular members, deposed
and turned out of employment, those who had taught them, when they found 'um
incorrigible, and blindly subscribed, in matter of doctrine, to all the orders
of the Church. I wish to God, we might see their example followed by a party,
who do not oppose the Society, for any other reason, but because, they know the
Jesuits the chief supporters of the Catholic doctrine, the destruction of which
is these Gentlemen's ultimat design. But this character of submission and
obedience, was always the character of the true and faithful Sons of this holy
Mother the Church; as that, of wrangling and obstinacy, cheating and knavery,
was constantly the mark of faction and error.

Here the Abbot made an end; having first convinced Cleander and Eudoxus, of
the justice of the cause he had undertaken to defend. They made him afterward
promise, that he would see them again next day, to examine the other accusations
Pascal had charged upon the Divines of the Society in his Provincial Letters.

The Fifth Discourse.
Immediately after dinner, Cleander and Eudoxus carried the Abbot to the
Jansenist's house, Eudoxus's friend, of whom they had spoke in the first
discourse, and who had by him all the Casuists of the Society. They had great
hopes to engage him to dispute with the Abbot, that they might have the
pleasure to see, how each of 'um would behave himself, and which would come off
best, in a matter of fact, to be made good, only, by looking into the books;
and wherein nothing could be necessary but eyes, to decide the controversy. But
as ill luck would have it, the new adversary they had intended for the Abbot
was not at home; yet notwithstanding, they went directly to his library;
whither as they were going Eudoxus said to the Abbot, we have really lost half
our design: For our intention was, to find out for you a stout antagonist; who
might a little moderat that ardent zeal, which makes you so warm in defense of
the Jesuits. We two are a very unequal match for you; and the victories you
obtain, by the advantage of truth, would be the more glorious, if they were a
little better contested.

I do not find, answered the Abbot, that you are of so gentle and pliable a
mould, so easy as you pretend; you do indeed yield to truth, but not before you
are convinced; and it was well for me, and absolutely necessary, to have had
good proofs and authentic pieces ready to produce. For, notwithstanding all
your compliments, and commendations of my sincerity, I have not found you very
forward, to take my word touching the matter in hand. But, however, I must
confess you are very much in the right, and take the course every one ought to
observe in their inquiries after truth.

Tell me in good earnest, said Cleander, whether you are as able to defend the
Jesuits, in the rest, in all the other particular points, wherewith they are
reproch'd, in the Provincial Letters, as you have seemed to us, in the general
article of their conspiracy, against the Morals of the Gospel, in their empty,
chimerical, division, of strict and loose Directors, and in the particular one,
the doctrine of probability.

You your selves, answered the Abbot, shall be the judges; all I can say to you
is, that I will not spare their Divines, when ever I find them faulty. But I
desire you would not, upon Pascal's word, and his odd notions, conclude every
thing, without farther examining, to be loose Morals, which in his Letters he
call's by that name: And, if by chance, we should happen to find some Jesuits
go astray from the rules of true Morals, be content to treat them, as you
would, in the like case, treat other Divines, as you would a Doctor of Sorbonne
who got his book approved by three of his brethren; or a Dominican, whose work
had the approbation of three Divines and a Provincial of his own Order. Blame
them; but without imputing to the whole body, as a contagious disease, the sins
of a particular person. Nay, I will freely give up, even, the whole Society to
your censure, if in any determination, evidently ill, I do not find out, among
it is members, ten, twenty, for one, who have taught the contrary: These
conditions are not, I think, over advantageous for the Jesuits, and yet if with
all these they carry the cause, you cannot but conclude, that the right is on
their side.

Nothing can be more equitable, than what you desire, said Eudoxus; let us
begin at one end and go, gradually, on to the other, the list of real, or
pretended loose decisions begins in the fourth Letter. Wherein upon opening,
see said he, what Pascal makes the Jesuits here speak, by the mouth of the good
Father; who discovers to him all the secrets of the Society. We do maintain as
an undoubted principle, that an action cannot be imputed for a sin, if God does
not give us, before its committal, a knowledge of the evil that is in it and an
inspiration exciting us to avoid it.

In the first place, this is false, cried the Abbot, and I boldly affirm the
contrary; and that in the sense Pascal gives this proposition, no Jesuit ever
taught any thing like it. Let us see, said Cleander, how well you can make out
this beginning. Let us examine, continued the Abbot, how many several ways,
according to the Jesuits, this proposition is false. First it is false in an
infinity of actions, to which men are not moved by any passion, or transport;
and which nature of it self does abhor; the Jesuits, according to the
principles of the common, ordinary Divinity, do affirm that a man may sin, and
sin mortally, although God should not have given him actual grace, or an
inspiration to avoid the sin. I will explain my self by an example, which will
make you easily comprehend both theirs and my meaning.

I have read some where or other, that a Christian, a skilful Painter made a
slave by the Turks, having presented to Mahomet the second, who understood
painting very well the picture of Saint John Baptist's head, the Emperor liked
it, and said to the painter, that it was a very good piece; but yet had one
great fault; which was, his not having given to the head, that turn of the
mouth, which is commonly seen in heads, that are cut off. And having said this
he called to him an other slave; drew out his Cymiter, and struck off his head;
to let the painter see by this horrible experiment the defects of his picture.

The Jesuits all do, and will, say upon such an occasion as this, and an
infinite number of others, where liberty, impunity, and very often the mad,
foolish, vanity of designing to pass for a libertin and an ungodly man makes
some people, daily, commit, in cold blood, in spite of conscience, and of
nature, actions altogether unworthy either of a Christian, or a man. I say on
such occasions as these, men, without being prevented with that grace, which is
called actual, or a Divine inspiration, do frequently commit very great sins:
because according to Saint Austins opinion, Lib. de Spir. and li^. c. 2^.
The image of God in our Souls, was not so defaced by original sin, but that
there still do remain some strokes and touches, by virtue of which, nature and
reason alone are sufficient, to restrain men from committing such brutalities;
and even to make the most vicious do, sometimes, actions conformable to the law
of God. And in this point, Saint Thomas does perfectly agree with Saint Austin,
and the Jesuits.

In the second place, the Jesuits tell us, that when a man, foolishly, and with
knowledge of the hazard, puts himself into a near and dangerous occasion of
sining, the providence of God is, not, at all, engaged to secure him; and that
tho God should not have given him any grace; in the instant preceding the sin,
to which he exposed himself, this sin, notwithstanding, would be imputed to him.

Thirdly, that the sins, the blasphemies, for example committed by a drunken
man, while drunk, are likewise imputed to him, although, by reason of the
condition he then is in, he can have no actual knowledge of the evil he
commits, nor any inspiration to avoid it.

Fourthly, they teach, that customary sins, for example, the false oaths, and
imprecations made, by a common swearer, are all imputed to him, although he
commits these sins without reflection, or the actual knowledge of what he does,
unless that being truly touched with sorrow for the sins he had committed in
this matter, he do not heartily detest the custom he has got, and destroy it,
as much as lies in him, by a real and sincere repentance.

Lastly, Suarez, Vasquez, La^man, Sauchez, Lugo Vasentia, Tannetus etc
they all teach, that the sins of vincible ignorance, that is to say, the
actions, committed against the law, and a command, wherein they ought and might
have been instructed, are also imputed to those, who commit them; although they
were done without any actual knowledge of the evil, and that they had no
inspiration before hand. After this, he showed them, in several of the Jesuits
books, he there found, and wherein these matters were handled, the doctrine he
had expounded to them.

You may now perceive, added the Abbot, whether this proposition, That no
action can be imputed for a sin, if God gives us not before its committal the
knowledge of its evil, and an inspiration that stirs us up to avoid it; whether
I say this proposition, which according to the Jesuits, is so many ways false,
be, among them, an indubitable principle, as they are here made to say.

It is true, said Eudoxus, that, as to this last point, the Jesuits could not
declare themselves more positively, than they have done in their book,
entitled, L'erreur du Peche Philosophique combattue par les Jesuits. No body
could defend themselves better, than they have done upon this occasion; wherein
it was certainly seen, and with good reason, that they took the thing to heart.
Here is the book you mention, said the Abbot, drawing it out of his pocket. Ho!
said Cleander laughing, nothing is more evident, Mr. Abbot, than that you have
prepared your self for this combat. Ha! could you doubt it, answered the Abbot?
could you believe I could have been so perfect in these matters, if I had not
reflected on them anew; and would it not have been a piece of rashness in me,
to have spoken of them, before two men of your sense, without having first
considered very well, what I was to say; and before two witty men, who,
notwithstanding all their equity, would have had, like many others, some small
malicious pleasure, to see the Jesuits found somewhat less innocent, than, I
say, they are in the things, whereof they stand accused. Here in the nineteenth
page is the place you speak of, continued he.

Yes, Sir, of so great number of Jesuits, Interpreters of Scripture, School
Divines, Controversits, Casuists, or Canonists, Writers of Spiritual treatises,
Preachers, and even Philosophers themselves, I defy you, to find one single
man, who, treating of ignorance, or inadvertence, in reference to our duty, has
not distinguished, that which is blamable, from that which is not; and who has
not said, that neither ignorance, nor inadvertence, does ever excuse from the
evil one is ignorant of, by a criminal wilful neglect.

Behold, said Cleander, an induction general enuff, and very exact; which,
without leaving out one, runs through all the several sorts of writers; and it
must needs be, that the Jesuits have said nothing but truth on this occasion,
since no body has thought fit to contradict them, or show the contrary. That
therefore which the Jesuits would say, continued the Abbot, by the proposition,
which Pascal attributes to 'um, or rather, that which they would say, by some
other propositions, which comes near to that, and which he reduces to it, to
poison more easily their doctrine, is no more than this, that every actual sin
is voluntary, either in it self, or in its cause; that men do never offend God
by necessity; and that to be criminal, even in the state of corrupted nature;
they must be free agents, and under no necessity. You are not now to learn the
reason, why this would please neither Pascal nor his friends. This doctrine of
the Jesuits is the contradictory of that which was condemd in ^ansenius by
Innccent the Xth. and Alexander VII.
Well, said Eudoxus, we are satisfied in this article. But I am not yet,
answered the Abbot; read again, if you please, this very passage, and that
which follows.

Eudoxus read, a second time, this passage of Pascal. We do then maintain, as
an undoubted principle, That no action can be imputed as a sin, if God gives us
not before we commit it, a knowledge of the evil that is in it, and an
inspiration to incite us to avoid it. Do you now comprehend what I would be at?
astonished at such a discourse, according to which, all sins of surprise, and
such as men commit, without once thinking of God, cannot be imputed........

Hold there, said the Abbot, what notion have you of these words? They give me
to understand, answered Eudoxus, as all the rest of the Letter does, that,
according to the doctrine of the Jesuits, as Mr. Pascal explanes it, there can
be no sin of surprise; that all the crimes of hardened libertins, who run
headlong and wilfully into a forgetfulness of God, are no longer sins; and
that, as he says, some pages after, when once a man has prevailed upon himself,
to think no more of God, he cannot afterward offend him; that he is very
silly, who sins but by halves; that these half sinners, who still retain some
love for virtue, shall all be damned; but as for the through paced sinners,
hardened sinners, sinners without any mixtures of goodness, complete, and
perfect sinners, there can be no place found for them in hell.

But, by the exposition I have made you, answered the Abbot, and by all, I have
shown you, in the Jesuits books, can you form to your self the fame kind of
notion; no, by no means, said Eudoxus; I conceive just the contrary; for it is
evident to me, that there are many sins of surprise; as your habitual swearers
fully demonstrate; and that the forgetting God, being voluntary in libertins,
it must necessarily be, according to the Society's Divinity, that they are
guilty of all the crimes they act, during this forgetfulness; and that they
will be infinitely more punished for them, than the half sinners who have still
some love for virtue. In a word, we must acknowledge, that this of Pascal is a
mere calumny.

I am now content, answered the Abbot, but if you desire to satisfy your
selves, yet more fully upon this subject, read the Jesuits second Letter
concerning Philosophic sin. See, how in that they explain it. Page 5.
The new heresy imputed to us, Page 40.
is, to maintain that all ignorance, and all forgetfulness of God, although
voluntary, and blamable, as in Atheists, Idolaters, Libertins, and all other
sinners, whose examples the accuser has made use of, to expound this heresy,
that all manner of ignorance, and all kind of forgetfulness of God, are
sufficient, to secure us against committing any sins, but philosophic sins,
which do not offend God, we all condem this as an abominable heresy; but, at
the same time, we say, it was never taught by any of our writers.

Read this book also, Art. 2.3.4. etc.
de l'erreur du Peche Philosophique combattue par les Jesuits page 17. etc.
here you will see the whole doctrine, of the Society upon this subject,
perfectly expounded; that which, as well the Jesuit Divines, as the Thomists,
and all others mean, when they say, that to offend God, the malice of the sin
is required to be known, is, that one must reflect upon the evil that is in it,
as the Libertins often do, in spite of their forgetting God. In a word, you will
find in these two books, all that relates to this matter, admirably well
handled, and cleared from all difficulties.

The Abbot also made them read a passage in Suarez, where he explains what
inadvertence is; Suarez de actibus hum. disp. 7.
and does it, in the most handsome, and most intelligible manner, so abstracted
and so hard a subject is capable of; which, for its difficulties, was purposely
chosen by the Jansenists, to confound those things, which every body is not
able to make plain and clear.

Let us go on, said Cleander to the Abbot, you have, for certain, saved the
body of the Jesuits; but I know not whether you are able, upon the same
article, to save Father Bauni, qui tollit peccata mundi, says Pascal, Who
takes away the sins of the world.
and as was formerly said by Mr. Hallier, when he fell out with the Jesuits.

Although I were not able, answered the Abbot, I should be but little concerned
for it. And I am persuaded, the Jesuits themselves would not be much troubled,
and would be the first to condem him, if he had maintained the doctrine, Pascal
ascribes to him. But let us see how the matter stands.

Then they read in Pascal the words of Father Bauni, Collection of sins.
taken out of his Sum des Pechez written in French. To sin and be guilty
before God, a man must know the thing he would do is evil, or, at least, doubt,
or fear it; or judge, that God takes no pleasure in the action he is about, and
that he has forbidden it, and, yet notwithstanding, skip over all rubs and
difficulties, go on and commit it.

After what I have told you, said the Abbot, of the doctrine, held by all the
Jesuits, it is not difficult, to understand the meaning of Father Bauni's
proposition. To sin, says he, and make a man guilty in the sight of God, he
must know, that is to say, he must not be ignorant by an involuntary ignorance,
that the thing he is about to do, is not good; at least he must doubt it, etc.
how do you prove, asked Cleander, that this was his meaning.

That, is not my business nor the Jesuits, answered the Abbot; they accuse
them; they give an ill sense to one of their authors propositions; their
adversaries, who are the accusers, ought to convince them and make out their
allegations: but I will not be so exact with you, nor stand upon that
formality, since it is your desire I will prove it.

First, Bauni teaches, or supposes, every where, when occasion offers, that
voluntary ignorance, which is called vincible does not excuse from sin. This is
positive, and makes his proposition blameless. Read, said he to 'um, the 775
page of the edition of la Sum des Pechez, whence Pascal has taken what he
reprehends, and see how this Father proves, by Scripture, that voluntary
ignorance is blamable. Such ignorance, 1 Cor. 14.38.
says he, is vicious, according to the Apostle's saying to the Corinthians,
ignorans ignorabitur.

But this position, That voluntary ignorance does not excuse from sin, is so
indisputable, continued he, and so certain among the Divines, that when they
treat of the knowledge requisite to sin, they do not believe it necessary, to
advertise, that they speak only of the knowledge, which is opposed to
involuntary ignorance. This is supposed clear of it self, and is understood in
all the propositions, which a thousand Divines have made, like that of Father
Bauni; Not. in 4, epist.
and Wendrok was never more wicked, or more ignorant in Divinity, than when he
argued upon this matter against that Jesuit.

In the second place, the reason which Bauni sets down for his assertion, is,
of it self, sufficient, to make his meaning known; and this reason, is the same
with Saint Thomas's, upon the like occasion; which is, Bauni page 906.
that a man is not to be blamed for any action, that is not voluntary: these
are the express terms Bauni makes use of, immediately after his proposition.
Whence it only follows, that to sin a man must not be ignorant by an
involuntary ignorance, that the action he does is evil; because, no other
ignorance hinders the action, from being wilful, and by consequence, according
to Bauni; from being a sin. I understand this, said Eudoxus, and to me his
meaning seems very plain and manifest.

In the third place, to confound and bring to nothing all the other malicious
reflections, which Pascal and Wendrok make upon this doctrine, the Abbot made
Eudoxus and Cleander read, what Father Bauni added, presently after, to
explicat the same assertion. The will, says he, carry's it self to, fastens
upon, and earnestly desires the forbidden object; which it may do, either
formally, or virtually, or very silently: formally, when, by an express act, it
loves, or hates, embraces, or rejects, what is represented to it, by the
understanding either as good or as bad. It Is thought to consent to it,
virtually, (mind well the following words, said the Abbot) when the actual and
formal consent, before given, still continues; as we ought to believe it does,
when it is not recal'd, interrupted, or hindered by some contrary act.

You see, added he, that to commit a sin, Bauni does not require an actual
reflection in the very instant of sinning; and that, according to him, it is
enuff, this knowledge should have preceded, to the end that the inadvertance a
man may have, even in the instant of acting, may be blamable.

He also showed the 92 page, where he speaks in this manner. To swear a thing,
which even might be true at random, and with the danger of being forsworn for
want of having well examined it before hand, is a mortal sin; in as much as
that danger is thought voluntary in it is cause, which is the ill and pernicious
custom of men's swearing rashly, and without heeding what they say.

Could a Divine, that talks at this rate, understand the present proposition in
this sense, that, without an actual reflection, in the very instant of sinning
upon its evil, no man can ever be guilty of a sin? it is then evident, that his
proposition, naturally, signifies nothing else, but that to sin, one must know,
or at least doubt, whether there be no evil in the action he is about, that is
to say, he must not be ignorant by an invincible ignorance that it is sinful.

It is manifest, answered Cleander, by what you have said, that this was the
good Father's meaning. But why do not the Casuists take care, not to make such
equivocal propositions, as give men a handle to catch at an occasion to
misconter them? you do not sufficiently thank me, replied the Abbot, for having
taken the pains to prove a thing, which required no proof, and to refute so
frivolous an accusation, as that was. However, I have yet patience enuff left,
to answer, without being angry, the instance you put me. You know, that in the
business of arts and sciences, it is the usage of words, commonly received
among men, of the same calling, that takes away equivocation, and determins the
sense of a proposition. Now, among Divines, as I have already given you to
understand, this usage, in reference to the present matter, leaves no ambiguity
in Father Bauni's proposition; and before the author of La Theology Morale
whom Pascal has followed, no body had thought of giving any other meaning, than
that, which we have given it.

For, when the Divines dispute of the nature of sin, they all say, after Saint
Austin and Saint Thomas, that to be voluntary is essential to sin; and they
explain the definition, and what it is to be voluntary, by the example of the
sins to which this quality does evidently agree; that is to say, by the sins
committed, with a perfect knowledge and a formal reflection on the evil of the
actions. After which, either in answering the objections, or otherwise, they
never fail, to extend this definition to some kinds of sins, to which it does
not agree so clearly. Such is Original sin, which they show to have been, in
its, own way, voluntary; such are the sins, custom makes us commit by surprise,
without any actual thought; such are the sins, caused by the ignorance, which
is called vincible; and it is, according to this method of Divines, which is
the method also of Saint Austin himself, that Father Bauni has defined sin;
saving, that, upon occasion, he extends his definition, as he has done in
pursuance of what is commonly practiced in the Schools, to the other sorts of
sins, which are voluntary only in their cause.

If this be so, said Eudoxus, Father Bauni was far from being in the wrong, for
explaining himself in that manner; but, on the contrary, they were very much
out; and showed a great deal of malice, or of ignorance, who made a business
on it, or objected any thing against him upon this account. I will convince you,
that this is the common custom, said the Abbot, not by the authority of Jesuit
Divines (they perhaps may be suspected) nor even of the Thomists or Scotists,
but by the very Theses of the Sorbonne. Read this passage of the Jesuits answer
to La Theology Morale upon this subject. Thus the Apologist spakes page 7.
part 2. I have before me while I am writing this a Thesis defended in Sorbonne,
in the year 1640, the 3. October by one Peter Bunot, Mr. Morel President,
approved by Mr. Forget, at that time Syndic, and Curat of Saint Nicolas of
Chardonnet wherein are these words, Ad omne peccatum praerequiritur expressa
cognitio malitiae moralis, vel expressa dubitatio ne actui eliciendo talis
malitia moralis inexistat.

Father Bauni's proposition seems to be but the translation of this Thesis,
which says, in Latin, that which he has said in bad French. The same Apologist
quotes also an other proposition, exactly like it of Mr. Du-val Professor of
Sorbonne, adding what is very true, that Saint Thomas, Saint Bonaventure, Saint
Antonin, Gerson, etc. speak, in this matter, just as Bauni has done.

I find you are strongly provided on this point, answered Eudoxus. I am yet
stronger then you imagine, replied the Abbot; I Will appeal to the authority of a
Judge, I am sure you will not refuse; casting his eyes, at the same time,
toward the shelf, whereon he had espied upon his coming in, the writings of an
author he was about to quote. I pray, said he to Cleander, who sat near it,
reach me down that parchment manuscript. Cleander took it down, and read upon
the back of the book, Traite des pechez dicte en Sorbonne par Monsieur de
Sainte-Beuve. Is it possible, cried out Cleander, that Mr. de Sainte-Beuve
should, at this time of day, be Father Bauni's security in this matter?

The Abbot, who, had seen these writings, of which there are thousands of
Copies spread all over France, opened the place, where he treats of this
subject, and gives it to Eudoxus, who began to read, that which follows in
Latin. To make an irregular motion in the sensual appetit become a mortal sin,
Trac. de pecc. dis. 5. sec. 1^ art. 3.
there must be a full and perfect reflection of reason, by which this act is
formally known to be bad, and prohibited; unless that, perhaps, the man, should
freely, and knowingly, have given occasion for that irregular motion or
delight. The first part is proved; because if this advertence be but by halv's,
the action cannot be perfectly voluntary, as it ought to be, to make it a
mortal sin, therefore, etc. the second is proved, because, if the bare action,
the matter it self, and not the evil of it, be but reflected on, then that,
which otherwise might be criminal in it, not being voluntary, does not become
sinful.

Ho! without doubt, said Eudoxus, Bauni is now safe enuff. I am sure Mr.
Arnauld and all his Party would much rather pardon him, than, with him, condem
Mr. de Sainte-Beuve. But let us proceed.

Since you have put me upon the proof, continued the Abbot, I could find in my
heart to tire you with my quotations; as indeed I could easily do, considering
the many passages I have ready to produce upon this subject. But since you ask
for quarter, I will give it you, upon condition, you will listen to one which I
must needs read you. All its strength and authority depends upon one of Mr.
Arnaulds best friends, a Doctor of Louvain, whose name and qualities I Will give
you an account of, after I have read you his doctrine. Here it is, just as I saw
it in the Thesis, faithfully reported by the author of the book, entitled
L'erreur du Peche Philosophique combattue par les Jesuits.

To sin mortally, a man must have a perfect, entire consideration, an express
knowledge of the sin, or of the danger there is of committing one, or, at least,
a formal doubt, or some fear, that the action may be sinful.

Mind now the reflection made by the author of the book just now cited,
addressing himself to his adversary. Do you not think, that this was dictated
by some Jesuit? and yet nevertheless do you believe him? it was Doctor
Pontanus, the famous approver of Austin of Ypres, whom the Church has condemned,
and of the Mons translation of the new Testament which he could not understand
(for he was ignorant of the French) it was, I say, this Pontanus one of the
Jesuits most vehement enemies, that signed this Thesis, and presided when it
was defended...... for, it is one of the statutes of the University of Louvain,
that no Doctor should approve, or preside at any Thesis, if any thing be
therein contained, contrary to the opinion of the University.

We have already more than enuff, said Eudoxus; I pray let the rest alone; and
let us also pass by what Pascal reproaches Father Anat with: I remember to have
read this passage in that Jesuits book; he intended but to say, that God
commands us nothing that is impossible; and if it was to be supposed, that it
was impossible for us, without actual grace, to avoid sin, God would either
give us this grace, or else would not impute that sin to us: which doctrine, is
contradictory to that which is condemned in Jansenius. This is neither the case
of Libertins, nor of hardened sinners; nor of customary sinners, nor of those,
who sin by ignorance, or a voluntary inadvertance of their duties. This single
passage, when I read it, made me think that Pascal was not well able to make
this out: since to support his cause, he was forced to have recourse to so weak
a proof; and that it was not usual with Father Anat, to mistake, or speak
improperly in matters of Divinity.

Notwithstanding, answered the Abbot, see how Pascal triumphs; do but harken to
that, which immediately follows Father Anat's proposition. Ho! how pleased I am,
said I to him, to perceive what fine consequences may be drawn from this
doctrine. I clearly see what will follow; what mysteries do offer themselves to
me. I see more men, without comparison, justified by this ignorance, and this
forgetfulness of God, than by Grace and by the Sacraments. What enthusiasme,
continued the Abbot, what vision, or rather what terrible malice is this?

Let us here take our leave of Father Anat, said Cleander interrupting him; but
let us not yet suffer Father Bauni to escape. I see another thing in this
Letter, which deserv's some reflection: it is what Pascal says, that his book la
Sum des Pechez was condemned at Rome, as well as by the Bishops of France; and
this also which Wendrok adds, that this proposition of Bauni was formerly
censured in Sorbonne.

I had much rather, answered the Abbot, have to do in this matter with your
Jansenist, Master of this library, than with you. For before I would answer
him, or make him take notice of a small touch of Jansenian honesty in this very
passage, I should ask him what his thoughts were of the censure of the Roman
Inquisition, whether he would be content, that we should, on both sides, refer
our disputes to this tribunal; if he would, the Jesuits might freely abandon,
or give up Bauni to the Inquisitors severity; but then they would have no
farther need to make any Apology or defense for themselves against the
Provincial Letters, since they are all to be seen, at large, condemned, by the
decrees of the Inquisition.

Ha! what do you say, said Eudoxus interrupting him, it is but two days since I
read in a letter from one of these Gentlemen, on occasion of the Mons new
Testament, Letter a un Confeiller.
that it is very often a mark of the goodness of a book to be censured at Rome.
If this be so, said he laughing, Bauni and Pascal, far from being confounded,
or thunderstruck by any sentence of that Court, could not be blackened, or so
much as wounded in their reputation. It must be acknowleg'd, continued he, that
there is something very odd in this business, and wherein it does not seem to
me, that the Jansenists pretensions are consequent to themselves, for that a
book, made by a Jesuit, being put into the Index expurgatorius should be
sufficient to make it infamous, but that the putting into it the Provincial
Letters and the Testament of Mons, which translation has been condemned by two
Popes, should be a sign, or testimony of their excellency, and make them be the
better liked, esteemed, and valued, appears highly improbable; and till better
made out, can never be believed by men in their senses.

However it be, answered the Abbot, they do not much trouble themselves at
Rome, in giving the public their reasons for putting a book into the Index.
That is sometimes done, for the omission of some formality in the impression;
and sometimes for asserting, or laying down, some principles, differing from
some maxims of the Canonists of Italy, with whom those of France do not always
agree; something of this kind there might have been in Father Bauni's books,
concerning the jurisdiction of the King's Officers over the Clergy; which
possibly might have displeased the Inquisitors, and in reality, it is well
known, that those, who solicited their condemnation, urged it upon this motive;
even those who daily endeavor, to make themselves be valued in France, by
running down the Ultramontanes, and pretending themselves zealous for the
Liberties of the Gallican Church. But, that which is most remarkable is, that
the Provincial Letters were always looked upon at Rome, as defamatory Libels,
full of calumnies and impostures; and which is more, full of errors, and, all
over, stuffed with Jansenisme. You have nothing now to do, but to guess, for
which of these motives, chiefly, they were condemned by the Inquisition.

As for what relates to the Bishops of France, pursued the Abbot, let us again
read Pascal's words. It is some prejudice, said my Jansenist, whispering softly
in my ear, that this book was condemned at Rome, and by the Bishops of France.
Would you not believe, said he, turning toward Cleander, when Pascal says
Father Bauni's book was condemned by the Bishops of France, that this must have
been done, in a National Council? I conceive, at least, answered Cleander,
according to this expression, that it must have been done in an assembly of the
Clergy.

No, replied the Abbot; all this was no more, but that Bauni was censured by
the late Archbishop of Sens Gondrin, by the late Bishop of Beauvais, and by the
Bishop of Comenges, who, not many years since, died Bishop of Tournay.

Was it no more then that, said Cleander? this is as if the Emperor should make
an Imperial decree, or proclamation against one of the German Princes, who
should dare to declare against the Prince of Orange. Bauni was a Jesuit, and a
great Anti-Jansenist, which was sufficient to make him lose his cause at that
bar.

I will say nothing else to you of the Sorbonne, continued the Abbot, but that
it is inconcevable, they should then censure in a Jesuits book, a proposition,
which they had heard, with respect, from the mouth of Mr. de Sainte-Beuve; and
which they had publicly defended some months before, as you have seen by the
Thesis I have quoted to you; and should endeavor to make Father Bauni believe
he had taken it in a different sense, from that which is commonly allowed in
Divinity, and which it ought not to have, according to its proper principles,
and which he could not have given it, I do not say, without heresy, but without
the greatest extravagance imaginable. Believe me, in all the wranglings and
disputes they so often had in those days with the Society, the Jesuits labored
under great difficulties, not so much to defend themselves, but to defend
themselves, with that moderation they always thought themselves obliged to
observe, even at the expense of their own interest, and without being wanting
to the respect they were willing to show, to some communities, or bodies which
did not treat them with the same kind of respect, and of whom some particulars
had pressed hard upon, and pushed 'um with the greatest rage and malice
possible.

It is certain, said Eudoxus, that the Jansenists then studied all the means
they could think of, to make all the world fall furiously upon the Jesuits: and
they had a wonderful effect; what they insinuated into several Communities,
does yet remain in some; where great pains are still taken to feed and keep up
the humor.

That is but too true, answered the Abbot, but let us make an end of examining
this Letter; where there is nothing more, particularly relating to the Jesuits
Morals. Only give me leave, to make in two words a short reflection among other
things, which, of themselves are obvious enuff, chiefly concerning the malice
of the author of the Provincial Letters.

This reflection, is upon the great weakness of Pascal's whole discourse, upon
what, I pray you, are all these consequences of loose Morals, in favor of the
Libertins, the ungodly, the revengful, the blasphemers, and the Epicureans,
founded, of which he makes the Jesuits the authors? they are really built, but
upon what he has thought fit, to make his imaginary Jesuit say, touching a
necessity of an inspiration from God, and an actual reflection upon the evil of
a wicked action, to make it to become a sin. All this is grounded, upon the
proposition of Father Bauni, and that of Father Annat, who never meant what is
attributed to 'um. The single distinction of sin, into that which is voluntary
of it self, and into that which is but voluntary in its cause; and of that
which is committed by an invincible, and involuntary ignorance, and that which
is committed by the other ignorance, called vincible and voluntary, does quite
dispel and drive away all these his frightful phantoms or bugbears.

By that distinction, all Pascal's libertins, all his impudent unchaste,
barefaced, sinners and his Epicureans, remain, according to the Jesuits
principles, guilty and convicted of all the crimes, from which he pretends
these Divines have absolved them. The little I have explained to you of their
Divinity, has made all this clear, and palpable; and yet nevertheless, it is a
wonderful thing, that in all the specious, fine accusations of the heresy of
the philosophic sin, (which was looked upon at first as a thunderbolt, that
would have crushed and broken the Jesuits to pieces, tho all of a sudden it
fell and came to nothing) men should be referred to the fourth Provincial
Letter, as to a writing, that contained an evident demonstration of the matter
of fact, after which the Jesuits ought not to be allowed or admitted, to make
any defense or excuse for themselves, of which I leave you to judge.

Mr. Abbot, said Eudoxus, interrupting him, to do you a pleasure, I Will repeat
to you, what I heard a very judicious man at that time say. He had newly read
the Jesuits second Letter, and the book you cited a little while ago, L'erreur
du peche philosophique, etc. he said he would laugh no more, nor take any
farther delight in the pleasanteries of the fourth Provincial Letter; but yet
would make himself amends, by reading the serious and vehement accusations of
the new heresy of the philosophic sin; at every article of which Mr. Arnauld
made him laugh more than once. His reason was, that the Jesuits had
demonstrated two things in these books; first, that none of their Divines ever
doubted but the ungodly, the libertins, and the customary sinners, were guilty
of sin, and ought to be eternally punished for those very crimes, which they
commit with least remorse and most quiet. Secondly, that the contrary cannot be
inferred, or proved from their principles; since it is certain, they all hold,
not one excepted, that neither ignorance, nor inadvertance, neither blindness,
nor custom, when wilful, can excuse sinners, or hinder them from incurring the
penalties of Hell, the due reward, and natural consequence of their ill
actions. These two matters of fact, said he, which the Jesuits have clearly
proved, and so as to convince all the world, destroys the whole appearance of
any probability, in the pleasant things said in the fourth Provincial Letter;
and, consequently, leav's them insipid, without salt, and without wit. For
there is nothing flatter, than raillery without a cause, a jest, without the
least foundation of truth, or reason, which therefore all men of sense have in
horror and indignation.

For which reason, the anger, and sometimes the fury of Mr. Arnauld, in his
five accusations of the Jesuits, for the philosophic sin, make men as often as
they read them, ask what this good man would be at? he has in hands, the the
Professor of Dijon's writings, as he himself tells us, he has no more to do but
to read them. This Professor himself has published them, and by good proofs
made them authentic; to the end the whole world might be witnesses of the
purity of his says, and of his opinions. The Jesuits condemned the expression
in his Thesis, and owned there was reason to contradict him. They cry out, and
tell Mr. Arnauld, that he makes objections, and sprites for himself to answer
and frighten away; that except the opinion of involuntary ignorance, which
excuses from sin, hardly any thing of the rest, is either a conclusion, or a
principle of their Divines: this they urge, and this they do indeed
demonstrate. At that time, I believed this matter but by halv's, continued
Eudoxus; but I am now as fully persuaded of it, said he to the Abbot, as you
your self can be. Let us therefore proceed to the fifth Letter.

The following part of the fifth Discourse.
WE have dispatched, said the Abbot, in our former Dialogues, a good part of
what is handled in this fifth Letter; of which the main subject, is the doctrine
of probability. There remain only some particular cases to be examined; the
first, that offers it self, said Eudoxus laughing, is a small matter, nothing,
in a manner; he only reproaches the Jesuits, that, with a subtle direction of
intention, they permit the Christians of China and the Indies, to commit
Idolatry. Let us read it, it is at the 75 page of my edition. By this means
they have (Directors) for all sorts of persons; and answer so well, according
to what is demanded of them, that when they are in countries, where a crucified
God passes for folly, they suppress the scandal of the cross, and only preach a
glorious, and not a suffering Jesus; as they have done in China and the Indies;
where they have allowed the Christians to commit, even, Idolatry, by that
subtle invention of making them hide, under their garments, the image of our
Savior; to which they teach them to refer, mentally, their public adorations of
the Idol, Chacinchoan, and of Keum-fucum; as Gravina the Dominican reproaches
them, and as the Spanish memorial presented to Philip the IV King of Spain, by
the Cordeliers of the Philippin Islands, reported by Thomas Hurtado in his book
of Martyrs page 427 does witness. Insomuch that the Congregation of Cardinals
de Propaganda Fide, was obliged to prohibit the Jesuits, in particular, under
pain of excommunication, from allowing, on any pretense whatsoever, the
adorations of Idols; and from concealing the mystery of the Cross, from those
they instructed in Christianity; expressly commanding them, not to receive any
to Baptisin, who had not a full knowledge of it; and strictly injoyning them, to
expose a Crucifix in all their Churches, as is at large set forth, in the
decree of this Congregation, dated the 9 July 1646, signed by Cardinal Caponi.
Thus you see by what means they have spread themselves over all the earth by
the favor of, etc.

I do profess to you, said Cleander, that these things are so very surprising,
the heads of the accusation so black, and also far fetched, that I had always
much ado, to believe them true, upon the report of the authors of la
Morale-pratique.

Ha! why not, answered the Abbot; are you also as hard to be persuaded of these
other curious particularities? That the Jesuits were the cause of the
persecution in Japon; which was always attributed to the Hollanders; and that
it was not the Dutch, but the Jesuits, who made the Kings of China and Japon
believe, that the Spanish Monks endeavored to get a footing in those countries,
for no other end, but to subject them to the King of Spain: that the Jesuits
did not only cross and drive away the other Missioners, but also persecute them
to death. That it was public all over Spain, that they had thrice poisoned a
Doctor, Morale pratique. tom 1. page 209.
called John Espino, and committed a thousand other such peccadillos, of which
they assure us they make no more scruple, than French high way men would do.

You railly, Mr. Abbot, said Eudoxus interrupting him; well then, answered he,
let us speak seriously. I say, if all these fine things, which they tell us,
are true, the Popes, the Kings of Spain, and the Kings of Portugal, are a
thousand times more to be blamed, than the Jesuits. For it is to them, that all
these complaints, all these memorials, and all these petitions against the
Society were made: and, yet notwithstanding all this, these Popes, and these
Kings, insensible of the interest of the Church and of their States, send the
Jesuits to China and the Indies: pray, and press them, to cultivate the
harvests, that are there; although they are every day told, that they spoil and
ruin them: and which is more, they exhort 'um to continue and to behave
themselves, as hitherto they have done; expressing, on all occasions, how much
they are satisfied with their conduct.

To this purpose Urban VIII, under whom the informers began to tell their
stories in Rome, declared himself in his Bull, directed to the Christians of
Japon, in the year 1626. And Alexander VII in 1655, writing to the Emperess
Helena, the wife of Yum-lie, at that time, Emperor of some of the Provinces of
China, and in a decree of the year 1656, expressly, approved the Jesuits
proceedings in China. Clement IX, in an other decree, in 1669, confirms that of
his Predecessor. 3. Dee, 1681.
Innocent XI did the same in what he writ to the famous Father Verbiest, and
afterward in an other letter to the Christians of Tunquin, when he sent them
back the Jesuits, as they had, for a long time, earnestly desired: 7. Ian.
1689. 25. July. 1690. and 2. Sep. 1691.
and as did also Alexander VIII and Innocent XII in their Bulls to the Emperor
of China. Wherein the first gave great commendations of the Jesuits, and the
second confirmed all his Predecessor had said in their favor.

This is for certain very strong, Mr. Abbot, said Eudoxus, but a little too
general: let us come to the matter of fact. The Decree of 1646, and the
allowance of Idolatry.

It seems to me, answered the Abbot, a little briskly, that all I have said to
you comes directly enuff to this matter of fact; and that, without much
arguing, it is easy to conclude, by the Popes, and Kings of Spain's proceeding,
by their Bulls, and Decrees, that all, which has been said upon this subject
against the Jesuits, are mere, perfect, calumnies; and that, if their enemies
could produce as strong proofs against them, as those I have alleged for their
justification, we should soon see finer declamations against them, than those
wherewith they have already filled six or seven tomes of the Morale-pratique.
But this is the fate of these Fathers; some whimsical, chimerical, vision of
any one of their enemies, or a popular report, raised, God knows how, is enuff
to blacken them; and yet to acquit and vindicat their reputations, the
authentic acts must always be expected. A hundred years hence, the Bombs of
Namur, will be a matter of fact, altogether as clear, and certain, in the
annals of some Port Royal man of that time, as the Gunpowder treason in
England is, in the accounts of the Protestants of that Island. Yet, since you
will have it so, let us come to this fine passage of Pascal; upon which I will
make you some short remarks, which I will justify and make good, either here or
at home.

First, as touching this decree, mentioned in the Provincial Letters, Pascal
must needs have spoken without book; and neither he, nor those who engaged him
to write, ever saw or read it; there was no decree made by the Propaganda on
this subject in 1646. but in 1645. nor was it dated in the month of July, but
in the month of September, nor signed by Cardinal Caponi, but by Cardinal
Ginetti; and thus all these little circumstances, which Pascal affects to set
down so exactly, to gain himself more credit, serve but to make his testimony
the more suspicious, as coming from a man, very ill informed, who writes at
random, and upon the credit of very uncertain memorials.

But from these simple falsities, let us go on to calumnies. Not one of those,
who reads this passage of Pascal, but thinks the Jesuits were heard and
convicted of all these crimes, in a full congregation, and condemned by a
decree, and afterward admonished, and obliged to change their practice, in the
instruction of their Proselites, and new Converts, and forced, more especially,
to make them detest Idolatry, and the adorations they had allowed of to
Chachin-Choam and Keum-fucum, or Confucius; and, yet notwithstanding, there is
nothing more false; and since you desire the particularities I pray harken to
the story.

After the Missioners of other Orders went into China, several memorials
against the Jesuits, were sent to Rome, upon the subject we now discourse of;
but more especially, among others, two. The first, was from two Bishops of the
Philippin Islands, and the other, from a Dominican Missioner, called John
Baptist Morales. The Bishops memorial did not give the Jesuits any long
trouble; for, some time after, In 1633.
these two Prelates writ to the Pope, that being informed of the contrary, of
what they had writ before upon false relations, they thought themselves bound
in Conscience, to justify the Fathers of the Society, against so unjust
accusations, and to defend with all their might, the innocence of these
Fathers, as well as the truth it self.

Father Morales did not forbear proposing his difficulties to the Congregation,
of which these following were two. Whether it were lawful to prostrate before
the Idol Chin-choam and to offer Sacrifice to Confucius. The Jesuits, who very
well saw, that these questions were made in prejudice to them, had nothing to
defend themselves with, to the world, but the Philippin Bishops retractation. I
say to the world, because the Congregation, without summoning them, was
content, themselves, to answer Father Morales's questions; in the greatest part
whereof, no more than in these, there was no manner of difficulty. Hereupon
followed a decree of the Pope; wherein the answers of the Congregation were
approved, and a prohibition made of proceeding otherwise in China, than
according to those answers: one of which was, that it was unlawful, to
Sacrifice to Confucius. This prohibition then, was, not particular to the
Jesuits, as Pascal says, (and that is a remarkable circumstance of the calumny)
but to all Missioners in genearl, and in particular, of whatsoever order,
profession, or institution, they were of. Omnibus and singulis Missionarijs
cujuscunque, Ordinis, Religionis, and Instituti; and to the Jesuits also, etiam
Societatis Jesu. This is the form of the style, they have, for a long time,
used in all decrees, relating to Religious Orders: and all this as the decree
go's on, till the Pope, or the holy See, shall otherwise ordain; Donec
Sanctitas sua, vel sancta Seeds aliud ordinaverit. Words, which, of themselves,
do plainly show, that the holy See desired to be more particularly informed of
the matter of fact. for as to the matter of right, there was no ground, or
pretense for another review, or deliberation; especially touching the pretended
Sacrifice offered to Confucius. This thing speaks of it self.

And his Holiness afterward was better and more effectually informed; for,
some years after Father Martini the Jesuit, being come from China to Rome,
fully acquainted both the Pope and the Congregation, with the whole affair; and
how all that had given occasion, for the suspicion of Idolatry, was but some
certain ceremonies, made at the reception of Doctors, in honor of Confucius,
which are purely civil, and have no manner of relation to Religion; and that
there was no Sacrifice, nor any thing like it. Whereupon the Congregation made
an other decree, in favor of the Jesuits, in the year 1656, of which without
doubt the author of the Provincial Letters, or his Commentators would not have
really been, or seemed to be ignorant, if it had been, but as much against, as
it was for, the advantage of the Fathers; whose innocence was thereby fully
justified; and after which, all other Morals, but those of Port Royal, would
have obliged Pas^l, publicly, to retract, what he had thereupon writ in his
Letters. This, indeed, answered Eudoxus, who had very attentively listened to
the discourse, is, to talk knowingly. But where have you learnt this piece of
Knowledge, said he to the Abbot?

I have drawn it out of the spring head, answered he, out of the most authentic
pieces that can be had of such a matter; and perhaps we shall find them here,
or, at least, extracts of them. If your Jansenist be as curious, as you say he
is, he will have, with all the tomes of the Morale-Pratique, the works of a
Jesuit, who has refuted some part of them; for, in these kind of disputes, men
seldom fail, to have what is writ, on both sides, pro and con.

The Abbot went to the shelf, where the tomes of la Morale-Pratique stood, and
thereon found the book intitl'd, Defense des nouveaux Chrestiens and des
Missionnaires de la Chine, etc. He showed to Eudoxus in this book, 1. part.
page 196. 2. edit.
the extracts of most part of the pieces, which proved what he had newly said,
and particularly the extract of the decree of 1656. where he made him chiefly
observe, that which here follows relating to the pretended adorations of
Consucius.

In the third place, they demand, whether it be lawful, for the Christian
Students of China, when they take their degrees, to practice the ceremony,
observed in Confucius's Hall; because there is not there any Sacrificer, nor
Minister, of the Idolaters. The Students, and the Philosophers alone, do meet
there only to acknowledge Confucius as the^ Master, and this, with such
ceremonies, as at their first institution, were only political, and terminated
wholly to an honor purely Civil. For those, who are to take their degrees, come
together into the Hall, and there wait for the Doctors and Examinators; and
that which they do, after the Chinese fashion, before this Philosopher's name
and picture, is no more, than the same kind of ceremonies and respectful
gestures, which all Scholars make to their teachers and professors whilst
alive. After they have thus owned Confucius for their Master, the Chancellor
gives them their degrees, and then they withdraw. You are also to know, that
this Hall of Confucius is a College, and not a Temple, properly so called, and
that it is open to none but Students.

The Answer.
The holy Congregation has judged, that, conformably to the demand here made,
the Christians in China may be permitted the use of the abovementioned
ceremony, because it appears to be no more, than a pure civil respect.

Truly, said Eudoxus, since these Gentlemen had no mind to acquit the Jesuits
from any blame upon this article, they had very good reason, not to mention
this second decree.

I will show you something yet more positive, answered the Abbot; and that is
the Jesuits Apology, made upon this occasion by the Dominicans themselves,
Dominicans of some weight, and of more than common consideration, in the Order:
Let us read, said he to them, this Apology in the Deffense des nouveaux
Chretiens. The author of which, after he had set down several testimonials
justifying the Jesuits conduct, speaks in this manner.

I know not whether Mr. Jurieu, Defense des nouv. Chrest. 1. Par. p. ^10.
and the author of la Morale-pratique may not be tempted to believe, that some
Jesuit has writ, or dictated this letter (of Father Peter of Alcala the
Dominican, of which this author has made an extract,) they may if they please
satisfy themselves in the matter; but what will they think of the following
testimony, which contains in it many others? it is the famous Dominican, Father
John of Paz, an ancient professor in Divinity, Rector of the University of
Manile, Prior and Provincial of his Order. This Father, in his answers, to the
doubts of the Missioners of Tunquin, printed at Manile in the year 1680, upon
the questions debated in China, touching the pretended Idolatry (for they
regard Tunquin also) having given his opinion, altogether conformable to the
Jesuits, or rather to the decree of 16^6, he affirms, that his answers are
founded, upon several relations of the Religious of his own Order in
China...... Parag 20. f. 198.
hoc mihi constat ex variis relationibus Religiosorum nostri Ordinis in Regno
Chinae assistentium...... but what need the suffrages of particular men be
insisted on, so long as there are those of three superiors of the first rate; I
mean three Provincials of this holy Order (of Saint Dominic) to wit the
Reverend Fathers, Charles Clement Gant, Francis of Palma, and Philip Pardo? For
these three have, several times, recommended to their Missioners in China by
the authority they had over them, to conform themselves absolutely to the
Society's practice, in what relates to the decree of Alexander VII, forbidding
them to write any thing to the contrary. All this, is to be seen in a letter,
of the Reverend Father Dominic Sarpetri, or of Saint Peter, directed to his
Provincial, and the Definitors of the Chapter of his Province; together with
the treatise he had writ about these matters. The author of la Morale-pratique
may one day see it, but, in the mean time, we will give an account of an other
small piece, writ by the same Missioner, which contains an abridgment of what
he has proved more at large in his treatise.

A Writing of the R. F. Dominic Sarpetri called of Saint Peter Missioner of the
Order of Saint Dominic in China.
I Brother Dominic Marie Serpetri, otherwise called of Saint Peter, by nation a
Sicilian, of the Order of the Friars Preachers formerly approved, for a Master,
or Teacher of Divinity, etc. do certify all, who shall see these Letters;
first, that being sent by the Superiors of the Province of the Rosary of the
Philippines of my Order, to Preach the Gospel in the Kingdom of China, and
having applied my self, by the command of the same Superiors, with all possible
care, for the space of eight years, to examine the superstitions of the Chinese
Sects, I am persuaded, that the practice of the Jesuit Missioners in that
Kingdom, in permitting, or tolerating some ceremonies, used by the Chinese
Christians in honor of the Philosopher Confucius, and their deceased ancestors;
that their conduct is, I say, not only without danger of sin, being approved by
the Congregation of the General Inquisition, but, also considering the
principles of the chief Sects of China, that this opinion, is more probable
than the contrary, and otherwise very useful, not to say necessary, to open for
the Infidels a gate to the Gospel....

Secondly, I do certify, that the Jesuit Fathers have declared and preached, in
the Kingdom of China, Jesus Christ crucified; and this not only by word of
mouth, but also by a great number of books, which they have made: that they do
explain to their new Converts, with a great deal of care and pains, the
mysteries of the Passion; that in some places of these Fathers Residence, there
are Confraternities of the Passion; and that, very lately, the persecuter of
our holy faith, Yamquam-sien extremely reproch'd the Preachers of the Gospel,
with adoring a man crucified, for the God of heaven and earth; and all this he
proved out of the books written by the Jesuits.

Hold a little, said Cleander, interrupting him, till I do compare this with
what is said in the Provincial Letters. They answer so well, according to what
is demanded, that in countries, where a crucified God passes for folly, they
suppress the scandal of the Cross, and only preach a glorious, not a suffering
Jesus; as they have done in China, and the Indies. Go on now if you please.

In the third place; I certify, and, as far as is requisite, do protest, with an
oath, that I have not been prevailed upon, by the entreaties, or persuasions of
any man whatever, but only by the mere love of truth, to give this double
certificat or testimonial..... for coming to understand, on occasion of some
doubts proposed, in 1645, to the sacred Congregation, by Father John Baptist
Morales, a man truly Apostolical, and actuated by a Christian zeal, that some
men, ill inclined to the Society, had published in Europe, and in the Indies,
that the Missioners in China, did not preach Christ crucified, and that they
allowed their Christians to commit Idolatry, being hereupon afraid, that I
should seem by my silence to approve the calumnies of those people, and being
also desirous to repair, to the utmost of my power, the injured reputation of
those Fathers, I resolved to declare my opinion in the foresaid manner,
submitting it, nevertheless to a more infallible judgment, to wit to that of
the Church of Rome. In witness whereof, I have writ this letter with my own
hand, in the house of the Canton, where we are kept prisoners and in exile,
this fourth of August 1688.

Ha! what can be added to this, said Eudoxus very much surprised? But do you
know, answered Cleander, that the author of the Apology, or la deffense des
nouveaux Chretiens, etc. invites any, who should scruple the truth of the
pieces he has cited, to come and see them in the Jesuits College at Paris,
where the originals, or very authentic and undoubted copies are kept? And do
you also know, that I my self have satisfied my own curiosity in this matter?
what, said Eudoxus, have you then read the book, and seen the pieces he quotes?
tell me seriously what you think of them?

The judgment I make of this book, answered Cleander, is, that it is an
excellent piece, folid, instructive, well writ, and because of the variety of
its matter, very diverting: it is, otherwise, very modest, and comes from a
man, who knows how to contain himself upon occasion where the bare reading of
what he writes often raised in me an indignation against those he confutes. The
heinousness and enormity of the crimes imposed upon the Jesuits, and the
evidence of the matters of fact, and of the proofs by which he demonstrates
their falsity, produces several different emotions in the minds of the readers,
which invite and oblige them to a constant attention; and yet nevertheless, the
author, with all his moderation, has let no advantage slip, which the matter
could furnish him with against his adversaries. In one word, this Apology, does
not only destroy all these black calumnies, we now discourse of, and which have
been so far fetched, but also begets a prejudice against those, who have
maliciously undertaken to spread and improve them in Europe and, for my own
part, I can truly say, that nothing has made me more distrust the Provincial
Letters, than this book.

I will find a time to read it, said Eudoxus, to satisfy my self, and to
gratify Mr. Abbot, who, certainly, can have nothing more to add to what you
have said. I could yet, observe to you, answered Mr. Abbot, an other falsity of
Pascal's in this place we are now examining: and that is, what he says of the
Jesuits permitting Idolatry, not only in China, but in the Indies also; which
is more than ever was objected by any of their calumniators; who always
confined themselves to China: and they had good reason not to extend their
reproaches to the Indies; which had they done, the imposture would have been
much more easily discovered. Neither Spaniards, nor Portugaise, neither
English, nor Hollanders, traded in China; whereas all these Nations drive a
trade in the Indies; from whence the Jesuits might have had as many witnesses
of their innocence as there were Merchants.

It is however, convenient to remark one thing, as we go along, and that is,
that the toleration of Idolatry in Japon, would have been much more necessary
for the Jesuits than in China. For, after all, the persecutions which they
suffered in this great Empire, were more than either banishment, or
imprisonment; whereas in Japon, they were almost always in continual hazard of
their lives. Near upon a hundred Jesuits there Martyred, some by the dreadful
torment of water, others, by being buried alive, and some, by being burnt by
little and little, might, easily have freed themselves by directing mentally
their adorations to a Crucifix, hid under their habits, whilst they seemed
openly to make them to Idols, as, is pretended, they allow their new Converts
to do in the Temples of China. For surely, they ought to be allowed to have wit
enuff To let Charity, according to the Proverb, begin at home.

Ha! what, Mr. Abbot, must I help you out in this matter, and make, upon this
passage, an other important observation, which you have forgot? the main piece,
which Pascal cites, for a proof of the Jesuits Idolatry in China, is, a Spanish
memorial presented, as is said, to Philip the IV, King of Spain by the
Cordeliers of the Philippin Islands; which writing you may remember was
supposed, and falsely attributed to these Religious, to give it more authority:
the true author not daring to publish it under his own name. This author was
one Diego Collado, who, before, had made use of such kind of artifices, in
other Satyrs of this nature; an unquiet, troublesome fellow, convicted, like an
other Oats, of an infinity of contradictions, and impostures; wherewith his
memorials are filled, and to whom sufficient justice has been done, in the very
history of his own Order; which recounts the many great troubles and
disturbances he had occasioned among them. The Jesuit Father, who showed me the
pieces, that are already inserted, or yet to be, in the Apology of their
Missions, gave me an account of this particular thing, and showed it me in the
history of China, writ in Spanish by Navaret, an other Dominican, and a most
obstinat accuser of the Jesuits, whilst he continued in his Order. But, being
afterward made an Archbishop, he became their great commender, their Patron,
and their friend: his friendship and esteem was so very great, that he founded
them a College in Saint Domingo, the Archiepiscopal City.

Really, said Eudoxus, this is not the least considerable point of your
animadversions, upon this first article of the fifth Provincial Letter: but it
is hard, I confess, to make a more solid remark.

The matter deserved the pains I have taken, answered the Abbot; this article
of Idolatry, is, for the Jesuits, the most cruel passage of all the Provincial
Letters; and I have often told them, that it was, in some measure, the decisive
point of all the rest: for, this being once supposed true, all that follows
would be taken for granted; at least would not appear incredible. But, the
falsehood of it being once clearly proved and made out, the obstinat rage and
malice of the Society's enemies, would be evidently seen, to the scandal and
indignation of all good men. The examination, continued he, of the other
particular articles in this Letter of Pascal, require not so much discussion;
which we shall therefore soon run over.

These are Escobar's cases about fasting, said Cleander; here they are, look
upon them, together with the fine preface of the twenty four old men, and the
four animals: let us read this passage in Pascal; it is really pleasant enuff.
He, who cannot sleep, if he does not eat his Supper, ought he to fast? no by no
means. Are you not satisfied? not altogether, says I to him, for I can fast
very well, by making my Collation in the morning, and eating my Supper at
night. See what follows, said he to me; they did not fail to consider every
thing. And what would they say, if one could be content, without any Collation
in the morning, to Sup only in the evening. To this it is answered, That
notwithstanding a man is not bound to fast; for no body is obliged to change
his ordinary course of eating. Oh what excellent reason, said I, is this!

This is very ridiculous, answered the Abbor, and it must be ingenuously
confessed, that Escobar, who is not always so much Escobar, that is to say, in
the Jansenists language, so loose, as these Gentlemen would have the world
believe, it, must be acknowledged, said he, that he very well deserved to be
raillyed for this his fine decision. I my self condem him for it; I only add;
that Escobar did not learn this answer, as far as I can understand, either from
the four animals, Suarez, Vasquez, Molina, and Valentia, or the twenty four old
men; and, also, that the good man was mistaken (as he often is) in quoting, for
his opinion, Filiucius, who in his treatise of fasting says nothing like it. I
am much pleased with you Mr. Abbot, said Eudoxus, I perceive your downright
honesty, and do very much commend you for it. As for my self, I cannot endure
some of the Jesuits friends, who, right or wrong, will defend them in every
thing. Can they think, that when men put on the habit of the Society, they with
it also put on, as if it were another garment, the gift of infallibility?

Those friends, answered the Abbot, would perhaps show the same moderation,
that I do, if their enemies had as much justice and equity as you. Both run to
extremities; but the last are more to be blamed than the first. As for the
other questions, about fasting, continued he, which Pascal calls diverting, if
he would but have taken the pains to read Saint Thomas in his fourth book of
sentences, Did. 15. q. 3. a. 4.
he might be sure to find many more such to divert himself with.

They are not very material, said Cleander; but how will you answer what he
charges Escobar with; that to drink wine, out of meals, and even several times
does not break fast?

Reach me hither (I pray you) Saint Thomas's Sum, said the Abbot to Eudoxus;
wherein he read to them the 147 question of the secunda secundae art. 6. where
the Saint thus teaches; the question, in the title is, whether the command of
fasting, obliges a man, to make but one meal; Vtrum requiratur ad jejunium quod
homo semel tantum comedat. He makes this objection; those who fast are not
forbid to drink, several times, at several hours of the day, they are not
therefore forbid to make more meals than one. Non est prohibitum quin pluries
bibamus diversis horis diei: ergo etiam non debet esse prohibitum jejunantibus
quin pluries comedant. He answers, that the fasting, enjoined by the Church, is
not broken, but by those things, which at the institution of the fast, she had
an intention to prohibit; but she had no intention to command abstinence from
drink; and by consequence it is lawful, for those, who fast, to drink several
times a day. Et ideo licet pluries jejunantibus bibere..... that if a man does
not drink moderatly, he sins and loses the merit, or reward, of fasting, as he
also does, who makes but one meal, and eats not moderatly. Si quis autem
immoderate potu utatur, potest peccare, and meritum jejunij perdere; sicut
etiam, si immoderate cibum in una comestione assumat. It is Saint Thomas, who
thus speaks, continued the Abbot, not Escobar, and his opinion is followed by a
multitude of Divines.

I have nothing more to say, answered Cleander; Escobar is very safe, his
security is beyond exception. But, said Eudoxus, Saint Thomas, at least,
declares, that if a man should drink too often on a fasting day, he would be
guilty of the sin of intemperance.

Pascal, answered the Abbot, who omits none of the circumstances, that might
make Escobar's decision appear loose to those who are ignorant of Saint
Thomas's opinion, takes great care to add, whatever could restrain it. Listen
then to Escobar, who, in this matter, is but Saint Thomas's Echo, This does not
hinder, said he, but that if you be not moderat in your drinking, you may
commit a sin against temperance, although you do not commit one against the
precept of fasting. Immoderatio autem potest temperantiam violare sed non
jejunium.

Ho ho! said Cleander, if Pascal had but translated these words also of the
Casuist, they would have turned all the edge of his wit, or rather have left
him no room for any; this would have made all his jests and raillery about the
hypocras, appear very dull and insipid, and Escobar, whom he designed to make
ridiculous, could not possibly have been laughed at. Here follows Filiucius
upon the same subject, continued Cleander; which Pascal has made his Jesuit
thus translate. Is he, that has tired himself by some action, as by pursuing a
wench, obliged to fast? no, by no means; but if he have tired himself, on
purpose to be thereby dispensed from fasting, shall he, notwithstanding, be
bound to fast? although this should have been his design, yet shall he not be
obliged to fast. Ho! very well, could you possibly have believed this, said he
to me; truly Father, says I to him, I can hardly yet believe it. Ho what! is it
not a sin for a man, not to fast when he is able? and is it lawful to seek
occasion for sinning, or rather are we not obliged to avoid them? that would be
very convenient; not always, said he to me, but according.

Let us read Filiucius himself, said the Abbot; who having found the passage
quoted, prayed them to pass by Pascal's translation for a moment, and harken to
his. Dices secundo, an qui malo fine laboraret, ut ad aliquem occidendum, vel
ad insequendam amicam, vel quid simile, teneretur ad jejunium? You will put me
a second question, to wit, whether a man who had wearied himself, in
prosecution of some ill design, as by endevoring to kill his adversary, or by
running after his mistres, or by some such business, should be obliged to fast.

Respondeo talem quidem peccaturum ex malo fine: at secuta defatigatione
excusaretur a jejunio. I answer, that this man's evil end would make him guilty
of sin, but yet, supposing him quite spent and tired, he could not be obliged
to fast. Ita Medina, nisi fieret in fraudem secundum aliquos: It is the opinion
of Medina, if it be not done on purpose, to avoid fasting as some Divines do
say. Sed melius alij culpam quidem esse in apponenda causa fractionis jejunij,
at ea posita excusari a jejunio. Ita Antoninus, Medina, Sylvester. But others
say better, that the sin consists, in a man's putting himself into a condition
not to be able to fast; but that being in such condition he is freed from the
obligation of fasting. This is the opinion of Saint Antonin, Medina and
Sylvester.

Ha what! said Eudoxus, if to the end I might not fast to morrow, I should get
my self blooded to day, both in my arms and in my feet, so much as to make me
faint, would Pascal, notwithstanding, condem me to fast to morrow? I believe if
he were my physician, and did not hinder me, that he himself would be guilty of
sin. I conceive, as Filiucius said, that I my self should commit a very
grievous sin, by proposing to my self such an end, and that to have put my self
into a disability of fasting, would be a sin, twice as great, as the single sin
of not fasting, could, otherwise have been. But, certainly, if I were in this
condition, I should not believe my self obliged, even, to ask a dispensation
from the Curat.

I leave you, said the Abbot, to compare my translation with Pascals's; and
also the decision of Filiucius, Saint Antonin and others, with the notion, or
idea he gives of it, in his captious way of proposing the matter. Thousands of
people, who read these Letters, only, to divert themselves, and who depended
upon what Pascal said, have treated this Divine, as ridiculous, impertinent,
extravagant, and a corrupter of Morals: but you see with what justice. Besides
this, Filiucius had made use of two examples to explain his meaning; one of
which, had nothing in it offensive; Pascal passes this by, and lays hold of the
other, which, put into French, seems not very modest or decent; whereas in
Latin, and in these sort of books which are never read by the common people,
nor by Laymen, the thing, is, in it self, indifferent, and very far from being
ill: there appears in all this proceeding a great deal of affected malice. But
what say you to the consequences he draws from this decision, and the instances
he puts to the good Father he is in discourse with? Ho what! said he, is it not
a sin not to fast, when one is able? is it lawful to seek occasions of sinning,
or rather are we not obliged to fly and avoid them?

I say, answered Eudoxus, that all this, is flat and dull enuff, and wicked in
the highest degree. Wendrok, in defending Pascal, added Cleander, struggles
hard, and in a very strange manner, to bring him off, from this unlucky
business. Upon this occasion, one told me, but the other day, that in all places
Wendrok railed against the Jesuits like a Carter, but in this, he cursed and
swore like a bog'd Carter; and yet, notwithstanding all, he still stuck fast
where he was plunged very deep in the mud. The comparison is not very neat or
cleanly, but yet it very fully expresses the matter.

The farther we go, said Eudoxus, the more I suspect, that the books of the
Society's Casuists, are not so fertile of monstrous decisions, as the
Jansenists, and those, who believe, or seem to believe them, do every where
publish. For, if they are to be met in such crowds, why do they choose those
the Jesuits are able to justify by the very bare exposition of the text; and
that in such a manner, as common sense must bear them witness they have taken
it right? why do they give them occasion to cry out against impostures? why do
they furnish them with matter for the just complaints they have so often made,
that they falsify the texts of their authors, to make themselves sport, and
turn them into ridicule, to give their readers a malicious kind of pleasure?
you shall see more examples, than one of this sort, answered the Abbot; but let
us now look back, and read the remainder of this Dialogue.

See, said Cleander, here is the place we broke off at. Is it lawful to seek
for an occasion of sinning? not always, said he to me, but according; according
to what said I. Ho ho! answered the Father, and if they should suffer some
inconvenience by shunning the occasions, are they, in your opinion, obliged to
avoid them? but this, at least, is not Father Bauni's opinion, as you may see
page 1084. Absolution ought not to be refused to those, who continue in the
near occasions of sinning; if they are in such a condition, as not to be able
to quit them, without giving the world occasion to discourse, or without
receiving some great inconvenience by it themselves. Father I am mightily
pleased at this.

Eudoxus, who, at the same time, read in Father Bauni's book, the place quoted
by Pascal, said to Cleander, interrupting him, I do not find it so here; nor
does Bauni make mention of the near occasion of sinning; and this is an
essential falsification, the contrary is expressly set down. For as much, said
he, as that the cause, which inclines and carry's a man to evil, is not of it
self bad, nor contrary to any precept, or Ecclesiastic decree, nor such, as, of
its own nature, morally obliges, and necessitates those, who make use of it to
sin, and therefore cannot be reckoned for such a near and disposing occasion to
ill, as the penitent ought, of necessity, to avoid, that he may be capable of
receiving the Grace of Sacramental Absolution.

Let me see, I pray you, said Cleander, Bauni's text; which after he had read,
he cried out, this, I am sure, they may confidently call an other great
imposture, and sufficiently circumstanciated, if I may be allowed so to speak;
there is nothing wanting to make it so; it is very plain, and beyond all
dispute.

The case here spoke of, continued Eudoxus, relates to the ordinary, and common
occasions of Merchants, and dealers, whose way of traffic obliges them, To see,
speak, and treat with women, wives and maidens, whose looks and conversation
make them often fall into sin; and all this amounts, but to know, whether a
Merchant, who cannot quit his trade, without the loss of his reputation, and
the injury of his family, having otherwise a firm resolution to abstain from
sin, dummodo firmiter proponat non peccare, may be allowed to receive
absolution; or, whether the Confessor be obliged to refuse it, or force him to
renounce his trade. Is this to say, as Pascal writes it in Italic letters,
impudently citing the page, that absolution ought not to be refused to those,
who remain in the near occasions of sinning? where is the sincerity! I have
always heard it said, that a near occasion of sinning, is, that which never
almost is resisted, as Bauni has just now told us, and as it is called by all
other Divines, an occasion that morally obliges to sin. But although there are
continual occasions, wherein we are engaged by some kind of employments, which
make us often fall, this does not hinder, but that these occasions may be also
often resisted; and there is a great deal of difference between the near
occasions and continual occasions. What shall then become of this Merchant, if
he do not turn Hermit or Carthusian? for in most secular employments, men are
obliged to treat with married and unmarried women, to talk with them, and to
see 'um. If the Curat of Saint Eustache's, should observe this moral, there
would be yearly, at Easter, abundance of shops to be let in Saint Denis's
street in Paris.

I have several times discoursed, said the Abbot, with Doctors of Sorbonne,
with Jesuits, and Religious of other Orders, concerning the near occasions of
sinning: about the difficulty one ought to make, of absolving those, who are in
them, either willingly, or by necessity; and do you know, that abating the
extravagance, to which some Confessors do sometimes carry this point, I have
seldom met any more severe in this matter than the Jesuits.

A Jesuit, answered Cleander, said to me once, upon an occasion like this we
are discoursing of, that it was observable, that in the Cities, where they had
Houses, some people, remarkable for their callings, and condition of life; and
known to have need of the gentleness and indulgence, which the Fathers of the
Society are said to show to sinners, were, seldom or ever, known to come to
their Confessionals at Easter; an evident and manifest sign, that they
elsewhere met with better bargains, with more accommoding, and complying
Confessors, than the Jesuits.

I know some, added Eudoxus, who, believing that aspersion, happened to be
shrewdly trapan'd; for the Knight of....... one of your acquaintance, once,
upon a time, assured me, that Pascal's memoires were neither true nor certain;
for, having relied upon them, he went to the Jesuits once to Confession; but
that, in all his life, he had never been handled so roughly; that his
absolution was deferred; and that upon some conditions, which appeared to him
very hard to be observed. The Provincial Letters were, at that time, much in
vogue; and the Knight was deceived, and drawn in by them; who made no secret of
this part of his case, which he was not ashamed to discover: and indeed the
rage he was in, for being deluded, made him every where cry out, that Pascal
was in that, at least, a mere impostor.

The Confessors, answered the Abbot, are much to be pitied; they are accused
without being able to defend themselves; and if some persons, of the same
character with your Knight, who do not think their reputation lesson'd, by
telling they were refused absolution, did not, from time to time, vindicat the
Jesuits in this point, abundance of people, would judge of them, just as an
Oratorian whom I know by sight and name, for a long time did. He was in the
country with a Jesuit of my acquaintance, who is not now of the Society. This
Jesuit had refused to give absolution to a man in those parts, who either
bragged, or complained of it; the Oratorian, much surpised at the story, asked
the Jesuit very seriously, whether any of their Order ever refused absolution:
it is commonly said among us that none of you ever do. After such little
digressions as these, which were now and then made to refresh themselves, and
prevent being tired, they went on with reading the Provincial Letters.

This, Father, does very much rejoice me; there remains now no more, than to
say a man may, on set purpose, seek occasions of sinning; since it is lawful
not to shun, or fly from them. Even that, also, is sometimes permitted, added
he; the famous Casuist, Basil Pontius, has said it; Father Bauni quotes him,
and approves his opinion, as you may see in his treatise of repentance q. 4. p.
94. A man may seek an occasion directly and for it self, (primo and per se)
when either his own, or his neighbor's spiritual, or temporal, good leads him
to it. Truly, says I to him, I seem to be in a dream, when I find Religious men
spea^ after this manner.

This turn of Pascal, said Eudoxus, that he seems to dream, when he hears
Religious talk at this rate, does suppose, without doubt, some very wicked
thing in this decision. Not at all, answered the Abbot, it was only to make a
more neat transition to the matter of probability. See what a pleasant thing
follows.

Ha what! Father, tell me in conscience, whether you your self be of that
opinion? no truly, said the Father: do you then speak, continued I, against
your conscience? not at all, said he; I did not in this speak according to my
own conscience, but according to Pontius, and Father Bauni's conscience, and
you may safely follow them, for they are two able men. What, Father, because
they have put these three lines in their books, is it lawful to seek for
occasions of sinning? I did not believe, we were to take your Casuists for a
rule, but only the Scripture and the tradition of the Church. O good God! cried
out the Father, you put me in mind of the Jansenists. Cannot Father Bauni and
Basil Pontius make an opinion probable? I am not satisfied, says I to him, with
a probable opinion: I desire to have a sure one. I see, plainly, said the good
Father to me, that you are ignorant of the doctrine of probability; if you
understood it, you would speak, after an other manner. Truly I must needs
instruct you in this point; you shall not lose your labor by coming hither:
for, without a right notion of this matter, you will not be able to understand
any thing: it is the foundation, and the A. B. C. of all our Morals. I was
ravished to see him fall upon what I wished for. Is not this pleasantly brought
in, continued the Abbot? and ought he not to have been guilty of a small
calumny, rather than to have lost so pretty a turn?

I speak thus, not that I disagree as to the truth of this quotation, on that I
lay no stress: Father Pintereau and Father Causin in their answers to la
Theology Morale denied, that these words were in Bauni, having taken one of
this Divine's assertions for an other; where Basil Pontius is also quoted upon
such a kind of subject, which they believed was that, which the author of that
book had attacked. This mistake made Pascal triumph in his fifteenth letter.
But he was well employed in the mean time; a little clearing and disentangling
of things will here discover a most evident calumny; which consists, in that
the words of Pontius, cited by Bauni, do contain, with reference to the place
from whence they are drawn, and according to the sense there given them, no
other, than a wise and most reasonable doctrine; and yet Pascal makes his
readers take up such a notion of the words, as that they might from them infer,
a most detestable doctrine. Let us look upon them, as they stand in Pontius
himself. Although he be an Augustine, your Jansenist friend will in all appearance,
upon Pascal's quotation, and joining him with Bauni, take him for a Jesuit: for
I see, he has placed him on the same shelf, and in the midst of the Casuists
and Divines of the Society.

The words are to be found in the sixth chapter of his addition to his book de
Matrimonio, where this Divine proposes, whether a Catholic may in conscience
marry a heretic, who may be thereby endangered to be perverted, when there is
otherwise a great deal of reason to make the match. An cum periculo
perversionis, said he, in the title of the chapter, possit ex aliqua magna
causa contrahi matrimonium cum haereitco. The interest of the state and
Religion is concerned in the marriage; there are hopes by it to draw the
Catholics out of oppression; whom a heretic Prince, or Princess's Ministers
treat with the utmost severity. These are the examples proposs'd by Basil
Pontius at the beginning of the chapter; and he answers, that, notwithstanding,
the Catholics danger of being perverted, the Marriage may be made with a good
conscience; provided the Catholic, confiding in the mercy of God, does
sincerely resolve, to continue faithful. Dum tamen contrahat cum firmo
proposito non labendi, fidensque de divina misericordia and gratia fore ut
eripiatur ab eo periculo fine crimine.

He supports his assertion by the example of Judith; who exposed her self to so
dangerous occasions, to save her Town of Bethulia. And also by the Marriage of
Hesther, with Hassuerus. By the authority of Saint Ambrose, Saint Austin, Saint
Thomas, Cardinal Cajetan, and a number of other Doctors; Whence he thus
concludes, concerning these and all other such Cases, it is manifest, that all
persons do sin in exposing themselves to danger, without some very pressing
cause or necessity obliging them to it; but it may be done without sin, when
such an occasion requires it: and it is not necessary that this cause should be
the spiritual good of the Soul, but it is sufficient that it be a considerable,
temporal, advantage, as is seen in Hesther's Marriage, and the conduct of
Judith.

I desire to know, continued the Abbot, whether there be any thing extravagant
in this doctrine; and what ground Pascal had to say, I fancy my self in a dream
when I hear Religious men talk at this rate? and whether, on the contrary, he
himself did not really dream, or rave, when he pretended to find in it such
great occasions of scandal?

I Will make a farther remark, said Eudoxus, who at that time was reading the
passage in Bauni; and it is a second circumstance of the calumny. Bauni does
not use Pontius's words, to prove a man may expose himself to the danger of
sinning, for a temporal advantage; but, only, by an argument called a fortiori,
to confirm his assertion, That one may sometimes absolve a person that is in a
dangerous occasion, without obliging him to quit it, when there is just cause
not to do it, provided the person be truly penitent for his sins past, and have
a firm resolution not to sin any more. This occasion, said he, a little lower,
ceasing to be a near one, in the notion of Divines, from the moment it ceases
to be voluntary: and it ceases to be voluntary, from the time, that with a
steadfast resolution not to offend God, there is a necessity to continue in it.
I am perfectly of your opinion, added Cleander, to the Abbot, that Pascal had
very great need of this transition, to set off, and make some sport with his
subject. But let us go on, and make an end.

The remaining part of the Letter we are examining, said the Abbot, relates to
the doctrine of probability: but it is to no purpose to enter again into this
matter, after all that has been already said upon it; especially since my
design is, not to take notice of all Pascals impostures. Nor will I say any
thing of an opinion, he, in the same Letter, attributes to Reginaldus, and
Father Cellot; That in Moral questions the new Casuists are preferable to the
Ancient Fathers, although these come nearer to the Apostle's times. This point has
been already debated, and I am of opinion, that we ought not to imitate Pascal
in his repetitions.

Here they stopped; Cleander and Eudoxus assuring the Abbot, that they were
extremely scandalized at Pascal's falsifications; and at the unfaithfulness of
the memorials he made use of in writing the Provincial Letters: then they
agreed at what hour to meet again the next day, to examine the following Letters.

The sixth Discourse.
SOme unexpected business hindered the Abbot from meeting at the time
appointed. Eudoxus and Cleander, nevertheless, resolved to go on with their
design; not in judging of what he had said about Morals, wherein they believed
they should need the Abbot's assistance; but of an other part of Perraults
commendation, of the Provincial Letters in his Paralelle; which gave them an
occasion to criticize upon the style, and purity of the language, etc. They
began with the first Letter; and plainly showed, by several instances from the
beginning of this Discourse to page 217, that this author was too lavish in his
Panegiric, and very much out, when he affirmed, that in these Letters there was
nothing but purity in the language, Page 217.
greatness in the thoughts, and wit in the railleries, and that the art of
Dialogue was here to be found whole and entire.

They were beginning to fall upon the second Letter, just as the Abbot
alighted. While we were waiting for you, said Eudoxus to him, we were
endevoring to take up a better opinion of Pascal, and an other impression than
what you yesterday left of him in our minds. We also endeavored to lessen the
horror of that frightful idea you gave us of him when you so often convinced
him of calumny and imposture.

How could you go about it, said the Abbot, for the proofs I brought, are
perfectly unanswerable; and a man, that has but eyes and understands how to
read, cannot but be satisfied of their force and their solidity.

We made no reflection upon that, answered Eudoxus, we only examined, what right
he had to the qualities of an extraordinary wit and an excellent writer.

Those are the qualities for which he is to be most valued, replied the Abbot,
and not at all incompatible with what I said of him yesterday. Pascal is a man
of wit, a good writer, and very perfect in the art of slandering: he is
pleasant, bold, expert, and happy in the trade of lying. The bare reading of
the Provincial Letters discovers the two first qualities, and the observations
we have made upon them do palpably demonstrate all the rest.

You are then, it seems, convinced, said Cleander, that these Letters, whatever
otherwise they may be, are at least a Masterpiece of wit, and in this kind one
of the wonders of the world.

Ho, not so, answered the Abbot, to say that it is a pleasant piece, and
wherein there is a great deal of wit, and art, is, what one in justice is bound
to say: but to say, that it is a Masterpiece, and without faults, a great many
faults, a man must be very much Pascal's friend, or persuaded by his friends to
a mighty degree of obstinacy. I am of opinion, that he writes easily,
naturally, and with life, but he neither writes purely, nor exactly, and Mr.
Perrault, in saying there was nothing but purity in the language, did not speak
like an able, or at least like a sincere Acadamist.

How you decide the matter! Mr. Abbot, said Cleander laughing, we durst hardly
say so much, after we had ran over, and seriously examined the first Letter.

If I should show you, answered the Abbot, the copy I have at home, you could
hardly find one page without some strokes of a pencil, pointing out faults
against the purity of the language, or the elegance of style, or the art of
Dialogue, and very often, also, marking out, a poor, mean thought, or a pitiful
conceit.

Are there as many, proportionably, in that, as in this? said Eudoxus, showing
him the first Letter, which they had newly examined, and scored in abundance of
places. Very near as many, answered the Abbot. Cleander, turning over the book
interrupted them, and said, I have here met a passage, which really shows, that
Pascal understood the rules of Dialogue: but it also shows, that he did not
always think of them time enuff. It is, at the beginning of the sixth Letter. I
will do it, said he, (meaning the repetition of the discourse he had with his
Jesuit) and I will do it more exactly, than I did the other. For I have now
brought my table book, to mark down the quotations of the passages, and I am
very sorry I did not bring it with me the first time.

This precaution, and this little word, thrown in by the by is, indeed,
necessary, to make the matter have some seeming truth in it; a main essential
thing in all Dialogues. For it is not probable, he could remember, exactly, all
the places the Jesuit had cited out of the Casuists, and yet he had reason to
mark them, since he was to give an account of the Conversation to his friend in
the Country.

But that which is very pleasant, and made me say, that Pascal does not
remember the rules of Dialogue time enuff, is, that in the precedent Letter,
where he relates a former discourse, he had had with the Jesuit, where at he
said he had no table book, there are yet full as many passages quoted; the
books, the chapters, and the very pages therein are set down, at least, as
exactly as in this. Not to speak of that list of near fifty Casuists, Divines
and Canonists, whose names seem to him so difficult to be pronounced, that he
asked his Jesuit, whether all of them were Christians, and yet,
notwithstanding, he made a shift, even without a table book, to remember them
all, very exactly.

This is a very good remark, answered Eudoxus; but in all appearance, this
precaution, being taken up after the thing was over, must have been the effect
of the observation of some one of Pascal's friends, who discovered this fault
of his a little too late. This, perhaps, was the reason, added the Abbot,
laughing, that we have found in his fourth and fifth Letters so many false
citations, and so many mangled passages out of Laiman, Bauni, and Filiucius. If
Pascal had had his table book then, he might have been more exact; but it is
manifest, that in writing his discourse, he spoke by heart. As to the rest,
added the Abbot, if the then critics of Port Royal did oblige Pascal to make
mention here of his table book, that his following Letters might appear more
true, and free from the faults he committed in the two former, they afterward
altered their opinions; for in the latter editions, they have omitted this
precaution of the table book, which by correcting the fault you speak, of had
made it more appear.

It is true, answered Eudoxus, reading this place in the edition in twelves,
which he had in his hands, that this article is left out; but now we are upon
this subject, continued he, I find that Pascal had not yet sufficiently
reflected upon the rules of Dialogue, when he supposed his Letters were become
public, and, in his eighth, writ to his friend in the Country, that every one
in Paris was guessing at the author; some saying it was a Doctor of Sorbonne,
others, fathering them upon four or five persons, who, like himself, were
neither Priests, nor Churchmen. This alone, takes away all appearance of truth,
from the conversations related in the eighth, ninth, and tenth Letters. For to
be able to continue these discourses with his Casuist, it must be supposed, the
Jesuits were ignorant, that the former Letters ran about, and were spread all
over Paris; and did not know, that all the world were delighted with them; that
their mysteries were discovered, and all honest men enraged at them. Now, most
certainly, this ignorance of the Jesuits in a point that touched them so near,
seems too gross to carry any likelihood of truth with it. Pascal was very much
out here, and did not sufficiently reflect upon the matter.

There is yet, answered the Abbot, an other more considerable fault, which runs
through all Pascals Dialogues, and it is, that he overstrains and carries too far
the character of his chief Actor. The first and great Personage of his
Dialogues, is a Jesuit, a well meaning good man and without trics; who franckly
tells all he desires to fish out of him. This is not much amiss, and Pascal
has, by this contrivance, a fair game on it. But of this plain simple Jesuit,
which at first he made him seem to be, he has insensibly made a natural, a sot,
and silly to the highest degree. He laughs at him, and mock's him to his face;
he openly rallyes him without his perceiving it; he foolishly runs into snares,
that any one might plainly see were laid to catch him; he makes him speak the
greatest impertinences imaginable; and all this he makes him do, in the name,
or as the mouth, of the whole Society; and takes all he says for granted;
believes his quotations true; the sense he gives them; the principles he lay's
down; and the application he makes of the whole.

I know there were Critics at Port Royal, who also found this fault with the
main point of his Comedies. But it was answered, that, notwithstanding, it was
to be passed over, and the same method to be still continued; that the
Provincial Letters with this fault, had all the effect that could be expected
from them; that the nicety was unseasonable; that very few would take notice of
it; and that when once the greatest part of the world was got into a vein of
laughing at any thing, or upon any subject, the most exact and observing must,
whether they will or no, carry on the same humor.

However it was resolved, that before the following editions, there should be
an advertisment to the reader, wherein this Person's character was to be
justified, as much as possible; in the same manner, almost, as Molicre had
apologiz'd for his Man-hater in his preface to his Comedy, le Misanthrope. This
Father, we are told in the advice to the Reader, is a good man, as there are
many such among them, who would have hated the wickedness and malice of his
Society had he been acquainted with it...... he that heard him was neither
willing to shock him, nor to consent to his doctrine; but received it with a
double meaning raillery; which might have sufficiently discovered his sense to
any person less prejudiced than this Casuist.

Double meaning raillery, answered Eudoxus! witness what Pascal says in his
fifth Letter, after the passage out of Bauni, concerning the seeking for
occasions. Truly, says I to him, I seem to be in a dream, when I find Religious
men speak in this manner. What double meaning raillery is this? of all Pascal's
railleries, continued he, there are not three, that can be called by that name.
The writer of this advice to the Reader calls this Jesuit a good man, he ought,
without doubt if he would have spoken properly to have called him an Idiot.
Such a man could never have had in the Society, the quality Pascal gives him of
a Casuist. And what this man says is so false, that among the Jesuits there are
many like him, that there could hardly be found two like him, among all the
most solitary hermits in the world; and I do verily believe, that one must go
to Bedlam, to meet with such an other example of madness and folly.

Pardon me, said Eudoxus, one needs go but to the Jacobins: the Dominican in
the second Letter, is, altogether, as silly as the Jesuit is in the others.
These two personages are both cast in the same mould: but I think it would have
done well to have made some little difference between their characters. I no
sooner meet the Jesuit in the fourth Letter, than the Jacobin comes into my
mind. But to speak freely, Pascal's having made the one to resemble the other
so exactly, is no sign that his wit or fancy was over fertile or luxuriant.

As I was lately reading with one of my friends, added the Abbot, Horace de
Art Poetica, we paused a while, to consider one of the most essential
precepts, given by this Poet of the art of Dialogue, extremely ill observed in
Pascal's Letters, and comprised in these three verses. Si quid inexpertum
scenae committis, and andes
Personam formare novam; servetur ad imum
Qualis ab incepto processerit, and sibi const^t.
And it is what is daily said, that when a man has once given a character to a
new personage, brought upon the Stage, he must take care to carry it on
exactly, every where to the end of the Scene or Play.

The figure, or character he has given the Jesuits in his Letters, is most
certainly new, and altogether peculiar to Pascal. In the beginning of the
Scene, he gives them, successfully enuff, the character of wit, policy, and
address, of men who understand how to insinuat themselves into the Courts of
Princes, to get into the confidence of great men, to win the people's
affections, and make themselves Masters of their Consciences, by certain arts
that for a long time had been kept secret. But after he had improved as much as
he was able, to their disadvantage, the mystery of probability, the better to
back and support this notion and idea, and to confirm his readers in it, he
proceeds to the direction of intention; which in his way of explaining is very
ridiculous; he makes the Jesuits speak of it, in so pitiful a manner, say so
many poor things, and advance so many extravagances, and so gross and
undisguis'd impieties, that the first thought of a reader, who reflected never
so little, must be to ask where is all this pretended policy and cunning of the
Jesuits?

What? did the Jesuits design to establish themselves in all parts of the
earth, to make themselves Masters of the people's consciences, to govern in the
Courts of Princes, to get into the confidence of Prelates, and Magistrates, and
all this by authorizing robberies, violences, murders, duels, simonie and the
disobedience of inferiors toward their superiors? in one word, by all those
things, which give men the most horrid apprehensions, and most capable of
disturbing the peace of the public, of giving Princes the greatest disquiets,
and of scandalising the most honest men. And which is more by printing and
publishing all this, in France, Spain, Germany, Italy, and Rome, as Pascal is
pleased to suppose.

But do you remember, added the Abbot, what he says in his thirteenth and
fourteenth Letters? for it is in those, chiefly, he takes upon him to preach
against and run down the Jesuits. There after he had cul'd some lines out of
the texts of several of their authors, which in his seventh Letter he had
attacked, and which the Jesuits had defended, and which in these two Letters he
had again stich'd and put together, with all possible art and malice, he
addresses himself to the Jesuits, as if they had been The Devil's agents,
devoted to execute this insernal spirit's orders, and declared enemies to the
Gospel. They are, no longer, those refined, skilful, politicians, those
Master-hypocrites, perfect in the art of disguising their thoughts; they are
men, whose own words and assertions, without any artifice, or wresting, make
them, openly, accomplices with all the most revengeful and malicious Duellists
and Murderers. What think you? do these things hang well together? and is this
his character all of a piece?

This observation, answered Eudoxus, seems very well carried on; and opens a
way for judging of some particular passages in the Provincial Letters, after a
very different manner from the judgment the world has hitherto passed upon
them. But, if you please, we will pursue our design, and begin with the
examination of the sixth Letter. That was my own intention, said the Abbot, and
therefore I am well pleased with your proposition.

The following part of the sixth Discourse.
CLeander and Eudoxus, to make the more have, had, the day before, agreed to
compare Pascal's quotations, one by one, with the Jesuits books, and divided
between themselves the several passages. They had also marked in the authors,
the matters in question, so that now they had no more left to do, but to open
their books, and communicate their respective reflections to each other.

The first article in this Letter, is part of my province, said Eudoxus.
Pascal, accuses there the Jesuits, of interpreting the Popes Bulls in favor of
sinners, and in particular, that, by which Gregory the XIV has declared
murderers unworthy of the sanctuary and protection of Churches, and that they
ought to be drawn out thence by force, and put into the hands of justice.

Before we go any farther, said the Abbot, interrupting him, what think you of
these Gentlemen? do they not do very handsomely to reproach the Jesuits with the
interpretation of a Bull? they who had the impudence and the rashness, to laugh
at, and make sport with, the decree, or Constitution, made by one Pope in
matters of faith, confirmed by an other Pope, and received by all Christians,
they, whose chief Hero fully informed of the censures of two Popes, and of the
most eminent Prelates of the Kingdom, against the Mons Testament, had yet the
confidence to say and Print, that they could not meddle with, or fall upon this
book without being guilty of folly and impertinence? Nov. def. to 2. pa. 563.
Let them freely submit to, and sign the decrees of Innocent the X. and
Alexander the VII, against Jansenius's propositions, without an interpretation
or a comment, and then the Jesuits will defend themselves about the
interpretation, whereof they are accused: till then, the testimony of the
Jansenists in this point ought not to be received against Jesuits.

This would be a puzzling instance, said Cleander, to a Jansenist: but you know
very well, that I am not one: but after all, the Jansenist may be in the wrong,
and yet the Jesuit not in the right. Let us see then, said he to Eudoxus,
whether you can bring off Escobar from this business an other way.

I have taken some pains about the matter, answered Eudoxus, and I have also
known by experience, on this occasion, how useful Mr. Abbot's help has proved
to us in our examination of the Provincial Letters. I read at first the
beginning of the sixth Letter, to which I pray you listen.

Sir I told you at the end of my last letter, that this good Father, the
Jesuit, had promised to make me understand, in what manner the Casuists do
reconcile the contradictions that are between their opinions and the Popes
decisions, the Councels and the Scripture. At my second visit, he did, really,
instruct me in the matter; and I Will repeat to you what passed between us. One
of the ways we have, said the good Father, to reconcile these contradictions,
is, by the interpretations of some terms. For example, Pope Gregory the XIV has
declared, that Assassins or Murderes ought not to enjoy the benefit of
Sanctuary in Churches, but to be drawn out thence. However our four and twenty
old men say, tr. 6. ex. 4. n. 27. That those who kill men, treacherously, ought
not to incur the penalties of this Bull. This seems to you, to be contrary to
the Popes decree; but they reconcile it by interpreting the word Assassin as
they do by these words. Are not Murderers unworthy to enjoy the privilege of
Churches? Yes by the Bull of Gregory XIV, but we understand by the word
ASSASSIN, those who have taken money to kill a man treacherously. Whence it
comes to pass, that those, who Murder, without receiving any reward, but only
to oblige their friends, are not called ASSASSINS.

The first thing I did, said Eudoxus, was to consult the text of Escobar, to
see whether it were faithfully reported; and I was surpised, to find the
assertion, directly contrary to what was cited. he that treacherously kills a
man, whether by sword or poison, is excluded from the privilege of the Church's
Sanctuary. Proditorie aliquem occidens, seu ferro, seu veneno, caretne
Ecclesiae immunitate? Caret. Now you see another plain falsification to
increase Pascal's list. But, reading on Escobar's text, I found the bad opinion
I conceived of the accuser, did not prevent, my taking up, from the following
words, a disadvantagious suspicion of the person accused. A man is said to kill
treacherously, when he kills one who did no way distrust him; for which reason
he who kills his enemy is not called a traitor, although he had layn in wait for
him, and struck, stabbed, or shot him behind. This, at first, seemed to me, to
have all the air and contrivance of a distinction and the subtility of a
Casuist. I read on: Have the Assassins or Murderers a right to the privilege of
the Church's Sanctuary? No, according to the decree of Gregory XIV. I
understand by the word ASSASSIN, a man who has taken money, on set purpose, to
ly in wait, surprise and kill an other; who is not upon his guard, nor
distrustful of him For which reason, he, who, without receiving any money, kills
a man only to pleasure his friend, is not called an ASSASSIN. As to the rest,
all those, who are accessory to the murder, who favor, or give the Murderer
succor, or carry him off, are deprived of the right of Sanctuary.

The first part of this decision, continued Eudoxus, appears as loose, as the
last seems severe; and I could not tell what to think on it. As to the matter of
Bulls, I have heard it said, in general, that they are written in a particular
style and language, which a man must understand well to judge of them aright.
This made me suspend my judgment upon this point; but I went immediately to
consult a neighbor and a friend of mine, who is a very able Canonist, and asked
him his thoughts upon this decision of Escobar. After he had read it quite
through, he told me, no body could speak more justly, or more learnedly than this
Jesuit had done. In all appearance, said he, you are most scandalis'd at the
definitions he gives of the words Assassin and Treachery, and the restrictions
he adds to them: but your surprise will he over, as soon as you have heard the
history of this Bull.

You must know then, continued he, that the immunities and privileges of
Churches, have always been, and, still, are, to this day, looked upon in Italy,
as a point of the last importance; which the Popes, on all occasions, have
extremely recommended to the Ecclesiastical Magistrates, and which they have
commanded them zealously to maintain, against the attempts of secular
Magistrates; but yet, notwithstanding, abuses having crept in, and this
privilege, having been the occasion of many horrid crimes, some Popes,
particularly, Sixtus IV and Pius V, thought fit to restrain them, and by their
Bulls made on this account permitted, that certain criminals might be drawn out
of the Churches, and delivered into the hands of secular justice, without
regard to any immunities whatsoever.

Afterward the secular Magistrates extended these Bulls farther than the Popes
intended; which obliged Gregory XIV to make a new decree, for the more exact
regulation of these things, and for the taking away all difficulties,
contentions, and disputes; wherein he declares, more particularly, the
criminals and the crimes, that were to be excepted from privilege, together
with the manner of proceeding on such occasions. Those, who kill men
treacherously, and Assassins and Murderers are in the number of criminals
excepted; Qui proditorie proximum suum occiderint, aut Assassinij. But in the
end, he forbids, that any other crimes, or criminals, except such as are
expressly mentioned in the Bull, should be excluded from the sanctuary and
privilege of Churches.

You must likewise know, said he to me, that, in the explication of these kind
of Bulls, men take care to speak with all the exactness and rigor of law, and
as much, as possible, not to give the terms any other signification than what
is received and authorized by the style and usage of lawyers. Now in the law,
proditorie occidere, and the word Assassinius have no larger a signification
than that, which Escobar here gives them; whereupon my Canonist made me read
Calvin's Lexicon juris, Bartholus, Ambrosius, Farinacius, Covarruvios, and
Clement the VIII. He moreover added, that if Escobar had spoken otherwise, he
had not followed the doctrine of lawyers, nor the terms, nor intention of the
Bull, and, contrary to the prohibition, would have restrained, more than he
ought to have done, a privilege, of which the holy See is very jealous. But
perceiving I had brought with me Escobar and the Provincial Letters, he guessed
the occasion of my doubt, and said to me, that Pascal was in the wrong for
attacking Escobar upon this point; and if he had not a little falsifi'd the
matter, he had in it betrayed, at least, his own ignorance. I answered, that I
would freely pardon his ignorance, provided it were invincible, but for that I
would not swear.

Your Canonist, said the Abbot, might have also added, that Escobar, in
speaking so, had but followed the usage of all Italy, and Spain; where this
Bull is observed after the manner wherein he has explained it. You may see
then, concluded Eudoxus, that here is another point dispatched to the honor of
Pascal, who had waded too far into a matter he did not understand.

That Is true, answered the Abbot, but whatever opinion you take up of the
imprudence, or ignorance of Pascal, do not forget his falsification of this
passage: which you your self acknowledged in the beginning, where you saw he
made Escobar speak the direct contrary to what he had said. We shall be sure to
keep an account of all, replied Eudoxus.

Do you imagine, said Cleander to Eudoxus, that it has cost me less pains, than
it has done you, to inform my self fully in the charge Pascal has drawn up
against the Jesuit Vasquez, touching Alms? you must know then, that I read over
last night at full length, this Divines treatise upon this subject; which took
up my time till midnight: but I do not at all repent the pains I have taken.
For it is hard to meet, upon that subject, a work more instructive and more
judicious, or where more is decided by the authority of Scripture, Fathers and
Canons. And as for the fourth chapter, which Pascal has found fault with, I
wish that all our beneficed Priests and Abbots, who thunder against, and run
down in words, the loose Morals, would read it with attention, and practice it
exactly: I should then willingly refer my self to their opinion.

What you say does very much surprise me, answered Eudoxus: for mind I pray
what our Pascal says upon the point. In the same manner, it is said in the
Gospel, Give Alms of your superfluities, or of what you have to spare, and yet,
notwithstanding, many Casuists have found out ways, to free the richest persons
from the obligation of giving alms; this also may seem, to you, contrary to the
rules of the Gospel; but it is easily reconciled, by interpreting the word
superfluities, or to spare, in such a way, as that no body shall have more than
enuff; and this the learned Vasquez has done in his treatise of alms chapter 4.
What worldly men hoard up to raise and better their own and their relations
state and condition, is not called superfluous: for which reason you will
hardly find, that any of these people who live in the world, have more than
enuff, no not even Kings themselves.

What, said Eudoxus, has Pascal falsifi'd this passage also of Vasquez? yes,
answered Cleander, this passage also is falsifi'd; and it is only by virtue of
this falsification, that Pascal concludes from Vasquez's doctrine, That the
Casuists have found out means to free the richest people from the obligation of
giving alms. This conclusion does not at all follow from this Divine's doctrine;
but it is directly contrary to it; the reading the whole passage, of which
Pascal has quoted but one part, will, without more ado, convince you of this
truth.

The falsification consists in this, that Pascal has made Vasquez say, in
general, That one could hardly ever find any thing superfluous among secular or
worldly people. Whereas Vasquez had only said, That it could hardly be found,
that worldly men had any thing superfluous, with reference to their state and
condition. Take notice of these last words to their state, which Pascal has
retrenched and left out, you will quickly see of what importance they are.
Vasquez, in the place quoted, comparing the obligation of beneficed persons,
with that of pure lays in giving of alms, speaks after this manner.

First I hold, that Ecclesiastics, as well as Seculars, are obliged to succor
and relieve their neighbors, in their extreme necessities; as for other great
necessities graves necessitates, the Ecclesiastics are obliged to ease and
comfort them, at least, out of what is superfluous to their condition, and
sometimes out of what is necessary to it, as I have already said even of
Secular men's obligation; Graves etiam necessitates status proximorum and alias
graves tenentur Ecclesiastici sublevare, ut minimum de superfluo status and
aliquando de necessario, ut supra de saecularibus diximus. But, continued
Vasquez, there is a very great and notable difference, between Seculars and
Ecclesiasties. For first, laics are not obliged to go and seek out the poor,
but only to give alms to those they meet; whereas Ecclesiastics, and chiefly
Bishops, as Corduba has very well observed, are obliged to go and seek them;
because they are the Fathers of the poor, and the care of them does
particularly belong to them. Secondly, because laymen have a right, to
treasure up part of their patrimony, to alter or better their own, or their
relations circumstances and condition. And what is thus reserved is not called
superfluous in this respect. Et tunc illud non dicitur superfluum. Whence it
comes to pass, that upon this account, it can hardly be said, that laymen,
even Kings, have any thing superfluous to their condition. Vnde vix in
saecularibus invenies etiam in Regibus, superfluum statui. But neither Bishops,
nor other Ecclesiastics, can make use of their benefices, to enlarge their
fortune, or raise themselves, or their relations to any higher degree. Because,
that out of the revenues of the Church they have only a right to an honest
livelihood for themselves; and therefore hardly any, that have good livings,
but either have, or may have, what is superfluous to their state and condition,
if they live modestly and manage well.

Pray read no more, said Eudoxus, interrupting him; the falsification you have
taken notice of, is, not only, an undoubted matter of fact, but it is yet also
true, that this passage alone, is sufficient to show, the vanity and the
falsehood of all Pascal's reasonings. For not only Ecclesiastics, and beneficed
persons, are here treated, as severely, as they could wish, and much more
roughly than many desire, but we likewise see, he obliges the Seculars also, to
relieve their neighbors, as well in their extreme, as in their other, great and
considerable, necessities, At the expense of the superfluous part of their
fortune, and even of that which is necessary to their state and condition of
life. Vt minimum de superfluo status and aliquando de necessario ut supra de
saecularibus diximus. How then is it possible, to draw such a conclusion as
Pascal makes from such a doctrine; That as to a man's salvation it would be as
safe, according to Vasquez, not to give alms, provided he have but ambition
enuff to hinder him from having any thing superfluous, as it is safe, according
to the Gospel, to have no ambition, that you may have wherewithal to give alms
and relieve the poor? This conclusion appears now to me as false, as the
expression always seemed obscure, ill turned and very much wrested.

I do not intend, answered Cleander, laughing, thus to lose the pains I have
taken in studying the doctrine of Vasquez. Have the patience, I pray you, to
hear the substance of it. Cap. 1. dub. 3. n. 19.
I Will give it you in few words, and it will not be unuseful for the defense of
this Doctor. After he had demonstrated out of the Scripture, and the Fathers,
the indispensable obligation the rich lay under, of giving alms, he demands
upon what this obligation is founded, and sets down the several opinions of
Divines, upon the matter; and, among the rest, that of Cardinal Cajetan, who
says there are two grounds, or reasons of this obligation. The first, the
extreme necessity of our neighbor, and the second, the superfluous wealth of
the rich; insomuch that by the right of nature, the goods of fortune, being
equal and common to all, and their appropriation to particulars being made but
by the law of nations, he that has any superfluity, or remainder, above his use
and condition, is not the real Master of that remainder, but only a Steward, to
distribute it among those who are in need.

Vasquez does not account these two reasons of Cajetan to be solid enuff, for
the establishment of the precept of giving alms; and, particularly, refutes
that which he takes, from the obligation of giving what is superfluous, by
virtue of the law of nations. Number. 24.
For said he, to speak precisely, if to have any remainder of wealth, over and
above a man's use, founded a reason and obligation, a man would be obliged to
part with it, although there should be no poor to receive it, which would be
absurd. Whence he concludes, that the obligation of giving alms, is not
founded, properly, upon men's superfluities, but upon charity; which requires
me not to refuse my superfluities to my neighbor, when under a necessity. And I
am of opinion, that this is both very well and truly said.

Besides, Number. 27.
Vasquez makes several kind of superfluities; the word superfluity, having in
it many relations, or meanings; that which is superfluous to one thing, may be
necessary to another, and what, in the language of Divines, is superfluous to
nature, is not always superfluous, in reference to decency, and the the
conservation of that state of life, wherein God's Providence has placed us.

Afterward, upon occasion of the several degrees of obligation all men are
under of giving alms out of their superfluities, Vasquez explains two ways,
wherein wealth may be said to be superfluous to the possessor's state and
condition. He says it may be said to be superfluous, either with reference to
the state he is actually in, or with reference to a higher state, supposing he
may have a right to raise himself to that state, and may do it without sin.
Quem ego licite possum acquirere: So that the same thing may be said to be, and
not to be superfluous in different respects. It will be superfluous to my
present state, if it be not absolutely necessary to the conservation of my
being. But it will not be superfluous, with reference to the state I may
lawfully acquire, if I cannot otherwise raise my self to it. Whereupon Vasquez
puts a case of conscience, to wit, whether a man, seeing his neighbor ready to
fall from the condition he is in, be obliged, under pain of mortal sin, to
maintain him in it, by giving him the money, wherewith he designed to raise
himself to a station he might lawfully aspire to. And he answers that he is not
obliged.

That is to say, answered Eudoxus, that if I am a Counselor of Parliament, and
see one of my Brethren forced to quit his place, because he is unable to
support the expense, I am not obliged to give him the money, with which I
intended to purchase a Master of Requests office, to which I might lawfully
aspire.

This instance, said Cleander, explains the thing perfectly well. And thence
Vasquez concludes, that, even, according to the principles of Cajetan, who
agrees with him in the notion and distinction of superfluity, a man will be
under none, or small obligation, to relieve his neighbor, supposing this
obligation be taken precisely to depend upon what he has of superfluity. This
is only a consequence ad hominem, to speak in the language of the Schools, to
demonstrate to Cajetan, that the reason, upon which he founds the obligation of
giving alms, is not a true reason. His argument is indeed both strong and good,
said Eudoxus.

Listen now, answered Cleander, to the conclusions he draws from the principle
he lays down, that the obligation of giving alms is precisely founded upon
charity, whereby you will see, whether this Divine be over loose in the matter.
This, in his opinion, is the order charity prescribes for succoring our
neighbor. You are not obliged to relieve your Brother, Cap. 1. number. 25.26.
at an equal loss to your self with what he would have undergone for want of
your succor. But you are obliged to assist him, at the expense of any less part
of your own fortune, than that which he is like to lose. So that, says he, I am
not bound to save my neighbors life, at the loss of my own; but I am bound to
save it, at the expense of all my fortune; and in all other cases the rule is
proportionably the same. Otherwise, How can the love of God dwell in me, if in
such a necessity, I esteem my honor and my wealth more, than the life of my
neighbor?

This being supposed, continues he, if my neighbor be in danger of death (which
is commonly called extreme necessity) or if he be just falling into a great fit
of sickness, I am obliged to relieve him, with all that is superfluous to the
entertainment and subsistence of my self, and those who depend upon me...... If
I do not expose all my fortune, to prevent my neighbors falling into this evil,
I do not keep and follow the rules and order of charity.

Secondly, to observe this very order, if my neighbor runs the risk of losing
his reputation, this being a thing more precious than gold, or any office, or
employment to be bought with gold, I am obliged to secure him from this evil,
tho I should thereby fall from my present state and condition, and which is yet
more, although my family should suffer by it, yet ought I, in this case also, to
succor him with all my possessions, beyond what is just necessary to support
nature.

Thirdly, if this man, by some loss, be upon the point of having his fortune
ruined, I am obliged to help him with all that is superfluous to my own state,
but not with what is necessary to maintain it. Because I am not obliged to
succor him at an equal damage to what I would hinder.

It is not enuff, replied Eudoxus to say, that this Moral is not loose or
large; I am very certain abundance of people would find it extremely strict and
severe, and, in some particulars, perhaps, a little too extravagant.

Let us return to the falsification, continued Cleander, and oblige Pascal to
argue in form by the principle he borrows, or pretends to borrow from Vasquez.
This then is Pascals argument.

A man is not obliged to give alms but out of his superfluities. But the rich
will hardly be found according to Vasquez, to have any superfluities, therefore
the rich, according to Vasquez, are never, almost, obliged to give alms.

I Will allow the first proposition to be true, Letter 12
but the second is not Vasquez's. He did not say the rich had seldom any
superfluities, and therefore the consequence Pascal draws from thence, does no
way concern this Jesuit. This is clear, said Eudoxus. Let us now therefore,
answered Cleander, make a formal argument of Vasquez's proposition, as it
really stands without any falsification, and see whether Pascal will find his
account in it.

One may say, according to Vasquez, that the rich have rarely any thing
superfluous to their state and condition, but the rich are not obliged to give
alms, but out of what is superfluous, therefore, according to Vasquez, the rich
are obliged rarely to give alms.

The Jesuits will here say, that the first proposition in the sense Vasquez
gives it, and according to the distinction he has made, of the state a man is
in, and the state he may lawfully aspire to, is very understandable,
reasonable, and true. The second proposition, is false, both according to him
and all Divines. For he, as they do, holds that the rich are obliged, on many
occasions, to give alms, even out of what is necessary to their state. This
will appear by looking on his doctrine, concerning the order, prescribed by
charity, and it is what we have just now read.

It is then true, said Cleander, making an end, that Pascal has falsifi'd this
passage; and that the inferences he makes contrary to the precept of alms,
cannot, without falsifying it, be drawn from Vasquez's principle. Whence it
seems clear to me, that Vasquez is very innocent; and that in this point,
Pascal has not acted like an honest man, or a good Christian.

The Abbot, with a great deal of pleasure, saw Cleander and Eudoxus do justice
to this excellent Divine, and attentivly heard them without any interruption.
But, yet, he could not forbear making them observe an important thing, for the
full justification of Vasquez. Take notice, said he to them, that he there
discourses only of a sum of money, wherewith laymen have a right to better
their estates and condition, and which is not superfluous to them on that
account, as it would be to beneficed persons; and that all this has no relation
to ordinary alms, which is a quite different case. I will make this matter
plain to you.

Tho a King should give a hundred Louis d'or's a week to the poor; and a man of
thirty thousand livers rent spend ten Pistols a month in alms, they would not,
regularly speaking, strip themselves of any thing necessary to preserve, or
raise their state and condition. Such a sum could not hinder the Prince from
fortifying his frontier towns, nor from increasing his fleet, nor the man of
thirty thousand livers rent from purchasing a new office, for some one of his
family; and by consequence those small sums are to be allowed superfluous to
their state and grandeur; so that this was not the matter in debate. Now tho
Vasquez should, with Cajetan, found the obligation of alms, upon superfluity,
and not upon charity, and the needs of our neighbor; although he should not oblige
the rich, as, in some circumstances, he does, to succor his neighbor, even out
of what is necessary for maintaining his estate and condition; yet would the
obligation of ordinary alms always remain. For from the moment there is a
question of one, two, three, or four Louis's, for the preventing, for example,
an Artisan from being broken, and his family undon, for want of being able to
purchase the necessary tools, or instruments for carrying on his trade, the
rich man, of whom I speak, and to whom this man makes his address, and who sees
that his refusal will ruin the poor unhappy wretch, and his family, is obliged
in conscience, according to Vasquez, to give him so much alms, as will not
deprive himself of what is necessary for the conservation, or even for the
lawful advancement of his state and condition.

And yet, notwithstanding this, what an idea has Pascal given of Vasquez? it
is, said he, in express words, that His Doctrine frees the most rich from giving
any alms. Can there be any thing more disingenuous or unjust?

In truth, answered Cleander, Pascal does not reason right, nor understand
these matters. But that, which has most moved my indignation, is the obstinacy
and cruelty wherewith he still continues, and pursues his invectives against
this Divine. After his sixth Letter came forth, the Jesuits made an apology for
Vasquez; which consisted in a short, plain, exposition, of his doctrine, in
substance the same almost you have now heard me make. Pascal replies, and
handles again the same thing in his twelfth and thirteenth Letters.

Rather say, said Eudoxus, interrupting him, that he confounds it anew on set
purpose. If I were to make a rejoinder to his reply, and to a thousand such
others, I would do no more than so often set down the very same explanation you
have now given us of Vasquez's doctrine. This beat's down all before it, and has
made all Pascal has since said, as well as all he had said before, fall to the
ground. If a man be never so little skilled in Divinity, he will quickly
perceive, that Pascal understands it not; or rather that he will not understand
what he pretends to refute. But before we go farther, have so much goodness, I
pray you, as to satisfy me about two new proofs, he has added in his twelfth
and thirteenth Letters, to show that the practice of the precept of alms,
according to the principles of Vasquez, will be reduced to nothing. First, says
he, because he does not oblige men to give alms in ordinary necessities:
Secondly, because he adds after some decisions, Hoc intelligo and caetera
omnia, quando scio nullum opem laturum. Can it then, says Pascal, often happen,
that in Paris, where there are so many charitable persons, it may be known,
that none will be found to succor the poor man who begs it?

The first reproach, answered Cleander, is founded upon a scurvy equivocation;
and the second, is mere sophistry and perfect wrangling. To find out the
equivocation, you are to know, that Vasquez, with all other Divines, makes a
distinction of three degrees of necessity, wherein our neighbor may be, in
reference to alms; Cap. 1. number. 9.
one is called extreme, the other great or pressing, and the third common
necessity. Necessitas extrema, gravis seu urgens, and communis. Extreme
necessity, is, not only, when a man is at the point of dying if he gets no
alms, but, also, when there is ground to believe, that, probably, he will be
reduced to this condition. The necessity called, great or pressing, is, when
there is reason to apprehend your neighbor is in danger, not of death, but of
some considerable damage, or inconvenience. Common necessity is, that, which
commonly an infinity of poor people suffer, whose poverty puts them into no
danger of death, or sickness; such, for example are those, who are ordinarily
called the poor; who have no way to live but by begging, whereby, however, they
make a shift to support themselves.

Vasquez teaches, that the precept does not only oblige, under pain of mortal
sin in extreme necessitys, as some famous Divines seemed to have taught, but
that it obliges also, in great or pressing necessities. As to common
necessities, he follows the opinion of the greatest part of Divines, who hold,
that, in this respect, the precept does not oblige under pain of mortal sin.
And that a rich man, going along the street, does not sin mortally in not
giving alms to all the beggars who ask him.

Instead of the term common necessities, Pascal was pleased to substitute that
of ordinary necessities; that he might be able to say, Vasquez had made void
the precept of alms, by asserting, that it does not oblige in ordinary
necessities. But who is it, that cannot see the malice of such a translation?
for although the necessity, which is called common, in the notion of Divines, be
ordinary, it is not the only necessity that is so. Great and pressing
necessities, in which, according to Vasquez, the precept does oblige, are
neither extraordinary, nor very rare. Last year, by the scarcity of corn, they
were become very ordinary; they are this year also more ordinary, and the best
years that can happen, they are never very rare.

There is always an infinite number of modest, bashful, poor, who have much more
need of assistance than common beggars; and for this reason it is, that the
Divines say, a rich man is not obliged, strictly speaking, under pain of mortal
sin, to give alms to all the beggars he meets. Nevertheless many, and Vasquez
among others, oblige, under pain of mortal sin, to succor those other poor in
their pressing necessities; and thus you see it is to abuse unjustly and
maliciously the term necessitates communes, to draw that consequence from it,
which Pascal has done against Vasquez.

When a man is once engaged, said Eudoxus, interrupting him, he catches at any
thing, and strives, as well as he can, to bring himself off. What would the
world have said, if Pascal had made no reply to the Jesuits, who bragged and
published, that they had convinced him of a notorious imposture?

The other article, continued Cleander, is a pitiful, wrangling, business.
Vasquez, by these words, Hoc intelligo, quando scio nullum opem laturum, meant
no more but this, that if I know another will relieve this poor man, I am not
then, under pain of mortal sin, obliged to succor him. Pascal thereupon argues
strongly; can it often happen, said he, that in Paris, where there are so many
charitable persons, one should know, that no body would be found to assist the
poor we meet? as if Vasquez had intended, that before a rich man was obliged to
give alms, all the Ladies, who make it their business to beg for the poor, and
all the other charitable persons of Madrid and Toledo, should come and make
before him a declaration in form of law, that no body would receive the
unfortunat wretch, who now begged his commiseration.

But could Pascal have once thought to have made so frivolous an objection as
that, if he had read Vasquez's treatise with any attention? For, in the second
chapter, he teaches in express terms, That if many rich persons know a poor
man's necessities, and do not succor him, they are all guilty of sin; because
every particular person is obliged to relieve him; and that it is ridiculous to
think the contrary. It is not therefore Vasquez's opinion, that a rich man may
take his measures from others, unless he know that those others will
effectually succor the poor man.

This is not worth the refutation, answered the Abbot; you only find by it,
that the Jesuits are not to be pardoned in any thing. Their Adversaries lay
hold of every thing; and let no advantage against them slip; there is not a
word, nor an expression, never so little doubtful, upon which they do not think
they have a right to cavil and wrangle with them. Such a thing as this cannot
but be a great prejudice to their cause, but to their adversaries would be but
a very slight one.

And to confirm what we say, continued the Abbot, a moment after Pascal had
given the Jesuit, who speaks in his Provincial Letters, this character of
extravagant impertinence, do but observe, how he makes him conclude this
article in his sixth Letter. I see plainly, Father, that this follows from
Vasquez's doctrine. But what can be answered if it should be objected, that to
secure Salvation, it would be as safe, according to Vasquez, to have ambition
enuff to hinder superfluities, as it is safe, according to the Gospel, to have
no ambition, that men might give alms out of their superfluities? it must be
answered, said he to me, that both these ways are safe, according to the
Gospel. The one, according to the Gospel, in the most literal and most easy
sense; the other, according to the same Gospel interpreted by Vasquez; by which
you may perceive the great usefulness of interpretations.

There is in this answer, said the Abbot, a most ridiculous extravagance; and
which exceeds all the bounds of probability. But you know the division that is
commonly made on such like occasions. One part of the folly is attributed to
the character of the person represented; and the excess, or other part belongs,
by consent of all the world, to the author. That which follows, answered
Eudoxus, relates to the Popes Bulls, I desired my Canonist, before I went from
him, to instruct me in the matter, for I found his learning might save me a
great deal of trouble. The matter I had a mind to hear debated was, to know
upon what occasions a Religious man might put off the habit of his Order,
without hazard of excommunication. Of this affair Pascals Jesuit speaks after
this manner.

The Popes have excommunicated Religious who put off their habits, and yet
notwithstanding our four and twenty old men discourse thus upon that subject,
tr. 6. ex. 7. nu. 103. Upon what occasions may a Religious man put off his
habit, without incurring the penalties of excommunication? he gives an account
of many; and among others of this. If he puts it off upon a shameful account,
as to go a robbing, or to go incognito into places of debauch, with an
intention to put it on again presently after. So that it is visible the Bulls
did not mean such cases as these. I could hardly believe this was possible; and
therefore prayed the Father to show it me in the original. And I saw that the
chapter where these words are, is entitled, The practice according to the
Jesuits School, wherein I read these words: Si habitum dimittat ut furetur
occulte, vel fornicetur.

And what advantage, said Cleander, interrupting him, could the Jesuits have by
treating such kind of rogues so civilly? I do not see their end in this kind of
policy: and tho their Divines should be as extravagant as Pascal would have us
believe, this exception is, of it self, too odd to let us think they could have
made it, if it had not been grounded upon some maxim of the law, or upon some
clause of the Bull.

You judge very prudently, said Eudoxus, and my Canonist told me upon this
occasion, that Pascal, having so fully studied his Escobar, must be supposed to
have found little or nothing in him worthy of reprehension; since he stood so
much upon such frivolous things. He therefore explained the business to me in
this manner; there are, says he, many decrees against Religious, who put off
their habits, and go out of their Cloisters, without their superiors leave. The
chapter here treated of, In sexto titulo. Ne Clerier vel Monachi
is, Vt periculosa, which forbids the Religious, upon pain of excommunication,
rashly to quit their habits, to go to the public Schools, or to any other
places. The Canonist put the question, whether, by virtue of this chapter,
every Religious man, from the moment he puts off his habit, incurs the penalty
of excommunication. And they do all answer, that this decree, together with all
others, ought to be understood, according to the intention of the Legislator;
that is to say of the Pope, who made it: whose intention appears by these
words, Vt periculosa Religiosts evagandi materia subtrahatur: To the end, an
occasion may be taken from the Religious, of running out of their Cloisters, to
the danger of their Salvation. So that a Religious man, who disguises himself,
and in that dress go's out of his Monastery, to walk and divert himself, is
excommunicated; therefore by a much stronger reason, a Religious man, who lays
aside his habit, to rob, or go incognito to baudy houses, would, without doubt,
incur the penalty of excommunication.

This being supposed, the Canonist sets down several occasions, wherein a
Religious man may put off his habit, without hazard of excommunication; some,
wherein he may do it without sin, and others, without mortal sin. Pursuant to
this, Escobar puts this question, Quandonam Religiosus potest sine
excommunicatione habitum exuere? and he answers, that in the following cases he
does not incur excommunication.

1. If he lays aside his habit but for his ease, either to leap, or run, in
some place, where no body can see him, Si in loco secreto exuat ut commodius ei
sit, vel ut melius cu^^t vel saltet. 2. If being oppressed by his immediate
superior, he disguise himself, that he may go with more security to find out
his mediat superior. Vel si injuste gravatus a Praelato immediato fugiat ad
Superiorem sine habitu, ne agnitus comprehendatur. 3. Or, if he should quit his
habit upon some criminal design, for example, privately to rob, or, to do
something worse, with an intention quickly to put it on again. Vel si ad turpem
causam, v. g. ut furetur occulte vel fornicetur, illum dimittat mox
reassumpturus. And these are his last words, which Pascal was pleased to
translate, or rather to paraphrase thus, if he lays it aside for a shameful
cause, as to go a robbing, or incognito to a baudy house, whereas it is very
plain, that this was not at all Escobar's sense or meaning.

For his design by these exceptions, and these examples, is to instruct a
Confessor, in the exact and precise sense of the decree; which only prohibits
Religious men from changing their habits to go out of the Monastery and to live
or act abroad with greater liberty, and by which the Pope had no thoughts of
excommunicating one, who should only lay aside his habit in the Convent, although
he should do it even with an ill and dishonest intention.

I replied to my Canonist, that what he said, appeared probable enuff, but that
Pascals paraphrase also did not seem very unreasonable, nor ill grounded. For
tho a Religious man might put off his habit, to rob within the Monastery,
because, for example, he was to pass through some hole, where his habit might be
troublesome, it is very rare that he could commit the other sin within the
Convent; and therefore Pascal seemed to have a right to interpret, as he has
done, Escobar's text and meaning.

Escobar, said he to me, writ in a time, when that was not so rare as you
imagine, even here in France, in several Monasteries in the country, which have
been since reformed; but, said he farther, Escobar's book, cited by Pascal, is
but an abridgment by way of question and answer. I Will show you this Divine's
sense cleared and explained at large upon this point of the Canon law. It is in
the third volume of his Moral Divinity. Tom. 7. p. 144.
There, after he had set down the text of the chapter ut periculosa, Escobar
says positively, that from the moment a Religious man quits his habit, to
conceal what he is, he incurs the censure of excommunication, and that, tho he
should not take another, although he should keep a part, quitting, for example,
the upper garment, without putting off the under, yet, notwithstanding, if this
be sufficient to hinder him from being known for Religious, he is to be judged,
according to the intention of the law, to have quitted his habit. See now, said
he, whether this agrees with Pascal's comment; who supposes the Religious man,
a robber on the highway, or in the streets of Paris, and running incognito to
places of looseness and debauchery.

I cannot, said Cleander, but still admire Pascal's ingenuous zeal for the
reformation of the Jesuits doctrine: for, I pray, take notice, that he has
chosen some cases and passages very difficult and obscure on one side, and
which, on the other, being dismembered, and cut off from the text, and proposed
without certain circumstances, which very few are able to supply, have
something extremely shocking, by which the common people are wholly drawn aside
from, and made ready, or prepared to rise up, as it were, in rebellion against
the Society.

You will see in what follows, said Eudoxus, a Masterpiece of this artifice
and cunning. It is without doubt a fine stroke, and must needs have given the
Jesuits a great deal of trouble, under pretense of not transgressing the bounds
of good manners, he only points at a passage, in Escobar, relating to a Bull of
Pius V against Priests, given to a crime not to be named, but upon great
necessity. I saw indeed, said Pascal, this passage of Escobar the evening
before, but I durst not tell it you, for it is a friteful thing.

The thing is indeed friteful, said my Canonist, if Pascal intends the matter;
for the crime there spoken of is one of the most infamous, that can be
committed; the particulars also to which Escobar descends, can hardly be read
without some trouble. But could it be imputed as a fault in a Doctor of Physic,
to hold himself obliged to expound to his Scholars, certain diseases, about
which they might some time or other be consulted? Prudence obliges men to write
cases of conscience in a language, not commonly understood by all the world;
and in books which are usually read by none but Priests, employed in hearing
Confessions; who daily meet with worse things than those mentioned by this
author. I fancy if one be guilty in this point, is it not Pascal, who sets
people a laughing to see what is not at all proper for them?

But if by saying, that it is a friteful thing, he means Escobar's decision, he
shows himself in this also to be either very ignorant, or very malicious. For
all that Escobar says upon this subject, may be reduced to this; he gives an
account of the opinion of another Spanish Divine; which is, that this Bull,
probably speaking, is absolete, and therefore does not oblige in conscience to
the penalties it imposes. This is a mere matter of fact, which Escobar does not
warrant, and, besides, it is no more surprising, that this Bull should not be
received, or put in practice in Spain, than that it should not be received, or
put in practice in France, where, in reality, it never was.

In the second place, supposing it had been received, Escobar explains in what
circumstances it does, or does not oblige; and that by an undoubted principle
of law, according to which, the Popes very well know their decrees are always
to be understood; to wit, that when they speak of any sin, it is of a sin
perfect, or complete in it is kind, except the contrary be plainly expressed.

In the third place, Escobar adds, that before the Judges declaratory sentence,
the criminals, in the court of conscience, do not incur the penalties of this
Bull. And these penalties are, to be deprived of their charges, or benefices,
if they have any, and to be degraded, and delivered up to the secular arm, to
be punished, after the manner of laymen, that is to say to be burnt alive.
What Escobar there says, is undeniable, according to the principle he lays
down, that no penal law obliges the guilty to accuse themselves; and certainly
it would be a great, and very particular extravagance to say, that a wretch,
actually guilty of this sin, was obliged, in conscience, to go and discover
himself, to the end he might be degraded and burnt alive.

This is ridiculous, answered Cleander, but, I pray you, continued he,
addressing himself to the Abbot, satisfy me in one thing relating to Escobar.
In this abridgment of Morals, often quoted by Pascal, Escobar gives some
chapters the title of Praxis circa...... ex Societatis Jesu Doctoribus, and
after the decisions, he puts into the margent the names of several
Jesuit-authors. Are all these decisions, really, taken out of the authors by
him cited? This is a matter of consequence, for a man cannot but conclude from
Pascal, that the whole Society speaks by the mouth of Escobar.

It would be great injustice to all the Jesuits, replied the Abbot, if men
should make them answerable, for all that Escobar says in those chapters. 1.
Because, that in many Moral points, it is the same thing with the Jesuits, as
with other Divines, Canonists, and Lawyers; one is of one opinion, another of
another, and therefore it would be nonsense, to take Escobar's doctrine, for the
doctrine of the Society; because he might, for example, have followed Vasquez,
so long as Suarez and Laiman are of a contrary opinion.

2. Escobar commonly thinks it sufficient, to make one of these authors support
his opinion, if he finds in him, the principle, from whence he imagins he has
rightly inferred his own conclusion: wherein he is not more infallible, than
other Divines, who are often mistaken in their arguments; and indeed Escobar,
himself, does sometimes mistake in that matter. 3. Escobar is a great
Collector, not very exact, and for want of care, often quotes falsely; witness
the case of fasting, which we have already mentioned; wherein he cites
Filiucius, and yet Filiucius says not one word, of what he makes him speak in
his margent.

As far as I see, said Eudoxus, interrupting him, if the Jesuits had the same
notion, you have, of Escobar, they would not treat him with much ceremony, but
freely give him up to Pascals censure and discretion. Nor do I know, whether
even Bauni would find any great kindness from you, at least, if I may judge by
what I have formerly heard you speak of him, and that without any reference to
the Provincial Letters.

I do not say so, answered the Abbot, they are both men of merit, and commonly
argue, and decide very well; I would only say, that in some places, they either
mistook, or expressed themselves scurvily; and that there was reason to
reprehend them, provided they would treat them in their reprehensions, after
the same manner, they would treat Divines of any other Body or Order; and that
the Jesuits, far from adopting the doctrine of these authors, did reject it,
conformably to the opinions of their best Divines; among whom these are far
from being reckoned of the first form.

But if it be unjust, to judge by these passages, of the remaining part of
these two Divines doctrine, it is yet much more unjust, to do it for the whole
Society. As there is no author in whom faults may not be found, so are there
none, who may not be defamed by publishing nothing but their faults;
exaggerating and exposing them on all occasions, without ever mentioning what
is good in their books. And as there is no body, whose members are all sound
and without fault; so can there be none, which, under the like pretense, may
not be decry'd and run down. But, said the Abbot, we are insensibly gone astray
from our subject.

That which follows for the most part in this sixth Letter, continued Eudoxus,
has no relation to the Jesuits, but to Diana and Caramuel, who are not of their
number. Let us pass by all that, and come to Valentia, upon his case of simony.
You, said he to Cleander, are to make a report of this matter.

Let us first do Pascal justice, said the Abbot interrupting them, and let us
own, that so very nice and tender a point, could not be touched more finely
than it has been by him; and upon which it was, for him, of the last
consequence, to turn his readers fancy. It is about half a page before the case
of Valentia, in your edition in quarto. I pray listen to it attentively.

Alas! said the Father to me; our principal end was no other, but to have
established the Gospel maxims in their utmost severity; and it is sufficiently
seen by our conduct, and the regulation of our manners, that if we suffer any
relaxation, or looseness in others it is more by condescendance, than design, to
which we are forced; the men of this age being so much corrupted, that finding
our selves unable to make them come to us, we are necessitated to go to them.

Pascal very well foresaw, that the behavior of the Jesuits, their ordinary way
of living, and the regulation of their manners, which he was willing to
acknowledge, would be a strong prejudice, and a general objection against the
belief of those horrid things, wherewith he intended to reproach them. He was
sensible, that they always had been, and still were, in so good a reputation in
the world, that, till the appearance of the Provincial Letters, all which had
been said against them, and so often published by their enemies in France,
Germany, Spain, and Rome, had made no great impression upon the men of sense,
even upon those, who were the least favorable to the Society.

And, really, when the Provincial Letters come first out, an infinity of honest
people said, that the regularity of these Fathers lives, was, alone, a
sufficient apology for them. That there was not the least liklyhood, or
probability, that a Society, where vice is less suffered than in any other, and
where, the manners and behavior of the particular members are commonly very
regular, and exact, should think of introducing, or countenancing corruption in
the world; that it is natural enuff, to be easy and indulgent to ones self,
however severe a man is to others; that, on the contrary, it is not man's temper
to be rigid and severe to himself, and soft and gentle to his neighbor. And in
the last place, that it was hard to conceive, that so many persons, who, on one
hand, did all a Christian, or a Religious man can do to be saved, should, on
the other, in favor of sinners, do that, which must necessarily dam both
themselves and those sinners.

Pascal foresaw this difficulty, and was aware of it, even when he writ his
fourth Letter; wherein he first began to attack the Jesuits, and did then, all
he could to lessen the force of this prejudice and argument against the belief
of all he should say upon that subject. He does here again the same thing, as
you see, and that in a very cunning, skilful, manner; and it was, without
doubt, such places as these, which made your Acadamist Perault say, that all
the art of Dialogue was to be found in the Provincial Letters.

Eudoxus and Cleander agreed to the truth of this remark; and that there was in
this transition of Pascal, as much wit as malice, and so without more ado fell
upon the passage in Valentia.

I know not, said Cleander, the reason, why in the several editions I have seen
of the Provincial Letters, the citations upon this article are so faulty, and
the pages in Valentia quoted with so little exactness. I thought it was done,
by mistake, which obliged me to read, at length, this Divines treatise of
simony; but before I tell you my opinion on it, let us read Pascal.

We have therefore maxims for all sorts of persons; for the beneficed, for
Priests, for Religious, and for Gentlemen...... Let us begin, said the Father,
with the beneficed persons. You know the trade, that is, at this day, driven
about benefices; wherein if we should govern our selves, by what Saint Thomas,
and old authors have written upon this subject, abundance of Churchmen would
be found guilty of simony: for which reason it was very necessary, that our
Fathers should, by their prudence, moderat things, as these words of Valentia,
who is one of Escobars four animals, will give you to understand. It is the
conclusion of a long discourse, wherein he sets down many expedients, of which,
in my opinion, that in the 1042 page of the third tome is the best. If a
temporal good be given for a spiritual, that is to say, money for a benefice,
and the money be given as the price of the benefice, it is plain downright
simony: but if it be given only as a motive, to induce a man to resign, NON
TANQUAM PRETIUM BENEFICII SED TANQUAM MOTIVUM AD RESIGNANDUM, it is not simony;
although the person, who resignes, considers and expects the money, as his
principal end Tanner, who is also of our Society, says the same thing in his
third tome page 1519, etc

I expected, said Cleander, to have found, at large, this conclusion in
Valentia, and did believe that the seven or eight lines of this Letter, written
in Italick characters, were but the translation of that conclusion. But I was
indeed busied to good purpose, to seek for it in the chapter or third point
quoted by Pascal. This paraphrase, is so different from the text, that, in good
earnest, I could not guess to what part of the treatise it had relation. For
Pascal, having in his French mixed these latin words, Non tanquam pretium
beneficij, sed tanquam motivum ad resignandum, I did believe he designed it for
a mark, to find out, the more easily, the place he meant to speak of. But I
sought for it in vain, not being able any where to find it. Pascal also says,
that what we have now read, is the conclusion of a long discourse, where
Valentia gives many expedients to show, how men may trade in benefices without
sin; but neither could I by this mark find out the place he intended to speak
of.

At last, by guessing, I thought I had found, what he would be at: it is in the
beginning of the third chapter, where Valentia puts this question; Whether
simony be committed, as often as a spiritual good is given for a temporal, or a
temporal for a spiritual? and he answers, that to do so, is not always simony.
It must be said, continued he, and it is the common opinion of Divines, that
there are, generally speaking, two ways, by which it may happen, that men may
give a spiritual good for a temporal without simony. The first is, when the
temporal good, is, only, a motive of giving, or of doing some spiritual good.
The second is, when the temporal, is, but a gratful acknowlegment, or
compensation of the spiritual good, or the spiritual of the temporal. He proves
his assertion, by the notion of simony; which he takes, as all Divines do, for
a kind of contract, after which he adds these words, The conclusion therefore
of my argument is established, or confirmed.

I had, I say, reason to believe, pursued Cleander, in reading his sixth
Letter, that this was the place Pascal principally pointed at. 1. Because, that
Valentia there, really, answered the question propounded; that it is not always
simony to give a temporal good for a spiritual, nor a spiritual for a temporal.
2. Because, he speaks of the distinction, of two ways of giving a temporal for
a spiritual good, as a payment, or as a motive. 2. Because he adds these words,
See my conclusion established or confirmed, to which Pascal seems to allude;
and lastly because I can find no place, to which the quotation can better agree.

But since the answers, and the replications, and the defense of those
replications, and the false citations, have infinitely puzzled and confounded
this whole affair, I think the best and shortest course, is, to do as we have
done in the case of Vasquez, and other matters; that is to say, to examine in it
self the doctrine of Valentia; and to judge by the exposition thus to be made,
whether this ought to be objected as a crime to the Jesuits. Now what I have to
say upon this point is this.

First, seeing, that in this dispute, Saint Thomas was quoted on both sides, I
thought it fit to read him upon this subject; of which he treats in 100 q. 2.2.
after I had read and compared it with Valentia, I perceived, that this Divines
treatise was nothing else, almost, but a comment upon Saint Thomas's question;
and that this holy man's doctrine, was the foundation of what was held by this
Divine.

In the second place, I observed, that in the places where the matter is
handled, Valentia, without determing any way the question about benefices,
treats the thing in general, to wit, whether a spiritual good may be sometime
given for a temporal, without simony, or a temporal for a spiritual; and that
all he there does, and the only thing, almost, is, to explain, with Saint
Thomas, how notwithstanding the precepts which forbids simony, a temporal good
may be often given, according to some customs, allowed by all the world for a
spiritual good: how it is not simony in the Church Ministers to receive money,
on account of their spiritual administrations. How it is not simony to bequeath
a fund to a Church for an annual Mass. How a Church is not guilty of simony, by
engaging to say an Obit or Mass, for those who give such, or such, an alms, or
offering. And also how money may be given, for certain, sacred, and spiritual
actions. Upon this last point, Valentia directs his reader to Saint Thomas's 3.
art. where he has for examples the giving money to the poor, to engage them to
pray to God for us, the giving money for Processions to get Prayers said for the
dead, and other such like matters.

Thirdly, Valentia, by the distinction which at first he mentioned, of a
temporal good given for a spiritual, as a motive, or gratful acknowlegment,
explains how the retributions for entertainment of the Ministers of the Church
are given, and received, without simony: and how they may in conscience take
them, because they are given, not in payment, but by way of a grateful
acknowlegment.

In the fourth place, he says, that a fund bequeathed to a Church, on condition
of a Mass, the money given for Processions, the alms given to the poor, on
condition to have their Prayers, etc. are all received, without simony; because
given, but as motives, to engage those, who accept them, to pray and do these
spiritual duties for the givers. In all this, added Cleander, not only, nothing
appears false, but it also seems to me, that no body could do, or speak
otherwise.

In the last place, since it is principally upon the direction of intention,
and upon the distinction of a thing given, as a motive, or grateful
acknowlegment, and not as a payment, that Pascal attacks Valentia, to give his
doctrine an ill air, or make men take up a bad opinion of it, I was desirous to
see, whether these distinctions, and directions of intentions, were, as well as
the rest, taken out of Saint Thomas; and I found all this was purely the
doctrine of this learned and holy man. Hereupon, Cleander, opening one of Saint
Thomas's Sums, showed Eudoxus examples in it, almost, upon all the articles of
the question.

To receive any thing given for the administration of spiritual matters, Art.
2. in conc^. and in corp.
as a payment is simoniacal; but it is lawful to receive it, as a retribution
for his entertainment, or necessity.

To exact these retributions approved by custom, is not simony, Ad. 4.
provided the intention be directed only to the observation of the custom.

Saint Thomas says the same thing yet more fully in the following article; In
concl. and in corp. ad 2.
as for the money given to the poor it must be answered, that those who give
them alms, to the end they may pray for them, do it not, with an intention to
purchase their Prayers, but only out of a principle of liberality, and as a
motive to engage them to pray to God for them.... The procession made at a
funeral, Ibid.
is judged a grateful compensation for the money given.

It is not lawful for the admission of Religious, Ad 4.
to take or exact any thing, as a payment, but it is, notwithstanding, lawful
to receive something, if the Monastery be poor... In like manner, it is lawful
to be the more easy, in receiving a person, who, by giving great alms to the
Monastery, shows he has a great deal of devotion for that place.

But above all, mind what follows, said Cleander, It is also lawful, to excite
this person, by temporal good turns or offices, to have a devotion for this
Monastery; to the end he may be inspired and inclined to enter into it; although
it be not lawful to make a bargain to receive, or give any thing for his
admission. If Escobar, instead of Saint Thomas, had made this distinction, and
allowed this direction of intention, Pascal would not have passed it by, nor
failed to have soon found a place in the Provincial Letters for these last
lines.

Cleander, after he had read all these passages to Eudoxus and the Abbot,
pursued the point in this manner. I do confess to you, that after I had
compared Saint Thomas and Valentia's principles, I was enraged to see, that the
most criminal part of these distinctions, was attributed to Valentia, tho he
had but transcribed it out of Saint Thomas. But I was yet more enraged at
Pascal's citation, and way of reporting Valentia's text. Who, having with Saint
Thomas, said, that a spiritual good might be given for a temporal, or a
temporal, for a spiritual, and proved it by the same examples this holy Docter
had made use of, is nevertheless made by Pascal, to speak in this manner. If a
spiritual good be given for a temporal, that is to say money for a benefice, and
that the money be given as the price of the benefice, it is plain, downright,
simony; but if it be given, only, as a motive, to induce the beneficed person
to resign, Non tanquam pretium beneficij sed tanquam motivum ad resignandum it
is no simony.

Who could believe, but that these are the very words of Valentia, seeing them
not only put down in an Italian character, but that the Latin words, also, are
inserted with the French Non tanquam pretium benefi^ij, sed tanquam motivum ad
resignandum, as if they had been the author's own text, joined with the
translation? and yet, notwithstanding, this Latin proposition is, altogether,
an impudent contrivance of Pascal, or his friends, there not being the least
footstep of it in any part of the whole treatise of Valentia.

Eudoxus, extremely surprised, said, that this could not possibly be; for which
reason he himself resolved to read over, exactly, the chapter pointed at by
Pascal; where having found nothing like his quotation; see, says he, crying out
the height and perfection of impudence and imposture. I perceive, pursued he,
clearly, the cheat. This principle, that a spiritual good may be sometimes
given for a temporal, being once laid down and nakedly applied to the matter of
benefices, has something in it very odious: for which cause Pascal was pleased
to give his commentary this turn.

But why did not the Jesuits then take the advantage of such a falsification?
for it is very visible, gross, and full of affectation; it was not, only, an
unfaithful translation, whereby the authors thoughts were made weaker, or a
strained sense put upon his expressions, but whole lines were falsely fathered
on him, and Latin words, inserted in the French, which are not to be found in
the text, pretended to be translated. Here are many essential words, both
French and Latin added, which from a very harmless principle, makes a most
scandalous proposition.

The Jesuits, answered Cleander, instead of making, as we have done, a plain,
simple, exposition, of Valentia's doctrine, compared with the doctrine of Saint
Thomas, amused themselves with distinctions; which, in reality, were good, but
not at all necessary. Whereupon their adversaries, quitting Valentia, began to
wrangle and quarrel with them; and thereby starting a new game, cheated and
deluded them, but, as you very well say, they ought to have been more stanch,
made use of that occasion and stuck precisely to the matter of fact. They
should have obliged the Jansenists, to have shown in Valentia, the words cited
by Pascal; however such men, after such a cheat as this, are unworthy of any
answer, till they have made public satisfaction by owning and condeming the
tric. But this, in all appearance, they will be careful not to do.

I have upon this point, said the Abbot, confounded twenty Jansenists with the
very book in their own hands: you have each of you hit upon the main
difficulty, and the most essential part of the calumny. For in as much, as the
application of Valentia and Saint Thomas's principle to the matter, to which
they applied it, is very reasonable, and in as much, as the application they
make of it, is necessary for instructing Ecclesiastics, how to purify and raise
up their intentions, in such holy Ministrations, so much the more impious and
ridiculous would this principle be, and so much the more dangerous in the
matter, to which it is applied by Pascal.

If a man should say to a poor body, here I Will give you a crown, on condition
you will pray to God for me; and that another should say to a beneficed person,
Sir your living is worth fifteen hundred livers a year, give it me, here are
for you ten thousand livers in ready money; which I do not offer you as the
price of your benefice, I have no such thoughts, but only as a motive to engage
you to accommode me with it. Can any thing be more different than these two
propositions, any thing more innocent than the first, or more extravagant than
the second? the first is a common practice among Christians; clearly justified
by the doctrine of Valentia; upon whom the second is grossly imposed; which is as
far from his thoughts as light is from darkness, or truth from error. This
learned Divine maintains, that it is not always forbid, to give a spiritual
good for a temporal; and he proves this assertion, by declaring expressly, that
that, which obliges him, and all other Divines to hold this opinion, is, that,
otherwise, the custom, universally received in the Church, must be condemned;
pursuant to which, the spiritual services, rendered to the people by the
Ecclesiastics, are done on condition of certain temporal retributions, which
serve for the entertainment of the Ministers of the Altar. Page 3. n. ^.
In contrarium autem est, quod si ita esset, oporteret damnare universalem usum
Ecclesiae, quo fere quidquid spiritualis ministerij confertur in populum,
confertur pro aliquibus subsidijs temporalibus, quibus Ministri alantur. He
explains, at the same time, how simony is avoided, upon these occasions, that
is by giving a temporal good for a spiritual, not as the price, or payment, but
only as a grateful compensation, or recognition, or as a motive whereby the
person, out of a principle of gratitude, is engaged, to grant the spiritual
good, intended to be obtained by the temporal.

Durst Pascal contend or dispute, that thus to give a temporal for a spiritual
good, was not an usual custom among Christians, or that this usage was not
lawful and innocent; or, lastly, that a man ought not to have the intentions
Valentia suggests, and to exclude those, which he does exclude in this matter.
Durst he say, that from Valentia's principle, determined and restrained to the
subject treated of by him and by Saint Thomas, it might be concluded lawful, to
give money for a benefice? let him therefore make Saint Thomas himself speak, as
he has made Valentia, and the whole Church say, whose custom we see is founded
upon this principle of Valentia, and only sanctified by the intentions
prescribed by this Divine to Christians, and to the Ministers of the Altar;
that their practice is to be extended much farther, than the principle it self.
But to argue and speak exactly well upon this subject, it is necessary to study
it, much better than Pascal has done.

The Divines, after Saint Thomas's example, established the distinction of a
temporal good given, as a motive, or as a payment; but it was only to be made
use of in fit and capable matters; and in such instances, as we have already
mentioned. It may, also, sometimes, take place in the matter of benefices; as
in that particular case, which neither Saint Thomas nor Valentia have forgot.

A Bishop has received many great services from a person, who is neither
incapable nor unworthy to enjoy a benefice: the Bishop gives him one; in this
there may, and there may not, be simony. If the Bishop, out of friendship and
mere acknowlegment, has done him this favor, it is not simony. But if he gives
him the benefice, as a recompense, acquitting him of all obligations to this
man, in so much that he believes himself thereby dispensed from paying his
salary, or the money he had advanced for his service, it is simony. So that, let
the Bishop direct his intention never so much to the motive of friendship or
acknowlegment, the benefice is really given for payment. Let but the heart of
those, who confer, change, or resign benefices, be but as right, as the
distinctions of these Divines are reasonable and solid, and they will never be
mistaken: but if the rectitude of their intentions be wanting, and they will
but listen to the dictates of their consciences, they shall soon perceive, that
these distinctions, ill applied, are not sufficient to set them at ease.

Here is an article, answered Eudoxus, that has held us a long time, and with
reason; for there were many things in it to be disintangled and explained. But
before we go to another, satisfy me in a small matter of fact; which during
this discourse, wherein it was often mentioned, has given me some trouble, and
which I have suffered to pass by, that I might not interrupt you. You have
spoken, several times, of some latin words, inserted by Pascal, in the
quotation of Valentia's passage, touching the money one might give to a
beneficed person for his benefice, Non tanquam pretium, sed tanquam motivum ad
resignandum. Which I do not find in my edition, and yet, notwithstanding, it is
one of the most criminal circumstances of the citation; and that which most
demonstrates Pascals unfaithfulness and disingenuity.

I know it very well, replied the Abbot; these latin words were retrenched out
of the following editions, after they had wrought in the first, all their
intended effect. The party were apprehensive of the bad consequences of such a
falsisication as this; of which it was very easy to convince the author, and
upon which, after conviction, it was natural enuff, to make troublesome and
pernicious reflections; and therefore, without saying any thing, they left it
out; and I do not believe, that even the Jesuits did ever perceive it, at least
they never complained on it. But yet in this edition in quarto, you may see the
words at length. If a temporal good be given, for a spiritual, that is to say,
money for a benefice, and that the money be given, as the price of the benefice,
it is plain simony. But if it be given only as a motive, to incline the
beneficed person to resign; NON TANQUAM PRETIUM SED TANQUAM MOTIVUM AD
RESIGNANDUM, it is not simony.

If with all the other falsifications, said Eudoxus, which we have hitherto
seen, upon so many different subjects, there should yet be found some other of
this size and force, I should not think there was no ground for the Proverb at
that time current, He lies like a Jansenist. But shall we be as long employed
in discussing the passage in Tanner another Jesuit, whom Pascal makes an
accomplice in Valentia's pretended crime? Tanner, added the good Jesuit in the
Provincial Letters, Tanner, who is still of our Society, says the same thing,
in his third tome page 1519.

No, said Cleander, for by reading but one colume, you will see they have
calumniated him, just as they have Valentia. They opened the book, and read
him, and except the general proposition, that it is sometimes lawful, to give a
spiritual for a temporal good, they found not one single word, which came near
what was attributed to him by Pascal. He expresses himself, also, with more
circumspection than Valentia has done: and the decisions he draws from his
principles, do so clearly show, he speaks but of the cases mentioned by Saint
Thomas, that he, who pretends to find there any thing else, must needs be a
whimsical, maggotpated fellow.

It must be acknowleg'd, that this is horrible, answered Eudoxus, and I could
hardly have believed it, if I had not seen it with my own eyes. But however,
continued he, it cannot be said, that Pascal was never in the right against the
Jesuits. And as for my self, I cannot but condem the following decision
according to which, a Priest, besides the ordinary retribution of the Mass, he
says to the intention of one person, may receive from another also, about a
third part of that retribution, by yielding up to him, the share he himself has
a right to pretend to, in the fruit, or benefit of the Sacrifice. This
decision, is in Escobar, I have compared and found Pascals quotation of it true.

You would therefore be very much surprised, said the Abbot, if I should tell
you, that Escobar, even by this decision, does combat a relaxation in Morals. I
should indeed, replied Eudoxus, be extremely surprised at that: for the
question he proposes in this place, seems to me, to be very impertinent, and
also to be very ill decided.

The thing, notwithstanding, answered the Abbot, is, as I say; and he argues
against this relaxation, after the example of the holy and learned Canonist
Narvar, whose principles and doctrine he follows. De celeb. Miss. and in Man.
cap. 25.
This man speaks of some Priests of his time, who, abusing what Saint Thomas
had said, that the satisfactory merit of the Sacrifice of the Mass, is infinite,
take money, without any ceremony, for their Mass from several persons; and
pretend by the same Mass, to satisfy the obligation they were under, to all
those persons; because, said they, that the Sacrifice, tho offered for an
infinity of worlds, was an inexhaustible treasure of satisfactions. This
obliged Doctor Navar to consider the point; wherein making use of all his
subtlety in Divinity, he distinguishes that part, which the whole Church has
right to pretend to, in every Sacrifice, that which belongs to the persons for
whom by name it is offered, and lastly that which is peculiar to the Priest; of
which, said he, he may yet quit to others some part.

And do you approve of all this, said Cleander, speaking to the Abbot.

No by no means, answered the Abbot. Escobar, as well as Navar, would have done
much better, to have set forth in general to the Priests, the shame and infamy
of this mean and sordid covetousness; which made them act as they did on these
occasions, rather than to have set down all these distinctions, of which the
practical consequences can no way agree with the spirit of the Church; and this
also was the sense of the most able Jesuit Divines, as Suarez, Laiman, de Lugo,
Vasquez, Turrian and many others; which they very fully expressed, as often as
an opportunity offered: and these persons, in my opinion, do much better
represent the Society, than this Spaniard, tho supported by the distinctions of
the famous Navar.

This was one of the School subtleties; against some of which if men cried out
and stormed a little, I should not be scandalis'd; provided a judicious choice,
and a faithful and exact list were made of them; which would be very much
shorter than is commonly thought; and provided, also, they would not falsely
give out, that subtleties, were the fund, the marrow, and as it were the whole
quintessence of School Divinity; and that, on the contrary, they would give
notice, of what is most true, that these kind of faults are very rare, in
comparison of an infinite number of excellent things, very useful for the
understanding of Religion and Christian Morals; which are to be found in this
sort of learning. And, in the last place, that the little, which may be
reprehended, or rejected, should not be wholly put to the account of the
Jesuits; who most certainly, to say no more, have not a greater share in it,
than others.

Here is, said Eudoxus, a project of accommodation, very fit to be propounded
to some, peevish, learned men of my acquaintance; who are always in an ill
humor against the Schoolmen; the greatest part of which persons, answered the
Abbot, never read them; but they speak out of prejudice and prepossession; the
discovery of an Epoch or period of time, by a manuscript, or a medal, is
something more, in their esteem, than the discovery of the Indies by the
Portugees. Should but a Schoolman fall into a mistake, in such a point as that,
it would be, in their opinion, a hanging matter; and always to be punished with
the last contempt. But let us return to our subject. Do you believe, added he,
that Pascal could long keep the character of a sincere and true judge or
cretic? I do not say that, answered Eudoxus, and even Father Bauni's three
following passages, which were joined together, tho taken out of several
places, gave me, at the very first, some suspicion, which I soon perceived was
not ill founded. To show that the Jesuits do say pro and con, when they please,
observe but how they speak in the Provincial Letters.

Father Bauni does in this exceed all others; there is some pleasure in seeing
this learned Casuist penetrate into the pro and con of the same question,
relating to Priests, and to find reason for both sides, so very witty and
subtle is he. In one place, in the tenth treatise pa. 474, he says, that a law
cannot be made to oblige Curats every day to say Mass; because such a law
would, indubitably, hand dubie, expose them to the danger of saying it
sometimes in a mortal sin. And notwithstanding, in the same treatise page 441.
he says, That Priests, who receive money for a daily Mass, ought to say Mass
daily, and cannot excuse themselves, by their not being always prepared,
because they may always make an act of Contrition, wherein, if they are
wanting, it is their own fault, and not the persons who engaged them to say
Mass.

By reading this, continued Eudoxus, I could not conceive, that it was to speak
pro and con; so different are the subjects here treated of from one another.
But, instead of any contrariety in the passages cited, I found out the malice
of the person, who quoted them. f we do but translate the latin, there is in
this matter, neither contradiction, extravagance, nor impiety, but all the
discretion possible.

This is his assertion: I say in the third place, that when a Priest agrees
with a person to say Mass for him once a year, or every day, he sins if he does
not discharge this duty, either by himself, or by some other....... if
therefore he does not do it, he ought to give back the whole money to the person
from whom he first received it.

He afterward makes this objection. This would be, to put the Priest into an
almost unavoidable occasion of sinning; to which he makes two answers, Cui
argumento duplice hac responsione occurritur. The first, that, by an act of
Contrition, he may return to God, and if he does it not, it is his own fault.
This answer is not good, said Cleander, interrupting him and laughing, at
least, according to Pascal's principles; for it supposes, that Grace is not
wanting, when, for want of it, a man is unable to fulfill, or obey the command.

For this time, I pray, let us not meddle with Jansenisme; that is not now our
business, answered Eudoxus. Harken to the other part of Bauni's answer. The
second is, said he, that a Priest, not being obliged, by virtue of his
agreement, to discharge this holy Ministry in his own person, and being at
liberty to do it by another, it depends on him, if he himself be not prepared,
to get Mass said by another; wherein there is neither sin nor danger. What say
you to that, continu's Eudoxus? can any thing be better stated, or fuller of
sense, than every point of this decision? and is not Pascal, think you, a man
of honor, for suppressing, as he has done, the second part of this answer, not
only to find a contradiction, in what this Divine has said, but also, to let
his readers think, that he had, in conscience, obliged the Priest to commit
Sacrilege?

I pray look upon this third passage, reported by Pascal. May a Priest, having
first been at Confession, say Mass the same day he committed one of the worst
of mortal sins? no, said Villalobos, because of his impurity; but Sanchez says
he may, and without any sin; whose opinion I hold safe, and to be followed in
practice: and tuta and sequenda in praxi.

This is a bold stroke, said Cleander; have a little patience answered Eudoxus;
when I my self first read this place in Bauni, I was a little shocked, but
running over the table of the book, I fell by chance upon a word, that engaged
me to read the sixth chapter of the fourth treatise, whereby I found what his
real thought was in this.

There he puts the same question, with reference to married persons, and
teaches, that, after even the most lawful actions in this matter; the respect
due to the holy Eucharist, obliges them, not to approach to it presently; and
that they cannot be wanting in the decency required in order to that mystery,
without venial sin. He adds, that there may, notwithstanding, be reasons, which
may lessen, or wholly take away the sin; the scandal, for example, which, in
certain circumstances, might happen, if these persons should not communicate:
the solemnity of a great feast, or the extraordinary desire of communicating,
where with God might inspire one in such a conjuncture. Thus it is evident,
concluded Eudoxus, that when Bauni speaks of Priests and Curats, whose duty he
particularly treat's of, in the chapter, cited by Pascal, it is but in relation
to some accidents, where the sin, on one side, and the necessity of saying Mass
on the other, holds them in suspense. Whereupon, in the first place, he
teaches, that a Priest, supposing he has made a good Confession, has all the
essential dispositions, required by the Council of Trent for the reception of
the Eucharist; that is to say, that he is in the state of Grace: which, in
spite of the imaginations of all our newfangled innovators, is most certainly
true. In the second place, when Bauni said, this opinion was safe in practice,
(he who thought it in married persons a venial sin) he intended no more but
that a Priest, or Curat, might, without sin, follow this opinion, when the
functions, joined to his Ministry, did not absolutely dispense with him from
saying Mass, which sometimes does happen.

And in such a circumstance, a Country Curat, for example, might possibly be,
whose parishoners, if they lost Mass upon a Sunday, by his forbearing to say
it, would take up strange suspicions of him. Let a man upon this decision
consult, not our pretended reformers, whose mistaken severity has sometimes
caused, on such like occasions, a great deal of scandal, but any Divine of good
sense, who knows how to apply the most solid principles of Morals to particular
accidents and cases, and he will quickly find, whether he can think otherwise,
upon this subject, than Bauni has done.

It is manifest, said the Abbot, that this must be Baunis opinion, after what
he has said of married persons. But these favorable, and so well grounded
expositions, are not to be made by the Jesuits: one part of a book is not
enuff, to defend the other, and upon every decision in Morals, their Divines
ought to have repeated all their principles, restrictions and circumstances,
and prevented all manner of difficulties and objections. If they fail to do
that, their adversaries would be sure to make extracts of their books, and get
these extracts censured, and afterward published, with beat of drum, or sound
of trumpet, all over Europe, and the Indies, that the Jesuits doctrine had been
condemned. But is this all you have to say upon this place?

Yes, said Eudoxus, for as to what Pascal has made his Jesuit speak, touching
the preference the Divines of the Society give the Casuists, before the
Fathers, and such other trifling matters, we have already said enuff. It is
true, answered the Abbot, but yet do you not look upon what he has advanced, in
general, against the Jesuit Filliucius, as a calumny, to wit, that the laws of
the Church, by being no longer observed do lose their force and virtue, cum jam
desuetudine abierunt? this proposition, so expressed, may be a false and
dangerous maxim; whereas, in the instance Filliucius makes use on it, and whence
Pascal has drawn it, it is the most reasonable in the world. I have really
seen, said Cleander, abundance of people very much scandalized at this
proposition, taken in the sense Pascal has given it.

This maxim, answered the Abbot, is of use in the Civil and the Canon law.
Saint Thomas, Saint Antonin, Gerson, and others, as well Divines, as Lawyers,
do very often make use on it: and the very terms of Filliucius, are taken out of
the law. But the application of it, may be, either, good, or bad: let us
therefore see, how it is applied by Filliucius. According to Pascal's
quotation, you will find it in the second tome treatise 25. nu. 33.

They read it, and saw, that Filliucius does, there, treat of the punishments,
decreed against blasphemers, in the old Testament by Moses, or, in the new, by
Councels and Decrees of Popes. Whereupon he says, that the Confessors in their
Confessionals, ought to enjoyne those penalties if they had been still in use.
But that some were never received in the Church, and others were become
absolete: At vel receptae nunquam sunt, vel jam desuetudine abierunt. Is any
thing more true, than this matter of fact? and was this maxim ever applied more
properly? this notwithstanding is the place Pascal makes use of, to prove, that
the Jesuits laugh at the ancient discipline; and make all it is rules give
place, to the frivolous maxims of their Casuists.

That which follows, said Cleander, is a part of my task: but I must
ingenuously confess, that my courage failed me, and I grew weary. You Will easily
believe, that the comparing and confronting of texts and citations, could not
be a very agreeable entertainment for a man of my humor. I was no longer able
to endure so toilsome and unpleasant a work; and therefore, resolved to refer
my self for the rest, to the testimony and integrity of Mr. Abbot.

What, replied Eudoxus, laughing, do you give ground or fall back? this is not
very fair nor stout. But I am very glad, I have gotten, over you, the advantage
of perseverance; however, I cannot but frankly own, that, like you, I have
already had strong temptations on this subject, and could not have answered,
much longer, for my own patience. For, whatever pleasure I take, in seeing Mr.
Abbot clear and unfold so neatly, as he does, these things, in the intangling
and perplexing whereof, all Pascal's wit and cunning consisted; the matter is
still very knotty and obscure, and obliges me to too much study and application.

Besides, the little we have seen, is more than enuff, to guide us in the
judgment we ought to make of the Provincial Letters. Perrault's panegyric of
them, cannot be more clearly justified, than it has been by Mr. Abbot; I am
above all things for The solidity of his arguments, and for his raillerys
always pure and decent. The Jesuits have no cause to complain; for it cannot be
more solidly proved, by any person, who contains himself within the bounds of
good manners, that their Society is the plague of the Church, a body of wicked
and extravagant sots and madmen, that ought to be banished out of the
Commonwealth, or shut up in Bedlam. It is not to detract, slander, calumniate,
impose, or falsify, when all this is done with Pascals wit and pleasantry.

Raillery a part, we are indeed infinitely obliged to you, continued he,
speaking to the Abbot, and we pray you, not to give your self any farther
trouble, to prove to us, that Pascal, and those who furnished him with memoirs
against the Jesuits, stood much more in need, than these Fathers did, of an
exhortation to make their Morals more strict and severe. He, that has given
occasion for this masterpiece of calumny, and who daily studys to improve it,
would edify all true Catholics by recanting, or disclaiming it. This
recantation would certainly be necessary to discharge his conscience of a world
of things, for which his great age cannot but advertise him, he must, very
soon, give a terrible account to God.

Oho, answers the Abbot! you are well employed indeed to preach to Mr. Arnauld
and endeavor to fill his head with scruples. I assure you, he has no more to
do, but to die; the pieces for his Canonisation are already prepared. And of
this you cannot doubt, if you do but reflect, upon the veneration paid by his
Party, to the memory of the Abbot of Saint Cyran. Notwithstanding the authentic
testimonies of Mr. Vincent, founder of Saint Lazar, which they have retrenched
out of the last edition of the life of this holy man (for that faction gains
their point in all their undertakings) but which Gods Providence has still
preserved elsewhere. Notwithstanding the testimonies of the Abbot of Prieres,
of the then Bishop of Langres, of the Archbishop of Sens Bellegarde, and which
is more, of the late M. Caulet, Bishop of Pamiers, a witness very troublesome to
Port Royal, notwithstanding what F. Gondren, General of the Oratorians both
said and knew, and several other witnesses of untainted reputations, of the
pernicious designs, which this Abbot had contrived, and was carrying on against
the Church, and of his heretical and extravagant opinions; in spite of all
this, I say, the Abbot of Saint Cyran must pass for a Saint, if what is daily
said by the Party, was to be believed, and for a great Servant of God, unjustly
persecuted by Cardinal Richelieu, who looked upon him as another Luther; judge
by this, what will be said of Mr. Arnauld, whose zeal had quite another kind of
success, than that of Mr. Saint Cyran.

But infine, continued the Abbot, you quit me at too easy and too cheap a rate;
I had a mind we should have carried on our work, at least, to the tenth Letter;
for those which follow are little more, than replications and frequent
repetitions of the same sort of impostures. But in this you shall command; I,
for my part, can only offer you, which I freely do, to proceed, or continue
what we have begun, when ever you please I will tell you more. I have in my
head a small design, and which is pleasant enuff, of drawing up a scheme of the
speculative and practical Morals of the Jansenists; a design, that could very
easily be put in execution: I should have no occasion to send to the Indies, or
have recourse to memoirs, brought five or six thousand leagues. No no, I would
consine my self within the bounds of France and Flanders; where most of the
pieces I should have need of, are certainly to be found: I would follow the
order of time, beginning with the Rise and Origin of these differences and
disputes, and bringing it down to our own days; the books, and Original pieces
of the process against the Abbot of Saint Cyran, would, among other things,
furnish me with a great deal of matter. And I know a thousand little stories,
of several, that have, and still make, a figure among the party, which would
give me occasion enuff, to make the subject both pleasant and diverting. The
single process of Perrette of Lions, Mr. Arnauld's she penitent, and by him
supported against the Dean of Senlis, this Devotes Uncle, and Guardian. This
suit alone, I say, well told, with all it is circumstances, would, I can assure
you, make a small tome that would not tire the readers.

Mr. Abbot, said Cleander, you must needs go on with this design; it would,
without doubt, be very successful: but do you know, that I have taken the pains
to write down our former discourses; that we have communicated them to some of
our friends; that they already run about Paris; and that I am resolved to take
the same course for the remainder?

I am of a meek, peaceful spirit and temper, answered the Abbot, and would not
willingly be an aggressor: but since you bring me into play by publishing our
discourses, you may very likely expose me to be libelled by the Jansenists:
which may perhaps put me also, into the same humor, and make me, at least,
endeavor an equal return. As for the rest, how tiresom soever, you may find the
examination of the Provincial Letters, you must, notwithstanding, grant me upon
this point two favors.

The first is, that you may have something in this matter perfect, at least, in
some manner, you must give your self the trouble of reading two, or three
small, loose, sheets of paper, concerning several general topics, treated of in
the Provincial Letters; and which, together with the doctrine of probability,
make, according to Pascal, the whole fund of the Jesuits Policy and Morals;
that is to say, the direction of intention, the distinction of probable in
speculation, and probable in practice; equivocations and mental reservations.
You need not trouble your self with inquiries after the author; you will, in a
few words, see in them all that is good or bad, as to these points of doctrine;
and whether the Jesuits are blamable, excusable, or commendable, for what they
have writ and taught upon this subject: the reading of the whole, will not take
up an hour of your time; and yet you will find it sufficiently instructive in
this matter; whereof the greatest part of men, have little or no knowledge, but
very slight and superficial notions. The cases made use of for examples, are
drawn out of the seventh and eighth Provincial Letters, and the others
following, which you would not take the pains to examine.

The second thing I ask of you, is concerning the last article of the last
Letter of ten addresses to Pascals friend in the country, which he calls The
Mystery of iniquity completed: because it relates to the love of God, which,
according to him, the Jesuits say is not necessary to Salvation. We must, if
you please, meet one of these days in your Jansenists friends library about
this article, and then I hope to make amends for the occasion you lately lost
of seeing us two engaged in the discussions of much less important matters.

Eudoxus and Cleander answered, that it would be a sensible pleasure to them,
to see the papers he mentioned, and that for their conversation with the
Jansenist, they would take any time he should think fit to appoint.

The seventh Discourse.
EVdoxus coming to the Abbot's house, and finding Cleander already arrived,
said to him, we shall not fail, to day, of meeting our man. He had notice of
our intentions, and is now actually waiting for us in his library. Let us take
coach then, answered the Abbot; I am ready, only give me leave to take two or
three papers, of which, I foresee we may have need. But yet before I go, I pray
let me know what kind of man is he I am to deal with: I cannot for my life
understand why you should be so very shy, as hitherto you have been, to tell me
the qualitys of an adversary, with whom you have so often threatened me.

What need you trouble your self, replied Eudoxus, laughing; have I not said
enuff of him already, in telling you he is a Jansenist? however, since you are
so desirous of being more fully informed of his character, it is fit you should
be satisfied. But yet, since he is one of my friends, it is possible, you may
not think my account of him so fit to be believed; and therefore Cleander, who
has seen him often with me and knows him well enuff, may speak of him more
disinterestly, and with greater freedom.

He is an admirable man, said Cleander, and a perfect original. He has a great
quickness of fancy, and an extraordinary readiness to express himself; which is
to supply his want of wit, and he is so very wise, as seriously to value
himself upon being a Jansenist: and looses no opportunity to make all men
believe he is what he is; for he thinks to get, by this means, the title of a
great wit. He has been but two years at Paris; he was before the chief
Magistrate of the small town of....., during which time, he had frequent
correspondance by letters, with Mr...... and Mr...... for whose interest and
service, he made himself business enuff; and they were overjoyed, for having
found in that country, an emissary of his credit and reputation. They have, for
a long time, looked upon him, as one of their forlorn hope; and I my self have
often compared him to a fireship; for the loss of which men are not much
concerned, provided it does but first do execution and blow up some of the
enemies great ships. Eudoxus has been acquainted with him several years, and I
have known him ever since his coming to Paris. If his answers do not altogether
satisfy you, his manner of making them will, at least, divert you.

That is to say, answered the Abbot, that you have as great an expectation to
be made merry, as you have to be instructed. But without more words, they took
coach and drove directly to Timante's lodging: this is the name, by which this
new antagonist of the Abbot's is to pass. Eudoxus went strait up to the
library, where he found him: and having saluted him, told him he had brought
the Abbot with him, of whom he had spoken the day before. He is, said he, an
obstinat, headstrong, Molinist; who has lately resolved, to undertake the
defense of the Jesuits against the Provincial Letters. I Will put him into your
hands to deal with; and having conquered him, make him, I pray, submit, and do
honor to the great Saint Austin and the honest party.

You have had the experience, more than once, answered Timante, that upon this
subject, I am never taken unprovided. Give me but an adversary worth the
trouble, and you shall find I will give you a good account of him. Without more
a do, they went immediately down to Cleander and the Abbot. I will very gladly,
said Timante to them, make one in the discourses Eudoxus tells me, you have
begun upon the Provincial Letters: you are a Molinist, continued he, addressing
himself to the Abbot; and I declare to you, that I my self am a Jansenist; and
ready to maintain the truth of these admirable Letters, as I would that of the
Gospel. For there is nothing in them, but pure truth, without any mixture of
error, lies, or mistake.

I have a long time known, answered the Abbot, that the gift of infallibility
has been allowed Mr. Arnauld by his party; but I did not know, till now, that
they granted the same privilege to Pascal. As for my self, I do not take upon
me to defend the Jesuits doctrine in so universal a manner: I consider they are
like other men, and believe them capable of being sometimes mistaken. But,
however the matter stands as to other points, concerning which, Eudoxus and
Cleander may some other time tell you their opinions, we are now come hither,
but to inform our selves, by the help of your great library, of one single
point. The matter is, to know whether, what Pascal has reproached the Jesuits
with, touching the precept of the love of God, be true or false.

Ho! truly said Timante, this is a doubt quite out of fashion; and I admire
Cleander and Eudoxus could have patience to hear you upon this subject. I know
not, answered Cleander, whether Mr. Abbot has the art to remove, or to make
charms; but which soever of these is his talent, it is certain, he has given us
a very different impression, from what we had before of Pascal. He has shown us
the Jesuits books, and, in them, has often made us read the direct contrary of
what this writer pretends to have found; and I could almost be tempted to
believe, he had done the same things by these books, which some say, the
Jesuits did with that of Jansenius, after the condemnation of the five
propositions, which, being shown in this book, to some persons, and they not
thinking it possible, Mr. Arnauld could have been guilty of a ly, when he
affirmed he never saw them in it, said these Fathers had falsifi'd Augustinus,
and inserted in him the condemned propositions, which they were sure could not
be in the original edition; to which Mr. Arnauld's affirmation related. I
should have thought as much, I say, concerning Bauni, Valentia, Vasquez, and
several others, if the copys we made use of, had not, for the most part, come
out of your library; where I am confident, you have none but good editions.

A man must really suffer himself to be charmed, answered Timante, to take up
such extraordinary sentiments as those you seem to be possessed with. What,
does not Mr. Pascal speak truth in the Provincial Letters? where he quotes, not
only, the books, but the very chapters, pages, and numbers; and mentions even
the several editions? and are not the Jesuits the patrons of loose Morals? I
dare you to say otherwise in Paris; unless you say it, before certain people,
who are frited out of their little wits with the bugbear of Jansenisme: and yet
among them, you will find some, who in the point now in debate, will not stick
to declare themselves Jansenists; and who will subscribe, without hesitation to
all the Letters, except the three first, wherein the author raillies about
sufficient grace, the potentia proxima, and the assemblys of Sorbonne.

Let us quit the general thesis, said Eudoxus interrupting him; and let every
man think, or be of what opinion he pleases; let us come to the point, that
brought us hither: are you not much edifi'd, continued he, to see how we
interest our selves about the love of God? what do you maintain upon this
article for Pascal against the Jesuits?

I am ready to maintain, said Timante, Letter 10.
Pascals proposition in all it is latitude, that The Jesuits teach, that the
love of God is not necessary to Salvation. And what will you do, said Eudoxus
to the Abbot?

I will maintain, answered he, and am prepared to prove it, that the Jesuits do
teach the direct contrary, to what in Pascals words this Gentleman has
affirmed. It is indeed your business to prove it, replied Cleander. Timante
denies the matter of fact, and you affirm it, show us therefore how it stands
in the Jesuits books.

We should for a long time find employment, said the Abbot, if we should read,
one after another, all the writers of the Society, who in express terms say,
that the love of God, is necessary to Salvation. I speak not of the books of
Meditations, Spiritual Exercises, Christian Practices, and an infinity of other
works of Devotion; wherein the Jesuits Preach up nothing so much, as the love
of God. I pass by their Rodriguez's, the Saint-Jure's, the Hayneuve's, the
Suffren's, the Du Pont's, and a thousand others, whose books you can no sooner
open, than find this truth in them. But I will confine my self to their
Divines, whose names would make too long a list. You may however see it, in a
book Printed at Louvain in 1689, entitled Sexaginta quinque propositiones nuper
a Sanctissimo Domino nostro Innocentio XI proscriptae, a Societatis Jesu
Theologis diu ante Sanctissimi Domini decretum consensu communissimo rejectae.
Where there are no less, than thirty cited. Will you be content with nine or
ten, such as are the chief, and looked upon as the Oracles of the Order?

I Will quit you for one half, answered Timante, in a bold and Magisterial tone.
Abate Mr. Abbot nothing, said Eudoxus, and be not too forward; for I have
found, by experience, that he is very exact in his quotations. Let us begin,
said the Abbot, with Cardinal Bellarmin. Take the pains, I pray you, to reach
me down his fourth tome. Listen to these his words. The holy Scripture does not
only say, L. 6. de gr. and lib. arbitr. cap. 7.
that charity is the gift of God, but farther commands us to love God: it does
not command us only to conserve the infused habit of charity, but also obliges
us, to love God with all our heart: for the laws have for object, the acts of
the virtues they command, and not the habits.

The Abbot also read in Cardinal Lugo's treatise of Penance, Disp. 7. sect. 12.
n. 250.
these words. The command of loving God, is absolutely founded upon the law of
nature; and although there had been for it, no positive law from God, yet should
we be obliged to it, as all Divines do agree. You here quote Cardinals,
answered Timante, that is to say, men, who in quitting the Societys habit,
quitted also their wicked maxims.

You do not know, replied the Abbot, nor are you obliged to know so exactly,
the chronology of all the Jesuits books: Bellarmin and Lugo were still Jesuits,
when they wrote those I have cited; and when the last said, all Divines were
agreed about this precept, he comprehended, without doubt, in this general
proposition all of his own Society, at least, as much as others. But since,
continued he, you will have no Cardinal Jesuits, I will pass Tolet, whose
testimony I was about to allege, and only stick to those, who were but Jesuits.
I see on your shelf of Divines, the tome of Suarez, wherein he treats of the
three Theological virtues: The Abbot opened the book, and in his treatise of
charity, read these following words. Dis. 6. sect. 1.


First, I say, that this precept concerns all men, and this is evident from the
sixth chapter of Deuteronomy, You shall love your Lord your God with all your
heart, etc. and by the tenth of Saint Matthew, This command of loving God, is
the first and greatest command of all.... the reason of my conclusion is, that
this love is a necessary means to Salvation, and that these kind of means have
always the obligation of a command.

Certainly, said Cleander, interrupting him, when Pascal said, that the Jesuits
taught the love of God was not necessary to Salvation, he ought to have
excepted Suarez out of the number; for it is impossible, for any man to speak
upon this subject, more clearly, than he has done in what we have read.
Hujusmodi dilectio est medium necessarium ad salutem. In the mean time, to
judge by the esteem this Divine is in, not only with the Society, but also with
all others, whether if the Jesuits had been obliged to determine, which of their
Body they would have pass for the chief Divine, they must not have chosen this
man. They have not, in reality, as I have been assured, any one, whose doctrine
is more the doctrine of the Jesuits, than this authors doctrine is; nor who is
more generally followed.

I will add to this, said Eudoxus, what was lately told me by one of my
friends, who traveled much in Spain, to show the great opinion they have of
this Divine in that country; where, he said; the reputation of Suarez was so
great, that in most Universities, he was quoted in their disputes, and the
Defendants, to whom his authority was urged, durst not refute him, but were
obliged to reconcile, whatever was out of him objected, with the doctrine of the
Thesis: he also told me another thing pleasant enuff, that in many towns of
Spain, and particularly at Perpignan, the inhabitants, even the Artificers, as
well as other tradsmen, are divided into two factions; one Suarists, the other
Thomists; in so much, that in the public sports and recreations, the men are
chosen out of these two different partys; and that the acclamations were
frequently heard at bowls, sometimes, of the Suarists and sometimes of
Thomists, according to the various success of the gamesters, all, ready to fall
together by the ears, the one party for praemotio physica, and the other for
Scientia media.

Timante, notwithstanding the trouble he was in, on account of the passages
cited by the Abbot, out of these three famous Jesuits, could not forbear
laughing at this odd proceeding of the Spaniards; and would willingly have
carried this digression farther; but the Abbot immediately returning to the
point, said to him, you see by what Eudoxus and Cleander have spoken, that if
the Jesuits could have thought themselves honored in the Schools by the name or
reputation of any one of their Doctors, as the Thomists do by that of Saint
Thomas, certainly they would on this score have preferred Suarez to Molina. And,
indeed, few Jesuits do follow Molina, in comparison of those, who stick to the
principles and opinions of Suarez, Vasquez and Bellarmin; and they are
Molinists, but because they maintain, and with reason, that the doctrine of
Molina, is without error; wherein there is none to be found, without
misrepresenting and disfiguring it, that they might have a handle and pretense
to refute it with the greater advantage. But since you have given me the name
of Molinist the very first moment I have the honor of seeing you, it is fit I
should make good and maintain my character with credit and reputation; and that
I should also demonstrate to you, that if Molina be to be believed, Pascal must
have spoken falsely, when he asserted, that the Jesuits taught, The love of God
was not at all necessary to Salvation. I shall find, in less than a minut, the
place I want: I have it, listen therefore, I pray, to what this Jesuit says.

I am persuaded, that we are obliged, Tract. 5^ de just. disp. 59. n. 6.
by the precept of the love we owe to God, under pain of mortal sin, to defend
his interest, to oppose every thing, which may wound his honor, or his glory,
and to do every thing, which, we believe, may be useful to this purpose; and
that we ought to do it, even with the hazard of our lives; which does not
hinder, Number. 7.
says he two pages after, but that there may be, a particular command of the
love of God, as a thing due to him, and that this love may be commanded, as a
necessary means to obtain the possession of God and of eternal life.

After this, the Abbot showed in Tanner, these words; Tom. 3. disp 2. de spe
and charit. q. 4. dub. 4. n. 62.
The command which obliges us to love God, is like a first principle, known,
and acknowleg'd by all the world.

He found in Valentia, this which follows. When we inquire, how and when the
command of loving God does oblige us, we do presuppose, as a thing most
certain, that there is such a command. For this is evident both by Scripture
and by reason. Tom. 3. disp. 3. q. 19. pun. 1.
And a little lower, I say, in the first place, that we are obliged, by this
command, to love God; not to love him with a common love, but as our last end,
and by consequence with a soverain love, preferring him above all things in the
world.

Layman also speaks, in this manner. The precept of the love of God, is called
in the 22th. of Saint Matthew, the first and greatest command of all; because it
relates to the first act of the most excellent virtue, and the most necessary
to Salvation.

See likewise, what Becanus's opinion is, De Sacram. c. 35. q. 6. n. 4.
in this matter. There is a twofold command of loving God, the first is
general, and comprehended in all parts of the Decalogue, which obliges us to
keep the law of God: the second is positive and particular, and obliges us to
make an act of charity, whether this act be produced by, or is the motion of
our love to God, or a detestation of our sin for offending God.

Thomas Sanchez thus argues. In decal. l. 2. c. 35. n. 1.
Nothing is more certain, than that there is a command of loving God; the
reason is, because the act of loving God is necessary to Salvation; He that
loves him not, said Saint John, is dead already; but all that is necessary to
Salvation, is commanded.

Have you then a mind, said Eudoxus, interrupting, and addressing himself to
Timantes, that Mr. Abbot should turn over, and confound all your library? there
is no more room on your table for these folio's; have you not seen enuff to
convince Pascal, either of rashness or of lying? of lying, if he has, as he
ought to have done, consulted all these authors; of rashness, if he has
advanced, upon the credit of an other, That the Jesuits taught the love of God
was not necessary to Salvation. These are the most learned and most famous of
all their Divines; and most of the others do but copy, or abridge, what they
have written. What answer can you make to all these matters of fact?

I answer, said Timantes, equally troubled and surprised, by another
enumeration made by Pascal in the same place, according to which the Jesuits of
France are of a contrary opinion. Observe but the words of Mr. Pascal's Jesuit.
Thus our Fathers have freed men from the troublesome obligation of actually
loving God: and this doctrine, is so advantageous, that our Fathers Anat,
Pintereau, le Moyne and A. Sirmond himself, defended it vigorously, when others
had a mind to run it down. It seems to me, added Timantes, that F. Sirmond
alone, is to be valued full as much as Sanchez, Suarez, and Layman, and perhaps
many more all joined together.

The Abbot, at these last words of Timantes, fell a laughing, what said he to
him, do you believe the Father Sirmond here spoken of, to be that famous Father
Sirmond, who, in spite of the Jansenists utmost envy and malice, preserved so
great a name and reputation among all the learned, not only of the Catholic
Church, but also of all other sects and partys whatsoever. He is not, at all,
the person intended: your error nevertheless is very pardonable, since it is
founded but upon Pascal's malice.

And, really, when after Father Anat, and Father le Moyne, men known, and, upon
many accounts, very valuable, these words, and Father A. Sirmond himself, are
seen to be added, by way of gradation, who would not believe, but that this
must be meant of the renowned Father Sirmond: he was the only one publicly
known in the world, and known commonly, but by his surname. The preference, in
point of merit and authority, which the word himself gives to the person here
spoken of, above Father Anat, and Father le Movne, leaves no place to doubt,
but that he must be the person intended. Among two thousand men, who should
read the Provincial Letters, there would not be found six, that should not
believe the Society's reputation wounded by this reproach on one of their
members, who is accounted the chief ornament of their whole body; and I do on
this account, forgive your having opposed him, to Suarez, Sanchez, Layman and
Molina: and also to the two Cardinals, Bellarmin, and de Lugo.

But really, the man Pascal speaks of, is a man very little known, and of no
consequence: however, it shall not ly at my door, if we examine not, what
relates to him: for there wants a great deal to make the idea given of this
Father Sirmond's doctrine, to be true: but first, let us see, whether Father
Pintereau, Father Anat, and Father le Moyne, do vigorously defend it. For in
this also, there is an equivocation, to say no worse of it, as great, as in the
name of Sirmond. Have you, said the Abbot to Timantes, the Jesuits apology
against la Theology Morale?

I have, answered he, all that has been written on both sides in this matter;
but I do, notwithstanding, own to you, that I have read very little of what the
Jesuits have writ in their own defense. They are too serious, and do not divert
me as Mr. Pascal does; and besides, all he says, has a certain air of truth,
which is of it self persuasive, and makes it unnecessary to read all those
rapsodies, his adversaries have heaped up together, with design to refute him.

This method of hearing but one side, answered the Abbot, laughing, is very
wonderful, for the enabling men to make a right and equitable judgment between
two contending parties. Which words he had no sooner ended, than he took into
his hands the book attributed to Father Pintereau, 2. part. p. 52. and 53.
entitled, Les impostures and les ignorances du libelle intitule la Theology
Morale des Jesuits: par l'Abbe du Boisic. He read in it the passage cited by
Pascal; where the author does but maintain these words of the Council of Trent;
Ses. 14.2.4.
That Attrition, produced by the fear of hell, disposes the sinner to receive
Grace in the Sacrament, although, that, without the Sacrament, it is not
sufficient to justify him. There this Divine shows, that the opinion, which
holds, that Attrition, with the Sacrament does justify, is the doctrine of,
almost, all Divines, especially since the Council of Trent; that although these
Divines do not treat the contrary opinion as heresy, yet many of them do esteem
it very rash; because the words, of the Council upon this subject, do appear so
positive and express; and which is more, he quotes a censure of Sorbonne, in
the year 1638, which says the same thing; a man cannot see in all this text of
Father Pintereau, one single word, which shows the love of God is not necessary
for Salvation. How then and by what rules of honesty, durst Pascal place this
Divine in the number of those, who maintain the opinion he attributes to Father
Sirmond, That the love of God, is not necessary to Salvation? Cannot one then
defend, with Catholic Divines, the Council of Trent's doctrine concerning
Attrition, without being suspected to destroy the precept of the love of God?

He! do you no see, replied Timantes, that in the words quoted by Mr. Pascal,
your Jesuit treats the obligation of loving God, as a difficult and troublesome
thing?

Nothing is to be changed in the terms, said the Abbot; Pascal thus sets them
down. It was therefore reasonable he should take away that troublesome and
difficult obligation man was under, by the law of rigor, of exerting an act of
perfect Contrition, to be justified, and that he should institute Sacraments,
which might supply it is defect, with the help of a more easy disposition: if he
has said, that this obligation of a perfect Contrition, was troublesome and
difficult, he has said so, after an infinite number of Divines; and this is very
true, in the sense, wherein so many learned men have said it. An act of perfect
Contrition, which includes an act of the pure love of God, is the most heroic
act of Christian virtue; and most directly opposite to selflove; of which it
stifles and excludes those motions, which appear the most lawful. He there
speaks of a sinner, who by that means was to quit his sin, and make an effort
to break his chains, and his will of iron, as Saint Austin calls it, which
keeps him fast bound: for this act a man needs one of the strongest graces,
that is in all the treasures of God's mercy. Infine, this is an act so hard,
and so contrary to corrupted nature, that the Divinity of Port Royal allows it
to very few men in the world; and it was partly upon the account of the
difficulty of making on it, that they formerly excluded from the Communion, so
many penitents for whole years, and even at Easter, in spite of the commands of
the Church.

Who then can doubt, if this doctrine be true, that Attrition, with the
Sacrament, is sufficient to justify a sinner; but that it is a particular
favor, granted by the new Testament, to those under the law of the Gospel, and
an advantageous effect of the blood of Jesus shed for us, and applied to
sinners in the Sacrament of Penance; since it is an easy way of returning to
God, which they had not, who lived under the yoke of the old law. What occasion
is there then of crying out, as Pascal does immediately after, O Father, you put
a man out of all patience, and the things that you have said to me cannot be
heard without horror? This is followed with a whole Sermon full of new
impostures and calumnies; and wherein several passages of Scripture, concerning
the love of God, are abused, to give the bloodiest wounds, that ever could be
given to brotherly love and Christian charity.

They made an end of reading what was in Father Pintereau upon this subject,
and what related to it, in the Apologies of Father Anat, and Father le Moyne.
Where the whole is reduced, not to maintain the opinion of Father Antony
Sirmond, such as is attributed to him, but to defend the man, by endeavoring to
show, that his accusers had not understood his meaning aright, and that there
was nothing worse in his expressions, than in the expressions of many other
Catholic Doctors, against whom, they had never objected any thing.

Timantes, whose trouble and confusion increased, in proportion to their going
on, foamed and sputter'd at this, and, after beating about the bush very much,
to very little purpose, addressed himself briskly to the Abbot, and said:
Infine Sir, declare your self, do you make any difficulty to give up and quit
to me even this Father Sirmund? We shall soon see, answered the Abbot, whether
we shall capitulate at last; but I would gladly first try, at least, whether I,
also, may not be able to defend him.

That does not appear to me very necessary, said Cleander interrupting him, to
satisfy our curiosity: Eudoxus and I, wish neither good nor harm to the Ghost
of this good Father, who has it seems been dead above these fifty years:
besides the reputation of the Jesuits, for which you interest your self more
than all of us, is already sufficiently secured, Manifest Apologet pour la
doct des sesuites.
by the crowd of authors you have cited out of their Society; This private man,
to make use of the Poetic style and terms of Father le Moyne, was neither a
Giant, nor a man like Geryon in the fable, with several bodies, that upon the
authority of his little book, it should be said of all the Jesuits together,
The^l. Moral.
They have gone so far in impiety, as to maintain, that an interior act of the
love of God, was but counseled and not commanded.

All this is very true, answered the Abbot, but you see, Timantes is not so
easily contented as you; he argues upon other principles, and I am going to
satisfy him. Say rather, replied Timantes, that you are a going to wrangle and
cavil with him.

Not at all, said the Abbot, my design is only to extricat and clear things a
little. I have, more than once, observed, that one of Pascals secrets, is to
puzzle and confound matters; that he possesses, in perfection, the art of
magnifying objects, and that giving them afterward to Wendrok, who is
naturally, as is said, very fanciful, he turns them into specters, or bugbears,
against which, Don Quixote like, he fights with all imaginable rage and fury;
and with a heat and fire, which makes him, from time to time, commit very gross
solecismes amidst those fine Latin phrases, that made him pass for the Cicero
of the party, in the opinion of all those, who understood nothing of the matter.

Solecisms in Wendrok, answered Timantes in a fret; those are the Jesuits
calumnies: there is better Latin, and more elegance in his notes and
translation, than there is in Petavius, Sirmond, Maffeus, and all their writers
put together. The dispute, at present, is not of Wendroks solecisms, said
Eudoxus, interrupting him, but certain it is, that Mr. Abbot showed me some
lately, of which I had not taken notice, and which might, possibly, have
escaped you also, as well as me: but let us put this matter off to another
time. You must, Mr. Abbot, now satisfy, if you can, Timantes upon the point in
hand.

This indeed is my intention, answered the Abbot; let us therefore return to
our subject, and read the passage in the tenth Letter, wherein he himself found
these words. I will pass by all that fooling, where the wit of the man so
insolently sports it self with the love of God; but, pursued he, our Father
Antony Sirmond, who triumphs upon this matter in his admirable book of the
Deffense de la virtue, where he speaks, as he tells his reader, French in
France, discourses thus in the 2d. to. sect. 1. p. 12.13.14. etc. Saint Thomas
says, that a man is obliged to love God, as soon as he comes to the use of
reason: that is a little too soon: Scotus says, every Sunday: upon what is this
founded? others hold, when one is grievously tempted, yes, in case there be no
way but this to avoid the temptation. Sotus says, when one receives a benefit
from God; good to thank him for it. Others say at the hour of death, that is late
indeed. Nor do I believe, that this ought to be done upon the reception of some
Sacrament; Attrition with Confession, if they have convenience of making on it,
is sufficient for that. Suarez says, that a man is obliged to it, some time or
other; but at what time? he makes you your self judge of that, for he himself
knows nothing of it; nor indeed do I; for who should know what this Doctor did
not? And he concludes, at last, that a man in rigor, is not obliged to any
thing, but to observe the other commands without any affection for God, and
without giving him his heart, provided he does not hate him. And this he proves
at large in his second treatise. When the Abbot had read thus far, he said to
Timantes, you are Sir a Divine without doubt.

No indeed Sir, answered Timantes, neither was Mr. Pascal, but this did not
hinder him, from arguing extremely well upon all Moral matters; wherein a man
needs but common sense to make a right judgment. A man must have something else
besides that, replied the Abbot, to judge well of some subjects; and I cannot
upon this, give you the satisfaction I desire, without entering a little into
Divinity: bear with me I pray you but one moment, I shall not be long.

First, there never was a Divine, that absolutely denied we had a precept of
loving God, and that the observance of it was necessary to Salvation: but after
the Doctors had, for the better clearing of things, made a distinction in this
matter of several kinds of precepts, they were divided upon some points.

2. This precept, they say, is, at once, both a general, and a particular
precept; because it is impossible to fulfill, or obey it, in it is full extent,
without the observation of all the other commands; of which we cannot violate a
single one, without wounding and destroying the love which we owe to God. They
account it a particular precept, because it enjoins acts of a certain
particular virtue, that is to say, acts of love, which, in their kind, are
wholly different from the acts of the other virtues, by which we observe, or
keep the rest of the commands.

3. The precept of charity, is, both negative and affirmative, a precept is
called negative, when it is considered with reference to the things it
prohibits to be done. It Is called affirmative, when it is considered with
reference to the things it commands to be done. Thus, the precept of the love
of God, is negative, in as much as it forbids us to hate the supreme good;
which is to be understood, not only, of a formal hatred, a sin, of which,
seldom any but the Devil is guilty, but also of every other sin; because that
every sin comprehends, or includes a distance and separation from God. This
precept is affirmative, in as much as it commands us, to make, on some
occasions, acts of the love of God: for example at the hour of death, or upon
our first coming to use of reason, which represents God to us, as our ultimate
end.

The Divines farther teach, that a precept may oblige either, by it self, by
it is own virtue, or by accident: their terms are per se and per accidens. It
obliges by it self, from the moment it enjoins me, independently, and without
reference to any other precept, to do an act of the particular virtue, to which
it has a relation: thus the precept of charity, will oblige me by it self, if,
independently on all other precepts, it obliges me, to make acts of the love of
God. A precept obliges by accident, when I am bound to acquit my self of some
incumbent duty, or to resist some temptation, and that neither the one, nor the
other, can be performed without doing the act commanded by this precept: thus
finding my self, in some circumstance, obliged by the precept of repentance, to
make an act of perfect Contrition, the precept of charity, upon this occasion,
obliges me, by accident; because that the act of Contrition, being a
detestation of sin, proceeding from the pure motive of the love of God, I
cannot fulfill the precept of repentance, without making an act of the love of
God.

Infine, all Divines agree, that there is a precept or command to love God;
that this precept is negative; because it includes a prohibition of doing any
thing against God; and that it is affirmative also; because it obliges us to
some particular duties. They likewise agree farther, that it is a general
precept, extending it self to the observation of all other commands; and that
it is, also a special, or particular precept, obliging us, at least, by
accident, as in the case of the necessity of Contrition and some others. The
whole current of Divines do, I say, agree in all these points; and Father
Antony Sirmond also agrees with them in the treatise we are now upon. And it is
not of this, he is accused, but in accusing him of another thing, they conceal,
or dissemble his having taught, even this; which alone, if made known, would
have sufficed to have lessened a great deal, the horror they endeavored to
bring upon his whole doctrine. The single question then, that can here be put
with reference to the doctrine of this Divine in particular, is to know,
whether, supposing all these other obligations, wherein the whole world agrees,
this precept, as far forth, as it is special, or particular, and affirmative,
does oblige us, not only by accident, but also by it self, to make formal acts
of love, by which we say to God, My God I love you with all my heart.

To that this author answers, that there is one command of God, by which we are
obliged to have this love; which he calls affective, Page 21.
as there is likewise one, by which we are enjoined to have this other love,
which he calls effective, and the love of execution. Which, consists in an
exact observation of his commands; but that the command of affective love, is a
command of sweetness, which God does not give under pain of damnation, because,
said he, a Father does not say to his Children, Love me, or I will kill you.
And that, Page 27.
on the contrary, the command of effective love, or of execution, is a rigorous
command, because if we do not fulfill it, we must go to hell.

This is somewhat subtle, said Eudoxus interrupting him. A little too much,
answered the Abbot, and if Timantes should say but that, we should soon agree.
I say, replied Timantes, that this proposition, is execrable and impertinent,
and tends to the subversion of all Morals, and the entire corruption of manners.

Forbear a while, I beseech you, answered the Abbot, your hyperbolies and
exaggerations; such things are good for nothing but to blind and dazzle men,
who are not used to make reflections. Let us look into things a little nearer.
Do you believe, that it is this love affective, which troubles and confounds
the common sort of Christians, and gives them pain in their way to heaven? no,
truly, it is the love Sirmond calls effective; it is this exact fulfilling the
commands of God, which discourages and overcomes nature. Let us, on the
contrary, suppose, that there should be no command at all, of affective love,
but that the command of effective love should subsist and be accomplished;
behold then the world reformed; there would be no more injustice, nor envy, nor
jealousy, nor dissentions, nor impurities, nor debauches; since this
reformation, the exercise of effective love, and the observation of the
precept, which commands it, is but one and the same thing. Let this doctrine
then of Sirmond, be as false as you will; to say it tends to the relaxation and
corruption of manners, is to give the world a very false allarm.

Let us come a little closer to the matter, descend to particulars, and
propose, according to the principles of Sirmond, this case. A man exactly
observes all the commands of God, either out of that saving, pious,
supernatural, fear, spoken of by the Council of Trent, and by it affirmed, in
opposition to Luther, to be a gift of the Holy Ghost, or out of some other
good motives of a different virtue from charity: a Christian, for example,
hears Mass very devoutly on Sundays and Holy Days, and he hears it out of a
motive of the virtue of Religion, which obliges him to honor him, whose infinite
excellence and perfection merits the homage and adoration of all the creatures
in the world: he communicates often, with this prospect and consideration,
fully persuaded, that God is infinitely honored by this action, by reason of the
victim which is offered in the holy Sacrifice. The same motive, hinders him
from swearing, blaspheming, and from being immodest in the Church. By a motive
proportionable to this, he honors his Father and Mother, as persons, who to him
are in the place of God. He submits himself entirely to his other Superiors, by
the motive of the Obedience he ow's his Maker. He gives alms to the poor, by
the motive of mercy: he fasts for Mortification, and in Obedience to the
Church. In one word, sometimes by one of these motives, and sometimes by
another, he avoids offending God; or if he does offend him, he presently
returns again, and detests his sin in the Sacrament of Penance, encouraged by
the motives of some one of these virtues I have spoken of. By behaving himself
in this manner, he observes the negative precept of charity, and fulfils the
command of effective love.

Now the question proposed by Father Sirmond, is, to know, whether a man living
in this manner, without any other formal act of the pure love of God, would
violate the command of charity, and sin mortally.

This is not altogether the case, said Timantes, interrupting him; you omit an
essential circumstance, remarked by Mr. Pascal, or rather, you add such a one,
as hides the poison of this doctrine; it is, that Sirmond would have it, that
this man keeps the Commandments without any affection for God, and by
consequence observes the law, not as a Christian, but as a Jew. Harken to what
Mr. Pascal says upon it.

Father Sirmond, said he, at last concludes, that, in rigor, we are obliged to
nothing more, than to the observation of the other Commandments, WITHOUT ANY
AFFECTION FOR GOD, and without giving him our heart, provided we do not hate
him. This is, what he proves at large, in his second treatise. Mind well, I
pray said Timantes, these words without any affection for God.

I have observed them very well, answered the Abbot, and have also, at the same
time, taken notice, that they contain a most notorious imposture. Here Is the
book; I defy you, to show me in it those words. Read the 16.19.24. and 28
pages, quoted by Pascal. If you find them there, I will own my self the
impostor I have called him. Father Sirmond, in this whole question, where he
opposes love affective to love effective, excludes nothing from effective love,
but only the motive, or the sole affection of pure charity, by giving it the
motive of some other virtue. His design, in the treatise, is chiefly to examine
this point, whether it be permitted, to act by hope, or fear, or any other
motive, but the pure love of God; as he speaks in his preface, and as it is
impossible, for any one, not to see, that reads this treatise, either in whole,
or in part. But to convince you, we need but hear how he explains himself in
his decision of this question.

The Abbot in the 22th. page, read these words. He, who does not find himself
inflamed with this Divine fire, and yet notwithstanding, keeps himself, out of
some other good consideration, so mindful of his duty, (observe, in your turn,
said the Abbot, these words, out of some other good consideration) that he has
no affection in his heart, thought in his mind, passion in his Soul, nor power
in his person, whose interest he does not quit, to accomplish, or fulfill, in
all things, the main will of God. even in cases, where he may be disgraced, for
governing himself as reason dictates, or directs. He that is in such a state,
obeys the rigor of this great Commandment, and does that, which is necessary
and sufficient to Salvation.

It is therefore false, pursued the Abbot, that this author is content, that
Christians should observe, or keep the law as a Jew purely, in an exterior
manner, without letting his heart have any share in it; since he exacts, that
it should be done, by some, holy motive, and that it be strong enuff, to make
us in all things prefer God's interest to our own. For liften, I pray you, to
what he farther adds. So that we never put any thing in balance with him, nor
waver between his service, and that of the creature, wilfully uncertain, to
which of the two we should give our selves up, much less, that we should not
prefer any thing to him, nor suffer our selves to act contrary to his will.

And well, said Timantes, in turning the thing even as you say, and as you
pretend, your Sirmond understood it, will you maintain this doctrine in all it is
points?

I do not say that, answered the Abbot; for I am, with the multitude of Jesuits
I have cited to you, of a contrary opinion; and believe, as they do, that the
precept of charity does, in rigor, oblige us to make, from time to time, formal
acts, as they express it, of the love of God, and distinguished from the acts
of obedience, of fear, of religion, and of that love effective, whereof he
speaks. But, without defending the doctrine, a man sometimes may, as I have
already said, defend the author, and therefore see, I pray, what, I believe, a
man may yet say to justify him.

1. He is not the first Divine, that has spoke in this manner: have not you,
said he to Timantes, the book writ at Louvain, by Doctor Dubois, Royal
Professor of the holy Scripture in that University, concerning the propositions
in Morals condemned by Pope Alexander VII in 1665 and 1666? Yes I have, answered
Timantes, and nothing is written in that country, upon such kind of subjects,
but is sent me by some of my friends among the Doctors of Divinity: look you
here it is.

This author, replied the Abbot, seems to be a sincere man; he is not at all of
the opinion you and I disapprove; Art. 1.ad prop 1.
on the contrary he refutes it; but before he does so, see how many authors he
reckons to have taught it. Into which number he put Bannez a famous Divine of
Saint Dominicks Order, Cardinal Cajetan of the same Order, Marchantius, John
Sanchez, who must not be mistaken for the Jesuit Sanchez, Jansenius Bishop of
Gant, Molanus a Doctor of Louvain, the greatest part of these persons would
have been, for their learning, quality, and characters, much more worthy
adversaries for Pascal, than this good Father Antony Sirmond: but alas his
business was to seek for adversaries, only from among the Society.

A certain person lately made me make a reflection which may be of some use to
the Jesuits: it is, that the Jansenists cry Victory, and believe themselves
secured against all their adversaries attacks, and sheltered against the
Churches excommunications, if they can but discover some Thomists, whose
expressions come near theirs upon the subject of Grace, notwithstanding the
contempt they have, at bottom, for the doctrine of this School: which they treat
by the name of folly, when they speak in confidence to one another, believing
it, with their Master Jansenius, very distant from the thoughts, ideas, and
system of Saint Austin. Why, therefore, should not a Jesuit be freed from
blame, or at least excused, when he can produce, as may be done here for
Sirmond, famous Doctors, Cardinals and Bishops, raised to these dignities, by
the merits of their learning and their virtues? Another author, with whom I am
not acquainted, who calls himself Florimond du Plessis, cites in favor of
Sirmond, the most eminent and illustrious of all the old Divines. Saint
Antonin, Sylvester, Almain Doctor of Paris, the learned Tostatus, Gerson, and
many others, whose expressions are perfectly like his.

In the second place, this Jesuit had shown no inclination for this opinion,
but because he believed it the opinion of Saint Thomas. Let us see, what he
says page 15. Saint Thomas said he, 2.2. q. 44. a. 6. seems to answer not, and
to content himself, for avoiding damnation, that we should not otherwise do any
thing against sacred love. Wendrok, answered Timantes, has fully shown, how
much Sirmond was mistaken in attributing this doctrine to Saint Thomas.

It is very hard, replied the Abbot, for any man to argue more in the air, to
shoot at random, or wider from the mark, than Wendrok has done about this
article, in his long dissertation. Whoever rightly understands the state of the
question, and the Divines doctrine, which I have endeavored to explicat and
unfold upon the command of charity, will see, that almost all Wendrok quotes
out of Saint Thomas against Father Sirmond, may, by this Divine be admitted,
without any danger, and does not at all prove, that Saint Thomas's thoughts
were any way different from his. But this is not the question now in debate,
whether this author be, or be not mistaken, concerning the opinion of this holy
Doctor, or whether Wendrok has reasoned well, or ill upon the point: it may be
always, truly, said, that Saint Thomas's opinion, well or ill understood, was
Father Sirmond's rule: and it is also most certain, that Saint Thomas's way of
expressing himself, gave him the occasion of thinking as he did. Let us see,
said Cleander, in Saint Thomas the passage, by which he supports himself; we
shall easily judge by that, whether his mistake be excusable, or not.

The place cited by Sirmond, was immediately opened; the Angelical Doctor there
puts the question; 2.2. q. 44. a. 6.2.
Whether a man in this life can fulfill the precept of the love of God; and
among other difficulties which he raises in this matter, he makes this
objection; Whoever does not fulfill a precept, sins mortally; if then in this
life no man can fulfill this precept, no body can be without mortal sin. After
he had explained in what sense a man might, and in what sense he might not, in
this life, fulfill this precept, he thus answers the objection: It must be said,
that as a Soldier, is not to be blamed for not getting the victory, provided he
fights valiantly, in like manner he, who in this life does not fulfill this
precept, does not sin mortally, provided he does nothing against Divine love.
Ita etiam qui in via hoc praeceptum non implet, nihil contra divinam
dilectionem agens, non peccat mortaliter. This passage, said Cleander, might
have deceived any other, as well as Father Sirmond, supposing he be deceived.

After all, answered the Abbot, I believe he did not rightly understand Saint
Thomas in this place: but the manner alone, wherein this good Father concludes
the question, would deserve his pardon, although he should have been the first
author of this opinion; which before him, so many others held. See how he ends
this article. It is our duty, Page 29.
not to abuse his fatherly goodness, but to act as much and as soon as possible
by a principle of love, of disinteressed love, of filial and of cordial love:
for this is to be carefully heeded, that, although God, of his great goodness may
save us, by the paternal conduct of fear alone, by which he disposes us, to
receive the effect of the Sacraments, nevertheless, as this way is the least
pleasing to him, so is it also, neither frequent, nor lasting, and we are
easily turned from it...... God has said, He, who has my Commandments and keeps
them, is he that loves me. He loves me by his works: to this he is in rigor
obliged by my law: but also, adds he, he who does not love me, does not keep my
sayings; no truly he does not keep them long: for which reason, the great Saint
Antony said, there was no sure defense against the attacks of the Devil, but
the love of Jesus Christ: all others, are transitory and unconstant. Is to
speak in this manner, added the Abbot, the way to ruin and destroy the love of
God in the hearts of Christians?

As for my own part, said Eudoxus, I am mercifully inclined, and clearly of
opinion, that if there should, ever be a new edition of Wendrok, the title of
his third note, ought to be changed, Antonij Sirmondi adversus hoc praeceptum
intolerandi errores proponuntur. It is enuff to call it a mistake, a vain
Theological refinement, and as Mr. Abbot was willing to term it, a false
subtilty, impertinently inserted in a spiritual treatise. Sirmond, without it,
might very well have maintained, as he has done, the doctrine of the Council of
Trent, against those who had the confidence to teach, that every action, which
has not the pure love of God for the motive, is a sin.

I will not go back, answered the Abbot, from what I said, to make you hope, I
might capitulate, after I had for some time defended my self; I think I have
done this well enuff, and I am ready yet to add, even somewhat more, provided
Timantes would, on his side, use the same kind of freedom. We must see, said
Timantes, what new propositions you have to make, to induce me to this
capitulation.

I will own, continued the Abbot, that Sirmond's distinction of The Commandment
of rigor, for the love effective, and The Commandment of sweetness, for love
affective, is a little chimerical. Who speaks in this matter of a command,
speaks of a thing opposed to counsel, or advice, and by consequence, of a
command of rigor. I will also say, that this doctrine, separated from the text,
where it is very much softened, has in it self something very hard, and fit to
be rejected, and that the pretended authority of Saint Thomas, or of Cajetan,
Jansenius of Gant, or others, ought not to make it current.

This is something, said Timantes, but what would you have me grant you in
exchange? I only ask, answered the Abbot, that the Divines of the Society, of
whom you have heard me cite a great number of the most considerable, having all
thought, and spoken quite differently from Father Antony Sirmond, you would
not, for the future, say The Jesuits teach, that the love of God is not
necessary to Salvation: nor call that, the doctrine of the Society.

This is, answered Timantes, a large article, and of great importance, which I
cannot grant, without first consulting with the Gentlemen, who speak so every
day; and whom I value too much, not to continue to talk as they do.

Since you will not then, replied the Abbot, conclude any thing, without these
Gentlemen's consent; it is fit, when you consult them upon this point, to tell
them, that a world of men are scandalized at the doctrine, and falsifications of
Pascal in his tenth Letter; where pretending to attack the doctrine of the
Jesuits, or rather of the most celebrated Divines upon Attrition, he does, not
only, propound it, in such a manner, as that it is not to be known by these
Fathers, but that it is also easily perceivable, that under this pretext, he
would fain run down some points, decided by the Council; that this proposition
Attrition with the Sacrament is sufficient, and this, The act of the love of
God is not necessary to Salvation, have no relation to one another, as he would
have it to be understood: that the Jesuits, defending the first, after an
infinite number of Divines as conformable to the doctrine of the Council of
Trent, do, at the same time, fight against the second; that the one ought not,
nor cannot be drawn into consequence, for the other; not even in any particular
case, which some may think ought to be excepted, out of the general thesis;
that they will show them reason, and very good reason, when they desire it, for
the diversity of the Divines systems, touching the time, wherein a man is
obliged to make an interior, formal act of the love of God; but on condition,
these Gentlemen will, also, propose their hypothesis, and opinion upon this
matter; to the end it may be examined by the rules and principles of true and
solid Divinity.........

You are there cutting out a great deal of work for Timantes, said Eudoxus
interrupting him; let us I pray you leave all these particulars, and speak of
an accommodation, but of an entire, universal accommodation. I have a
proposition to make, which, at first, will be surprising to you; but you shall
hear the conditions. It is to unite us four in the same party, and the same
interests. Mr. Abbot has been hitherto devoted to the Jesuits; you Timantes, to
the Jansenists; Cleander and I have always kept a kind of neutrality; it is not
fit to see, such friends as we are, thus divided; to what ever side we turn, we
shall be well received; the Jesuits would esteem themselves happy in a friend,
and a defender, so zealous, so quick, and so resolute as Timantes: and if Mr.
Abbot would become a Jansenist, his conversion would, no doubt, make the party
great gainers.

What you propose, is a matter of consequence, said Timantes, interrupting him;
let us hear what are the conditions. The conditions, answered Eudoxus, have
nothing in them, but what is just and reasonable; you that are so equitable,
will accept them without boggling; and I am also confident, that neither Mr.
Abbot, nor Cleander will reject them. It is not, to make a discussion of the
justice, or injustice of both partys, nor to enter into the particulars of all
the points of doctrine disputed between them. Let us lay aside all prejudices,
by which each party endeavors to gain an advantage over the other, and only
mind one thing, to wit, the advantage of sincerity and fidelity.

This I agree to, very willingly, said Timantes; you know I pretend to those
virtues more than any man living; and you take me on my blind or weak side; but
this point is of large extent, and the Jesuits will have need of a great many
apologies, before I can be drawn to 'um by this way. I intend, replied Eudoxus,
to reduce the matter to one single point, wherein you are fully instructed, and
which you need but just run over again. To what point demanded Timantes?

To the very Provincial Letters, answered Eudoxus; do but only justify the
fidelity and sincerity of your Gentlemen in the fourth, fifth, sixth and
seventh Letters, of which we have already begun to have some doubts and
suspicions, and Cleander and I are yours.

This is a small thing, a very easy business, said Timantes, but I would be
glad that Mr. Abbot would, also sign the treaty on these terms. I do engage to
make my self a party to it, answered the Abbot; but be sure you keep your word
upon the penalty of valuing your self hereafter, as much upon the name of an
Anti-Jansenist, as now you do upon that of a Jansenist.

I accept the condition, replied Timantes, so certain am I not to hazard much
by the bargain. More than you are aware of, said Cleander; have you ever
confronted, or compared Pascal's citations, with the texts of the Society's
Divines? I have not, answered he, but we will immediately do it if you please.
The most unnecessary and unprofitable labor, will be always agreeable, when I
undergo it for your sakes. It is too late to begin it to day, replied Cleander,
do it at your leisure, but be sure you do it exactly, and when you think fit
give us an account.

It is fit, said the Abbot, that we should make this piece of drudgery as easy
to you as is possible, considering that to a person of your brisk, lively
humor, such a task should not be a very pleasant pastime. I will therefore quit
you for four or five points: of which the first shall be, to show, in the
assertions, or principles of one single Jesuit, the whole, or the least part of
what is attributed to all the body in the fourth Letter, concerning the sins of
libertins, or hardened and impious men. The second, to make good the accusation
against them in the fifth Letter, of their permitting Idolatry to the new
Christians in China, and of their having, for that end, put in practice, the
direction of intention, and teaching their Converts, that they may outwardly
adore Idols, provided they do but inwardly direct their adorations to a
Crucifix, hid under their garments; and that also which is added, that these
Fathers do not expose in that country in the assemblies of their new Converts,
the Crucifix, but only discourse to 'um of the glorious Mysteries of our
Savior, without saying any thing of a suffering Jesus.

The third, is, to justify Pascal's honesty and fidelity in reference to
Filiucius's passage, touching fasts. The fourth, is, to show, in Valentia, the
passage quoted by Pascal concerning simony. If a temporal good be given for a
spiritual, that is to say, money for a benefice, and that the money be given as
the price of the benefice, it is plain simony. But if it be given as a motive
to induce the beneficed person to resign, NON TANQUAM PRETIUM BENEFICII, SED
TANQUAM MOTIVUM AD RESIGNANDUM, it is no simony. The fifth, is, to tell us,
what right he had to cut away from, or dismember the text of Bauni, touching
the obligation a Priest is under, of saying the Masses he has agreed for, with
him who gives the retribution. This text, whole and entire, seeming to have
nothing in it, but what all men may, and ought to allow, nor any thing contrary
to that, which Pascal does oppose. If you give me but a good account of these
five points only, continued the Abbot, I shall be wholly yours, and pursuant to
Eudoxus's proposal, change my side. That shall not hinder, answered Timantes
confidently.

If you fail in your undertaking, added the Abbot, I will not, however, oblige
you, to change your party, at least till I have convinced you of some other
things: which if I do not do, I will own my self vanquished and submit. 1. If I
do not clearly show you, that the doctrine of probability, is not an invention
of the Jesuits; that it is not peculiar to them; and that they do not teach it,
but with a crowd of Doctors of all Schools, all Orders, and all Nations; that
they do not teach it, in the manner Pascal pretends; and that what he says of
it in his Letters, is full of falsifications and impostures.

2. If I do not justify the Jesuits touching the Idolatry of China, by
authentic pieces, and records, by most full and positive testimonies, such as
will make you admire the boldness and impudence of the Societys enemies. 3. If
I take not from you, all doubts and scruples, concerning the innocence and
purity of Valentia's doctrine of simony, and that of Vasquez about Alms.

You speak, said Timantes, interrupting him, and very much astonished, with
great confidence and assurance. Does not Pascal, in his former Letters, set
down the very articles, pages and numbers, of the Jesuit authors he quotes?
does he not put all his extracts out of them into Italic letters? he does so,
answered the Abbot, both in his former and in his latter Letters; and this
draws the belief of all those, who do not examine the texts and compare them
with his quotations, and the indignation, of all those, who do give themselves
that trouble.

What, said Timantes, Pascal the honestest man of his time, to falsify, impose,
and calumniate? you are certainly in jest, this is not possible: nor could any
thing be more unlikely, according to the character I have had of him from good
and able men of his acquaintance.

Let him be as honest a man as you will, answered the Abbot, what I say are
matters of fact; which I undertake to prove; and when I have done it, choose
whether you will preserve for him the quality of an honest man, or give that of
cheats, impostors, falsifiers and calumniators, to those, who furnished him
with memorials and extracts against the Jesuits. Make this division how you
think fit, it is very indifferent to me.

Do you know, said Cleander, that what Mr. Abbot promises you to do, he has
already done for us; and what he has affirmed, we have seen, with our own eyes,
in the authors themselves, having actually confronted and compared the
Provincial Letters, page by page, with the texts, cited just as they follow in
order, without any choice; and that, except one or two inconsiderable points,
which Pascal had reason to find fault with, these Letters are one continued
series, or complication of falsifies and impostures; which prepossesses a man
with a terrible prejudice against the other articles, concerning the greatest
part whereof, he has offered to undeceive us when ever we please?

The Jesuits, answered the Abbot, are so little of the opinions ascribed to
them by Pascal, that they would, without hesitating, subscribe to the
condemnation of most of the propositions he contends against, taken in the
sense he gives them. But that, which is wonderful, and a new calumny of their
enemies is, that these propositions, for the greater part, as Pascal has framed
'um, the better to refute 'um, having been most justly condemned at Rome, it was
every where reported, that it was the Societys doctrine, which was there
condemned. The Jesuits in France, have suffered all this to be said, and indeed,
they have done well, not to trouble themselves much about the matter. But the
Flemish Fathers had not so much patience. For, they have fully demonstrated,
that hardly any one of the condemned propositions, had been taught by the
Jesuits; and if any one of them be found, in one or two Divines of the Society,
they were neither the first, nor the only persons that taught them; but that
there had been always, some non-Jesuit Divines, especially among the Thomists,
who lead the van: and that for one Jesuit, who fell in with those opinions, the
main part, or body of the Divines of the Society, were of a contrary opinion.

These are very strange things, which you advance, said Timantes interrupting
him; and I am apt to believe, that what you say of Pascals being furnished with
false memoirs, might have happened to your self; and that the Jesuits, imposed
upon you, and persuaded you they were true: but be it as it will, since you
pretend to have been already fully informed in this matter; it is not my
business any longer to make head against, or oppose you, at least, till I have
satisfied my self, and taken the same pains, that you have done. Let us
therefore, for the present take our leave of this subject, and talk of other
things.

And thus ended the discourse upon this matter, whereof Eudoxus and Cleander
did not expect so moderate a conclusion from their Jansenist: whom the Abbot's
phlegm and staid temper, had, all along, kept within certain bounds, which, on
such like occasions, had been very usual for him to transgress.

OF THE DISTINCTION OF Probable in Practice, AND Probable in Speculation.
THIS distinction, which some Divines have made use of in their decisions, has,
from time to time, very much incommoded Pascal: It has made many of his
raillerys, which he believed the most witty, become false and insipid and his
most vehement invectives appear altogether impertinent, and not at all to the
purpose; and I am persuaded, this was one of the distinctions he was most
afraid of.

My business now, is, to discover the sense of this distinction, whether it be
solid, useful, or even necessary in Morals; or whether it be only an artifice,
by which the Jesuits have served themselves To ruin Religion, Let. 13.
without sensibly wounding the state: this is Pascals own expression.

It is certain, there always was a great deal of difference, between the
practice and speculation, in an infinite number of subjects, especially in
matters of Morals. But not to dwell upon a common place, let us examine, whether
this distinction, may be admitted, even in the instance, wherein Pascal condems
and raillys it: it is upon the chapter of murder and other violent acts,
whereof he has spoken in his seventh and thirteenth Letters.

As all this writers artifice and cunning consists, in confounding things, so
the Jesuits whole justification upon this point, ought to consist, in a plain
unfolding and explication of the matter; in order to this, I will first
presuppose some propositions, the truth of which none can deny.

1. When it is asked, whether, on some occasions, it be lawful to kill, or
strike, it is, always, without prejudice to the Evangelical Counsel; where our
Savior bid us Not to resist a wicked man, that treats us ill: to turn our left
cheek to him that has smote us on the right; and to let him have our cloak,
that would by violence take away our coat. There is not a Casuist, who does not
agree, that this conduct, in a Christian, is infinitely to be praised, and
perfectly heroical.

2. But as it would be impious, to think otherwise, so it would be extravagant
for a Divine or a Canonist, to regulat, by these Counsels of Perfection, the
strict obligations of a Christian in this matter; and to condem him to hell,
because he would go to law with a man, that took away his goods unjustly; or
because he would defend himself against a man, that should draw his sword to
kill him, or lift up his hand to hit him a box on the ear, or to cudgel him.
The question here, is, not what is most perfect, but only what is lawful; nor
that which is counseled, but that which is not forbidden. I made this
supposition, at first, to show, what pitiful antitheses, or oppositions Pascal
has made, from time to time on this occasion, between these Evangelical
Counsels, and the doctrine which he attributes to the Jesuits.

3. Although that life, honor, money, and other temporal goods, are infinitely less
valuable, than spiritual and eternal riches, they are yet however goods, and
goods which men have a right to keep and defend, against those, who would take
them away unjustly: that this right is founded upon the law of nature, and the
right of Nations, authorized by the Divine, written Law: that to pretend the
contrary, as some heretics do, would be to over-turn the order established by
God, and to give wicked men occasion of offering violences, and insulting over
good men. It is upon this ground, that all Divines agree with Saint Thomas in
this general maxim: 2.2. q. 64. a. 7.
Secundum jura licet vim vi repellere, cum moderamine inculpatae tutelae. That
a man is allowed, by all kinds of law, to push back, or return violence for
violence, provided he contains himself within, the bounds of a just and moderat
defense. But all the difficulty is, to define, or determine, what these bounds
are; and the difficulty is by so much the greater, as by how much we are
naturally inclined and disposed by our passions and self-love to extend and
transgress them.

4. All hereupon do further agree in the following propositions: that a man
ought not to do himself right, when the wrong done, or intended may be
prevented or repaired, by a superior power: that to avoid death, at least we
may take away his life, that attacks us, with a full design to take away ours:
that the person assaulted, if he cannot otherwise defend himself, has a right,
at least, in some circumstances, to do the aggressor a greater mischief, than
what he apprehends from him: so although money and all household stuff, are much
less valuable than life, yet notwithstanding, Cap ^. de homi. cap. 3.
Saint Thomas and the Canon Law, founded upon the 22th. chapter of Exodus,
teach, that it is lawful for a private man, to kill a robber, if he finds him
forcing open the door, or breaking into his house in the night; and the same
law adds, that one might kill him by day, if he offers to defend himself with
weapons.

All this being supposed, certain, there arise, upon this subject, a thousand
difficulties, of great importance, to be resolved, by the Canonists and
Divines: whereof this, which has a relation to the present question, is one: it
is a case decided by the Jesuit Reginaldus, wherein he makes use of the
distinction Of Probable in Speculation, and Probable in Practice, In praxi,
libr. 21. nu. 62.
mentioned by Pascal, in his seventh Letter. I have chosen this example,
because, it is very proper to make the business in hand be easily understood:
and that, afterward it will be easy to apply, what I shall say upon this
subject, to other cases of this nature, reported by Pascal, in his seventh and
thirteenth Letters: where the falsifications are horrible, especially in the
citations of the passages in Reginaldus and Lessius.

Reginaldus, after he had explained the circumstances wherein it is lawful to
take away the life of an unjust aggressor, adds this which follows. It is to be
observed, that, in this respect, it is very indifferent, after what manner an
unjust aggressor undertakes to destroy a man he resolves to kill: whether he
makes use of arms, poison, or false evidence; or, whether he does it, by
himself, or by another. For what signify's it, by what means he endeavors to
make me perish, when once it is supposed, that the way he takes will have it is
effect. From this principle, Reginaldus draws many conclusions; the last of
which Pascal proposes for an example of the Jesuits cursed doctrine, concerning
murder. Here you may see it, not as reported by Pascal, but as it is in the
author himself.

Infine, says Reginaldus, if I meet you, when you are going to bear a false
testimony against me, which is sure to occasion my death, so as it is impossible
to be avoided, and that I have no other way to escape, Nec alia est ratio
effugij, it is lawful for me to take away your life, as from a man that is
going to take away mine: for what matter is it, whether you do it, by your
sword, or by the hands of the hangman?

The circumstances of the case carefully to be regarded are, 1. That this
adversary is actually going to execute his wicked design against me: Si eas ad
ferendum contra me falsum testimonium. 2. That this design will be effectual,
and it is execution morally certain; Ex quo accepturus sim mortis sententiam. 3.
That I have no other means to avoid it. Nec alia est ratio effugij, that is to
say, that I can have no access to the judge, to make my innocence appear; that
I can neither hide my self, nor run away. Without speaking of a fourth
condition, which Reginaldus has put down in the beginning, to wit, that I ought
to be sure of my enemy's ill design; and that how strong soever the proofs may
be, so long as there is room to doubt, it is not lawful for me to make use of
such a precaution. Notandum est primo mihi non licere quidem, quandiu res dubia
est, occidere eum a quo mortem injustam mihi parari suspicor; etiamsi
vehementia sint indicia, quod ita res habeat.

But yet this is not all: not content with these precautions, he adds, that, as
to this case and some others of the same kind, a man must take notice of the
advice he gives in another place, in relation to practice, to wit, in number
63. Quoad hoc autem, and alia hujusinodi, in praxi habenda est ratio cautelae
proponendae in sequenti numero 63. versiculo, CAETERUM. And there he declares,
this conclusion to be of the number of those, which, as probable as they seem
in speculation, are not to be followed in practice; because of the many
inconveniences morally inevitable which attend it; Quamvis in speculatione pars
affirmans non careat omni probabilitate, in praxi tamen non est sequenda. Let
us now examine the distinction of probable in speculation, and of probable in
practice, with reference to this case. The example will, as I have said, make
the thing very easy and intelligible.

Reginaldus's answer in the case propounded, is probable in speculation: for
what reason? because it is founded upon a principle of the law of nature,
wherein all the world agrees, that it is lawful for me, to avoid death at the
expense of his life, that would infallibly take away mine. Moreover this
answer, is a consequence drawn by analogy with this other decision, of the
truth of which, no body makes any doubt; I see a man watching and just going to
kill me; I have therefore right on my side to prevent and kill him if I can.

It cannot be denied, but that Reginaldus's conclusion, considering things in
themselves and in general, is rightly inferred from this principle, and that
with probability enuff, and that it also has an analogy with the other case;
which is sufficiently plain, and admits of no difficulty: for as he said
before, it is altogether indifferent, whether I loose my life by poison, or by
steel: whether my enemy kills me with his own, or the common executioners
sword. This is what the Divines call a proposition probable in speculation;
that is to say, with reference to general principles, from whence it is drawn;
in the doing whereof, they consider nothing but only the principles, and the
connection the proposition has with those principles, without regard to any
thing else.

But as probable as it is in speculation, it is not probable in practice, said
Reginaldus; and it ought not to be followed In praxi tamen non est sequenda.
For what reason? because the practice would be subject to great abuses; give
occasions of many murders; and also because that this thing, of defending ones
self, as much founded as it appears to be upon the right of nature, is morally
inseparable from hatred and revenge, etc. These are the reasons of his
assertion in number 63. and by which it may easily be comprehended, how a
proposition how probable soever it may be in speculation, may not yet be always
probable in practice. Reginaldus's proposition follows from a principle,
received by all the world, but yet it would have very great inconveniences in
practice.

I now therefore ask, whether these two propositions be not true? the first;
that this answer is probable in speculation; the second, that, it is not
probable in practice? nay are they not even evident? and supposing them true
and evident, is there any scandal, or any danger, in advancing, or explaining
them in a book of Divinity? could Reginaldus have decided the matter in a more
severe manner than by saying; In praxi non est sequenda, this proposition is
not to be followed in practice?

The love of life alone, and the heat of passion, in a man, who sees himself
upon the point of dying with infamy by the malice of his enemy, will make the
right, which, he believes, he has of killing him, appear, not only probable,
but also evident; and that without ever having read the arguments, or
reflections of Divines upon the subject: he will not spend time to weigh, or
consider this principle, but prevent his man if it be possible. Who shall stop
him then, in case he may be stopped, but his Confessor, or some friend directed
by the doctrine of Reginaldus?

The thing being thus unfolded, or explained, (which was needless but for such
as have not the least tincture of Divinity) have not the Jesuits a right to
demand justice from the Public against Pascal for the insolent turn or
application, which he has made to them, of part of his discourse, on occasion
of this distinction in his thirteenth Letter?

See, said he, in what manner your opinions begin to appear under this
distinction, by means whereof you do but ruin Religion, without wounding, yet
sensibly the state; whereby you believe your selves secured; for you imagine,
the credit you have in the Church, will hinder your being punished for your
attempts against truth; and that the precautions you set down to prevent these
permissions from being easily practiced, will secure you against the
Magistrates; who not being Judges of cases of Conscience, have properly no
concern but for the exterior practice. Thus an opinion condemned under the name
of practice, is made good under the name of speculation: but this basis, or
ground being once established, it is not difficult, to raise or build upon it
the rest of your maxims.

Can there be any thing seen more flat or dull, and, at the same time, more
roguish, or more wicked than this discourse? but it was the same spirit that
maintained in the thirteenth Letter the calumnies at first advanced in the
seventh: and which will clearly appear such, by only comparing Pascal's
citations with the texts of the several Jesuit authors by him quoted. I shall
content my self to instance in that which I have newly made use of, to explain
the distinction of probable in speculation, and probable in practice: these are
the words of his seventh Letter.

According to our learned Reginaldus in his 21 book, chap. 5. number. 57. We may
also kill the false witnesses, which a calumniator has raised up against us. If
that be Reginaldus's proposition, it is very horrible; supposing this
proposition true, as general and as little restrained as it is, there is no
calumniator, or false witness, nor any man that cooperat's to the death of an
innocent person, that may not in conscience be killed; and it is not to be
doubted, but that it deserves to be anathematis'd. But first, hold a little; is
this Reginaldus's proposition? where are the circumstances, so wisely and so
expressly set down by this Divine, of a pressing danger, of a certain and
inevitable death, without any manner of means either of hiding or escaping?
circumstances, which appeared sufficient to other non-Jesuit Divines, even in
practice, to make a man, in this occasion, find the defense just and lawful. In
one word, he has made Reginaldus to say absolutely and in general, That the
false witnesses raised against us may be lawfully killed. And yet
notwithstanding the result, or conclusion of his whole doctrine is, as we have
seen, that one can neither kill, nor counsel the killing of them, even in the
most pressing circumstances. Was there ever any calumny so horrid, and so
extravagant as this?

Can a Divine, that concludes, after a serious weighing and examining all the
difficulties of the question (and it is not to be denied but that there are
considerable difficulties on both sides) can a Divine, I say, who concludes, as
Reginaldus has done, be suspected to flatter or indulge our passions, and
authorize revenge? and would not any other, than a Jesuit, have appeared to
Pascal to have determined this matter in the most severe manner that was
possible? must not a Jesuit Divine dare to propose the difficulties on one
side, as well as on the other; nor show, that he perceives what they are? and
shall he be condemned of loose Morals, for following, even the strictest
opinion, because he follows it with some doubt? what, may not a Casuist arguing
upon this matter say? If we proceed by general principles; if we argue by
analogy to such and such other cases; if we stick only to speculation, and the
consideration of the nature of things, this opinion is probable: but if we
regard the inconveniences, which are almost inevitable in the practice; if we
mind a man's ordinary temper and disposition in such a rencounter, it is not
probable, and by consequence ought not to be followed in practice. Must not a
Casuist express himself in this manner, although the subject obliges him to do it
in a thousand instances? can he not do it without being accused to allow that,
which he says expressly ought neither to be done nor permitted?

The object of this science is practice; and all conclusions which are not
practical but purely speculative, are not properly moral conclusions; they are
no decisions; they are without consequence in reference to actions, because
they are not the rules of our manners. It is not therefore their decisions
wherewith Reginaldus and Lessius are reproached in the seventh and thirteenth
Letters; not only because their texts are there falsified, but also because the
proposition, which properly contain their decisions, are directly contrary to
that which is attributed to them.

It is however fit not to leave unanswered the objection Pascal makes the
Jesuits upon this subject; Let. 1^.
taken from a passage in Escobar touching the distinction of probable in
speculation, and of probable in practice. Escobar, say they, in the first of
his six tomes of Moral Divinity in the Preface n. 15. teaches, that every
probable opinion in speculation is also probable in practice. What a great
misfortune it is, that Escobar should not be of the same opinion with others?
but it is not one of the secrets of the Society, to make one of their Divines
first say, that an opinion is probable in speculation, and not probable in
practice, and afterward to make another advance, that every opinion probable
in speculation, is also probable in practice; to the end, that people should
accustom themselves to follow their caprice and their passions, and so by
degrees widen and enlarge their Consciences for the committal of the greatest
crimes?

No doubt but Reginaldus writ to Escobar from Lions to Madrid, to concert with
him this pleasant artifice: or, that their General himself took care to make
this division of doctrine with so commendable and holy prospects. Oh the
prodigious cunning of that thought! by which we are almost returned to that
wonderful secret, discovered by Pascal in his fifth Letter, of the agreement of
the Directors and Jesuit Divines with their Superiors, to make some of them
strict and severe, others loose and accommoding Doctors and Directors: but as
ill luck would have it, Escobar agrees with the rest, even in this point, and
if there be any difference, or dispute between them, it is but a dispute of
words.

First, in his Examen Confessariorum, styled in the Provincial Letters, The
four and twenty old men's collection, he thinks and speaks upon this subject
after the usual manner as Pascal himself confesses; and as for his book of
Moral Divinity, where he says, that what is lawful in speculation, is lawful
also in practice, if Pascal had read on a few pages beyond that cited he would
have perfectly understood this Casuists meaning; which is very good, and which
has, in reality, nothing in it contrary to what he had said elsewhere, nor to
what is said by others. His words are these.

If after having foreseen the inconveniences arising from practice, I yet
probably judge, Lib 2. theol. mor. prob. 5.
that this practice is lawful, I may accordingly make use on it. But yet
nevertheless I do acknowledge every thing which is lawful, is not always
expedient, because of outward circumstances. And moreover, if the Prince, or
supreme Tribunal, should forbid it by their declarations or decrees, then the
opinion, contrary to these orders, would cease to be probable: for example,
there were some opinions of Angelus, Armilla, and Sylvester, which were
probable before the Council of Trent; and yet notwithstanding since the
Council, it is no longer lawful to follow them in practice: and therefore for
my part; from the time it is said, that an opinion is not probable in practice,
I hold that neither it is probable in speculation; because that the
inconveniences which are found in the practice, do demonstrate it is falsity.

What can all this mean, but that Escobar would not have an opinion called
probable in speculation, when, tho never so well grounded upon certain general
principles; admitted by all the world, the inconveniences, which are found in
practice, do hinder it from being possible to be held probable in practice:
whereas other Divines would have it, that the inconveniences, which hinder it
from being probable in practice, do not hinder, but that it may be said to be
probable in speculation, so that it appear conformable to the general
principles, from whence it is drawn in a probable manner. But all do agree, as
well as Escobar; that because of these inconveniences, it ought not in practice
to be the rule of our actions.

To do a pleasure therefore to Escobar, I will forbear calling such an opinion
probable in speculation; and yet to accommodate my self with others, I would
very willingly call it so. I should not by that wrong any body, and my
condescendance would be altogether without consequence as to our manners: and
so also would be, all the other Divines different ways of expressing
themselves. According to this notion of Escobar, which has nothing in it but
what is very reasonable, I will say, That one may safely follow in practice the
opinions which are probable in speculation; because I shall be ascertained
before I call them probable in speculation, that they are probable in practice,
and according to the notion of others, I will say, That it is not lawful to
follow in practice all the opinions which are probable in speculation; because
the quality of probable in speculation does not include all that is necessary to
make it probable in practice; and I will before all Divines defy Pascal, with
all his vain and sophistical declamations, to gainsay, or find fault with this
point of my doctrine.

Now to make an end, and give a short and precise account of all I have said,
see to what it is reduced, according to Reginaldus and according to others, to
whom they have done the same injustice. See, I say, to what all the mystery of
the distinction of probable in in speculation, and of probable in practice is
reduced. The end of this distinction is, first to show, that in matter of
Morals, it is not enuff to argue by certain general principles, whose
consequences, how well soever drawn, may sometimes have very sad sequels if by
them alone, we should govern our actions. And in the second place, that there
are many things, which considered in themselves, and with reference to general
rules, do not appear to be sins, but yet for all that, it is morally impossible
to practice them without sin; because, that the corruption of the heart of man,
the violence of the passions, which the objects do excite, and the vehement
impression which the presence of good or evil makes, do seldom leave the mind
in such an even situation and tranquillity, as is sufficient to hinder the
transgression of those bounds, which reason and the laws of God do prescribe.
Is then to say, that a thing is probable in speculation, and not probable in
practice; that it is prohibited to be done, that it ought not to be advised,
nor it is practice permitted, to invent an artifice to ruin Religion, and the
Gospel, by only managing the state so, as not to wound it openly?

But the conduct alone of Pascal and his followers, so seeming zealous for
strict, in opposition to loose Morals, sufficiently proves, that, generally
speaking, there is a great deal of difference between speculation and practice.
One equivocation, one mental reservation, as they affirm, in their books and in
their conversations, are damnable sins; and yet in practice, the lies,
falsifications, and malicious turns, which they give to the doctrine and
opinions of many Religious and Learned Persons, are the most innocent things in
the world, and the most lawful, provided they do but fall upon the Jesuits, or
some of their friends.

OF THE Direction of Intention.
THIS wonderful principle, says Pascals Jesuit in his seventh Letter, is our
great method to divert the intention, which is of such mighty importance in our
Morals, that, in some manner, I dare compare it to the doctrine of probability.

Let us now endeavor to penetrate into the bottom of this secret also, and
discover it to the world better than Pascal has done. The whole doctrine of the
direction of intention consists, in teaching, that in things that are of
themselves indifferent, the intention, according as it is good or bad, makes an
action either good or bad; that a good action ceases to be good, for want of a
good intention, and that, generally speaking, the intention, is a thing of that
consequence in Morals, that it makes, in a thousand instances, the only
essential difference of our actions; or to express my self in the language of
the School's, it is that, which form's, or constitutes every one of our actions
in their several species or kinds.

I could, by following the Jansenists method, fill the text and margent of this
small writing, with an infinity of passages out of the holy Fathers, concerning
the Intention; but I will content my self with two words, taken from Saint
Austin and Saint Thomas, which sufficiently express, all that is comprehended
in the proposition I have now laid down. ^n Psalm. 31.
Bonum opus Intentio facit, it is the Intention which makes an action good,
2.2. q. 69 ^^. 7. in corp.
says the first. Morales actus recipient speciem secundum id quod intenditur:
it is the Intention which makes the difference of actions says the second. It
is in this sense also, that the Fathers understand the words of the Son of God
in the Gospel: If your eye be clear, Math. 6.
your whole body will be full of light. That is to say, if your intention be
pure, what you act will not be a work of darkness: so that this principle of
Divinity, has nothing in it, but what is highly orthodox and reasonable: it is
very common and very necessary, and therefore to call it wonderful and make it
a secret of the Jesuits policy, is the most absurd and the most ridiculous
thing in the world.

But, perhaps the Jesuits abuse it in the usage, by a wrong, or an impertinent
application of it to some matters. I do not intend here to refute, at large,
all Pascal's calumnies upon this occasion. I will content my self, with
singling out, or pointing at a few; and showing in two words, that the Jesuits
application of this principle to the several subjects, is neither impious, nor
extravagant: particularly in the matter of simony, of usury and of violence;
wherein they are reproached by the Provincial Letters, to have made use of the
direction of intention. Valentia says, that a man may, sometimes, give a
temporal good for a spiritual: Escobar holds, that a man may expect some
advantage for lending a sum of money: Reginaldus tells us, that we may sometimes
pursue and beat a man that has insulted and affronted us; and all this without
sin, provided, that the intention be well directed. And Bauni prescribes, even
an express form reported in the eighth Letter, where the direction of intention
is put into practice, to make a contract lawful.

Abstracting from Pascal's railleries, and the malicious turn he gives these
things, which is not now the matter in question, is it never lawful to pursue,
to beat, or to kill an unjust aggressor? it is sometimes, without doubt; and it
is even always lawful, when a man contains himself within the bounds of a just
and moderat defense, Cum moderamine inculpatae tutelae. In continuing within
these bounds, may not he, who defends himself, have a good, or an ill intention
in beating him, by whom he is attacked? may he not do it to be revenged, or may
he not do it only to defend himself? it is certain, it may be done either of
these two ways; and therefore the direction of intention may very well take
place in this matter.

Is it never lawful to give a spiritual for a temporal good, or to make profit
of one's money? without doubt nothing is more lawful: the Priests daily receive
money for their Masses, and men do hourly make contracts of partnership, and
contracts for a yearly income; if I give a Priest money as a payment of his
Mass, I am guilty of simony; but if my intention be to give it only out of a
principle of pure gratitude, or for alms, or for some such motive. I am not
guilty of simony.

I have given a man twenty thousand pounds, at five in the hundred, if at
twenty years end he pays back my principal, he will find that for twenty which
I gave him, I shall have received forty: with what conscience, and by what rule
of equity, can I receive back as much more as I paid? if in giving out this
money, I intended to purchase a right of receiving yearly a thousand pound out
of an estate of land, for example, that was mortgaged to me, I do nothing
against justice; but if I had only an intention to employ my money, to get by it
a great deal more than I gave, I become an Usurer: if in giving my money to a
Merchant to be made use of in his trade, on condition that he will restore it
with profit, for example, at five in the hundred, I become this way also an
Usurer; but if I have a real intention to enter into partnership with him, my
conscience is secure.

Since the intention then in matter of contracts, is always essential to make
them valid, or lawful; and since when a man is to defend his life, his fortune
or his honor, the intention, is one of the things that contributes to the
making this defense just and lawful; why should not the Jesuit Divines be
allowed, as well as others, to teach, that in these matters, if a man will not
sin, he must take care to act with a good intention?

Valentia, in his treatise of simony, propounds the question just as Saint
Thomas did, he handled the same cases, and resolved many of ^um, as Saint
Thomas had done, by the direction of intention. Why should the direction of
intention be a most innocent thing in Saint Thomas, and yet in Valentia be a
wicked thing, and a mystery of the Jesuits policy?

Bauni expounds the manner of making a contract by which men may lawfully make
profit of their money; and by doing of it otherwise they would be guilty of
Usury; what evil is there in this? now to speak truth, he does in this example
suppose the doctrine of three contracts; but he is neither the author, nor the
only defender of it: it was maintained before him by abundance of very learned
non-Jesuit Canonists and Divines: being also useful and so much practiced as it
is in commerce, and the direction of intention not being more forced, or
strained in that, than in many other contracts, which are allowed; why must it
be a crime in him, to follow it, as long as neither the Church, nor the
Ecclesiastic Superiors have thought fit to forbid it?

Escobar says, that it is Usury to exact any thing above the principal, on
account of the loan; but that to hope by lending money to a person that wants
it, for example to buy a piece of land that lies conveniently for him, one
should get his friendship by the pleasure he does him, or some favor upon
occasion, is not Usury even in thought; nor is it Usury in act, when
afterward, by putting him in mind of the pleasure he did him, he endeavors to
excite his gratitude, that he may thereby obtain from him the service he stands
in need of; what is there unjust, or unreasonable in this distinction? must a
man pass for an Usurer for doing such an act of kindness for another, who he
foresees is like to be within a little time, in a condition and credit to serve
him? do men look upon the good offices they receive on such accounts as
Usuries? and is there need of any thing but common sense to justify those who
are here accused with so much malice, or so much ignorance?

Infine, when Reginaldus teaches, that it is probable in speculation, but very
rarely probable in practice; that in some circumstances which he sets down, and
of which Pascal says not one word, a man may, but yet in the instant only
wherein he is offended, pursue the person from whom he receives the affront, he
gives notice, that this must not be done, with an intention to do evil for
evil, but only to do that, which is necessary and no more, to save his honor;
is this restriction unuseful, or capable to empoyson his answer? can this
decision with all the precautions which attend it, be more abused than the
example of David may, who commands Solomon to rid himself of Joab and Shimei
upon the first occasion that offers? without the direction of intention, what
should we think of this order of David?

No, neither Reginaldus nor the others have here advanced any thing new,
touching this direction of intention. They have said, but with Innocent III,
that all laws do allow men to repel force by force; not with an intention to
revenge, but to defend themselves. C^p significasti.
Vim vi repellere omnia jura, legesque permittunt, non ad vindictam sumendam,
sed ad injuriam propulsandam. They follow Saint Thomas, when they say, that we
may sometimes repel injuries, in case we direct our intention to the good of
the injurer, to repress his insolence, and to conserve our own honor and
authority. 2.2. q. 72. art. 3.
Illatas contumelias nonnunquam repellere homo potest propter bonum illius qui
contumeliam infert, ad reprimendam illius audaciam, and ad tuendam suam
dignitatem and auctoritatem.

What then have the Jesuit Divines done in this matter? they have taught, that
a good intention, on these occasions, was so necessary, that, without it, men
may be guilty of great sins; and what has Pascal done? he has turned the thing
quite otherwise, in publishing, that the Jesuits made use of this direction of
intention, to excuse the most horrible of sins. The Jesuits have advertised,
that, in the most just defense, a man must take care, not to suffer himself to
be transported with passion, that he must have no other intention than that of
defending himself: and Pascal by falsifying and dismembring the writings of the
Jesuits, has given out, that they excuse the greatest crimes and violences,
provided men have but a good intention in their committal.

The Jesuits have taught, that in giving a spiritual good for a temporal (and
the business there is not of giving ready money for a benefice, but Prayers,
Masses, Foundations and such other things) one must, on these occasions, have
no intention of giving the temporal good, as the price of the spiritual; but
that one must have another intention, which is, to engage the person out of
gratitude, to Pray to God for him, to say Mass, etc. and Pascal upon this,
Prints without ceremony, or any more ado, that Valentia and Tanner had
succeeded admirably in justifying the traffic that is driven now a days for
benefices.

After he had reported what Father Bauni had said, to exclude from a contract
an Usurious intention, and had put into his Letter the good Fathers bad French,
in such a manner as was most proper to make men laugh and ridicule it; he makes
his Jesuit say, very insipidly: Usury consists, according to our Fathers,
almost in nothing but the intention of taking this profit as Usurious; and it
is for this reason, that our Father Escobar makes the sin of Usury to be
avoided by a plain simple turn of the intention. And at the same time he
reports, or rather cites the passage in Escobar, of which I have just now
spoken, and quotes it for a ridiculous decision; although it be impossible to
decide it otherwise without madness or extravagance. This then at last is the
great All they can make the direction of intention amount to, with which the
Society has been so much reproached. This wonderful principle in the Jesuits
Morals, the importance of which would make one almost, compare it to the
Doctrine of probability.

After all, we leave it to God to judge of Pascal's intention in his most
unjust and cruel persecution of the Jesuits. It is not impossible, but that he
might have had the same end and designs, and have been actuated with the same
kind of spirit, wherewith the Abbot of Saint Cyran, the Saint and Oracle of the
party, was at last found to have been inspired; who upon a time, confidently
said to the Abbot of Prieres; Information du process de l'Abbe de Saint Cyran.
That the Body of the Jesuits, as being mischievous to the Church, ought to be
entirely ruined: to which he further added, that it was God himself who
destroyed the Church; that the time for it is edification was past; that the
Bishops, Ecclesiastics, and Religious Persons, of the present age were,
generally speaking, destitute of the true spirit of Christianity, of the spirit
of Grace, and of the Church: that all the Religious of his Order, had they been
true Sons of Saint Bernard, would have spent their whole time in studying, how
to ruin School Divinity: that Saint Thomas himself had quite spoild the right
Science of Theology by human reasoning, etc. Oh how Devout and Edifying is all
this Learned Discourse? and what can you, or any one imagine, ought a man to
judge of a Sect or Party, whose Head or Founder thinks and talks at such a
rate? who yet notwithstanding, if their own words may be relied on, is not only
to be valued and esteemed, but also to pass for a zealous Christian, and a
perfect Saint?

OF Equivocations and Mental Reservations.
ONCE more, let us begin with Pascal's text in his ninth Letter, where the
Jesuit makes this following discourse. I would willingly now talk to you of the
easy methods we have found out, to avoid the sins people are apt to fall into
in conversation, and in the intrigues and transactions of the world. One of the
most troublesome things in these occasions, is, to avoid lying; and especially
when they would have a thing that is false believed to be true: for which
purpose, our doctrine of Equivocations is admirable: by which it is lawful, to
make use of ambiguous terms, to make them be understood in a different sense
from the speaker's own meaning, as Sanchez, op. mor. p. 2. l. 3. c. 6. n. 13. I
know that very well, Father, said I; we have published so much, continued he,
that, at last, all the world is sufficiently instructed in the matter. But do
you know, what must be done when equivocal words are not to be found? I do not,
said I; I questioned it very much, answered he, for the thing is new: it is the
doctrine of mental reservations, etc.

Oh how agreeable and diverting is all this! there is really nothing wanting
but truth to make it so. For if Pascal has not here made use of equivocations,
or mental reservations, he has ly'd, at least, three or four times, as shall be
soon perceived. This matter is not a little curious, and there are very few
people, that understand it, as it ought to be understood. I will collect and
put together all the strongest and best arguments, on both sides, that have
been made use of, upon this subject: for I will not in this matter adopt any
opinion for my own. I. d. a^ bus^ restrictmental. c. 12.
The author of the Provincial Letters is not the first, who has attacked the
Jesuits upon this article. Malderus, Bishop of Antwerp, cites and refutes a
book writ by a Calvinist, and Printed in the year 1609. Some articles of the
Jesuits doctrine and of some other Doctors of the Popish party.
entitled Articles de la Doctrine des Jesuits, and de quelques autres Docteurs
du parti du Pape; where this particular point is mentioned. But I do not intend
to draw from thence any advantage for the Society. My design, is, to examine
things in themselves without prejudice or prepossession; and only to make
appear how difficult it is to make a right choice in this matter.

1. Although equivocations and mental reservations are often confounded together,
there is, notwithstanding, a great deal of difference between the one and the
other. Every proposition that has more senses than one, is called Equivocal;
and that also which the speaker foresees the hearer will take in a different
sense or meaning from that which he gives it in his own mind. Such was the
answer of Abraham, when he told the Egyptians that Sara was his Sister;
foreseeing that they would take this word Sister in another signification, than
that which he himself gave it. It is called a mental reservation, when a
proposition, which, being literally taken, appears to be false, but being
restrained by something that I retain in my mind it is found to be true. A man,
for example, that is earnestly importuned by an other to lend him money, tells
him, I have none. This answer is false, but it would become true, if it were
joined with the words, to lend you, which he did not add.

2. There is no manner of doubt, but that, in these equivocations and
restrictions, there is something, which at first sight, appears opposite, or
contrary to sincerity and simplicity, or single heartedness; which often seems
to be very odd and unnatural; but after all, those, who are concerned in this
dispute, have a right to desire the reader to suspend his judgment for a few
moments, till he has examined the reasons on both sides; let us therefore grant
them this favor.

3. All Catholic Doctors unanimously agree, that it is never lawful to tell a
ly; and that a ly, being an ill thing of it is own nature, no reason, no cause,
nor any motive can possibly make it lawful.

4. This principle, once laid down and received of all as indubitable, has
occasioned many great difficulties in Divinity, as well in reference to
practice in some conjunctures, as on account of the exposition and meaning of
several passages in holy Scripture. Men are obliged on several occasions to
speak in a very particular manner, which manner of speaking seems hard to be
reconciled, or made consistent with sincerity. As to the Scripture, when God,
or the blessed Saints, or Angels do speak in it, it is not lawful to say, there
is any thing of a ly; and when it only reports the words of some persons
commended in it, and whom we are to esteem as great and eminent Servants of
God, it is also very hard to find in their sayings any thing contrary to truth.
Notwithstanding there are passages of both these kinds in Scripture, which have
been very difficult and puzzling to Interpreters, and cost even the Holy
Fathers, in all times, no small pains to explicate them aright.

5. These two sorts of difficulties, without which, in all appearance, none
would have ever thought of asking, whether the usage of equivocations and
mental reservations be lawful, were the cause, that many Divines, Interpreters
of the Scripture, Canonists of every School and every Country, have accounted
them, even necessary, on several occasions: but yet nevertheless, straitening
them within bounds much more narrow, than they commonly say, who, under this
pretense, have undertaken to decry and run down their adversaries. For all the
Doctors, who have handled this subject fully and at large, do not fail to show,
and point out, it is abuses, and to give their readers great cautions to beware
of them.

6. Since on one side these difficulties I speak of are the principal proofs of
those, who are for this custom, and that on the other, the consequences, which
it seems to draw after it, are the strongest arguments of those who are against
it: my main business in this discourse shall be, to oppose the one to the
other, and to consider and weigh them exactly, without dissembling, or
concealing any thing, that may raise the value, or give the advantage to either
side. In the next place, I will examine whether the Jesuit Sanchez, who is by
name and most strongly attacked upon this point be guilty; and whether his
accuser has done him justice or injustice. Here follow the chief reasons of
those, who absolutely condem the usage of equivocations and mental reservations.

First, they say, they are palliated lies, and the exposition alone, that is
made of the nature of equivocal propositions, either in general, or in
particular, in the examples brought, do show, that they are but subtilties,
invented on purpose, to persuade us, that men do not ly, when they speak most
expressly against their thought.

In the second place, the design and effect of the one and the other, is to
deceive and lead into error those we speak to.

In the third place, they tend to the destruction of civil society and human
conversation: for if he, that speaks to me, be persuaded, that equivocations
and reservations are not lies, how shall I know, that he does not actually make
use of them, even at the moment he seems to me to speak, with the greatest
sincerity and simplicity imaginable?

In the fourth place, the passages in Scripture, and in the Fathers which
inspire me with horror against double dealing, and make elogiums of the
contrary virtues, do visibly fight against double meaning words and answers;
which makes the man who hears me, take up quite different notions from what I
seem willing he should conceive. Infine, these subtilties are new, and
altogether unknown to the men of old. This is the sum, or precise account, of
all that can be said against equivocations and mental reservations. Let us now
see what is said to defend them.

And first, an infinite number of Divines and Canonists, who after much
meditation upon this matter, could not resolve absolutely to condem their usage,
do agree, that they are sensible of the force of these arguments; they would
yield to them with all their hearts, if they could find out some other better
secret, to avoid certain troubles and abundance of inconveniences, to which
human society would find it self exposed, in case that equivocations and mental
reservations were absolutely forbidden.

Besides that, they believe them founded upon the practice of Saints, on
occasions, wherein they are not condemned by the Scripture, nor by the
Ecclesiastical history, and where they are often defended by other Saints. Let
us begin with these last articles.

Among several examples in the old Testament, I will content my self at present
with that of Abraham. This Patriarch, obliged by famine to retire into Egypt,
Genesis ^^.
was afraid lest the King, or some of the Inhabitants of the country, charmed
with the beauty of Sara, should murder him, that they might marry her. To avoid
this danger he said to his Wife, the Egyptians, seeing your beauty will say,
this Woman is that Man's Wife, and they will kill me, that they may enjoy you:
say therefore, I conjure you, that you are my Sister. Dicturi sunt Vxor ipsius
est, and interficient me and te reservabunt; dic ergo, obsecro te, quod Soror
mea sis. The thing happened just as he had foreseen: being therefore questioned
upon the matter, both answered directly as they had agreed, and saved
themselves by the equivocation of the word Sister, which in that country had
two significations. Abraham found himself under the same circumstances and
trouble at Geraris in Palestine, and there behaved himself after the same
manner.

Isaac his Son, finding himself in the same place, in the same kind of danger,
on account of Rebecca his Wife, acted just as Abraham had done. Genesis 26.
Cumque interrogaretur a viris loci illius super uxore sua, respondit, soror
mea est. Timuerat enim confiteri quod sibi esset sociata conjugio, reputans ne
forte interficerent cum. The Son for this was neither punished, nor reprehended
by God, no more than the Father: both of them did the same things, at the time
that God promised them a numerous posterity: he also protects them in a
miraculous manner on these very occasions, where to avoid death, they lay hold
of means which are pretended to be so very unjust; and which must have been so,
contrary to the respect and to the obedience we ow to the Master of our lives;
so injurious to his goodness and to his power, upon which these holy men had so
much reason to depend.

Saint Austin, far from accusing, in this, these two Saints, takes their part
against a Reformer of his time. Faustus the Manichean. He maintains, that in
this rencounter Abraham did not lie, although he answered the question but by
halves, and not at all, according to the thoughts and expectations of those
that spoke to him: for, says he, Abraham, being asked, did not answer, that
Sara was not his Wife; but they enquiring what relation she had to him, he
answered, she was his Sister, but did not deny she was his Wife: he concealed
the truth, but did not say any thing that was false. Lib 22. cont. Faus^. c. 33.
Neque enim, utrum ejus uxor esset interrogatus, non esse respondit: sed cum ab
eo quaereretur, quid ei esset illa mulier, indicavit sororem, non negavit
uxorem. Tacuit aliquid very, non dixit aliquid falsi.

A little after he defends Isaac, as he had before defended Abraham. What evil
had he done in all that, said he, since he did but imitate his Father? the same
reasons defend him in the same kind of instance, wherein Abraham committed no
sin. The same holy Doctor speaks after the same manner, upon the same subject,
in several places of his works. But let us come to the examples of some
Christian Saints.

I will say nothing of the answer of Saint Francis, who being asked whether he
had not seen a man pass by, who was pursued for murder; answered, putting his
hand into his sleeve, He did not pass this way: perhaps that such nice men, as
I have to do with, would make little account of this, look upon it as an idle
story, and give little credit to the writers who report it.

The example of Saint Athanasius, who flying upon the Nile escaped, by an
answer like this, from the hands of those who were sent by Julian the Apostat
to seize him, is too well known to need to be here particularly mentioned. I
will tie my self to two others, which hitherto have been less spoken of: the
one, is, of Saint Paulinus, the other of Saint Fulgentius, both great admirers
of the doctrine of Saint Austin. Does not that, joined with the approbation,
which this holy Doctor himself has given to the conduct of Abraham and Isaac in
the instances I have brought down, make a very strong argument for the Divines,
especially when they defend themselves against men, who, every where, value
themselves upon being the Disciples of Saint Austin?

Saint Paulinus in a piece of Poetry, Natal. 5.
which he composed in honor of Saint Felix of Nola, tells us, that this Saint,
being upon the point of being arrested for a Christian by the heathens, who
were in quest of him, God by his miraculous power hindered them from knowing of
him; they asked himself, where they might find Felix. The Saint perceiving, by
this enquiry, the succor sent him by Jesus Christ, and the miracle he wrought
in his favor, answered them, laughing; I know not this Felix whom you seek for;
which made them pass him by, and proceed.

Persensit and ipse faventis Consilium Christi, ridensque rogantibus infit:
Nescio Felicem quem quaeritis. Illicet illi Praetereunt ipsum. It is not to be
doubted, but that, if Felix had told a ly upon this occasion, he would have
made a very scurvy return to the kindness our blessed Savior showed: but if he
did not tell a ly, what can we think, but that he had recourse to the
equivocation of the name of Felix, or to some mental reservation? it seems
otherwise impossible to save him from a ly.

But a plainer and more express equivocation, is not to be met with, Cap. 12.
than that of Saint Fulgentius: it is in his life, written by the Deacon
Ferrand, his Disciple, and dedicated to Bishop Felician, this Saint's Successor
in the Bishopric of Ruspa. This Deacon reports, that Saint Fulgentius, whilst a
Monk, having suffered great persecution in Africa, took a resolution to go and
visit the Solitarys or Hermits of Egypt, of whom he had heard wonderful
things: he took his way through Sicily, and landed at Syracuse; whereof Saint
Eulalius was Bishop; but without quitting entirely his Monastic profession. The
holy Prelat received Fulgentius into his Monastery, as he used to do other
strangers, whom he treated with great hospitality. He discovered in two
conferences he had with him, the extraordinary merit of this passenger, and
pressed him to tell him the causes that made him quit Africa.

Fulgentius, says the author of his life, apprehending he should be guilty of
vanity, if he should acknowledge the motive that made him go into Egypt,
answered him in these terms, I am going to seek my parents, who I hear are
traveling in that country: Parents meos requiro, quos illis in partibus
vivere peregrinos audivi. The Bishop, having some suspicion that he did not
speak sincerely, and half diving into the sense of this ambiguous answer,
learnt from another Monk, who those were whom Fulgentius meant by the word
parents; in so much that Saint Fulgentius, seeing himself discovered, was
obliged to confess the truth. But said the historian, he might truly call those
his parents, whose examples he intended to imitate.

If that be not a full and formal equivocation, there never was any: for Saint
Fulgentius seemed to take the word parents in it is ordinary signification, and
yet really intended by it those, who were to be his Fathers in Christ; and he
also gave to the word perregrinos, a sense as metaphorical as this was,
understanding that those he spoke of were travelers upon earth, advancing or
going on to the celestial country.

You see then, that Saint Austin approves the couduct of Abraham and Isaac, and
that Saint Paulinus does approve that of Saint Felix: you see also, what has
been practiced by Saint Athanasius, by Saint Felix himself and Saint
Fulgentius, which seems manifestly to authorize equivocations and mental
reservations: it appears to me, there needs little more to make a probable
opinion in this matter.

But the Divines, whose doctrine I here explain, do believe they have yet
something stronger to support it. They pretend, that the usage of reservations
and equivocations cannot, in prudence be absolutely condemned, without having
first seriously reflected upon certain places of the Gospel, where they seem to
be practiced.

What, say they, is this thing called equivocation? it is an ambiguous word,
that has several significations, or a proposition composed of ambiguous or
doubtful term's, which the speaker foresees ought to be taken by those, who
hear it in another sense or meaning, than he himself understands it in; of
which there are two plain examples in the Gospel.

In Saint John Cap. 11. the Son of God said to his Disciples: Lazarus our
friend sleeps, but I go that I may awake him out of sleep. It is evident,
that this is an equivocal proposition: it is also certain, that the Apostles
took it in it is natural signification. Lord, said they, if he sleeps, he shall
do well. It is also certain, that our Savior foresaw they would take it so.
Jesus, said the Gospel, spoke of his death, but they thought that he had spoken
of taking rest in sleep.

The second example, is taken out of the second chapter of the same Evangelist,
where our Lord said to the Jews, Destroy this Temple and I will build it up
again in three days. He spoke of his body, and the Jews thought, as naturally
enuff they might, that he spoke of the Temple of Jerusalem. It is very well
known, that our Savior had no ill intention in speaking after this manner; and
that what he aimed at, was not to deceive those he spoke to; but that signifies
nothing; for say the Divines we condem as a sin all equivocations, that may
possibly wrong any other person whatsoever, and all those whereby the speakers
have a design to deceive and surprise their hearers.

There are also found in the Gospel mental reservations, and that not made out
by arguments or by consequences, but such as appear, to every reader, formal
enuff and of themselves sufficiently evident.

In the seventh chapter of Saint John, The Brethren of Jesus said to him,
depart hence and go into Judea. Our Savior answers: Go ye up unto this feast;
but as for me, I will not go. Non ascendam: having so said, adds the
Evangelist, be abode still in Galilee; but when his Brethren were gone up, then
went he also up unto the feast, not openly, but as it were in secret. Non
manifest sed quasi in occulto. This proposition, Non ascendo ad diem festum
istum, considered precisely, according to the words, would be false, but by
adding to it this word manifest which our Savior had in his mind, it becomes
true.

I know what reflections were made by the Cretics upon this passage, because of
the variety of the Greek manuscripts; but I also know the invincible reasons by
which it is proved, that the reading of our Vulgata in this place, is certainly
the true reading. Here are also two other passages, wherewith I will end the
proofs which these Divines believe they may draw from the authority of
Scripture to confirm their opinion.

One is taken out of the thirteenth chapter of Saint Mark; where after our
Savior had made his Disciples a descriprion of the terrible things that should
happen at the day of Judgment, he adds, But of that day and of that hour
knows no man; no not the Angels which are in heaven, neither the Son; but the
Father only. We are notwithstanding, bound to believe, that the Son of God did
really know that day; and from the beginning the Agnoitae were accounted
heretics, for saying, that our Lord did not know it; and the Greeks called them
by that name, to show, that their error consisted, partly in attributing this
ignorance to the Son of God. The Arians would have made use of this passage
against the Catholics; but the Fathers refuted them with all the zeal and
strength that was possible.

This proposition, say the Divines, would then be false, if taken expressly
according to the terms: The Son of God knows neither the day nor the hour of
the last Judgment. It must needs follow by consequence, that the truth of this
very proposition depends upon a sense, that our Savior gives to these words,
and which is not expressed by the words themselves; that is to say, that in
speaking them, he had besides a particular meaning, or understood something
else, which was only in his own mind; and which therefore, conclude they, could
be nothing but a mental reservation.

But that which is remarkable is, that the Fathers, and particularly Saint
Austin, gives us, when he explains this passage, a form of mental reservations,
exactly like that which the Divines propose. Our Lord, according to Saint
Austin said, that he knew not, when the day of Judgment would be; not, that he
was really ignorant of it, but because he knew it, not to discover, or, as may
be said, to betray it, In Psalm. 9.
ad prodendum. Ipsi judici occultum esse dictum est, non ad cognoscendum, sed
ad prodendum.

Let us here set down the example, which is commonly made use of, to explain
what a mental reservation is; my Father's enemy is in quest of him to kill him,
he asks me where he is? I make answer, that I do not know; this answer, is
likewise false in it self, taking the terms or words, precisely as they stand;
but let us add to them, not by word of mouth, but only by thought, ad
prodendum, that is to say, I do not know where he is to betray him, and then it
becomes true, at least in the same manner, that Saint Austin finds our Savior's
proposition true.

Infine, continue these Divines, the passage in the fifth chapter of the book
of Tobit, appears inexplicable without an equivocation or a mental reservation;
and one needs do no more than read it to be convinced of that. Old Tobit there
demands of the Archangel Raphael, whence are you? Vnde te habemus? the Angel
answers, ex filijs Israel, I am an Israelite. After several questions Tobit
enquires again, Of what Tribe, and what family I pray art thou? The Angel
answers, do you not seek a guide for your Son? what signifies it to you, to
know my family? but that you may be freed from all fear, I will tell you, that
I am Azarias, ego sum Azarias Ananiae magni filius. Thou art, replied Tobit, of
an illustrious stock or family.

Mind how the Divines argue upon this place. In all these passages, where the
propositions, taken according to the terms and their natural meaning, are not
true, a man is obliged to acknowledge, that there is in them a ly, or an
equivocation, or a mental reservation. One cannot, without blasphemy,
acknowledge there is a ly; and therefore must admit, either an equivocation, or
a mental reservation: and thus, neither an equivocation, nor a mental
reservation, can in their own nature, be so ill, as a ly, and one may, with
some restrictions, or conditions, make use of them without sin.

These then are the authoritys and the difficultys, that at first made the
Divines suspend their judgment of a thing, which the first idea made them
reject; and which made them conclude after turning and tossing about this
question, and considering it on all sides, as much as was possible, that
equivocations and mental reservations could not be lys, nor things in
themselves absolutely ill: that there were conjunctures and occasions, wherein
they were not at all criminal, and that they were of the nature of certain
things, which ordinarily are bad, because of the circumstances, but which are
not bad in themselves, and which only become ill, by being made use of, without
necessity, and the lawful precautions. But, before I proceed to the other
ground or reason, upon which the Divines build their doctrine in this matter, it
is not amiss to see, what is said against it, by those who declare themselves
for the contrary opinion.

A very able man, in a work where he has collected and heaped up a great deal
of learning, has found a place for a dissertation concerning equivocations and
mental reservations, where he puts this proposition in the front of his
discourse. Mendacium omne lege divina retitum est, P. Alex. tom. 9. p. 3. Saec.
4. dissert. 43. page 483.
adeoque and restrictiones mentales, quae sunt very nominis mendacia. Every ly
is forbidden by the law of God; and by consequence, mental reservations, which
are real lies. And in the remaining part of the dissertation, he speaks of
equivocations, just as he had done before of reservations.

He proves his position, by a number of passages, out of the Scripture and the
Fathers; and infine he propounds many objections: among these objections are to
be seen part of the difficulties which I have set down; there are others also,
of which I have not spoken; but upon which I shall make some reflections, by way
of instance or replication, to the solutions by him given. Than which method,
nothing can better show the difficulty of the matter.

Father Alexander answers the Priscillianists very well, that Abraham did not
ly neither in Egypt, nor in Abimelech's house; and he grounds his answer upon
the authority of Saint Jerome and Saint Austin. But I would gladly know, what
answer he would make, if a Priscillianist, in case there still were any, should
make him this reply?

You say, that equivocations and mental reservations are lies; but it is
impossible to excuse Abraham from lying on this occasion, without saying he
made use of a mental reservation, or an equivocation; therefore according to
your principles, it must be confessed, that he told a ly: this Priscillianist
might thus prove the minor of his syllogism.

In the present question, we call a proposition equivocal, which has several
senses or meanings; and which we foresee will be taken by the person to whom we
speak, in another sense than that which we give it in our own mind, and which
notwithstanding is the most natural; especially when we make such a proposition
expressly and with intention, to hide from him the truth, which by his question
he is desirous to know. These are the characters by which an equivocation
appears most contrary to sincerity and comes nearest to a ly; but it is
visible, that all this agrees perfectly, with the answer made by Abraham in the
circumstances he was in, when asked whether Sara was his Wife; and he answered
she was his Sister; he therefore, on this occasion, made use of a very formal
equivocation.

But the way this Doctor maintained, according to Saint Austin, that Jacob did
not ly, when he robbed Esau of the blessing, designed for him by Isaac, would
give the Priscillianist a yet much greater advantage. Jacob makes three
propositions on this occasion, which can hardly be justified from being lies.
1. His Father, who was blind, inquires of him, Who are you my Son? Jacob makes
answer, I am your first born. Ego sum primogenitus tuus Esau. 2. He adds, I
have done as you commanded me. Feci sicut praecepisti mihi: although his Father
had said nothing to him. 3. Jacob continues, Eat of what I have hunted, my
Father, comede de venatione mea: although he had not been a hunting, and that what
he had prepared for him were two Kids, which his Mother had made him take out
of the flock.

1. Jacob did not ly, in saying I am Esau your first born Son, said Father
Alexander; for what reason? because Esau had before sold his birth right to
Jacob for a mess of lentils; and so Jacob in this sense might call himself the
elder. It must then be, says the Priscillianist, by virtue of the equivocation
in the word primogenitus, or first born, that he does not ly; but when he said
I am Esau. Ego sum Esau, this word is not in it self equivocal, and not showing
as the word primogenitus the right of eldership, nor the birth time, he must
needs in saying that, have made use of a mental reservation. I am Esau, not in
person, but by way of representation; not in reality, but by virtue of my
privilege.

2. For the second proposition, Feci sicut praecepisti mihi, I have done as you
commanded me. Father Alexander says, It is true, with respect to Isaac's first
intention, although it be not true with respect to another less principal
intention. For in commanding his eldest Son to go a hunting, Isaac's chief
intention was, to make him merit by this action his last blessing; but his less
principal intention, was to give this order to Esau, whom he believed his
eldest Son, being yet ignorant of the mystery and the design of God. So Jacob,
having performed his Fathers principal intention, said to him without a ly, I
have done what you commanded me.

The Priscillianist might make a great many reflections upon an explication so
confused, and so strained as this is; but Father Alexander could not, but
confess and agree with him, that the shifts, the several windings and turnings,
which they make Jacob take to secure his proposition from the falsehood which
appears in it, do, at least demonstrat, that if it be true, it is but with
relation to some meaning, which he gives it in his own mind, and not in
reference to the meaning, which offers it self, and naturally arises from the
words: it is easy to see, of what consequence this confession must be to the
present subject.

3. But as for these other words of Jacob, continues Father Alexander, Comede
de venatione mea, Eat of what I have hunted, they are altogether true, for
Jacob had brought two Kids, which he had sought for and chosen from among the
flock; and he understood by the word hunting or venison, the animals he himself
had taken, and his Mother had dressed.

Without making the Priscillianist argue any farther, I leave the reader to
judge of these answers, and I will only say with all respect to the person who
made them, that if I had undertaken, as he has done, to declare against
equivocations and mental reservations, I would, without ceremony, have
abandoned the opinion and explication of Saint Austin, Theodoret, and Saint
Gregory, and would with others have freely confessed, that Jacob was guilty of
several lies: or, if I would have followed the interpretations of these these
three Fathers, I would have acknowledged, on this occasion, with many other
Divines, that equivocations and mental reservations were not lies. Whoever
pitches on a middle way, will find it insupportable, not possible to be
maintained; and every body must allow, that to join his answers with his
assertion, is to say two things contradictory, to deny and to prove at the same
time, that the usage of equivocations and mental reservations is lawful.

It is the same thing as to the manner he takes to explain the Angel Raphaels
answer to Tobit. Ex filijs Israel. I am of the Children of Israel. This is
true, says Father Alexander, because be came from the Citys of the Children of
Israel, that is to say, of the faithful, whom God has given him in charge: or
because that Israel in Hebrew is the same thing with God governing.......
Raphael, adds this Father, said also truly, that he was Azarias the Son of the
great Ananias, because he had taken the shape and figure of Azarias, who was
the Son of this Ananias...... besides in Hebrew Azarias signifies the succor of
God and Ananias signifies the Grace of God. Moreover the Angels are the
Children of God, and Raphael being sent by God to succor Tobit in several
dangers he was like to fall into, and being an Angel, he might truly say, I am
Azarias the Son of great Ananias. And thus Father Alexander explains this
passage.

That all which was spoken by the Angel Raphael on this occasion might be truly
said, is not to be doubted, since it was an Angel that spoke in this manner;
but that all this could be truly said, without equivocations and mental
reservations, is hard to be conceived: for since these propositions are not
supposed true, but by giving them another meaning, than that which naturally
arises from them, and that they deceived him to whom they were spoken, and
could not but deceive any body that should hear them, they are not therefore
true, with respect to the words, of which they are compounded; but to make them
true, something else must be added, which was only in the thought of the
speaker, and by consequence, here is another argument for equivocation and
mental reservation.

It is also fit to add the explication, Tom. ^. Dissert. 39. p. 275.
which Father Alexander gives in another place, of that passage in Saint Marc,
of which I have already spoken. I answer, says he, in the third place, that our
Lord did not know the day of judgment for us, but for himself alone: that is to
say, that he really knew it, but that he did not know it, to tell it us.
Respondeo 3o Christum nescivisse diem judicij nobis non sibi. Id est, licet
absolute sciverit, nescivit tamen illum ut nobis ^evelaret. By all this, the
Divines, forced by these difficulties, to have recourse to the usage of
equivocations and mental reservations, for the explication of this matter, are
confirmed in their opinion, perceiving that those who oppose them, are
themselves, at last, obliged to do the same thing.

A Religious man of another Order, contending also against equivocations in a
work full of zeal, if you will believe himself, but which if read, will be found
full of bitterness and gaul, made use of another shift, or rather of other
terms than those of Father Alexander, to free himself from the same
difficulties and troubles. And particularly upon that passage in Saint Marc, he
says, that our Savior did truly affirm, that he knew not the day of judgment,
because he said, that in sensu praeciso and formali; in a formal and precise
sense; he did not know it, said he, in quartum erat purus homo, in as much as
he was a mere man.

Passing by this expression, which is altogether Nestorian, I would be glad to
know. 1. Whether the proposition, precisely taken, according to the terms or
words, be not false; The Son does not know the day of Judgment. 2. Whether it
does not become true, by these words, which express the formal and precise
sense, in as much as he was a pure man. 3. Whether it be not true, that these
words were in the Son of God's mind, and not in the proposition, when he made
it. If all this be true, these words spoken in a precise sense which they do
not express, make a clear and perfect mental refervation. For it must be
remembered, that by a mental reservation we understand a propolition, which
taken, according to the terms, is false, and which is not true, but with
reference to other words which the speaker reserves in his own mind. But all
this is here to be met with; all therefore, that this writer has done, is to
change the name of mental reservation into that of the formal and precise
sense. He argues much after the same manner upon the example of Jacob, upon
that of the Angel Raphael, and upon Judith's discourse to Holofernes.

But what is pleasant in all this is, that if once the formal and precise sense
be admitted, instead of equivocation and mental reservation, and that it is
allowed not to be bad in it self, to make use of the formal sense or meaning, I
may say of that, all that can be said of mental reservations and equivocations;
and draw from thence, all the same conclusions, true or false. I will say, it
is a piece of subtilty of the new morals, and that by favor of this formal and
precise meaning, all manner of lies shall be palliated. Every man may be
considered under several qualifications, or according to the School language,
has many formalities whereupon to ground a formal and precise meaning. For
example, when I speak to a Merchant, I do not know whether he will answer me as
he is a Merchant, or as an inhabitant of Paris, or as a Father, or as a man
precisely: the formal and precise sense being, at least, as well able to secure
us from lying as equivocation: I may be in doubt, whether he that speaks to me,
does not make use of it: And by this means all civil commerce, is over-turn'd;
there is no longer any thing in the world, but dissimulation and double
dealing; and we can have no more confidence in any person.

I do not pretend to make any comparison between this other writer and Father
Alexander, either for capacity or probity. That man's ill conduct did honor to
his opponents; he apostatis'd sometime after from his Order, and was afterward
arrested and made a close prisoner for other reasons than his mental
reservations.

But I dare positively say, that Ftaher Alexander's answers are no better than
his: that the principles of the one, go as far, as those of the other; that if
one may speak, after the same manner, that Jacob spoke to Isaac, without being
guilty of any sin; if one may, without a ly, call hunting or venison two Kids
presented to an old blind man; and say they came from hunting them down,
because they took them out of the flock; assure him in formal terms, that he
was the elder Brother, although he were but the youger; say I am Esau, I have done
what you commanded me, although he had received no order from him, and that he was
not Esau. I say, if all this was lawful for Jacob, and that he could do it
without a ly, and without sin, as Father Alexander teaches, because he gave to
the word elder to Esau and to hunting, other significations than Isaac by his
questions took them in, and which all men besides; give them I say, that this
reason will produce the same consequences, with that of the formal and precise
meaning; and that this principle being once laid down, it would be very
indifferent, whether they freed from lying and from sin, a man that should now
use the same conduct by virtue of a formal and precise sense or meaning, or by
virtue of equivocations or mental reservations, or any other name Father
Alexander shall be pleased to invent, to distinguish his own system from that
of other Divines. I will not at present carry this reflection farther, because
the subject will again oblige me to do it in another place. We will now go on
to the second foundation of the opinion, which holds it lawful, to make use of
equivocations and mental reservations, in some conjunctures: and these are
cases of conscience upon which the Divines consulted, found themselves under
some difficulties and trouble; it will be enuff to propose three or four of
them.

1. A man is entrusted with a secret of state, the discovery of which would
have no smaller consequences, than the ruin and destruction of the whole
Kingdom, the profanation of the Churches and Altars, and the total overthrow of
the true Religion; this person is interrogated by a spy, or by a traitor, whom
he knows to be such, and that he is besides a cunning skilful knave, of a deep
insight, and infinitely penetrating into things. The circumstances are such,
that if he seems to hesitat, boggle, or elude him; in a word, if he does not
clearly, and positively say, it is not so, there needs no more, to make this
traitor discover what he would conceal. What should a man thus catechis'd do?
on one side, he may not ly, tho the whole world were at stake; on the other,
the charity and the fidelity he ow's his Prince and his country, will not allow
him to expose them, by violating the secret to all the terrible evils wherewith
he sees them threatened. What side is he to take? he would willingly sacrifice
his blood, and a thousand lives, rather than betray them; but this is not now
the matter in hand.

2. A profligat, wicked, brutal, furious fellow, whose violence I am not in a
condition to stave off, is in quest of my Father to kill him, of my Sister to
dishonor her, of my Prince to give him up to his enemies. I am under the same
circumstances and the same troubles in this respect, that he was in I just now
spoke of, to whom the state secret was entrusted: if I do not boldly say, I
know nothing of them, or the person you seek for is not here, one of the three
sought for must be lost; what is to be done?

3. A man discovers the secret crime of another; if he does not retract, the
fortune, the honor, and the life of the man he has defamed is in danger: he
go's to Confession; his Confessor tells him, that he cannot be absolved, if he
does not remedy the evil he has caused: but the penitent answers, what I have
said, as secret as it is, is true, and if I should recall my words, I should be
guilty of a new sin, because I should tell a ly: what must he resolve?

4. Infine, nothing is more inviolable, than the secret of Sacramental
Confession: let us suppose a Confessor, questioned about the sin of his
penitent, in the same circumstance, or conjuncture, with those persons spoken
of, in the two first cases; that a cunning man, if you will have it so, should
have made him say certain things without thinking of 'em, and which he believed
indifferent: they are, notwithstanding, such, that being once spoken, they will
give ground to suspect the penitent: if the Confessor interrogated about this
matter, be at a stand, if he makes use of the general, and ordinary answers
upon these occasions; if he does not say plainly and positively, that he has
not told him such a sin, he increases the suspicion, and gives occasion to him,
that set the share, to pursue the matter. What shall the Confessor do in such a
case?

These cases then, I say, with many more of the like nature, and the difficulty
there is in solving them otherwise, have made the greatest number of Divines
say, that it is lawful, in some circumstances, to hide or disguise the truth by
equivocation, when men would have us speak it, who have no right to know it,
and when it is our own, or our neighbor's interest that they should not know
it. Let us now look back and join to this the passages and examples in
Scripture, of which I have spoken; the explications the Fathers have given of
them, the practice of many Saints, the opinion of some other Saints concerning
this practice, and infine, the manner of their answers, who accuse the Divines,
that maintain it; which is such, that, at the same time, they roar and cry out
lowdest against equivocations and mental reservations, they are
notwithstanding, forced to come back to them, and reestablish, under other
names, the things they had undertaken to abolish, and fall into the same
inconveniences, supposing there be any, wherewith they reproach them. I say,
supposing there be any, for the Divines, who have had recourse to these
principles, for the pressing reasons I have mentioned, have taken care to
prevent inconveniences, by the wise precautions they have prescribed or set
down upon this subject: and this is that which now I must needs explain in a
few words, to the end, men may have a full and perfect understanding of this
whole matter.

The remaining part, of the Treatise of Equivocations and Mental Reservations.
THE same charity and the same equity, that moved the Jesuits adversaries to
attribute to them the doctrine of probability, as their proper and peculiar
doctrine, and which had it is birth in their Schools, have also made them
answerable for the doctrine of equivocations and reservations. The falsehood of
this accusation, is a matter of fact, which might also be as easily made out,
as that which relates to the doctrine of probability: but it is sufficient in
general, to advance upon this point, that it can be readily shown, that all the
Jesuits have said upon this subject, always very different from what their
enemies have made them speak, is not only grounded upon all the reasons, and
all the authorities we have spoken of, but also upon the principles of the most
famous and the most ancient Lawyers, Canonists and Divines, of all the several
Schools. Let only that be read, which was written by the eminent Navarre before
any thing was published by the Jesuit Divines, what was taught by the most
renowned Doctors of Saint Thomas's School, as Saint Antonin, Sylvester,
Victoria, Medina, Ban. in 2 2 q. 69. a^. 2. in 3 P^com. dub. 1.
and above all, the famous Dominic Bannes, and it will appear, that what I say
is true.

But without entering farther into the examination of this matter of fact, we
must know, that the Divines, and others, who agree, that the usage of
equivocations and reservations, is a thing lawful in certain conjunctures, and
when there are sufficient reasons for it, are notwithstanding divided among
themselves, about that, which makes the difference between a ly, and a mental
reservation. I will explain this in the example of the penitents Confession and
his Confessor.

All do unanimously agree, that a Confessor, interrogated, whether his penitent
was guilty of such or such a sin, or had told it him in Confession (supposing
him in such a circumstance, as that he cannot otherwise keep the secret of
Confession) may in conscience answer, I do not know that he has; or, he told me
no such thing; although he had really told it him: and all agree, that then he did
not ly. In this case it is demanded, what does hinder it from being a ly,
considering, that the answer taken according to it is terms is false, and
contrary to the answerers own thoughts and knowledge.

Some pretend, that that which hinders this from being a ly, is precisely the
reservation, which the Confessor has at that time in his mind, where he has
this thought; he has not told me this sin, in such a way, as that I may tell it
again. This proposition, say they, is very true, and does not contradict what I
have said by word of mouth, which is one half on it. So there is no ly in this:
for a ly consists in the opposition there is between the thoughts and the words.

Others say, that this is too great a subtilty: that although the Confessor may
really have such a thought yet, notwithstanding, if he had nothing else, his
answer could not but be a ly: but that which hinders it from being so, is, that
the person to whom the Confessor makes this answer, he told me no such thing,
might and ought in prudence to think, that the sense of his answer is this: he
did not tell me such a sin in a way that I could tell it you. The proposition
he makes in saying, he did not tell it me, having then, morally speaking, this
sense in respect to him who puts the question, as well as with respect to him
who answers, is no ly. Whence it follows, that, as to the practice, it is the
same thing, which way soever you take it; and that all the dispute between
these Divines, is, but about this purely speculative question, to know, what
precisely it is, which frees such an answer from being a ly.

What I say of the Confessor, ought, in proportion, to be applied to the case
of an important secret; or to the case of a Judge, who should not interrogate
according to the forms of Law, or should do it without jurisdiction: and to
several other cases, upon which one might argue after the same manner.

The greater part of the Jesuit Divines, and among others, Azor and Laiman
follow the second opinion, which, in reality, appears the more reasonable, the
more natural, and the more conformable to simplicity: but which equally
concerns the purity of Morals neither more nor less, but just as much as the
other: of this opinion also, is Malderus, that learned Bishop of Antwerp in a
work of his, upon this subject.

Father Condren, that holy, and wise General of the Oratorians, propounds an
other system, not very unlike this: it is in a small writing of his, made upon
the question of equivocation, at the entreaty of Cardinal Richlieu, and, in all
appearance, upon occasion of the dispute, which then began to grow warm about
this matter.

He first lays down three principles. The first, says he, that a ly is a sin;
the other, that we must keep the secret we are entrusted with, and that to
betray it, is an infidelity, odious both to God and man. The third, that there
are truths, the knowledge of which, is hurtful to our neighbor, and sometimes
to the public, and sometimes to our selves, which charity obliges us not to
publish, although we should be required.

We ought, continues he, to inform our selves of the means God has left us, to
satisfy the obligations both of charity and fidelity, without falling into a
ly. Since it is certain, that a man can never be obliged to sin, and that, in
the ways of God, we have always the means not to offend him, which we ought
carefully to seek after.

The first means, is, to refuse to answer.... it is the most sincere, but not
the most universal, and sometimes that would be tacitly to declare, what we
ought to have hid.

The second, is, to answer readily one thing for another, as Saint Athanasius
did Julian the Emperors Soldiers, who sought to take him. But this means is not
universal, no more than the first: since that, etc.

The third, is, to conceal the truth, under some figure, of which the most
common are hyperboles, ironies, amphibologies, ambiguous or double meaning
words, antiphrases, or opposition of contrarys, and equivocations: for the
Doctors do agree, that there is no sin in speaking figuratively, which must be
understood, when a man makes use of the figures as he ought to do.

This prudent Director, reasons upon all this very wisely; and concludes, that
this third way, is not universal, nor less defective than the others: that it
is often useless, that it seems opposite to simplicity, or single-heartedness,
and that, in many circumstances, it would be criminal.

After he had rejected all these expedients, which had been invented to avoid
lying, he thus decides the question. The whole difficulty arises from men's
confounding a ly with a fiction, and their comprehending, under the name of
this odious sin,..... all the appearances that may be lawfully given, without
violating justice, charity, simplicity, or any other virtue, and which, in many
rencounters or accidents, are of obligation for conserving justice and the
precept of charity, which thus ordains.......

The holy Scriptures are full of such fictions, which we ought to reverence,
and cannot reprehend. But to the end no body should abuse this truth, some
rules are to be observed.

1. It is not lawful to feign, or give appearances to deceive any person,
unless it be for his good, or that one has a right to deceive him, or for a
lawful and innocent delight, or for some other just reason for his good. Thus
the Archangel Raphael feigned himself to be of the Tribe of Nephthali, and
endeavored to persuade Tobit even by words, by naming one Ananias for his
Father, although there was no such thing.

2. When Men have a right to deceive; thus Judith abused Holophernes and slew
him: Thus Jacob made his Father believe, that he was his first born, because he
was so by a right.

3. When it is for recreation, in time and place; for to make it just, it ought
not to be continual, but according to the necessity one is in, and that the
fiction is innocent. There are many other subjects, which give Men a right to
feign, wherein care must always be taken, that justice and charity be not
wounded, nor any other virtues.

Father Condren, after this puts himself some objections. To take away, says
he, all the the doubts that may arise, we must satisfactorily answer, or remove
two principal grounds, or arguments they have, who hold that all fiction in
words is a ly.

The first is, the holy Scripture, which absolutely condems lying; to which we
ought to answer, that the Scripture does not call just and reasonable fictions,
of which we have spoken, lies; nor ever blames them: but only such, as are
unlawful, and ordinarily contrary to justice, or charity, or some other virtue.

The second is, that every man is bound to speak truth to every man: which
ought to be understood, according to justice and charity, and as far as he is
capable and worthy to receive it, and that it does neither our selves, nor our
neighbors any wrong: for otherwise it is as little lawful, to discover a
hurtful truth to a Man, as to put a sword into a mad-man's hand.

There is, besides, a third argument: that our words are the natural signs of
our thoughts, and that by consequence, it is a sin against nature, when they
are not conformable to one another: it must be answered, that words are the
free and voluntary signs of our intentions, rather than of our thoughts, which
nature has given to man and submitted to his will to be made use of according
to right reason..... a man has a right, and even an obligation, to defend
himself, his honor and his fortune, and all that belongs to his neighbor, by
his words, as well as by his hands: in the same manner, as he is prohibited, or
forbid to hurt by word, as well as by action, etc. This is the whole of Father
Condren's doctrine, relating to the present subject, upon which these three
reflections may be made.

The first, that it clears and takes away an infinity of troubles, which occur
in practice and the commerce of life, for by thus distinguishing feigning from
lying, and reducing to lawful fiction all the propositions, and all the
answers, which have, for their end, the security and assurance of the rights of
justice, fidelity, and charity, a man is drawn out of, or freed from, pain, or
trouble: and all the reasons and difficulties, for which men had recourse to
equivocations and mental reservations, are quite removed and at an end.

For example, that a Confessor interrogated, about the sin of his penitent, a
subject about the secret of his Prince, a Son about the place where his father,
whom they would kill, is hid, may answer, that they know nothing of what is
demanded; or may say, the direct contrary to what they know: their answer will
not be a ly, but shall be reduced to a lawful fiction: and this fiction shall
be lawful, or unlawful, according to the circumstances a man is in at the
making of it; and pursuant to the obligation or right, which he may have, to
manage the interest of justice, fidelity, and charity, either in regard of his
neighbor, or himself.

But the second reflection, is, that this doctrine would give our reformers as
much occasion, at least, if not a great deal more, than the doctrine of
reservations and equivocations, to cry out against the relaxation of Morals:
for, on one side, this fiction does authorize and justify, all that is
authorized and justified by equivocations and reservations; and that without
being obliged to seek for any art or shift: and on the other side, as that
which makes a fiction lawful, according to Father Condren, is the right, and
even the obligation a man has to defend himself, his honor, his fortune, and
all that appertains to his neighbor, without which he confesses, that it would
be a real ly: so likewise does he acknowledge, and with truth, that those, who
approve most of equivocations, do own, That they ought not to be made use of
without good cause, nor for every purpose. And that the too great liberty of
such a practice would be a mere illusion, and a kind of double dealing, odious
to all men, of good sense and, even insupportable, and contrary to right
reason, and very often to the equity and justice we ow to one another,
sometimes to charity, and in a manner always to Christian simplicity; that it
would destroy public and private faith, and even human Society, and entirely
ruin sincerity, if this license had not it is laws, to bound and regulat it is
usage.

These are Father Condren's words, which are enuff to make the calumniators of
so many learned and holy Divines blush for shame, if they have never so little
left, but let that be how it will, it is evident, that, as for the practice, it
would be, at least, equal if not the same thing, which of the two systems be
pitched upon.

Infine, the third reflection is, that however easy, or useful, this hippothesis
of fictions, grounded, upon the authority of a man, so wise, and so holy, may
be; how reasonable soever it may appear; how ever proper it may be, for the
explication of several facts and passages of Scripture; and in a word, how
great soever a desire, men may have to follow it, for it is seeming conformity
to good sense; yet notwithstanding, it answers but one part of the difficulty,
and does not at all, satisfy that, for which the Divines believed themselves
bound to have recourse to equivocations and mental reservations.

The difficulty is, that according to Saint Austin, and after him, according to
all Divines, the essence of a ly, consists in a man's speaking contrary to his
thoughts: now this fiction, if one adds nothing more to it, does not hinder a
man from speaking contrary to his thoughts. For the Confessor, in saying his
Penitent did not kill such, or such a Man, the Minister of state in affirming,
that the King did not intend to besiege such or such a town, both the one and
the other think, and know at the same time, the direct contrary of what they
say. It therefore seems, that a fiction would be a perfect ly. For to take away
this evil quality the Divines, grounding themselves upon the examples,
authorities and important reasons we have seen, determined, or made choice of
the system of equivocations, and mental reservations: nor have they otherwise
given it a greater latitude, than Father Condren believed himself obliged to
give his system of fiction: for they did not fail to restrain theirs, as he has
done his, by exceptions, and by rules, which prevent all those inconveniences,
not possible to be avoided, without these modifications or restrictions,
whatever principles men lay down, or whatever side they take.

But the necessity of the system of equivocations, or of some other, which
comes to the same thing for the practice, being supposed and demonstrated, this
article of modifications, or manner of restraining it is usage, is essential for
the justification of Divines, and to point out and make palpable the the
exceeding malice of the author of the Provincial Letters.

To prove, that the Divines did not propose their doctrine but with these
restrictions, there is no need to stuff this writing with an infinite number of
plain formal passages, drawn out of their works, which I could very easily do;
it will be sufficient, that I may free the reader from the toil of so
troublesome a work, to repeat part of Father Condren's words, who had taken care
to read exactly the Divines upon this matter, before he returned an answer to
the desires of a Minister of state, so knowing in Divinity, and so clear
sighted and judicious, as Cardinal Richlieu was.

Those, says Father Condren, who most approve of equivocations, do confess,
that they ought not to be made use of without good cause, nor upon every
occasion; and that the too great liberty of their usage, was an illusion, a
mere cheat, and a kind of double dealing, odious to all men of good sense and
even insupportable and contrary to right reason, and to the justice which we ow
to one another, etc. Therefore without dwelling longer upon this matter of
fact, let us come to Pascal's dishonesty and insincerity.

The exposition alone, which I have made, of the difficulties and importance of
this question, as well as of the conduct of the Divines in their discussion or
examination of it, sufficiently show, how very frivolous the railleries of this
writer are: but to understand how criminal they are, we must consider the
manner, wherein he affects to propose this Doctrine.

Thomas Sanchez the Jesuit, who is, even at this day, for the canonical matters
he has treated of, the Oracle of Italy, Germany and Spain, and of England also,
is the Divine he has pitched upon, among others, to divert himself with upon
the subject of equivocations and mental reservations. I will here content my
self with comparing Pascals translation with the text of this Divine, without
much arguing, and with making only some short remarks upon it; see how Pascal
makes this pretended Jesuit speak, with whom, and at whose expense, he makes
himself sport in his ninth Letter.

I will now, said this good Father, acquaint you with the easy methods we have
found out, for avoiding Sins in conversations and in the intrigues of the
World.

Pascal, in this place, would have the World believe, that they are obligd to
the Jesuits for this fine secret of equivocations; and yet if he had read
Sanchez, he would have seen, that upon this article, he speaks according to the
opinion of, Number. 15.
almost all Doctors. Ex fere omnium mente.

One of the most troublesome things in this matter continues Pascal's Jesuit, is
to avoid lying, and especially, when one would have a thing that is false to be
believed true.

What an admirable fellow is this Pascal? Especially, says he, when a man would
have a false thing to be believed true. But Sanchez says expressly, that it
would be a sin in any man, to equivocat with design to deceive his neighbor,
and that when there is a just cause to make use of equivocations, the only end,
a man ought to have, is to conceal a truth, which for important reasons ought
not to be made known. Quoties adest justa causa his usendi equivocationibus,
animus utentis non debet esse ad fallendum proximum, sed ad occultandam
veritatem quam non expedit revelare. In so much, that if a man, making use of
an equivocation, to hide, for example, a secret of state, or a sin told in
Confession, should have any other end, or prospect, than, precisely that, and
should endeavor to deceive his neighbor, he would commit a sin.

And here comes in the distinction and direction of intention, which Saint
Austin himself teaches Divines, Cap. 2.
when in his book of lying, he says, that the malice of this sin, consists in
the desire, which a man has to deceive. Culpa mentientis est in enunciando
animo suo fallendi cupiditas, and that there is a great deal of difference
between lying, and hiding a truth. For, says the Father: although every man that
lies, would conceal the truth, yet notwithstanding, it is false to say, that
every man that would hide the truth does ly. L cont. mendac. cap. 10.
Non enim hoc est occultare veritatem quod est proferre mendacium; quamvis enim
omnis qui mentitur, velit celare quod verum est, non tamen omnis qui vult
celare quod verum est, mentitur. Sanchez then, does not allow, that a man
should make use of an equivocation, To make a false thing be believed true; but
according to Saint Austins opinion, To conceal a truth, which for important
reasons ought not to be made known. These are his own proper terms: let us
return to Pascal, who makes his Jesuit thus continue.

For which purpose, to wit, to make a false thing be believed true, our doctrine
of equivocations is of admirable use, by which as Sanchez says, it is lawful,
for a man to make use of ambiguous words, or doubtful expressions, to have them
understood in a different sense from that wherein he himself understands them.

By Pascal's good leave, Sanchez did not say, that this was lawful, he only
said, that this was no ly, and he proves it very well. Quoties verba sunt sua
significatione ambigua, pluresque sensus admittentia, nullum est mendacium ea
proferre in sensu, Number. 13.
quem proferens in illis vult and concipit But by the principles of Sanchez,
there is a great deal of difference between these two propositions, that it is
not a ly, and that it is not a sin: for although it be not a ly, yet according to
his opinion, it would be a sin to equivocate without just reason. Quarta regula
sit etc.
It is not at all lawful, said he, to make use of ambiguous, or double-meaning
words, even of those which have this ambiguity in ordinary and common usage, at
least, unless there be a lawful cause to give us a right to do it. And this is
a rule, which he establishes expressly, to prevent the abuse of equivocations,
because, said he, that the commerce of life requires the avoiding ambiguities.
Hoc enim victus communis hominum postulat. Compare but these two texts. Nullum
est mendacium, it is no ly. Nullo modo licet uti verbis ambiguis nisi, etc. it
is by no means lawful to make use of doubtful words, except etc. With this
translation of Pascal. It is lawful to make use of doubtful words, and tell me
what sincerity there is in such a proceeding? it is, as if a Casuist had said
in latin, that a man may without lying, discover the secret crime of his
neighbor, but that it is not lawful to do it, but in some cases; and that
Pascal should make him say absolutely and without restriction, That it is
lawful, and that a man may, without sin, reveal the secret crime of his
neighbor.

This maxim, That it is lawful for a man to make use of ambiguous terms, that
they may be understood in any other sense than he himself understands them:
thus propounded in an indefinit manner, as Pascal proposes and attributes it to
Sanchez, is false, and very much to be condemned: whereas being restrained, by
the most wise rule, and the exceptions which I have related, it is a doctrine
very common among Divines; and in practice, contains nothing contrary to
public good, nor more prejudicial to human Society, than all the other systems
men are obliged to invent, to remedy the inconveniences to which a Man may be
often exposed, if he had no way to hide a truth. What difference is there then,
between the opinion of Sanchez, and the idea Pascal has left of it in the minds
of his readers?

This Divine treats of mental reservations with the same precautions he had set
down in his doctrine of equivocations: and Pascal is again guilty of such an
other falfification as I have already observed, when he makes him speak these
following words. A man may swear, he has not done a thing, although he had
effectually done it, by understanding, or meaning that he had not done it on a
certain day or, etc.

Sanchez, in this place, does only teach with Angelus, Sylvester and Navar whom
he quotes, and with many others who were not Jesuits, not that a man might
absolutely do it, but only, that he might, Without a ly, make use of these
restrictions, when he has good and juct reasons for it: and at the same time he
proves, that without such reasons, it cannot be done without sin: Although it be
not a ly, says he numb. 16. by which the negative precept, that forbids lying
is violated, it is notwithstanding a sin of omission, against the affirmative
precept, that commands us to speak truth: the common good of civil Society,
obliging us to answer positively to the matter we are questioned about, unless
he that is interrogated have a right, for some just cause, not to discover the
truth in question. But he proves, that, in such a case, a man may conceal it
without a ly: and he proves it by the Scripture examples which I have lately
mentioned, and of which Father Condren makes use, to establish his system of
fiction: by the example of the Angel Raphael, speaking to Tobit, by that of
Judith to Holofernes, and by that of our Savior, who told his brethren, that he
would not go to Jerusalem, etc. to which Sanchez add's, that, even when there
is a just cause of acting in this manner, if a man does it with an intention,
or prospect of deceiving his neighbor, he is guilty of the mortal sin of
perjury. Re been inspecta est mortale perjurium.

The dishonesty and infidelity of the author of the Provincial Letters, is not
only sufficiently seen by the little I have quoted out of Sanchez, but also,
that one ought not to judge in this matter, of the doctrine of some Jesuits, and
so many other Divines, by certain propositions, detached or drawn out from the
text, on purpose: because he was sensible, that being thus separated from their
restrictions, they had in them, something paradoxical, and shocking to those,
who know not, or do not examine things to the bottom. How many were scandalized
at the doctrine of equivocations, because that these two propositions were
confounded together: An equivocation is not a ly, and an equivocation is not a
sin, and they were confounded upon the false prejudice taken up; that an
equivocation could not be a sin, but because it was a ly; and yet the first
proposition, That it is not a ly, is at least, highly probable; and the second,
That it is not a sin, is sometimes true, and sometimes false, according to the
different circumstances, wherein an equivocation is made use of. It is almost
the same thing in the case of mental reservations: for by distinguishing as I
have done, the question in reference to pure speculation, and in reference to
practice, there will hardly be any ground to differ, or argue farther upon the
matter.

But how many People, for want of attention and reflection, divided the names of
pure morals, and loose morals upon this subject, between the opinions they
believe opposite to one another, and which yet in the bottom are really the
same? a Jesuit, out of his respect and adherence to the opinion of Saint
Austin, frees Jacob's saying to Isaac from being a ly. Ego sum primogenitus
Esau. I am Esau your first born Son, and the other things which follow: this is
well enuff liked; but because he adds, that these words cannot be excused from
being a ly, but by having recourse to equivocations and mental reservations,
there needs no more to run down this Jesuit, and to publish him every where an
abettor, or follower of loose Morals

And yet on the contrary, Father Alexander passes for orthodox, and a Divine of
severe Morals: and for what reason? only because that in his dissertation he
declares aloud against equivocations and mental reservations. But by thus
declaring himself, how does he save Jacob from lying? this is done, says he, in
that by answering his Father, that he was Esau, not in person, but by a kind of
representation; that he was the elder, not by birth, but by a right purchased
with a mess of Lentils. Where, I pray, is the difference between Father
Alexander and the Jesuit; unless it be, that the Jesuit gives things their
proper names; that he calls a spade a spade; the most formal equivocations,
equivocations; and the most manifest plain, mental reservations, mental
reservations: and that Father Alexander, in attacking these equivocations and
reservations, does authorize them the most openly, that is possible, by only
taking from them, a name, against which it is the mode or fashion of the
present age, to declaim with noise and vehemence?

But since they began to argue upon this question, which is pretended so
important to Morals, it is very strange and surprising, that among so many
Persons, who have declared themselves against equivocations, there should not
be any one found, whose Zeal had produced a work, able to give satisfaction in
the matter; wherein the true state of the question should be fully proposed,
all the difficulties of the different hypothesis, explained and cleared, all
the disputes about words, avoided, the matter of pure speculation distinguished
from that, which relates to practice, the reasons, on both sides in their full
force impartially set down, in order to their being exactly weighed and
considered; and infine, where nothing should be done out of prejudice, nor by
aversion to, nor obstinacy for, either party.

I dare not flatter my self, that my dissertation has all these qualities; but
it may give occasion to a more able and more knowing person than I, to write
one, wherein all may be found. I am, at least persuaded, that I have made a
scheme, exact enuff, of this matter, and I think the whole may be reduced to
this precise account.

1. An equivocation, is here called, a proposition, that has several senses, or
meanings, and which he that speaks, understands in a sense, which he foresees
his hearer will not take it in: and a mental reservation, is a proposition,
which taken according to the words is false, and cannot be true, but by joining
to it some other thing, which is in the speakers thoughts, but not exposed in
the proposition. The question is, whether one may without lying, and without
sin, make use of an equivocation: or mental reservation thus defined?

2. Not whether it may be done commonly and upon every occasion; all the World
agrees, that it cannot: and that whenever Religion, Justice, or Charity are
concerned, they cannot be made use of without sin: and that even, when the
interest of these capital virtues is secure, it cannot be done, without just
and considerable reasons; that practice being contrary to Christian Simplicity,
so long as an important reason does not prevail, and take away from
equivocation and reservation the character of double-dealing.

3. It must likewise be examined, whether the examples and passages of
Scripture, which are usually proposed in this matter, do not contain great
difficulties.

4. whether in the explication of these passages, Saint Austin in particular,
without mentioning other Fathers, did not make use of the Doctrine of
equivocations and mental reservations: or at least, whether his exposition does
not suppose it.

5. What can be answered to the practice of Saint Athanasius, Saint Fulgentius
and Saint Felix of Nola, etc.

6. Whether the Case of the Confessor, the state secret, the secret of natural
affection and duty, and of a criminal interrogated by a Judge with
jurisdiction, and such others, can be decided, without recuring to
equivocations and reservations.

7. Whether being once supposed certain by the decision of these cases, and by
the other reasons which support the system of equivocations, that they are not,
as lies, bad in their own nature; whether, I say, this being supposed, I may
not make use of them, when I am concerned, to keep a truth secret, which my
neighbors interest or my own, when just and lawful, obliges me to conceal: and
whether the rule, which Father Condren gives, in his system of fiction, may not
take place in this of equivocations: That a man has a right, and even an
obligation, to defend himself, his honor and his fortune, and all that
appertains to his neighbor, by his words, as well as by his hands.

8, Infine, whether the different systems, upon this matter, do not come to one
and the same thing as to practice; whether, that of the fiction, by Father
Condren, or those of the figures, hyperboles, ironies, and of the Formal and
precise sense, or meaning, are not subject to the same inconveniences, as that
of equivocations, be not as susceptible of the same precautions and
restrictions, as the others: and whether, really, the Divines, who maintain it,
do not employ, or prescribe these precautions and restrictions: and whether, in
comparing all these systems together, any other difference can be found, but
that which consists in the terms or expressions.

I do at least, believe, that the exposition I have made, of the difficulties
in this matter, and of the troubles the Divines find themselves in, whatever
side they turn themselves to, will convince all persons of equity, that
abundance of men, in the world, often speak confidently, of the things they
least understand: and that, if a man should ask many the sense and state of
some certain questions, upon which they railly, or pronounce most positively,
he would very much confound them.

It was no small piece of skill, or cunning in Pascal, not to wade too far into
matters; and to make things be looked upon but on some sides, which were sure
to have all the effect he designed in the minds of his readers: men would not
have laughed nor seemed delighted if he had discovered the rest to them.

But does not this artifice, and this superficial manner of handling the most
difficult questions of Divinity, joined to so many other prejudices. give a
right to the Divines Pascal has attacked, to make use of the words of Saint
Austin, upon a like occasion? when the question is, said he, to clear the
doctrine of some books, it is the greatest rashness and imprudence imaginable,
to consult those, who for some certain causes, have declared a mortal war
against the authors of those books: Nihil est profecto temeritatis before....
quam.... librorum sententiam requirere ab his qui conditoribus illorum atque
auctoribus acerbum, nescio qua cogente crusa, bellum indixerunt. Aug. lib. de
utilitane credendi. cap. 6.

And may they not also add, these other words, which the same Saint spoke to
the Manicheans of his time: who to have the pleasure to ridicule, and inveigh
against Catholics, attributed to 'em extravagant opinions? do no longer deceive
your selves, said he to them... all the grave and eloquent invectives you make
against such fooleries concern not us, those impertinent opinions which you
attack, with equal vehemence, and childishness are not, at all, our opinions:
those who upon account of these satyrs, go over and embrace your side, do not
condem our morals; but only discover their own ignorance, and demonstrate that
they do not know what our doctrine is. L. 1. de moribus Eccl. Cathol. cap. X.
Definite errare.... in has enim and in hujusmodi nugas graviter copioseque
invehi soletis, quare nos invectio vestra non tangit; sed aniles quasdam vel
etiam pueriles opiniones eo inepitore, quo vehementiore oratione percellitis:
qua quisquis movetur, and ad vos transit, non Ecclesiae nostrae damnat
disciplinam, sed eam se ignorare demonstrat.

Sperastis in calumnia, and tumultu, and innixi estis super eo.

You have put your trust in calumnies, and built your hopes upon the noise and
tumult, wherewith you have pread and published them. Isaiae. 30.

OUR holy Father Innocent XI, when, by his Decree of the second of March 1679,
he condemned and prohibited to be taught several propositions, relating to
Morals, did declare, that they are prohibited, sicut jacent, that is to say,
taken according to the terms, or words, without reference to the author's
books, from whence they might be drawn, whether they have, there, a good or an
ill meaning. Whereupon the publisher of these Discourses thinks himself bound,
to remark to the Reader; that, if in these, he has given a favorable
interpretation to any one of those propositions, for example, to that of
Vasquez concerning Alms, it was never done, taking them as they ly, sicut
jacent, couched, or expressed in words, but only with reference to the Divine's
text, which qualifies them. On the contrary, he does protest, out of the
respect which he has for the holy See, that he does condem all those
propositions, condemned, whatever the subject matter be; sicut jacent, according
to the order and intention of our holy Father the Pope.

FINIS.

