DOUBLE OF THE CONTRACT Betwixt the Lord Cochran, etc. And the Town of Pasley.
AT Pasley the third day of May the year of God one thousand six hundred and
fifty eight years: It is appointed, contracted, concorded, and finally agreed,
betwixt the Parties following; They are to say; The right Noble Lord, William
Lord Cochran of Pasley, and Dundonald, and William Master of Cochran his eldest
Son lawful, both with one Consent and Assent on the one part: And William
Greenlies and John Park Merchants, present Baillies of the Burgh of Pasley,
William Love Thesaurer of the said Burgh and Counselors thereof
undersubscribing for themselves, and taking the Burden upon them for the
Community of the said Burgh of Pasley, on the other part, in Manner, Form and
Effect as after follows, that is to say, (...) of Pasley, with consent of the
Convent of the Abbacy thereof for the Time, having of old given and granted to
the Baillies, Council, Community and Indwellers of the said Burgh of Pasley,
certain Freedoms, privileges, Liberties and Immunities, with and adjoined to
the said Burgh of Pasley, and contained in the Charter of the Erection of the
samen; And the said Noble Lord, William Lord Cochran, now Lord of the Erection
of Pasley, and William Mr. of Cochran his eldest Son lawful, being most
careful, that not only the haill former Freedoms, Privileges Liberties and
Immunities of old, granted and conferred in favors of the said Burgh of Pasley
be kept and preserved whole, firm and entire to them: But also being most
willing for the better thryving and Flourishing of the said Burgh, to
Corroborat, Strengthen and Augment the samen in manner after-mentioned; And
therefore they the said William Lord Cochran, and William Master of Cochran his
eldest Son lawful, for diverse and sundry Respects good Causes and
Considerations moving them hereunto, and for certain Sums of Money paid, and
delivered to them by the said present Baillies and Council of the said Burgh
of Pasley, and their said Thesaurer wherewith the said William Lord Cochran,
and William Master of Cochran his Son grants them satisfied, discharging them
thereof for ever; Have renounced, dimitted and over-given, and hereby renounce,
dimit and overgive frae them, the said William Lord Cochran, and William Master
of Cochran his Son, their Heirs Successors and Assigneys, all Right of the
Superiority of the said Burgh of Pasley within the Bounds thereof
after-menttioned, to the effect and intent the foresaid Burgh of Pasley,
Freedoms, Liberties and Privileges of the samen, in all time coming may be
holden of his Highness, the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland and Ireland,, and Dominions thereunto belonging, and his Highness
Successors Superiors thereof; Likeas the said William Lord Cochran, and
Williliam Master of Cochran his Son lawful, both with one Consent and Assent as
said is, be the Tenor hereof, Renounce, Quite-claim, Discharge, Dispone and
Overgive frae them and their foresaids, to and in favors of the said
Baillies, Council, Community, Thesaurer and Inhabitants of the said Burgh of
Pasley, and their Successors, all Right of Property and Magistracy of the said
Burgh of Pasley, and Election of the Baillies, Council, Clerk, Burgesses,
Officers and other Members thereof, in all time coming, and of the Tenements,
Lands and others, within the same Burgh and Lands of Seedhill annexed thereto,
within the Bounds after-mentioned, and Territory of the samen (except the
Millns called the Seedhill Millns, Corn, Kilns thereof, Milln-Hills, or
Shilling-Hills of the samen, and Thirled and Astricted Moultures of the said
Burgh of Pasley, and Knaveship thereof according to use and wont, and of the
Lands after-mentioned within the Territory thereof, to the effect they the
said Baillies, Council and Community of the said Burgh, and their Successors,
may bruik, enjoy and possess the samen, conform to their respective Titles
thereof, and may be in Capacity and power to Elect, Choice, Change and continue
their own Magistrates, Baillies, Council, Thesaurer, Clerk, Burgesses, Officers
and all other Members necessary and usual within the said Burgh, as they shall
think convenient: And in like manner they the said William Lord Cochran, and
William Master of Cochran his Son, both with ane Consent and Assent as said is,
for them and their foresaids, hereby sell, dispone, renounce, assign and
overgive frae them and their foresaids, to and in favors of the said
Baillies, Council, Thesaurer and Community of the said Burgh of Pasley, and
their Successors for the public use of the said Burgh, all and sundry the
Feu-duties of old addebted, oblisht and usual to be paid to the Abbot and
Convent of the said sometime Abbacie of Pasley, and sensyne to the Lords of the
Erection of Pasley, and their Factors and Chamberlains forth of and for the
said Burgh of Pasley, Houses, Biggings, Yards, Tenements, Aikers, Teinds and
parcels of Land thereof westward frae the east end of the Bridge of Pasley, and
Mustard yard dyke, including and comprehending the Lands of Calsisyde, Orchard,
Bladoyard, Snaddon, Huthead, Hillhead, Welmeadow, Broomlands and others within
the Bounds, Territory and Limits of the said Burgh of Pasley, Property and
Commontie of the samen (excluding the Feu-duties of the Lands called
Oxshaw-wood and Wardmeadow, whilk are no ways comprehended in this present
Disposition and Assignation above-written: To the Effect and Intent, that the
said Baillies, Council, Thesaurer and Community of the said Burgh and their
Successors, may hereby have full Right and power as by the Tenor hereof, the
said William Lord Cochran, and William Master of Cochran his Son for them and
their foresaids, now Give, Grant and Commit to them the said Baillies,
Council, Thesaurer and Community of the said Burgh, and their Successors, their
full Right and power to collect, gather, uplift and receive, all and sundry the
said Feu-duties of the said Burgh of Pasley, Houses, Biggings, Yards,
Tenements, Aikers, Roods and parcels of Lands thereof, within the Bounds
abovementioned, Including and Comprehending as is above included and
comprehended, and excepting and secluding, as is above excepted and secluded of
the Cropped and year of God one thousand six hundred fifty eight years instant;
Both Whitsunday and Martinmas Terms of the same, and yearly and termly in all
time coming. And to employ and bestow the samen to the public and common use
and good of the said Burgh, Emolument and Profit thereof, and giff need beis to
call, follow and pursue therefore, Decreets, Sentences, Precepts and
Executorials thereupon, to obtain, raise, use and cause put to Execution, and
to give Discharges thereof, and to do every other thing needful thereanent, as
the said William Lord Cochran or either of them, or their foresaids might have
done, giff they had not made their presents: And moreover the said William Lord
Cochran, and William Master of Cochran his Son, both with one Consent and
Assent, for them and their foresaids, Hereby ratify and approve to them, the
said Baillies, Thesaurer, Council and Community of the said Burgh of Pasley,
and their Successors for ever, their former and accustomed Privileges and
Liberties of that part of the Moss of Pasley, which is bounded betwixt the
Marches of Ferguslie and Merksworth, conform to their former Right and Title
thereof and Possession used and wont; And by their presents, they the said
William Lord Cochran, and William Master of Cochran his Son, both with one
Consent and Assent for them and their foresaids, Renounce, Dispone and overgive
frae them and their foresaids, in favors of the said Baillies, Thesaurer,
Council and Community of the said Burgh of Pasley, and their Successors, all
Right, Title, and Interest, whilk they the said William Lord Cochran, William
Master of Cochran his Son, or either of them, or their foresaids, had, have, or
can pretend to that part foresaid, of the said Moss of Pasley, betwixt the said
Matches of Ferguslie and Merksworth, made or to be made, to the effect that the
said Baillies, Thesaurer, Council and Community, and their Successors may
bruik, enjoy, and possess the samen in all time-coming, conform to their said
Rights thereof Title and Possession used and wont; And of the whilk Right of
Superiority above-written of the said Burgh of Pasley, within the Bounds above
specified, including and comprehending, as is above included and comprehended,
and excepting and secluding as is above-excepted and secluded; The said William
Lord Cochran, and WIlliam Master of Cochran his Son, bind and oblige them and
their foresaids, to formally and legally divest themselves in the Hands of His
said Highness the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and
Ireland, and Dominions thereunto belonging, and his Successors, or their
Commissioners of Exchequer in this Nation, ad perpetuam remanentiam, to the
effect the said Superiority may conform to the Laws and Statutes of this
Nation, be consolidat in the person and favors of His said Higness, and his
Successors for ever. And sicklike, the said William Lord Cochran, and William
Master of Cochran his Son, hereby bind and oblige them, and ilk one of them,
conjunctly and severally, and their foresaids, by all legal and lawful means,
to divest and denude themselves, and their foresaids of the said Property of
the said Burgh of Pasley, and Magistracy thereof, and Election of the said
Baillies, Clerk, Burgesses, Officers, and all other Members thereof, and of all
Right that they or their foresaids can or may in time-coming claim or pretend
thereto, and to the Tenements, Lands and others foresaids, within the said
Burgh, including and comprehending as is above included and comprehended, and
excepting and secluding as is above excepted and secluded, to the effect and
intent abovespecified, and to the said Feu-duties of old addedbted and due to
the said Abbot and Convent of the said sometime Abbacey of Pasley, and sensyne
to the said Lords of Erection of Pasley, and payable to them forth of the said
Burgh of Pasley, Houses, Biggins, Yards, Tenements, Aikers, and parcels of
Lands thereof within the Territory of the samine, and Bounds abovementioned,
including and comprehending as is above included and comprehended, and
excepting and secluding as is above excepted and secluded, to the effect and
intent above exprimed, and of all Right Title or Interest foresaid, whilk the
said William Lord Cochran, William Master of Cochran his Son, and their
foresaids had, have, or can pretend to that part foresaid of the Moss of
Pasley, bewixt the Marches foresaid of Fergusly and Merksworth, made or to be
made, in manner above-specified, to the effect and intent above contained, by
resignation of the samine in the hands of his said Higness the Lord protector
of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, and Dominions thereunto
belonging, or his highness Successors, Superiors thereof, or their said
Commissioners of Exchequer, in favors of the said Baillies, Council, and
Community of the said Burgh of Pasley and their Successors, and for new
Infeftment to be made, given and granted to them thereof, to be holden by them,
from the said William Lord Cochran, William Master of Cochran his Son, and
their foresaids, Of the said Lord Protector, and his Highness Successors, in
all time coming, in free Blench, for payment of an Scots penny yearly at the
feast of Whitsunday, at the Mercat Cross of the said Burgh, in name of Blench
Ferm, giff it beis asked, allenerly, and sicklike, for payment yearly to his
said Highness, and his Successors of the Sum of Seven pounds good and usual
Scots Money, as an proportional part of the Blench-duty of the said erected
Lordship of Pasley, for the said William Lord Cochran, his said Son, and their
foresaids, their Relief of the said Blench-duty of the said Erected Lordship of
Pasley, pro tante, Or by payment thereof, to the said William Lord Cochran,
William Master of Cochran his Son, and their foresaids, to be employed, and
applied by them, for their own Relief of the samen, at the Option of the said
Baillies and Council of Pasley, and their Thesaurer and Successors. And with
special Clause of Warrandice, of the Infeftment foresaid. Likeas now, as give
the samen Infeftment were made and perfected, and then as now. The said William
Lord Cochran, and William Master of Cochran his Son, hereby bind and oblige
them, conjunctly and severally, and their foresaids, to Warrant, Acquit, and
defend to the said Baillies and Council, and Community of the Burgh of Pasley,
and their Successors and Thesaurer, the Premises above disponed, Assigned and
Ratified to them, als freely and quietly, in, and be all things, as is
abovementioned, from them the said William Lord Cochran, and William Master of
Cochran his Son, and their foresaids, their own proper Facts and Deeds
allenarly. That is to say, that they, nor any of them, nor their foresaids have
not done, nor shall not do any Fact or Deed, in hurt and prejudice of the
Premises, in any sort. And moreover the said Williliam Lord Cochran, and
William Master of Cochran his Son, hereby also bind and oblige them, and ilk
ane of them, and their foresaids, that they or any of them in the purchase of
their new Signature and Infeftment of the said erected Lordship of Pasley,
shall either cause to be Excepted, Reserved and expunged the haill Privileges,
Liberties and Feu-duties, and others above-disponed above assigned, and
above-ratified by them to the said Baillies, Council, and Community of the
said Burgh of Pasley, and their Successors, give they the said Baillies, and
Council of Pasley, and their Successors, shall find the same Conducing, for
their Security: Or otherwise, the Inserting, and not excepting, reserving and
expunging thereof forth of the said Signature and Infeftment, shall no ways
derogat any thing from this abovewritten Security, nor extenaut, nor weaken the
same, but to the contrair, shall be in Fortification and Corroboration hereof.
And shall be an Supervenient Right to them, The said Baillies, Council and
Community of the said Burgh of Pasley, and their Successors, for that effect.
And the said William Lord Cochran, his said Son, and their foresaids, are, and
shall be further bound and oblidged hereby, for the further Strengthening and
Securing of the Premises to the said Baillies, Council and community of the
said Burgh of Pasley, and their Successors, in all time coming, That the said
William Lord Cochran his Son, nor their foresaids, shall not purchase, in hurt
or prejudice of this abovewritten Security, Any new Gifts or Donation of the
Premises Above-assigned, Disponed and Ratified. But to the contrair, shall not
only abstain therefrae, Or giff any such Gift or Donation shall be so purchased
by them, or to their behoof, The same shall Acresce, and be also Supervenient
to the said Baillies, Council and Community of the said Burgh of Pasley, and
their Successors? and shall be Transferred in their favors, in so far as may
secure the Premises to them. And it is provided, and declared hereby, That
this present abovewritten Security of the Feu-duties foresaids, made and
granted by the said William Lord Cochran, and his said Son, to the said
Baillies, Council and Community of the said Burgh of Pasley, and the
Successors, shall be upon, and with special Condition, That notwithstanding of
the Premises, the samen Feu-duties shall be Redeemable, to his Highness, the
Lord Protector, superior foresaid, and his Successors, or to the Heretors of
the said Lands, Tenements and others foresaids, out of which the samen are
payable, conform to the Act of Parliament, Laws and Constitutions of this
Nation. And yet thereby the said yearly Duty of seven pounds money foresaid,
shall no ways be impaired nor diminished: And for the making and perfecting to
the said Baillies, and Council and Community of the said Burgh of Pasley, and
their Successors, of the said Infeftment and Resignation abovementioned the
said William Lord Cochran, and William Master of Cochran his Son, both with
one consent and assent, have made constitute and ordained, and by the tenor
hereof Make, Constitute and Ordain their Lovits and ilk ane of them conjunctly
and severally, there very lawful, undoubted and irrevocable Procurators,
Actors, Factors, and special Errand-bearers, to the effect After-specified,
Givand, Grantand and Committand to them, and likeane of them, as said is, Their
very full, free and plain power general and special, express bidding, mandament
and Charge. To compear before his said Highness, the Lord Protector of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, and Dominions thereunto
belonging, and his Highness Successors, Superiors foresaids, or before his
Highness Commissioners of Exchequer of this Nation: And there, for, and in Name
of the said, William Lord Cochran, and William Master of Cochran his Son, and
upon their behalf, to Renunce, Resign, freely quite clame, Discharge,
Surrender over and upgive purely and simply be Staff and Baston, as use is. As
they now by the tenor hereof, Renunce, Resign, Freely Quite Claim Discharge,
Surrender over and up-give frae them, and their foresaids, the foresaid
Superiority, or Right of superiority abovewritten, of the said Burgh of Pasley,
within the bounds above-specified, Including, and Comprehending, as is above
Included and Comprehended. And Excluding, as is above Excluded, with all Right,
Title, and Interest, whilk they, or their foresaids had, have, or can pretend
thereto, in the hands of his said Highness, or his Successors, Superiors
foresaid, or their Commissioners foresaids, in their Names, ad perpetuam
remanentiam, in manner after-specified, and to the effect abovementioned: And
also, for them, the said William Lord Cochran, and William Master of Cochran
his Son, and in their Names, and upon their behalfs, to Renunce, Resign, freely
Quite-clame, Discharge, Surrender, Over and Upgive, frae them, and their
foresaids, purely and simply, by Staff and Bastoun, as use is, as they now
hereby Renounce, Resign, freely Quite-clame, Discharge, Surrender, Over and
Up-give from them and their foresaids, in the hands of the said Superior, or
Commissioners of Exchequer foresaid, the said Property of the said Burgh of
Pasley, and Magistracy thereof, and Election of the said Baillies, Council,
Clerk, Burgesses, Officers, and other Members thereof, and of the said
Tenements, Lands, and others within the samen Burgh, and Lands of Seedhill
foresaid, annexed thereto, within the Bounds above and after-mentioned, and
Territory of the same, except the said Milns, called the Seedhill Milns, Corn
Kilns thereof, Milnhills, or Shilling Hills of the samen, and Thirled and
Astricted Multures of the said Burgh of Pasley, and Knaveships thereof
foresaid, according to Use and Wont. And of the Lands above and after-mentioned
within the Territory thereof, to the Effect and Intent above-specified, and
all and sundry the said Feu-duties abovementioned, of old addebted and due to
the said Abbot, and Convent of the said sometime Abbacy of Pasley, and sensyne
to the said Lords of the Erection of Pasley, forth of the said Houses,
Biggings, Yards, Tenements of the Burgh of Pasley, Aikers, Rudes, and parcels
of Land thereof Westward, frae the said East End of the said Bridge of Pasley
and Mustard-yard-dyke, including and comprehending the said Lands of
Calsisyde, Orchard, Bladoyard, Snaddoun, Hut-head, Hill-head, Well-meadow,
Broom-lands, and others within the bounds above-written, and limits of the said
Burgh of Pasley Property and Commonty of the samine, (excluding the Feu-duties
of the said Lands of Oxshaw-wood and Ward-meadow, which are no ways
comprehended within this present Resignation) to the effect and intent above
exprimed. And sicklike, all Right, Title, and Interest foresaid, whilk the said
William Lord Cochran, and William Master of Cochran his Son, or any of them, or
their foresaids had, have, or can pretend to that part foresaid, of the said
Moss of Pasley, betwixt the said Marches of Fergusly and Merksworth, made or to
be made, to the effect above-contained; and that the said Baillies, Council
and Community of the said Burgh, and their Successors, may brook, enjoy, and
possess the samine in all time coming, comform to their said Right thereof,
Title and Possession used and wont, in the special favors of the said
Baillies, Council and Community of the said Burgh of Pasley and their
Successors, and for new Infeftment to be given to them thereof, to be holden in
manner above mentioned, and thereupon Instruments and Documents to take, ask,
lift and raise; and generally all and sundry other things, to do, use and
exerce in the premises that to the Office of Procuratory, in such cases of the
Law, and consuetude of this Nation is known to appertain, or that the said
William Lord Cochran, and William Master of Cochran his Son, or any of them
might do themselves if they were personally present, firm and stable, holding
and for to hold all and whatsomever other things by their said Procurators, or
any of them, in the premises, in their Names, righteously appertains to be
done, and thereat obliges them to abide, without Appellation or Reclamation.
FOR THE WHILKS CAUSES, the said Baillies and Council of the said Burgh of
Pasley, and their said Thesaurer for themselves, and in name of the Community
of the said Burgh, hereby bind and oblidge them and their Successors, Baillies,
Council and Community and Thesaurer of the said Burgh, either in manner
foresaid to make Payment yearly to his said Highness the Lord Protector of the
Commonwealth foresaid, and his Successors, and Commissioners of Exchequer, of
the said Sum of seven Pounds Money of Scotland yearly, as a proportional part
of the said Blench Duty of the foresaid erected Lordship of Pasley, for the
said William Lord Cochrane, his said Son and their foresaids their relief of
the said Blench Duty of the said erected Lordship of Pasley pro tanto; and for
that effect to procure and deliver to them yearly Accquittances and Discharges
thereof, beginning the first years relief thereof for this Instant year of God
one thousand six hundred and fifty eight years, and sua forth in all time
coming, or else to make Payment to the said William Lord Cochrane his said Son
and his foresaids, of the said yearly Duty of Seven Pounds Money foresaid, to
be employed or applied by them for their own relief of the samine, beginning
the first years payment as is above written, and that at the option of the
said Baillies, Council, Thesaurer, and Community of the said Burgh, and their
Successors; and sua forth to continue in all time coming as they shall choice,
in manner foresaid yearly. And because the said William Lord Cochrane, and
William Master of Cochran his Son, have in manner as is abovementioned,
conferred on the said Burgh of Pasley diverse Favors, Courtesies and Respects,
therefore the said Baillies, Thesaurer, and Council of the said Burgh of
Pasley, hereby binds and oblidges them and their Successors in Office, that not
only they and their said Successors shall themselves in all time coming
endeavor to live peaceably, and to give to the said William Lord Cochrane, and
William Master of Cochran his Son, and to their Families and Successors at all
occasions, all due Honor, Respect and Observance becoming them, and to do
their best endeavors to counsel the Inhabitants of the said Burgh of Pasley to
do in like manner the samine, but also that they the Magistrates of the said
Burgh shall yearly in all time coming, immediately after their Election go to
the Place of Pasley, if the said William Lord Cochran, William Master of
Cochran his Son, or their Successors and their Families be there abiding, or
residing for the time, or how soon thereafter they shall come there to abide;
and there shall solemnly declare and demonstrate to them the said William Lord
Cochran, his said Son, and there Successors foresaids, their humble
acknowledgment of the favors, Courtesies and Respects foresaids, conferred by
them on the said Burgh of Pasley, and give unto them the said William Lord
Cochran, his said Son, and their foresaids therefore, all Honor, Observance
and Respect due to them, with all condign Reverence. And it is provided and
declared hereby, that this present Security above-written, and Warrandice
therein contained, shall not be extended to the propriety of that Tenement
within the said Burgh of Pasley disponed by the said William Lord Cochran to
John Snodgrass Burgess there which formerly pertained to Andrew Sempill of
Bruntfields, nor to the Propriety of the Land without the West Port of Pasley,
which sometime pertained to Umquhile John Stwart called of Bridgend, or
Margaret Cochrane his Spouse, nor to the Propriety of that piece of Land
extending to an half Rude of Land, or thereby, near the Gates-law, called
Cocksmailling; But that the Propriety of the said Particulars shall be excepted
forth of the Security and Warrandice foresaid; and the exception of the
Propriety thereof foresaid, shall no ways prejudge the said Baillies, Council,
and Community of the said Burgh, and their Successors, and their Thesaurer, of
the Feu-duties of the Premises sua above excepted; but the Feu-duties thereof
accustomed shall hereby belong to the said Baillies, Council and Community,
and their Successors and Thesaurers in all time coming, and the same shall be
holden of the said Baillies and Council, and their Successors, as the rest of
the Tenements and Lands within the said Burgh respectively, are and shall be
holden for ever. And for the mair security, both the said Parties are content
and consents that their presents be Insert and Registrat in the Court Books of
Justice, or court Books of any other Judicatory in this Nation, there to remain
for the future memory of the Premises, and to have the strength of a Decree
of the Judges thereof, and their Authorities to be interponed thereto, that
Letters of Horning on six days Charge, Poynding and others may pass hereupon as
effeirs. And hereunto they constitute their Lovits.

And ilk one of them conjunctly and severally their Procurators, in most ample
form of Procuratory. In Witness whereof their presents are Written by Robert
Alexander of Black-house, Writer in Pasley, whereof the other double is Written
by Mr. Robert Wallace his Servant. Both the said Parties have Subscribed the
samine with their Hands, Day, Month, Year and Place foresaid, before their
Witnesses, Colonel Allexander and Gawin Cochrans, Brethren German to the said
William Lord Cochran, James Dunlop of House-hill, James Freeland Fiar of that
Ilk, Servant to the said William Lord Cochran, and the said Mr. Robert Wallace
Writter, and John Mackerrell Brother to Hill-house. Sic Subscribitur Cochrane.
W. Cochran, John Perk Baillie, John Spreul. John Kelso, John Corswell, John
Wallace, William Greenlees; William Adam, William Love Thesaurer, William
Henderson, John Wilson, Robert Parkhil, Andrew Wilson, Thomas Iuctice Robert
Alexander Nottar Public do Subscribe their presents, for, and at command of the
said William Greenlees, one of the Baillies of the said Burgh, and of John
Snodgrass, Patrick Baird, William and John Paterson, Counselors of the said
Burgh, because they cannot Write themselves, as they assert, Witnessing my Sign
and Subscription, etc. I Robert Perk Notar Public required in the Premises,
have Subscribed the same at command above-written, these my Hand-writ and Sign
testifying, etc. A. Cochran Witness, Ga: Cochran Witness, Ia. Dunlop Witness,
Ia. Freland Witness, John Mackerrel Witness, To. Wallace Witness, etc.


