A DREADFUL WARNIN^ FOR Drunkards, OR THE EXECUTION AND CONFESSION OF Fabian
Price, a SOLDIER, who wa^ Executed at Tyburn, on Wednesday the Tenth of th^^
instant July; for Murdering another Soldier in the Parish of Chiswick, in his
Drink.

As also of James Smith, who was Executed on Thursda^ the Eleventh, at
Hounslow-Heath, for Running away from his Colors.

With the manner of their Behavior in Prison, and a^ the places of Execution.

With Allowance.

London: Printed for D. M. 1673.

A Dreadful Warning EOR DRUNKARDS.
AT the late Sessions holden for the City of London and County of Middlesex,
there were Five Persons received Sentence of Death, three Men and two Women. Of
the Men one was for Murder; another for a Rape, or beastly abuse offered to a
Child under ten years of Age; and the third being a Soldier, for running away
from his Colors. The two Women were condemned for several Robberies, which
they had long practiced; but by the Mercy of our ever Gracious Sovereign, three
of the five obtained the favor of a Reprieve.

The most remarkable or notorious of those that suffered, was Fabian Price, a
Soldier, and one who for a considerable time had been of that employment,
having been in the late Expedition against the Rebels in Virginia; where, as
some say, he in Drunken Quarrelsome Humors committed some Crimes that were
like to have rendered him obnoxious to Capital Punishment from the hands of
Justice. But whether that be true or not, it is certain he himself could not
deny but he now suffered justly, for taking away the Life of another, who
endeavored to assist and help him, as far as he was capable. That lying in a
field, in the way to Branford, he was civilly, awakened by these three
Soldiers, who being wholly strangers, had no other inducement, but as he was
their Fellow-Souldier, to take him along with them. That he swore bitterly at
them, and when they first came up with him, his Musket being cockt, they asked
him whether it were Charged; he replied with an Oath, Yes, and that with Bullet
as well as Powder: and that after all this he cockt again privately, and on a
sudden discharged it upon them, shooting one of them into the Belly; whereof,
without ever speaking a word, he instantly died. All these Circumstances, I
say, were evidently proved by three Witnesses at his Trial; and all that he had
to plead for himself was, that he was in Drink when he he did it.

It Is true, the operation of Drink does frequently cause people to do what they
never thought on when sober; but if in that Condition they commit any Crime,
their Drunkennness is so far from excusing them, that it is in all cases an high
aggravation; for a Drunkard is voluntarius Demon, a voluntary Devil; a Beast
and a Mad man of his own making; and can it be an Apology for a Maus villainy,
that he first put out the light of his understanding, that he might commit it
resolutely; shall one Sin patronize anot^e^, or shall the defacing God Image in
our selves by Drunkenness, justifying us for destroying it in others by Murder;
Alas! No, this poor wretch found it otherwise, and justly suffered when he was
sober, for the Blood he had shed when he was drunk.

The other Soldier who was Executed the day following at Hounslow, for running
away from his Colors being Condemned upon the Statute, had very little to say
for himself, but we hope it will be a warning to all others for committing the
like offenses.

Their Behavior in Newgate was very penitent, especially the Soldier for the
Murder, who expressed his sorrow for his Sins, with abundance of Tears, and all
other signs of a hearty and sincere Contrition. The Sunday before they
suffered, two Sermons were preached to them, upon 2 Cor. Ca. 4. v. 2 If our
Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost; From whence the Minister took
pains to show them; the danger those persons were in to whom the saving
Mysteries of the Gospel were hid or unknown; who were Strangers to the Covenant
of Grace, and had no Interest in the Lord Jesus, That such Souls were in a lost
undone and desperate state, the horror^ whereof he aggravated in several
circumstances; and then came to give them directions, how to receive and secure
their Souls from such peril and destruction, a destruction, (as he well
observed) not of its natural Existence, but of its Moral Excellence, when it is
depraved, degenerated, banished from God, defiled with Sin: and given up to ^^e
by Devils eternally tormented; in handling this part, he first cautioned them
from Seducers, that would be apt to offer them Heaven and Happiness upon other
terms than ever God intended, and ready to abuse them with pre^ended
Absolutions and pardons, which in the day of the Lord would be of no value; in
the next place he pressed them earnestly to consider the greatness of the loss,
when their Souls were lost, to consider what it was for ever to be shut out of
the Joys of Heaven, and endure an Eternity of Torments; that they now had but a
few moments, left them, for not only their year and days, but hours were
numbered, and upon these Moments, their Everlasting Bliss or woe depended, he
therefore did beseech them seriously to reflect upon their Condition, to be
thoroughly sensible of bewail and abhor their natural state of enmity against
God and Goodness, to Repent speedily and heartily for all their multiplied and
repeated Transgressions, to see the loathsome deformity of Sin in it self, and
the necessity of a Savior, without whom they must infallably perish to all
Eternity; to fly to the Lord Christ for help and for Salvation, and to accept
him upon his own terms, admitting him for their King to rule them, as well as
their Jesus to save them, for they must be sanctified, or else they would never
be justified; to this purpose he desired them to remove all lets and
hindrances, and seriously set to the work, to cast off all thoughts of the
World, which they were so soon to part with, and fix them on Eternity, whither
they were hastening, to improve every minute of that small time they had left,
in making their peace with God, and not deceive themselves, by mistaking sorrow
for the punishment, to be Repeutance for sin, or every check of Conscience, for
the pangs of the New Birth; Alasa! there must be a total and thorough change of
the whole man; an abhorrency of all sin planted in their wills, and a love to
God above all objects whatsoever in their Souls; he told them there was not
only an infinite value, but an infinite virtue too in the blood of Christ, and
that they must feel the effects and influences thereof, upon their hearts in
this world, if ever they Expected the benefit of it, in the next, etc.
concluding his discourse with diverse other necessary directions and pathetical
Exhortations.

When the Person for Murder was carried forth to suffer, he declared himself
freely willing to Dye, as having justly deserved it; and would often aggravate
his own Wickedness and Gods Mercy, in that he suddenly had destroyed an
Innocent person, that offered Kindness to him, without giving him any space for
preparation, or so much time as to say, Lord have mercy upon him; whereas he
himself now was indulged several days to prepare for his Death. At the place of
Execution, with abundance of Tears, he besought all people to take warning, and
avoid that odious and most dangerous Sin of Drunkenness, which renders those
Men, or rather beasts that practice it, fit and ready for all kind of
mischief. How many Whoredoms, Adulteries, Rapes, and Murders have been hereby
occasioned! For Drunkenness is not only a Sin of the first rate in it self, but
a common Seminary, or Seed-plot of all other Sins.

There is a Relation of a well-educated and disposed Young Man, how he was once
tempted to three Sins, Murder, Whoredom and Drunkenness, of which he might
take his choice; who chose the last, as being in his apprehension the least
heinou^. But behold! When the Wine had inflamed him, having no longer any sense
of Pity, or the obligations of Nature, he slew his own Father, and committed
Incest with his Sister.

Let the sad Example of this poor wretches deplorable and untimely end, that
now justly suffered for a horrid Murder, committed when he had made himself
insensible of what he did by Drunkenness, prevail with all to watch over
themselves, and avoid such Excess. For how know thou, O Reader! but if thou
proceedest in that Swinish Sin, though masked under the flattering Title of
Complaisance to Company and Good-fellowship, God may give thee up, when thou
thy self have wilfully drowned that reason which he gave thee for a guide, how
know thou I say, but he may give thee up to commit as great a sin as this
poor Man now suffered for, and so come to be made an Example thy self, that
would take no warning by the example of others.

FINIS.

