Draught of an ACT concerning the Mint.
OUR Sovereign Lord Considering, That by the Act of Parliament 1686, Entitled
Act anent an humble Offer to His Majesty for an Imposition upon certain
Commodities for defraying the Expense of a free Coinage, and other Matters
relating to the Mint: The forsaid Expense of a free Coinage, and several
Matters relating to the Mint were indeed settled, but neither so perfectly nor
so fully as experience has since discovered; But that there is still need and
place for a farther Regulation. Does therefore with Advice and Consent of the
Estates of Parliament, Statute and Ordain, that notwithstanding it be
Recommended by the said Act to the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, to try
by some of their Number every Journal of Coin by itself dictinctly, and that
twice every year. viz. In the month of July and December yearly: yet seeing
the forsaid distinct trial of every Journal has been found both a Tedious and
Superfluous Labor, and is not practiced any where else; It shall be Leisome for
the said Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council to make the said Trial by such
of their Number as they shall think fit, not of every Journal of Coin by itself
distinctly; but by taking and making Trial of any one or more single Journals
as they shall think fit: And then to cause Melt down in one Mass or Lignat the
rest of the Journals to be at that time Tried, and to take an Essay of the Mass
so Melted down as said is which shall stand for the whole, but Prejudice always
to the said Lords of Council, to make distinct Trials of the haill forsaid
Journals as they shall see cause: As also still Recommending to them the exact
Trial of all matters relating to the Coynage at the for said two times above
specified in manner mentioned in the said Act. And farther, for the better
ascertaining of the Fineness of the Coin, His Majesty with Advice and Consent
for said, does hereby Ordain, that not only the Principal or Counter-warden be
present at the taking off all Essays: but that there be a Plate of Silver of
the true Standard fineness made by the, EssayMaster at the sight of such as the
Lords of Privy Council shall think fit to Appoint, which Plate duly made and
Marked, one half thereof shall be put in the hands of the Clerk of Exchequer for
a Proof of the general Essay, and the other half in the hands of the Principal
or Counter-warden: that all the Pott and Pix Essays may be thereby Made and
Examined.


