A Discourse in Praise of St. Andrew, the Saint and Patron of Scotland.
IT has been the custom of all Nations from the very first Ages of the World to
keep Records of the Famous Actions of their Native Country Heroes, to insert
their Names in their most Authentic Histories, which relate their Noble
Exploits and rare Achievements, and to erect Monuments on their Graves, to be
Monitors and Memorandums to Posterity, to trace the Footsteps of their Valiant
and Magnanimous Ancestors: And this has not been done only by the civilized and
most refined Nations, but even among the most Savage, Rude, and Barbarous
People we find Remainders of Honor and Gratitude paid to their Victorious
Progenitors; otherwise we shall never be able to give an account and render a
reason of these rude Monuments yet remaining almost in every Nation we travel
in: These prodigious heaps of Stones piled up like Pyramids, are nothing else
but the rude Monuments of Kings and famous Generals of those Days, who died
nobly in the Bed of Honor in defense of their Native Country.

Now if we find such effects of Gratitude and Thankfulness naturally implanted
in the minds of those Heathen, who had no more Light to conduct them in the
Maze and Wilderness of this World, but some faint glimmerings of Light conveyed
to 'em through the Crannies of Nature, without the assistance of Divine
Revelations, and Prophets endued with Divine Blasts from above; let not us
Christians, who have all these helps afforded to us which they wanted, prove
ungrate to our Benefactors; and seeing all Christian Nations have their Saints
and Patrons who were Instruments of planting the Gospel among them, and that
Posterity may not forget so great Benefactors toward them, have appointed
Festivals to be kept in Honor of such Holy Devoto's for ever: Let us not be
behind others in paying that Tribute of Thanks to the Memory of St. Andrew our
Patron, one of the first that was called by his Lord and Master to be a
Promulgator of the Gospel of Peace, being the second Person of the Sacred
College of the Apostles, and had the hardest and most difficult Province
assigned to him of all the rest of his Brethren, if we consider the vast
Nations he traveled over, the Rudeness and Barbarity of the People, the
Opposition of their Priests, the Menaces, Threatenings, and Frowns of the
Princes and Great Ones of the Earth, threatening the Holy Apostle every moment
with the most bitter and cruel Death imaginable. For,

Who but such another as the Holy Apostle would have had the Courage and
Magnanimity to enter Scythia, to face those barbed Darts and poisoned Arrows
which had still been a terror to the effeminate Persians, galled the Grecians,
and long vexed the very Romans, before they were subdued, and obliged to pay
Homage to the conquering City? Who would have forced his way through the vast
Hyr^inian Forest, a Wood of more than a thousand Miles long, inhabited only by
the voracious Generation of Wolves, Bears and Tigers, but St. Andrew? Who would
have had the confidence to encounter the cruel Sogdians, the treacherous
S^cians, and pilfering Arabians, who have ravaged in a continued Chain of
Plunder and Rapine since the time of their Father and Founder Ishmael, but such
a Saint as St. Andrew? But once more, who but one endued with Heavenly
Fortitude would have taken his Life in his Hand, and enter the Taurik
Chersonese (now Crim Tartary) inhabited by a People more cruel and barbarous
than any of the former, whose constant custom was to drink the Blood and suck
out the Brains of their Enemies, and adorn their Temples with Skulls of the
Vanquished.

What could our Apostle think of those signs of Barbarity? what strange
thoughts, mormo's and uncouth amusements would tumble in his Brain at such a
hideous prospect, beyond the savageness of the fiercest Animals? He could in
all probality imagine nothing else but that himself should be the next Sacrifice
of their Cruelty, and his Skull fixed on a Spike in Honor of their Goddess
Diana Taurica. What must he do in these extraordinary and amazing
circumstances? must he skulk off, and make the best of his way, and get him out
among these Savages? but that was it he was not acquainted with; he must not
falsify his Trust, and stifle his Commission he had received from his Lord and
Master, which was to preach the Gospel, and disseminate the glad tidings of
Salvation to the Barbarian and Scythian, wise and unwise, bond and free. That
saying of his Master when he was first called to be an Apostle, Follow me and I
will make you Fishers of Men, was rivetted in his soul, and never slipped out of
his mind; but fulfilled that saying in bringing in many thousands to the
Christian Faith; for he was certainly a Fisher of Men who catched in his Net
vast hords of roving Tartars, great multitudes of Sacians, and mighty Caravans
of pilfering Arabians, scouring off the barbarity, and mitigating the ferity of
these wild People, making their Dagons of Idolatry fall on their faces to the
ground to pay Homage to the Son of the Eternal born in Jury. The four great
Monarchies of the World had made some, but fruitless Attempts and faint Essays
to civilize those Barbarians, seeing their Banners were only set up on the
Confines of these Nations; but the complete conquest of 'em was left to our
Holy Patron, who subdued the passions, conquered the hearts, and captivated the
minds of the fiercest Creatures of all the sons of Adam.

Who but the soul of the Holy Apostle would have sunk under such innumerable
Calamities that so fast trod upon the heels of one another? his Lord and Master
crucified, his native Country shortly to be overrun by the Romans, and their
Eagle to perch on the loftiest Turrets of the Holy City, his Friends
discouraged, and black Idolatry now become impudent in the World: All which was
enough to discourage and exanimate the stoutest Hero and most stupefied stoic
imaginable. But all these were no Bugbears to him who was proof against all the
disasters this World could present unto him, seeing he was assured that his
Redeemer lived, and would plentifully reward him at the latter day.

So wandered our Holy Apostle up and down his Province, whose constant
Companions were Hunger and Thirst, Cold and Nakedness, with all the other
sorrows and miseries that accompany this mortal Life, he went about always
doing good till the time of his dissolution drew near, and the time that he
should be offered up approached.

And when he finished his course, and dispatched his Commission, he returned
from his Northern Proselites toward the warmer Climate of Arabia, where he
ended his miserable and tedious Life; For AEgeas the Proconsul of that Province
laid hold on him, and Crucified him; O how glad was he of these Tidings, how
acceptable was this News to him that he should mount the upper Regions on the
Ladder of the Cross, certainly Old Jacob's heart was not more extended with
Gladness when he saw his Son Joseph, than the Apostle's was with joy to see the
Sign of that which had been the chief design of his Travels, and the principal
Theme of his Orations. O, how did his Soul leap within him for joy that he was
honored to die after this manner! Now he was sure with the end of his days to
obtain the end of his Faith, even the Salvation of his Soul.

Now let out thoughts go along with him, to the place of Execution, and suppose
our selves posted in the Ring of his Disciples and Proselites, standing round
the Cross, and hearing our blessed Patron Preach his farewell Sermon to them in
these words. O blessed and happy Plants of the Christian Faith. O pleasant
Blossoms of the Infant Church. O my exceeding great Joy and Crown, my Darling
and loving Babes, whom I have Begot, in Christ Jesus through the Gospel.

You know my beloved Children, that after many hazardous Journies and great
Toils, I have at last Arrived in this City, and gained many Souls to Christ in
it: But the Governor AEgeas, who should have been a good Example to others,
has rejected the Gospel, and stopped its Progress very much: But I bless God,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, That notwithstanding his Malice and Cruelty, I see
so many Witnesses of my Death, so many Ambassadors behind me, to water those
Barren Places I have Planted.

Therefore, my Dear Children, be steadfast in the Doctrine which you have heard
from me, which indeed is not mine, but his who is the Author and Father of all
things, it is his whose mercy knows no limits, who had Compassion on the
deplorable Condition of the Sons of Adam, whom the Old Sepent has endeavored
to Circumvent from the Beginning: But our heavenly Father to put check to this
Old Deceiver, has sent beloved Son into the World to destroy the works of the
Devil, and to rescue his Children out of the thick mist of Darkness, and bring
them into his mavelous light, to rescue them from the precipices of
Destruction and confines of Hell, into the heavenly Canaan, to the place of the
Spirits of just men made perfect.

Wherefore return, never any more to abominable Idolatry, which has bewitched
the minds of Men for so many Ages; but believe and trust in the everliving God,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the eternal and uncreated Trinity, for God is one
and three, who is great without quantity, whose will is his power, who governs
all things without trouble, and there is nothing that can in the least disturb
the order of his universal Empire, who is always communicating and doing good
to his Creatures without weariness; so that we need no inferior Mediators to
carry our Petitions into the Court of Heaven, after the manner of the Heathen,
but let all your requests be put up to your omniscient Creator, who will hear
your Prayers and grant your Petitions by the infinite Merits of his Son.

Don't Grieve and Lament, because I am fixed to this Cross; for this Tree is to
me the Tree of Life, a Plank of Safety in the Shipwreck of Sinners; In hoc
signo Vinces.
it is a Trophy which our Savior has erected over his Vanquished Enemies, in
this you shall overcome, Triumph, and to Valiantly, in after Ages Kings and
Emperors shall glory to have the Sign of it for their Banners; and shall
rejoice to Fight under the Standard of the Holy Jesus.

Lastly, Dear Children, let not the Allurements of this World entice you, nor
Honors, Pleasures, and Preferment ensnare you, nor the most horrid Instruments
of Torture affright you, to run out of the right Road of a Holy Life: But when
the most dismal Calamities shall assault you, have recourse to our Blessed
Redeemer, look back to his Cross and Bitter Passion which he patiently endured,
and all to save us from Eternal Woe and Misery.

These and such like Exhortations, you may suppose, the Holy Apostle uttered to
his mourning Disciples from the Theater of the Cross: I have given you this
Abstract of a very long Sermon, (the longest that ever was Preached,) a Sermon
of Three Days (for so long he lived on the Tree) and spent all the time in
Exhorting and Instructing his Proselites, to adher to the word of Truth he had
delivered to them, amidst all the Temptations, Miseries, Calamities, and
Persecutions they should be trusted with for the sake of the Gospel, O what
rare Emblems are wrapped up in this Circumstance of the Apostles Preaching Three
Days on the Cross: He was Three Days fixed to his Cross, to Sympathise with his
Master, who continued Three Days in the Grave under the power of Death: He was
Three Days Tormented on the Tree, because his Lord was so long Chained with the
Fetters of Mortality: He Three Days out-braved and dared all the Cruelty and
Malice of his Enemies, because his Redeemer so long a time was triumphing over
Death, Hell, and the Grave. He preached Three Days from the Theater of the
Cross, to signify to his Disciples, that the Church should groan under cruel
Persecution for Three Hundred Years.

O Happy! yea, Thrice Happy People of Edessa, who had the Honor to Hear this
Mirror of Love and Patience make his Will, and Harrangue so long from the
Excruciating and Tormenting Pulpit. The Edesseaens were not the only Spectators
of this Spectacle; but the Holy Angels were Hovering over him in the Air, and
greatly rejoicing to see him do so valiantly; although his Disciples were Weeping
and Mourning, the Heavenly Coire was Singing an Anthem, which continued till
his Soul was lodged in a state of Joy and Bliss; now he had Fought a Fight and
Finished his course, and dispatched the Commission he was entrusted with, and
wafted above the Stars in a crowd of Blessed Spirits, to receive that Crown
which his Master had prepared for him, and not for him only, but for all those
that love his appearing.

Now my dear Countrymen I have given you this short Account of our Holy
Patron, to the end we may imitate him in all Piety and Virtue, to follow his
Steps in a continued chain of Patience and Long-suffering, with an unwearied
diligence in being good our selves, and performing all good Offices to others,
in extending our Charity not only to uphold the outward Shell of the frail
Bodies of Men, but to have a true and brotherly Compassion for their Souls by
our good Example, Holy Life, Seasonable Admonitions, and frequent Instructions;
weaning them from all worldly Lusts; and so we shall have the honor of being
Instruments of saving Souls, and rescuing them from the coasts of eternal Ruin.

And the only way to put us in mind of these things, is to preserve the Memory
of Holy Men; and the way to preserve their Memories, is to commemorate them; on
these Solemn Times the Church in all Ages has thought fit to set apart for the
Commemoration of the Piety and Suffering of good Men, to stir up others to
imitate them in their good Works and holy Lives.

There is certainly a Civility in Humane Nature, which will not suffer men to
wrong the Dead, especially those who have been Good and Virtuous; for as bad as
the Pharisees were, and they certainly were as bad as we can imagine, yet they
built Monuments and set up Tombs on the Graves of the Prophets, whom their
Fathers had Slain and Butchered, and protested, if they had lived in those
Days, they would not have been guilty of such horrid Cruelty, and base
Ingratitude, and Inhumanity to the Men of God; it is true, the best of Men in
this World have the luck to be ill Treated and basely Handled while among us in
this World of Pride, Malice, and Emulation; but when removed from us, then we
lament the want of 'em, and are anxious for want of their Society and
Fellowship, which was little regarded when present, but very much valued, when
we cannot recover it. So that Virtue is still most esteemed, and Piety most
regarded at a distance, but when present, it is despised and rejected, because
the persons where it lodges are fallible like our selves. But what ever
thoughts the World may have of Good Men and their Actions, the Psalmist has
told us that the Righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance, and how can
they be in remembrance, except we set apart some time to commemorate their
Virtuous Actions, our Savior's presence at the Feast of the Dedication, although
not appointed by God, but the Jews themselves is warrant enough for us to keep
Festivals in memory of Good and Holy Men, in order to imitate them.

Is it not very strange to see some people so Inhumane and Ungrate to the
memory of the Saints, that they will scarce be so kind to them as the great
Caesar was to his Horse, who caused him to be Buried and Interred out of a pure
humor of Gratitude, to save his Carcass from Dogs and Ravens, because the
Beast had done him good Service, and saved his Life many times in the Wars.

Now seeing every Nation have their Patron, to whom they pay a grateful respect
to the memory of their Ashes, let us not be behind with them in Commemorating
the holy Apostle St. Andrew, let not France boast of their St. Dennis, the
Russians of St. Nicholas, the Norwegians of Ula, or St. William, while we can
glory of St. Andrew, a part of whose remains, viz. his Arm is Interred in our
Kingdom, brought thither (as the Story goes) by one of his Disciples St.
Regulus of Rule, and Buried at St. Andrews, which City retains the Name of the
Saint to this very day; so that though our Kingdom lies in a Cold Cli^^^^
toward the North Pole, yet it is no small Honor and great cause of Glorying,
that some of the remains of so great an Apostle, and one of the most renowned
Saints, is Buried in the Heart of our Ancient Kingdom, so as with our Crown for
its Antiquity, so with our Religion and Patron, we can contend and compare with
our Neighbor Nations, if we have not the better of the most of 'em. Therefore
all I shall say more on this subject, is this, that we ought in all gratitude
to Commemorate this Saint on this day, which the Church in all Ages assigned
for his Festival, not that any respect we pay to his Memory, can add the least
thing to his Glory, who is now in full Joy and perfect Bliss, but only to show
our selves grateful and to make us better, by following his Example and
excellent Pattern.

Dublin: Printed for David Pollock, next door to the Sign of the London in
D^^'s-street.


