Rebellion Arraigned,

A SERMON Preached before Their MAJESTY'S In Their Chapel at WHITEHALL, Upon
the 30th. of January 1687.

The Anniversary and Humiliation-Day, In Abhorrency of the Sacrilegious Murder
Of our Gracious Sovereign CHARLES I

By the Reverend Father JOHN DORMOR, of the Society of Jesus.

Permissu Superiorum.

London, Printed by Mary Thompson at the Entrance into Old-Spring-Garden near
Charing Cross, 1688,

TO THE READER.
READER,
SInce the Printing of the Pharisee's Council; my Promise has been Challenged,
and I called upon, for two more Sermons almost out of mind. The First, My
Humiliation Sermon, Preached the 30th. of January 87. named, Rebellion
Arraigned. The other Enituled, The Law of Laws, and Preached the 19th. of
September 86. If I told thee in my last; The rest of my Sermons were at thy
call: Now I tell thee, call for no more. It is my design to ease thee of that
Trouble, by publishing them all together, as soon as Leisure will give me
leave. In the mean time, Remember what thou wilt often find in them; a short Life
is giving way to a long Eternity. Farewell,

J. D.

A SERMON Preached before Their MAJESTY'S On the 30th. of January 1687.
1 Pet. cap. 5. ver. 6. Humiliamini sub potenti manu Dei, ut vos exaltet in
tempore Visitationis.

Be ye humbled under the Powerful Hand of God, that he may exalt you in time of
Visitation.


IF ever Nation, to its Advantage and Renown, complied with the words of my
Text, Dread Sovereign, it is your Loyal England. England by humbling her self
this day in the presence of God and yours, appears more Glorious, than ever it
did, by humbling with force of Arms, her most redoubted Enemies. Victory in
War, is often a gift of Fortune, at the best the fruit of Valorous Conduct;
dear bought, not soon got, and soon forfeited. Englands Humiliation, is a
standing Victory of Peace, it is a quelling of Rebellion, it is a Vindication
of her Kings Right and her own Honor; Chance has no part in it, Loyalty
produced it: The Wisdom of both Houses of Parliament concurred unto it: It is
not fed with Blood and Booty, but Fasting and Tears; with Devotion it is
maintained, and a forever settled Obedience renders it Eternal. Thus England
has Humbled her worst of Foes, by humbling her self, and by so humbling her
self, in this time of Visitation of Gods Mercy upon us, is exalted as high, as
ever Rebellion had cast her low. Humiliamini, etc. Be ye humbled under the
Powerful Hand of God, that he may exalt you in the time of Visitation.

The unnatural Enemies of their Country joy'd in her Confusion, in her Disgrace
they Gloried, they Triumphed in her Losses. England was gazed at by Foreigners
as a Monster, to be kept up, and cut off, from the Commerce with the rest of
the World. A King Arraigned? said they, and with horror; by who but England? A
King called to the Bar, by who but England? A King process'd and Condemned, by
who but England? A King brought upon the Scaffold, before his own Palace and
People, and Barbarously put to Death; When? Where? tell the place, name the
Time, mention the Record, by whoever but England? Such were the insulting
Reproaches whole England was exposed to, for the guilt of a Crew of Miscreants
degenerated from the Fear of God, and ancient Allegiance paid by Dutyful
England to her Kings. But Silence, O you! Who thus impeach the whole, for the
Crime of a few, A party of wretched men, desperately Wicked and hardened in
Impiety. They are the words of the Act in reference to this day. The King was
Arraigned, The King was called to the Bar; but England Sighed, England Wept.
The King, against all form of Law, was Process'd and Condemned, but England
Agoniz'd, between Grief and Horror. The King was Cruelly Murdered, but England
Vowed a just Revenge, and since has taken it of the Regicides. Rebellion in
that time overruled the Stage, Rebellion acted the Tragedy it had contrived;
poor England disarmed, with sorrowful Eyes was forced to look on. No House of
Peers then sat, no free House of Commons; a Kennel of Bloodhounds, a rude
Expression, (did they not merit worse) were the Assassins, of our most
Indulgent Monarch; they were led on by the Scent of an aspiring Passion, masked
with Zeal for Religion, so to delude some: At Tyranny they ran with a fair show
of Liberty, so to entice in others. Liberty indeed, to debase their Equals, to
pull down their Betters, to enslave their Country. England groaned under the
heavy Scourge, and is no sooner recovered, by the Happy and long Sighed for
Restoration of her Natural Prince and Government, but makes it her first care,
to vindicate her self to Posterity. Sitting therefore in Parliament she
declares to the World, her Inexpressible Detestation, and Abhorrency, of that
Villainous and abominable Fact, and for a lasting Monument of this her Sense,
she beseeches the Royal Power to establish this day of Humiliation, to which
Piety and Loyalty oblidges us to concur. Humiliamini, etc. Be ye humbled under
the Powerful Hand of God, that he may exalt you in time of Visitation. In order
to promote so Religious an Act, my first point shall be to remind you of the
subject of Humiliation, which is Rebellion; and since Rebellion so unhumanely
Arraigned our Gracious King. My second point shall be to Arraign Rebellion. My
third, to see Execution done upon her, and that by the hand of Humiliation. But
let us first implore his Divine Assistance him, who made himself a Pattern of
Humiliation for our Sins, by the Intercession of His Virgin Mother, Ave Maria,
Humiliamini, etc. Be ye humbled under the Powerful Hand of God, that he may
exalt you in the time of Visitation.

THe proper subject of Humiliation is sin; the greater the sin, the greater
ought the Humiliation to be. To private Offenses, which prejudice the Offender
alone, private Humiliation is due, a public Humiliation becomes sins, which
influence upon the public; and no sins wound the public so dangerously, as
those, which are destructive to Loyalty, Obedience, and Government; Kings bare
the burden and dignity of the Public, no sin therefore requires a more signal
Humiliation and Repentance, than Disloyalty, Rebellion, and the Contempt of the
Right of Kings, and their Majesty; nor was there ever a Disloyalty, Rebellion
or Contempt equaling that committed, against the Sacred Person of Charles the
First. Humiliation then, on this Anniversary-Day, should exceed all others. If
I mistake not, my Discourse holds good, relying upon the just proportion to be
kept between Humiliation and Sin. I could exemplify each part out of holy Writ,
were I not pressed between scarcity of Time and Copiousness of matter: It is
enough that I insist only upon Rebellion.

But is not that Rebellion to be blotted out of Memory, and buried in Oblivion?
Old Soars are not to be ripped up. True, if perfectly Healed; and if perfectly
Healed, yet their trouble and danger, may be exposed for future Safety and
prevention of the like. This is the method observed by Preachers in order to
other Sins; and I have no cause to desert it in order to Rebellion of sins the
greatest.

Forgive and forget, is a maxim of Christian Charity, in so much, as I find
Acts of Pardon and Indemnity, styled Acts of Oblivion; and yet I reflect that
as pardoning is a property of Goodness, and Magnanimity; so to forget, argues a
carelessness, or weakness of mind. God forgives, but cannot forget; and England
on this day, will not have forgotten, what your Royal Brother, and your Sacred
Majesty have so Generously forgiven. You have forgiven but, England will not
forgive her self, and with the noblest of Dispositions, does Penance for a
Crime which was not hers. So Christ an Innocent, humbled himself for the sins
of his People, even to Death. Him we are to imitate; by so doing, England
endeavors, to make her Loyalty, vye with your Clemency; and by not forgiving
her self, for having been the Mother of a few Vipers, cannot but confirm and
increase, that tender Love, shown in all Time, even with the evident and many
hazards of your Sacred Persons, in Defense of her Rights and Honor.

True it is; there is a forgetfulness, ever joined with forgiving; for albeit
one remember a Displeasure, yet in case he pardons it, he forgets the main
resentment due unto it. God cannot but remember sin, yet forgiving it, forgets
as it were to inflict the Punishment of Hell due unto it. This is what the
Royal Prophet Psalm. 78. and the Prophet Isa. c. 64. both v. 8. crave at the
hands of God, Ne memineris Iniquitatum nostrarum, Remember not our Iniquities,
and in conformity with this it is, that we are ordered to implore the Mercy of
God, That neither the guilt of that Sacred Innocent Blood, nor those other
sins, by which God was provoked, to deliver us and our King into the hands of
Cruel and Unreasonable Men, may at any time, be visited upon us and our
Posterity. Thus the Act of Parliament expresses it self, where we are at once
reminded, of the worst effect of Rebellion, and to Pray God to forget the
resenting it. Having laid the subject of Humiliation before your Eyes, I come
in my second point to Arraign Rebellion.

Rebellion, The Daughter of audacious Pride; Rebellion, Mother of the basest
Treacheries, Rebellion nurse of private Discontents; Rebellion sower of
Jealousies and Fears; Rebellion the disturber of peaceable Minds; Rebellion the
distroyer of true Liberty and Religion; Rebellion the bain of humane Commerce;
Rebellion the destroyer of Wealth, Happiness, Birthright and Life it self;
Rebellion, the open enemy to Order, Government, and God; Rebellion blazing in
Fire and wallowing in Blood. This is the Monster of Monsters, disguised in all
shapes to compass her ends; her Name I tell you is Rebellion, and from her Name
I begin her Arraignment.

Rebellion, Thou art convicted of being a restless Spirit. Nothing in heaven;
no State, no place, no Condition, can possibly content thee, Happiness swells
thee, Misery enrages thee, Piety cannot mollify thee, thou art ever for Reform
of Religion and Government; whereas True Religion alone, can reform thee.
Heaven could not keep thee in peace, all the delicious Fruits of the Garden of
Eden, could not satisfy thy disordered Palate; the Church has felt the smart of
thy Divisions; thou have overrun the Earth with Calamities; in Hell alone if
thou art quiet, it is because tamed by punishment. Restless thou art; the World
thy old Acquaintance, comes in Evidence of it, by imposing the Name of
Rebellion upon the: from Re. and Bello. I War again. Rebellion's stomach turns
at the sweets of quiet: Unfeigned Hydra, in the Fens and Bogs of Discontents
she breeds, Is one head cut off? Without fable another shoots up. Is she beaten
to the ground? She renews her Forces, She Is ever beginning, ever Warring. Has
she no Sword to manage? She Wars with her Tongue, she Wars with her Pen. If
daring neither; she Wars with her Thoughts, she lays her Designs, she expects
her Time, she is ever Rebellion warring again, a restless Spirit by Deeds
answering her Name. And from her Name, I pass to her Deeds.

Rebellion, Thou art brought in Guilty of being wilfully void of Reason. A
Rebel, in the first place, wages war against himself, by opposing the Law of
Nature, which is his own Reason. Reason promotes a friendly Intercourse between
Men, to their reciprocal Help and Comfort; Rebellion obstructs it. In order to
this amicable Society, Reason prescribes a Supreme Power to end strifes, when
arising; to provide against Invaders of the common safety. Rebellion will be
Arbitrary, will stand to no Authority, will her self invade. Reason teaches us
to Sacrifice a Private Interest, Disgust or Wrong, to the Public Tranquillity.
Rebellion will have the Public Welfare to truckle to Private Passion. Reason's
Decision is, that a patient Sufferance, is preferable to a successful
Rebellion; Rebellion feignes causes of Sufferance, where there is none. In all
her Proceedings unreasonable, But more,

Rebellion, The foulest Ingratitude is Charged upon thee. Nothing works so
forcibly upon the generous Heart of Man, as to see himself loved: But Rebellion
of a Man, thou leave no more than a Figure. Love by thee is slighted. Thou
devidest Friends, thou Arm'st Patriot against Patriot, thou stirrest up
Relation against Relation, Brother against Brother, Son against Father; the
Love of thy Prince is requited with Hatred and Disdain. No tie, which thou do
not unloose; no knot, which thou do not untye or cut, Country, King, God,
cannot win thee with Kindness, I Will only give a glance at some particulars, too
well known to dwell long on them.

Heaven is the seat of Felicity, the center of Bliss: Lucifer vouchsafe to be
at rest; submit, and it is thine: No where can thou be more at ease.
Rebellion has stopped his Ears, and he is unquiet. Reason tells thee, it is a
madness to Rise against thy Maker. Where Rebellion has got in, Reason's not
heard. God has conferred the Noblest of Beings upon thee, what more endearing?
But endearments loose their Virtue with Rebellion.

Adam let this Example be a warning to Thee and Terror. I come too late.
Neither the fortunate state of Paradise, nor his own Reason excelling all
other, nor the Demonstrations of Gods singular favor, could allay the Spirit
of Rebellion, that had entered his Heart, when that Eritis sicut Dii, You shall
be like Gods, had entered his Ears. What shall I say to the contumacious
Children of Israel? What to the unnatural Absalom? No Content, no Reason, no
Kindness, could abate their Seditious Fury, and to advance to the subject I now
am on.

England was an Earthly Heaven, a worldly Paradise: The Liberty of the Subject,
with a grateful acknowledgement, Reverenced the Royal Prerogative. Law ran in
its natural Channel, each one sat under his own Vine, fed of his own Grape,
ever ready to lay down Life and Fortune, for his Princes Honor and Safety;
when Rebellion stomaching at so much Prosperity, revolts against Religion,
resolute never to end, but by making an end of Government.

Was there ever Sovereign who tendered his Subjects Liberty, who abhorred the
effusion of Blood, Sacred Majesty, it was your Royal Parent. What Clemency did
he not use, in putting up injuries? What Advantages did he not forfeit, by
ketching at every overture of Peace, to avoid the Miseries ensuing upon his
Kingdom? Peace was his Darling: But Rebellion was restless. Englands Happiness,
was ever in his Eye, the object of his Wishes. But Rebellion hated its Felicity
and Repose. The Comeliness of his Person, the Exquisitness of his Wit, the
Sweetness of his Temper, the Undauntedness of his Mind; showed in the midst of
the greatest Calamities, would have gained the Affection of any, but
Unreasonable and Ungrateful Rebels: His only Failure was, (if I may be so
bold,) That he was more covetous of his Subjects Safety than his Own; more
concerned for Them, than resenting their Disloyalty, his Condescentions he
acknowledges in his (...), or Royal Portract passed too far; all to gain his
Enemies; and what in Reason could be of greater force, to subdue Hearts of Men,
than such Paternal Proceedings? But all in vain; the hardship of his Fate was,
he had to deal with worse than Brutes; he had to deal with Rebels. No gaining
Rebellion by Love or Reason. Love is deemed Weakness, Reason is against the
Liberty of the Spirit. Rebellion is a pure, pure, Spirit, but in nothing more,
than that pure Spirits, as Divines teach us, in the fall of the Angels are
Incorrigible, and so for the most part are Rebels. Reason works not upon them,
Favors will not oblige them; their Spirit is fixed upon inquitude, their Cause
is ever for pretended Religion and Property, which puts me in mind of carrying
on my Process,

Again, I find Rebellion notoriously Convicted of having invaded Property,
under pretext of maintaining it. True regard to Property would respect the
greatest of Properties: The Property Kings have, not only to their Revenues,
but much more to be Obeyed, in what concerns their Government. Had the least
sparkle of this regard, had place in the Rebels thoughts, they would never run to
such Extremities. His Sacred Majesty had never entrenched upon the Property of
any. Whatever he acted, was with the Advice of the Judges of the Nation; and
well it might be, and it ought to be presumed, they knew what was due to Law,
Property, and Prerogative.

But grant he had taken a step too far, was the Subject to rage with Rebellion,
to Depopulate the Nation with Sword and Flames; and in room of Kings and
Countries Property, bring in Tyranny? These were the lamentable effects of
Rebellion convicted, of having invaded Property, under Profession of upholding
it. To maintain Property; Houses were Pillaged: To maintain Property; Villages
were Fired: To maintain Property; Towns were Beleagur'd, and Battered, To
maintain Property; so many Battles were Fought, so many thousands, and
thousands of Lives cut off: To maintain Property; Estates of the Loyal were
Confiscated, the Rights of both Houses abolished, the People burdened with
Impositions. Rebellion will tell you, (and who will believe her but Rebels) all
was to maintain Property, but the pretense of Property went not alone; it
joined hand and hand with appearance of Religion and Rebellion, appears
horribly tainted with the most execrable Hypocrisy.

Religion was in the Case. Was it so? O Holy Rebellion! So highly concerned for
Religion: That thou art ever new modelling it. The Reason may be; that thy
Principles, and those of True Religion, cannot subsist; and since thou art
resolute, not to shape thy Principles to Religion, thou wilt cut out a Religion
to thy Principles. Religion is Peaceable, thou Seditious. Religion teaches
Submission to God, and his Vicars; but that Lesson is not for thee: Perpetual
Change is thy business. Innovation is thy inseparable Camerade; and one
Innovation is ever a precedent for an other; and in all thou art the Leader.
Thy Spirit is a singular one, it cannot away with what is common; as if
Religion by being the common, could become the Prostitute of Babylon: The Truth
is, Church Orders, are of too great a Subjection; thy Spirit will be at
Freedom, the Lord alone must govern it. That is, the Lord in the Mouth, and
Beelzebub in the Heart. Religion upon the Lips, and Alteration of Government in
Design. Thy Religion was, to change Churches into Stables, Bells into Canons,
Leads into Bullets: It was Hypocrisy, not Religion. And O! that here I might
stop, and stay thy fury, which draws me on to the last Act, Horror chilling my
Blood at the very Thought of what I am to say.

Rebellion appearing convicted of being a restless Spirit; of violating the Law
of Nature, Reason; of the basest Ingratitude, in abusing her Princes Love; of
having invaded Property; of most profane Hypocrisy: That nothing should be
wanting to the greatest excess of Iniquity, she passes the utmost bounds, of
Exorbitancy and Cruelty. In all she has done, she pretends to Justice and
Revenge, and that by Law, and that against her Sovereign.

The Design of Rebellion, ever lurks in the breast of a few; by her specious
Cheats, many are engaged; she is an Artist in contriving. Property, Religion,
Law, she makes her different Scenes, and turns them at her Pleasure, to humor
the Parts she is resolved to perform. Having the Sword in her Hands, she pulls
off her Mask, and discovers her Villainous Intentions; she erects a Court of
High Justice, and behold the Catastrophe, The last Act of the dismal Tragedy;
She Arraigns her King. Ah Rebellion! Rebellion! Thy earnest Demonstrations of
zeal for Property and Religion, are they come to this? Thy pretentions, ever
are Jezabels, Fair in show, in substance Cruel. A High Court of Justice? A High
Court of Enormity and Treason. Do thou know who thou Arraignest? He is thy
King. Do thou know, whose Condemnation and Murder thou have resolved? It is
thy King's. Consult the Fundamental Laws. Consult? What need of Consult, where
the Abomination so clearly discovers it self? High Court of Justice? If this be
Justice; what is Treason? And if this be Treason, and of Treasons the most
Horrid; down with the Name of High Court of Justice? No Court can be held, but
by Power from the King, and no King can lend that Power against himself. But
since thy vain Plea is Law, and thou will not know what a King is. It is my
Duty to make thee know, both what is Law? And what is a King?

It is not the Sword, it is not the Mace, it is not the Grave Attire, it is not
the Bar, it is not the Chair, it is not the rest of Formalities, which
constitute Law; they are only to sustain its Dignity. Rebellion may usurp them,
to color Injustice; but can have no Law to justify her Proceedings. Law is an
obliging rule of humane Actions, ever ordered to the common good. To be
Obliging its Authority must be derived from above, from God; and this Authority
God has placed in his Vicars Supreme Governors. To be a Rule it must not
deflect, from the first Rule of the Divine Will and Command, it must stand with
Reason and Justice; the Peace and Good of the Public must be its end: And to
be for the common good, Law cannot be a weapon of private Passion. No Law then
can uphold this Court of thine, O Rebellion! Thy ends are Private. Thou
reced'st from the first Rule, by usurping Gods Prerogative, who alone is the
King and Judge of Kings: It is against Reason to claim Power over a Supreme, it
is Unjust to Arraign thy Judge. Law then opposes thy Pretentions to Law, and
the Dignity of a King wholly defeats them.

Will'st thou once learn what a King is? Give Ear. God is the King of Kings, 1 Timothy 6.15. And Kings are as it were the Gods of their People: Kings cannot be
Gods Judge, nor can the People be their Kings. Who is the Supreme? Who the
Judge without Appeal, but the King? To whom do inferior Judges own their
Authority, but to the King? From who do Courts receive their Power, but from
the King? In whose Name are Impeachments drawn up, but in the Kings? Acts of
Parliament; by who are they Enacted, but by the King! And by consequence, the
final Legislative Power, in who does it reside, but in the King. By the
undoubted fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, neither the Peers of this Realm,
nor the Commons, nor both together in Parliament; nor the People Collectively
or representatively, nor any other Persons whatsoever, ever had, have, or ought
to have any Co-ercive Power over the Persons of the Kings of this Realm. It is
the Parliament which speaks, and yet Rebellion against The undoubted and
Fundamental Laws, dared Erect a High Court of Justice against her Sovereign,
and what dares not Rebellion do? She is too well versed in Holy Writ, not to
know, That to resist Kings, is to resist God; Romans 13.
What shall it be to Process, to Condemn, to murder one?

But by who is he to be Tried? Commons are Tried by Commons, Peers by Peers;
have you a Jury of Kings? And had you, there is no Judge left to give the
Sentence but God: And Woe to Rebellion, when God's to Sentence. More yet; in
case you Condemn him according to your execrable Formality of pretended Law,
may he not grant himself a Reprive? He can bestow it upon the meanest, and most
guilty Subject, shall he not be able to confer it upon himself; he can give it
another, even when the Sentence is most Just; and shall he not enjoy his own
Prerogative against the most unjust of Sentences?

Ah! To what end do I tire my self and you? Our Renowned Prince, placed by God
above Law, without Law, and against Law, must fall a Victim to the highest
Injustice. Rebellion has got the Sword, and the Sword without the Balance is
the Type of Cruelty; to Cruelty Majesty is forced to bend; and Sacrilegious
Rebellion never appeared with so ghast a Countenance, as imbrued in his Royal
Blood. That Blood will ever set her out to the detestation and horror of the
World. That Blood will blaze her to all Ages for what she is. That Blood will
speak aloud and say: Fly Rebellion, she will never spare Subject, that durst
Process, Condemn, and by Name of High Justice, Murder the Meekest of Monarchs.
No more, no more, of what without Affliction and Tears, I cannot call to mind.
His last Thoughts were his Peoples Welfare, his Kingdoms Peace, his Nations
Happiness; he died, undaunted, like himself, like a King, forgiving what the
World will never forget, so Sacrilegious a Murder. That Pardon, that Innocent
Blood, cries yet for Revenge against Rebellion, and upon Rebellion let it fall;
let Rebellion die never more to rise; let it die by the hand of Humiliation;
The subject of my third point, with which I conclude, Humiliamini, etc. Be ye
humbled under the powerful Hand of God, that he may exalt you in time of
Visitation.

In my preceding Discourse, you have seen at Leisure Rebellion Arraigned,
Process'd and Convicted, of the most detestable of Crimes, and by consequence
Guilty of the worst of Punishments; And as her Sins surmounts all others, so
would I have her Chastisement proportionable. The subject is of a large extent;
but not to transgress, I will close it in little. Men that die for Offenses
will rise again. Rebellion I would have her die so, as never to revive. Let
Rebellion then die, but how, Sub potenti manu Dei, Under the Powerful Hand of
God, by an humble Obedience, For what end? That God may exalt us in time of
Visitation.

God has his different Visitations, as you will find in Holy Writ; Visitations of
Anger, Visitations of Love, Visitations of Mercy, Visitations of Revenge,
Visitations of Humbling, Visitations of Exalting: His Visits of Humbling, Anger
and Revenge lay grievous upon us by the Scourge of Rebellion; a Road grown on
our own Soil, This seems a time of a Visitation of his Love, Mercy, and
Exalation upon us. But Humiliamini, Humiliamini, Be ye humbled. We may humble
our selves, and we may be humbled by another; to be humbled by another, is
commonly a Chastisement, to humble our selves, is now and then a satisfaction,
in order to Rebellion it is a Pevention; so that our humbling our selves, is at
once a satisfaction, for Rebellion that is passed, and prevention of Rebellion
that might come; and behold, the desired Execution done by Obedience upon
Rebellion; greater revenge cannot be taken. Satisfaction destroys it, and puts
it, as I may say to Death, Prevention hinders it from reviving, so that
Humiliation Tryumphs in the utter ruin of Rebellion.

And had I not Reason in the beginning of my Discourse to term it England's
standing Peace, more glorious than any victory in War? So it is. If Obedience
stands, Rebellion must fall. And by this Humiliation Day, our Obedience being
perpetuated, Rebellion must down for ever, Be ye then humbled under the
Powerful hand of God. The Powerful hand of God, I interpret to be Kings, in
their Scepter they sway Gods Power, in their Sword his Justice; and so by
Obedience to our Prince, we are Humbled under the Powerful hand of God, to the
total extirpation of Rebellion. The best of satisfactions we can give to the
Royal Father, is to annihilate Rebellion by a true Allegiance to his great Son;
Fasting's good, Prayer yet more excellent, by them the Rebellion of the flesh
is tamed the Rebellion of the Spirit by sole Obedience.

The ever hard neck'd Children of Israel. They Fasted, Isaiah 5.8. v. 3.
Wherefore have we Fasted, and thou see not? wherefore have we afflicted our
Soul, and thou take not knowledge? Rebellion can Fast, and none invoke the
Lord with longer breath than Rebels: But their Fast and Prayers are not
acceptable to the most High, They Are Disobedient, their Humiliation is
Hypocrisy, it enters not the heart; Hear what the Lord Answers to the complaint
of those pretenders to Prayers and Fasts, Behold in the day of your Fasting
your own Will is found. A Rebel will ever have his own will, and refusing to
submit his Will to God, gives out Gods Will to be his; and so makes God as it
were a Subject, and himself a God. From Obedience then our Humiliation is to
derive its whole Worth and Valor, and that it may be eternal, to the eternal
destruction of Rebellion, O that England would learn to know the voice of the
Serpent! Would learn no more to be deluded by those canting Charms of Liberty,
Property, and Religion. Remember that even Satan the Prince of Darkness, 2 Cor.
c. 11. v. 14. read the place, it is much to our purpose, transfigures himself
into an Angel of Light. And so does his first Child Rebellion. No pretense
whatsoever can Justify Rebellion. You have a Prince, whose Wisdom and
Experience makes him know your true Good and Happiness, I may confidently say,
better than you know it your selves. Trust him, who God has Entrusted with you.
With the free use of your Religion, your Bodies and Minds he has both eased: He
has vindicated your Properties Invaded by false Zealots, but real Persecution.
His indefatigable Concern, for the public Honor and Welfare of his Kingdom,
you cannot but own; but you must inviolably own your Duty to him. Rebellion's
to be kept down by his Wisdom, Courage, and Power; but by a generous and ready
compliance in you. No Army ever gained Victory without Obedience; and no
Kingdom without Obedience shall ever reap Glory. Humiliamini, etc. Be ye then
humbled, to be exalted. Vir Obediens loquetur Victoriam, Prove. 21. v. 28. The
Obedient Man shall speak Victory. We are to be Men, Stout Rational, but
Obedient, to be Victorious both of our Earthly and Spiritual Foes. Let
Jealousies be laid aside, and you will improve your Sovereign's Love: Appease
Animosities, Chase away Fears, and you will produce, and nourish a mutual
Confidence in each other; to your own Quiet and Comfort, to the Terror of your
Enemies, and to your King and Countries Renown. Thus in Spite of Rebellion,
by Obedience to the Son, you will complete the Wishes of his Dying Father: You Will
make an Atonement for that Sacrilegious Murder. Obedient England will be more
Glorious, than ever she was Disgraced in the Ignominy put upon her, by a few
Unnatural Rebels; and so enjoying the Fruits of a Peaceable Conscience, the
Sweets of a settled Tranquillity in this Life, she will be disposed to be Crowned
with Eternal Reward in the next: Which God of his Infinite Goodness grant us
all. In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

FINIS.

