Draught of an ACT for regulating Agents
OUR Sovereign Lord considering the many and great abuses which have creept in,
in the managing of Pr^^eses before the Lords of Session by mean and
inconsiderable persons, who have assumed to themselves the name of Agents to
the great prejudice of the Liedges both by reason of their want of probity and
their little Knowledge and Experience in such Affairs, whereby many people have
been extremly prejudged, and some utterly ruined; and also to the
discouragement of many good men, who by their Education and Experience have
attained to sufficient knowledge in that matter, and are of known Integrity:
Does therefore with advice and consent of the Estates of Parliament, Statute,
Enact and Declare, that for hereafter no person shall be allowed to manage or
agent any Process before the Lords of Session, except such as shall be named by
the faculty of Advocats or offer themselves to be named, and thereafter
particularly approven of and recaved by the said Lords, which Agents so
approven and received by them, shall have the only power and Liberty of
agenting exclusive of all others, but prejudice of the privilege due to
Advocats and their first Servants as formerly; As also to parties to Agent in
their own proceses, and but prejudice to the Lords of Session and Faculty of
Advocats to license such to Agent particular Proceses, whom for design of
studying the Law to be Advocats and interest in the parties, the said Lords
and Faculty of Advocats shall think fit: And farther the said Agents so
approven and received as said is, are hereby declared to have right to and
enjoy the Privileges of the members of the College of Justice: As also are
allowed to meet among themselves for this effect allannerly that they may
represent to the Lords of Session any abuse they may find to be committed in
the said Office by their own Members or the Encroachments of others who shall
assume that Employment at their own hand: As also to provide a Stock-purse for
supplying of their decayed Members or their Relicts and Children who may fall
in Poverty, and that by voluntar Contribution, Legacy, Donation or such other
Method as the Law allows.

Follows the Reasons for passing of the foresaid Act.
1. AS this employment is found necessary by the Experience of all Nations that
have regular Business; under the name of Procurators in several places Abroad,
and of Attorneys in England; So the same is of great Importance, and
consequently to be trusted only in good hands. For, Agents come to have the
Trust not only of their imployers Writes, but likewise, in many cases, those of
others: The Clients Secrets are deposited in their Breasts, and the fair, and
successful, and Expeditious, carrying on of Proceses depends mainly, in the
first place, upon their being right founded at the beginning after a full
knowledge of the matter of fact and Writes; and in the next place on the
careful attendance of Dyets with the Lords, Advocats, Clerks, Writers, etc.
Both which depends upon the Understanding and Vigilence of the Agent; who is to
expiscat the whole Circumstanses of the Affair by advise of Advocats (who can
only answer on what is represented) before the Liedges be troubled with the
Expense of any Action; and the exact information there anent, and precise
observance of Dyets in processes, would prevent the scandal of calumnious
Alledgeances, the trouble of the Lords in frequent Callings, the prejudice of
the Clients by long dependances, and the discredit to Advocats arrising from
Miscarriages in Processes, which, tho commonly imputed to them (there names
only being insert therein) yet are truly ascrivable mostly to the ignorance or
unfaithfulness of the Agent.

And its known how much the making a narrative of the state and Circumstances
of Proceses from time to time progressively by way of Journal; and considering
the Seasons of proceeding in the Business; would clear the affair both to the
Lords and Advocats. The want whereof has been one great occasion of much
Confusion, Miscarriage of men's Rights, and delays; But as the blame of it will
betaken off of the Advocats when Agents are only a select Number of such as are
admitted in manner mentioned in the Act: So this Regulation will prevent the
abuse, which is agreeable to the Constitution of the Nation wherein other
Employments of far less import, cannot be taken up at any persons own hand; But
are under a Regulation as to admission thereto and behavior therein; Which
cannot but be well provided for, in the present case, when Agents are to be
named by the Advocats and admitted by the Lords.

2. Hence this will be the interest of the whole Leidges, since

1. There have been many Writes of the greatest Importance lost, not only by
the carelessness and unfaithfulness of Manadgers: But likewise on occasion of
its being unknown where to seek them, tho, perhaps, they may be lying amongst
the papers of a person who was an Agent, after his Removal or Decease: But that
comes to be totally forgot while de recenti, the parties are Minors, absents,
or under such other disadvantagious Circumstances. Whereas, now, Agents will be
known, and such a Regulation will follow on their Establishment: as after death
or removal, their Papers belonging to others, will be put in safety; and
Inventars thereof patent in such manner, as any of the Liedges may find out
what he wants.

2. The Leidges will be freed of being imposed upon, by several persons who
have neither Skill nor probitie; but assume to themselves the name of Agents;
and thereby be liberat of groundless Pleas, mismanadgment of Business,
protracting of Processes, unfaithful accounts, etc. whereof there has been
such Complaint.

3. The Lords are subjected to great fatigue and Vexation, chiefly by occasion
of Processes being confused and out of Order; Of Writes founded upon therein,
not being marked distinctly at the places mentioned in the Alledgeance; Of the
Advocats not being fully informed, and frequently not advertised, when the
Process is first called, or at subsequent Callings thereof etc. all which will
be prevented by the sufficiency of the Agent.

4. The Lords do challenge the Advocats when they are not ready or distinct, So
in the Country, for the most part, all the Fatalities that fall upon the
Action, are laid to the Advocats share; Whereas were the Agents in a select
Number (to be admitted in the terms of the foresaid Act) they would take off
that unjust Imputation: and in effect the most of Manadgers about the house,
from the false Character, wherewith they are asperst by those who are ignorant
of their Constitution.

5. The poor of the Nation will likewise reap the benefit of this Act, for,
they may have Agents appointed to manage their pnrsuits the same way and manner
as they have their Advocats and Writers to the Signet, Besides that at present,
there is no fond for the indigent Relicts or Children of Writers, who as they
will be provided for when Agents are put under this Regulations, So the other
poor will get these Charities which are at present expended on such.

Finally: When Agents are so immediately under a special Government their
actions will be more particularly supervised then it was practicable hitherto,
when they were dispersed. And as this will be a check on their sufficiency
vigilance and faithfulness in their Employment toward the Leidges: So it will
be a good mean to restrain Immoralities, which our King and Government has
taken so much pains to prevent.


