OVERTURE Regulating the Breadth and Length of LINEN: To His Grace JAMES Duke
of QUEENSBERRY Marquess of Drumfries-Shire, Earl of Drumlanrick, and Sancher,
etc. His Majesty's High Commissioner to the Parliament of SCOTLAND, and Most
Honorable Estates of Parliament.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by John Reid, 1700.

AN OVERTURE, Annent Regulating the BREADTH and LENGTH of LINEN.
To His Grace JAMES Duke of QVEENSBERRY, His Majesty's High Commissioners to
the Parliament of SCOTLAND, and Most Honorable Estates of Parliament.
THE Sovereign Governor of the Universe, and inexhaustable Fountain of all
Perfection, has been pleased to Cloth Your Grace with a Considerable Ray of
His Power and Greatness; Forasmuch as, you Represent the Person and Authority
of one of the most August, Magnanimous and Potent Monarchs in the World; which
is a Dignity no less becoming so Great a Personage. Descended of so Illustrious
Progenitors, whose Magnanimous and Heroic performance make up a considerable
part of our Histories; than the Moderation, Affibility and other singular
Accomplishments of your Person, from whence we expect such special Acts of your
Benevolence, Goodness and Prudence, in your Conduct on this Occasion, as may be
lasting Blessings to this poor Nation, and Emblam your Name to Posterity; For
as it is the property of the Fountain of all Goodness to take pleasure in Acts
of Goodness and Bounty, so it is the Glory and Happiness of Mortals to imitate
Him as much as possible, and the greater they are in Power and Authority so
much more are they Capable of Acts of Benovolence; And your Grace being now in
so Eminent a Station, has a fair Opportunity of doing much toward the Welfare
and prosperity of this Kingdom, and thereby to add a Gem to the Diadems of
Glory purchased by your Ancestors, and Eternize your Name to following
Generations.

And you the Honorable Estates of Parliament from all Corners of the Kingdom
being now Assembled, cannot but be well acquainted, and sensibly touched with
the present Circumstances thereof, and consequently understand how to Regulate
Matters, so as the present miseries of the same may be in a great Measure
removed; Wherefore it may seem presumptious for a Person in my Circumstances to
offer any thing to your Wisdoms Consideration for that end. Nevertheless when
it is considered, that a Finger or a Toe may be as sensibly affected with the
Distemper of the Body as one Eye or Arm, and that a Mean Person may discry
something worthy to be noticed by the Greatest, which through the Multiplicity
of other important Affairs, may be by them overlooked; your Wisdom will
Construct favorably of this undertaking, especially seeing the sole Motive
hereunto inducing me, can bea^ no other Interpretation then my hearty desires
to see the prosperity of this poo^ Nation, being exceedingly concerned to
behold the distressed Condition it is in at present, and has formerly expressed
my good wishes for the public Good, not only to the hazard, but to the loss of
my ALL, as is not altogethe^ unknown to some of the Honorable Members of this
August Assembly, of which I might give a hint, if Your Wisedoms would have the
patience to hear, and the Goodness to notice, both as to what I did in the
Equipment of Men for his Majesty's Service, about the time of his Accession to
the Throne, and other Services; As well as the Expense I have been at of late,
in forming some Overtures into writing, and putting the same to the Press,
merely for the Public Good, which tho it be but small, is much to a poor Man,
and two Mi^^ from a poor Widaw is accounted greater Charity, than much Treasure
from the Rich.

But that I may come to the Matter purposed, and be no farther tideous by a
prolix Introduction; I humbly conceive it were not unworthy of your Wisdoms
Consideration, to think on some means for Regulating the Breadth and Length of
our Linen, which at present is so irregular, and for the most part so narrow,
that it does in a great Measure mar Traffic, and is unfit for many uses.

The Length of our Linen is commonly from 7 or 8 ellns to 10 or 12 a Piece, as
many of them, with odd ha^^ Yairds as of an even Measure, and these too often
made up by tareing of an handbreadth or two off one that is over, to make up
another that is short; And the Breadth from an Eln to 3 Quarters of an Eln so
that when the same is of^ered to Sale in any place except England and Ireland,
where the Merchants are pretty well acquainted with those irregular Measures,
sca^ce will a Merchant give more for the longest than the shortest Piece, or
for the Broad than the narrow, being unacquainted with Calculating such
irregular Measures, all other Nations making each sort of their Linen at a
certain Length and Breadth, as we may lee by the Musellines, Cambricks, and
Calegoes, etc. Imported, each sort or species of these being of a certain
Length and Breadth, on which the Merchant relyes without Measuring, buying the
same by the Piece. But when our Linen is offered to Sale in Foreign Parts,
the Pieces being so irregular, there is no Barganing that way.

Perhaps without farther Trial, some may object, that already a Law is made for
Regulating the Breadth and Length of Linen, but the putting of it in practice
was found incommodious and Grieveous, for as much as, many of the Weavers not
having furniture for wor^ng Cloth of that breadth could not ^mply, and honest
People having ^^eir Webs seized upon that account, ^^de Complaint to their
Landlords, ^epresenting that the Price of their ^^nnen being only that which
was al^^ted for paying of their Rent, with^^t which they could not make
pay^ent, and the same being taken from ^^m, because not of the Dementions
^^scribed by Law. The Landlords ^erposed, and by their Remonstrances ^vailed to
make this Law of no effect. Notwithstanding of all which. I shall with
Submission) make it appear, ^t the breadth and length may be ^^gulated with
little or no difficulty, (...) in the first place, shall show some ^^^siderable
advantages of making the ^he of a fixed length and breadth, viz, ^welve elns
long, and one broad. so ^t when the same is offered to Sale, ^erchants will
easily know how to buy ^y the piece, without troubling themselves to calculat
irregular Measure^ is now commonly in use: But the gr^ set advantage is in the
breadth, (...) Our narrow Linen being unfit for m^^ uses (needless to be
Repeated) reason of its narrowness, is in a man merely bought by the Merchants
a Linen Drepers of England to sort their course Linnens, and is alm^ wholly
applied for the use of Boys (...) Children; And the meanest sort Persons of
riper years, who cont^ themselves with it, allenerally for (...) cheapness of
the same; Forasmuch they can buy three elns near three ^^ters and an half
Broad, as cheap as (...) elns of that which is eln Broad, of (...) like
fineness.

This being Matter of Fact, can^^ be otherwise proven than by the Te^imony of
Merchants and others, a quainted in that matter, to whose D^ termination I
refer it; And in the me^^ time shall make it appear, that the is no such
Difference in the proportion (...) Yearn, of which each is made, as the Price,
as is above hinted; For sup^^se the narrow Cloth were but three ^arters Broad,
the Yearn which would (...) four elns of the one would be three (...) the
other, whereas often times the ^arrow Cloth is three quarters and an ^^lf in
Breadth, the Yearn which makes ^^ght elns of this, would be seven of (...) eln
Broad; But that I may come ^^aret to the true Breadth, and that which will very
near hold in all Nar^^w Linen, is three quarters and about ^^e third part of
an quarrer of an eln, ^his also I refer to the Judgment and ^etermination of
all acquainted in that ^^ffair; And here I fix the Breadth in ^^eneral, and
from thence sho^^l Calculite the Difference, adhereing alwise (...) my first
Assertion. Viz. That Lin^^n of an eln Broad, will give a third more than that
of the Ordinar Breadth, ^at is to say, if the Narrow give 10 ^ence, the Broad
will give 15, and if ^^e Narrow give 12, the other will give 18 at least, etc.
Whatever Price is of, yea, I may affirm that 12 d. Clo^ Narrow, will of the same
fineness give (...) d. if eln Broad, even tho it were an in^ less; Nevertheless
I shall reckon t^ the Difference, as 18 to 12, and pr^ ceed to Calculate the
Difference of t^ Proportion of Yearn, of which ea^ is made, which being as 10
to 12, for (...) elns of Cloth at 3 Quarters and thi^ part of a quarter, does
exactly agr^ to ten else of one eln in Breadth. The Price of 12 else Narrow is
12 Shillin^ and the Price of ten elns eln Broad, (...) 15 Shillings, according
to the form Supposition, which is one 4th pa^^ more than what it would give of
the o^dinar Breadth.

Perhaps some may say, if there w^^ such Difference in the Price of the Broad?
and Narrow Cloth, why does not People make all their Linen el^ Broad. If this
objection be sustaine^ 100 such may be brought in, As for instance, if the
Datch who leave some hundreds of miles from our Coasts, find profit in sending
Busses hither to the Her^ing Fishing: How comes it to pass that our own People
who need loss little or no Time in going to and coming from the the place where
the Herrings are to be Caught; And in the time of Storm or Tempest may be
Livering and Repacking of their Herrings ashore, when the other (...) Obliged
to ly by. And can mantain ^^ishers and Other Persons employed for ^alting and
Packing, etc. at easier rates than the Dutch can, Does not find it their
Interest to Apply themselves to such ^ profitable Labor? together with many
^uch Queries, to which no Answer can be given; Besides the Folly and Ignorance
of these who neglect it: Nevertheless I shall give two Reasons why I judge
people ^eglect to make their Cloth eln broad; The first is, From a Fault in
the Weavers, who usually exact twice as much for working Linen of an eln
Broad as for that which is Narrow of the same Finness; The Reasons they give
for this unreasonable price, Are, tha^ they not being usually Employed t^ work
Cloth of that Breadth, The^ want Reeds, and other Furniture fit (...) working
the same; And when they a^ obliged to provide such Furniture up^ on special
Occasions, they ^ndeavour t^ make the profit of their Labor Recompense that
Expense; They like wife say, that Cloth of this Breadt^ requiring the extending
of their Armsurther than Ordinar, to drive through the Shuttle, they are
thereby much Fatigued, tho others who mak^ a daily practice of Working Cloth
(...) that Breadth, find themselves no way^ thereby Incommoded, as I have hea^^
from several of themselves. And ha^^ farther declared, that they would scar^
Reckon any Difference between Working Cloth of an eln Broad, and tha^ which is
near one Quarter Narrower^ However it be, this Extravagant pric^ for Working,
being a sensible Deburs^ment to the Employer, and most of People ^or having
Judgment to Calculate ex^ctly the Difference of the price of their Broad and
Narrow Linen, with Re^pect to the quantity of Yearn, of which it is Composed,
Generally believing that whatever the Price of the Broad may exceed that of the
Narrow, a proporti^nable quantity of Yearn is required of ^he one more than the
other, and if ^here be any odds at all, the double ^rice of Working the
Brodest, does at ^ast cast the Balance.

The other Reason is, Merchants not ^nding Broad Cloth ordinarily in the
^ercats, lay their Account with buying ^^at which is Narrow, and in a manner
Confine themselves to such sorts of Lin^^n as they can usually find; And on ^^e
other hand, the Linen Drepers in England, which are in a manner the sole
Merchants for that Comodity, laying their Account with no other sorts of ^innen
from this Country, than what they have hitherto been in use to get ^^om hence,
do provide themselves in these sorts of course Linen from Hamburg, and other
Foreign Places, which we cannot afford, and buy ou^ Linne^ only to sort
themselves with some Narrow for the use of Boys and Children and the Meaner
sort of People.

Now upon the former Supposition (which I hope all known in that affai^ will
grant) that two elns of eln Broa^ Cloth, will yield as much Money, a^ three of
the Common Breadth, provided they are both of alike Fineness, a^ has been
showed, one fourth part more Money may be had for the same quantity of Yarn,
which would be 12 Elns Narrow if it were made Broad, that is to say 100 lib:
Sterling worth Narrow Cloth, would be worth 125 llb: had the same Yearn been
made in Linen of an El^^ Broad. And some think the whole Linen Cloth Exported
from this Kingdom yearly, may be between 2 and 300000 lib. Sterling in value;
but let us restrict it only to 200000, the same being made in Broad Cloth would
yield 250000 lib. But because it may be alleged, that some of our Linen is
actually Eln Broad, and Consequently will yield no more than it does at
present, tho the rest were made of the same Breadth likewise; For this I shall
allow a 5th part to be deduced off^^e 50000 lib: supposed to be produced by
making all our Linen Eln Broad, more than what it yields at present; so the
profit hereby arising will be but 40000 lib. yearly, yet when it is considered,
that the English and Foreign Customs are exacted by the Eln; not only so much
of these Customs will be saved as the Broad Cloth does exceed the Narrow in
proportion, which is a^^th part, but likewise the value of the Broad being a 3d
part more than the Narrow according to the number of elns; Whatever the Broad
Cloth is better than the Narrow bulk, for bulk, (which has been already
reckoned,) one 4th part of the value of the Narrow; So much of the Capital
S^^^k pays neither Custom nor any other Charg which will at least
over-balance, that can be deduced upon Accoun^ the Broad Cloth at presented
expor^ so that 50000 lib: will still be m^ more yearly than it now yields.

To clear this a little further, I she suppose a Merchant to buy 1200 (...) of
Linen of the ordinar Breadth, 12 sh. per eln, and a thousand elns Broad, at 18
Pence per eln, the Yet of which they are made being alike both, consequently
there is no Differe^ in the bulk or Weight of both parc^ the Expense of Carriage
or Transpo^tion, and other Charges will be a (...) in both parcels, save only
that of C^ome, which is exacted by the eln, (...) in this the Goods of the
least val^ bear the greatest Expense, Viz. (...) being entered at any Custom
Of in England, the Narrow Cloth p^ 2400 Pence, and the Broad only t^ Thousand,
or if the duty be less more, does not weaken it the Argume^^ his only being
supposed for a Dem^stration, (as is likewise the value of the whole Lennen
exported) grant him to Sell the Narrow at 15 sh: the Broad at an equivolent
advance, will yield 22 Pence half penny per eln. Off 75 l. 2 d. per eln being
deduced for Custom, (as for other Charges it is needless to reckon, seeing it is
only in this, the Broad and Narrow Cloth differ) there remains 65 Lib: which
cost at first buying 60, wherefore the whole profit made of this parcel is 5
lib: Whereas the 1000 elns of Broad Cloth at 22 d. half penny per (...), yields
93 l: 13 sh 4 d, from whence deduce 2000 Pence of Custom* which is 8 lib: 6 sh.
8 d. there remains 85 lib: 8 sh: 4 d. from which Substract 75 lib: which was
the price given for it ^t first, there remains 10 lib. 8 sh. 4 d. which is 5
lib. 8 sh. 4 d. more profit than what the other parcel does produce, so much
more does this parcel give Abroad ^han the other, which because it stands the
Merchant dearer than the parcel of Nar^ow, cannot be Reckoned all Gain to him;
because heought to have profitproportio^able to his Stock bestowed, yet it is
a^ clear Gain to the Kingdom, for out of thi^ parcel of Yarn which would have
been but 1200 elns of Narrow Linne^ and would have vielded no more tha^ what is
Reckoned in the other parcel Yet the same being made in Cloth o^ an eln
Breadth, yields to the Selle^ here 15 lib: more then it would have done in
Narrow, besides 5 lib: 8 sh. 4 (...) Abroad to the Merchant, the Expenc^ of
Customs being deduced of both from whence it is plain that a quantity of Yarn
which would make 60 Lib* worth of Narrow Linen, will yield 8^ lib; 8 sh: 4 d.
when made in Broad, thu^ the Saving of part of Foreign Customs and the other
advantages arising from making of Our Linen eln Broad, will do more than
Compence all that was deduced upon account of a 5th. part o^ our Linen, being
granted to be e^^ Broad, And for that Reason could b^ no farther in that
Respect improven.

But besides all this, there would be great Advantage many ways by making of
our Linen of a fixed Length, because we could then fell it to Advantage in
Foreign Parts, and get in Exchange these Goods at first hand, which we often
times buy at the second with ready Money; neither would we need to de^end so
much upon England for vending of it, which is without doubt, out Wisdom, seeing
they are taking all possible measures to discourage our Linen Trade, not only
by encouraging Linen Manufactures in Ireland (which are already come a great
length,) and ^utting off our Traffic thither by imppsing an Exorbitant Duty
upon Linen Imported to that Kingdom, But alto have laid an Additional
Imposition upon our Linen Imported to England, and are at present supplied in
a great Measure with Course Linen Yarn from ^eland, which formerly they used
to get from hence, for making of Buttons Gimps and Bus^ines, etc. From a^ which
it may be easily perceived, that the Regulating of the Breadth and Length of
Linen is very necessary and Convenient: But in respect it falls often out,
that good Laws are not punctually put in Execution; It will be necessary that
your Wisdoms do not only Reviv^ former Laws Determining the Breadt^ and Length
of Linen, but also that effectual Measures may be taken for putting the same in
Execution, and for tha^ end, with all humility, I shall offer the following
Overtures.

First, That there be timely warning given at the Merkat-Crosses an^
Church-Doors, so that the Weave^ may have full time to work out all the Webs
that they have already Warpe^ before the Act begin to be put in Ex^cution, so
that they may have no pretext of making Narrow Cloth after the time perfixt.

Secondly, A Month or six Weeks before this Law begin to take Effect, (...) the
Heritors or Chief Farmers in ever^ Paroch be appointed to Meet and Condescend
on some of their Number to take a Cirquiet through their several Quarters, to
see whether the Weavers have provided Reeds and other Furniture fit for working
of Eln Broad Linen, and where they find any Reeds, Hiddles or Shafts for
Working of Linen, that are not of such a Length as may work Cloth of an Eln
Broad, let the same be siezed, burnt and destroyed.

Thirdly, At every Brugh Royal and Merkat-Town, let there be a Person appointed
fot taking Inspection of all Cloth offered to Sale, and to put a mark or stamp
on each Piece which is of the Dementions prescribed, and all Cloth that is
offered to Sale without this mark, to be siezed without respect of Persons, the
Owner to Forfeit the Cloth, and the Weaver that Wrought it, to loss the price
of Working, and the party to have Reparation of him, if the same is already
paid.

Fourthly, That there be some p^^sons empowered by the Government, break open
all Packs of Linen offe^ to be Exported, and if any Cloth (...) found therein
not marked by some the said Persons for that end appoint^ to seize and
Confiscat the same.

And further, perhaps it may not improper, in part to determine the pri^^ of
Working or Weaving e^n ^road Li^nen; Forasmuchas, the Unreasona^^^ exaction of
Weavers is no small hind^^ance to the Working of Broad Clot^ upon the pretenses
above mentioned. If therefore it should be ordained the Weavers should exact no
more (...) Working of eln Broad Cloth, than the used to do, for the like
quantity of Y^^ in Narrow, and Bailies of Burghs, a^ Justices of Peace to
determine wh^ any Contriversy shall happen. This (...) be no ways Unreasonable,
for no rea^ can be given, showing that three elns eln Broad Cloth will require
more Labo^^ than to work 4 Elns 3 Quarters Broa^ but one might rather think
that 3 Elns of Broad Cloth would require least ^abour. Neither will it be any
consi^erable Hardship for Weavers to make Utensils for working Linen of this
Breadth, for there will be no need of making of it altogether new, their Reeds
and Hedles can be lengthned with great ^ase, and no other Furniture will need
to be changed, the Frame of their Looms being generally, if not all of them,
fit for working Cloth above an eln broad.

Having thus far laid before your Grace, and the Honorable Estates of
^arliament. what I humbly conceive may be useful as to the Regulating of ^^e
Breadth and Length of Linen, I ^all with all Humility put you Wisdoms (...)
mind of a small Treatise, Entitled, ^^e Undoubted Art of Thriving, which
offered to you a^ your former meeting in May last, Wherein I hope is made ^^ar,
that this Nation may be greatly ^^riched, by raising a Fund of Credit, and the
great Dis^^lty of Circulating ^^otes (...) Hazard of Vitiation (...) removed, I
hope all other Objections may be easily ^^pelled; Yea, I humbly conceive all
^^terial Objections are in the Book it (...) so enervated, that the perusal of
t^^ same will be Sufficent to convince ye^ Wisdoms, of the great advantage the
may thereby ensue to the Nation: N^ vertheles, for as much as. I have hea^ two
things objected against the said p^^ject, of which I took no special notice the
said Tretise. I shall now make a sh^^ reply to each of them.

The first is, How is the Nation se^ed, that so many of these Notes she be
canceled every year as is propose^ or what security has every Person the may
come to have right to the sa^ Notes, that the said project shall (...) fail,
and every man sustain the loss as much as the value of the Not^ in his
possession amount to, wh^ ever a subsequent Parliament shall fi^^ this project
inconvenient?

To this I answer, that for every No^^ or percel of Notes that are given o^ the
managers or Commissioners apoi^^ed for that end, are to receive go^ Security
from the party to whom they are given out, that he or they shall be furthcoming
to the value, with interest so long as the same remains unpayed, and to take
the Sufficiency of the Security upon their own Hazard; So if ever the
Parliament should think the citculation of the said Notes inconvenient there
are Sufficient Funds for paying all persons in specie, what Notes are in their
Honds; But any who pleases to Consider the Calculation of the expense of
Circulating the said Notes, as it is made in the said Treatise, will plainly
see, that the expense of Management comes not to above a Tenth part of the
interest of the Notes, and therefore this Objection can never take place.

The other Objection is, That if such a Project should be promoted, it would be
very prejudicial to the Bank, for as much as, these Notes would be transmitted
from hand to hand, and supply the Room of Bank Notes.

With Submission to your Wisdoms, I cannot Homologat such an Opinion, having
alwise looked upon the Scarcity, and not the plenty (...) Money, as prejudical
to a Ba^ For the Bank and the Project propose in the said Treatise are intended
for qu^ different Ends, and serve for quite different Uses. The Bank being
intend^^ for receiving Money in specie from Tr^^ding Persons, and delivering
out Not^ to them for their Conveniencie, it being easier for 'em to Exchange a
few Paper than to tell over vast Sums of Money in which they are Subject to
(...) overseen at Receipt or Delivery, bot^ as to the Quantity and Quality. And
on the other hand, the Bank is ready Fund to answer the pressing occ^ sions of
Merchants or others, who a^^ thereby presently provided with wha^ Sums they
please for a short time, upon good Security, so that there is no nee^ for them
to keep Sums of Money by them, but may bestow it whenever they can do it to
advantage, seeing they may depend upon the Bank for Money to satisfy their
Creditors at a Choke. B^^ the design of these Notes proposed a^^ ^^t supplying
every one who can give ^^fficient Security, either by Morgages (...) otherwise,
with what Sums they want (...) Traffic with or employ in Manufa^tures, thereby
to be improven so as the ^orrower may make profit to himself, besides the
Interest, which he is obliged to pay to the Managers of the National ^tock
proposed, and herein I should willingly oblige the Bank, that no person
Borrowing from the said Managers, should be permitted to Repay it till he keept
the same a Year, two or three at cast, for it is not the interest of the said
office to lend Money for a short time; ^^t that I may Prosecute this a little
^a^ther, the promoting of a National Stock in the Terms proposed, will
exceedingly advance the Bank, for not only may the Proprietars of it, receive
(...) much benefit by taking in, and ^^ving out of the National Stock Notes, as
they would do of the like ^alue of Gold or Silver, if the same were immediately
produced; But if they should think that Merchants and Factors having these
Notes transmitted them, would not trouble themselves give in these to the Bank,
and take (...) Bank Notes, yet such as have Mo^lying by them, (for so I call
these Note^ and cannot immediately bestow it to advantage or secure it in good
Hands, w^ be satisfied to give it in to the Ban^ till they find how to dispose
of it, a^ on the other hand, others upon press^^^ occasions will borrow the
same to sat^fie their Creditors at a Junctur; And father these Notes will
gradually decre^ so that in 25 years they will be all Ca^cel'd, and as much
Silver or Gold C^ in their Room, merely by the Annurents paid to the National
Stock ^fice, even besides a third part allow for Expense of Management, and
oth^^ Contingencys, and what is made (...) the improvement of those who are t^^
Borrowers: From all which it is m^ evident, the Nation cannot but be gre^^ly
Enriched, and as Money encreas^^ the Bank must proportionably be adva^ced,
otherwise the Bank of Engla^^ should be of less value than the Ba^ of Scotland,
and the Bank of Amsterd^ than either. And if I might ask a Que^^tion at our
Banke^s, I could be satis^^ed to know whether they have more ^^ain by a dozen
or 20 Merchants, and ^onsiderable Trading Men in Edinburgh, or by 100 or 200
meaner sort of Shop- keepers and Pedlers, and if they say the first, I would
fain know why the last might not advance their Interest proportionable to their
Number, if they were as rich, of which they would seem to be afraid, when they
speak against the project proposed. If it were not for swelling this to too
large a proportion, I might add several things to show the Groundlessness, (not
to say Rediculousness) of our Bankers objection.

To conclude, I shall be no fatther ^edious to your Grace and the Honorable
Estates, save only to put you in mind, that in the foresaid Treatise, besides
the project for raising a Fund of Credit, there are several things proposed for
improvement of Manufactures, providing for the Poor, and several other things,
which I hope may not be altogether unworthy of your Thoughts; as likewise an
Overture for Suppressing of Vice a Idleness, which I gave in by it self most of
the Honorable Members Parliament; Wherein I humbly rep^sent, that the E^ecting
of an Office each Burgh, and in each Parish in t^^ Country, for Recording the
Names of a Inhabitants, and Certificats of those w^^ remove from one place to
another; a^ that some honest Men may be appoint^^ to Visit each family therein
Monthly, a^^ to make report to the said Office, ea^ in his respective Bounds,
whether the be any Persons residing there, who ca^ not give satisfying Accounts
of the^ selves, to the intent they may be de^ with according to their Merit,
(...) which if your Wisdoms think fit to consider, I hope you will find seve^
things proposed, which may be of go^ use. That you may with unanim^^^ and
Concord proceed, and Act in the Session of Parliament as with one sho^der, in
promoving the welfare of the poor Nation, shall be the earnest Pra^ers of

Your Grace, Lordships and Honors (...) Humble and Obediant Servant Ja:
Donaldson


