Draught of an Act brought in from the Committee of Trade, prohibiting the
Importation of Silk-Stuffs, etc.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Does
strictly Prohibit and Forbid the Importation of all Stuffs of any kind, made
of Silk or Hair, and the importation of Caligoes or other Stuffs of any kind
made of Cotton, or wherein there is any Cotton, Hair or Silk; as also of Capes,
Stockings, Gloves, Buttons, or any other kind of manufactored Cottan, Hair or
Silk, or wherein any Cottan, Hair or Silk shall be found; and all manner of
White-Threed-Laces and Points of any kind, and that from and after the
Promulgation of this Act, excepting Musline, and all plain Black-Silk-Stuffs
and Velvets for Women's Hoods and Scarffs only; as also, Velvets for Pales,
Mort-cloaths, Foot-mantles, and the Robes of such public Officers who are in
use to wear Velvets upon them: Excepting likewise from this Act, whatever of
the foresaids prohibited Goods shall be imported by the Company of Scotland
trading to Africa and the Indies, on their own Stock, and to their believe
allenarly. And Ordains that all prohibited Goods imported contrair to this Act,
shall be seized and brought before some of the next adjacent Magistrates, and
the Magistrate shall immediately cognosce if the Goods be forbidden; and if they
be, he shall within two days time call two of the next Commissioners of Supply,
or Justices of Peace, who are hereby required to concur with him, and they
shall carry the said Goods to the Market cross, betwixt ten and twelve in the
Forenoon, and there and then they shall burn and destroy all the said Goods,
having first Inventared them, and given a Declaration on the said Inventar,
bearing that they were seized and cognosced, and thereafter burnt and
destroyed: And if either the said Seizure or Magistrate to whom the said seized
Goods are brought, shall failie, they shall be liable to the same Pains as
Importers; which Declaration expressing both quantity and value, attested by
the Magistrate, and two of the Commissioners of Supply, or Justices of Peace,
shall be a full ground and title to the Seizer and others underwritten, for
acquiring of all his Proportions of the Fines and Penalties from the persons
liable according to the tenor of this Act. And it is hereby Statute and
Declared, That all Importers, Resetters, Collectors or Farmers of the Customs,
Surveyers or Waiters, who shall assist, concur or connive at the importing of
the said prohibited Manufacture, and Carriers who shall import the samen by
Land, and Masters of Ships who shall import the same by Sea, and all who buy or
sell or wear or use the same in Apparel, Houshold-furniture or otherways, and
the Tailors and others employed in making Apparel or Houshold-furniture
thereof, that they shall be fined separatly, without relief, as follows, viz.
The Importer, Resetter, Collector or Farmers of the Customs, Carrier, Master of
the Ship, the Buyer or Seller (in way of Merchandice and not for proper use)
Surveyers or Waiters transgressing in the value of the prohibited Goods
imported, or five hundred Merks, at the option of the persons after mentioned,
to whom the Fine is to belong, viz. two parts to the Discoverer and Pursuer,
and a third to the Fiscal of the Court before whom the matter is cognosced. And
if any Master of a Ship shall transgress, by importing in his Ship any of the
said forbidden Goods, then the pain shall be Confiscation of the Ship, the one
half to the Discoverer, and the other half to his Majesty, and that the Ship be
immediately sold by Roup, for making the said Division effectual, reserving
relief to the Owner against the Master thereof. And if any of the Seamen import
in any Ship any of the said prohibited Goods, he shall be liable to six Months
Imprisonment, and Escheat of Movables to the Master for his relief: And the
Carriers Horse and Furniture to be immediately seized and belong to the Seizer,
and himself to be imprisoned until he declare the Owner or Imployer upon Oath,
and the Wearer, or User, or Tailor, or other employed in making up the said
Apparel or Funiture, to be fined in the Sum of 500 Merks each separatly, and
all these Penalties by and attour burning of the Goods. And for the greater
Encouragement of such as shall make the foresaid Seizure: It is hereby further
Statute, that in case any person shall make the said Seizure of Goods, and
shall make Faith, that he is not able to discover the Owner of the Goods
seized; then and in that case he shall have the Reward of a 100 lib, or
proportionally under if the Goods be not of that value, to be paid to him by
the next Collector of his Majesty's Customs, under the pain of the double;
which Sum or Reward shall be allowed to the Collector in his Accounts, and this
Additional Reward to endure till the next Session of Parliament, and no longer;
And if any Magistrate aforesaid shall be informed of any such Imported Goods,
and shall be required to Assist to the Seizing thereof, he shall without delay
give Councurrence, and make all diligent Search for the same, and make open
Doors if need be: And further, the Magistrate who refuses or delays to do so, or
who shall not judge and Execute the Laws against the Dilinquents and
Contraveeners of this Act, he or they shall be liable for the foresaid
Penalties, and Action shall be given to the Informer and Pursuer against him
before any Judge competent Summarly; and if it be pursued before the Lords of
Session, it is to be discussed without abiding the course of the Roll. And in
regard there are or may be some of the several kinds of the said Prohibited
Goods in the Merchants hands not yet Vended: Therefore His Majesty with consent
foresaid, Statutes and Ordains, that all Merchants who have any Goods
Prohibited by this Law, in their Shope or Warehouses, shall betwixt and the
(...) Day of (...) Inventar all the said Goods in their own Books, and extend
an Double of the said Inventar; the which prohibited Goods being so Inventared,
they shall apply themselves to the Keepers of the Halls of the Foreign Cloth,
in whose Hands a Seal it to be lodged by the Magistrates of the Burgh where the
said Goods are, for Sealing all the said prohibited Goods; which Seals are to
have an Thistle on the one side, and the Name of the Town where the said Seal
is kept on the other side: and the said Merchants are hereby Ordained to
require the said Keeper, to come to their Shops and Warehouses, to compare the
said Inventars with the Goods in their Possession, which being found just, to
require him to Seal the said Goods, after the doing whereof, to deliver to the
said Keeper the Double of the said Inventar; which Double and the Inventar
contained in the Merchants Books is to be Subscribed by the Merchant himself,
and Appender of the Seal: and in case the Keeper of the said Seal, refuse to
Append the same he being required thereto under form of Instrument, he shall be
Fined in the Sum of an 100 lib. besides the loss of his Office; and the
Magistrates are hereby Ordained to name another in his place: And further, it is
Statute and and Ordained, that the said Goods shall be Sealed betwixt and the
(...) day of (...) next by the said Hall keeper, and immediately thereafter the
said Seals are to be broken at the sight of the Magistrates of the place where
the said Seals are kept, which Magistrates are hereby obliged to take sufficient
security for the Keepers faithful administrating his Office, and for which
sealing the Sealer shall have one shilling Scots as his Reward for ilk piece to
which he shall append the said Seal; And farther, it is hereby Statute and
Ordained, that the said Merchants shall give an Account of their Retail of the
said inventard Goods quarterly to the said Keeper of the Halls, bearing the
Names of the persons to whom they were sold. that they be recorded, thereby to
make known when all contained in the Inventars are sold out, and the Merchant
failling to give in the said quarterly Accounts, shall be liable in a 100 lib.
toties quoties, and whatever of the said Goods shall be found either in
Edinburgh or elsewhere not so sealed, shall be repute as wrongously imported
and burnt as herein appointed, and the counterfiting of the said Seal is,
hereby discharged under the pain of Forgery: Declaring always* that this Act
shall not extend to Furniture belonging to any Scots Man, bought for their own
use before the date of this Act, nor to any wearing Clothes bought and used by
any person at any time when they resided abroad, they giving their Oath that
the said Goods were bought for their proper use, and made and used before
their coming into this Kingdom. As also, it is farther Statute, that the
Merchants who have any such prohibited Goods in their Shop, shall give Bond not
to import any Silk or other prohibited Goods, and that neither they nor any for
their behove, shall import any of the prohibited Goods, or retail any of them,
under the Penalty of 6000 lib. and whatever Merchant or others against whom it
shall be proven that they have imported any Silk, or other Manufacture
whatsomever contrair to this Act, albeit the Goods be not found nor seized, yet
if it be proven by his Oath or otherways as accords of the Law, before any
judge competent, the person so guilty shall be liable in an 1000 Merks of Fine
toties quoties, to be applied to the Pursuer and Phiscal tn manner foresaid,
excepting nevertheless from this Act, all manner of Silk, Hair or Cotton
Manufacture, made or to be made within Kingdom, with all the necessary
Materials for making thereof allennarly; As also, excepting the importing,
Selling, Buying and Wearing all manner of plain Ribbens until the next Session
of Parliament, and the Selling, Buying and Wearing such of all the said
prohibited Goods, as are already imported before the date of this Act.


