THE Voyages and Travels Of that Renowned Captain, Sir Francis Drake, INTO THE
WEST INDIES, And round about the WORLD.

Giving a perfect Relation of his Strange Adventures, and many Wonderful
Discoveries; His Fights with the SPANIARD, and many Barbarous Nations; His
taking S. IAGO, S. DOMINGO, CARLAGENA, S. AUGUSTA, and many other places in the
Golden Country of AMERICA, and other parts of the World: His Description of
Monsters, and Monsterous People. With many other Remarkable Passages not before
Extant; Contained in the History of LIFE and DEATH, both pleasant and
profitable to the Reader.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by M. H. and I. M. for P. Brooksby, at the Golden-Ball, near
the Hospital Gate, in West-Smith-field. 1683.

THE VOYAGES AND TRAVELS Of that Renowned Captain, Sir Francis Drake, INTO THE
WEST INDIES.
SIR Francis Drake was born at Ipswich, and in his Youth put Apprentice to a
Master of a Vessel, during which time he gave himself wholly to the study of
Marin Affairs, and grew so perfect therein, that he in the end became the
Worlds Wonder, the Nations Glory, and Terror to its Enemies; in demonstration
of which, I shall declare his several Voyages and great Achievements, till his
Death.

First, Then he having by his many Exploits gained great Applause, and the
Reputation of an able Seaman, was made Captain of a small Vessel by Queen
Elizabeth, and employed against the Spaniard, her Mortal Enemy, from whom he
took diverse Prizes near Home; But not so contented, he, on the 24th. of May,
1572. set Sail in the Paschal of Plymouth, a Ship of 70 Tuns, and mounted with
10 Guns, accompanied with the Swan, a Ship of 25 Tuns, and 8 Guns, Commanded by
his Brother John Drake: having on Board both the Vessels, 73 Men and Boys, with
all other Necessaries, and having a fair Wind, came to Guadalupa, one of the
West India Islands, on the 29th. of June, but found nothing there, except some
few Cottages made of Boughs, and covered with Palmata Leaves, which secured
them from Rain, in the Nature of Tiles; yet they had sight of two Canows, but
could not reach them, by reason the Calm was so great. These Canows are Boats
which the Indians use, being for the most part cut out of Trees like Troughs,
and a piece of Wood fixed on either side, to keep them from overturning;
Whereupon, after they had watered their, they weighed Anchor, and Sailed to
Port Phesant, so named, because of the abundance of that sort of Foul found
there: and there going on Shore, found that one Mr. Garret of Plymouth, had
been lately there, and had left an Inscription in Lead nailed to a Tree, to
warn him not to stay in that Port, forasmuch as the Spaniards had notice of his
Arrival; yet Landing more Forces, he resolved to stay and build a Pinnace,
which he affected, fortifying the Port in the mean while, to prevent any
surprise. And whilst they stayed there, a Bark came from the Isle of Wight,
bringing in a Spanish Prize, which joined with Captain Drake; So that having
finished the Pinnace, the 3 Ships and Pinnace Sailed to the Isle of Pinos,
where they found 2 Spanish Ships of Nombre de Dois, Lading Timber by the
Negroes. In those Vessels they were informed of the State of the City and
Country, and that new Forces were daily expected, to defend it against the
Symerons, a Black People, with long Hair, who had Revolted from the Spaniards,
by reason of their Cruelty, and since chosen themselves two Kings. Whereupon
setting the Negroes on Shore with some gifts, Captain Drake resolved to go to
Nombre de Dois, which he entered by Night, beating the Spaniards from their
Defenses, who hung Lines a thwart the East end of the Street, to make the
English believe, by the lighted Matches tied thereon, that their Forces were
greater than indeed they were, and immediately Fired, which was answered with a
like number of Fire-shot and Arrows from the English; they came to push of
Pike, and butt end of the Musket, upon which the Spaniards fled, and the King's
Treasury consisting of 360 Tun of Silver Bars, and a like value of Gold, had
fell into the hands of the English, had not Captain Drake been unfortunately
wounded in the Leg, which caused the loss of so much Blood, that he fainted,
yet nevertheless he persuaded his Men to persist, for that the like advantage
could not be expected to be regained, if it was once omitted; but they
prefering their Captain's Life before the Treasure, forced him on Shipboard.
In this Battle only one Englishman was killed, and three or four wounded by
the Weapons the Enemy had cast away in their flight; several of the Spaniards
were killed, and taken Prisoners. But Captain Drake being now on Shipboard,
and well perceiving the Spaniards had increased their Forces, thought it not
convenient with so small a number, to make a second attempt, therefore taking a
Vessel Laden with Wines, which at his coming he found in the Port; He set Sail
for the Port Plenty, and there, by the advice of a Negro, Caressed the Symerons
he found there, who being Mortal nemies to the Spaniards, joined Friendship
with him, and greatly furthered his Affairs; and Sailing thence toward
Cartagena, he took a great Ship Richly Laden, and after that, another, in which
were two of the Spanish Kings Scrivendoes, who were sent from Nombre de Dois,
with the News of what had happened there. Yet he acted not so secretly, but
that his coming was known to the Cartagenians, who taking the Alarm, came down
to the Shore in great number, insomuch that Drake thought it no ways convenient
to Land there: and that his Pinnaces might be the better Maned, he caused his
great Ship to be sunk, after all things necessary were taken out of her, and
Sailed from that Port, lying for some time undiscovered, about a League thence,
and caused the Negroes to build a House, to shelter his Men from the violent
Storms of Rain, that fell during his stay; To which place the Indians brought
store of Water and Victuals, for which they were amply gratifyed. At which
place leaving one Ship, he, with the two Pinnaces, Sailed to Rio Grand, where
Roving up a great River, the Mariners were much afflicted with the
insufferable stinging of Flies, called Muskalos, against which there is no
Remedy, but Juice of Lemons, with which the skin being wet, they will not
fasten. In the River he met two Indian Canows, in which were Fishermen, but
took no notice of them, for fear of being discovered, but passing for
Spaniards, the Captain and his Men came to a Storehouse, on the River side,
where he found great plenty of Provision, prepared for the Fleet that was about
to return into Spain; after which, having notice that the Spaniards were coming
down, they returned to their Pinnaces, and soon after took five or six small
Barks, Laden with Provision, setting the Men on Shore, and so Sailed to the
Country of the Syme^ons, who kindly received them. These Symerons are a People
Inhabiting between Cabezas, and Rio Piego, who by certain Negroes, were given
to understand, That Drake came as a Friend, and would protect them against the
attemp^s of the Spaniards; which caused them to admit the English to confer
with them, and furnish them with such necessaries as they required; promising
Drake, that as soon as the five Rainy Months were past, in which, Spaniards
never carry their Treasure by Land, they would so order the matter, that he
should make himself Master of much Gold. Whereupon he ordered them to build him
six Houses, for sheltring his Men, which they did, as likewise with the help of
the English, a Fort Triangle, which the Captain fortifyed to prevent any
surprise; and leaving part of his Men there, Sailed amongst the pleasant
Islands, in the River replinished with Gardens, and Delicious Fruits, where the
Indians were at his Devotion, delivering up their Bows and Arrows, bringing
Baskets of Fruit and Juices in Bails, as an Oblation of these People. Drake
inquired into the State of the Country, and then Sailed toward Charesha, and
Anchored between the Island, and the Main-land, to defend which, the Spaniards
had lined the Shore with Shot, Firing incessantly at the English, so that they
were obliged to stand off, the Captain having one of his Men sore wounded; and
next Morning took a Bark Laden with Provision and Sweetmeats, bound for
Carlagena, setting all the Men on Shore, except a Negro, wh^m the Captain kept,
to be by him, instructed in the Affairs of the Country, and Anchoring at the
Mouth of the Haven of Carlagena, took two other Barks, which caused the
Spaniards to send a Srivaneo with a Flag of Truce, who desired to be admitted
on Board, which was accordingly granted; But Drake findi^^ his Message was only
to protract time, till the Forces came ^^n to surprise him, would not accept of
his Invitation on Shore, which Treachery was soon apparent. For the Spaniards
perceiving Drakes warriness, and that they could not get him within their reach
by Land, sent two Ships of War to sight him by Sea, which he perceiving, went
joyfully to encounter them: but after exchange of several shot, the Spaniards
finding their entertainment too warm, put themselves under the Protection of
the Castle, and soon after came two other Pinnaces, who fared no better then
the former: Whereupon Drake Landed several of his Men, and drove the Spaniards
from the Shore, and for their safety, to betake themselves some to the Town,
and othe^s to a thick Wood standing close by; but Victuals growing scarce, he
was obliged to stand away to Rio Grand, where a little before, he had found
store of Provision, but now was frustrated in his expectation, for the
Spaniards had caused the Natives to retire to the Mountains, and carry with
them all their Cattle, etc. But at length meeting with several small Vessels,
which he took, their want was in some measure supplied, yet the scarcity caused
a Sickness to rage among the Mariners, but Providence so ordered it, that only
one them Dyed.

The Sickness ended, Drake returned to the Fort, where he had left part of his
Men, together with the Symerons, but upon his arrival, to his great grief,
found his Brother, and one Richard Allen, Dead of the Wounds they received in
attempting to Board a Spanish Ship of considerable force. Nor was this all the
loss, for Joseph Drake, another of the Captains Brothers, soon after Dyed of a
Calenture; yet he took Courage, and being supplied by the Symerons, he attended
his better Fortune, and was soon after informed by those People (who like
Greyhounds ranged the Country to learn what they could) that the Spanish Fleet
was arrived at Nombre de Dois; whereupon Drake sent the Lion Frigate to discry
them, who upon her approaching that Port, fell in with a small Spanish Vessel,
Laden with Mace, Hens, and Pompions, from Tolon; The Spaniards that were found
therein, the Captain used courteously, protecting them from the fury of the
Symerons, who are Mortal Enemies to the Spaniards.

Upon certain notice that the Fleet was arrived, Drake confered with the Native
Symerons, about the Necessaries that were to be provided for the expedition, to
surprise such Carriages of Gold and Silver, as were to come over-Land; who told
him he must be well furnished with Weapons and Shoes, and that for the rest
they would not be wanting; which being provided, 48 Men set forward, of which,
30 were Symerons, and the rest English; the former serving instead of
Sumpterers for carrying Provision, and when the store failed, they would range
the Woods, and catch such Provision as they could, seldom missing to return
without a Buck or Faun, or store of Foul, bearing about them many Arrows,
headed with Iron, Wood, or Fishes Bones; which they will cast so dexterously,
that they seldom miss the Iron, with which their Arrows are headed, and is
frequently found to be more precious in their estimation, than Gold.

This March they continued over-Land through many thick Woods, from Sunrise,
till ten in the Morning, and then resting in watery places till four in the
Afternoon, they walked till eight; and when Darkness came on, the Symerons
laying aside their burdens, would cut down Boughs to build Harbors with,
covering them to keep out the Rain, if any should fall, building them with
Planata Leaves, decent-wise according to the Fashion of Norway Cottages;
insomuch that no Rain would enter for the space of 24 hours; nor were they
wanting to bring several sorts of Fruits, as Mammeas, Guyanas, Palmitos, Pinos,
Oranges, Lemons, etc.

After 3 days Travels, they came to a Town of Symerons, situate on a Hill near
a River, compassed with a Dike of eight foot broad, and a thick Mud-wall ten
foot in height, containing one broad Street from East to West, and two cross
Streets of a lesser breadth; all consisting of sixty Families, who in their
Apparel, somewhat immitated the Spaniards: This Town is distant from Nombre de
Dois 35 Leagues, and 45 from Panama, being sufficiently stored with all manner
of plenty. As for their Religion, they have no Priests, yet they hold Crosses
in great Veneration; but at the persuasion of the English, they laid their
Crosses aside, and in some measure, embrace the Worship of the true God
learning, the Lord's Prayer, and many other necessary Articles of Belief; they
continually were upon their Guards, for fear of the Spaniards, who daily
molested them, aiming at the Subversion of that place, on which they had made
several attempts, but without success, their Scouts upon the Frontiers
continually giving notice of their approach, and so Allarumed their
Neighboring Towns, especially that wherein their King resided, in which were
supposed to be 1700 Fighting Men; and fain would they have entreated the
Captain to a longer residence amongst them, but he being intent on his Journey,
with many expressions of kindness took his leave, and so marching with four
Symerons, who knew the way about a Mile before him, who by breaking off Boughs,
and strewing them in the way, gave directions; and the other twenty four
divided equally for his Vaunt-Guard, and Rear-Guard, the English continuing in
the middle. After passing many Gloomy Woods, which sheltered them from the Suns
hot Beams, they came to a great Hill, on which stood a high Tree, in which were
cut several steps, that led to a pleasant Bower, situate on the top, in which,
ten or twelve Men might sit, and from thence take a view of the North and South
Athantick Ocean; and from thence they passed on to a plain Champain Country,
abounding in Grass so high, that the Inhabitants are obliged to burn it twice
or thrice a Year, to give their Catle advantage of feeding; through which they
Traveled to Panama, and for fear of being discovered, struck through a Gloomy
Grove, on the Right Hand, and at the edge thereof resting: they sent a Symeron
disguised like a Negro, to Panama, to inquire what Night, for by Day they
Traveled? not by reason of the heat of the Sun. The Recoes passed to
Venta-Cruz, in order to their Passage to Nombre de Dois, to Land the Fleet, and
by him, upon his return had notice, That that Night eight Moils Laden with Gold
and Silver, and one with Jewels, together with fifty others Laden with
Provisions and Merchandise, were to pass the Rode; whereupon Drake, with his
Men, and the Symerons, placed themselves in the Grass, and thick Shrubs, near
to the way side, in expectation of the Rich Booty; The Truth of which, was
likewise confirmed by a Spanish Soldier, taken by two Symerons, and brought to
the Captain; and so placed themselves, that whilst one Party was seizing on the
foremost Moils, the other might take the hindermost. And all things had
succeeded to their wish, had not an Englishman and a Symeron, though contrary
to the strict command of the Captain, suddenly started out to seize a Cavelier
coming from Venta-Cruz, who perceiving them by the English-man's white Shirt,
which he and the rest, had put over his Clothes, the better to distinguish them
if it should come to a skirmish, as in in all likelihood it would, he suddenly
put Spirs to his Horse, and out striped them: about a League distance meeting
with the Recoes, he informed the Convoyers of what he had seen, telling them,
That he was sure that either Drake, or some of his Men, lay in Ambush for them:
So the Recoes, Laden with Gold and Silver, and Jewels, turned back again, and
only that Laden with Provision, Merchandise, and a small quantity of Treasure,
come forward, which was accordingly taken, and declared the manner of the
Prevention; imploring Drake to defend them from the rage of the Symerons.

Matters being at this pass, it was not thought safe to stay long in those
parts, but to return to the Ships, which they could not do, but by the tedious
way they came, or by cutting their way through Venta-Cruz, the latter of which
as less difficult. Drake resolved on, and therefore commanding his Men to
refresh themselves, asked Pedro, Captain of the Symerons, whether he would
stand by him or not? who answered, He would Dye at his Feet, e're he would
leave him; and thereupon on they marched, till they came near the Town, and
there taking out of the Recoes what was best Portable, they turned back the
Moiles and their Drivers, commanding them on pain of Death, not to follow them:
and sentering the way, cut through a thick Wood, as thick as our English
Hedges, they were incountered by a company of Spaniards, under the leading of a
Convent Friar; when after a hot skirmish (in which John Harris, an Englishman,
and one Symeron, were killed, the Spaniards were put to flight, many of them
being killed, wounded, and taken Prisoners; The Symerons at that time behaving
themselves valiently, doing with their Arrows, great Execution. But far they
had not marched, e're the Spaniards, who had retired, being reinforced, had
fortifyed themselves in a Wood, by which the English must pass; into which Wood
the Symerons in a Dancing posture rushed, singing in their Tone, Yo-Peho,
Yo-Peho, and with their Aroows, drove the poor Spaniards thence, with the loss
of but one Man; who, wounded as he was, e're he Dyed, killed two Spaniards.

The out-Guards beaten, those that remained in the Town, made but small
resistance, so that the English and Symerons entering, found most of the Houses
abondoned. This Town of Venta-Cruz, consists not of above fifty Houses, besides
one Monastery, and a few Storehouses. Here likewise they found three Spanish
Gentlewomen that had lately been delivered of Children, came some days before
from Nombre de Dois; for that it had been observed, that no Spaniard, or White,
had ever been delivered at the latter place, but that the Child soon after
Dyed: But that being brought to Bed at Venta-Cruz, or any other place Adjacent,
the Children came to maturity. In compassion to this, Drake strictly commanded,
that neither his own Men, or the Symerons, should outrage them: and so having
set a Guard upon all the Passes, they took some small Pillage and departed,
having first beaten back twelve Horsemen, who supposing them gone, came
thither from Panama.

Thus the chief ends, for which the Journey was undertaken, being unluckily
frustrated, Drake (after a tedious March, in which many of his Men had perished
by hunger and thirst, had not the Symerons proved their Purveyors) arrived to
his Ships; those on Board, who before were in great heavyness for his absence,
abundantly rejoicing at his return; and so staying on board in the River
Fortugos, for some time a consult was held, what Enterprise was next to be
undertaken, in which the Opinion of Symerons was held necessary, as they who
best knew the Country, and where the Treasure lay; who gave Council, that near
a Town, called Veragna, lived one Senior Pezaro; who had formerly been Master
to some of them, and whom for his cruelty, they had abandoned; And that this
Man, in a strong Storehouse, Guarded by 100 Slaves, had heaped up great
Treasure, being Propriator of several Rich Mines. This Advice pleased them, yet
they was prevented at that time by another Advice; for one of the Frigates being
abroad, had taken a small Spanish Prize, in which was a Genoway Pilot; The said
Pilot, upon his being kindly entreated, informed Drake. That in the Bay of
Nicaragua, lay a Vessel ready to depart, in which was a Million of Gold, and
that by his knowledge of the Channel, if he might partake in the gains, he
could bring him in undiscovered, and that he might have time to dispatch his
business e're the Town could be Allarum'd. Whereupon the Captain giving such of
the Symerons (who were willing thereto) leave to depart, gifting them with many
large gifts, he took the rest with their Captain on Board, and set Sail to
seize on this so much desired Prize; But entering the Harbor, although it was
yet Dark, he understood by the Firing of several Chambers, which were answered
(...) others a distance thence, that he was discovered, and the Wind rur ^ing
against him, he thought it not fit to attempt any thing further in that matter.
So returning to his Station, he met the Bear Frigate, a small Vessel that he had
fitted up, who had taken a Spanish Bark, Laden with twenty eight fat Hogs, two
hundred Hens, and great store of Mace; which is a kind of a grain like Rice,
and in it ten Spaniards, who informed him, That the Fleet was arrived at Nombre
de Dois, and that two Galleys were building there to waft them to and fro, but
not yet Launched. Whereupon Drake feasting his Men in this manner on
Easter Day, which that Year fell on the twentieth of March, he resolved to
attempt something on the Fleet, and weighing Anchor bore with the Wind, till at
length they espied a small Vessel plying to the Westward, which after some
Sai^^ng, was discryed to be a French Vessel; whose Captain likewise supposing
it was Drake, stood with him, and in a most submissive manner, begged some
fresh water, for that he had nothing but Wine and Sider on Board: the which, by
reason of the hot weather, had much impaired the health of his Men; with which
Dra^e supplied him, willing to stand with him to the next Port, which he
accordingly did, making him there, a Present of a Case of Pistols, and a Guilt
Scimeter, which he said had been the late King of France's, who was killed in
Just, with Monsieur de Gomery; in req^ital of which, Drake gave him a Chain of
Gold, and a further supply of necessary Provision. So that in the end he was
willing to accompany him in his Voyage, and take such part as should befall him;
yet Drake not altogether satisfied in his Fidelity, so divided either Nation,
that it was not in the power of the Frenchmen, if the^ would, to have injured
the English; and then sending for the Symeron Captain, he approved of what was
done, and thereupon it was agreed, That twenty French, fifteen English, and a
considerable number of Symerons, should pass over-Land, to intercept the Ricoe
that were coming from Panama, to Nombre de Dois; when having gone seven
Leagues, the Bells of the Camels, and Moiles, were heard, which made the
Symerons rejoice, assuring Captain Drake, that he should have more Gold and
Silver, than he could dispose of, and so indeed it fortuned, for the Recoes
being seized, a R^ch Booty appeared, but there being a Guard of forty Spaniards
attending it, a hot dispute happened: but in the end, the Spaniards were put to
flight, and the Gold and Silver unladed, and every one took what he could
conveniently carry; but scarce had they hid the rest, and entered the Wood,
e're a great number of Horse and Foot came on, yet they kept their way, all
escaping, except one Symeron that was killed, and a French Soldier that was
taken Prisoner, who being put to the Torture, confessed where the Gold was hid,
the Conflict the French Captain, was dangerously wounded: But what was most
amazing, was that when they came to the Sea side, where the Pinnaces had order
to attend them. They perceived seven Spanish Pinnaces, which were sent to take
the English Vessels, then but weakly Maned, whom Drake and the rest imagined to
have executed their design; but taking courage, he resolved to make a raft of
such Trees as were driven on Shore and put to Sea, in order to seek his
Vessels, which he occordingly put in practice, accompanied with one
Englishman, two Frenchmen, and two Symerons, and with great joy, sound his
Vessels safe, riding it out behind the Point; and in spite of the Spaniards,
according to his Promise, fetched off his Companions, when having refreshed
themselves, they went to look for the hidden Treasure, but found as aforesaid,
That the Spaniard, by the French Captain's Confession, had discovered it. Yet
had they not searched so narrowly, but that they had left several Bars of
Silver behind them, as also some Quoits of Gold; but what troubled the
Frenchmen most, their Captain sore wounded as he was, fell into the hands of
the Spaniards, yet upon sharing the Booty equally amongst them and the English,
they were comforted, especially upon the Arrival of one of their Companions,
who had escaped the hands of the Spaniards. Yet being desirous to depart into
their own Country, they left the English, yet fearing the danger they might
incur, by falling into the hands of the Spaniards, they repented their
rashness, and lingered till Drake over-took them: when notice being had, that
the Spanish Fleet Richly Laden were about to depart from Cartagena, Drake
Sailed to the Mouth of the Harbor, and there droping his Anchor, braved them
with all Streamers flying, and Flag astern, and took a Frigate of fifty Tuns,
Laden with Provision, within sight of 'em, and not to be cumbered with the Men
taken therein, set them on Shore, and so without longer stay Sailed to Cabezas,
having first burnt the Ship, that it might no more advantage the Spaniards.

During Drake's stay at Cabezas Pedro, the Captain of the Symerons importuned
him for certain Iron Instruments belonging to Navigation, which he frankly gave
him for the good service he had done him; further promising, that he would look
out some Silk and Linen for his Wife, not intending to hold any thing from him
that he could conveniently spare. But whilst he was looking in his Chest, the
Indian espied the Scimeter, given him by the French Captain, and was greatly
desirous of it, but being bashful himself, he gave another a Quoit of Gold to
ask for it; and having his request granted, he gave Drake four Quoits of Gold
in requital, saying, He would present it to his King, who would highly promote
him for such a present.

And now Drake being desirous to return into England, rewarded the Symerons
with diverse gifts, and after leave taken, though to the great grief of those
Indians, who earnestly desired the company of the English, they stood away to
the Island that bespangled the Ocean, and coasting that tract, came to Cape St.
Anthony, where they took two hundred and fifty Turtles, which they powdered and
eat, as occasion required; and from thence Sailing North-west, after touching
at several places, they, to the great joy of their Friends, who concluded them
lost, arrived safe at Plymouth, on the 9th. Day of June, Anno. Dom. 1573.
bringing home to the value of 80000 Pounds in Gold and Silver, and other
Merchandises, besides the great Credit and Applause they obtained of all that
heard of their strange Adventures. Drake himself being Knighted, and the rest
amply rewarded.

Sir Francis Drake, his Second Voyage, in which he compassed the World; In
which is comprehended, the many Strange and Wonderful Discoveries he made,
during that extraordinary Navigation.
DRake impatient of remaining at Shore, importuned his Sovereign Queen
Elizabeth, that he might be Commissioned to make a Second Voyage, the which
after some delays, was granted; whereupon the Adventurers furnished him five
Ships, Viz. The Pelican Admirable, Burdened 100 Tuns, in which he imbarqued
himself; The Elizabeth Vice-Admirable, Commanded by Captain Joseph Winter,
being a Ship of 80 Tuns: The Mar^ygold, a Bark of 30 Tuns, Captain John Thomas
Commander; The Swan, a Fly-boat of 50 Tuns, John Chester Commander; and a small
Pinnace of 15 Tuns.

These Vessels being Maned with 164 able Seamen, and Soldiers, and furnished
with all things necessary, Sailed out of Plymouth Road, on the 15th. of
November, 1577. yet met with many difficulties, by reason of Tempests, and
contrary Winds, e're they could get clear of the Lands end; at what time Sa^^ng
toward the Coast of Barbary, they came to an Anchor on the Coast of Magadore,
lying three Degrees, forty Mi^uits, b^^ng part of the Territories of the King
of Fez, being a ^mall I^and not above three Leagues in Circumference,
abando^^ng with Foul and Fish, though of an unusual shape. There ^^^^e of the
English going on Shore, the Negroes, who Inhabi^ that place, were desirous to
be conducted on Board, for whose ^^urity; Drake left a Pledge on Shore, the
Moors seemingly desireing to Traffic for such Commodities as the English had,
bringing to the Seaside, Camels Laden with Merchandises. But when the Negroes
were returned, some of the English going on Shore in a Boat, one of them, name
^^hn Fry, was detained, which much incensed Drake, so that he wy^ about to
revenge the Indignity, to that purpose Landing his Men: But when he understood
no injury was off^red him, they departed, and although he went not with them,
yet after the Governor of that Island understood of what Nation he was, he
sent him home in an English Ship, having upon his causing him to be surprised,
conjectured him a Portugal, and that Drak^ was the forerunner of the Portugal
Fleet, prepairing to Indamage that Coast.

Departing from this Island, Drake took a small Spanish Fisherboat, conducted
but with three Men only; and after that, Sailing under the Tropic Cancer, fell
in with a Spanish Craval, which he took, and then Sailing to Cape Barbas, he
there took another, though indifferently Laden with Provision; where having
plenty of all things necessary he stayed a while, during which space, the
Natives came down to view the English, bringing with them a Negro Woman half
starved, with a Child at her Breast, offering her to Sail, but Drake would not
Traffic for such Commodities; whereupon they brought Gums, and Amber greese,
offering it for fresh water, which above all things is most scarce in that
Country. Water they had, but Drake would not take any thing for the common
Element, as likewise some Provision, for which they were very thankful for,
eating greedily.

Having thus far proceeded, they set the Spaniards on Shore, and after triming
their Ships, Sailed to Cape de Verde, and so C^urted Bomavista, falling in with
the Isle of Mayo, Inhabited by the Portuguese, and so touching at several
Islands, came to St. Jago, ^n the South-West of which Island, they took a
Portuguese Vessel, Laden with Wine, Woollen, and Linnen-Cloath, on its return
from Brazil; and in defiance of those on Land, Fired upon three or four ^f
their T^wns, standing on the Seacoast.

Near to the Island of S^. Jago, is the Burning Island, called Fogo,
continually casting F^^^es; and near to that, lies a pleasant Island, always
^lad with ^^^n, exceeding fruitful, abounding especialy with Figs, Cocos,
Planatos, Oranges and Lemons; it is also replinished with pleasant Streams,
though the Harbors about it, are not capable of receiving any Ships of
burden: and in all the Island, was only one House supposed to be Inhabited by
an Hermet.

From this Island, after having taken some of what it afforded, they stood away
to the Coast of Brazil, but by contrary Winds, were kept out so long at Sea,
that Provision grew scanty, and especially Water, which in that burning Climate
was most requisite. But when they despared of obtaining any, God so ordered it,
that there fell great store of Rain, which supplied their necessity; And
amongst many other strange Creatures, found in these Seas, they delighted
themselves with viewing the flying Fishes, which are as big as ordinary
Pilchards, having Finns the length of their Bodies, so that when they are
pursued by any Fish, and in fear to be devoured, they save themselves by
leaving their Element, and flying in the Air; but cannot continue it long, for
that their Finns wanting moisture become unserviceable, by reason of the thin
Filme that joins the Bones, or Quill, etc. Sailing from thence to the Coast of
Brazil, they beheld huge Fires on the Shore, made by the Inhabitants, in which
they Sacrificed two Devils, using many Conjurations to raise Whirl-Winds and
Tempests, thereby to w^ack such as approached their Coa^^: Which Hellish
Inchantations, the Portugals to their cost found fatal, when they first
discovered those Countries; But the English sustained no other damage, than
the separation of their Ships, when leaving that C^ast altogether Rocky and
Inaccessible, Drake stood away to another Point, which he called Cape Joy, by
reason he there met the Ship he lost in the Storm; And having watered and
refreshed his Men at Cape Verd, and taken store of Deer, which that Country
affords in abundance, he stood away Twelve Leagues from the Main to a
convenient Harbor, sheltring from the South Wind; and North-Winter growing
fast upon him, he sought out a Harbor where he might ride safe: and at last
coming to Cape Hope, he curred with a Shallop, to sound the Bay, which promised
good Anchorage. But e're he could return so great a Fog arose, that he could
not see the Ships, and a Storm withal arising, he was greatly endangered to be
lost: But the Captain Thomas, suspecting some danger had befallen him by reason
of his stay, entered with his Ship, and by Fireing a Gun, directed him to the
Wessel and having received him on Board, droped Anchor, and there lay till the
Storm was over: and the next day going on Shore, made great Fires, as a Sign to
the dispersed Ships to return into the Haven, who all met, except the Swan.

Upon their Landing the People being fled, they entered homely House near a
Rock, where they found Fifty Es^riches of a Prodigious size, whose weight were
such that they could not fly, but run as fast as Greyhounds so that they are
not catched, but by decoying them into a Net, by the likeness of an Estrich
made of their Feathe^s. Drake not finding this Harbor for his purpose, stood
away South-West, about Twelve Leagues, where entering a Port, a great number of
the Natives presented themselves upon a Hill, leaping and dancing after an
extravagant manner, and at first Landing seemed fearful of the English, but
soon after became more familiar, bringing Estriches Feathers and Bones,
variously Carved, and Arrows of Reed, which they dilivered for English
Commodities. They went all Naked, except a skin of Fur cast over their
Shoulders when they sit in the cold, but when they are doing any thing, they
g^^d it about their waste: their Hair is long, which when they Cravel, they
bind up with Estriches Feathers, of which likewise they make their Quivers.
Their Bodies are painted with diverse Colors, and their Faces they wash with
Sulpher: upon them appear the Figures of Suns, Moons, and Stars, which they
term the Marks and Characters of their Gods. Their Victuals is Roots, and Wild
Beasts Flesh, which they eat raw; they have no Boats, and seldom enter the
Water: these that appeared, were Fifty in number: they use for their Weapons,
Bom^ headed with Bone, and Flint stones, Artificially cut.

Having stayed some time with this People, and caught in the Ba^, about 2^0
Seals, they weighed Anchor, and stood toward the Antar^ick Pole, till they
came to St. Julian, so named by Magelen, otherwise the L^n^ o^ Gyant^; for here
are found People of a mighty size, who at first received several of the English
kindly, but in the end seeing their advantage, killed one, and wounded two or
three others, e're they could recover their Boat, yet not without the fall of
two or three of their own Men, especially of him who first began the mischief,
which injury Drake resolved to revenge. But upon their Repenting what they had
done, and declaring they supposed his Men to be Spaniards, who had slain many
of their People, he departed that Coast, and soon after had notice of a
Conspiracy against himself, and his Principal Captains, by one on Board: of
which the Conspirator being detected, was worthily Executed, worse Execution
being thereby prevented. And so keeping on, came (...) three Islands lying
Tryangle wise, which he called Elizabethides, in Honor of our Virgin Queen; On
one of them he found store of Birds, as big as Stuble-Geese, without Feathers,
having only matted down on their backs and beaks like a Crow: they cannot run
fast, but swim exceeding swift; they lay their Eggs in the Ground, where they
make holes with their Beaks like Conies. Of these they killed 3000. and with
them made merry: and then coming to another Island, Inhabited by People of
little Statute, he found them Rowing in Canows, made of the Bark of a Tree;
But that place affording no variety, he stood away to the South Sea, Sailing
among the Islands 1^^ Leagues: but a Storm arising his Fleet separated, and
some Ships lost their Anchors, narrowly escaping the devouring Waves. But God
so ordered it, that entering Mare Delzur, they got under the Tempest, and
remained safe till the Storm was over: and then Stearing North ward along the
Coast of Peru, they entered an Island full of Birds, Inhabited by Spaniards,
and Native Indians; and being fallen with the Land, they Sailed along the Coast
two Degrees, where going on Shore the Natives at first received them kindly,
and offered to Traffic with them: But having trained them into danger, shot at
them, as they were in their Boat, killing and wounding diverse others, amongst
which Drake was one, having an Arrow shot into his Nose, and another h^t him on
the Forehead, yet he val^isg the loss of one of his Men, worth a hundred of
theirs, thought not fit to go on Shore to revenge the injury. These People
Inhabiting the Islands, are such as the cruelty of the Spaniards had driven
from the Main, which cruelty renders them unhospirable to all Strangers. Their
Weapons are Spears, and Darts of Reed, headed with Stone and Bone.

These barbarous People thus left, they not far distant, found an Ind^an
Fishing in his Canow, who being ^^ken, and brought on Board, was courteously
enter tained: who in re^^^tal thereof, being set on Shore, returned with diverse
others, bringing store f Provision and di^ected the English to a watering
place, of which at that ti^^ they ^ood in great ne^d; And soon after the
Governor of the Country came o^ ^oard, and they afterward going on Shore with
him, found store of C^inly Wine, and other Rarities, in a homely Town,
consusing mostly of Ware-hous^s.

Being thus refreshed, Drake Sailed to seek the Ship separated from him in the
Storm, carrying with him an Indian Pilot, the better to know these Seas, and
stood away toward the Line; and by the way, putting into a convenient Harbor,
built a Pinnace, and then entering a Bay Southward came to the Town of Cyppo,
Inhabbited by the Spaniards, who discovering them ever they could Land any
considerable number of Men, came down with 100 Spanish Horse, and 200 Indians
on foot, running after them like Dogs. But e're they could prevent it, all but
one Man was got on Board, but he, bolder then the rest, staying to outface them
in a bravery, was shot by one of them, and then by the Indians, stuck full of
Arrows made of green Wood, cutting off his Head, and Right Hand, and pulling
out his Heart: yet what they left of him, his Companions the next day Landing,
Buried. And leaving these Butchery Spaniards, Sailing Northward, they came to
the Cape of Mormorena, where finding four Indians in their Canows, they
promised to bring them to a place where they might water, which accordingly
they did, where lighting on a Spaniard a sleep, with thirteen Bars of Silver
weighing 4000 Spanish Duckates, they eased him of the burden: and not far from
thence they met another Spaniard, and an Indian Boy, driving four Pervanian
Sheep, each Sheep bearing two bags, in each of which, was fifty pound weight of
Silver, which became likewise their Prize, and so returned on Board: and a
little from thence, met several Indians Rowing in Boats of Leather sowed
together, and floated Bladders filled with Wind, which Row very swiftly; with
these they carried Knives and Glass-Beeds, for Fish.

Sailing along the Tract, they came to another Island, near the Province of
Cusco, where they found Sheep as big as Cows, whom the Inhabitants use in
carrying their burdens, the Wool and Flesh of which are excellent Clothing,
and Provision. This Coast is Inhabited by the Spaniards, which made our Men
hope for some Rich booty, nor were they deceived in their expectation; for the
first thing they happened on, was a Bark with forty odd Bars of Silver, and
soon after another Laden with Linen, and so Sailed to Lima, 12 Degrees, 30
Minuets South Latitude, where they Anchored, although in the Harbor, were 30
Spanish Wessels, Boarding a Vessel that had in her 15000 Bars of Silver, of
which, and some other Commodities found there, they eased her; And having
notice of a Rich Ship, bound for Panama, they set Sail, and falling with
Francisco, about Noun they discovered her, and bearing up without resistance,
Boarded her, finding in her Fruits, Conserves, Sugars, and a great quantity of
Jewels, 13 Chests of Plate Rial, 80 l. weight of Gold, and 26 Tun of uncoyned
Silver, valued at 360000 Pezoes, for which they only gave the Master a little
Linen in exchange, which he took, supposing that better than nothing, as well
knowing Drake would be his own Carver.

Sailing from thence one Degree, North Latitude, they met with a Ship Laden
with Linen, China Dishes: and besides, found in it a Falcon, with a great
Emrald in its Breast, which they took, and so passed by the Port of Papagaia,
and diverse dangerous Gulphs, continually sending forth violent Winds. And
entering the Port of Gualulio, Inhabited by the Spaniards, they furnished them
with all things necessary, and compounded for their safety, with a Pot of
Riats, as big as a Bushel, a Gold Chain, and a Jewel; whence Sailing 5^^
Leagues, they came under sixty Degrees North Latitude, where, although it was
about the middle of June, they were so afflicted with cold, that they were
obliged to haste thence, to save their Lives, all the Countries round being
covered with Snow, and the Seas with Globes of Ice; so that falling Southward
to thirty eight Degrees, the Weather was very temperate, where bearing with the
Land, the Narives sent a Man in a Cannow, to invite them on Shore, who made a
long Oration in his own Country Language, and by his Gestures, expressed his
meaning, and being dismissed, he came again; and the third time bringing
presents of Estrich Feathers, which none but those about their Kingdom are
suffered to wear, he brought also a Baoket filled with Herbs, called Taback, in
requital of which, Drake preffered him many things, but he would receive
nothing but a Har.

Upon this invitation Drake put to Shore, and Landing his Men, erected (...)
ea^, and Armed it well, to prevent any danger, if the Natives should prove
^reacherous. Who no sooner perceiving the English come forth of their Ships,
^ut they came down with great haste from a Hill, and fell down at their feet,
^orshiping them as Gods, throwing away their Bows and Arrows, and made many
Laments and Cries.

These People Drake treated courteously, bestowing shirts, and other things
upon them, wherewith to cover their nakedness; signifying unto them, that he
was but a Man, and that all his Company were Mortals, and no Gods, as these
poor deluded people supposed them to be: to the belief of which they could
hardly persuade them. In Recompense of what they had received, they bestowed
upon the English, Caws, Quivers of their Arrows, and the like; and so with joy,
which they expressed by their leaping and dancing, they departed to their
Houses, which are dug round in their Earth, having chefts of Wood set up and
joined close at the top, like a Spire without Chimneys. Their Door is like an
ordinary Scurle in a Ship stop-wise; their Men for the most part go naked,
being of a loving and tractable Nature: their only Weapons are Bows and Arrows,
with which, though they are skilful, they do but little Execution, they being
of no force: their Women make themselves loose Garments of Bulrushes, to cover
their secrets, wearing on their shoulders Beasts skins, being altogether
obedient to their Husbands.

Two days after, a great multitude of them came down to the Tent, leaving their
Women and Bows some distance behind them, upon a Hill; who as soon as they were
arrived at the Tent, fell to scratching their Faces, and casting themselves
upon the Ground, with lamentable Cries, as they use to do when they offer
sacrafice to their Gods, not being yet persuaded but that the English were
such, though Drake and his Company endeavored to undeceive them, with pointing
toward Heaven Praying, and singing Psalms.

Three days after their King came down, attended by a great number, who sung in
a lamentable Tone about him; before him one bo^e a Scepter, made of Black Wood,
about a Yard and half long, whereon hanged three Crowns, two Chains, and a bag
or a Herb, called Tabak; the King had on a Caul of Network, resembling a Crown
on his shoulders, to his waste a Coat of Coney skins; his Guards had Coats of
other skins, and Cauls with Feathers in them, of div rs Colors or covered with
Down, which grows on a Herb like a Lettice: which Down is not permitted to be
worn, but by those about the King, the seed of it is only used in Sacrifice to
their Gods. The common sort were for the most part naked, with long hair, tied
with bunches of Feathers, every one having their faces painted. Lastly, The
Women came with Baskets on their Arms, made of Rushes, so closely Woven, that
they would hold Water, being hanged with Pearl shells, and other shells, and
with two or three links in a Chain, signifying they were Vessels Dedicated to
their Gods. When they came near, he that bore the Scepter, made an Oration for
the space of half an Hour, which ended with a general Amen, and all (save the
Children) came down the Hill.

Being come near he that bore the Scepter, with a stately Carriage began a
Song, and a Dance as also did the King, and all the rest (save the Women) who
daunced, but did not sing. Which ended, they entered ^he Tent, where the King
caused his Crown to be set upon Drake's Head, desiring him, which by many signs
he made, to take upon him the Kingdom, saluting him by the Name of H^oh ending
the solemnity with a Song and a Dance, which Drake received, to the behoof of
Her Majesty. Whenas the common people leaving the King with Drake, went amongst
the rest of the English, and finding such as pleased their Fancies, which were
commonly the youngest, and most beautiful, they enclosed them round, and
offered sacrifices to them, crying with lamentable shr^cks, weeping,
scratching, and tearing the flesh from off their Faces.

This Country a bounding with all things necessary for the use of Man, Drake
named Albion, and at his departure, set up Her Majesty's picture and Title to
the Kingdom. Engraven in Brass. Loath were these people, that the English
should forsake them, and great Laments they made, running to the tops of high
Hills, and cl^ming Trees to send their Eyes after them as far as they could,
making ^ires, and offering Sacri^ices, that they might oblige them to return
again, and become their Protecto^s.

From this Country they sailed to the Islands of Molucos, where the Inhabitants
in their Canows, under pretense of Trafficking with them, sought to surprise
them, but soon found to their smart, that Drake came to that end; whereupon
naming it the Isle of Thieves, they stood away to Tarnate, where the King of
that Country sent his Deputy to entreat them to come on shoat, vvhereupon Drake
cast Anchor, and sent a Messenger to the King with a scarlet Cloak, desiring
that he might be supplied with provision, and other necessaries; who returned
Answer by his Viceroy, that he would do any thing to serve them, and that he
would shortly visit them at their ships, who accordingly came in his Canow,
attended by several of the Nobility, Clothed in White Calico. Whenas the King
did Obeisance in humble manner, being of a tall statute, Corpulent, and of a
princely Countenance; his respect amongst his Subjects was very great, none of
his a^ ^^dants daring to speak to him, but on their knees; he was received on
^uard w^^, Drums beating, Trumpets sounding, and Vollies of great and sm ^^
fo^t: ^is Attire from his wast downwards, was Cloth of Gold, his Legs b^^ on
his Feet shoes of Red Cordivant: on his Cap were dives Rings of Plated Gold,
and Iach and half broad about his Neck, and on his Left hand a Diamond, an
Emeral^ a Rub^, and a Turquois: on his Right Hand Rings, set with Rich Stones.
After he had been treated and welcomed, he ^eturned to Shore, and sent store of
Provision, for which those that brought it, received good presents; He sent one
of his Brothers the next day, to invite Drake to his Palace, but some suspicion
arrising, by words let fall, he would not go, but sent some of his Gentlemen,
detaining the Viceroy as a Pledge of their safety, who upon their Arribal were
Honorably received. These people are Moors, and live in a v^ry plentiful
Country, and Fertile Clime; But after the English had Trafficked with them for
such necessaries as they wanted, they, on the 9th. of October set Sail, and
arrived at the South of the Island Caelibes, where they repaired their Ships,
etc. there they found Bats as big as Bullets; and Crab-fish that lived on the
Land, making holes in the Earth, and running up Trees, and Worms that shined in
the night like Fire. Departing from this Island, they Sail to another, but
could find no Ground near it at a 100 Fathom, wherefore Sailing to the West,
Drakes Ship happened to run on a Shole that extended it seven Leagues, where,
had the Wind been high, she had been lost? But Providence so ordered it, by the
heaving and setting of the Sea, and the Sailors endeavors, she got off, and
Sailing amongst the Islands of the Sea, came at last to Java, where the chief
King of the Country came on Board, sending before him store of Provision; him
they welcomed in the best sort, with Music and Provisionr especially with
Wine, who within a while after, returned highly satisfied; And there having
Trafficked a while, they took their leaves, and Sailed toward the Cape of Good
Hope; Coasting along part of Affirica, they came to the Main of Rio de Sesto,
and watering in the Mouth of Tagoine, passed the Tropic Cancer, and so
standing off to Sea, on the 26th. of September, came safe to Plymouth, after
two years, ten months, and some odd days absence, bringing with them in Gold,
Silver, Jewels, and other Merchandises, to the value of 100000 l. having
encompassed the whole Earth.

The Voyage of Sir Francis Drake, in^o the West Indies; wherein were taken the
Towns of St. Domingo, St. Jago, St. Augustina, and Cartagena.
THe Spaniards great Armado, routed in 88. the Queen, to revenge the
Treacherous Design against her Crown and Life, fitted out a Fleet consisting of
twenty five Sail, on which were Imbarqued 2585 Mariners, and Soldiers. Sir
Francis Drake being Admiral, the said Fleet set Sail for the West Indies,
taking by the way, several Spanish Vessels, when coming to Vigo, rhetook
several Boats and Cravals, and among others, a small Vessel Laden with the
Furniture of the Great Church of Sr. Vigo, in which was much Plate; and amongst
other things, a great Silver Cross double Guilt, all amounting to the value of
3 (...) ^^^^^es. In the mean time the Governor of Galicia came down with 3
(...), and 2000 Foot, to defend the Shore, desiring Parley with the A^miral,
promising Water and other Necessaries for Money, which was excep^ed; and after a
supply of all things they required, waighe^ Anchor, and Sailing for the
Canaries, fell in with Palma, with purpose to have Lan^ed there: but finding
^he Shore strongly fortified, changed their purpose, and so Sailing by Faro
Cape Blank, and Cape Verd, they came to the ^^^e of St. Jago, and Landed (...)
Men, under the leading of Lieutenant General Carlisle; and Marching over Land
un^iscovered, surprised the Town of St. Jago, situate in a Valley, and planted
St. Georges Cross upon the Wall, not a Spaniard daring to make resistance.
After which, they Marched to St. Domingo, and found it abandoned, and although
Treasure was conveyed thence, yet in both places, store of plunder was found,
as also in the Town of Pray; all situate in this pleasant Island abounding
with all things necessary for the support of Man.

The Country thus Allarumed, the Spaniards in great numbers run to their Arms,
but durst attempt nothing; so that the General commanded Pray to be burnt,
which so perplexed the Spaniards, that they resolved to compound for Domingo,
and St. Jago; but whilst the Treaty was in hand, the English had withdrawn
themselves out of Domingo, the Spaniards fortified it, planting Canons in the
Gate, and laying an Ambascade. Whereupon Drake's 1200. Men, went to force the
Guard, which accordingly they did, making great slaughter of the Spaniards, so
that they fled to the Castle; but fear so far prevailed with them, that they
stayed not long there, but fled; upon which the Town being gained, a Negro Boy
was sent to such Spaniards, as were retired to the Mountains, with a Flag of
Truce, giving them leave to return in safety. But as he was going, he was run
through by a Spaniard, which so enraged the General, that he caused two Friars
to be carried to the same place, and there hanged; protesting, that unless the
Murderer was delivered up, he would hang two Prisoners every day, till none
was left: which Mennace so troubled the Spaniards, that they delivered up the
Murderer to Justice, who according to his deserts was Executed.

The Spaniards not coming to agreement for their City and Town, Drake gave
order to Fire them, but being most stone building, it proved a task very
difficult; yet the Spaniards desirous to preserve them, offered 25^^0.
Duckates, which offer was accepted. One thing in the King's House denoting his
Ambition, was remarkable, viz. An Escutcheon, containing a Glove, and a Horse
standing in one part in it, and the other part leaping out of it with this
Motto, Non sufficitate Orbis, The World is not enough; which the Spaniards
themselves were even ashamed of.

From this Island they put over to the Main Land, and came within sight of
Cartegena, when Landing about four in the Afternoon, Lieutenant General Carlisle
about Midnight, came before the City, having put a Party of Spanish Horse to
flight by the way; whilst the Vessels in the Read, attacked a small Fort that
stood on the Sea Coast. Half a Mile before they came at the City the Land grew
straight, having the Main on the one side, and the Harbor on the o^^er: which
straight was f^rtefyed with a Wall and a Di^ch, only a space left for passage,
and on i^ pl^n^ed six pieces of Canon, th^^ bent upon the said passage.
Moreover, the Spaniards had drawn two Galleys into the Harbor, into which they
had put one Ordinance, and 4^^ small shot, and on the Land side stood 300 shot,
lined with Pikes: but the English taking the lower ground, frustrated their
design, and did nor Fire, till they came up to the Wall, when leting fly a
Volley in the spaces of the Spaniards, and seconding it with the bu^t end of
their Muskets, they beat them first from their Baracadoe^s, and secondly,
caused them to fly, entering the Town pell mell with them: and obtaining the
Market place, planted there a strong Guard, nor withstanding they had
B^^recaded every street, set Indians with poison Arows at each corner, and
fluck up poisoned sticks with sharp points, to disable the Soldiers.

The City thus won, the Joy was not great, by reason of a Mortal Distemper that
raged amongst the Soldiers, occasioned by ill Airs, which killed a great many
of them, and caused so^e to lose their Wits, which utterly frustrated the
Design upon No^^^e ^e ^ois, and Panama, where all the Treasure was. Whilst they
lay here, they took two small Spanish Prizes, in attempting which, Captain
Varny, and Captain Moon were slain with Musquer shot, out of the Bushes where
the Spaniards had run their Vessels on Shore.

The General having given order for the Fireing of Carragena, the Bishop,
Governor, and some other P^^ncipal Men of the Island, entreated him to spare
it, and they would Ran^^^ (...) Ducka^es, which was accordingly done; and for
an Abbey that s^ood some distance from it, they gave (...) Duckares; but
refusing to give so much ^s was dem^nded, for a Castle standing without the
City, it was blown up so the Army Imbarking, Sailed to Cap^ Sr. Anthony, to
Water: but finding none there, passed over to Florida, where Sailing up the
River, they took a Fort of the Spaniard^ and found in it several pieces of
Ordinance, and 2 ^. pounds in Money; and so Coasting along, came to Virginia,
where several English resided, under Mr. Lane the Governor, to whom Drake
offered a Ship with provision; or if they pleased, to transport them into
England, the latter of which they accep^ed: not being greatly desirous to stay
in a Country, where they had found suc^ c^ld comfort. From this place the whole
^icer set Sail, and arrived safe at (...) mouth, the 28th. of July; the Booties
got, besides the defraying of Charges, amounted to 6^^^0. pounds, of which the
Companies that Traveled in the Voyage, were to have 200^^. l. and the
Adventurers for their Merchandise. 4^00. l. In this Voyage, 150 Men were lost,
the great Ord nance taken from the Spaniards, were 240. of which 203. were
Brass.

On the 27th. of January they came to Villa Por^^. where to the ^rief of all
English men, the Renowned and ^^uly Worthy Sir ^rancis Drak^ ended his days,
and was let down in a Coffin of Lead into the sea, on which he had so often
Triumphed; the Drums bea^ing, Canons sounding his la^^ farewell to the World.

The General dead, all concluded to return home, which they accordingly did,
being forced to fight their way through the whole Spanish Fleet, that was sent
to interrupt them, after they had been a year abroad.

FINIS.

