THE CASE OF THE DISSENTERS of IRELAND Considered, In Reference to the
SACRAMENTAL TEST.
I Have ever been of an Opinion, That a bare Ease to tender Consciences, was
not the thing the Dissenters aimed at, and that a Bill to that purpose would
not please them, unless they might have Liberty to come into Offices and (...).
And now (...) length the Mystery is discovered, by the Author of the Case of
the Protestant Dissenters in Ireland; who tells us, That it is Dangerous and
Unreasonable to lay such Restraints upon them, as to incapacitate them for
Employments; that it will be rather an Hardship than a Favor, and will put
them into worse Circumstances than they are at present.

If the Author of the Case had considered the Matter, without any bias to his
own Party, and how much the Established Church and Religion is like to lose, by
their concessions to Dissenters, in point of Indulgence, he must have thought
it Reasonable; That the Members of it, should have some equivalent for their
Losses, and would not have pronounced such hard Things, concerning the
Sacramental Test, which is the only Restraint that troubles them, and the
strongest Security that the Church has.

I presume, There is a general inclination in all sober Persons, to Grant Ease
to tender Consciences, in matter of Religion, as far as it is consistent with
the Peace of the Civil, and the Security of the Ecclesiastical Government; and
it is very certain, That as the external profession of Religion, and the
enjoyment of Civil and Military Offices, are things of a very different Nature,
so the Dissenters may enjoy the one, without desiring to be admitted to the
other: And since they are not satisfied without both, they give us just Reason
of standing upon our Guard, and to be wary of what concessions are granted
them, lest they turn to our own Prejudice: We have felt the roughness of their
Hands, when they were in Power, and have no invitation to try their goood
Nature a second time, by putting them into a capacity of doing us Mischief.

I shall not enter into any Debate, with the Author of the Case, upon the first
Head; Viz. That they should have a Bill for full Security in the free exercise
of Religion, if that would content them: For I think it reasonable and fit to
Grant it, as far as it is consistent with the Peace of the State, and the
Security of the Church by Law Established* Though, by the way, there was a time,
when they, that plead now so strongly for Toleration, did formerly condemn it,
as unlawful, when they were in Power, and would not allow it to others: That
which I have to Offer, is on the Second Head; That Modestly taxes the
Sacramental Test, as a thing hard and unreasonable to press upon them, but if
it can be made appear, that the Established Church of Ireland should have some
Security, that She ought to have more Security, than the Church of England
has, in her Act of ^ndulgence, that the Sacramental Test, is fit to be
insisted on, as one Branch of her Security: I hope it will not be thought
unreasonable in the Church Party, to desire it, and that, if the Honorable
Parliament thinks it not fit to give them any higher Security, they will at
least think it reasonable not to praeclude them the benefit of this, which is
so necessary to the support of Her Constitutions.

First, It is reasonable that the Established Church and Her Members should
have some Security: First, because there is no State or Government where
Toleration, or Indulgence, to Men of different Persuasions, is allowed, but
takes a care to secure the Religion and Worship of the State against all
Dissenters from it: They will not suffer the Religion of the State to be
Preached against in Public, nor the Magistracy to be possessed by Dissenters:
All that they are allowed, is freedom of Trade, and exemption, from suffering
in point of Conscience: It Is so in Holland, in Switzerland, and in the several
Principalities in Germany, where Indulgence is allowed. Secondly, The Church of
Ireland parts with (...) present Security, and may therefore reasonably expect
an equivalent for them: She parts with Her two Acts of Uniformity, which the
Wisdom of former Parliaments thought necessary, for the Security of Her
Worship: And it is expected, That several of Her Articles, that senced in Her
Doctrine, should be quitted in favor to Dissenters: Viz, The 27th in
compliance to the Anabaptists: The 39th in favor to the Quakers: The 34, 35,
36th, together with the Clause in the 20th Article, in favor to all
Dissenters: Nay, some of these Articles are not the peculiar Doctrine of the
Church of England, as she stands divided from other Communions, but they are
the common Doctrines of Christianity in general; I mean the 27th Article,
relating to Infant Baptism; the dispensing with which seems to me, to be the
quitting of the Cause of the whole Catholic Church.

Secondly, The Church of Ireland has Reason to insist on, and expect more
Security, than the Church of England has: Because, Her Circumstances and
Condition is very different from Hers, by Reason of the growing Power and
Interest of the British among us, and the Obligation they take to lie upon
them, of maintaining the Solemn League and Covenant.

It Is well known, That the British are already possessed of near one fourth
part of the Kingdom, that they have spread themselves into other Provinces, and
that there are frequent Colonies coming out of Scotland to carry on the
Plantation of the Party: That the Commons are generally fond of the Solemn
League and Covenant, and retain an Affection for it (though the Nobility and
Gentry are otherwise affected) That by the Second Article of the Covenant, they
are bound to endeavor, without respect of Persons, the extirpation of Prelacy
as well as Popery: That the Assembly in their Catechi^m, have declared, That a
false Worship is not to be Tolerated, that they judge ours to be such: That the
Kirk of Scotland has Acted in pursuance to these Doctrines, since His
Majesty's happy Accession to the Crown, and would allow no Toleration to the
Church Party in Scotland, though they received several Messages from His Majesty,
in favor of their Persecuted Brethren: So that by these Doctrines and
Practices; it is easy to infer, what sort of Usage we are to expect from them,
if they had the Power in their own Hands, and they cannot think it
unreasonable, that some stop should be put to that Power, which when once
grasped, will put them upon the Execution of their Principles, without any
respect to Age, Sex, or Condition: No State did ever yet put its Subjects, into
Places of Trust and Power, that thought themselves obliged in Conscience to
overturn its Constitutions, and if ours consents to it, it will be the first,
and the only one, that ever did it: Indeed, if by any Public Authentic Act,
they would declare, either against the Second Article of the Covenant, or the
Clause in the Assemblies Catechism, it would be some Motive, to the Church
Party to lay aside their Jealousies: But till that be done they have no Reason,
to be offended with their Brethren of the Church of Ireland, for desiring such
a Security, as may be consistent with their future Safety.

Thirdly, The Sacramental Test is fit and reasonable, to be insisted on, as one
Branch of the Churches Security: First, Because it seems consonant to Reason,
That, if the Dissenters in Ireland be Established upon the same foot of
Indulgence withtheir Brethren in England, the Church Party, should be
Established upon the same foot of Security, with the Church of England:
Secondly, Because it is designed for two good Ends and Purposes. First, To
Reconcile them to a good opinion of the constitutions of the Church, by
obliging them to (...) Secondly, To praeclude them, the capacity of doing
themselves and us Mischief, by admitting them to places of Trust and Power: To
persuade the Church Party to lay this Test aside, is every way as unreasonable,
as if the French King should persuade the Dutch, to break down all their Dikes,
and dismantle their Garrisons, which are their great Strength and Security
against his Encroachments.

Nor will the Objections against it be of any moment with him, that considers
these following Particulars.

First, That the Sacramental Test, was designed against the Dissenters, as well
as the Papists: Because, The Government of England thought it self, in equal
Danger from them both: And though the Title of the Act may seem to favor the
Objection, yet really it does not; for it is well known to them that are versed
in Laws, that fair and specious Titles, are frequently put to Acts, to make
them pass more easily with the people.

Secondly, That such a Test is not against the common Protestant interest of
Ireland: It will neither discourage Foreigners from Planting here, nor weaken
the Hands of our own Country Men, against the common Enemy: It will not
discourage Foreigners, who desire no more than freedom of Trade, and Liberty of
Conscience; Witness the several Families that came into this Kingdom, since the
passing of the Act 14 and 15 Car. II. for Encouragement of Protestant
Strangers: Nay, They are so far from being discouraged from Planting here, so
little averse to the public Worship of the Church, That they blame our
Dissenting Brethren for their Separation, that many of them have United
themselves to our Churches, and have been constant Communicants in our Worship:
Witness several Dutch Families, and the French Congregation in St. Patrick's
Church, Dublin: and I do not doubt, but that more of them would Conform, did
not our Dissenters endeavor to sower their Tempers against the Orders of the
Church; I remember the time, when the Dissenters Supported and Encouraged a
French Preacher, to raise a Schism in the French Congregation at St. Patricks:
And I have been much misinformed, if they have not been busy since this Happy
Revolution, with the French Refugees, to persuade them not to join in Communion
with our Church.

And as the pressing of this Test will not discourage Foreign Protestants, so
it will not weaken the Hands of our Country Men, against the common Enemies of
our Religion: They have other Reasons to engage them in the common cause
against Popery, then such as are derived from the hopes of Recompense, by
Offices and Employments; Viz. The Security of their Lives, Liberties, Estates
and Possessions, the fears of Slavery, and the hazards of losing all that they
enjoy Peaceably, the dismal apprehensions of Massacre, and the dangers of being
Plundered of all their worldly Substance; These I presume were the great
incentives to the generous Persons in Derry, Crum, and Inniskillin, to Arm
themselves in the common Cause of their Brethren, and not the uncertain hopes
of enjoying Offices, and Employments; which all of them could not pretend to,
and most were disappointed of, and for which, many, to this day, have received
no manner of Recompense, save only their Share and Part in the common
Deliverance: And if these have been sufficient motives for the time past, to
engage them in a Defensive War, they may, and will be as urgent for the future,
notwithstanding all the Surmises of the Dissenters Case to the contrary.

Thirdly, It Is agreeable to the Judgment of the Parliament of England, That the
Test should be imposed here, because they have retained it there, and preserved
it as a Pat^ern for Ireland to imitate; and since, in the Act made in England
relating to this Kingdom, they did not think fit to (...) the Imposition of it;
it is more than a Presumption, That they thought it reasonable to leave Ireland
to its own Liberty, in providing such Security for its self, as by the Wisdom
of its Parliament should be thought convenient: It was their Work to secure us
from those Dangers, that were brought upon us by the Irish Papists; and to
prevent the continuance of them, in case K. J had been Restored to the Throne;
but not to abridge our Liberty, of providing for our selves, in other matters,
relating to the public Safety: And the Author might as well have Argued,
because they mentioned only the Oath of Fidelity, and the Test against Popery,
that they did therefore think the Circumstances of Ireland, incapable of any
farther Security: Nay, it will follow from his Principles, That they intended
no Toleration for Ireland, because they did not mention it in their Act.

Fourthly, The imposing of it, is not unreasonable. If the Dissenters are
better without a Bill of Indulgence, by the favor of His Majesty; it is their
best way to stick to that, and not to press for it by a Law: Though with
Submission to the Authors Politics, it is much better for them to have a
settled Toleration, than a precarious Indulgence: If they think the Test a clog
to their Ambition or Liberty, they know how to evade it, by their Doctrine of
occasional Communion, which seems to be invented to Lull the Consciences of
their undiscerning Zealots asleep, and to capacitate them for Employments: If
some deserving Men must lose their present Employments, and others their future
hopes of them, by the Imposition of the Test, there is a ready way for them to
extricare themselves out of the Dilemma, by endeavoring to be better informed,
and laying aside their Nice and Groundless Scruples: And I presume, the
generality of the Dissenters are not of such Tender, and Squeamish Stomachs,
but that they could digest a much harder Morsel, than the Test, rather than
quit a beneficial Employment.

The imposing of this, is not to Treat them with the same Rigor, that we do
the Papists, but to Rouse them into a consideration of their Scruples; and to
open a Door of Mercy and Kindness to them, by laying a foundation of a sincere
and lasting Love and Amity among our selves: And instead of being Offended,
they will have Reason to thank us for doing them a double Benefit at once, the
curing the Errors of their Mind, and providing for the Necessities of their
Fortune.

Fifthly, The Receiving of the Sacrament may be employed, as a fit Test of
admission to Employments: There was a time, when it was thought no Evil to use
it as an Instrument of Purgation; witness the Case of K. Lotharius that purged
his Innocence and the Synod of Worms, that required the Monks to purge
themselves of Crimes; by the Reception of it, and at this day no Man thinks it
amiss, on the Reception of the Holy Sacrament; to say; That as he hopes for any
Benefit by it, he is not guilty of such a Crime laid to his Charge. And if it
be no proftitution of that Holy Mystery, to use it as a Symbol of Purgation; is
it any Crime in the State to use it as a discrimination between the Good and
the Bad, betwixt him that fears God, and him that fears him not; and to deny
her Employments to those, that are careless of their Salvation. This is not to
impose it as a Penance on any one, for he is free to quit it as well as the
Employment, but to oblige and encourage him to his Duty, by Temporal Rewards
and Punishments. And if Men will not court so Holy an Ordinance, as their
Privilege, it is fit for the State to compel them to it, because every
Government is responsible to God, for not suppressing the Immoralities of its
Subjects. If Men will venture upon the Sacrament, rather than want Employments,
the Fault is not in the Test, but in their own corrupt Hearts, that will choose
rather to Profane the Table than want Bread, as the Author speaks.

But because the Author slides from this, to the Mode or Gesture of Receiving;
and tells us, That it does not deserve to have that stress laid upon it, as to
be made the foundation of so vast a distinction, in reference to Civil Rites;
because it is an enclosing of that Table, which our Lord has left common: And
because the real Interest of Religion is not concerned in it: I shall crave the
liberty to reply these following Particulars.

First, That there was a time when a thing far less defencible, was made the
foundation of such a Distinction; I mean the Solemn League and Covenant. All
that refused it, were turned out of Employments, and none could be admitted to
them, that did not take that unlawful Covenant. They that are so acute as to
spy a Mote in the Eye of their Brethren, should pluck the Beam out of their own.

Secondly, The Kneeling Posturs, is no more an enclosure of the Lords Table,
then the Sitting Posture is, which the Directory has enjoined; and since our
Blessed Savior, has not prescribed the Gesture, in which the Elements are to
be received, it is as lawful for our Church to prescribe an Enclosure as for
theirs.

Thirdly, That if the Kneeling Posture be so Trivial a Matter as the Author
suggests, then his Party are inexcusable, in raising such Clamours about it,
and in unqualifying themselves to serve the State on account of a thing which
they esteem a Trisle: But the Truth is, though the Posture it self se mota
Authoritate imponent is may be indifferent; yet, when it is once enjoined by
lawful Authority, he interest of Religion is concerned in the wilful contempt
of the Rules and Orders of the Church, because it is a striking at that
Authority which our Blessed Lord has placed in the Governors of the Church.
Either the Church has a Power of determining indifferent things, or She has
not; if not, farewell all Government in Church and State, whose Commands are
chiefly employed about such Matters; but if She has a Power in such Things, and
the State thinks fit to concur with Her in imposing them, then the Dissenters
are unreasonable, in breaking with both for a Trifle. And now it is no hard
matter to turn the Authors subsequent Reasons on himself, that since it is the
Interest of Government, to keep persons out of Power, that have no Affections
to its Constitutions, shall a way be opened to put them into a capacity of
Ruining them, would not a Wise Man lop off a corrupt Member, for fear of
infecting the sounder Parts: And to suppose, that persons, who are no Friends
to the Constitutions of the Government, though of never so great Wisdom and
Ability, are to be admitted into the Administration of Public Affairs, is in
effect, to postpone the public Peace and Settlement, to the Interest of a few
private and solf designing Persons.

Sixthly, The Established Church will be endangered; if the Bill of Indulgence
passes without the Sacramental Test. Indeed, if all that the Established
Church minded, were their Temporal Honors and Revenues, the Author might
possibly be in the Right; but we desire him to consider, That we are more
concerned for the Mischief of Separation, and the good of Souls, than the
hazard of our Tithes and Revenues, He must suppose us to be very worldly, if he
thinks we are concerned for nothing else. Alas, what do these things signify,
in comparision of the Souls of the People committed to our Charge; what comfort
is it to us, to see the Fruits of our Ministry disappointed, and the people
drawn away from us into Error and Division, and the pernicious Consequences
that attend them? What pleasure is it to us, to see our Purses full, and our
Churches empty, to have the Hearts of our Flocks first stolen from us, and then
the maintenance taken away, for want of People to frequent our Worship. For my
part, I value these things so little, That I could be content to be recuced to
the Necestities of the Apostles, so that I might but live to see a Period to
(...); and Peace, and Charity once more settled in the Church. This would be a
more comfortable, and reviving State, than all the Revenues of the Church are
worth.

We are not offended, that a few of your Party, are admitted to enjoy a share
in the effects of His Majesty's favor, but we are afraid of opening a Door to
let the whole Party in; we do not accuse you of any unpeaceable Turbulency to
wards your Neighbors; but we humbly crave leave to say, that you Magnify the
Merits of your Party too much, and undervalue the Deserts of others, in saying
that it was you that preserved the Nation from Ruin; I pray let others have a
share in the Glory of the Action, as well as your selves; for if I am eredibly
informed, there was none of your Party engaged in the hazardous Action at Crum,
few or none at Iniskillen, and in Derry you had but a common share with others
in the saving of the Nation. What shall we say of the several undertakings in
Munster, and Connaght; are they to be imputed to your Party also; no certainly,
for your selves being Witnesses, you know, that many of them came to
Iniskillen, after the insuccessfulness of their Affairs in other Places: I
beseech you do not Eclipse the Glory of others to gain a Splendour to your
selves: But give us leave to say, That we have deserved as well of the
Government as you have done; and have as just pretenses to Security, as you
have to Indulgence; and if a Medium can be found, whereby to secure Us and
content You, I shall not be against it.

DUBLIN, Printed by Joseph Ray at the 3 Nags-Heads in Essex-street. 1695.


