A FURTHER REFLECTION touching St. Austin's Mind for the releasement of Souls in
Purgatory.
SIR,
IN your Notes on my tenth Chapter you take a civil confidence to tell me, that
I know St. Austin testifies in his time, as yet the question (of the souls
delivery before the last day) was not agwated, and that each part may love
either true, or false. I pas^ed this over as a simple assertion, not
strengthened with any proofs, either from my writings (whence should be
grounded, your assurance of my knowledge) or from any Text in St. Austin, which
should force me to such an acknowledgment: yet finding these words redoubled in
your Religion, and Reason, p. 105. where you say that St. Austin professes
expressly (ad Dulcitium Q. 1.) the question had not yet been handled before this
time, but might hereafter, but that he knew not whether side would prove true.
Hence I gave you as to that place a short Declaration of his sense, and of your
mistake, in my Answer to your notes. But by reason you tell the world, that I
know this to be St. Augustines mind, some persuade me, that for truth, St.
Austins, and my own sake, I am obliged to examine my manuscripts (for my
present condition give me not opportunity to look into his Works) since my
memory may fail in laying up every passage of his numerous Volums touching this
matter. Hence I offer to you the Texts, which after long persistance in him my
former diligence placed in my penuary with my faithful observations upon them,
that you, and I, may be secure of I is mind. He has this happy privilege,
that all sides of Christians pretend a non plus ultra to his definitive
sentence in matter of controversies of Religion, and surely you, and I, may
well be excused to refer our selves to him, since even Calvin himself desires
all to make him the General Umpire in all such occurrences. To the better
teaching his mind in his African style, I presume to give these premonitories.

First in writing so many Volums, wherein various occurrences have occasioned
sometimes only an enquiring (as he notes upon his seven books upon questions
on the seven first books of Holy Scripture, and upon Geuesis ad literam he
acknowledges, that there he sought more then he found, and found more then he
confirmed;) sometimes only a touching as it were incidently, of a question,
which is frequent, we cannot in justice say any such passage to speak his
deliberate sense, as he himself asserts in his 111 Epistle, but we must refer
our selves to those places where he concluds upon a full Examination, or
Immoration, as he calls it De Praed. Sanctor. C. 14. if we will faithfully know
his mind.

Secondly even among those places, where he treats, and concludes examinately,
there is respect to be had to the times of his treating: for as he justly
demands in his retractations, of his reader, they must give him leave to
advance in Learning, and therefore we shall best know his mind in his later
writings, when as he asserts L. 2. de bapt. C. 3. even of Councels, experience
has confirmed former results.

Thirdly, This (as I conceive) will hold universally, except where he himself
interposeth a restriction: as when in later Writings he referres the reader,
and himself to his former decisions: as in the question we now determine to
treat of; in his second question to Dulcitius he remits us to himself, treating
the same subject to Paulinus in his Care of the dead, as also to Laurentius, in
his Enchyridion, therefore assuredly we shall find there his full Judgment, as
he calls it, in the Epistle cited, especially since in his retractations he
particularly owneth these three books, as his own without any correction.

Lastly, It is very observable for the clearer and surer understanding of his
sense in some points, collateral to our present question that he much served
himself of platoes principles; especially touching abstracted substances, as
Angels and separate souls, in consequence whereof he forms many resolutions,
which may sometimes refer to our present purpose. I give impregnable instances
in my Systeme, C. 45. I could profusely prosecute it, if it were necessary. But
as to Platoes doctrine touching only temporal punishments after this life, he
excellently refutes de Civit, L. 21. and else where.

As to the first question of Dulcitius, whereon you ground your certainty, he
referres him to two former books, the one of Faith, and Works; the other of
Faith, Hope and Charity, which he otherwise calls his Euchyridion to
Laurentius. His question was whether such who committed any sins after
Baptism, should ever come out of Hell: that is whether dying in sin they shall
be saved; which does not touch our present difficulty: yet so for as it does
relate to us I gave you St. Austins answer, which was out of a probable
interpretation of the Apostlr, 1 Cor. 13. Namely, that such who committed
levicra peccata, smaller sins which he interprets by wood, hay, and stubble,
should suffer punishments eitheir in this world, or in the next; and so be
saved, but not those greater transgressions without repentance: where you see
all that he says, relates to St. paul's text, and not at all to a delivery out
of Purgatory before the last day, or an easing them by help of the Church, etc.
which is one question he treats the same matter de civ. l. 21. c. 16 and
elsewhere, and expounds the Apostle, as here that it may import temporary
punishment, sive ibi tantum, sive hic and ibi, sive ideo hic, ut non ibi. Where
you see he asserts a punishment but he conceives St. Paul's words my a signify
each sort of temporary purgation.

I see you lookd on this place with other e^es, or else ^ou read them not in
irely, otherwise you would not urge Dulcitius his first question, which either
not at all, or else very remotely touches your design.

The second question indeed which you touch not, has more appearance, for there
he asks down right, Vtrum oblatio quae fit pro quiescentibus, etc. Whether
oblations for the dead, avail any thing for their soul^. Whereunto he first
brings the opinion of others who hold that if any help could be procured for
the dead, they thought it might be more effectual for themselves; but as for
his own judgment he referres him to his two books which I named before, where
he is very positive, and clear for the souls relief by prayers, Almsdeeds,
Divine Sacrifices, etc. In case they died with true repentance, which upon all
occasions he inculcates constantly by reason of some, who would have faith in
Christ to suffice alone.

Its true that in his Enchyridion c. 69. he uses these words: Tale etiam
aliquid post hanc vitam fieri inrcedibile non est: and utrum ita sit, quaeri
potest: and aut inveniri, aut latere, non nullos fideles per ignem quendam
purgatorium, quanto magis minusve bona pereuntia dilexerunt, tanto tardius,
citiusve salvari, etc. Here he speaks the Churches doctrine, and our answer
accurately to each particular, and surely tells us what was the sense of
Christians of his time in our controversy; but seems not so certain, as to the
manner of punishment, whether by fire, etc.

It is evident indeed, that first he relates to the Apostles obscure words, as
he calls them, out of which he conceives it may not incredibly be inferred,
that after this life there are such fiery Purgations, out of which some sooner,
others later, arrive to salvation. He puts his assertion in that weak modality
of not being incredible, not upon the sooner, and later being saved, which is
our question, but upon their passage by fire, which to this day has not the
same certainty with the former. This is plain, for that, Tale aliquid
immediately applies to those words of the Apostle.

Again he speaks not at all of the Tenet, as it is a parterei, but as it is
deducible out of St. Paul by reason of the obscurity of the context. He says
further, that there may be excusable ignorance in respect of this, or any other
determinate manner of punishment in Purgatory, for as much as can be evidently
gathered from that Text, which is a great Truth.

But as to the thing it self, that he did not call in question at all the
certainty of present relief by prayers, and alms, in case they merited in
their life time to be so helped, is most evident by what he solemnly and
finally teaches in his Chapter 110. which is perfectly contrary to what you would
have him teach here, neither could he so grossly forget, what so soon before he
had taught his words are: Neque negandum est defunctorum animas pietate suorum
viventiam relevari; cum pro illis sacrificium mediatoris effertur, vel
eleemosynae in Ecclesia fiunt, seu eis haec prosunt, qui cum viverent, ut haee
sibi po tea prodesse possent meruerunt, etc.

Its not lawful to deny, that the souls of the dead are cased by the piety of
the living, when the sacrifice of our Mediator is offered or Alms in the
Church are done but these things profit such, who they lived, merited to have
them afterward to profit them.

This is his resolution of our question: to which he referred Dulcitius, and
this clearly expounds the former words, where you must observe (to prevent your
cavit) that he said, they receive their helps cum pro illis, etc. even then
when the Holy sacrifice is offered for them, it is not therefore at Doomsday,
nor at the first separation of their souls, etc. Both which, and only which you
assert, contrary to him.

As to that other excellent work of the care of the dead, which is to be
preferred before all his other works, as to this matter, by reason it is
designed for it, and ex professo there handled; I gave you the marrow of it in
my result, and nothing can be more home, for clean thorough the book he teaches
that actual benefit profit, help, advantage, availement, and rest, is procured
for the souls, and he speaks condistinctively of the soul, as separated from
the body, as when the body is dead, and he says, that then it receives succor
which is the full resolution of our controversy; and he referred Dulcitius to
these two places for it.

Against this some peradventure would bring him in his twentieth book of the
City of God, where Chapter 15. comparing the saints of the old Law, with those of
the New, he says non absurd credi videtur, hos in locis quidem a tormentis
impiorum remotissimis, sed tamen apud inferos fuisse, donec eos inde sanguis
Christi, and ad ea loca descensus erueret: profecto deinceps boni fideles
effuso illo pretio jam redempti, prorsus inferos nesciunt, etc. This would seem
to deny all stay in Purgatory since Christ's passion for good Christians, who he
says know not Hell, under which Notion he explaines himself to comprehend any
such place of detention.

But it is evident, that he speaks only of Saints under the Gospel, who are
not detained in any Infernal place, as the Saints in the time of the Law, but
go presently to Heaven, which is consequent to all other places, where he puts
only a middle sort of Christians, not the Saints in Purgatory.

Others may bring him L. 20. De Civit. c. 25. where speaking of certain
Purgatory punishments, and the Day of Judgment out of the Prophets, Malachy
and Isaiah, he concludes; Verum ista Quaestio de paenis Purgateriis, ut
diligentius pertractetur, in aliud tempus differend a est; where he seems not
to assert with confidence: but it is evident he speaks in relation to a harder
Question, of the manner of purgation at the last Day, before the eternal
separation of the Just from the Wicked in the day of Judgment. For those
Chapters wholly treat of that, where every where he asserts temporary
punishments after this life to Some, and to Others eternal, against the
Platonists, who will have none eternal, but all emendatory, as they, and he
speaks; sometimes indeed he inclines to their Tenet of the manner of
punishment, and out of that ground he speaks dubiously, which others not well
acquainted with him, have misinterpreted, as if he had doubted of the
punishment itself which he, and they assert, as an undoubted Principle.

Neither does he assert, as you would have him, only temporary punishments in
ipso judicio; for if yougo to the next book, which is 21. cap, 13. when he
gives you his answer to that difficulty, which he propounded here, and differed
his answer to that place, he says, that Temporarias poenas alii in hac vita
tantum, alii post mortem, alii and nunc, and tunc, verum tamen ante Judicium
illud severissimum, novissimumque, patiuntur; so that the main suffering of
purgatory is before the day of Judgment, which wholly destroys you, though he
denies not, that some suffer in ipso Judicio.

In further process of this matter c. 14. he gives his full Solution of the
Churches prayers for them and of their release upon their prayers in these
words: Pro defunctis quibusdam, vel ipsius Ecclesiae, vel quorundam piorum
exauditur oration, etc. he treats largely of the effects of Church prayers and
(as you see) he evidently asserts, that upon the Churches, and good peoples
prayers, such Dead persons are released; for he says, that their prayers are
granted, exauditur Oration. Now all know, that the prayers are tendered to relese
them presently: in conformity to this, he teaches c. 16. Purgatorias autem
paenas nullas futuras opinetur, nisi aute ultimum Judicium. Here can be no
reply, as to his judgment. And indeed this book De Civitatc added to the
former book, we mentioned before, speak clearly, and of set purpose, of our
matter, and therefore give us his full judgment.

Some may object, l. 22. c. 25. de Civitate: Si in regni dei possessione
nunquam erunt, aeterno supplicio tenebuntur, quia non est locus medius, etc. As
if he did not admit any middle place of Purgatory: but it is evident, that he
will not have any eternal middle place, as you know the Pelagians would have
for some; to the same tenor he speaks in other places. For a further assurance
of his mind, I must needs add the ninth book of his confessions, which he
never retracted, but always confirmed: in this place, he tells the practice of
the whole Church in his Mother. Tantum illud vos rogo, ut ad domini altar
memineritis mei, vbi fueritis, etc. Where she beggs assistance at our Lords
Altar. Where after he has told the manner of her Christian burial, answerable
to the present practice of Holy Church, he falls a praying for his Mother. Nunc
pro peccatis matris meae deprecor te, exaudi me per Christum, etc. Credo quod
jam feceris, quod te rogo: sed voluntaria oris mei proba Domine, etc.

Here we see, what St. Augustine prayed for, and in this what St. Monica begd
of him, that her sins might presently be forgiven her, and consequently her
soul received to Heaven. Inspira domine servis tuis fratribus meis, quibus and
voluntate, and cord, and literis, servie, ut quotquot haec legerint,
meminerint ad altar tuum Monicae famulae tuae, cum Patricio quondam ejus
conjuge, etc.

He hoped, that what he begged was already granted, yet he prayed on and begged
others to do the same for her, and all was to bring her to Heaven: and he
beggs, that it may be granted him for Christ's sake; that is a present
forgiveness of her sins, therefore he says, his Mother knew upon the Alter,
dispensarii victimam sanctam, qua deletum est Chyrographum, quod erat contra
nos. This was therefore her, and his prayer, that by application of Christ's
Holy Sacrifice, her sins night be blotted out upon their prayers. Does not this
evidently witness their hopes of a present release? for he beliered, that God
had already granted what he prayed for, that is, he believed that she was
already in Heaven, and yet he prayed for it. His prayers were then to get her
to heaven presently, which he believed was all ready granted. He did not then
pray for her going to Heaven, at Doomsday. This admits no reply as to his
mind, and truly of the whole Church: for he speaks no singularity; and hence
desires all men to join with him: Here we also see that they all believed ^^th
the present Church, Christ himself to be offered upon the altar for our sins.

Read him upon the 48 Psalm, where he shows the sense and practice of those
^^mes, read him also upon the 80 Psalm. to the same purpose, only and always
requiring, that the faithful dye in true Repentance.

In his 64 Epistle he tells, and examines (...) custom of the faithful, to make
offe^ings up at the graves of the dead, where he speaks thus: Oblationes pro
spiritibus dormientium, quas vere aliquid adjuvare credendum est, super ipsas
memorias non sint sumptuosa, etc. He would have them to savor of Charity, not
Vanity, and the Money which was offered there, was presently to be given to the
poor. Certainly he never dreamed of your speculation of the preventiall helps
at their deaths, by those future Alms, much less of an expectation till the
last day, when he simply speaks, that the souls have some help by them, surely
not before the Alms were distributed.

In fine, that no rational person may hereafter doubt of St. Austins mind as
to plesent release upon prayers, etc. Let him read him L. 1. De anima and ejus
o^igine, c. 10. Which he acknowledges in his Retractione. De fratre autem S.
Perpetuae Dinocrate, pro quo illa imminente Martyrio creditur exaudita. ut a
poenis transferretur ad requiem: quis scit utrum puer ille post Baptismum,
persecutionis tempore, a patre impio per idolatriam fuerit alienatus a Christo,
propter quod in damnationem mortis ierit, nec inde nisi pro Christo moriturae
sororis precibus donatus exierit, etc.

Here is first evident, that it was believed, that upon St. Perpetua the
Martys, prayers, just before her death, offered for her brother, he was
transferred from his pains to rest. Here is the full Solution of our whole
Controversy, conformable to his own and the Churches Doctrine, for the Souls
delivery before the last day.

Secondly, here is another passage which in my Answer to your Notes I said he
would not deny, evidently opgosite to your undervaluing St. Gregory's, St.
Bedes and St. Damascens Relations of some souls relieved out of Hell by Saints
prayers; which (as you see) he holds it possible to be obtained, though he
teaches every where, that according to Gods ordinary Laws, there is no hope of
any sort of Heaven without Baptism, against the Pelagians; and particularly
against Vincentius, who would, jugiter offerri Sacrificia: that continually
Sacrifices should be offered for Children dead without Baptism, that is, for
Souls in Hell.

I purposely omit other passages in many places, as being not so full, as I
have omitted other Objections less urgent.

(...)the degrees of acceptance of future prayers, for the soul is purely
groundless. Lastly whatsoever this relief is in reality (though in apprehension
you put it sooner) it is not to be had till Dooms day. I propound it to your
further reflection, whether the whole machine be not insignificative as to the
real sense of the Church and of all Christians in their prayers.

Sir, Your faithful Servant, F. D.
March, 26.
FINIS.

