AN ANSWER To some Queries in Mr. Whites Notes.
Most Honored Sir,
NOw I receive a Present from you, which finds me so much preingaged in a
subject of greater concern, that I can hardly dispense with so much time, as
diligently to peruse it; you will accept this short answer to the most
considerable doubts, I observe dispersed in your Notes.

FIRST, St. John Damascen, who exactly weighs them, as also Gennadius does,
being both Greeks: to whom you may please to add (since you are impatient to
expect their due place) great Athanasius in his questions to Antiochus, where
he propounds your very question, and gives the Churches answer; also St. Cyril,
in his Mystagogical Catecheses, where he comes home, these you know are Greeks
of whom you make most difficulty. I wonder very much after, when I drew out the
pith out of St. Augustines Care of the dead, (which most perfectly speaks our
Doctrine) that you say as if you were in have, per transennam, you agree to
all, whereas in truth you deny all. The Reader will observe it. You say in
another place that he ad Dulcitium acknowledges this question of the souls
relief to be never yet heard of: the truth is, he knew not how the Almighty
would be satisfied, whether by temporal punishments here, as surely in some it
is, or whether hereafter, as it is in others, but he never doubted of that
effect of prayers in order to each. After you press harder, and with more
biting Language, than I suspected. Second.

You say you are surprised at my believing S. John Damascens relation of the
dead heads spaking against your doctrine of the souls relief in Purgatory. I
must confess that I read the Saints with so great Reverence, especially such,
whose Religion and learning are Solemnly Celebrated in the Church, as he is for
both, that if I should find any seeming warts of humane infirmity, as our
learned Countryman Waldensis says of Councels, I willingly do not see them but
with a Christian blush endeavor to cover their nakedness with modest glosses:
and this I have learned in Athanatius toward Dionisius Alexand. St. Augustine
to St. Cyprian, St. Hierome to many, rather then the Church should loose such
great men for the slip of a pen against their own intentions.

But as to this passage of St. John Damascen, I am not enforced to apply any
such lenitives. For why could not a dead Heathens skull answer in confirmation
of a Christian truth in the name of the dead to great St. Macharius, (as St.
John Damascen calls him) though himself was not concerned in the cause, as well
as a Heathens skull, answer in presence of all the people in declaration of our
Holy Faith, being asked by a holy Monk against Eunomius his rising Heresy,
wherein he was less concerned? which without Control is asserted in John
Cassian, and others, and being public cannot be denied? Saints have
Privileges above our reaches; it was a more in credible business for Balaams
Ass to speak unasked. Aristotle will deny this, not St. Augustine.

I will not enter the lists to examine St. Cyrils pantn pls, when he says,
they prayed in some suffrages for all sorts of dead, its true according to Gods
ordinary Laws; there is no redemption in Hell. But it is not so certain in
somes Judgments that there may not be a relevation; you know some have prayed,
that mitigatior fiat poena, but I am not compelled to assert such
Singularities, only en passent remind your reading, St. Gregory's relation of
Trajans soul is far higher then this of St. Damascen, yet it is Solemnly
recounted by the Greeks in the Council of Florence; and the truth not
questioned. I dare not therefore Aristachus like attribute so much to others
Criticismes as to question the truth, but rather with the Greeks acknowledge a
great miracle in the effect of prayers for the dead.

No ingenious person who is conversant in St. John Damascens spirit, style, and
devotion, can at all question the work to be his, which was so acknowledged in
the Coun. of Florence, though Cook and Rivet are prodigal upon any terms to
deny the Fathers works, as St. Augustine tells us, the Manichees did the
Scriptures, where they thwarred with their errors. I wish you would not trust
them, for they will deceave you; yet I am glad, that you acknowledge St.
Hierome to allow the History.

And truly though the Histories of Trajans delivery, or of this dead man's
answer were not true, yet the solemn bringing them without resistance in the
Council, abundantly serve my design; because they declare the sense of the
Greek Church, as to the Churches Tenet of easing souls before the great day.

Where you must also further observe, that the Greeks in the council grant,
that the whole Greek Church, as well as Latins, believed, that ad nonnullorum
peccatorum absolutionem mortuis preces, supplicationesque pro apsis magnopere
conducant; And that they understand this absolution to be before the last day,
is clear; for afterward weighing St. Gregory's Dialogues, they asse^t with
him, and most manifestly in his sense, that after death, th^^^ is, at the
oblation o^ the Churches suffrag^^, their sins are remitted, and they speak
al^^ies in ^^e ^e of the whole Greek Church; so that as to this they agreed
with the Latins, and therefore they durst not deny those examples, which you so
much undervalue, but esteem Trayans and others delivery from Hell, to be
miraculous, rather then question the efficacy of such holy Persons prayers, or
a relief before the last day. I read these passages in the Orations of the
Greeks in the Council, published in Greek in Holland, surely not to be
suspected as to this.

But you admit not St. Gregory's Dialogues to be his, upon Photius his
authority, though St. Ildelphonsus, almost contemporary with him, in L. de
viris illustribus, and after St. Isidore of the same subject, connumerate this
with the rest of his Works: so venerable Bede, St. John Damascen, and all
writes, Geek, and Latin.

Photius, the truth, is much esteemed these books and peradventure could gladly
have attributed them to his Countreyman against the sense of all the world. I
have read him entirely heretofore, but I remember not every particular in him.
As to the points themselves in St. Gregory, I have given you the sense of the
Greek Church which is enough to my design. Third,

Whereas you say, that if the words of the Fathers, by which they Attribute
purging of souls to the ^ire of Judgment, be not beyond contest, I will yield
the whole cause. This is not the question, whether Fathers have asserted such a
purgation, but whether they have admitted no other, which you assert: and if
they say this, not I but the Church has lost the cause: which alone may
suffice as answer to the Fathers for the sole purgation at the general
conflagration. I said it is easy to elude the Fathers by voluntary glosses out
of blasted Authors, you interpret me as if I had said, it were easy to
answer the Fathers by such glosses, the reader will observe this not to be
fair. Fourth,

There is one considerable objection, which you hint at: what the poor shall
do, who have not such helps. St. Augustine in this care of the dead, c. 4.
says, the Church prays for all in Purgatory, to provide for such, who have not
other helps; and truly since St. Augustine rightly says, that none are helped,
but qui meruerunt, ut sibi prodesse possint; no doubt but the degrees of their
helps are answerable to their merits: so that in Gods Counting House,
doubtless there is an application of the Church suffrages so largely to some
that they are sooner helped by them, then many rich by the superaddition of
other assistances, which yet if they should not provide for by Almsdeeds etc.
They relying on others, when they could have helped themselves, may render them
justly less participant of the common Almes-basket, which is reserved for the
poor.

Again it is not certain, whether particular suffrages, though designed for
particular persons, be not taken equally for the account of the poor, as well
as for the rich, you know some Divines hold it, they will indeed be available
for them for whom they are offered, according to their former merits, with
which is consistent, that others have a communcation, as being Co-members of
the Church: but as to time, or measure, we have no assurance, being the effects
are not ex condigno, or ^x justitia, as I have taught. Scotus in his Quodlibets
puts worthily three effects of the holy Mass: one for the whole Church; one
for the Priest, one for him, or them, for whom it is offered: so that all
capable of help, have benefit by this common oblation, the degrees we know not,
only all do not expect Doomsday for their help. I pray read Saint Bede in his
History l. 5. c. 13. you say he brings relations of others. His words are
Multos praeces viventium and eleemosynae and jejunia, and maxim celebratio
missarum, ut ante diem judicii liberentur juvant. Note before the day of
judgment: read also Sir Thomas Moore his whole tract called supplication of
Souls, his design is to maintain this truth: That the merits and prayers of
good folks for them may minish and abridge their pain, etc. They are his words.
Fifth.

You wonder how I can assert greater punishment to a soul from many years being
in Purgatory, whose measure is in divisible. I shall easily declare these
consistent: for although time is not the measure of it; neither does the
coexistence of time at all increase the pains even in bodies, as being holy
extrinsical to them both, and yet our pains are longer, if we stay longer time,
and consequently greater, as to our bodies; so in our souls, times coexistence
is extrinsecal, and so augments not intrinsecally the sufferances: yet as in
bodies, the succession, or accession of parts of pain renders pain greater, in
which is required access of parts of time for the spiritual pain being
altogether in so long time, though it receives no addition of parts, as in
corporal sufferings, yet here is a replication of the whole, as St.
Bonaventure, and Scotus explicate Aevum, which renders it strangely greater
upon longer time. This methinks is easily conceavable. Sixth.

As to privileged altars, though that is not our present controversy, as not
nearly touching Faith, yet I present you my apprehensions of the ground of that
practice. Many great Divines, as you know, such as our Corduba in his
questionary, Sotus, and others, are of opinion, that the efficacy of the holy
Sacrifice of Mass, is so great, though only by way of suffrage to the dead,
th^^ we may strongly hope for (...) effect aimed at; others more numerous, hold
also that even by way of divine promise, the effect is certain to the dead. And
truly when I read St. Ephrem, and others of the ancient, methinks they incline
to it supposing then this to be probable out of so great authorities, in order
to the opinion it self; if to it be superadded the Supreme power in the Church
in order to application of Gods promise herein, as is done in those cases,
though peradventure only by way of suffrage, methinks its clear, that the Popes
in such graunts, may rationally be presumed to proceed upon probable grounds,
which, as I have taught in my Enchyridion, is enough to secure Ecclesiastical
and civil Magistrates, in their practical results. As to the mercenary part, it
concerns particulars, with whom I meddle not, least St. Peter should quarter me
amongst his llotriepiskopuntes

As concerning supernumerary Priests, it is no less out of my cognizance; I
remember St. Augustine attributes the desires of so very many Christians of his
time to be Priests to their reverence and devotion of Priesthood, why may we
not judge as charitable of these?

Whereas you hint I do not take notice of your Reasons. The unbiassed reader
will find answers to every considerable reason in particular of your former
book, though in that being not designed against it, they are pro re nata only
incidentally couched in the body, but as I conceive not less energically for
being modestly hinted.

Your other notes though they every where savor of your eminent parts,
administer only matter of repetition or unnecessary explication, if duly
paralleld to each Chapter; I have not leisure to be superfluous, and therefore
I desire your pardon, if I wholly desist from further treating this subject,
though never from being.

You seem indeed to remit of your former rigor as to relief though not to
release of souls by prayer: yet by reason first that it depends on putting the
effect before the cause. Secondly, on putting more force on the foreknowledg of
the future operation of the cause then upon the real operation of the cause it
self when it exists, for then it has no effect for fear of changing a soul.
Thirdly, the very foreknowledge it self being of the secret decrees of God not
only in order to an acceptance, but even of the degrees of acceptance of future
prayers, for the soul is purely groundless. Lastly whatsoever this relief is in
reality (though in apprehension you put it sooner) it is not to be had till
Dooms day. I propound it to your further reflection, whether the whole machine
be not insignificative as to the real sense of the Church and of all Christians
in their prayers.

Sir, Your faithful Servant, F. D.
March, 26.
FINIS.

