A DECLARATION IN Answer to several lying Pamp(...) concerning the Witch of
WAPPING BEING A more perfect Relation of the Arraignment, Condemnation, and
Suffering of Jone Peterson, who was put to death on Monday the 12 of April,
1652.

SHEVVING The Bloody Plot and wicked Conspiracy of one Abraham Vandenbemde,
Thomas Crompton, Thomas Collet, and others.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1652.

A Declaration, In answer to several lying Pamphlets concerning the witch of
Wappin.
THe said Abraham Vandenbemde with other the said confederates (having laid a
Plot to take away the life of Mrs. Anne Levingston, because the Lady Powel had
given her an estate which some of them expected) in December last repaired to
one Jone Simpson, and proffered her 10 l. in hand, and 500 l. more in Hillary
term following, if she would swear that Mrs. Levingston had used sorcery and
withcrast to take away the Lady Powels life. And on the 10 of Jan. then
following, one Anne Hook (who pretends her self to be a cunning woman) being
employed by the said confederates, did persuade her thereunto, offering her six
score pounds, and half the money which the said Vandenbemde and the said
Cr^mpton were to give her and her husband for making their Affidavits, if she
would do the like. But the said Simpson abhominating so wicked a practice, to
take away an innocent Gentlewomans life, discovered the Plot; for which
conspiracies of the said confederates, a special Supplicavit was granted out
of Chancery, to bind them to the good behavior and other legal prosecutions
are still depending against them. But the said confederates not resting there
(in further prosecution of the Plot) did employ the aforesaid Hook, to procure
witnesses to swear what they desired: who accordingly about January last came
to the abovenamed Jone Peterson, at her house in Spruce Island near Wapping
and there made offer of 100 l. to her, to swear, that the said Mrs. Levingston
had received from her (the said Peterson) certain powders, and bags of seeds,
to help her in her law suits, and to provoke unlawful love (as the said Jone
Peterson did affirm before her trial.) But she refusing to do the same, the
said confederates to prevent the punishment, which justly and vnavoidably must
have befallen them, in case the said Peterson should have revealed this their
practice, as Simpson (before) had done the other, they lay a new design, to
anticipate the same, as follows.

On the 7th of March last, the said confederates came to Wapping, and got a
warrant from one Mr. Waterton a Justice of the Peace, to apprehend the said
Petersons person, and to search her house for Images of Clay, Hair, and Nails,
which accordingly they did; but upon strict search and diligent inquiry could
find no such thing; whereupon the said confederates carried her before the said
Justice, to have her examined where the said Vandenbemde, Collet (their
Sollicitour) and two or three other persons whom they brought with them, sat
at the table as the Justices Clerks to take her examination, where the said
Justice examined the said Peterson upon oath (contrary to law) concerning her
using of witchcraft and sorcery to take away the life of the Lady Powel of
Chelsey. To which she answered, that she never used sorcery or Witchcraft,
neither had she ever heard of the Lady Powel, saving that not long before one
Anne Hook (an Irish woman) came to her with one Goodwife Garland to have
persuaded her to have made such an oath against Mrs. Levingston, as she the
said Hook her self before had done, as the said Jone Peterson likewise did
affirm before her death. Whereupon the said Justice (contrary to law) gave
order to search her, which was done; but the searchers could find nothing on
her body which might create the least suspicion in them of her being a witch;
whereupon the said Justice took bayl for her appearance at the next Sessions.
And on the 14 of March following (being the Sabbath day) was by the said
confederates means, again apprehended, and examined a new, about the said Lady
Powels death. And the Argument which they then made use of to persuade the said
Peterson to confess, was, that she needed not fear what she confessed, for it
was not her life they aimed at, but to have matter whereby to accuse one Mrs.
Levingston, who had gotten the said Lady Powels estate, and thereby had undone
36 Persons of the said Ladies Kindred: And then told her, that they were
shortly to question the said Mrs. Levingstone for the same, either in the
Parliament house, or before a Committee (as the said Jone Peterson did likewise
affirm before her death.) Whereunto the said Jone Peterson replied, that she
never knew, nor heard of the said Lady Powell, otherwise as aforesaid; And that
she had not heard from the said Mrs. Levingstone for above a year before that
time: Then they caused her (contrary to Law) to be searched again in a most
unnatural and Barbarous manner, by four women whom they themselves for that
purpose had brought along with them, on of which women told the Justice that
there was a Teat Note that this Teat upon the view of the Physicians was the
day before her death found to be natural' and less then in many other women,
and the said Physicians also affirmed that she was then quick with child.
of flesh in her secret parts more then other women usually had, whereupon the
said Justice committed her first to New-prison and from thence to Newgate,
where she was left to the ordering and mercy of one Brooks, a Keeper there, and
an Agent of the said confederates.

On Monday the 5th. of April instant, two Bills of indictment were preferred
against her at Hicks-hall, Note, That Sir Jo. Danvers, Mr: Snape, Mr.
Winstanley, and Mrs Waterton Justice. of the Peace were with the confederates
at a Tavern near Hicks-hall, consulting when the Bill of Indictment was
preparing, and that Sir John Danvers came and dined at the Sessions house and
had much private discourse with the Recorder and many of the Justices and came
and sat upon the Bench at her Trial, where he has seldom or never been for
these many years.
and found by the Grand Jury, upon which indictments upon the 6th. of April,
she was arraigned before Mr. Recorder (who is of Council for the conspirators,)
and on the 7 of Apr. she was tried; at which trial the said confederates (who
before had spent three weeks time at Wapping in procuring witnesses) were
present, with three Counselors to prosecute the said Peterson. Then the Court
proceeded upon the first indictment, which was for bewitching the Lady Powel to
death; whereupon many women persons of mean degree (and of ill fame and
reputation) were produced against her, and interrogated by the said Council,
according to the Briefs delivered unto them, wherein were all the witnesses
testimonies, written before hand. And being asked what she had to say for her
self? (upon her knees) she took God to witness that she never knew the Lady
Powel nor the house where she dwelt, nor was any wise guilty of her death; and
delivered a paper of such witnesses as she had to defend her, desiring that
they might be called, whereupon Dr. Bates, and Dr. Colledon Physicians,
together with Mr. Stamford, and Mr. Page Chyrurgians, and diverse other persons
of good quality, testified the disease, manner of sickness, and the cause of
the said Ladies death, which were the Dropsy, the Scurvey, and the yellow
Jaundies, and that they wondered how she was able to live so long, having most
of those diseases growing on her for many years before; amongst which evidences
the innocence of (Mrs. Levingstone) formerly by the confederates maliciously
aspersed and bespattered, was now fully vindicated, to their great
astonishment, trouble, and disgrace.

Then the Court proceeded to the other Indictment, which was for bewitching one
Christopher Wilson (who does not himself complain of any such thing, but the
Confederates only:) and the only material evidence that then was against her,
was one Margaret Austin (who had formerly been a wandering person, but was in
charity taken up, relieved, and kept, by the said Jone Peterson, until she
perceived that the said Austin had purloined some of her goods out of her
house,) and two Witnesses more; the substance of whose Testimony was as
follows. That the said Wilson, having been a long time sick, and hearing that
the said Peterson had done good to many, sent for her to come to him, who
accordingly did and administered means for his Recovery, which at first was
conceived to do him good; But he afterward relapsed, and the reason that was
urged to induce the Court and Jury to believe that he was Bewitched, was, that
dureing his sickness, she sent to him for monyes ^or her Physic; to whom
Answer was returned that he could then send her none. Whereupon it was then
deposed* that she did reply, that he had better have sent her moneys, for he
should be to times worse then ever was; And that afterward he became very ill
again, and remained languishing. Many other witnesses were produced, but could
only swear to generallities, hear-says, and most absurd and rediculous
impertinences: then being by (...) Court demanded what she could say for her
self? she ^^sired that such Witnesses as she had then there prese^^ might be
called (some of which durst not appear becau^^ that the said Mr. Waterton, (as
the witnesses them selves do and will affirm) had threatened to send them to
Ne^gate, if they did appear.) Whereupon several witness^^ were called, and
being demanded what they could say for the Prisoner, they began to tell, that
they had known her a long time, and that she had done many Cures, and much
good amongst the Neighbors, but never knew that she did any ill; But the
Officers of the Court interrupted them saying (in a taunting manner) are you
for a Witch? and is this all you can say? and so turned several of them away
before they could be further heard. Then one came to the Court (a Stranger to
the prisoner) and offered to depose, that one in black, called Thomas Southwick
(known to be servant to Thomas Cromton another of the confederats) stood in
the Sessions yard, offering money to strangers there, to come in and swear)
that the said Peterson was a Wtich, and amongst the rest offered to give her
money if she would do the same, but he being called for, could not be had, nor
would appear, although Colonel Okey, and some other Justices upon the Bench,
desired the Recorder to take notice of it, and to give Order that the said
Thomas Southwick might be brought into Court. Whereupon the Jury went forth,
and brought in their verdicts, that the said Peterson was not guilty upon the
first Jndictment of bewiching the Lady Powell to death; But found her guilty
upon the second, for which she was then cast, and the next day condemned to dye
as a witch, And after that the said confederates and their agents went very
often to her promising her a Repreive or Pardon if she would confess that Mrs.
Levingstone had Employed her to make away the life of the Lady Powell, to which
she replied she could not, because it was altogether false. But one of the said
confederates urging her again to say something against Mrs. Levingstone, she
told him he was a rogue, and gave him a blow on the face, which made his nose
bleed: Where it is to be noted, that what for love of money they could not
tempt her to, they resolved at last for love of her life to force her to, by
necessitating her either unjustly to confess a notorious falsehood against the
said Mrs. Levingstone or else to dye without mercy or Repreive, which otherwise
was proffered her by the said Confederates, to make her unjust in doing the
same.

On the 12 day the said Jone Peterson (being brought to the place of Execution)
was by the Ordinary nine or ten times earnestly pressed to confess something
against the said Mrs. Levingstone. Whereupon the Executioner told the Ordinary,
he might be ashamed to trouble a dying woman so much, to which he replied, he
was commanded so to do, and durst do no otherwise And afterward the said
Ordinary still insisting in his discourse, and very often pressing the said
Peterson to confess and discharge her conscience before God and the world; she
answered that she had already confessed before the Bench, all she had to
confess; that she had made her peace with God; and therefore desired to dye in
quiet, for now she was to appear before God who presently would Judge her, and
that God was witness, that she dyed Innocently, and was in no wise guilty of
what was laid to her charge, and that she hoped he would freely forgive her all
her sins, and to this effect she still replied to his frequent importunities:
And having gone to prayers, she showed her self very attentive and penitent,
and after Prayer called to sing the 25th Psalm, which she performed very
Christianly and cheerfully, and so died, etc.

The Copy of a Certificate under the hands of several Doctors of Physic and
Chirurgions concerning the death of the Lady Powell.
October the 8. 1651.
In the Body of the Lady Powell, who dyed the seventh of this instant, was
observed, The Skin universally discovered Yellow. The Belly swollen very much,
the Thighs also and Legs. The Cavity of the Abdomen possessed with yellowish
obscure water, the quantity whereof not much above one Gallon and an half. The
Stomach and Guts not dissafected, nor the Kidneys. The Pancreas canceorus in
part, some part being degenerated into a feculent matter; like Amurca or dregs
of oil, yet contained in a Ciste. The Liver larger then it ought, black, of an
unequal schirrous or rather Cancerous substance, exangues. The Spleen joined
with the left part of the hallow of the liver, as if they were one body, very
black, and hard outwardly, inwardly rotten. The Gall large and full, but of a
deeper Yellow, inclined to red and black matter. In the cavity of the Breast or
Thorax water of the same substance and color near a Gallon. The Lungs
something thicker and more discolored then usual. The heart well. The Bones
very easily broken.


Physicians.
Colladon. George Bate. Goddard. George Chabrey.
Chirurgians.
Charles Stamford Thomas Page.


Besides the Apothecaries, and several other persons, who testified the same
And are still ready to do the like.

Coll. Okey, Coll. Berkstead, and diverse other Justices of the Peace, both at
Hixes hall, and at the old Baley, did declare themselves that they were not
satisfied either with the proceedings, or proof against this Peterson, that she
was guilty of witchcraft, but that there was a design in it, relating to the
prejudice of Mrs. Levingstone, which they are ready to testify to the
Parliament when they shall be required thereunto.

FINIS.

