The Preface.
Christian Reader,
HAving not in all my few labors and studies either heard of, or met with any
entire Treatise of this kind or nature, and daily perceiving the Spirit of
Dissension beyond Measure Operating amongst the generality of Mankind, so that
if it were possible he would beguile and seduce the very Elect: I thought fit
therefore upon a serious Consideration, to endeavor to put a stop to the
malicious Project of the Devil, who is incessantly striving to draw men
headlong into Eternal Perdition with himself, especially by insinuating into
them some blasphemous thoughts of the Almighty, according to that which you will
find mentioned in the following Discourse, viz. That he has appointed some on
purpose, as it were, for the endless Torments of Hell, as well as others for
the Enjoyment of Everlasting Bliss; and that (they being so voluntarily
predestined) if they did use all imaginable means, there can be no hopes or
possibility of a repeal; which in my opinion, is a very great Blasphemy, to
think of so Wise and Merciful a God as ours is, who did not only vouchsafe to
send his only begotten Son Christ Jesus, to be a Propitiatory Sacrifice for all
our Sins, but has left his plain written Word, whereby if Men had but Grace to
Read and Practice it, they might be easily convinced of such wicked
Imaginations: He has also granted a Redemption and Deliverance from all Sins
whatsoever, except that against the Holy Ghost, provided that Men will timely
and sincerely perform the Conditions upon which they are pr^mised. My Courteous
Reader, I shall not here trouble my self with a second Exposition, but if you
please diligently to peruse the following Treatise, I hope, through God's
Grace, you will find full satisfaction concerning the whole Point: Besides, you
will find many other wicked conceits about the same Matter, and all of them
singly opposed and confuted by the plain Word of God: Therefore I shall not
here take time to reckon them up in their Order; neither will I recommend it to
the protection of any particular Person, presuming that it may be material
enough in it self to Challenge a Patronage from all those that are any way
concerned for the Interest and Honor of their Maker.

Now, my Christian Reader, I have no more to add, for the better offering of it
to thy kind acceptance, but only this seasonable Admonition, viz. Be not too
curious, too inquisitive, in searching after those things, which God is not
pleased to Communicate to any humane Capacity, according to that excellent
Maxim in Philosophy, quae supra nos, nihil ad nos; But yet above all, be
careful and diligent to know and understand those things which especially
belong to thy Spiritual and Eternal Welfare, always remembering that no Man can
be too circumspect in a business of so great a Moment; which that you, and I,
and all may do, God of his infinite Mercy grant, etc. Farewell,

S. D.

An Antidote against the Erroneous, or rather Blasphemous, Opinions of some
People in this our Corrupt Age, etc.
James 1st. 13, 14, 15. Verses. Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted
of God, for God cannot be tempted with Evil, neither tempts he any Man.

But every Man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own Lust and entic^d.

Then when Lust has conceived it brings Sin, and Sin when it is finished,
brings forth Death.


ALthough all Scripture are inspired by one and the same Spirit of Truth, yet
have they an accidental difference, according to the Nature of the Penmen that
did first indite them, some being of a higher, others of a lower Style; some
hard and intricate, others more plain and easy to be understood.

And this, I presume, it was that occasioned St. Gregory to compare some
Scriptures unto Jacob's hasty Rods, which were partly peeled, and partly
covered; others unto Acab's house of Ivory, which was without any covering at
all.

The Scripture which I have now mentioned unto you, is of the former sort, hard
and difficult to be understood: It craveth therefore your best attention whilst
it is interpreted, and your chiefest affection when it is applied; I will first
briefly and plainly, as I can, lay down the general heads, and afterward come
unto the particulars.

1. We have here a full and complete proposition, viz. That God is not the
mover unto evil, nor the author of Sin:

Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God.

2. The Apostle confirms and strengthens this proposition by two Arguments in
the following Words. The first whereof is drawn from the of God's divine
Nature, and is partly Negative, and partly Affirmative.

1. Negative, He cannot be tempted with Evil. 2. Affirmative, He tempts no
Man.
2. The second Argument is drawn from the Corruption of Man's own Nature,
arising out of the verse following, where the Apostle sets down the true and
efficient Cause of Sin, which is our own concupiscence and desire; For every
man is tempted when he is drawn by his own Lust and enticed.

And in the next place, by a kind of gradation, he proceeds further to show us
our Corruption, in semine, in germire, in fructu, in the seed, in the bud, in
the fruit.

In the seed there is, concupiscentia titillans, pleasing concupiscence, in the
bud there is, concupiscentia provocans, willing concupiscence, and in the fruit
there is, concupiscentia proveniens, actual concupiscence: And then follows the
effect which this bitter Root does produce, and that is Death; When Lust has
conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin being finished brings forth Death
and Destruction, both to Body and Soul.

These are parts that I chiefly design to insist upon, that I may thereby
vindicate the Honor and Justice of God, from the Blasphemous thoughts of
wicked and obstinate People.

This Proposition is the first point, that God is not the Mover unto Evil, nor
the Author of Sin: A point, I must needs confess, very hard and intricate, if
rightly weighed and considered; and if we take it in its full latitude, it will
bring us to understand, if it were possible to be comprehended, how far God
has a hand in the actions of sinning: A point so high as the highest Heavens,
and dwells in Light as unsearchable as God himself, covered with a Curtain of
Sacred secresy, which shall never be drawn aside; for who is able to apprehend
(that has his habitation here upon Earth, and his dwellings amongst us
Mortals) how far the Council of God goes in ordering and disposing of sinful
actions.

The Manichees were here driven to such a strait, that they framed two Gods
unto themselves, to the end that they might acquit one from being accessory
unto Evil. 1. They called a good God the Father of Christ, and the Author of
the New Testament; But the other they surmised to be Evil, and the Author of
the Old. And this they say was he, who is said to have hardened Pharoah's
heart, to bid Shemei curse David; and lastly to have delivered the Gentiles
unto a reprobate sense, Romans 1.24. But, alas! foolish men, they were deceived,
for the Apostle tells us plainly, Ephesians. 4.6. That there is but one Lord, and one
God, and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all.

And St. James says here in the Text that he is (...) one that cannot be moved
or tempted unto Evil: But I will leave this Error of theirs, and come nearer
unto our selves: There is a great Error about this point, and I suppose it to
be in two extremes.

The 1st is of those who maliciously ch^r^e God to be the Author o^ Sin; these
are the sensual Libertines of our Age, who rub their Filthiness and
Licentiousness upon God's Purity.

2dly, The others are those who think that God does only suffer and permit
(...); and so they make him like a King, sitting upon a Scaffold, to behold a
Stratagem; or as if his G^dhead were bound up, and restrained like Sarr^^^'s
Arms, that he could not use it.

Either of th^se Opini^ns do seem r^ally to deny the Godhead it self, the one
destroying the Goodness and Divine Justice of the Deity in that they charge God
to be the author of Sin: The other his Omnipotence and Providence in that they
bereave him of a great part of his Honor.

The latter of these positions is very true, that God does permit sin, and
sound and Catholic enough if more were added unto it, as you shall find in the
explication of the point in hand: But the other is filled to the brim with
monstrous Impiety; for if the very damned Spirits in Hell might be heard to
speak against God, what could they say to deprave him more than this?

Indeed the very best of us all, no doubt, have sinned, and that most
presumptuously too, and have most highly violated the Sacred Laws of our Maker:
But that God caused us so to do, is, I say, a most damnable and reprobate
Thought, that any Vessel of Clay can conceive of his Maker, who is absolutely
good, and neither is, nor can be, tempted with evil.

And yet our Adversaries, the Papists, have not stuck to father the birth of
this prodigious Monster upon our Church it self, by affirming that we maintain
it as a point of Doctrine, that God is the Mover unto evil, and so consequently
the Author of sin: I say our Church never affirmed it, and to redeem a thousand
Deaths if more were due unto our sins, we would not.

It Is true, this we say, that whatsoever has substance, being and perfection
in the action of sin, God is the Author of it, because it is good, and
proceeds from him in whom we live, and move, and have our being, Acts 17.28.
Our life, our motion, our being is from God; he is, Anima Mundi, the very Life
and Soul of the World. A Poet of the Gentiles did first deliver it, but now an
Apostle of ours has ratified it, and sanctified it for a truth. Our Life is
God's, whether we live to him as we ought to do, or to the Lusts of the Flesh,
or after the pleasure of the God of this World, the Prince of Darkness. Our
Motion is his, whether we lift up our hands to Prayer, or to Murder, or to
Stealth, or any other Outrage. Our Essence is also God's, the nature, being,
and substance of man, of reprobate Angels, and others are from him, and his
good Creatures, for he made all thin^s good, and not evil. So that still I say,
God, thus s^r, is a worker in Temptation, or may be said to have a hand in
Sinnin^; for in sin, you must know, there is a positive and peccative port,
nature and corruption, action and defect; now God is the Author of the former,
but not of the latter: As for Example, in the striking of a jarring and untuned
Instrument, the playing and singering is from the Person, but the jarring and
discord is in the Instrument: So God is the Author of every acti^n, but not of
wickedness in any action. But would you see it yet more plain by an example out
of the Book of God, then let Cain be the man, Genesis 4.5. we read that because
Cain's Sacrifice was rejected, and his Brother's accepted, he was exceeding
wrath, his countenance fell, and he had a purpose to slay his Brother: Now Cain
could never have thought of the death of Abel, his eyes could never have seen
any offensive thing in his accepted Sacrifice, nor his heart have prosecuted
with desire, nor his hands have executed with power so unnatural a fact, if God
had not given him strength and activity to have used the service of all these
faculties.

To think, to desire, to move the parts of the Body, are the good Creatures of
God, and therein consists the action of God: But to turn these gifts of God
unto so wicked, and vile a purpose, as to murder his Brother, was the sin of
Cain himself, the fault of the action proper to him alone. And so in all our
motions and actions God has a hand in them, as far as they are righteous and
good, but as they are evil and sinful, they chiefly proceed from the impure
fountains of our hearts, for God can no way be touched with evil.

2. God may be said to move unto Evil, per p^ivationem gratiae suae, by
withdrawing his Grace; and in this sense says St. Chrysostom, God is said to
give over unto a reprobate sense, to harden, to blind, to tempt unto evil: Non
quod haec a Deo siunt, quippe cum a pr^pria hominis m^lit^a provenient, sed
quia Deo just homines deserente, haec illis contingunt, Not that these things
are done by God himself, for they proceed from the malice of men, but because
while he does fully forsake men for their obstinacy and rebellion against him,
these things do commonly overtake them. And to the same purpose is that of St.
Austin, Indurare dicitur Deus quem mollire noluerit, God is said to harden whom
he will not mollisie, Et ex^ae care quem illummare noluerit, and to blind them
whom he will not illuminate; so he hardened Pharoah's heart, and blinded the
false Prophets.

Neither may we here arraign God of injustice, because it is lawful for him to
do what he pleases with his own: He has power over his Clay, to make of it at
his pleasure, either in Judgment, a vessel of Dishonor, or in Mercy, a Vessel
of Honor: And the Clay may not say to the Potter, why have thou made me thus
or thus.

3. God may be said to move unto evil by offering occasions and objects, to try
whether a Man will sin or not: As for Example, A Master suspecting his Servant
to be false and thievish, lays something of considerable value in his way, to
try if he will steal it, which if he does, the Master having found his theft,
will not only expose him to the world for a Rogue and Deceiver, but will for
ever after suspect his fidelity and trust; now this Trial is no sin in the
Master, although the theft be a great one in the Servant: Even so it is with God,
we must not fasion my injustice on him, because he tries and proves us by
occasions and objects, for they are things good in themselves, though we pervert
them unto evil ends.

M^ses wrought many signs and wonders in the Land of Egypt, which were good in
themselves, and yet proved as means to harden Pharoah's heart, not so intended
by God, but so perverted by his malicious temper. Thus we see that the Wicked
and Blasphemous Opinions of those who make God to be the Author of sin, and so
charge him with our impieties, are absolutely false, for he is not evil
himself, neither tempts he any Man unto evil.

I come now to the second Opinion, viz. of those who make God to be the only
sufferer and permitter of evil, which I confess is but an Error of humanity,
many offending herein rather through infirmity than malice: They speak a truth
of God, when they acknowledge his permission of sin, but not the whole truth,
because they think he only permits it, and so they make him an idle
spectator of all our actions: But for our sure proceeding herein, let us take
along with us these three Notes, viz. That God does praescire, permittere, and
ordinare peccatum, foresee, permit, and dispose of the sinful actions of Men.

1. He foreseeth sin, he foresaw the iniquity of Esau, long before his being,
and the sentence of reprobation was denounced against him before he had done
either g od or evil, Romans 9.11. He foretold the infidelity of the Jews, (says
St. Austine) and their malicious purpose in complotting the Death of the Son of
God: What of that? praedixit non fecit, he only foretold it, but did not work
it: Vidit ab aeterno (says Lipsius) sed vidit non coegit scivit non sanxit,
praedixit, non praescripsit: He saw it from all Eternity, but he only saw it,
enforced it not, knew it, decreed it not, foretold it, prescribed it not.

2. As the Lord foreseeth sin, and yet is not the author of evil, so he
permits sin to be done in the World: He suffered the Amorites to go on in
their wickedness, and tells Abraham that it was not yet full, Genesis 15.16. He
suffered Shemei to curse David, as we read in the 16th Chap. 2d Book of Samuel:
I omit several other places of Scripture, of less importance, because it is so
true, that it needs no proof, for there is nothing visibly or sensibly done
within the compass of the whole World, which is not either commanded or
tolerated from the Court of the highest Emperor.

He suffers his own Children to be tempted, that they may not be exalted above
measure, and that they may know the Power of the Lord, and the proof of his
Armor.

And thus he suffers the wicked also to go on in their wickedness, that their
Condemnation may be greater.

3. As he foreseeth and permits evil, so he orders and disposes of it, as
seems best to his Godly Wisdom, ^or as he is a most (...) Creator of good
Natures, so he is a most righteous disposer, of the evil wi^^s and siaful
actions of Mankind.

Look upon that unnatural sin in selling Joseph into Egypt, and you shall see
it there so plainly delivered, that no man need to doubt, I will not take time
to recite the whole History, the words, which especially make for our present
purpose, are these in the 45th Chap. C^n. 8th Verse. It was not you that sent
me hither, but God, and at the 50th Chap. of the same Book and 20th Verse, Ye
thought evil against me, but God meant it unto good, t^ bring to pass as it is
this day, to save much People alive: Observe, they thought evil, God disposes
it unto good, their minds were wholly bent with malice and envy toward their
Brother, whilst God's providence was working how to serve them in a famine, and
to save much People alive. Thus you see that the Lord does not only foresee and
permit evil to be done in the World, but in the very doing of it, his
Providence is busy, how to order and dispose of it, that he may bring it to
some good Event: I will now join all these three together, viz. The
Pre-science, the Permission and Providence of God in the action of sinning, and
so couch them under one Example, and that shall be in the seducement and fall
of Ahab, as we have it in the 22d Chap. of the first Book of Kings, at the 19th
Verse; It is a place, I must needs confess, that has been strongly urged to
tax God of injustice, for it seems God did not only permit the false Spirits to
seduce Ahab, but gives encouragement also, saying, thou shall prevail, adding
a commandment go forth, and likewise allowing of the form of acting in the
matter do so.

Now that you may know how innocent God is in an action of such a prejudice,
observe well the circumstances of the place, and the thing intended, the thing
designed was that Ahab should fall at Ramoth Gilead: and concerning the means,
inquiry was made, who should entice Ahab, because it was not in the nature of
God himself to effect it, therefore that which he does, he does by a false
Spirit, one of Satan's Band and Retinue.

But observe also, God infuseth no mischief into the Spirit, he comes furnished
of himself, for when one said thus, and another thus, he proffered his service,
saying, I will entice him, when God demanded the means, he invented the
practice, I will be, says he, a false Spirit in the mouth of his Prophets.

Now what were these Prophets of Ahab they were a faithless Generation, whose
guile it was, either for reward or ^avour of the King to say they had dreamed,
when it was not so, and that the Lord had said it when he never spoke it; so
you s^e there is h^th Malice in the Spirit, and falsehood in the Prophets,
before God had any hand in the Matter: Therefore what does the Lord therein?
Wh^^, he sits upon the Throne as the Judge and Moderator of the whole Action;
He Commands the Attendance of all the Army of Heaven on the Right Hand, and
on the Left, both clean and unclean Spirits are in Subj^ction unto him: He
gives leave then unto the Spirit, who, without his permis^ion is unable to do
any thing.

Thou ^hal ^nt^^^ says be and then he gives the Success, which all the Devils
in Hell, c^uld n^^ effect, if he would have resisted it: Therefore says he
th^^ shall prev^^t, and then he bids him go, and he goes; run, and he ru^s:
And ^^^^ly, he disposes the Course, do so, i. e. do so, and no more than so;
which is us much, as if he had said, since thou have Malice to bestow, Extend
it upon Ahab, rather than upon Je^^phaphat, and falsehood to infuse, power it
forth upon the four hundred Prophets of Ahab, rather than upon Micah'^, or an^
other Prophets of mine: And let the fall of Ahab be at R^^^^th G^^^^d, rather
than at any other place; And in this Battle with the King of A^^t^^, rather
than at any other time. Thus when the Matter is their own, God gives the
Fashoning and Ordering thereof, in some sort touching the Persons, time, and
place, and other the like particulars.

I hope Render by this time you are sufficiently convinced, that in the Actions
of sinful Men there is more to be deemed of God than his bare permission: for
doubtless he has his will therein, mistake me not I beseech you, I mean not
Vo^^ntaetem Appr ba^^onis, His will (...) Approbation, as if the Lord did
either Allure, Counsel, or Compel unto Evil: But I m^an Volunt^tem
Providentiae, His Provident W^^^, whereby the Lord does order and govern sinful
Actions in applying them to better ends, then the Offend^^s are aware off: For
God says the Pr^phet is of pure ^^es and can be^^ld n W^^k^dness, his Soul
hates and abhorteth Sin: His Law to this ve^^ day curses and condemns Sin,
his hands have smitten and scour^^^ S^n; He has thrown down Angels from
Leaven, pla^^d M^n upon E ^th, ^^^^^rted whe^^ Ki^^doms, destroyed whole ^^^ies
and Corporations, and not spared his own Son Christ Jesus, w^il^ he appeared in
the ^^militude of sinful Flesh.

He has drow^ed the World with a Flood of Waters already, and will ^er aster
consume it wit^ Fire (...) of Sin: He has threatened Tribu^^tion, An^^ish and
D^^^^ unto a^ the Workers of Iniquity, and that Sentence of his shaft fraud
more Stable than all the Marble Pillars upon Earth, and endure longer than the
days of Heaven.

If then his Indignation against Sin be such, Who can accuse him to be the
Author of it.

Let God then be true, and let all Men be Liars, let God be just, and let all
Men be sinners: Let him be justified in (...), and p^^^ in his sayings, and
then let all his a^^^s^^s vanish and (...) away like the foam upon the Waters.
But as (...) those that (...), (...) the Lord, let them stand fast as M^nat
(...), which (...) by (...) ^^t them stand fast in Love, fast in Faith, (...)
in ^^ve that they keep his Commandments, (...) not from Grace, fast in hope,
that they despair (...) in ^^^^^ance, that they ^ha^ one day enjoy the Rivers
of plea^^^^ in the Kingdom of Heaven for evermore.

And now I am come to the first argument, which the Apostle produces here to
prove the former propositions, which (...) immediately drawn from the purity of
God's Divine Nature, being partly Negative, and partly Affirmative:

First, Negative, And therein the Apostle denies God to be tempted with evil.

Secondly, Afirmative, And therein he averreth that he tempted no man.

I shall begin first with the Negative part, God cannot be tempted with evil.
As if the Apostle should have said here, God is in nature so pure, that he
cannot be stained; in Will so stable, that he cannot be moved; in Wisdom so
wise, that he cannot be deceived; and in Liberty so free, that he cannot be
compelled unto Evil; He is Light, and there is no Darkness, either of Error or
Ignorance, in him; He is goodness, and there is no evil of sin, which can
contaminate or defile his divine Nature; He is good (...), and ext^^^se, in
himself, and without himself; in himself, as being the Father of all Goodness,
for there is no goodness upon Earth, but what is derived from him; In which
sense our Savor says there is none good but God; He is ipsa ^^mit^^, Goodness
it self, his Nature is Goodness, and from him, as from an Ocean, flow all the
streams of Goodness into the World: He is exceeding good without himself, I
mean unto all his Creatures in general, whether you consider him in his
Creation, or in his Preservation of them.

1. In his Creation, there was not a Work that passed his fingers without the
approbation of his Jugdment, Behold it was good, and very good, and God saw
that it was good, Genesis 1.10.

2. In his Preservation; For he opened his hands, and fills all things living
with his Blessings, the whole Earth is full of his Goodness, (says the
Psalmist) and his Mercies are over all his Works. He is also exceeding good
unto his chosen, unto his Israel, unto those that are of a pure heart, Psalm.
73.1.

Do you distrust of his righteousness? Ask as proud and ^^^^ate a ^^^ner as
ever trans^^essed, P^areah by name, and he will tell you, that the Lord is
righteous, though he and his people were wicked, Exodus 9.27.

Ask but the m^^^ers of humane Wisdom, and they will inform you in this be^^^^.
(...) of him, (...) no ^^ans is unjust, but as (...). A (...) the Question, why
the Gods do good? Answers himself, N^^^^ (...) their Nature is the cause;
they neither take, nor do wrong, they neither give, nor have mischief in them.

I am come now to the second ^^^^rmative part, viz. As he is in Nature so pure,
that (...) tempted himself, so likewise tempts he no man (...) does not
pe^^^^de men unto sin, not does ^e approve of it, when (...); For (...) art ^ot
a God, that (...), (says the Prophet) (...). ^.4. ^eather shall (...) with
(...): T^^ go^^sh shall not stand in (...) sight, (...) ^^^^st all them that
(...).

If then God neither move men unto sin, nor command it when it is committed,
nor assist the committers of it, because his Nature is so good, that he can
neither tempt, nor he tempted unto evil, in no wise then certainly is he the
Author of Sins, For* ^eus ^ui borus ^st, (says P^^^^^ mal^rum causa dici non
^^^^st; And it is an excellent speech which St. A^s^^^ has to this purpose;
Fi^^i non potest, (...), (...) a peccatis s^^gi^^r, (...) cum in peccata
decidatur: It cannot be that men should ^^ll, or be driven into sin by him,
through whom they have their Resurrection from sin; for surely, if he did truly
and properly throw them down, he would never be so willing to raise them up.
Many have been restrained and held up by God's Grace, that they might not fall
into disparate (...), but none have been by him occasioned to fall, for he
tempts no man unto ^^^l.

Does God tempt no man unto evil? why then (may some say) do the Scriptures
seem to speak so plainly to this purpose? why is it said of God, Exodus 4.21. I
will harden Pharaoh 's heart, that he shall not let the People go: And Exodus
7.22. we read that Pharoah's heart was hardened, neither did he hearken unto
them, as the Lord had said. And Romans 1.24. it is said of the Gentiles, that the
Lord delivered them up unto a reprobate sense: Nay, the Prophet Jeremiah
charge God to his face, in the 4th Chap at the 10th Verse, Then said I, ah
Lord God! surely thou deceived this People and Jerusalem, saying ye shall have
Peace, whereas the Sword reaches unto the Soul.

And the Lord himself in plainer terms takes it upon himself, Ezekiel. 14.9. If
the Prophet be deceived when he has spoken a thing, I the Lord have deceived
that Prophet: And in the 2d Chap. 2 Epist. to the These. at the 11th Verse, God
shall send them strong Delusions, that they should believe a lie.

If so, how does our Apostle speak a truth here, when he says God tempts no
man unto evil,

For the better explication of these mysterious Expressions, and withal to make
it appear unto you, how God shall be just, and ^^t bath the natures and workers
of such wickedness shall be ashamed before him: Take, I beseech you, seriously
these two things into your Christian consideration.

First, That in all the Scriptures before alleged, th^re is (...) made of some
precedent Iniquity in those ungracious Persons, wh^^^ God so deals with,
deserving and procuring the hand of God t^^, heavily upon them.

Has God hardened Pharaoh, surely ^^^^^^h ha^d^^^ himself, Exodus 8 32. Du^ities
often Hominum peccatum O (...) s^^th (...) so it was with this Obstinate Sinner,
(says S. A^g^^^^) D^^^ (...) Ju^^^^^^ ^ys^ (...) per l^^erum a^b^trium, God
hardened (...) by his just Judgment, but Pharaoh first hardened himself by his
(...) free Will. Did he give over the Gentiles to a reprobate Sense? Filthiness
not to be (...) of* Look into the (...) of the Romans at 27, and you shall find
the Apostle there to Answer in God's behalf, that it was a Recommence or Reward
of their former Errors, or because they chan^^d the truth of God into a lie,
worshipped the Creature more than the Creator, and turned the Glory of an
incorruptible God into the Image of a corruptible Man; and wherefore were they
misled with strong delusions, but because they received not the love of the
Truth, that they might be saved

Thus God as a just Judge, seeing the Heart of Man to be wholly bent upon
Wickedness, does inflict upon him the Spiritual Punishment of induration,
slumber, blindness, or the like punishment, I say, for when Sin is plagn'd with
Sin, as it is many times in the Wisdom of God whereby he governs the World,
then it is not Peccatum but Judicium, not Sin, but Judgment; Thus St. A^gustin
speaking of the hardening of Pharoah's Heart, he thus concludes, God indeed did
incline (...) will of Phar^^h, being Evil of it self in this Sin, but it was by
his Just and Secret Judgment. D^^^ non est Author Pe^cati, ut est Peccatum, sed
ut est ^^^^a P^^^at; God i^ not the Author of Sin, as it is Sin, but as it is
the punishment of those former Sins, which we have so presumptuously committed
(...) his Divine Majesty.

But (2dly,) The second thing which I would (...) you to consider is this, That
whatsoever God does in the Action of Sin^ing, as in hardening of Pharoah's
Heart, or any other the like Judgments, he does it not by infusing any
Wickedness into their hearts; (...) infused no Wickedness into the Heart of
Pharaoh, there was Infidelity, Obstinacy, and Rebellion, before God did any
thing in the matter, as it evidently appears by that Speech of his unto Moses
and A^^^^, Exodus 5.2. Who is the Lord th^^ I should hear his Voice, and let
Israel go, I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go.

Thus Reader, as this Doctrine has been sufficiently proved, suffer the
Instructions, (I beseech thee) arising from thence to be effectually enforced.

In the first place then, if God be not the mover unto evil, or the author of
sin, as the Apostle here affirms, then let no man attribute his sin unto God,
by saying, God moved me to do thus or thus: For perditio tua ex t^, O Israel,
thy sin is of thy self, and thou art the cause of thy own ruin.

We cannot but be sensible that it is a great wickedness of this present Age
too, too heathenish to impute the fault when they have sinned unto the Stars
and Planets, by saying they were born under a Malignant Planet, and that the
Stars had fore-signed their going awry: But to this St. Austin answers, and
says, that the Grace of God does not only excel all the Stars and Planets in
Heaven, but also controlleth the very Angels and Devils in Hell. And if you
look into the 10th Chap. of Jeremiah at the 2d Verse, you shall not only find
this judicial Astrology to be condemned as a heathenish invention, but also the
People of God to be forewarned that they should not rely upon such vain signs
and constellations.

2dly, Others there be which stick not at this only, but reach more immediately
at God himself, by saying, God would have it thus, and thus; and if God would
not, I could not have done it, for who can resist his power.

Thus, when they have spilt the blood of the innocent, like water upon the
ground, defiled their Neighbors beds, and provoked Heaven with many
presumtuous sins, as Rapes, Robberies, Murders, Treasons, and the like; they
will spue out a Blasphemy against God himself, by countenancing their sins
under his authority; and by pleading that they have done but the will of God,
in committing such wickedness against him.

It Is true, but it is a will, against his will, that because they did not value
or regard that which God had publicly enjoined them, they should do another
thing which he had privately determined; and he that fulfilleth the will of God
in this manner, or rather the will of God is fulfilled upon him, will
certainly, without timely and unfeigned repentance, perish unto all Eternity.

I am now come to the second Argument, which the Apostle produces here to
prove his former proposition, which is drawn from the corruption of Man's own
Nature, arising out of these words, but every Man is tempted, when he is drawn
away of his own lust and enticed.

As if the Apostle should have said here, but every Man's falling into any Sin,
comes from himself, his own Treacherous sensual Appetite suggests, and tenders
him some sensitive carnal baits, and so consequently by them draws him out or
his Course, and entices him unto Sin.

God then is neither the Mover, not the Author, nor the perfecter of any evil
Action, that proceeds partly from our own Corruption, and partly from the
suggestions of Satan: for our Natures being through the ^ail of ou^ first
Parents corrupted, our desires are defiled, and being defiled rebel against the
rules and dictates of right Reason, and so hu^^y upon headlong unto all
uncleanness, to draw iniquity with cords of Vanity and sin as it were with
Cart-ropes.

Now what shall we ^ay, that God is the cause of this Original Corruption,
^^^^ly no, But every Man is tempted, when he is drawn away by his own ^ust and
enticed.

God placed Man at first in a perfect state of happiness, of innocently and
integrity, for he made him pure in his Body, pure in his Soul, and pure in the
(...) Soul,

1. For his Body, though it was formed out of the Dust, yet we must consider,
that the Earth was not then corrupted, nor at that time infected, the
Corruption came afterward through the fall of Adam, when that curse of God was
laid upon it by reason of Adams Sin; Cursed is the Earth for thy sake, Genesis
3.17. In sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life, Thorns also and
Thistles shall it bring forth unto thee: Before that, Man was free, and had a
possibility to live for ever.

2. For his Soul, it was most divine and heavenly, (Divina particula Aurae)
being a spark of Divinity infused by God himself, who breathed into Man the
breath of Life, and made it spiritual like unto himself: It was not of the
Essence of God, for then it should have been equal with God, but it was such a
workmanship, as did resemble him in true holiness and perfect integrity.

3. As for the faculties of his Soul, they were likewise pure, his reason and
understanding was clear, without any blindness or imperfection at all; His will
was free from all Bondage, Coaction, or Compulsion whatsoever, so that none but
himself could have brought any inconveniences, or damage unto himself.

There Is no fault then upon Gods side possibly to be found, no hard measure
offered by him: He gave unto Man all things necessary and commodious for a
pleasant and an happy life, he gave him liberty and freedom to stand, what more
could he desire? It was miserable Man then, that was the cause of his own
ruin, who abused that power which God had given him, by suffering the Devil
that great Enemy of Mankind, who always Enveighed at his prosperity, to beguile
and poison him with an Apple, not by force, but by deceit, working on the
Woman, the weaker Vessel, she being poisoned, poysoneth her Husband, and the
poison being contagious; spreads it self through all the faculties both of Body
and Soul, and that deadly too: For so God had said before, in the day that thou
eatest thereof thou shall surely dye, Genesis 2, 17. Man was now after all this,
subject unto all infirmities, his Body to the Temporal, his Soul unto the
Spiritual and eternal Death.

There is neither Disease of the Body, nor Sickness of the Soul, but what came
in with Sin, not unto Adam only, but unto us his Offspring; for though at first
he only sinned, yet we are culpable through his Fact, and it is derived unto us
both by imputation and propagation.

1. By imputation, so says the Apostle, Romans 4, 19. By one Man's disobedience
many were made Sinners.

2. By Propagation, Ezekiel. 18, 2. The Fathers have eaten sour Grapes, and the
Childrens Teeth are set on edge.

So that now (our natures being corrupted) the soundness and integrity of all
the faculties therein are diseased, the Image of God is wholly defaced, the
Soul is taken up with a Mass of Injustice, and we are subject to a necessity of
Sinning.

For as it was true of Man in the State of Innocence, Potest non peccare, he
might if he would, not have Sinned, because God left him in the hands of his
own Counsels, and gave him liberty both ways, either to Sin, or not to Sin; So
now it is true in the State of Corruption, non potest non peccare, he cannot
choose but sin; the whole lump of his Nature being sour'd with that ancient
Leaven; nor shall he ever be delivered from that Corruption, whereunto he is
Subject, until he attains unto the State of glorification, wherein it shall as
certainly be verified, non potest peccare, he cannot Sin, though he would,
corruption having put on incorruption, both in Body and Soul.

Which necessity of Sinning in the mean time is not in any external cause, but
in the decayed Nature of Man, upon the fall whereof comes Vanity in the Mind,
and a frowardness in the Will, to depart from the living God.

Thus then you see the immediate cause of Sin, to be our own corruption and
concupiscense, which draws us away from the rules of Reason, and the right
Paths of Gods commandments: nor is this true only in the wicked and reprobate,
but even in the dearest Children of God; They are not free from this Original
infection, they have many combats and conflicts in them.

There is Ishmael against Isaac, the Flesh against the Spirit continually
striving; S. Paul himself complained hereof, Romans 7, 23. He found one Law in
his Mind, another in his Members, striving against the Law of his Mind, and
leading him from that which was true, just, and holy, unto the contrary which
he did not allow of.

Thus then we still see the former proposition to be very true, viz. That God
is not the mover unto Evil, nor the Author of Sin, but every Man is Tempted
when he is drawn away by his own Lust and enticed. For there is an absolute
Antipathy betwixt God and Sin, as being contrary to his divine Nature, which is
pure and holy. Let no Man then say at any time, when he is tempted unto evil,
God caused him to err, for he has no need of Sinful Man; The Lord hates all
abomination of Error, and they that fear God, love it not, says the Son of
Syrach, Eccles. 15.11, 12. Again in the last Verse of that Chapter he has
Commanded no man to do wickedly, neither has he given any man a License to Sin.

In the last place, this Doctrine may teach us all not to suffer our selves at
any time to be drawn away by our own Lust and Concupiscence; not to hearken to
the dictates of our own corrupt Natures, but to endeavor with all immaginable
resistance to oppose those unruly Motions, and evil inclinations, which do
daily tempt and solicit us to violate the sacred Laws of our Maker.

In a word, whenever the Devil shall assault us by any manner of Temptation,
let us I beseech you both remember and practice what S. Peter has prescribed
unto us 1. Peter 5.9. Whom resist steadfast in the Faith, and by how much the
De^^^^^ ^he more watchful for his Prey, let us I beseech you, be so m^^^ the
more watchful unto prayer to withstand him.

It is good Advice, which the Wiseman gives, viz. That we should giv^ the water
no Passage, no not a little; so we should give as small an entranc^ unto Satan
as possibly may be, for let but one foul Spirit enter and rest (...) while in
thy Soul, and by and by Legions will be there, and then Satan wi^^ be like the
Centurions Servant in one part, but not in the other; bid his come and he comes
presently, but bid him go and he will not be gone without much ado, for if you
once give him an Inch, he will be sure to take an Ell^

Let us therefore (obstare principiis) withstand him in the beginning of hi^
assaults, and stifle our sins in their first conception, before they are
brough^ forth into action, for when once Lust has conceived, it brings forth
sin, and si^ when it is finished brings forth death, death and destruction
both to body and soul, and a final rejection from God and all divine Mercies,
which man by sin has justly deserved from the hand of his Creator.

I might indeed here enlarge a great deal more, but I think it needless having
made out the main points of the Text, and answered all the objection^ that
might possibly have been brought to oppose it.

So I beseech all that bear the name of Christians, to abandon every wicked
conceit, or opinion of their Maker, and likewise not to be any way concerned
for the non-apprehension of those sublime mysteries, which he does no^ think
either profitable, or convenient for us to be acquainted with: Bu^ let us all
unanimously join in the diligent fulfilling this most seasonable and excellent
advice of S^lomon, Fear God and keep his Commandments for this is the Whole
Duty of Man; This is indeed the Will of God, and the end of all our obligations
to him, with which we are charged, and to which w^ are all enjoined: But as for
the Books of God's Councils and secret Decrees which are clasped up, that no
man may read them, let us leave them unto the Lamb and blessed Trinity; But
those of Moses, and the Prophets, of Christ, and his Apostles, are written for
our Instruction, and for our Posteritie's after us These let us search, and
inquire into with all imaginable care and diligence and with reverence and
submission, let us with the Prophet David Meditat^ upon them day, and Night,
that hereby our Sinful Souls may be amended and saved finally in the day of our
Lord Jesus. Amen.

FINIS.

