DUPLIES To the PETITION and REPLIES given in to the COMMISSION of PARLIAMENT
For FYNES and FOREFAULTURES, By Alexander Monro of Bear Crofts.
THIS Petition being a pretense to an Office impetrate contrare to the express
Terms of an Act of Parliament, and without payment of a sixpence, and whereof
the Petitioner having reaped the profit for six years together; He thereafter
freely Renounced and Overgave it in favors of Haystoun, upon payment of seven
Thousand Merks. It is no wonder if the grounds of it be now urged, and debated
with as little Reason and Argument, as the claim it self was first intented
with regard to Law and Justice, for the Printed Replies resume the Defenses,
and cite the Text of the Roman Law with so much disingenuity, making such gross
and affected misapplications and unreasonable and illiterate inferences; First,
setting up a shadow of Fear and Force, and then adduceing a nauseous volum of
impertinent citations against it, that it seems the Petitioner (who could have
replied much better himself) has referred them to some of his Lawyers, who had
only the advantage to read more Catalogues, and profess more Law of design to
embroile the case, and to teach the Lawyers employed for the Clerks no other
point of Learning, then to mistake their Defense by his Example.

It will be needless to trouble the Commission by repeating here the matter of
Fact in the Answers, seeing the Answers are in the hands of the Honorable
Members, nor is it necessar to resum the Dilator defenses, already proponed,
but only to add this farther, which may be considered as a Dilator, viz. That
since the Petitioner has neither Consigned nor Offered the price he received,
his Lybel should be cast, and the Defenders not obliged to Answer to it, as
was solemnly Decided on the 6th of July 1543. the Lord of Waughtoun against
Sinclair of Steinstown, and on the 26th of June 1576, Mackilvain against
Crawford; And therefore the Defenders shall endeavor shortly to Duply to what
is alleged in the Reply against the perremptor Defenses.

Where 1mo: It is denied, That the Government can dispose of private Men's
Rights, for the public Utility, upon giving the private Party a reasonable
Recompense for their loss, which was never before denied by any Doctor, and is
allowed by the practice of This and all other Nations, especially as to the
Disposing or Regulating of public Offices; Was not the Office of Justice
Deputes suppressed, and the Justiaciary turned in a Commission to five of the
Ordinary Senators of the College of Justice, when Mr. William Murray, and Mr.
John Preston had Gifts of the said Office of being Justice Deputes during life,
without alleging any crime against them; or giving them any recompense for
their loss? And twenty other instances might be given of the like cases, even
when there was no pretense of any Law against the Constitution, as there is a
clear and positive Act of Parliament founded on in this case, if it were not
destroyed by the double Cannon-shot at it by the Reply, viz.

1mo. That there is no such Act of Sederunt, nor Act of Parliament; because the
Defenders acknowledge, the Record containing the Act of Sederunt is a way, and
consequently the Act of Parliament must fall, being only relative to the Act of
Sederunt; Et non creditur Referenti nisi constiterit de relato.

This is a sort of reasoning unworthy of a Schoolboy, much less of a Doctor of
Law, as the Replier pretends to be: For seeing the Act of Sederunt subscribed by
the whole Lords is extant, the abstracting of the Record will not make it Null.
2do. Esto, That both the Record, and Act of Sederunt were abstracted, will that
extinguish the force of the Act of Parliament, which does not only ratify the
Act of Sederunt, but declares the same to have the Force and Authority of an
Act of Parliament? and that none may pretend Ignorance; The whole Tenor of it
is verbatim repeated in the Act of Parliament, and made a part of the same.

But the Replyer finding that this would not do the Business, the Act of
Parliament must be found Null, by its not being insert in the Index of the
unprinted Acts. Which 1mo. is most Irrelevant. 2do. It is most false, as any
that will be at the trouble to read the Index will find.

And as his last effort against the said Act, he will have it in desuetude, and
prescrived by an Argument of a piece with the rest, viz. That on the 25 of July
1632, Mr Alexander Gibson, and John Gibson his Brother, were presented conjunct
Clerks in one Office, by Sir John Hamiltoun Clerk Register, and accordingly
admitted by the Lords; and upon the 1 June 1636, Mr John and Mr William Hay his
Son, were presented conjunct Clerks in one Office by Sir John Hay Clerk
Register, and accordingly admitted by the Lords, and that ever since there has
been two Clerks in each Office.

The matter of Fact, as appears by the Record, was, That Mr Alexander Gibson in
the 1632 being sole Clerk; designed to have his Brother John Gibson joined with
him, and did dimite the Office in the hands of Sir John Hamilton, to the effect
he might grant a new Gift in favors of his Brother John Gibson and him, the
longest liver of the two; which was accordingly done. And in the Year, 1636. Mr
John Hay and Mr Alexander Hay his eldest Son being conjunct Clerks, Mr
Alexander the Son dyed, and Mr John the Father makes a Dimission of the Office
in the Hands of Sir John Hay Clerk Register, for his granting a new Gift in
favors of himself, and John Hay his other Son the longest liver, which was
accordingly done; Both which Gifts proceed expressly on the consent of the
Incumbent, in the terms of the Act of Sederunt, and Act of Parliament; and
consequently are very foolishly brought in to prove that the said Acts were in
desuetude and prescribed; And the first instance that can be given of placing
two Clerks in one Office, without the consent of the Incumbent, was in June
1649. (when the English were invading the Kingdom, and all things in disorder)
that Sir Archibald Iohnstoun of Wariston did present Mr. David and Mr. John
Hayes conjunct Clerks in one Office; And to infer by that single instance, That
the Act of Parliament was in desuetude, or that it did prescrive betwixt the
1649. and 1661. or 1669, argues more Confidence than Judgment; So that the
great foundation of the Reply, viz. That the Act of Sederunt and the Act of
Parliament were in desuetude, and prescrived, falling, all the Superstructer
must fall in consequence, and the Kings Letter appointing the Clerks to be
regulate according to the said Acts, will not import injustice, much less
Concussion.

The Learned Author of the Reply is in a mistake, to pretend that the Answerer
alleadges, the Lord Tarbat was the first that procured a Liberty to admit more
Clerks then one in each Office; For all along its acknowledged, That Sir
Archibald Primeroses Gift did likewise import that Liberty; But all that is
contended is, That the Lord Tarbat was the first that did exercise that Liberty
according to Law viz. By conjoyning only upon the express consent of the
Incumbents in the Office; For, if the Register might conjoin one without
consent, there can no rational ground be given why he might not conjoin three
or four in each Office: So that the cause of Deputing one or more in each
Office, will either run too far, or must be regulat by the Act of Parliament,
and the Interest and Convenience of Lieges, of which the Lords of Session are
the only proper Judges. And it is hoped it will not be pleaded, That the King
could dispense with the Act of Parliament; And the reason why the Lords of
Session did think it convenient, that there should be no more then one Clerk in
one office, unless the other Clerk were brought in at the Desire, and with the
Consent of the Incumbent, was by reason of the prejudice that the Liedges might
sustain through the delay it might occasion in the dispatch of Justice, by the
Debates and Quarrellings that might arise betwixt two Clerks in one Office,
that were not in a good understanding together, whereof the Petitioner is a
living Instance.

It is then apparent that His Majesty's Letter being conform to the standing
Law of the Kingdom, neither it, nor the Act of Sederunt following thereupon,
can import any injustice as to the Petitioner; But on the contrair, Mr John Hay
had better ground to allege, That the Lords sentence, appointing him to pay
7000 Merks, was unjust, seeing the Petitioner was imposed upon him contrair to
Law; then the Petitioner has to allege that the 7000 Merks was not a
reasonable Composition, being more than ever before that time was paid for any
of these Employments. And the vast difference betwixt Tarbat his bringing in of
Conjuncts in each Office, and Sir Archibald Primrose his bringing them in does
clearly appear, in that the one was done in the express terms of the Act of
Parliamenr, and conform to Law; and the other expressly contrair to Law, which
was fully considered by the Parliament 1685, wherein what Tarbat did, was
approven and ratified, not in course, but by a special Act of Parliament, which
is not Declaratorie, but is Statutory, and yet not Derogatory from the Act
1621; for as the Act 1621, allows only one Clerk in each Office, without
consent of the Incumbent; so the Act 1685, allows only of two with consent;
and so secures that the Register should not be able to bring in more then two
in each Office, albeit he should procure the Incumbents consent, which seemed
to be unclear by the Act 1621.

To the second Defense, on the Brocard, That in dub^^ melior est causa
possidentis, It is Replied, That the Petitioner in point of Right was prior
tempore, and therefore potior jure; And that the possession of the present
Clerks can avail them nothing, in respect of the violent way that the
Petitioner desiit possidere.

To which it is Duplyed, That it is true caeteris paribus qui prior est tempore
potior est jure; But in this case (tho there were no such thing as the Act of
Parliament) the advantage of the possession would make the difference, and
prefer the Clerks; And the Law does indeed provide, That qui dol^ desiit
possidere, cannot thereby better his own case, which may be the Petitioners;
but unless it could be proven that the Clership were not in commersio, or had
vitium rei furtiva, this advantage must by Law follow the possession, that in
dubio it prefers the Possessor; And it is observable, that albeit by the Law of
the twelve Tables rei furtivae aeterna fuit authoritas; Yet the Praetorian Law
in the Edict, quod metus causa, neither did nor could extend in rebus metus
causa gestis, such a vitium reale, for ever nor against all singular
Successors; and supposing there had been just cause of fear in this case, as
there could be none, it were but an unjust wreasting of the Roman Law, to the
plain prejudice of the Clerks, to give the Petitioner the benefit of that
Edict, the effect of which against singular Successors was at first but Annual,
ending with every Pretor's Authority, and thereafter endured no longer, even in
rebus immobilibus, then for the Ten years of the Roman Praescription, and to
refuse the Clerks, the benefit of that Ten Years Prescription, which
(considering that their Rights have been bona fide acquired; and possessed be
them and their Authors for fourteen Years together, without a shadow of
interruption) would settle and secure the same according to the Roman Law,
beyond all possible controversy.

The third defense founded on the recording of his Majesty's Letter, the Clerks
consent, and all these public Acts of Sederunt, and Parliament mentioned
therein; and the Petitioners so long acquiescence and not quarelling the same,
meets with no other Reply then that it is a quible on the l. gesta: cod: dear
jud: to apply it to any other thing then to the Testimonies and Depositions of
Parties and Witnesses, and that the recording any Transaction or Matter in it
self defective cannot supply its defects.

To which it is Duplyed, that it would appear the Replyers common sense in
Applying of that Law goes no farther then his Gloss and Commentars led him,
otherways he could not oversee the Import of the word (Gestum) in his so much
boasted Edict, Quod metus causa gestum est, etc. And the ll: 19. and 58. ff. de
verb signif. Are the best Commentars for the meaning of that word, which make
it to signify any Deed that can be the foundation of a Right; and it was not
reasonable to think, that the recording Depositions of Parties, and Witnesses
should interess the public Faith more, or put singular Successors in greater
security in Relation to the subject matter of such Depositions, then the
Recording public Rescripts of Princes, and solemn Acts of Sederunt, and Acts
of Parliament should do in Relation to what is defined and enacted thereby. And
albeit the Discharge and Renunciation to Haystoun, on payment of so
considerable a Sum, be the likest thing of any to a Transaction; yet it is
hoped that the KING's Letter for executing the Law, the express and judicial
consent of the three Clerks who had then the sole Right, and the several Acts
of Sederunt Recorded, and whereupon the Clerks Rights are founded, will not be
found matters in themselves defective; and though they should, the two Acts of
Parliament cannot; So that without the highest Violation of the public Faith,
that can be made in reference to private Rights, and most unjust Derogation, to
the uncontraverted Law of the Kingdom, there can be no question of the Rights
of the present Clerks to their respective Offices, which were bought as dear,
and have as many clear and solemn Laws for their security, as any so much
property within the Nation.

To Elide the 4th and 5th Defenses, founded upon the Homologation and
Renunciation; There is a forced Bogle of a Concussion pretended, and a
laborious Concession of Citations thrown in, as if the antiquated Name of
Caldas were as useful in Lawyers debates to persuade the wisdom of the Nation;
as the Jargon of Album Grecum, and the like; is to raise the value of that
precious Drugge; But because all, or most of the Citations, do not at all serve
to clear, that there was any Fear or Concussion in this Case, and only prove
that Deeds extorted by Force and Fear, are reduceable in Law, which is not the
question; And likewayes, that the Replyer pretending to explain the true causes
and effects of Fear has after his manner wandered far from these Causes of
Fear, which the Law has fixed: Therefore passing these Citations which concern
not the question, let the Legal Causes of that Justus Metus, which by the Roman
Law, gave the Benefit of Restitution be considered, as they are defined by the
Text it self, which is so clear, that it leaves no ground of debate, and
plainly excludes the Petitioner's Case; For the l: 3: and what follows in the
Title ff: Quod metus causa, etc. Determines concerning the just causes of Fear
in these words: Continet igitur haec clausula and vim and metum, and si quis vi
compulsus aliquid fecit per hoc edictum restituitur.: 1. sed vim accipimus
atrocem, and eam quae adversus bonos mores fiat, non eam quam Magistratus recte
jutulit, scilicet jure licito, and jure honoris quem sustinet. (which is the
very Case) Caeterum si per injuriam quid fecit populi Romani, Magistratus vel
Provinciae Praeses. Pomponius scripsit hoc edictum locum habere, si forte
inquit mortis vel verberum terrore pecuniam alicui extorserit. l: 4: Ego pato
etiam servitutis timorem simuliumque admittendum. l: 5: Metum accipiendum Labeo
dicii non quemlibet timorem, sed majoris malitatis. l: 6. Metum autem non vani
hominis, sed qui merito, and in hominem constantissimum cadat ad hoc Edictum
pertinere dicemus. l: 7. Nec timorem in famiae hoc Edicto contineri, Paedius
dicit, neque alicujus vexationis timorem per hoc edictum restitui, proinde si
quis meticulosus rem nullam frustra timuerit per hoc edictum non restituitur
quoniam neque vi neque metus causa factum est, proinde si quis in furto vel
adulterio deprehensus, vel in alio flagitio, vel dedit aliquid, vel se
obligavit. Pomponius recte scribit, posse eum ad hoc edictam pertinere, timuit
enim, vel mortem, vel vincula. l: 8:. 2. Quod si dederit ne stuprum patiatur
Vir seu Mulier, hoc edictum locum habet, cum Viris bonis iste metus major quam
mortis esse debet. l: 9. Metum autem presentem accipere debemus, non
suspicionem inferendi ejus (as might have been in this Case) Et ita Pompomus
scribit, Ait enim metum illatum accipiendum, id est, Si illatus est timor ab
aliquo denique tractat, si fundum meum dereliquero audito quod quis cum armis
veniret, an huic edicte locus sit, and refert Labeonem existimare edicto locum
non esse and unde vi interdictum cessare, quoniam non videor vi dejectus qui
dejici non expectavi sed profugi. And Cujacius on the said L: 7: defines in so
many words, Non quilibet m^^us causam dat Edicto, sed mortis aut verberum, aut
vinculorum, aut servitutis, aut stupri ex qua animus consternatur; And Antonius
Faber ad dictam, L: 9: is of the same opinion, if the Authority of these two
may be compared with that of the Replyer, and the same Faber, ad l: all: Eod:
is positive, quod facto opus est, and quidem atroci and majoris melitatis ad
hoc ut vis facta vel metus illatus dici possit. By all which it is clear as
Light, that the Roman Law gave Restitution against no other fear than that of
Death, Scourging, Fetters, Slavery, and Ravishing; And it will be as clear,
That the Petitioner could be under no just fear of any of these, if it be
considered; 1mo, That albeit his Majesty's Letter had made particular mention
of him, and his Office, and that he had never so good Right to it; Yet in that
case, the loss of his Office was no just cause of Fear, so as to infer
Restitution against the Renounciation: How much less? when in that Letter he
was not so much as named. And if neither the fear of Infamy, nor of any other
Vexation, fell under the Edict, as a justus metus, which is expressly defined in
the above Text, it is not intelligible how the parting with an illegal
pretense, to an Office that cost him nothing, and for no less than Seven
Thousand Merks, can be reckoned a just cause of Fear; in the Petitioner,
occasioned by a Letter, wherein there is not so much as one word of him. 2do:
Albeit the Letter had contained a threatening of his Majesty's displeasure
against such persons as the Lords should think fit to remove, if they should
refuse either to remove, or accept of the Modification; Yet that could infer no
Restitution on the Edict, quod metus causa, nam metum non ^actationibus tantum
vel contestationibus, sed atrocitate facti probari convenit; l: 9: cod: de his
qui vi. 3tio: As his Majesty, and the Lords in this case, showed not the least
disrespect to any of these persons who were removed at that time; so it is
impossible per rerum naturam, that they could have designed either by that
Letter, or Act of Sederunt, any other thing then their Removal, and the
observing of the Act of Parliament, there being no manner of Certification
adjected, in case of their not accepting the Modification; So that no
confidence short of the Petitioners, could obtrude such a groundless pretext of
Fear, to which he is able to give no other foundation then his own mere
conjectures anent his Majesty's displeasure, to convell so lucrative and
voluntar a transaction on his part; And after fourteen years silence to quarrel
singular Successors, for most Onerous Cause, in their Rights to an Office, so
solemnly secured to them, and their Authors both by the public Law, and his
own private Paction.

The first of the two Texts, which were thought fit to be cited in the Replies,
is in l: 6:, 7: ff: de acquir: vel omit: haered: eum qui metu verborum vel
aliquo timore coactus fallens adierit haereditatem sive liber sit, haeredem non
fieri placet sive servus sit dominum haeredem non facere.

To this it is Duplyed. 1mo. That the Aditio Haereditatis, being the engaging a
Person in an Affair, which of its own Nature is of the greatest import, and the
most involved that is known in Law, since it is almost Impossible for any Man
to know distinctlie the Vniversum jus, Quod defunctus habuit, before he enter
Heir, and for which cause the dies Cretionis, and Au nus Deliberandi, were
introduced to lessen that danger; it is therefore most probable that the Romans
were more prone and ready to allow Restitution against the Aditio
Haereditatis, and upon more slender Grounds then against any other Obligation
in their Law, and it is certain that in our Decisions the Lords do frequentlie
sustain defenses to Elide an Odious passive Title, which they would repel in
other causes, for the whole context of the Civil Law, anent the Edict, Quod
metus causa makes that paragraph altogether excentrick and Irregular. But 2do.
the great Cujace; whom never Man after Justinian's time equaled in the
knowledge of the Roman Law, was so conscious to the absolute inconsistency of
this Text, with the whole Titles, Quod metus causa both in the digest: and Cod.
That he is forced in his Comentar, ad. l: 21.: 5. Digestis quod metus causa to
correct it, and in stead of Verborum to Read it Verberum: For (says he) metus
est futurorum and sic dicimus metum verberum qui justus est, metus non
verborum: So that this Text being thus restored will not meet the case; seeing
if the alique timore, which follows the word verberum be not likewise
corrupted, it must be understood habili modo, and necessarly supposed to be
always a justus timor, scilicet ex justa causa; and it is pleasant to take
notice that the Replyer could not find one single grue in all the Body of the
Civil Law, which could be wreasted so much to favor the Petitioners case save
this corrupt Text only, and yet tho it were sincere, as it cannot be; He could
not subsume in the terms of it, neither the King nor the Lords having by Word
or Write threatened the Petitioner to accept of the Money or to grant the
Renunciation.

The other Citation is the l: 11. Cod. de his quae vi, etc. Si per impressionem
quis aliquem metueus saltem in mediocri officio constitutum rei suae in eadem
provincia, vel loco ubitale officium peragit, sub venditionis titulo fecerit
Cessionem quod emptum fuit reddatur. Upon which Text the Replyer most insipidly
subsums, That in the Petitioners case, there was aliquis metus, for a Child
would have adverted that the word aliquem in the Text, could not construe with
impressionem, and did refer only to the Concustor, and he is pleased to add
that the Petitioner could not have disobeyed the Kings command in his Letter,
without the hazard of being constructed a seditious Contemner of Authority; so
that his taking the Money was an Act of necessity.

It is Replied, That the Impression mentioned, there behoved to have been a
just one from a sufficient Cause; And albeit in this Text, which is
acknowledged to be sincere, the word aliquem had been written aliquam, as the
Replyer would have it: Yet the Law even in that case would regulate the Extent
of that general Term, and restrict it only to a just impression, the causes of
which are fixed and known in Law; And as it is evident from the Causes of Just
Fear defined in the Text, as well as from the l: 10: cod: hoc tit: in these
words, accusationis institutae vel futurae metu alienationem seu promissionem
factam rescindi postulantis improbum est desiderium. That the hazard of being
constructed a seditious Contemner of Authority was no cause of fear, to which
the Roman Law would allow the benefit of the Edict, unless he should thereby
have run the hazard of being truly guilty of Sedition: So it is gross to
allege that the Kings Letter bears a command to the Petitioner for accepting
of Money, or Relates to him otherwise then as the Lords of Session should find
just to apply it; but in this case there is no difficulty to understand that
the Petitioner was abundantly secure from the hazard of contemning Authority,
by his forbearing to intrude any more upon that Office, and suffering the Act
of Parliament to be put to execution, whether he had accepted of Money for so
doing, or granted any such Renounciation or not.

By all which it is plain, that none of these Citations that are adduced out of
Baldus, Anchoranus, Fulgosius, Geminus, Pappon: Caldas, Natta, Alexander,
Arretinus, Menochius, and Bartolus are to the purpose; And in the case the Lady
Gray against the Earl of Lauderdale, the Right transmitted by the Lady, was a
Legal Right consistent with Law, the Concussor was called and insisted against,
and there were Acts of Force and Violence lybelled and proven; such as that the
Earl violently entered to the possession of these Lands, disponed before any
sentence in his Favors or Right made to him be the Lady. Whereas in this Case,
though the Petitioner's Right had not been null by the Act of Parliament; yet
there was no Force or Violence done for removing him, much less was he any
ways compelled to accept of Money, or give such an express Renunciation of his
Right; and if he had been intimidate by the LORDS to accept of the Money, as he
was not; yet a Receipt of the seven Thousand Merks, had answered the Terms of
the Act of Sederunt, by which he is not at all ordained to Renunce: And he
might upon offering to consigne such a Receipt without the Renunciation, have
obliged Haystoun to pay the Sum by a Charge on the Act of Sederunt, upon
which, albeit it be plainly and positively urged, that on the other Hand no
manner of Execution could have followed against the Petitioner, if he had not
voluntarly both given Obedience and Renunced; yet nevertheless, there is no
Reply made to this, but that in those days he durst not offer to repossess
himself of his Office, as it is humbly conceived he dare not now a days,
albeit he might then as well as now, refuse or accept Money, and grant
Renunciations or not, as he thought fit.

The second Allegiance against the Concussion, That the LORDS had no interest
to concuss, gets no better Reply; For to say the KING concussed, especially in
an Affair wherein the Petitioner's particular Interest was not considered, and
which might have taken full effect without his accepting of Money, and all
without his giving any such Renunciation, does not at all take it off, and
therefore needs no farther Duply.

To the third on the special Case of singular Successors. It is Replied, That
the Action of Restitution competent to the Party laesed, is in Rem scripta, and
follows the thing extorted, whatever Bona Fides the possessor had in the
acquisition.

It is Duplyed, That this Allegiance does not grant, but only suppose the
Concussion; and if the Replyer had been ingenuous enough in citing the Law, it
had cleared the point: For when in his Reply to the Dilators, he cites, l: 14::
3. ff. quod met. causa. After the words; In hac action non quaeritur utrum
isqui convinitur au alius metum fecit, sufficit enim hoc docere metum sibi
illatum esse. He industriously suppresses these which immediately follow, Et ex
haere eum qui convenitur etsi crimine caret lucrum tamen sensisse. Which words
do not only quite exclude this Case from falling under that edict, seeing the
Clerks have their Offices for most Onerous Causes, as is notour to all
concerned, and so cannot in Law be said Lucrum sensisse; But likewayes these
words must secure all such singular Successors from the Avarice of evil Men,
whose pretenses they could not possibly obviat, and what is said before to
enforce the second Defense, as to the difference of res furtiva, and metu
gesta, in relation to singular Successors is here repeated, though it be
sufficiently cleared by what is already said, That the Petitioner was under no
Impression whereof the Law takes notice.

Whereas it is Replied, to the 4th: Allegiance. That the Renounciation being
granted while the King who signed that Letter was in life, And the Petitioner
within his reach; The Renounciation ought in Law to be looked on as an effect
of the same continued Awe and Force, whereby he was removed; And the same as if
Robbers had plundered him of an hundred pounds, and offered back ten on his
Discharge of the whole, in which case the Discharge could not hinder
Restitution.

It is Duplyed, 1mo: Although the Letter had expressly commanded him, to remove
from his Office, yet unless it had adjected a certification of Death, or an or
other, of the above effects of the vis atrox, defined in the Text, it could
import none of the Legal and fixed causes of justus metus, But its far
otherwise, and that Letter is intended and conceived in such terms, as could
not possible fright any Rational Man, And it is not in the least questioned,
but the Petitioner (if he had not been conscious to the nullity of his Gift, as
being grounded on that dispensing clause, in express contradiction to the Act
of Parliament, and constitution mentioned in that Letter) he would have refused
to accept of the money, and without delay would have applied to the King, to be
reponed, who as the Petitioner cannot deny, looked on him at that time as a
very Loyal Subject, and wanted but such an occasion to reward the Faithful
Sacrifice he constantly rendered to him during the English Usurpation. But 2do:
The Letter and Act of Sederunt were sufficiently obtempered by his removing;
and if he was thereby bound to give a Receipt to Haystoun on payment of the
Seven Thousand Merks, which is not unquestionable, yet it is plain beyond all
contradiction, that there was no necessity from that Letter, or the Act
following upon it, either for his accepting of the Money; or after he had taken
it for his granting so positive and ample a Renounciation in terms sufficient,
both to Denude himself, and to transmit his pretense in favors of others; tho
the Letter and Act of Sederunt had left his pretended Right as entire as it was
at the first granting of it; and as to the ungentle parallel of the Robbers,
there are so many disparities, and so palpable, that it merits no more
Particular answer then that the Petitioner is not in the case of the Edict, and
tho he were, the difference in Law betwixt Res metu gestae and res furtivae
betwixt singullar sucessors for most onerous Causes, and Robbers need not be
insisted upon.

The Replyer ends with a Reflection on the Wrongs committed in the latter
Reigns, as if the dispensing clause in Sir Archibald Primroses Gift, and be
virtue whereof he appointed six Clerks of Session, in manifest contempt of the
Act of Parliament, were not one of the most pregnant instances, though nor the
most important, that can be observed of that Nature, since the Restoration of
the Monarchy; and was a wrong done not to a single Person only, but to that
entire Fraternity, and the making a preparative to break that Employment and
thereby occasion the greatest disorders in the Administration of Justice in all
time thereafter, if the Registers thought fit to constitut as many Clerks of
Session as the Secretaries of State are in use to admit Writers to the Signet,
which they might very well have done be virtue of that Clause, if the King
could have thereby dispensed with the Act of Parliament, 1621. Although it be
but consonant to the Modesty of the Replyer to obtrude that the Kings letter
for Executing the Act of Parliament was an act of Tyrrany; and yet that Clause
was a deed of legal Administration because it is the Foundation of the
Petitioners pretended Right who does very much disparage the sufferings of
these Persons in whose favors Their MAJESTY'S and the ESTATES past the Act of
Parliament, for Rescinding Fynes and Forefaulturers, by so Whinning a
Comparison of the merits of his cause; for tho his MAJESTY'S Commissioner had
not in plain Parliament Ordered the Petitioners Case to be Expunged out of that
Act, it is very well known that he never suffered the least inconveniencie for
Conscience sake; Nor will any Man who has not darkened that Light by Self-love
and Avarice, pretend to an Office; which after he enjoyed for several years
without paying a Groat for it; He then Renounced upon Receipt of Seven Thousand
Merks; And knows very well that the present Clerks, whom he would now Rob of
it, did purchase it bona fide, for a greater Sum; And whereof (if he should
prevail) they have no Action competent to them for Recovery of a Sixpence.

In Respect whereof, The desire of the Petition ought to be Refused, and the
Petitioner condemned in such Expenses as the Honorable Lords and other Members
of the Commission of Parliament, shall find just.

THE VISCOUNT OF TARBAT Being Cited INCIDENTER in the Action betwixt Alexander
Monro, and the Clerks of the SESSION; Does humbly Offer what follows to be
Considered by the Right Honorable COMMISSION of PARLIAMENT.
BY The express standing Statutes, the Clerk Register's Deputes for Parliament
and Session, are restricted to the number of Three. The Law prohibites the
Clerk Register to commissionat any more; or to adjoine any to these Three,
without express consent of the other Principal to whom any shall be adjoined.

Some three or four times, one desires of the Principals; one has been adjoined
to the Desirer before the year 1640, and this was consonant to Law. But Sir
Archibald Primrose casts in a Clause in his Commission allowing him to join
one or more in these Offices, as should be found conducing to the good of the
Leidges; and on this warrant joins one to every one of the Three Offices,
ratifies their Gifts in Parliament, and they serve in Session; but without
asking or getting any express consent of the other Three, as the Law does
specifickly require; and amongst others, Mr Monro is adjoined to Mr John Hay
Gratis.

Anno 1764, The KING being informed, that this was against Law, and (as some
said) inconvenient, He by a Royal Letter to the Session, as a just Executor of
the Law, requires the Lords to reduce these Offices to their lawful
Constitution and Number; But according to His Clement Nature, did also
prescribe, that these who in consonancy to Law were to be removed, should have
a Gratification given by the other who was to remain in each Office, at such a
rate, as the supreme Judicature of the Nation should judge fit: The Session
giving dutiful Obedience to the Royal Will, in reducing this matter to the Rule
of the Law; They modifie no less, then the full of what was by custom paid for
such an Adjuncts Office at, or before that time; viz. 7000 Merks to each.

There is no doubt these who were judged fittest to be removed, would rather
have kept their illegal possession, then take this sum: But they could not but
think their removal was ordered with Clemency, when as by Law, they might have
been set off from their illegal Possession without the reimbursment of their
inconsiderable Advance; yet to be re-imbursed of it, and enjoy their gain
whilst they possessed, tho to the Laesion of the other Clerks, on whom they were
intruded, and accordingly they went off in acquiescence.

But if two who bought their Office did so, how well satisfied should Mr: Monro
have been, who not only entered illegally, and more illegally than the other
two; but also gratis? And albeit he would rather have kept the Office, yet he
showed full acquiescence; 1. By using no Protestation nor interpellation to the
sentence; 2. By homogating it, in receiving the Price. 3. By a Legal
Disposition of all such Right and Title as he had, to another. And 4 by
acquiescing for 14 years in this transaction. And 5 by a voluntar exercing
another Office in that very Court, inconsistent with his being a Clerk. viz. Of
an Advocate without Protestation or Insinuation, that he had so much as any
pretense or an eye to the Clerkship. One who were not versed in the Novel of Mr
Monro's Replies, and knew nothing but Law and Reason, would think that if there
was Injury done to any in all this Affair, it was to Mr John Hay, on whose
Office Mr Monro was obtruded; And when the KING restored him to his Right, that
yet he behoved to pay for this Justice, and to one who had no legal Tittle to
it, and who gave nothing for it, had Mr Monro so much of pretense, it had saved
his Lawyers the expenses of a great deal of mistake, both in citation and
application of Laws

However Mr Hay goes from the Office, Sir Thomas Murray being Clerk Register,
what should now be done? A Clerk is necessar for the Kingdom, and exercise of
Justice; Mr Monro puts in no claim on his notable Tittle, and I dare say, Sir
Thomas Murray did not guess that he could not place one in that Office, without
hazard of being a Concussor, a Robber, or some other of the Replyer's Epithets.
In the name of sport, the Clerks place must vaik till Mr Monro think fit to
desire it, or until he sit down in his Chair: Sir Thomas did not know this
Obligation, he Commissionates another whom he and the Session judged fit, and
receives a good deed for it viz. 100 Pieces more then Mr John Hay did give for
the half of it to Mr Monro. He serves the Leidges, but what is paid him for his
Service? He must by this New Natured Logic, pay it in to Mr Monro who Served
none, Interpelled none, and Exerced two other lucrative Employments at the
time, inconsistent with this Service of a Clerk: And not only so, but to the as
good, he must remove and yield his Place to Mr Monro, I hope under the pain of
Quadruple: For so the Edict prescribes against the unwilling Restorer; and no
doubt, the now Clerks are not frank to Restore hastily.

Well, Tarbat as the Replyer does shortly call him, comes thereafter to be
Clerk Register, and in his time Actions were multiplied, and it was judged by
many not unfit that there should be two in every Office. Tarbat advises it, and
finds the Judges of this Opinion, He Represents it to the King, who gives his
Consent, but so as by a Letter, to lay it before the supreme Judicature, who
found that because of the standing Law this could not be done without the
consent of the Three who were in Office, and they consenting, Three were
adjoined.

Tarbat did not by Virtue of a Clause contrait to a standing Act of Parliament,
take a Liberty to add one or more in these Offices; But Tarbat according to the
Law, did add one to each, with the consent of him, to whom he was added; And
whereas the Clause creept in to the Clerk Registers Commissions was no narrower
than to allow him to add one or more; Tarbat did take care in the Act of
Parliament 1685, That the power of Adding, tho with consent, should not exceed
one of Addition; And all this while Tarbat can Declare, he never heard or
thought of Mr. Monro as pretending to be a Principal or Adjunct.

Now, How comes Tarbat to be called or concerned in this Process? if it be for
Restitution of what was paid to him, in case of Eviction; he protests to be
heard against that in time convenient, since on hitherto uncontraverted grounds
of Law, he will make it evident, that non tenetur de evictione, of what he got,
quatenus in officio; and that against the Repetition when urged.

But he presumes it Legally impossible, That Deputes can be in the least hazard
from so wild a Claim, not only not founded but opposite to all Law, Justice,
and Reason. And is far from doubting, That the Right Honorable Court of
Parliament, will take severe Animadversion of so scandalous and calumnious
Plea's; which indeed as much as in the Pretender lies, reflects as far on the
Justice of that Court, as can possibly be done, by bringing ridiculous Claims
to vex the Leiges; As if that High Court could not soon discern what every
Person of common sense, cannot but discern; As to which Lybel and Replies so
full of the darkest mistakes of Law, and Lawyers, and so stuffed with Paralogisms
in Law, and Solaecisms in Grammar; He will make no Answer, that being with far
more Learning, nor is proportionable, fully made by the Clerks in their
Answers, and Duplies to the Petition and Replies. And albeit he knows himself
not reachable in the particular; yet your Lordships will, I hope, allow him to
expostulat for redress against such Injuries, to Subjects, to Laws, and to our
Sovereigns; For as to our selves perhaps Record cannot instance so calumnious
a Plea. Sometimes the Adversaries gives their Action the name of Concussion,
another time of Quod metus causa; and sofurth. I may say with Cato in salust.
Jam pridem equidem nos vera rerum vocabula amisimus, If there was Concussion?
will the Possessor sine crimine be decerned against before a Concussion be
proved? And can a Concussion be proved Judicially, without so much as citing a
Concussor? For they are not yet so ridiculous, as to allege that the now
Clerks were the Concussors: Well, if they miss of a Concussion, it must be
found reduceable ex capite metus; But where is the Violence? not so much as one
threat alleged to dimit the Office, no, not a Legal Execution, nor possibility
of one to force an Homologation: And yet both Dimission, Disposition, and
Homologation, so voluntarly granted without a shadow of Coaction, must be
reduced ex capite metus: Is not this unparellel'd calumny, and ridiculing of
our Laws, intollerablie! But to make up all, Concussion, Violence, Robbery; And
all the Black Names is sum'd up at last, by the Replyer, in this. It was done
by the Letter of a King, who because he writes to his Senate, to Reduce
Enormities and illegal Invasions of Rights, to, and according to the Standing
Laws, and that by no extrajudicial Edict, nor new erected Court, nor
extraordinary Commission, but by the Ordinar Supreme, and best loved Court of
the Nation: So far from showing Anger at the Persons; that in Rectifying the
wrong, he gratifies them by Reward, rather than Punishment; And so far from
Threats, that Gentler Expressions could not be Adapted, to excuse the faults of
a Child, than was used by this Father of the Country to these transgressors of
his Law; But this is treated with no more Civil Name, then Concussion; And in
plain Terms a KING! for so Just, so Clement, so moderate, so beneficial
execution of the Just Laws, is branded with the express Character of a
Concussor, a Robber, a Tyrant! which touching so rudely on the lawful exercise
of the Sovereign Power, as not only to Defame a late Glorious King, Uncle to
both Their MAJESTY'S; But with a most Criminal Insolence, to Panel Kingship!
And to Attacque the Monarchy in its most Eminent Rights. Therefore to
conclude, The Viscount of Tarbat, Does Humbly Entreat Your Lordships, to
consider this Invasion of the Royal Honor and Power, as a matter worthy of
Your Notice; And Desires that no Progress be made in this matter, which wholly
depends on the Kings Sovereign Power; And the Execution thereof until His
Majesty be informed of the nature of this pursuit, wherein His Honor, and the
Right of the Crown is so deeply concerned. And Humbly Offers, and Proposes as a
Subject, a Peer, and a Member of Parliament, That His Majesty's Advocate,
Solicitor, or their Substitutes, may be consulted in so high a Point; And that
inquiry be made for the Authors of this scandalous, Criminal Lybell; And
further, Humbly Offers to Yours Lordships Consideration, if the Cause do not
require, that the Authors and Spreaders be secured, until His Majesty's
Pleasure be known herein.


