TRUE TO THE END FIDES PROBATA CORONAT The Right Honble. Patrick Hume Earl of
Marchmont Viscount of Blasonberry Lord Polwart^ (...) Polwarth etc Lord High
Chancellor of Scotland* ^. 1702.

bookplate

EX LIBRIS F.S. FERGUSON

THE UNSEARCHABLE RICHES OF CHRIST, And Of GRACE and GLORY In and through HIM.

Diligently Searched into, Clearly Unfolded, and Comfortably holden forth, in
Fourteen Rich Gospel SERMONS Preached on several TEXTS, at Communions, in
Glasgow.

By the late pious and Powerful Gospel Preacher in that City, Mr. JAMES DURHAM.

2 John 1.3. That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye may
have fellowship with us: and truly our fellowship is with the Father and with
His Son Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 10 16. The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it
not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we break, is it not
the Communion of the Body of Christ. GLASGOW, Printed by Robert Sanders, one of
His Majesty's Printers, 1685.

THE Epistle Dedicatorie and Prefatorie. To all Christians seriously pursuing
Conformity unto Christ, and panting after Communion with God in him.
Particularly the Inhabitants of the City of Glasgow, that are such: And in
special to Mistress Durham, the Famous Authors worthy Relict and my Sister in
Law, who has had a singular care to preserve her deceased Husbands Lectures
and Sermons, that they might be made forthcoming for the Public use and
Edification of the Church.
Dear Friends,
ADAM in Innocence and Integrity was in a state of perfect friendship with God,
of beautiful conformity to His Image, and of sweetly Comfortable Communion
with him; But alace! he continued very short time in that excellent state; for
the entering in of sin, by his Transgressing the Law and condition of the
Covenant of works, quite brake off the friendship, utterly disfigured and
defaced the conformity, and altogether interrupted and put a stop to the
Communion: He having thereby run himself and his Posterity under a forfeiture
of that desirable state, and of all the Precious Privileges annexed to it,
under which himself and they had lain Eternally, had not God in the depth of
his infinite wisdom, and in the exceeding and unsearchable Riches of his free
Grace and Mercy, devised and found out a way for taking off that forfeiture, By
sending his Son made of a Woman, made under the Law, to Redeem them that were
under the Law; who according to the Covenant of Redemption treated and
Transacted, finally concluded and agreed betwixt Jehovah and him; having made a
most costly, but a most Complete Satisfaction to Provoked Divine Justice for
the debt of the Elect, In whose room, for that end he did surrogat and
substitute himself, as their Surety and Cautioner, has reestablished the
friendship, restored the Conformity, and recovered the Communion: of which Glad
tidings of great joy Publication is made in the Preached Gospel: the Tabernacle
of the Ordinances whereof is reared up amongst men, that thereby God the Lord
may dwell among them: These Ordinances in their institution and nature being
means of Communion and fellowship betwixt God and men: Amongst which Divinely
instituted Ordinances, that of the Lords Supper bears expressly the name of
the Communion, because, often and ordinarily the greatest measures and highest
degrees of Communion with God in Christ attainable by sojourning and militant
Saints here on Earth, are win at in the Participation of that Ordinance, the
great pledge and love-token of our dieing Lords dearest respect to his
Disciples and followers, calling and oblidging them, in the use thereof, to a
Solemn Commemoration of him and of his love, and to a Public and avouched
Declaration of his Death till he come again: Therefore is it beyond all other
Gospel. Ordinances, as it were, railed about with such injunctions, Cautions,
and warnings; with such terrible threatenings, with such intimations of
Atrocious Guilt, and with such denounciations of formidable Judgments against
unworthy Communicants, Thunder and Lightnings (as it were) being spoken against
such. The desirable deceased Author of these few following Sermons Preached at
Communions, used at such occasions to endeavor, through Grace, to rouse and
work up himself to such a Divineness of frame, as very much suited the
Spiritual state and Majesty of that Ordinance, greatly fearing lest himself, or
any of the People to whom he dispensed the same, should fall under the grievous
Guilt of the Body and Blood of the Lord; then, in a manner, his face shone, as
being in the mount of Communion and fellowship with God, and at some of those
Solemn and sweet Occasions, he spoke some way as a man that had been in Heaven,
Commending Jesus Christ; making a Glorious display of the Banner of free Grace,
holding forth the Riches of it very clearly and convincingly, and bringing the
offers thereof very low, wonderfully low; So that in hearing some of these
Sermons. Particularly that on Matthew. 22. I was made to think, that the Rope or
Cord of the Offer of Salvation was let down and hung so low to sinners, that
those of the lowest stature amongst them all, though but as Pygmees, might have
caught hold of it, who, through Grace, had any mind to do so: and so home, so
vehemently and urgently pressed, on so sweet and easy terms to be embraced,
that I have been sometimes made to wonder how the hearers could refuse or shift
them: But there is no saving Belief of this report made by Prophets, Apostles,
Yea or by Blessed Jesus himself in his own Personal Ministry, but where the
arm of the Lord is Revealed, No man can or will (invite, beseech and Persuade
who will, if it were not only men, but even Angels,) come to the Son except the
Father that sent him draw him; There is no moving here without a pull of
Ommipotencie; none are nor can be willing to yield themselves to Christ, till
the day of his Power Pass on their hearts; till then, they will sit the most
pressing calls of the Gospel, but then they can sit no longer, they must, they
will rise then, and run after him, they will then (as the word signifies) make
a free will Offering of themselves to thim, however inexortable and inflexible
they had showed themselves before, they will then make an absolute, entire,
universal, unexceptioned and Irreversible Surrender and Resignation of
themselves to him, to be at his dispose, to be guided and saved by him in his
own way. I know, the Remembrance of those Communion Sabbaths, High Sabbaths,
and other ordinary Sabbaths and week days, wherein you Sister, and other
Serious seekers of God in Glasgow in particular, heard the joyful sound,
walked in the light of Gods Countenance, and Rejoiced in his Name all the day,
Living in a Holy crowd of Precious Gospel Ordinances, and having, as it were,
the Heavenly Manna of the Gospel falling abundantly about your Camp every day,
making you think and say, that it was good to be there, is this day sweet and
Savoury to you, and helps you in a good measure, to keep up a suitable and due
esteem of fellowship and Communion with the Father and with his Son Jesus
Christ, which is commended and indeared to your Souls and to the Souls of
others of the Lords People, by the choice, rare, excellent and non-such Nature
and Properties of it, It being found by you all, Privileged with admission to
the enjoyment thereof, in your experience to be: First, most Real and no
Chimerical fancy, or a thing that has no being but in the deluded imagination
of the Person; and truly (says the Apostle John. 1 Jon. 1.3. Our Fellowship is
with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ: It has most real effects,
though Spiritual: Gracious Souls being more lively affected with them, then
their very external Senses are by the rarest and most Remarkable Objects: And
no doubt, the more Spiritual any thing is, It has in it the greater reality,
and works the more Powerfully and efficaciously; It is uncontrovertible and
quite removed from all reach of rational debate, that God is the greatest
reality, and by Proportion Communion with God, Whereby nearest and closest
Approaches are made to him, must be very real: mavelous are the effects of
this Communion, and that your Souls know right well, as the Psalmist speaks
Psalm. 139 14. in another case. Secondly, It is an Awful Fellowship and full of
dread, It impresseth the Soul with a deep, yet kindly veneration of the
Glorious Majesty of the great and Holy God, Who (as it is said, Psalm. 89. verse.
7.) Is greatly to be feared in the assemblies of his Saints (where they are
admitted to fellowship with him) and to be had in reverence by all that are
about him; When Jacob was admitted to very near Communion with him, Genesis 28. He
says, verse. 16. Surely the Lord is in this place, and I was not aware: and
verse. 17. It is said of him, that he was afraid, and said, how dreadful is
this Place, this is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of
Heaven: Familiarity here breeds no contempt, nor is it waited with any neglect
or forgetfulness to keep due distance. Thirdly, It is a deeply humbling and
Holily Self debasing Fellowship, as appears in Abraham, Genesis 18. who being, as
Gods special friend, admitted to talk with him at an unusual and
extraordinary rate of Familiarity, Yet interlines, (as it were) his discourse,
almost in every period of it, with deeply self debasing acknowledgements of his
being but dust and ashes, and deprecatings of Gods anger for his taking upon
him to speak to Him, betwixt whom and himself there was so infinitely vast a
disproportion: so the Prophet Isaiah, when he has that Glorious Vision of the
Majesty of God, Chap. 6. and hears the Seraphims, those purely intellectual
Creatures, having their faces covered with their wings, as not being able to
behold the Brightness of the Glory of the most absolutely perfect Holiness of
God, crying, in a transport of admiration, each to another. Holy, Holy, Holy,
is the Lord God of Hosts, the Earth is full of his Glory, he says, Wo's me for
I am undone, Because I am a man of unclean lips, and dwell in the midst of a
People of Polluted lips, for mine eyes have seen the King the Lord of Hosts: So
also Job, non-such in his time, according to Divine testimony, when he is
admitted to unusual nearness to God, says Chap. 42. I have heard of Thee by
the hearing of the Ear, but now mine Eye sees Thee, wherefore I abhore my self
and repent in dust and ashes: The nearest approaches to that light wherein
there is no darkness at all, make the clearest discoveries of the most eminent
Saints their unworthiness, nothingness, and vileness. Fourthly, It is a
Transforming Fellowship, and assimilats the Person Privileged with admission
to it, to Him that is conversed with, and with whom Fellowship is attained
unto: there is no real Communion with him, but the result of it is some
lineament of further likeness to him; We all (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.18.)
Beholding the Glory of the Lord as in a Glass, are changed (or transformed)
into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord:
Communion with and conformity to God have mutual influence and Reciprocal
force each upon other: the more Communion with him, the more likeness and
conformity to him, the more likeness to him, the more Communion with him: little
Communion with him makes little conformity to him, and little conformity to him
cannot but be attended with little Communion with him. Fifthly, It is a
wonderful Fellowship, a fellowship that even sometimes transports, in a manner,
the Soul admitted to it, especially in any more then Ordinary way or measure,
into a sort of Rapture and ecstasy of Admiration at it: Thus it did David, 2 Sa.
7.18. Who (says he) am I, O Lord, and what is my Fathers house, that thou have
brought me hitherto? and Solomon, who being very near to God, in that Solemn
prayer of his at the Dedication of the Temple, says, 1 Kings 8.27. But will
God indeed dwell with men on earth? and as it is, 2 Chronicles. 6. verse. 18. But
will God in very deed dwell with men on Earth? And indeed it is no great wonder
that it be greatly wondered at, that the Infinitely great and Holy God who
inhabiteth Eternity, and the High and Lofty one who dweleth in the High and
Holy Place, and is surrounded and attended there, with an Innumerable Company
of Angels, and of the Spirits and of Just men made Perfect, all of them shining
in light and burning in zeal, none of them wearying to do him service, should
humble himself so far and stoop so low, so very low, as to dwell also (an
Emphatick also) with sinful, though humble and contrit Creatures, who dwell in
Cottages of clay and whose habitation is in the dust, that he who is of purer
eyes then that he can behold iniquity without detestation and abhorrency,
should yet humble himself not only to Behold, but with delight to dwell and
keep fellowship with them, who are in a great measure unholy, and have so much
of that dwelling in them, which his Soul hates; that the Glorious Persons of
the dreadful and adorable God head should come and make their abode with such,
in whom so great a Remainder of stinking unmortified Corruption has still its
abode; that infinitely pure and perfect light should have fellowship with them
in whom there is so much darkness. Sixthly, It is an estranging fellowship from
all Idols, and what ever is displeasing to God and estranging from him;
Accordingly Ephraim being brought near to him, says (Hos. 14. v. 8.) what have
I to do any more with Idols? and the people of God supposed to be in a good
Spiritual frame and near to him, say, Isai. 30 22. to every Idol (which they
cast away as a menstruous Cloth) with Indignation and abhorrency, get thee
hence: and David being admitted to very near Communion with God, Psalm. 6. says
v. 8. To wicked men by whose company he might have been estranged from him,
depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity, for the Lord has heard the voice
of my weeping, the Lord has heard the voice of my Supplication: And indeed it
is Highly suitable and congruous, that it should be so, for what agreement has
the Temple of God with Idols? and Believers are the Temple of the living God,
as the Apostle affirms 2 Cor. 6.16. Seventhly, It is a heart quickening and
reviving Fellowship; Therefore he is said, Isai. 57. verse. 15. To dwell with him
that is humble and of a contrite Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the humble and
to revive the heart of the contrite one. Eighthly, It is a heart-staying,
Calming and composing fellowship, it husheth into silence and drives away
disquieting, Perplexing and excruciating fears; And therefore says the
Psalmist, when near to God, Psalm. 3.56. I laid me down and slept, I awaked, for
the Lord sustained me, I will not be afraid of ten thousands of People that
have set themselves against me round about ^ and Psalm. 4 8. I will both lay me
down in Peace, and sleep, for thou Lord only make me dwell in safety: So
Psalm. 27.13, 14. Ninthly, It is a heart chearing, refreshing, and Rejoicing
fellowship, the refreshing and joy that result from fellowship with God, do
quite surpass and transcend the joy that the men of the world have in the
enjoyment of all their earthly Pleasures; Lift thou up (says the Psalmist in
the name of the Godly, Psalm. 4.7. In contradistinction from and opposition to
those many who cry, who will show us any good? debasing, and in a manner,
brutifieing themselves, as if they had not rational and Immortal Souls capable
of enjoying God the chief good, the only Object suited Completely to satisfy
their most enlarged desires) Lord lift thou up the light of thy Countenance
upon us, for thou have caused more joy of heart to me, (to wit, thereby) Then
when their Corn and Wine abound: And Psalm. 89.16. those who walk in the light
of His Countenance are said to Rejoice in his name all the day: Thus, when he
Prays, Psalm. 43. For admission to fellowship with God in his public ordinances
(to which he had gone with others of his people, with the voice of joy and
gladness, as they that kept Holy days, as he tells us in the Preceding
Psalm) he promises in that case, that he will go unto the altar of God, unto
God his exceeding joy, the gladness or joy of his joy, the very heart and Soul
of his joy, or the Cream of it, as some translations render the word; there is
reality, Solidity, strength and Efficacy, in that joy; it is heart-joy, while
as in the very midst of the carnal joy, jollity and mirth of natural men
arising from the greatest affluence of worldly pleasures and enjoyments, their
heart is sorrowful, as Solomon says: there is no solidity in it, it has not
a bottom: if they would but a little retire within themselves and ask for a
reason of their laughter, mirth, and jollity, it would instantly evanish, and
their hearts would die within them as stones; it is kept up to their delusion
and ruin, by their abstracting from, and non-reflecting upon the unsolidity
and irrelevancy of the Grounds thereof: but the more the grounds of this joy of
the Godly be reflected on, considered and searched into, they are found to be
the more able to bear the Highest Superstructures of their joy. Tenthly, It is
such a fellowship, that whatever measure of it be attained by sojourning
Saints, It wakeneth desires, sharpeneth appetite, and stirs up kindly
longings for more, and yet more of it, even till it be completed: Thus Moses
the man of God, and his great favorite, whom he knew face to face, when
admitted to very much familiar fellowship with him, and is told, that he had
found Grace in his sight, that he knew him by name, And that at his earnest
desire his presence should go with him, Exodus 33.12, 13, 14. Yet says he to
the Lord, verse. 18. I beseech thee show me thy Glory: So Holy Job Gods darling,
whose candle shined on his head, by whose light he walked through darkness, and
on whose Tabernacle the Secret of God was, Yet with much Holy longing, cries,
Chap. 23.3. Oh that I knew where I might find him, I would come even to his
seat; and comforts himself amidst all his Sorrows with the assured hope of the
fully Satisfieing sight and enjoyment of his Redeemer at the latter day: So
likewise the Spouse in the Song, who had often been brought into the
Banqueting house, having the Banner of her beloveds love spread over her,
whose left hand had lain often under her head, and whose right hand had
em^raced her; who had often sitten down under his shadow with great delight,
and found his fruis sweet to her taste: whose Spikenard did send forth the
smell thereof, while the King sat at his Table: who had frequently found by the
kisses of his mouth, his love to be better then Wine, and to whom he had often
given his loves in the Vineyards: Yet cries in the conclusion of that High
Song, make haste (or flee) my Beloved, and be thou like to a Roe or to a young
Heart on the mountains of Spices: So was it also with David the man according to
Gods heart, who had much sweet Communion with him in his wanderings and
wilderness condition, in Caves and Dens of the Earth, and had often seen his
Power and his Glory in the Sanctuary: Yet pants and breaths after more
fellowship with him, even as the chased Heart does after the water brooks, and
cries, when shall I come and appear before God? Psalm. 42. So in like manner,
was it with the Apostle Paul Christ's great Minion, who beside all the good
days he had in dispensing Gospel Ordinances, in planting and watering
Churches, in converting and edifieing multitudes of Souls, in his triumphing,
by making manifest the savor of Christ's knowledge, had been ravished into the
third Heavens, caught up into Paradise and heard there unspeakable words, that
were not lawful or possible to be uttered: Yet as if he had never been with
him, desired to be dissolved and to be with Christ as best of all, and groans
within himself, longing to be absent from the Body and present with the Lord:
And thus was it, finally, with John the Divine, the Beloved Disciple, who had
often lain in his sweet Masters bosom, and could confidently say, Truly our
Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, closes his
Revelations with that Holily Passionat desire, Even so come Lord Jesus.

Dear Friends, let it be more then ever your great work, and business, to keep
your selves in case and capacity to enjoy his blessed company and Fellowship:
And in order to this end. 1. Study to keep your selves through Grace as chaste
virgins to Christ Jesus, as your one Husband, let him be to you as the loving
Heart and Pleasant Roe, let his embraces satisfy you at all times, and be ye
always ravished with his love, and beware of embracing the bosom of a stranger,
let him be to you as a bundle of Myrrh lying all night betwixt your breasts,
be for him and not for another, so shall he be for and with you, resting in his
love and rejoicing over you with singing. 2. Touch no unclean thing, hate the
very garment spotted with the flesh, abstain tenderly from all appearance of
evil: O defile not those Temples of the living God, of the Holy Ghost, which
Temples ye are: let no unclean thing be harbored or tolerated there, nothing
that may provoke him to leave or loath his dwelling and Temple, nothing that
may make his abode in them grievous, unpleasant, loathsome, or wearisome to him.
3. Let all his Ordinances, and duties of his worship be high in your esteem,
and much commended and even endeared to your hearts, as means of Communion and
fellowship with him: O be much in love with the habitation of his house and the
place where his Honor dwells; let his Tabernacles be very Amiable to you: these
are his haunt, and let them be yours. 4. Beware of all sinful dalliances with
Idols, whereby the Soul is estranged from Communion with God, for there is no
agreement betwixt the Temple of God and Idols: from love to fellowship with him
and from zeal to his Glory, bid them all, with indignation, be gone, saying to
them, what have we any more to do with Idols? and as to a menstruous cloth, get
you hence. 5. When He hides his face, withdraws his presence, and suspends you
from fellowship with him, be troubled, arise, shake off laziness, sloth and
security, be Holily restless, and go the round (as it were) of all Commanded
duties, till you find him, seek him diligently in the night watches on your
bed, go forth to the streets and broad places, go to the watch men, and seek
him whom your Souls love: you will have gone but a little and you shall find
him, and when you have found him, hold him and let him not go, do not awake nor
raise him, till he please. 6. Study to be very humble, tender and contrite of
heart, to be poor in Spirit, constantly sensible of your Spiritual poverty,
emptiness, wants and indigencies; and to tremble at his word; at commands, lest
they be not suitably obeyed; at threatenings, lest they be executed, at
promises, lest you seem to come short of them; for it is in persons thus
qualified that he delights to dwell, and it is to such that he loves to look,
as is very clear, Isai 57 15. and 66.2. 7. Love, prize, improve, and, as ye
have access, study to keep up (as you Sister in Particular are helped through
Grace to do beyond many) the Communion of Saints, those excellent ones of the
earth, in whom, next to his own blessed self, all your delight should be: in
Communion with those Saints, Communion with the King of Saints is readily
attained, it being there that he Commands the Blessing, even life for evermore.
8. Be much in the lively exercise of Faith in, and of love to the Lord Jesus;
and be Spiritually precise, strict, exact, accurate and punctual in obedience
to all his Commands, from Principles of Faith and love; and Christ and his
Father will love you and come and make their abode with you, as he promises,
John 14.21, 23. O! desirable Guests and worthy of all possible welcome, of all
ready and cheerful entertainment: follow hard after him, constantly and
closely pursue conformity to him, and Communion with him: It is but a little,
and the conformity to him shall be completed, and you likened Perfectly to
him, according to creature capacity; and the Communion with him which is now
but in Part, (as all the spiritual privileges and enjoyments of the People of
God, while upon earth, are) shall be fully perfected, shall be Immediate without
the intervention of the Comparatively dark Glass of Ordinances; even to seeing
him face to face, and as he is; and shall be eternally uninterrupted without
the least cloud or moments Eclipse; now it is a Cloud and a clear day, a
sun-blink and anon a shower, rara hora, brevis mora, a rare hour, but quickly
gone; It shall not be so then. O desirable and delightsome day! O sweet,
singularly sweet and solacious day! O Rare and Ravishing day! let all other
days pass and hasten away, and let that Glorious day come; Even so come Lord
Jesus and tarry not. I am

Beloved Christian Friends, and dear Sister, Your very affectionat Friend and
Seriously well-wishing Servant in the Gospel. J. C.
I heartily wish that this mite of service may be acceptable to the Saints, it
being not improbable, that it may be the last service of this kind, that I
shall have access to do them.


Feb. 4. 1685.
A Preparation-Sermon, FOR THE COMMUNION.
1 Cor. 11.29. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
Damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords Body.
IT has been so ordered in the good Providence of God, that ye have lately
heard of that main, very comprehensive and indispensibly necessary duty, called
for from all that would worthily partake of the ordinance of the Lords Supper,
for which we are now making ready, viz. Self Examination; In reference to which
the Apostle having perceived many faults, and failings in these Corinthians,
and much unsuitableness as to their communicating; gives advertisment that
whoever for the time to come would aright approach to the Table of the Lord,
would examine themselves, and so eat: and knowing well that this is a difficult
exercise, and that there is naturally a great deal of averseness in peoples
hearts from it; he Judges it meet to Press the exhortation to that necessary,
though difficult duty, by a reason or Motive set down in the words now read in
your hearing, For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
Damnation to himself; As if he had said, you had need to look well to the
examination of your selves, for if ye neglect or miscarry in that duty, your
hazard and danger is dreadfully great through unworthy communicating; which if
ye would escape, then make conscience narrowly and carefully to examine your
selves: The last words of the verse are a confirmation of the reason, and do
show why the Lord is so holily severe in punishing and Plaguing those who
approach to this Table unworthily through not examining of themselves? because
They discern not the Lords Body; The force whereof is, that there is a most
singular and graci^us presence of the Lord Christ in the Sacrament of his
Supper, and therefore the person who goes not aright about it; does put a great
disrespect upon, yea does even vilify him who is thus present in that
ordinance.

It is the first Part of these Words, that at this time we would mainly speak
to; wherein we would explicat the meaning of these three. 1. To eat and drink
unworthily, here, is to eat and drink unsuitably or unbecomingly; as the
Apostle when he wills the Christian Romans Chap. 16.2. To receive Phebe as
becomes and is suitable to Saints, he makes use of the word worthily, for so
it is in the Original; and this being the opposite to that, is to be
understood, unsuitably and unbecomingly, to such a manifestation o^ the love of
Christ, in giving himself to, and for his people: as in our common language,
when a man does a thing unsuitably, we say he did it unworthily, when it
answers not the end proposed. 2. Judgment or Damnation here, takes in these
three things. 1. A Temporal stroke: as v. 30 31. For this cause many among you
are sickly and weak, and many sleep. 2 It may look to eternal Judgment, as
Damnation is often taken in Scripture. 3. It may look to Spiritual Judgments;
for though a Believer be not capable of eternal Judgment: yet by unworthy
Communicating he may draw upon himself temporal strokes and spiritual
Judgments; he may much wear out the life of Grace, and bring himself under
blasting and withering; and unbelievers draw upon themselves not only those,
but eternal damnation, and that with a higher degree of aggravation. 3. That he
is said to Eat and Drink this to himself, as in the former verse a man is
C^mmanded to Examine himself; It may take in these two, as aimed at by the
Apostle, 1. It is to provoke every man to his particular duty, from his
particular haza^d, He hazards his own soul, 2. Its put here to show the
restriction of the Judgment according to the Sun; and so, if a man examine
himself, though others neglect it, the Judgment shall not overtake him; but if
he examine not himself, whoever escape Judgment, he shall not escape it; and
thus its an encouragement to a man to go about the duty of Self-examination, as
well as a motive of terror; Corinth being corrupted with man^ abuses, one
Person could not amend all: well (says he) Let a man examine himself, and so
he shall escape the hazard, if not, he will fall under it.

We shall First draw some observations from the words, and then speak a word for
Use.

First it is supposed here, that in this ordinance of the Lords Supper there is
a special eminency, excellency dignity and worth; or, this Ordinance of the
Lords Supper, is of a singular Solemn nature: and this I gather partly from
this verse considered in it self, He that Eats and Drinks unworthily, implies
that there is a special worthiness in it, that a man should not offer indign^ty
to; and partly from the connection of this verse with the former, for it is made
a reason why he presses particular and strict Self-examination, which shows
that there is a more singular excellency in this ordinance then in others: and
partly from the context, for every Circumstance speaks out a Solemnity in this
Ordinance, as 1. The night when it was instituted, verse. 23 The same night in
which he was betrayed, and when he was taking his goodnight of his Disciples,
2. His jealousy of, and his quarrelling and threatening for the abuse of this
Ordinance, Speaks out a special excellency in the Ordinance; that all who
approach thereunto should be suitably affected with: all the ordinances of the
Lord are excellent: for if all his works be excellent, Then much more the
Gospel Ordinances, as being a step above those: and yet this ordinance of the
Lords Supper seems dignified with an eminency and excellency above them all.
1. In reference to what it sets out and exhibits: They all set out love, but
this sets out love in an eminent degree: for it sets forth the Lords Death,
wherein the most eminent step and degree of his Love shines, Yea this Ordinance
sets out his actual dieing, and so sets out his Love in its Liveliest Colors,
and as the great Masterpiece of it. 2. In respect of the excellent Benefits
communicated in it; It is true, there is no other thing on the matter
communicate in it, then there is Communicate in the word and Baptism, Yet if we
look to the words, Take ye, eat ye, this is my Body, They hold out Christ Jesus
not so much giving any Particular gift, as actually conferring himself in his
Death and Suffering; And the main scope being to conferr Christ and all that is
in him to the Believer, It holds out some way the excellency of this ordinance
beyond others. 3. In respect of the manner how our Lord Jesus makes over
himself; whereby I mean not only the clearness of his making over himself for
in this ordinance there is the clearest view of a slain Savior, and of
Covenanting wi^h God; and often the most comfortable manifestations of Love go
along with it, for which cause its called eminently the Communion; But also
that there is here a clear glance of Heaven upon earth, Jesus Christ and his
People mixing (to speak so) and being familiar together; he condescending not
only to keep company with them, but to be their food and refreshment: and he
giving them not only the word to their faith, but himself (as it were) to their
sense: in so far as the mean whereby He communica eth himself is more sensible:
It is by his Spirit that the mean is made effectual: and there is not only a
fixedness of Faith on ou^ Part but a sort of Divineness in the ordinance it
self: the very First fruits of Heaven being communicate, as it were, to the very
senses of the Believer: I say unto you, (says the Lord, Matthew. 26 29.) I will
not Drink henceforth of the Fruit of the Vine, until that day, I Drink it new
with you in my Fathers Kingdom; where he seems to point out a more special
way of keeping communion with his people in this Ordinance, in resemblance to
that which he will have with them in heaven: There being here a more special
union and communion betwixt the head and members sealed up, a type of that
which is to be in Heaven, A taste whereof is sometimes given in this ordinance
of the Communion: hence, its not only called the Communion, as in the foregoing
Chapter, but the communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, and the Table of
the Lord.

The first Use of it serves to let us see how much we are oblidged to Christ
Jesus, what could he have given more then himself? And what mean could have
been invented, that could have mo e confirmed and warmed the hearts of his
people then this, which is so lively a representation and Commemoration of his
Blessed Body? very like we might come to d^scern His body better, if there were
a more high estimation of this ordinance: not as if there were any efficacy in
it of it self to communicate Grace: Yet in respect of Christ's institution, its a
most lively mean of Grace, and there is not a circumstance in all the action,
but its to be wondered at: as that it was instituted the same night he was
betrayed: and after the Paschall Supper when the Traitor Judas was going to
bring the band of Soldiers to take him: That he warrands us to take it, and
that we have therein sweet Communion amongst our selves: every thing in it
ought to draw us to admire his sufferings, and the great love they came from,
and the notable affects thereof ^o us.

The second Use, serves to Provoke us to study to be in a Solemn Divine
Heavenly frame, for such a Solemn Divine Heavenly action as this is: and
thoroughly to examine our selves, and to see that all things be in good order:
like to a bride that is to be Married to morrow, who will be trying on her
marriage clothes, and seeing that all things be right. I shall not descend to
particulars, but in Three or Four words in the general, only point at such a
frame as we conceive is called for from you. 1. It should be such a frame as ye
would desire to be in, if Christ were coming personally and visibly to Marry
you to morrow: and O! That this night might thus be a Brydel or Marriage
evening to us all: Consider what frame we would wish to be in, if we were to
meet with him, and strike hands with him personally and visibly, Study and
seek after such a frame. 2. It should be such a frame as we would desire to
have if we were going to give up the Ghost, when all earthly things will be
insignifi ant and of little worth to us: even such a Frame as if our eternal
Peace and happiness were depending on that chock, This would be the night of
making our Testament (as it were) and of the adjusting our accounts with God
and of putting things to a Point betwixt him and us; other ways our debt may
increase and grow greater, and it will not be so easy for us to win to a
discharge of it. 3. It should be such a frame as we would desire to be found
in, if the day of Judgment were coming, and if that day were to be to morrow:
O! how humble, how abstracted from the things of a present world, and how
confirmed in the Faith of Gods love, would we study to be, If the voice of the
Arch angel, and of the last Trumpet were sounding, and a Solemn meeting of all
before the Tribunal of Christ were presently to be? what a frame (I say) would
ye desire to be in in such a case? Even such a frame should ye study to be in
this night as ye would desire to be found in, In that day: We fear it will be
to many then a Prick and a sting in their Consciences within them, That they
made so little Conscience to be in a suitable frame for this so Solemn an
O^dinance; The Text tells that a sentence will pass on every one of you, and
you would by all means labor to be in such a Posture as the sentence may not
be terrible to you. 4. It should be a Heavenly and Divine frame, for if it be a
Heavenly and Divine action, ye would consider what a frame it calls for; how
abstracted (as I just now said) the Heart should be from the Worldr, and from
your carnal delights. How much in Heaven and conversant with God, what a pitch
your communion with God should be raised to, in apprehending of, and meditating
on him, in considering of, and admi^ing at the Sufferings of Christ and at the
love they came from: tasting that he is good, and even deligh^ing and solacing
your selves in his love, which is the Lords allowance on his People, when the
action is humbly and reverently gone about.

2. Observe, that though this ^e a most singularly Solemn Ordinance and
Solemnly to be gone about, yet oftimes men and women go most unworthily about
it and abuse it: This is employed in the words, and we need not many proofs of
it: If we will read from the 20. verse. to this, we will find it sufficiently
proved: and if we look forward to verse 30 and 31 We will find that many sad
strokes came on these Corinthians for abusing and profaning this Ordinance, and
the Apostle would have them gathering their unworthy communicating from these
strokes: There is a readiness both in unbelievers and in believers themselves
to miscarry in going about this ordinance: a readiness in unbelievers, for as
they Spoil all things, all ordinances and duties they meddle with, all things
being unclean to the unbeliever, So there is a miserable and woeful necessity
lying upon them to spoil this Ordinance: and a readiness even in Believers, who
also may miscarry therein, as is implied in the last words of the Chapte^
compared with verse. 32. When we are Judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that
we should not be condemned with the World: Some of them that were believers
were chastised for this fault to prevent their eternal ruin: and are there any
acquainted with their own corrupt nature but they may and will in some measure
find in themselves an aptitude to miscarry, as in all other duties and
ordinances so in this: But the Doctrine holds out a singular and peculiar
bentness to misca rye ^n this duty and Ordinance, So tha^ one who will p^ay
with advertencie and be ca^ried fairly through in that and several other du ies,
may yet in this Ordinance fall under the guilt of unworthy Communicating: The
reasons of it may be these. 1. Because the more Solemn the duty be, and the
greater concurrence of duties be in it, there is the greater difficulty in
going about it, for a Soul cannot be right in this, except it be right in a
number of other duties and Graces, as in Prayer, Faith, Love, and Repen^ance;
and that word: Let a man examine himself, takes in a complication of Duties and
Graces: there would be a good state and a good frame, and Graces would be in
some vigor, and every Duty suitable and Proportionable to the Nature of the
action and o^ the day: and if it be a great and difficult work to carry rightly
on an ordinary Sabbath, or in Prayer, or meditation, or other duties any day,
what a difficult work must it needs be to have all these rightly yoked
together? A Second reason may be drawn not only from the complication of Graces
and Duties, that is required in this action; But from the Nature of the thing
it self, that calls for Duties in a high Degree of Spirituality; if any o
dinance or Duty call for a Spiritual f^ame its this, It requires that the
exe^cise of the Judgment be most clear, that Faith be most distinct, that
Meditation be most Divine etc. And the more Spiritual the Duty be, there is
cer^ainly the more aptness in us tho^ow our corruption to miscarry in it. A
Third reason is, Because there is in Men and Women na^urally, and ordinarily but
very little study, and endeavor to know and take up aright the nature of this
ordinance; There is in the most part a great ignorance of the Strain and Series
of the Gospel; but generally there is a greater Ignorance, Darkness and
Blindness as to the right partaking of this Ordinance, then as to most others;
either through the difficulty of it, or through our Laziness that puts us not to
study it better: So that if it were asked at many of us who may have some
affection, what is a Communion? And what is the right way of partaking of it?
there would be found but very little distinctness in the thing, and many
content themselves to live without clearness about it: And this makes people
incapable to go about it aright. A Fourth reason is from Peoples loathness to
bestir themselves in the woe k of Preparation for it; There is some Self
examination requisite for every Duty, but there is a more Solemn Self
examination enjoined in reference to this; and how very reluctant are we to it?
And seeing examination of our selves is as the door, and entry to this Duty, is
it any wonder that most Persons Communicate unworthily? This exercise of
Self-searching, being so much slighted, which is to the most part so very
difficult, and to many through their own fault impossible.

The First Use Serves for warning as to this matter; It is easy to get a Token
and to come to the Table, but it is not so easy To Eat and Drink worthily, not
so easy, to discern the Lords Body and to get Christ himself in the ordinance:
and in a word so to go about partaking of the Lords Supper, as ye may have
solid quietness of mind in reflecting on it: Is it not a wonder then that the
most part do so securely and in a manner even desperately rush upon it, who
have it may be lain, some Ten, some Twenty, some thirty years without trouble
under this guilt? We would think it a good piece of Preparation, if ye were
Seriously afraid to become guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord: want of
this holy fear breeds security and keeps from stirring up to duty, and from
reflecting on our selves: whereas if the heart were stirred and rouzed with
such a fear, there would be greater and more seiously sharpened diligence in
all these duties, whereof we heard from the foregoing words, to which this is a
strong and pressing motive.

The Second Use Serves for Trial, who among the great company gathered together
here this day (are afraid of si^ning against God and taking his Name in vain in
so Solemn an Ordinance; many think they are prepared: but we think not that
person the better prepared that is not afraid and holily jealous over himself:
Woe woe to many on the account of Communion-dayes that are past and gone without
fear: It were good that ye were afraid lest this day prove to be like many
former days, and lest any of you come short of what has been attained in
former communion days.

Thir^ly: Observe That the sin of unworthy Communicating is a Wrath provoking
and a Judgement-drawing-on-sin: He that Eats and Drinks unworthily, Eats and
Drinks Damnation to himself: There is hardly any sin that the Lord will more
readily, speedily, and Sadly Plague and punish, then this: Its true the Lord
ha^h annexed ha^ Certification to the third Command, That He will not hold him
guiltless, that takes his Name in vain: but i^ there any Ordinance wherein the
Threatening is more expressed, and in reference to which the Judgment hat^ been
more seve^ely and some way indifferently inflicted? As is clear whether we read
before o^ after the words of the Text: And there is good reason for it. For
first, If the duty be more Solemn, if the presence in it be more gracious, and
the bounty that fl was in it be more abundant, then sure the sin of abusing, or
of unbecoming going about it, must be the greater. Secondly if we look to the
sin not only in respect of its greatness in ^everal other respects, but in
respect of the Nature of it, Its a more direct disrespect put upon and despite
done in some respect even unto Christ. Its to be guilty of the Body and Blood
of the Lord: It as if the Spear had been in such a man's hand that pierced
Christ's side, and as if he had driven by his own hand the Nails through His
Hands and Feet: The reason is because Christ in this Ordinance brings himself
and his death so very near, that the sin^er is put to it in a special m^nner
either to receive him, or to refuse and reject him; and when he refuses and
rejects him, he thereby Practically says, that he makes but very little or no
account of him at all, and that if he had been living in those days when He
was crucified, he would also have joi^ed with the Multitude and cried, away
with him; Thus such an one Crucifieth the son of God a fresh and puts him to an
open shame, O heinous and horrid guilt!

The First Use Serves to alarm you; that if the fear of sin will not prevail
with you; the fear of Judgment, of Gods curse and wrath, and of the vengeance
of the Media^o (represented in this Ordinance very clearly, as crucified and
bleeding out his precious life or sinners) Here and eternally hereafter, may
prevail with you to be serious in the work ye are now called to.

Let me (which is a Second and more particular Use of the Doctrine,) advise
you, as to examine your selves seriously, in reference to all your other ways,
so to take a Special look of your bygone Communicating; O! that many of you
who are so whole at the Heart, that there is no provoking nor wakening of you,
and who are so senseless that ye scare at nothing, could be prevailed with to
charge your selves with this horrid sin of being guilty of the Body and Blood
of the Lord, That thereby ye may be awakened; It will certainly one day awake
you: therefore in your Self examination, take special notice if ye have not
Communicated unworthily: make Special addresses ^o God for removing of this
dreadful Guilt: and have a special eye for the time to come that ye fall not in
it: I say again, take a special review of your bygone carriage in this
Ordinance, and say to your selves, whether are we Guilty of this sin? and
whether are we in Hazard to ^all into it of new? And to stir you up to this,
Consider 1. What temporal strokes from God have come or may come for it: who
knows but our outward captivity, the Blood that has been shed, the many new
and unheard of or but very little heard of diseases that are among us, have in
a great Part been for this Sin? Secondly know: that beside temporal Strokes on
the outward man, ye may fall under Spiritual Plagues: the Lord may blast the
Ordinances for the time to come, that they shall do you no good: and He may last
any part and gift that ye have: He may make your Ears dull of hea^ing and your
Eyes blind, and your Hearts fat; And if ye quench any convictions that ye may
possibly be under for the time, it may be that ye shall never be privileged
with such convictions again, nor be brought ^o near Heaven hereafter: but more
delusion and seduction by Error, more Prophanity, Security, Hypocrisy, and
Presumpt^on may break in among you; And though these be not thought much of now
by some a^ least, but looked a^ as very light things, yet the day will come when
they will be found to be in^uppo tably Heavy: And men will be put rather to
wish, that this house, wherein we now a^e, had fallen on them and bruised them,
or that the Sword had fallen in upon them and slain them, then to ly under such
a weight. Thirdly, know that it may bring on eternal Judgment; And O! but this
will draw deep on the Score of many Professors; even the abuse of the Lords
Table, in partaking of His Table, and of the Table of devils: I shall Name but
a few Sins here that ye would notice and try your selves in as to this: First
Ye have often Communicate, have ye also often Examined your selves? can many of
you Pitch on such an hour or half hour, that ye set a part to try your Souls
condition! Secondly I would ask what Repen^ance has there been, Right
examination makes discovery of Guilt: and discovery of Guilt brings out
Repentance, which has some pricking and Soul panging with it; Thirdly. What
effect has followed? What engagements have been kept? How have many of us
reformed our walk? Is not our carriage as it was? Passion and Pride, as quick
and lively as they had wont to be, Deadness, Security, and worldly mindedness
as they were before? Are we not as little Self denied? As unready to Fo give,
As Ignorant and having as little knowledge of Gospel mysteries as we were, and
had many a Year Since? But very few can say on good grounds that they have made
any Progress in Mortifi^ation and Holiness; and except it be some conviction,
Some flash of affection, Or some faint Resolution to amend things amiss, What
use has been made of, or what benefit has been reaped by many and that not of
the worst sort, by the Communion? and therefore in the next place let me say
that it were not unbecoming or unsuitable to the Communion, to make this night
a night of Humiliation before God and of prayer to him to be delivered from
Blood Guiltiness; There is not a more legible Evidence of our untenderness,
then our being little pricked at the heart for this sin; a word of reflection
from our Neighbor, or the apprehension of some great Man's displeasure and
Feud, has lain nearer our hearts, then the wronging of the Son of God at this
rate, has done, for which it were good now to cast an eye To look to him, and
to mourn as on mourns for his only Son, and to go to Zion weeping as we go,
asking the way thitherward. These are no uncouth nor strange things, but such
as are Ordinarily pressed upon us; We are afraid that many have loathed and left
the simple way of Godliness; to get and look after some Shining and Glistering
thing to the Eye, and that way will never profit them; to take a serious look
of your Souls condition, and to be in good earnest in the exercise of
Repentance, as the life o^ your Preparation; even that ye may come knowing well
what ye need, and what ye are to Receive if ye come aright.

The Third and main Use is, that seeing there is so great ground to fear
Communicating unworthily, and that so great Judgments follow upon it, it would
be, as our fear to Communicate unworthily, So our uptaking business, how we may
communicate worthily; This is the end of the day, and should be our task, and
work this night, even to endeavor to be worthy communicants to morrow: Ye will
readily ask how is such a Frame to be attained and come by? I would, for
answer, desire you seriously to mind what ye have heard on these words, Let a
man Examine himself and so let him eat, Which comprehend the Sum of what is
called for from you; and we shall now add these Four things, that in your
preparing your selves to Communicate Rightly and worthily, ye would seriously
mind, 1. A right uptaking of your selves. Secondly, A Right uptaking of the
Ordinance. Thirdly, A right Acting in reference to both. Fourthly, A right
manner of Acting, or a right Frame in your going about the work. For the First,
We say, there would be a right uptaking of our Selves, that we may know what we
are, what are our Sins, Spiritual wants and necessities, that we may have some
distinct errand to God; This is employed in these Words. Let a man examine
himself; That he may be well acquainted with himself: if there be not some time
taken for attaining to a right Consideration of our Selves, we cannot come
rightly to thy O^dinance: or if any word come that suits our condition it will
come by guess as to us, and we may come to the Communion, and neither know
what we need, not what we are seeking or would be at.

For the Second: We say, there would be a right uptaking of the ordinance it
self, which when wanting it mar^es us, that we know not how to Communicate: in
the ordinance we would take up the substance of it, the end of it, and how it
effectua^s the end. First, The Substance of the ordinance is Christ Jesus
himself, who though he be not bodily, yet is he really present in the
Sacrament; His words are not empty words, the Signs are ^o^ empty Signs; But
the Bread is his Body, and the wine is his Blood: For if there be a presence in
the wo^d, as he makes it known through his Spirit, by the efficacy of it on
the Heart; then in a more special and Solemn manner, there is a presence in
the Sacrament; which also he makes sensible, to the Spiritual senses of the
Believer Secondly, The end and use of the Ordinance for which God has
appointed it, would also be rightly taken up; and this is large. It serves for
the man festing of his love in his Death till he come again; and this would be
a piece of your exercise to descover the love of Christ in it, and to put your
faith to exercise on that love: In which respect Christians have not only their
Particular case to look to in the Sacraments, But also that their Spirits be
taken up with the thoughts of the wonderfully condescending love of Christ, who
has given and left behin^ him a token and Memorial of it: and especially
these ends would be looked to and considered, viz. That its given for our
instruction, for it gives us a Sight o^ Christ crucified; It shows us the way
of making up our union with him, and the necessity of it, and the warand given
us to make use of him: and as its given for instruction and teaching so for
sealing and confi ming; the Lord would have us the eby knowing the truth of his
Promises and covenant for our greater consolation, and that we may with greater
liberty apply them: even as when a Prince offers peace to a Rebel and grants
him a Pardon, to make him ^he more su^e, and to remove all doubts and
jealousies there is a seal appended to the Pardon, which confirms it, and
consequen ly strengthens the Faith of the Rebel to rest upon it: So this is a
special end of the Sacrament to Seal and confirm: God having graciously
condescended to Covenant and Promise, and to Swear to the truth of his Covenant
and p omise, That the Heirs of Promise may have strong consolation, He also
appends seals to his Covenant. But Thirdly, We are to consider how it
effectua^s these ends: and thus we are to look on the Sac^amen^^ as exhibiting
and appl^ing Jesus Christ and his Benefits: which must needs be a spiritual and
Sublime thing, holden out in these words. Take ye, eat ye, this is my Body,
etc. Where we have Jesus Christ giving over himself to the Believer, so as he
and the Believer become one, and he ha h Christ to feed upon: Its true there is
no Physical conjunction here: Yet as in the word, the offer and promises
conveigh Christ holden out in the Promises to the Soul, being received by
faith, there is an union thus made up betwixt Christ and the Person: So in the
right partaking of the Sacrament, the Spirit go^ng along with the word and
Seal, and the believer receiving the Seal as given him of God for that end, as
well as the word: The^e results an union and Communion, a mystical and
Spiritual uniting and joining of Christ and the believer together: Which
although it does not always necessarily presuppose Faith going before, yet it
supposes Faith necessarily to go along with it: and in this there is most
express covenanting and bargaining betwixt Christ and the Believer, Jesus
Christ not giving himself here indefinitly, as he does in the word and offer of
the Gospel, but particularly: and thus the Believers Faith has the most
distinct ground and reason to make application of him, and so the more distinct
confirmation.

For the Third, there is a right acting in reference to both the former to be
looked to, 1. There is something that our Judgment and memory would be taken
up with, which is as the key to what follows: we are to remember the Lords
Death, the end of it: the love he had in dying: and his instituting of this
ordinance when he died for this end, that we might remember his death and love
therein, till he come again; and have our minds meditating on these. Secondly,
There would be the exercise of our Graces, as of repentance, from reflecting on
our selves; of love from looking to Christ, and of continued spiritual mourning
resulting from both; and especially there would be the exercise of Faith as
being the main thing that on our part makes up the union, and whereby our
Communion is entertained: and there is a threefold act of Faith called for in
worthy Communicating, 1. An act receiving, 2. An act giving. 3. A ratifieing
act, that knits both the acts together. 1. I say an act of Faith receiving
Christ's word and ordinance, and himself therein. 2. An act of faith giving,
resigning or committing our selves to him: the covenant being in this respect
mutual. And Thirdly, a ratifieing act coupling or knitting these together, viz.
Christ giving himself to us and our giving our selves to him, his engagement to
us and ours to him: To clear these a little further, First the receiving act of
faith looks to the institution and covenant to which the Sacrament is appended,
and to Christ in the words of institution and in the Covenant, making offer of
himself; Which is to be considered as in the word and covenant, to which the
Sacrament is appended, and accordingly it welcometh him, as it does in the
word; for as there is a receiving act of Faith as to the Word, So there is a
receiving act of Faith as to the Sacrament; That is, when the Soul is put to
dispute whether about the offer if it be made to it, or about the Promise that
supposes the condition, if it may lay hold upon it; The Believing souls taking
of the Sacrament, is the permitting and allowing of it self to be confirmed by
virtue of Christ's appointing that ordinance for its confirmation, that the
offer is made to it, and that the Promise belongs to it in particular: as when
a penitent sinner comes to the Communion, and that promise rolls in his
thoughts, Thy sins and thy iniquities will I remember no more, and he would
fain believe it; the receiving act of Faith is to take the Sacrament as Gods
putting his Seal to that word of p omise that he will make it good to the soul
in particular. Thy sins and thy iniquities will I remember no more: Or when a
Soul has its secret longing after Christ, and cannot dispense with the want of
him, and cries out, O! When will thou come unto me? In the Sacrament it lo^ks
on the institution and takes it as a Seal of confirmation to put it out of
question, that he that has promised to come, will come and will not tarry, and
it looks on Christ giving the Communion, as if it saw him taking the pen, and
with his own hand Subscribing the contract, and lays it up in its heart as in
a Charter Guest, as an evidence and confirmation of its right to Christ: and
indeed there is much need of being distinct in this; for there are many who
make conscience of engaging to Christ in this Ordinance, who look not on it as
Christ engaging to them; but the receiving act of faith looks on it Immediately
as his engaging to the S^u^: as a person that has a hard heart, looking on
tha^ promise, I will take away the stony heart, and give a heart of flesh, and
expecting the making out of it, takes the Sacrament as a Seal that he will
perform that promise, because he a^ticles so with him to get that promise made
good; even as a man that would have some debateable clause in h^s right to such
a piece of land created and put out of question, brings it to his Superior to
get it Sealed of new: Now this receiving act of faith does not only, dispose
and fit us to receive from God; but as the hand takes o^ receives the elements
so Faith receives Gods offer of the Covenant, and that which is represented and
sealed up in that ordinance. Secondly The act of faith giving; is (as I said)
that whereby we give our selve^ away to Christ; and so, as we get one right, we
give (as it we^e) another; or as we take on ba^d we gave another; we receive Ch
is it engaged to us according to the Covenant, and we engage and give our selves
away to be His: our very receiving su^p^se^h our c^nsenti^g, and faiths
delivering and giving up it self or the person to Christ and taking Christ to
it, or to himself, So making (as it were) an exchange. (O! wonderful exchange,
by which we receive infinitely more and better then we give) when the Soul has
gotten him, it gives it self to him, to be changed and made better, and renews
its purposes resolutions and promises to that end, and takes the Sacrament to
make these sure and secure. Thirdly The ratifieing act of Faith is this, when
we have taken Christ's Promise by Faith and have given our promise to him, and
surrendered and delivered up our selves unto him; and we go about the communion
and exer^ise our faith to get both confi^med; as we use to speak We will take
our Sacrament on it; we take the Communion to seal his part of the Covenant to
us, and to confi^m our selves as to the performance of that which we have
engaged to him; and thus that which was before a bond on Christ's side, and a
bond and engagement on our side, becomes now a mutual contract and bargain;
both a^e put in one and complicated together, Sealed with one seal, and made
use of for both these ends: the believer thinks himself surer of Gods promise,
and himself more securely engaged to God; and though this engaging has no new
Promise with it; yet thereby the more explicitly is our duty brought forth,
and the promise more particularly becomes ours.

As for the Fourth and last thing, It is a right manner of acting, or a right
way or suitable frame in our going about this ordinance, which takes in several
things as. 1. Fear, because it is a very difficult thing rightly to Communicate,
and we had need to fear least we mistake and miscarry. 2. Distinctness and
clearness, which is a part of the result of self examination; we would at least
be so far clear in our condition as to know and be convinced that the general
strain of our way has not been right as it should have been by very far when
we cannot so well find ou^ and condescend upon he particular evils, that we
have been given to or have done; and though we know not all nor many of the
particular Promises of the Covenant, yet we would be clear in that general,
that in the Covenant God makes over himself a God all-sufficient to the
believer. Thirdly faith in and dependence on God for preparation, and for a
suitable frame; for gaining new ground of corruptions, for more humility and
tenderness, for more through turning to the Lord; Convert me (says Ephraim,
Jer. 31.) And I shall be converted, there would be many Serious and Sincere
resolutions, engagements, and purposes, and much heart-melting, and Prayer in
the making of them, as it was with Israel and Judah Jer. 50.5. Whose great
desire and design was, to have the Covenant betwixt God and them so secured,
that it might hold perpetually and never any more be forgotten, they desired to
keep (as we use to speak) no bank in their own hand, they allow of no
reservations or exceptions, and they go about this great work Praying and
weeping: This were a Sweet and suitable frame for a Communion, and notably well
becoming a people that Approach to the Lords Table; and we seriously commend it
to you, and you to the grace of God in the Practice of these things, which his
own blessed self make forthcoming to you.

A Preparation SERMON, for the Communion.
On 1 Cor. 11.29. Not discerning the Lords Body.
IT is a very great and grave, a very Momentous and concerning work, rightly to
partake of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; it has as many and great
advantages, attending the due and worthy Participation thereof, and as many sad
consequences following the unworthy Participation of it, as any other of all
the ordinances of Christ has; and therefore when the Apostle has sharply
expostulated with the Christ an Corinthians for several abuses in reference to
this Ordinance; he proceeds, after a full declaration of its institution, to
guard them against all after abuse thereof, and to fit and prepare them for
suitable and worthy communicating; And the first direction that he gives them
is in reference to preceding Preparation, Let a man examine himself, and so
let him eat. The Second is, in reference to the action it self, teaching them
to communicate worthily, So as they may discern the Lords Body, by holding out
the danger of unworthy Communicating; both which he knits together, telling
them, that if any of these things be wanting, it will bring on Judgment.
Whence in a word, and but in passing, we may Observe these two things. 1. That
a man will never Communicate worthily, that does not before hand endeavor to
prepare himself for it; And therefore he prefixeth this, Let a man examine
himself, and then subjoins, And so let him Eat. 2. That a man that is not
distinct in discerning himself in some measure after the examination of
himself, will never aright discern the ^ords Body in this Ordinance of the
Communion; He that takes not up himself, will never take up Christ rightly.

In the words more particularly we have Three great things in reference to
present Communicating; The 1. whereof is, the great and peculiar use of the
Communion, and that is, that it makes the Lords body discernible, It puts
Christ in a capacity (to speak so) to be taken up and discerned; The Second
is, the great duty of a worthy Communicant; and that is, rightly to discern the
Lords Body, so holden forth. The third is, the great Sin that unworthy
Communicants fall into; and that is, They do not discern the Lords Body; but
are like so many Dogs and Swine, who not knowing what delicats are there, they
go about the action, not knowing what they are doing.

The First is clear, That in the Sacrament, Christ Jesus his broken body is
made discernible to us; else he would not find fault with them who come, and do
not discern it; The words al^o before verse. 24. clear it; This (says he) is my
Body which is broken for you; So Chap. 10 verse. 16. The cup of blessing which
we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? And the bread which
we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? And the sharp
Judgments, that come on People ^o^ not dis^erning the Lords Body, and so for
being guilty of Communicating unwo^thily, do show, that not only is our Lords
Body really present, but in a special manner discernible in this Ordinance.

To clear this a little further, we shall First Premit a two fold distinction,
and then. Secondly answer a few Questions that serve for clearing the Doctrine,
and for better uptaking of this Ordinance.

First then, we would distinguish betwixt these two viz: Looking on the
Sacrament as strictly taken, and as contradistinguished from the word; and
looking on it as more complexly taken, as including the word; It is in the last
sense that we consider the Sacrament here, viz: as taking in, 1. Christ
signified and represented by the elements, 2 The word and Covenant to which the
Sacrament as a Seal is appended; Therefore the cup is called The Cup of the New
Testament: 3. The seal of the Sacrament it self appended to the word and
Covenant.

2. We would distinguish betwixt Christ's broken Body considered as discernible
to our understanding only; and the same considered as it is discernible to our
very senses, or as it is apprehensible, when by feeling we may grip it as it
were; and not only look to it, but take hol^ of it: (how this is, shall be more
Particularly explained and cleared afterward for preventing of mistakes,) it is
in this last sense that we understand discernible here, not excluding the
former; so that Christ's broken body in the Sacrament is not only made
discernible to the understanding of the right communicant, but he is made
Communicable and apprehensible, and there is an union with him attainable in
that Ordinance; and what we said before proves this: he holds out His Body to
be received, And He is received in it.

A^ for the Second, to wit, The Questions to be answered; they are these Four.
1. In what respect is Christ present and discernible in the Sacrament? Secondly
to what is he made discernible and Communicable? Thirdly how the Sacrament
makes him discernible, and what way it holds him out as discernible to us?
Fourthly what may be the reasons why Christ holds out himself, His broken Body,
as discernible to us in the Sacrament?

First, then, in what respect is Christ present and discernible in the
Sacrament? We answer, first, not simply considered as he is the Son of God, nor
in respect of any benefi^ from him as media^or, neither simply as Redeemer; But
he is holden out as incarnat, and so this Sacrament differs from the Jews
Passover, which held him out as to come, while this holds him out as come.
Secondly, it holds him out not only as become man, but as suffering, as having
his Body broken. Thirdly He is made discernible in respect of the end for which
He suffered, and had his Body broken and his Blood shed; This is (says he) my
Body which is broken for you, This cup is the New Testament in my Blood shed
for the remission of the sins of many: to wit, of all the Elect; It holds out
Christ Mediator, God-man suffering for us. Fourthly, It holds him out as
Communicable and in capacity to be participat of, by us; Therefore its called
the Communion of His body. Chap. 10.16. To tell us that we may be united to
him, and made to share of him; and we are bidden Take and Eat and all to drink
of it: These last two look to the Covenan^ and hold out the Sacrament in
reference to it, and how our Lord Jesus, First by his sufferings was to
purchase a People to himself, and Secondly that he was to be Communicable to
his People; therefore the Cup is called the New Covenant in his Blood; The Cup
and the Covenant go together: For though we may consider Christ without the
Sacrament; yet we cannot so well consider the Sacrament without Christ and the
Covenant.

Secondly, To what is Christ made discernible and Communicable? We answer:
First he is not discernible nor present after a corporal manner to the bodily
eye, though he be really and truly present; The bread that he gives is his
Body, and the Cup his Blood, and yet it was Bread and wine which was given, and
not his Body and Blood corporally. Secondly, he is not present and Communicable
by any local mutation, by taking us up to heaven to him, or by bringing his
Body out of Heaven to us; But he is these three ways present and Communicable;
First to our Spiritual senses, to an enlightened understanding, which considers
Christ's Body broken and his Blood shed. Secondly, To the Faith of his people he
is present in his own ordinance; when his spirit goes along and quickens their
hearts, and their faith is in exercise. They are made to apprehend Christ's
Body, and to have an union with him sitting in Glory as really as they partake
of the elements with their hand and feed upon them with their mouth and
stomach; an union as real as is betwixt the head and the members, and betwixt
the root and the branches: These two, the Spirit on Christ's side, and Faith on
our side make up a real union; and therefore though this presence be real, yet
it is Spiritual; Faith looking and going through the elements takes up Christ
according to the end appointed; and this makes the union, even as faith will
look and go through the word and crediting the word, takes up Christ in it, and
makes an union with him; so by virtue of this ordinance there is a Spiritual
presence of, and union with Christ Jesus. Thirdly A presence to sense, not so
much in respect of inward feeling, as in respect of the powerful effects of his
presence, though often inward feeling goes along with it; and therefore its
called the Communion of his Body, and the wine of Heaven; And in respect of the
mean and way he manifests himself therein, to the eye, to the touch, to the
taste, and to the ear, and there is a color sensible: which is more then is in
any other ordinance, where there is but the exercise of one sense; for the more
of the outward senses he makes use of, he brings with him a proportionable
blessing to the inward senses of the soul.

Thirdly, How does the Sacrament hold out Christ as discernible to us? For
answer I shall offer these Four ways. How he may be present to the faith of the
Believer in the Sacrament; all which ways he is made discernible: 1 In respect
of the institution; for Christ is here represented by the Minister as giving
himself; his authority and warrant is here; therefore himself is here: This
though it be common to all Christ's ordinances, yet it belongs in a peculiar way
to this ordinance; for in it he is present in a special man^er making over
himself and his sufferings to us. Secondly, He is made discernible in the
Sacrament in as far as it represents him: and though the word hold him out, yet
the Sacrament does so, more fully, clearly and sensibly, by such and such
signs, by bread, and bread broken, representing his Body broken by Suffering;
by wine, and wine poured out, representing his Blood shed: and by wine distinct
from the bread, to show a most true and real death; In which respect it is
said, Do this in remembrance of me: and as often as ye eat this Bread and drink
this Cup, ye show forth the Lords Death till he come again: Every Sacrament
represents Christ, but this represents him in his suffering and dieing, and in
the end of it: and makes it over to the worthy communicant, Thirdly he is made
discernible by this Sacrament in this respect, as it is a seal appended and
affixed to the Covenant, serving to ratify and confirm the Promises contained
in the Covenant, and so the Bread and wine, considered in reference to the
institution, are a real confirmation of our real partaking of the thing
signified, and in some respect make Christ really present: as the giving of a
sealed Charter of a house to a man, is the giving him the house: or as the
giving of infeofment by a bit of earth and stone (being a legal confirmation)
is the giving of that land to the man, wherein he is infeoft: because (as I
said) it is a legal right to it, and makes it present and discernible to him:
even so Christ is ma^e discernible in this ordinance, because we have our right
to him which is in the word, in a special manner, confirmed to us in it: for
not only does this (as other Sacraments do) confirm the word and Covenant in
general, but it has this peculiar to it, that it confirms Christ's making over
his dieing ^e^^ to us. Fourthly Christ is here present and di^cernible, and
made ^o by this ordinance; if we consider the Sacramen^ as a mean whereby we
have Christ Communicate to us, he not only makes over himself Covenant wise: but
seals this gift: and the Sacrament is a mean of Communion with him thus made
over to us: in which respect the believer does and may warrantably make use of
the Sacrament, for his quickening, elevating, and strengthening to cleave
closer, and to grip faster to Christ: for which cause it is called the Communion
of his Body: and hereby we are said to be made one Body with him: Not but that
without the Sacrament it may be and is often so: but by the Sacrament this
Union and Communion is strengthened and furthered to the faith, and Spiritual
sense of the believer.

Fourthly, what are the reasons why Christ will have his broken Body made thus
discernible and apprehensible in this Sacrament? We answer, that he will have
it so for these reasons. First for evidencing of and bearing Testimony to his
great love to his People; It says that a dieing Christ so loves us that he
gave himself to us; and ^o the memory of his death is revived and kept up; He
will have his dieing self, in a Sacrament bestowed on his People, to keep his
love still fresh to them in their remembrance. Secondly for the Public
Professing and testifying our faith in a dieing Savior; For in this Sacrament
we profess our Faith in him, and dependence on him; and we say thereby and
declare to the world, this my Savior died, and is able to give me life; which
is a piece of Honor and Glory to the Mediator, and a part of our duty; when
we give Public testimony, that we think no shame of a crucified Redeemer.
Thirdly, The Lord has, for the edification and benefit of his People, made
himself ^o discernible in this Sacrament; and there is a Fourfold edification
o^ benefit that redounds to them by it. First instruction, for they that cannot
so well take up the Lord in the word, may be somewhat helped to take him up in
the Sacrament as a slain Savior, and as being as needful as meat and drink,
without which, as we cannot live, no more can we live without him: and O! how
many Spiritual lessons may be ha^ by these significant ceremonies instituted
by Christ? Secondly There is here edification unto the faith of Gods People:
and thus it b^comes strengthening, when not only Christ says in his word, I
have loved my Church, and given my self for her, and they that believe shall not
perish; but we have his ordinance Sealing this: Its exceeding strengthening to
a poor weak doubting body which could not easily believe, that Christ would be
so kind to a rebel; when he gets a sacred Seal of his kindness, it helps to
Believe what is promised. Thirdly It edifies as it serves to promote the
inward growth of Grace, for in the Sacrament Christ is Communicate: and as he is
Communicate, life is Communicate, love to God, and to one another is Communicate:
and in a word we cannot Imagine a Communication of Christ; but it brings with
it strengthening to the inward man. Fourthly there is edification in respect of
the believers consolation, whether as, to his Sense, or as to his Faith; the
Gospel in its offer and Promises comes out and says, men and women, be it
known to you, that Christ is p^eached to you and remission of sins through him;
But the Sacrament says, Believing man and woman, there is my Body not only
broken for all the Elect in general, but for thee in particular: and this much
silenceth the great debate whether I be elected or not, or within the Covenant,
or not; for it says, O Man, here is a slain and broken Redeemer made over unto
thee upon condition that thou close with him in the Covenant, as he offers
himself: and so when there has been some wavering and fainting in respect of
consolation before, it proves very strengthening of the Believers consolation,
considering the nature of the Ordinance: and in this respect the Sacrament is
as a Love-token of a kind Husband to his Spouse, who when he is to remove to
some considerable distance from her for a time, says, take and keep this in
remembrance of me, and think that I dearly love thee and will not forget thee,
till we meet again.

The second Point of Doctrine is, the great duty called for from a worthy
Communicant, and that in short is, rightly to discern the Lords Body made so
discernible, and as he is made discernible: The Text confirms the Doctrine:
for though a man had never so many good things, Suppose that he had not only
gifts but Grace, yea and a Holy frame of Spirit, yet if he be ignorant of what
he is called to or a doing in this Ordinance, he cannot discern the Lords
Body, and so cannot Communicate worthily: Hence it is that there is so much need
of Knowledge, without which a man can no more then a child or a fool rightly
take up Christ in the Sacrament.

To open this a little we shall speak a word to these three, 1. To the Object to
be discerned. 2. To the act of discerning. 3. To the reasons why this
discerning is so necessary a duty.

First, for the Object to be discerned, It is Christ Jesus, suffering, dieing,
and making over himself to his People aco^ding to his Covenant, It s Christ,
and yet Christ di^ing, and Christ dieing according to the Covenant from which
he can never be sepa a ed, and especially i^ this ordinance in Particular,
considered with it is end an^ institution with respect to the Covenant; It Is
Christ giving himself, and in this Sacrament, according to the Covenant.

Secondly, For the act of discerning; It is taken For ways, the last whereof
is the main. 1. To discern thing in Scripture is to have distinct thoughts and
apprehensions concerning it, Its to take up a thing simpl^ and as it is in it
self; Thus to discern Christ present (...) the Sacrament, is to discern how and
wherefore he is present. 2. To discern a thing is to difference it from other
things, and in this respect a thing is said to be discerne^ comparatively as 1
Cor. 4.7. Who makes thee to diffe^ from another? Thus to discern this
Sacrament an^ Christ in it, is to difference it from other things; considering
tha^ it was once common Bread and Wine, bu^ that now it is not so; It is to put
a difference betwixt the Sacrament and common bread and wine; and betwix^ the
Sacrament and the Word and Covenant, yet with respect to the Covenant; as the
Seal differs from the Charter; and to difference this Sacrament from other
Sacraments, In respect that it looks to a dieing Savior and Communicats him
and his benefits that way. 3. To discern a thing, is to have a high esteem of
it, such a^ was the discerning of Meats days, and Places; So to discern Christ
in this Ordinance, is to have a deep impression and high estimation of Jesus
Christ, of his death, and of his ma^chless love shining therein: To have much
Spiritualitie, Holy fear, awe and reverence in reference to him: Such a fear
and reverence as mean men will have before a King or a great man, who when they
carry not suitably before such a great person, we will say to them, know ye
where ye are? So the right discerning and uptaking of Christ here, is to have a
high est^mation of him. 4. There is a complex discerning of a thing in
reference to its use and end: or we may call it a Relative discerning, which is
Practical, when a man conforms himself Sui^ably to his di^cerning of the
thing, the want whereof ou^ Lord reproves in the Jews, Hypoc^its (says he) Ye
can di^cern the face of the Sky, but ye cannot di^cern the signs of the times;
and in this resp^ct also when a man carries unsuitably before a Magistrate, it is
said to him by discerning Persons, know ye where ye are? And this being the
main thing here implied, we shall speak a little more to it: wher^in these two
things are supposed, 1. Some distinct up taking of our selves, of our need, and
of our hazard. 2. The right p^taking of Christ in this Ordinance, as to the
supply of those necessities and preventing of that hazard: and this Doctrinal
discerning go^th before that which is Practical, which is a man's suitable
use-making of Christ, or suitabl^ exercising himself in reference to his need,
and that ordinance appointed for supply of his need by Jesus Christ: which is
with a reflex look sometimes on himself, sometimes on Christ. And there are in
this these five steps which follow one of them upon another. 1. It consists in
a suitable frame of heart, as becomes such a poor sinful unworthy and needy
person in the presence of so Holy a Lord, going about such a Holy action:
another frame then is called for at our dinner or Supper, or at ordinary
hearing the word, or at Prayer: A holy, humble, cheerful, serious, Heavenly
and hungry frame: Holy awe and respect to God making humble, Faith of Gods
goodness and rich Grace in Christ shining in this Ordinance, making cheerful:
The conviction of need making Sober, and yet very serious and eager in what he
is about: It Is a frame made up, as it were, of contrarieties: ardent love and
zeal, and yet a calm and composed Spirit to hear what God says, To take what
he gives, and to behold what he manifests. 2. It consists in an exercise of the
mind in meditation, both in reference to our selves and to Christ: Meditation
in reference to our own sinfulness and misery: and meditation on Christ's love:
calling to mind all that he has done: thinking with delight on Christ's
suffering and on the end of it, and again reflecting a look on our selves to
keep life in this meditation, what was I, when he suffered and did all this for
me? and what am I now, when he is offering this to me? To have the picture of a
loving Husband hanging by a wife to what purpose is it, and for what use does
it serve, if she never look on it to mind him whom it represents? 3. It
consists in an exercise of Graces, It Is even (as it is laid in the Song) a
making of all the Spices to cast forth their smell: and the putting of all
things in good order and studying to have them in good case: It Is to have love
warm to the giver, and closing with the gift of a dieing Savior, and to have
love warm to others of his people for his sake, and because he has taken us in
with others, to partake of the benefits of his love shining in his Death: for
love to the head and members, go together: It Is to have repentance lively
stirred up and sin made heart-pricking and Godly sorrow to flow: the heart made
to loath it: and the mind exercised in forming hearty resolutions, Purposes,
vows, and engagements against it: but it is especially to have faith stirred up
and in exercise, and to have all the senses of Faith (to speak so) set a going:
as when the word comes out and says Take ye, Eat ye, this is my Body, which is
broken for you. Faith beholds and gets as clear and satisfieing a view of
Christ's Suffering and dieing, as if the man saw him with his Bodily eyes: when
the hand is stretched out to take. Faith acts Proportionably in stretching out
it is hand to take Christ, and not only grips him, but in this Ordinance and
according to the end of it, takes it as a pledge of Christ performing what he
has promised, making use of him for the end appointed: when the eye looks on
what is done, Faith is considering and taking a view of Christ and of the
covenant and of the benefits purchased by him, and sees another thing then the
elements, even the wakened up sword of the Fathers justice pursueing the
mediator, as the elects cautioner: when the eye looks on the distribution,
Faith it sees Christ made as it were believers Common-good given among them,
and to every one of them: when the hand puts the bread and wine to the mouth,
Faith has a way of opening it is mouth and (as it were) chewing and feeding
upon Jesus Christ, and of strengthening, refreshing, and cheering it self in
him counting it self well come to with him and secure in him, and fastening
it is engagements to him: all which strengthen our Spiritual life, as eating
and drinking does the natural life: and then when it comes to the taste, Christ
relisheth most sweetly to the Believer, so that no Wine does cheer the natural
heart so much as Christ in the Sacrament considered in his love and Covenant,
and in the benefits that come by him, do the Soul of the believer; Faith here
considers Christ not only as communicable: but as actually communicated. The
fourth thing wherein this discerning consists, is a reflecting exercise, when
we have received the Sacrament we are to reflect and consider what we have
done, and what we are doing, are we indeed feeding upon Christ? What is this in
our hands? This bread in some respect is not bread, but Christ; This cup is not
Wine, but the cup of the New Testament in his Blood, and by this reflex act,
the Believer applies, and confirms himself, having received the Sacrament,
whereby his union with Christ is signified and sealed up, he applies and says
within himself, now Christ is mine, and I am his: and he confirms himself in
Christ's love to himself and in his interest in him: Now says he, I have
gotten no delusion, but the sign and Seal of his blessed Body broken, and of
his Blood shed for me: If unbelief say, have ye gotten Christ indeed? Yes says
the Believers faith, having received this Pledge of his love, I have gotten
himself and I should Believe it; and this is to act on Christ not only
directly, which is a thing common to the Sacrament with the word, but to act on
Christ reflexly: and to persuade our selves of our union and Communion with
him, which is the end of this Ordinance: else we take not up Christ as giving a
seal; Therefore the word is, Take, eat, This is my Body broken for you: there
is more then a bare sign here: and faith acts not only for receiving, but for
confirming it self, that by receiving it has an union and Communion with him,
who is holden out in the Sacrament, For if it be a seal and exhibit Christ as a
seal, then faith should receive and act on it as such for attaining the end
that a seal should have, supposing the condition to preceed. Fifthly, it
consists in an act of spiritual affecting, when there is a Holy smacking (to
speak so) and kissing of Christ, The soul digesting him for the life of the
inner man, and thereon delighting, rejoicing, and exulting in him: and so the
faith, confidence and hope of the Believer are strengthened: which makes him
that he is not ashamed; and upon the back of this ordinarily the Love of God is
shed abroad in the heart: and though there should be little sensible feeling,
yet the believer finds himself oblidged to cheer himself in Christ, and in the
Covenant and in the benefits that he has through his purchase: and there is
readily some warming of love to Christ, and he is confirmed in the faith of the
love of Christ to him: and it is impossible, where these two are, but some Holy
tickling of affections, which flow from the Word and from this Ordinance thus
rightly gone about (as has been said) will follow: and if this be not, That is,
if Christ be not thus discerned in the Sacrament, 1. God gets not what he calls
for, Christ's death is not rightly minded, his Glory and our edification are not
promoved, Nor 2. Is the end of the Sacrament attained: neither. 3. Is our
comfort furthered: For its not the Ordinance barely, or Ordinary Bread and Wine
set apart for a Holy use, But Jesus Christ discerned and received in the
Ordinance, that comforts; otherwise, the ordinance in and by it is self will not
promove our comfort and growth.

The Third Doctrine is, that it is, though a very common and rife, yet a very
great sin not to discern the Lords body as he is holden out in this Sacrament
discernible; The greatness of which may be easily gathered from what we have
discoursed concerning the great privilege of the discernibleness of the Lords
body therein; from the horridness of the guilt that it involves in, even the
guilt of the body and Blood of the Lord, the greatest and most horrid of all
Blood guiltiness; and from the dreadful Judgments and Plagues that follow on
it, temporal or bodily, and Spiritual Plagues, yea even eternal Damna^ion, if
Repentance through Grace prevent not: But we must, because of the shortness of
time, leave all that might be spoken in the more particular Prosecution of this
Doctrine; and shall only give you Two or Three Caveats (wherewith I shall
close) to guard against mistakes in reference to what has been spoken; I know
it will readily be said, If this be discerning of the Lords body, and if none
other do discern it, but such as go about these things, it will be hard for any
to discern it. For answer to this I would have you to consider, 1. That there
is a more explicit, distinct and perfect discerning; and a more implicit,
confused and indistinct discerning of the Lords Body: if we speak of perfection
in discerning; who come up to that? but if we speak of an honest sincere way of
aiming to discern, though it be somewhat indistinct and confused, that may be
won at; yea I would not think them in a good condition that rest satisfied with
themselves, as being distinct enough in all these things whereof we have
spoken; yet where there is (as I just now said) honest aiming at these things,
though in a confused and indistinct way; where faith and love are in some
measure acting with a sort of fear and joy mixed together; when there is a fear
to profane the ordinance, and yet the soul loves it so well that it cannot
endure to want it, nor Christ in it, There is a discerning of the Lords Body
that warrands to draw near. 2. Consider, that there is a general confusion and
a particular confusion (to speak so) in going about this Ordinance: The general
confusion is this, when persons are so very ignorant and confused, that they
know not at all what they are doing: a Particular confusion is only in some
respect, that is when a Soul knows that Jesus Christ is in the Ordinance, and
knows its own condition to stand in need of him, that it has many Spiritual
wants to be supplied, and that there is much good and a Supply of all those
wants to be had from Christ in this Ordinance, but how to come at it thereby,
it knows not so well nor so distinctly: A person that is confused in the
general cannot discern the Lords Body in the Sacrament, But one that is
confused in a particular, may: and though^ such an one cannot, it may be, Pitch
on a particular promise that suites his need, yet he may fix on Christ and on
the covenant in general: which is one of the main things that Faith acts on:
and indeed unless himself be acted on by Faith, his benefits fail: and though a
serious Soul cannot get a particular promise to settle on, We say it should
stick by the Covenant in general as including all particulars. 3. Consider, the
discerning is not to be astricted to the very instant o^ receiving, but we
would look well what is our a^m a^ endeavor al^ngst the action, and if
habitually we b^ indeed seriously seeking after and pursuing t^ese things we
cannot have them all in our thoughts at once, tha^ is scarce, if at all,
Possible; but if the aim and strai^ of your Souls exercise run this way: and
though the^ be failing in many things, yet this is not a neglectiv^ slighting
and careless inconsideration: In a word, see (...) there has been, First some
clear conviction of sin an^ of your great need of Christ: And, 2. See if there
has been some uptaking of Christ in the Ordinance, and He made precious and
lovely therein in some measure: and that it was your errand in going to that
ordinance ^o take Christ to Supply your need and take away your sin, and your
aim to go about the Ordinance rightly in order to that end, If the strain and
Series of your way, in these, has been honest and sincere, ye have no reason
to account your selves (at least altogether) unworthy communicants: Though,
when we have done all that we can do, It Is God himself who must enable us
rightly to discern the Lords Body, and who must graciously pass by many things
that will be found amiss in us: according to good King Hezekiah his prayer 2 Chronicles 30.38, 19. The good Lord Pardon every one that Prepares his heart to
seek God, though he be not cleansed according to the purification of the
Sanctuary; So must we say the Good Lord Pardon us, though we discern and take
not up Christ's Body with that Faith and love, with that distinctness, and
clearness, with that delight, cheerfulness and joy that become, and are
requisite, for such a Solemn action.

A SERMON Preached immediately before the Communion.
On Matthew. 22 2. -- 4. -- All things are ready, come to the Marriage.
THere are many great and glorious things spoken of the Gospel; and our Blessed
Lord Jesus has made use of many good Similitudes wonderfully opposite, to set
it out: Sometimes it is called the Kingdom of Heaven, for reasons that we will
no^ now insist upon; sometimes it is called a Marriage, as here and elsewhere;
some o^ those Similitudes show what great and singular satisfaction is to be
had in it, therefore its compared to a Feast, Supper, and Dinner, some of them
show the way how we are made Partakers of it: So opening and receiving holds
forth believing; and some of those similitudes hold forth both, as this of a
Marriage, which points at the strait union betwixt Christ and Believers, and at
the manner or way of our entering into this blessed union, on which follows
Communion.

We need not insist in opening the Words, which are plain; we shall only say
these two Words, to make way for Observations; The first whereof shall be, to
show that the scope of the Parable is not to hold forth Peoples coming to the
Ordinances, or the Sacraments only or mainly; but their coming to Christ Jesus
himself and to the fat things in the Ordinances: Many come to the Ordinances
who come not to Christ and to the feast: that which is called for here, is a
real closing with Christ, and an accepting of him for our Husband, on his own
terms: The second word is, to show that though the Ordinances be neither the
Marriage nor the Feast, Yet it is by the Ordinances that the marriage is
furthered and the Feast prepared and made ready? for Faith takes Christ in the
word, and strikes hands with him in the Sacrament, when he says in the Word,
be thou for me and I will be for thee, Faith says, content Lord, and when he
says in the Sacrament, Take, Faith says welcome with all my heart, He being
there as well as he is in the Word.

These two things being premised, we shall first, at once and together Propose
some Observations from the words. Secondly we shall clear and confirm them: and
and then Thirdly we shall insist in the application of all jointly. The
Observations are these. First that in the Gospel there is a clear and manifest
making up of a Marriage betwixt Christ and Souls; The preaching of the Gospel
is like a man's making of a marriage for his Son. The second is, that this
marriage is one of the most excellent marriages that ever was: therefore its
called the Marriage of the Kings Son. The Third is, that before this marriage
can be brought about and accomplished, there are many things to be made ready.
The Fourth is, that where the Gospel comes, all things are made ready for Souls
closing with Christ in this marriage. The Fifth is, that the Master of the
Feast the KING God the Father, and the Kings Son the Bridegroom are not only
content and willing, but very desirous to have sinners coming to the Marriage,
they would fain (to speak so with reverence) have poor Souls espoused to
Christ. The Sixth is, that when the Master sends out his servants in his name,
their great work is to invite to the wedding and to close the marriage. The
Seventh is, that when People are invited to this Marriage, it is their duty and
greatly of their concern to come. The Eighth is, that all they that come may
expect a very hearty welcome: therefore they are invited once and again: and if
we compare this Text with Luke 14. We will find there, that the Master orders
his Servants to Compel them that are invited to come in.

All these Observations are very obvious in the Words; and if the Lord would
Graciously please to help us to speak and you to hear: as they are no
unpertinent to our Present Purpose, So they might be made very edifying,
strengthening, refreshing and comfortable to us.

We shall in the second Place, a little more particularly clear and confirm
every one of them. The First was, that, There is a Marriage betwixt Christ and
souls held forth and made offer of in this Gospel. We take this for granted:
for here is the Kings Son, and some bidden to his marriage, and those that are
bidden are not worthy: they are all Professors and members of the visible
Church, the scope of the Parable being to show, that the offer of this Marriage
was first made to the Jews, and again renewed to them, and then from them it
came to the Gentiles, I shall in passing give you a little hint of the nature of
this Marriage in these four: 1. There is by this Gospel a real union made up
betwixt Christ and the souls of Believers; Which union is not with the
O^dinances, nor with sense, nor with the Benefits which flow from Christ; but
with Christ himself Primarily and Principally, and it is so near a ^ye and very
close, that it is preferred unto and goe^h beyond the union that is betwixt the
Husband and Wife: Ephesians. 5.30. We are (says the Apostle) Members of his Body,
of his Flesh, and of his bones, Where alluding to that union betwixt Husband
and Wife, he not only makes the union real, but makes the one much straiter
then the other. Secondly the nature of this union is such, that it is Mutual;
the Bridegroom has in a manne^ (to speak so, with reverence of his Majesty) no
Power ove^ himself, when he is Married un^o the Bride; and the Bride has no
Power over her self, but the Bridegro^m: So that here there is a sort of
mu^uall upgiving of the Bridegroom to the Bride, and of the Bride to the
Bridegroom; according to those w^nderfully condescending words, Hosea 3.3. Thou
shall not be for another man, So will I also be for thee: The Lord has
Believers under a peculiar tie to him, and he has tied himself Peculiarly to
them, so that (if we may speak thus) neither of them is Master of themselves;
The Lord Jesus does some way account himself not to be master of himself, he is
so engaged to them to be theirs and for them; and cannot but be answerable to
his engagemen^; and they are oblidged to be no more Masters of themselves, but
to be absolutely and altogether at his disposing. Thirdly this union is made up
by mutual consent of Parties, and the consent must be willing; His consent
comes in his Word; He says from thence, Behold I stand at the door and knock,
if any man will hear my voice and open the door, I will come in to him, and
will sup with him, and he with me; I come, (as if he had said) in my Go^pel to
woo, and if any will consent to take me on the terms on which I offer my self,
I will be theirs: The souls consent is given by Faith in his word, which is
called John 1.12. receiving of him, and is relative to the offer: The offer is
indeed backed and quickened by the Spirit, without which it would never be
received; yet notwithstanding, that which our faith lays hold on, is not the
Spirit, but the word quickened by the spirit. Fourthly consider here the
effects that follow immediately and instantly on this Marriage union, Christ
with all that is his becomes ours, and we with all that is ours become his; our
debt is imputed to him, he is liable to it and must pay i^, and provide for us
and be our head and Husband; and his righteousness, the Purchase of his Death
and sufferings, viz. Justification, Sanct fica^ion, his Spirit, Grace and
Glory, and every good thing that he has, become ours, and at length the Bride
is taken into the Kings ivory Palaces.

The Second Observation was, that this is a most honou^able Noble and excellen^
Marriage; the like whereo never was, nor never sh ll be from Adam to he end of
the Woe ld, it is with the Kings Son with the Prince of the Kings of the earth,
the Heir of all things, the brightness of the Fathers glory, the express Image
of his person, who was before all things, and by whom all things consist. O! is
there any match like this? Is there any so great and so Noble as He? Is there
an^ in this world whom ye can marry, that is so rich as He? They that Marry Him
shall inherit all things Rev. 21.7. We may clear it a little further from five
or Six Particulars in the Text. 1. It Is an excellent and honorable Marriage in
respect of the Bridegroom who is, (as has ^een hinted) The Kings Son, who has
not another natural Son, He is he only begotten of the Father? there is not
another Mediator, He is the Fathers equal and fellow; So that if (if we may
put an if to it) the Father be great and glorious, so is He, for He is God, the
same God equal with the Father in Power and Glory; the wonderful Counselor,
the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. Secondly this
Marriage is excellent and honorable in respect of the Brides Father in Law,
(so to speak) He is the King; God the Father, Son and holy Ghost have all a
hand in it; and the Believer married to Christ is Daughter in law to the great
God, ingrafted some way into the same stock, allayed with the same family. 2
Cor. 6.18. I will be a Father to you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters
says the Lord Almighty. Thirdly it is excellent and honorable in respect of
the Preparation made for it. There was never such a wedding Feast; the dinner
is prepared, the oxen and Fa^lings killed: but you will say what is all that?
Even Jesus Christ himself, He is that Bread indeed, that drink indeed; the
feast of fat things and of wines on the lees well refined; the Bridegroom is
(to say so) the chief dish that the Believer feeds and lives upon for ever; and
the Spiritual blessings and benefits that are gotten in him and from him, are
as so many dishes of this feast; such as righteousness, Pardon of sin, Peace,
and friendship with God, the Spirit, Adoption, Sanctification, joy in the holy
Ghost, grace and Glory, the hope of a Croum in those mansions that are in his
Fathers House, of a seat with him at his Table and on his Throne; even a share
in his whole Purchase; and is not that a feast? Fourthly its Honorable and
excellent in respect of its most noble rise, viz. From all eternity, in the
bosom of the Father, it bred (to say so) in the Kings breast before the
foundation of the World was laid; the Covenant of Redemption was then
concluded, and the contract of marriage there drawn, and the blessed Project of
it then laid down; Sacrifices and Offerings thou did not desire, (says the
Mediator, Psalm. 40.) Mine ears host thou opened, burnt offerings nor sin
offerings thou have not required; Then said I, lo I come, in the Volume of thy
Book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will, O my God: The Father gives
so many to the Son to be redeemed of whom he willingly readily, and cheerfully
accepts, and offers to satisfy for them, which in due time he does. Fifthly,
its excellent and honorable in this respect, That there was never such a
concurrence of so many and so great things to commend and further a marriage as
there is in this; Such as the making of the World, men and Angels, the
incarnation of Christ or his coming into the World, his Preaching and working
of Miracles for confirmation of his doctrine, his suffering and dying, rising
and ascending, his giving Ministers and their gifts: and to make up the
Marriage union, the Spirit from Heaven coming along with the word, and working
faith in the Soul, by which bonds Christ and the Believer are joined together;
Christ by his Spirit apprehending the Believer and the beliver apprehending
Christ by Faith: was there ever a marriage contract or union bound up betwixt
two such vastly and infinitely distant Parties? was there ever such honor and
riches attending and following a match? such righteousness, remission of sin,
Adoption, Peace with God, joy of the Holy Ghost, the Spirit, holiness in the
beginning and gradual advances of it, fellowship and walking with God, the
White stone, the new Name, the Throne, the Crown, Grace, and Glory, every thing
that is good, for the Bride here, and Glory in Heaven; In a word Jesus Christ
and all the benefits of his Purchase; were there ever such easy terms and
conditions? It Is only, come to the Wedding; when the King comes a wooing, let
him be welcomed with your hearts consent; when he says, I am content to marry
you, let your hea^ts say, Amen, Lord Jesus, I am content to marry thee, and to
be for thee and for none other: and may not I add, was there ever such security
and confirmation given of any marriage? it is confirmed by the death of the
Bridegroom, he has sealed his Testament with his Blood, and there is no
annulling nor altering of a man's Testament when he is dead; and our Lord Jesus
who was once dead is now alive and lives for evermore, he will never die again,
nor make another Testament: O! beloved hearers, all this is to let you see that
our Lord is in earnest and very willing to espouse you: and indeed it shall not
be his Fault, i^ it be not a bargain, and if it be indeed a bargain betwixt
your souls and him, it is a very ra^e and rich one: O! the many rare, excellent,
noble, notable and non-such Privileges and advantages that attend this
marriage, and are to be enjoyed by the soul espoused to Christ; even God and
Christ, Grace and Glory and all that is comprehended under these belongs to
tha^ soul: We must here be silent, lest in speaking of them we darken them by
our words; here is an abyss and bottomless dep^h ready as it were, to swallow
up words; we confess we can tell you our very little wha^ they are, nay if all
the ablest and holiest Ministers on earth, all the Angels in Heaven were joined
together they could not to the full by very far, tell what an excellent match
and marriage this is, even to be matched with the Son of God; and yet this
privilege and honor have all the saints, all Believers, to whom he is
wonderful and Precious, though alace! not as he ought to be; there is a day
coming, when we shall know to satisfaction, that the Father is in the son, and
the son in the Father; and that believers are in Christ and he in them; We
shall then know the now in expressible and inconceivable advantages of this
marriage, When He shall come to be glorified in His Saints, and wond'red at in
all them that believe: and till that day the one half will never be told us.

The third Observation was, that there are many things to be removed out of the
way, and to be done: many things to be made ready before this marriage can be
made up. 1. There is a natural distance between the Parties, that must be
removed: God cannot be one flesh with us: and betwixt Parties to be married,
there must ^e some Suitableness of nature: therefore to remove this distance,
and to bring about the marriage, the Son of God becomes Man, that he may be
Immanual God with us, God i^ our nature and so in capacity to be closed with.
Secondly, there is a sinful distance, w ich also must be removed before this
marriage can be made up: For God is a c^nsuming fire to sinners; He and they
neither will nor can unite in that posture: The efore ^efo^e an offer or
marriage can be made to any Purp^se, ^e must give himself for his Church, that
he may Sanctify and cleanse it with the Washing of water by the word: and he^
i^ f^ll^ws, that he presents her to Himself a glorious Church without spot and
wrinkle, or any such thing: He ^ould not have access to marry his Bride, she
was so u^c^mly, fi^thy and lothsom, lying in a most pityful condition, in her
blood as Ezekiel sets it forth ^o ^he life and at great length, Chap. 16.
Therefore to cleanse her, he gave himself for her. Thirdly, ere all this could
be do^e, there beh^ved a ground to be laid for peace with God the offended
party, who was to be father in law: and here comes in the Covenant of
Redemption, Psalm. 40 6, 7. Sacrifice and Off^ring thou did not desire, then
said I, lo I come etc. For taking away the curse and reconciling the elect to G
d, the Father says (as it were) I must needs be once in friend^hip with them,
ere I can admit them to my house; and Son if thou will Satisfy my Justice, and
Pay their debt, I shall give them to thee for a seed, and to be thy Bride and
wife: well says Christ the mediator, Father I accept of the bargain, Lo I come
to do thy will, O my God: Whereupon it comes to pass (as the Apostle has it, 2
Cor. 5. last,) That he is made sin for us who knew no sin, and we are made the
righteousness of God in him: For it was as really agreed in the Covenant of
Redemption that he should be made sin for us, as it came to pass in the actual
execution of it: and thus way is made for the marriage. Fourthly when this is
done, the marriage must be proclaimed through the world by the Preached Gospel,
the contract must be opened up and read, and sinners consent called for; We are
told therein, that the Word is made flesh and dwelt amongst us, and because No
man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son who is in the bosom of the
Father, he declares him: as it is John 1.14, 15. He comes and reveals more
clearly the contract, first in his own Person and by his own Ministry, and
then by sending his servants, and telling that all things are ready. Fifthly,
the last thing to be removed is the uncircumcision and stupidness of our
hearts, naturally we are given to slight him in his offers, to refuse to open
to him, and to let him in, when he knocks, to make excuse, to delay, shift and
put him off, nay to refuse to entertain his proposal of Marriage, and to give
him a repulse: therefo e he comes by his Spirit, and puts in his finger by the
hole of the door, and lets some Myrrh drop on the handles of the lock, and
powerfully but sweetly inclines the heart to cast it self open to him; and then
he performs the promises of Sanctification, Circumcising the heart to love him
with all the heart, and with all the Soul, as it is Deuteronomy. 30.6. And all these
promises are contrived, framed and provided to meet with difficulties in us; we
are told, John 6 44. That no man can come to Christ except the Father that sent
him draw him, and Psalm. 110.3. It is Promised, that in the day of his Power His
people shall be willing: and whoever (being made willing) comes shall in no
wise be cast out, John 6.37.

The Fourth Observation is, That by the Preaching of the Gospel, whither so
ever it comes, and by the great things made offer of therein, all things are
made ready; Obstructions and what ever might hinder the closing of the Marriage
are removed; the Father is ready, having declared his willingness to give his
consent; This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him, Matthew.
3. I am well satisfied with him, take him to you for your head and husband: the
Son is ready to take all by the hand that will embrace him: Pardon of Sin,
Peace, with God, Sanctification, the mansion etc: are ready to be bestowed: the
feast is ready, the fatlings are prepared; the Promises are filled with every
necessary good thing, there is bread enough in the Prodigals fathers house and
to spare: the contract is ready, and an offer of it made on the Bridegrooms
side: the terms are drawn up and put in Form, and all things agreed upon and
ready, even to the Subscription: and there is no more required, but that the
hearers of this Gospel heartilly consent to take him, and submit to his
righteousness and dominion: which if they do, all things shall be theirs, even
life eternal, and all things that may fit them for it, Promises for this life
and that which is to come, and Christ engaged to keep the bargain: and this is
it that is preached every day to you, though, alace! unsuitably: so that it is
not now, Who shall go up to Heaven and bring down Christ from above? or Who
shall descend unto the deep, and bring him up from the dead? That we may get
him to Marry: but the righteousness of faith, says the word, is near thee even
in thy mouth, etc. Christ's consent is not to be asked or brought from afar, for
he has declared it in his word, and the terms of the contract are, if thou
shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe with thy heart,
that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved: Romans 10.8, 9.
Engage therefore honestly with Christ, and keep to him: deny your selves and
close wi^h him, give u^ your selves to him, and ye shall be saved: and that is
all one with this, to be married to him: yea the day of the Marriage is set;
and that i^ the day of the Gospel, the Bridegroom is come to the Church, the
Table is covered, and the Ministers the Bridegrooms friends are waiting on, to
espouse you ^o him and to make up the Marriage, so that all thin^s meet and
requisite for making peace betwix^ God and sinners are ready

The Fifth Observation was, that Christ the Bridegroom and his Father are very
willing to have the match made up and the marriage completed: therefore does
he send forth his servants with a strict commission, not only to tell sinners
that all things ready, but to bid them come to the Marriage: yea he not only
wills them to tell that all things are ready, and to invite, but to Compel them
(as Luke has it Chap. 14.23.) to come in: to stir them up and press them to
it: to threaten them if they come not, and to accept no refusal or na^-say: the
evidences of his willingness are many, which I will not now insist upon: as
that he has made the feast, and such a feast, and prepared so for it, and
given himself to bring it about, and keeps up the offer and Proclamation of the
Marriage, even after it is slighted: all these and many more tell plainly that
the Father and Son are most heartily willing: therefore they expostulat when
this Marriage is refused, O! Jerusalem, Jerusalem how often would I have
gathered you, but you would not: Matthew. 23. O! Jerusalem, Jerusalem, if thou
even thou, had known in this thy day the things that belong to thy peace; Luk
19. All these sad complaints, that Israel would not hearken to his voice, and
his people would have n ne of him. Psalm. 81 7. That he came to his own and his
own received him not Joh. 1.11. And that they will not come to him that they
might have life. Joh. 5.40. make out his willingness abundantly and undenyably.

The Sixth Observation was, That the great work of the M^nisters of the Gospel
i^, to invite unto, and to endeav^ur to bring this Marriage betwixt Christ and
Souls to a close: the Servants are sent out for this very end, to conclude the
bargain: Though he be Lord of all, yet he would not employ in this work,
Angels, neither would he speak immediately by his own voice from Heaven: for by
rea^^n of his greatness we could not have endured that way of wooing: but
says on the matter to men, subject to the like passions and infirmities go
tell that the King ha^h such a Son, and that ye are sent out to w^o in his
Name, and make not only offer of Marriage, but request, entreat, persuade, pray
and obtest, yea command and compel them to come to the Marriage, by holding
forth the curse which comes on them that will not come: and hence are those
denounced woes and shaking of the dust off their feet, for a Testimony against
them that will not come.

The Seventh Observation was that i^ is the duty of all to whom the good news
of this marriage come to come to it, and when the^ a^e invited to it, Presently
without all delay to yield. Needs there any proof of this? do not the Masters
sending and the se^van^s coming call for it? do not his preparing of all
things, his inviting to the Marriage, and his expostulating w^^h them that come
not, and our own great necessity urgently require it?

The Eighth and last Observation was, that all they that come may expect a very
good and heartsome welcome, none need to fear, that they shall not be made
welcome, seeing they are come not uncalled, they shall not sit unserved: The
Lord will not look down on such as come: nay he is waiting on to welcome them,
and to meet them, as it were Midway: as we see in the Parable of the Prodigal,
Luke 15. His father stays not till his son come to him, but seeing him
afar-off coming, he runs with speed to meet him, and then most affectionatly
embraced him and falls on his neck and kisses him; and if the poor child should
say, I am not worthy to be called a Son. He answers that, not suffering him to
speak out all that he had resolved to say; Even when the debaucht runagate had
spent all by riotous living and would fain have told out the sad and shameful
story of his gross miscarriages and great unworthiness he interrupts him and
says, in a manner, Son hold thy peace as to that, I know well it is grievous to
thee, go quickly and put on the robe, the Ring and the shoes that are provided
for thee.

I come now in the Third place to make application of all; and is it possible
to speak or hear of this Subject, as becomes? who is sufficient for these
things; to speak suitably in the name of the Lord, and to lay before you this
contract of marriage with such a Bridegroom? Beloved hearers, are ye in a
suitable Posture to tryst with him? Do ye think that ye are for this Marriage?
is it your serious purpose to close the bargain with him? If so, Pray the Lord
to give us to speak and you to hear the word in such manner as it may be a
marriage-day indeed: there are very good news here, and blessed eternally be
God, that ever we heard them, or had them to speak of, and that ye have them
yet to hear; they should make your very souls, in a manner, flighter within
you, and make you to rouse up your selves, to welcome them with gladness of
heart.

And therefore First, we would exhort you all to believe this report; there are
alace! but few who do indeed believe, that the Eternal God has this design of
a marriage betwixt him and sinners? Therefore let not your hearts be straightened,
only believe that this is the good word of God, that these are the faithful and
true sayings of him that cannot lie, and that he is waiting on to ratify them
to all who give them Credit: It Is somewhat hard to deliver or receive a word of
threatening in faith, but in some respect, more hard to believe a word of
Promise and of consolation; It is Proportionably hard to look upon this as Gods
own offering of a marriage with his Son, as if he himself were by vive voice
speaking it out of Heaven, and to believe that this offer is really his: and
therefore as I desire (as his Servant) to speak to you, so I would, again and
again, Obtest you to be rouzed up, and to rouse up your selves to believe it.
Secondly, Rouse, stretch and enlarge your understandings, and your hearts and
affections, for beholding, conceiving and embracing this rich bargain of Grace:
O! consider seriously, from whom it is, For what end it is, how it is brought
about, and does come to you: the height and Depth, the Length and breadth
whereof is inconceivable; be Holily amazed and wonder, that the offer of this
marriage comes to you, and that he is content to marry you. Thirdly, In a word,
would you know what we have to do with you, or what is our commission to you
this day? This is even it, to tell you that the King has made a marriage for
his Son, and has prepared and made all things ready for reuniting you to
himself; yea this same King that has made this wedding ready, and has carved
out this way of throughing his design, by speaking to you in his Word by his
servants, speaks to you by us, and we speak to you in his name and tell you,
tha^ our blessed Lord Jesus is wooing you; we declare, publish and proclaim it:
O! take notice of it, our Lord Jesus is not far to seek, he is here waiting on
to close ^he bargain with you: This is our errand to proclaim these glad
t^dings to you; and what glader tidings could yo^ wish, then to have it told
you, tha^ ^e may be happy and easily happy, and that if ye be content ^o be so,
the^e is nothing that might mar^ ^his happiness, but it is ^emove and taken ou^
of the way: Is not the Fa^^e^ ready? He has given his consent; is no^ the
Bridegroom ready, when he has done so much and is waiting on your consent? the
Feast is ready, and the Garments are ready, and there is n^ more to do, but t
take and put them on; and fa^^h exe^cised on him w^^l (...) both; the Con^ract
is ready, and there is nothing ^o (...) changed o^ altered in it; and He is
ready to accep^ o^ you, if ye will accept o^ him; our blessed Lord Jesus says,
he is c^n^e^^ ^o marry you; and there is no more to do, but to subsc^ibe your
name to the contract i^ you want clothes he will give them to you; ^f ye want a
house, if ye want meat or drink, he will provide for you, what ever it be that
you really stand in need of for Soul or body, in time o^ eternity, ye shall
have (...) from him; The promises a^e filled with all things tha^ p^^^ain to
life and godliness, to h^s life and to tha^ which is to come; there is in
effect n thing wanting but your consent, and let not tha be wantng, I beseech
you.

I^ prosecuting this purpose, I shall speak a little. 1. T^ those to whom the
offer is made, or to those wh^^ a e called 2. To wha^ they a^e called ^o 3. To
the terms on which they are called. 4. To the manner how ye should come. 5. To
the Peremptoriness of the call, and to the necessity of coming, And 6. (If it
be Possible to win at it) a word to some motives, whereby ye may be Pressed to
come, and not to neglect the opportunity of such a Precious Season of Grace.

For the First; it is not one or two or some few that are called, not the great
only, nor the Small only, not the holy only, nor the Profane only, but ye are
all bidden, the call comes to all and every one of you in Particular, Poor and
rich, high and low, holy and profane; Ho (Proclaims the Lord, as it were,
with an Oyas Isa. 55.1.) Every one that thirsts, come, and he that has no
money, Let him come: whosoever will let him come and take of the water of life
freely, Rev. 22.17. Our blessed Lord Jesus is not straightened in his call; and we
may humbly say in some measure, that we are not straitened in our bowels; in
his name we invite all of you, and make offer of Jesus Christ to be your
Husband; that ye may have a room among them that stand by, and be with him for
ever: I say we make this offer to all of you, to you that are Atheists, to you
that are Graceless, to you that are Ignorant, to you that are Hypocrites, to you
that are Lazy and Luk-warm, to the Civil and to the Profane; We pray, We
beseech, We obtest you all to come to the wedding; Call (says the Lord) the
blind, the maimed, the halt, etc. Bid them all come, Yea compel them to come
in: Grace can do more and greater wonders then to call such, it cannot only make
the offer of the Marriage to them; but it can make up the Match effectually
betwixt Christ and them: We will not, we dare not say, that all of you will get
Christ for a Husband, but we do most really offer him to you all, and it shall
be your own fault if ye want him and go without him. And therefore before we
proceed any further, we do Solemnly Protest, and before God and his Son Jesus
Christ, take instruments this day, that this offer is made to you; and that it
is told to you in his name, that the Lord Jesus is willing to match with you,
even the profanest and most graceless of you, if ye be willing to match with
him; and he earnestly invites you to come to the wedding: if you can touch at
any thing on his side, that is not ready, or at any thing on your side, but it
may through grace be made ready if ye will come, you may: but its impossible:
for the Covenant is well o^dered and sure, and that in all things, and these
words are not the words of men, but the Words of the true and faithful witness,
which ye must count and reckon for, when we are dead and gone: He has killed
his Oxen and Fatlings, and prepared his dinner and bid his guests: all things
are ready, in the due order and manner, whether on your side or on his, if ye
be willing to step to and make the bargain, he has drawn up the contract, and
sent us out with it to you, to crave your subscription, and if ye be ready for
that, he craves no more of you: Now, I put you all to it, whether will ye
subscribe it or not? and I would not put one of you without the reach of this
invitation; however we be, Alace! much carnal in speaking his mind, yet we
desire not to obscure nor limit our Lords grace, he calls all of you to the
wedding, he has sent us out as his Servants (though of all the most unworthy)
to close and conclude the contract of Marriage with you this day, if you be
willing. Come then, O come and subscribe, and it shall be in very deed a
bargain, if ye can through Grace say from your hearts, We will take him, then I
say to you, take him and have him with the Fathers blessing; our commission is
not only to offer him, and to invite you to take him, but to close a bargain
betwixt him and you who are content to take him: we would (as the Apostle
speaks, 2 Cor. 11.2) Espouse you to one husband, that we m ght present you a
chaste Virgin to Christ, and have you hand-fasted to him, as the word is: and
this is very well becoming one of the days of the Son of man, and one of such
seasons of his grace, to make this offer to great and small, rich and Poor,
learned and unlearned, Gracious and Graceless, Hypocrites and profane; there
is here no exception of persons with him; the blessed God is content to match
with the most graceless and Godless of you, as well as with those who are
gracious and Godly; There is joy in heaven at the conversion of a sinner, and
the price was paid for the Elect, that are yet Graceless, as well as for these
of them who are now gracious; for all were once in the same condition;
Therefore look not with narrow and straightened hearts on the Rich and liberal
allowance of our Blessed Lord Jesus.

But Secondly, what is it that we call you to, when we bid you come to the
Marriage; It Is not to the Communion only, It Is not to any of Christ's benefits
only, it is not to say at first hand confidently that all is yours, or to have a
sure knowledge (as ye call it) and persuasion at the very first that it is so;
though I heartily wish that ye may find this Persuasion on solid and good
grounds; but it is first and mainly to marry the Bridegroom, and then to come
to the Feast: We call you to believe, and we declare in his Name, that if ye
will betake your selves to him in good earnest, ye shall be saved: If ye will
as it were, put your hand to the Pen, and Subscribe your selves heartily
content to take him, ye shall most certainly have him and all his benefits: ye
that are Profane take him, but not to live still in your Profanity, but to
study Holiness in all manner of conversation in his strength; Ye that are
self-righteous take him, but not to live still in the good conceit of your
self-righteousness, but to renounce it, and to take him for your righteousness;
ye that are blind take him, but not to live still in your blindness, but to
grow in grace and in the knowledge of him: whatever ye be, and whatever ill
aileth you, take him, but not to continue in the ill, but to get it amended:
This sure is no less then to call you to the communion, yea it is more, whether
therefore ye come to the Communion or not, we call and invite you all to come
to Christ, and to marry Him; which if ye do, we dare Promise you in his name,
begun Communion with him here, and full communion with him in Heaven hereafter.

Thirdly what are the terms on which ye are called and may warrantably come to
this marriage? I need not stand on the terms on his side, nor to tell you what
he promises, It Is this in a word, I will be for thee: He is content to make
over all that is his to you; Pardon of Sin, Justification, Sanctification, his
Spirit to quicken you, even his whole Purchase to enrich you: in Sum (as it is,
1 Cor. 1.31.) He is made of God unto you Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification
and Redemption; He has made all things yours (as it is 1 Cor. 3.21.) And in
him ye are complete, (as the Apostle has it, Col. 2.10.) Ye need never go out
of him, to seek for any thing truly good that ye stand in need of. And on the
other hand, what seeks be of you but to be for him and not for another: (as it
is Hos. 3.) He seeks no hard condition: In Sum it may be comprehended in that
word 1 Cor. 1.31. That he that glories may glory in the Lord: not to glory or
boast in any thing or in our selves, but of him, and in him. But for clearness
cause I shall draw the terms on your side to these there. 1 You must deny your
self, Your lusts, and Idols and your own righteousness: Where is boasting then?
(says the Apostle Romans 3.27.) It is excluded; by what law, of works? nay, but
the law of Faith: Ye then that would Marry Christ and share indeed in the
feast; ye must have a sight of that which ye want; and of your own inability to
make it up: and that ye are undone in your selves without him, to him that
works not, but Believes on him that Justifies the ungodly, his faith is
counted for righteousness: That is, to him that expects nothing by his works,
but betakes himself to Christ and his righteousness for his Justification
before God: and that is no unreasonable condition. Secondly as ye would not
glory in your selves, so ye would glory in him: what ever ye deny in your
selves ye would put him in the room of it: If ye dare not lippen or trust your
souls to your own righteousness, lippen or trust them to his: He says I am
content to pay your debt, and since ye cannon pay your own debt your selves,
say humbly to him, blessed Lord Jesus pay our debt for us; He is the end of the
Law for Righteousness to every one that believes Romans 10.3. When he offers
himself, take him thus, and let Faith say, sobeit Lord, I accept of the
bargain, Q! hold to it and quit it not. Thirdly, It is required that ye shall
be his and have no Power over your selves: and this takes in Sanctification,
dying to sin and living to Righteousness, adorning the Gospel, living
answerably to the several relations ye stand in: for though Mortification and
holiness be not the cause, for which he marries, yet it is a condition of the
contract; and it well becomes his Bride to be dutiful: Thou shall be for me,
and I will be for thee, If he will graciously please to be for us, it is all the
reason in the World that we should be for him: Now we know somewhat of the
terms, which may all come in under these three, there are many conditions on
his side and but few on ours.

Fourthly ye would consider the Peremptoriness of this call, to accept of and
to Marry our Lord Jesus Christ on these terms, it is not an ordinary
complement, but purposed by the King the Father, and by the Kings Son the
Bridgroom: He sends out his Servants, who are come to call you Peremptorily:
and there are three Peremptories, that this offer and call has with it: all
which three we carry in our commission, and crave of you to Subscribe to them.
The 1. Whereof is; that ye take no other husband but this Bridegroom, there is
no latitude left to you in this; ye must by no means engage with any other;
It Is only for Jesus Christ that we woo, and we seek of you that ye would give
him your souls, your hearts, and affections, that ye may be devoted to him and
to no other; and therefore we intimat to you that are Married and Joined to
Idols, that ye must be divorced from those and betake you to him alone The
Second Is, the Peremptoriness of the terms we speak of; we cannot and ye must
not alter one jote or title, Ye must deny your selves, ye must be content to be
divorced from your lusts and Idols, ye must renounce your own righteousness,
and give up with the law your first husband, considered as a Covenant of works,
and run out from the curses thereof to him, which ye will never do; till ye see
your own righteousness to be as filthy rags, and reject it, as Part of your
enditement, that ever ye trusted to it. Ye must forget your fathers house. 2.
As you must deny your selves, so you must close with Christ, and embrace him
for your husband and Lord: do not think that ye will or can dwell beside him,
that ye can sit and hear him: if ye Marry him not. 3. Ye must be devoted to
him in your conversation, he must needs be your King as well as your Priest; Ye
must forsake Father and Mother and all your kindred and betake you to him, and
ye must take up and keep house with him, you must dwell with him, and study to
be answerable to the Marriage tie and obligation put upon you, we dare dispense
with none of the Three. The Third Peremptory is this, as ye must engage with no
other, and as ye must not alter the terms, so ye must not delay to come and
close the bargain, ye must not put off till to morrow, nay not an hour; All
things are ready, Just now, Now is the accepted time; Here stands the blested
Bridgroom, here are the conditions and terms on which he will marry you, and we
as the Bridegrooms friends stand ready to espouse you to him: We dare not be
answerable to our Master, nor can we be answerable to our trust and commission,
if we shuffle by, or thrust out any of you, if ye do not thrust out your
selves, nor may we admite of an excuse from any of you: and therefore let me
again say to you, that here is not only a marriage, and of all marriages the
most excellent; but let me beseech and obtest you to come to the wedding;
either come or give a reason why ye will not, or cannot: as you can assign no
relevant reason for your not coming, we dare not accept of any Irrelevant
reason, nor admit of any answer but this, that ye will take him: we dare admit
of no excuse: ye must not shift nor delay: ye would think that those who were
bidden Luke 14. might have come, when they had seen their Farm and proved
their Oxen: but that would not be with them: So I say it will not be with you,
to shift this offer: He is here waiting on to see who will consent and say even
so I take him: Say it, O say it seriously and abide by it.

Q! Are there any here now looking up to him? Are there any here that would
fain have it a closed bargain? Are there any here that believe these things as
the truths of God? Then we pray you let them sink down into your hearts, and
come. And to press this a little further, let me ask, what can hinder the
making of this bargain? is it the want of notice or timeous intimation of it?
That cannot he, ye are clearly convinced of the contrary: Is it because ye will
or can be happy without him? Woe to that happiness: is it any difficulty
standing in the way? That shall be removed, yea as to him it is removed
already, and shall be as to you on your closing with him: Pose and put your own
hearts to it then, Is there any of you that dare or can find in your hea^ts to
refuse? the Lord is waiting on; his faithfulness is engaged to make out what he
offers; He stretches out his hand, and says, Even so I take you, if ye
will take me; are ye content to stretch forth your hand and to say, Even so I
take thee blessed Lord Jesus: or if this be not win at to Satisfaction, are
there any rouzing and stretching themselves to essay how it will go with them?
what are ye doing? Is it a bargain or not? ye must say, yea or nay, and that
even now; We suppose ye will not say down right, nay: though more then probably
many will delay: but this must not be, the Table may be drawn, other guests may
be called in and ye removed: we cannot allow you an hours time to advise,
especially from indifferency, yea if ye begin to take advisement for shifting a
present closure, Christ's call and invitation, and your consenting will readily
cool upon your hand: Paul says that he consulted not with flesh and blood: So
must not ye consult with flesh and blood in this matter, ye must cast away the
beggars cloak, be content to deny your self, quite your lusts, and close with
him presently, or ye may never have the like opportunity, There is a necessity
imposed on you from the command to come, from the curse and prejudice that
abides you, and will certainly overtake you if you come not: ye will be
eternalie miserable without him, there is no happiness but in him: The King is
on his Throne, the Table is set and covered, the day is fixed, his Servants
invite in his name: come therefore, come without further lingering, dallying,
shifting or delay: alace! there are too many days put by already, ye must put
by no more.

Now let me speak a word further to this purpose, what can mar the matter,
what can obstruct its being a bargain? certainly it must be one of three:
Either first: because ye are not content with the Bridegroom, Or Secondly
because ye are not content with the terms. Or Thirdly because ye are not
content with your selves or with some thing in your selves: As for the First: I
suppose ye can say nothing against the Bridegroom: is there any other like to
him or that can compare with him; I appeal even to you Atheists, and Profane
Wretches, that live and ly in your Lusts, Is there a beloved like this Beloved?
has He a match in Heaven or Earth? Is He not the Kings Son? and if ye ask who
that is, ye may hear and know from Psalm. 24. The King of Glory, the Lord of
Hosts, strong and mighty in Battle, and from Heb 1.3. The brightness of the
Fathers Glory, the express Image of his Person, upholding all things by the
word of his Power: There is none like him, but the Father, and the Holy Spirit,
and as God he is one with them, ye have both the Question and answer, Cant.
5.9. What is thy beloved more then another Beloved? What is yonder Christ of
whom we hear so much? The answer is given (which we cannot stay now to
Paraphase upon) He is white and ruddi^, the chiefest, or Standard bearer among
ten thousands, Fairer then the Sons of men; and if ye would know him more
Particularly, His head is as the most fine gold, He is God: His locks (or his
hair) are bushie and black as a Raven: there is not the least unseemliness,
even in those things that would, to our thinking, seem less necessary, as his
hair; Yea his very Garments smell of Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia, (as it is Psalm.
45.) His eyes are as the eyes of Doves by the Rivers of waters washed with milk
and fitly set, O! so lovely as his Properties are, his Cheeks as beds of
Spices, as sweet flowers: His lips like Lilies dropping sweet smelling Myrrh:
his hands, as Gold rings set with Berill: His belly (or bowels of love and
affection) Like the bright Ivory overlaid with Saphires: His legs like pillars
of Marble set upon Sockets of fine Gold: His Countenance like Lebanon,
excellent as the Cedars: O! So excellent and stately: His mouth is most sweet,
or (as the word is) sweetness, in the abstract: never soul kissed his mouth,
but there was a bond thereby laid on it, that it could never again part with
him: in a word, He is altogether lovely, or (as the word is) all desires: there
is nothing that Souls can desire but it is in him: and there is nothing in him,
but what has desireableness in it: This is my beloved and this is my Friend
(says the Bride) O! ye Daughters of Jerusalem: this is He, he is sure no common
or ordinary Beloved: see if among all the beloveds in Heaven or earth there be
any like Him: O! Ye despisers and slighters of the Son of God, put your selves
to it, Is there any like him to be found? has he not the preference of and the
Pre-eminence above all beloveds? He is the only begotten of the Father full of
Grace and truth; He is the mighty God, the wonderful Counselor, the
everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. It would well become us all to be
wondering at him, and to be drawing near to him, to behold Him in his beauty;
To go forth and Behold King Solomon with the Crown wherewith his Mother Crowned
him in the day of his espousals: O! take a stayed view of him in his Personal
excellencies and in the excellent qualifications of this Mediatory Office, and
it cannot be that on this ground ye will cast at the Match, Will any of you
dare to say it or to abide by it, that ye will not Marry Christ, because ye
think nothing of him, or because he is not worthy to be thought of? We suppose
none will do so.

If it be the Second, viz. The terms, That ye are not content with; ye would
have Christ, Grace, and Glory, and every good thing; but here it sticks, you
look at it as an hard matter to be denied to your self and to be wholly Gods,
to renounce your own righteousness, and your lusts, and your Idols, to be
absolutely devoted to him and wholly dependent on him in your walk, As the evil
and the slothful Servant called him a hard Master; So do many think of him,
though they will not down right say so much in express words: But I would ask
you, is there any unreasonable thing here? Or shall all those terms be sought
after, in some respect, in the Marriage of a poor creature like your selves?
And will ye deny them to Christ? 1. If you get his righteousness; should ye not
deny your own? If ye come under the Covenant of Grace with him, is there any
prejudice to lay by the Covenant of works? If ye get him for your second
Husband, and infinitely best, is it any prejudice to quit your first husband the
Law? And in that respect is it reasonable to cast at the bargain, because it is
free? Secondly, Is it not reasonable that ye should give him the room of all
things? If He be able to fill the room of all, let him have his room, as being
well worthy of it; It is your advantage to quit your lusts and sinful
pleasures, your covetousness, Pride, vanity, self conceit, etc. To exchange all
for him; and if ye be not content of this condition, ye say he is not worth the
having. 3. Is it not reasonable that ye should be devoted to him in your
Conversation? That ye should no longer Play the harlot, but be as a chaste
Virgin to him? Is it any advantage to you to follow your Idols, that will go
betwixt you and happiness? If Heaven be an advantage, it is your advantage to
quit them and be for Christ; Or is it any Prejudice to be Holy? Or will ye quit
Christ, because ye must be Holy? Or will ye refuse him because he will not
suffer you, to your ruin, to take your own will as formerly? yea it is not
only reasonable, but very good and Profitable; Nay there is a necessity you
should be Holy, and may not love to him loose your heart from sin? There was
another sort of consolation, and other bowels of love at the first making of
the Bargain betwixt the Father and the Son; and it was calculated for more
honorable designs, and levelled to more Noble ends then any thing the Devil,
or the World, or the flesh can Promise to you: and any of you that will stand
and stick at the terms that are so just equitable and every way reasonable and
easy with all, we take your own consciences to be witnesses that they are so,
and you dare not avouch the denial of their being so: If ye be content to take
him, to be reconciled, and made friends with God by his satisfaction; and to be
made Holy by his Sanctifieing Spirit, to be for him as he shall be for you; It
is a bargain: and what, I pray, ailes you at such a ba^gain; If this be not
made, ye shall never be able to make such another: What should ye do then, but
come to the wedding; It Is not time to dispute or debate, but to close: Say, O!
say sincerely, as those do, Jeremie. 3.22. Behold we come unto thee, for thou
art the Lord our God; When He says, as he did to them, return ye backsliding
children, and I will heal your backslidings; turn it over to him, and say,
Behold we come unto thee.

Thirdly, Are ye not content with your selves, or with something in your
selves? Do ye indeed think and say, that it is a good bargain, and that the
terms are very reasonable and easy; and we have nothing to say against them;
but we have, alas! much to say of and against our selves; The bargain pleases
us wondrous well, and so do the terms; but we are not at all pleased with our
selves. I answer, 1. May ye not then the better quit and deny your selves, and
take Christ in the room and place of self? 2. I Ans. Christ makes no such
objection, He bids the most Profane, the most Ignorant and Graceless wretch,
the most Hypocritical dissembler, that never knew what it was to be honest
come, and assures them that they shall be welcome, if they will come indeed.

Object. But I can do nothing, I cannot keep a word word that I say to Christ;
I Answer, Engage and consent to close with Christ on his own terms, and doing
and keeping shall follow, to give thy consent is that which thou art now called
to, and he engages to help thee to perform.

Object. But shall I take on an engagement, presently to break it again? I
Answer, If indeed thou consent; thou may ^ail and break, but the covenant
will never be utterly broken nor dissolved; yea thou shall have surety for thy
keeping of it; Forasmuch as (says the Apostle, Heb. 7.22.) Jesus was made
Surety of a better Testament.

If ye Object and say; that ye have much sin, that ye are Loathsome, and
Abominable; Subscribe this Contract and bargain, and ye have a free and full
discharge of all your debt; I will (says the Lord Hosea. 2 19) Betroth thee
unto me in loving kindness, and mercies; He will pardon your iniquities; There
is no exact or severe seeking and searching out of the debt here, where it is
ingenuously taken with, but rather a covering of it; He will also cleanse you
from all your filthiness, and from all your Idols.

But it may be thou will Object, And say, I will rather purpose then engage,
because I fear I shall break it.

Answer, But is it likely that thou will make good such a purpose, who dare
not engage? Or will purposes and resolutions do the business without
performing? Purposes of Marriage make not the Marriage? It is actual consent
and engaging which does that.

But thou will Object, And say, alace! I am not in a right frame; I am very
confused; all things are wrong with me. Answer, What is this thou say? Will
your frame be amended without Christ? will those swarms of Corruptions be beat
out before thou take in the King of Glory, who is strong and mighty in Battle?

But thou will Object. I am not clear as to my interest. Ans. Will thou not
consent till thou be clear, that is as much as to say, thou art doubting, but
that thou will not put it out of doubt; if thou be unclear as to thy
Subscription, rather Subscribe and write thy name over again: if ye have not at
all Subscribed, take now the pen and do it; say, Lord Jesus, I come to thee and
will be thine.

Object. Alace! fain would I come to the wedding, but I cannot come, it will
not do with me; I would fain believe, but my Faith is not Prompt and ready. I
Answer. Is not the Covenant provided with an answer to that also? It calls for
nothing but for your Subscribing; and if ye say ye cannot; look well that it be
not a shift; it comes to this, yea or nay, and if ye say, ye cannot say Yea in
Faith, which yet thou would fain be at; is there not a promise of Grace,
that though your hand be as it were withered, if ye mint and essay, you shall
be enabled to stretch it forth: Faith may come in the very essaying to grip
him, only essay it and it shall go with you.

Object. I have essayed it often, and it has not gone with me; Ans. Essay it
again and cast a new knot; If your evidence be not clear, Subscribe over again.

Object. But it goes not with me, when all is done, I cannot believe, I would
Subscribe, but I cannot writ (as it were) I cannot distinctly act Faith. Ans.
What is that? Our Lord stands not on that, though you cannot write well, do as
ye can: It Is strange to see, how somes Subscription is almost like a scratching
with Crow-toes, yet it is a valid Subscription; some again will write down their
mark in place of their name, and that also where it is well known, is admitted
as valid; if you cannot (as it were) write your name in fair and legible
Letters, set down some Mark, if it were but two scores or lines in any form or
figure, If ye cannot act Faith so distinctly, come on as you may; if ye cannot
to your satisfaction say, Yea, with the heart, say it with the mouth, striving
and longing to have thy heart brought up; force thy self (If I may speak so) to
believing; If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe with thy heart, that God raised Him from the dead, thou shall be saved,
Romans 10.9. Endeavor to make thy Mouth engage thine heart; bind thy self fast
to Christ, even in a manner whether thou will or not: act Faith with the
understanding, laboring honestly to bring up thy Will and affections and
though ye win not now to a Faith that is distinct, it shall come in a due time:
essay to set open the door, and it shall go with you.

Object. But my heart says, all these are but fair words? Ans. Away with that
blasphemy, They are the truths of God: essay then, O! essay Seriously this way
of Believing, and ye shall find power meeting you, The Pen is, as it were,
lying by you, and albeit ye cannot write well and be distinct, take the Pen,
and Christ shall (as it were) lead your hand and guide it, to write so, as it
shall Pass in Heaven for a Subscribed consent: set your selves to give him a
welcome, and he shall account it to be a welcome. Say now, what more ye have to
say; lay out your scruples; this word, all things are ready, will answer them
all: the garment is ready to be put on, yea Jesus Christ is your Wedding
Garment, take and put him on: He is the cure for all your diseases, apply him
for the cure of them all; ye cannot certainly be clothed, before you put on the
garment: neither can ye be Healed, before ye apply the cure: ye cannot by any
means be rich, till ye marry him. But beside all these, there are several other
needlessly disquieting scruples, there are many other shifts (and alace! that
there should be such triffling, if I may call it so, such whining, as it were,
and standing on Ceremonies (to speak so) with our Lord,) among which this is
one, I wot not If I be in the Covenant and Contract of Redemption, I know not
if I be one of Gods elect: Ans. What is this? ye know not well what ye say:
have ye any thing to do with that secret by a leap and at First hand? are ye
not called to Marry Christ? Is not that his revealed will to you? I protest in
his name, this is the thing that ye are called to: and will ye make an
exception, where he has made none? Or will ye shift obedience to a clear
command, upon a supposed decree, which you cannot know but by the effects? Will
ye reason so in the matter of your eating and drinking? upon a supposition that
God has decreed, that ye shall die to Morrow or within a few days, will ye
this day not take your dinner, nor make use of any refreshment, till that
supposed day come? Or because ye know not, if God has appointed you to live so
and so long? Will ye forbear therefore your callings? Or will any of you, in
seeking after a match in the World, reason so? Will ye not seek after nor Marry
such a Woman, till ye be clear that God has decreed her to be your Wife? When
or whom would ye Marry at this rate of reasoning? But 2. Because there is a
sort of faculty and facility here to dispute against God, I answer by way of
question, were there ever any that had that doubt cleared to them before they
came to Christ? whoever would have come to him, if they had stayed till that
had been taken out of the way? Or has the Lord told that to any before they
came? Has he said to them, believe for ye are Elected: but his method is thus,
believe, and ye shall know in due time that ye are Elected. 3 Is there any that
can say, that the offer or the refusal of the match depended on this? If any
of you will say, because I was not elected, he refused me: He will answer, How
often would I have gathered you? And there will need no more ground for
sentencing Professors of the Gospel to destruction, then this, Man, woman, thou
had the offer of the Gospel and refusedst it, therefore go to thy place: he
will not Judge you according to the decree of reprobation, but according to his
call and your disobedience to it: And further ye may take Christ's Answer to
this Objection, from John 6.39. Where there are two wills, or rather two things
willed, of equal extent betwixt the Father and Christ in the Covenant of
Redemption, under which all the elect come: The First is verse. 39. This is the
Fathers will which has sent me, that of all that he has given me, I should
lose nothing; But, as if he had said, this is not it that ye have to do with at
first hand: Therefore verse. 40. He says. And this is the will of him that sent
me, that every one that sees the Son and Believes on Him may have everlasting
life: Not that all the elect should know that they are elected, before they
Believe; but that he that Believes in Him, may know that he is Elected: He
gives the same promise to them that Believe, that is given to them that are
Elected: and they are distinguished, because He would have them to come under
distinct considerations.

And now to conclude, Is there not need, great need to come? and have ye not
good warrant to come? Lay by, therefore, seeking satisfaction to sense and
carnal reason: and ^hile the Lord says, All things are ready, come to the
Marriage: It will be greatly to your prejudice, to sit or shift the invitation:
ye have the Contract laid before you, alter not the Terms, dispute not, delay
not: This is our Commission to you to day, We tell you that the King has made
ready for the Feast, yea all things are ready come then and let there be no
more debate about the matter: if ye will but say it and say it in earnest, Here
Lord Jesus I give up my self to thee, and though my consent be now but
confused, I shall endeavor, through Grace to give it more clearly and
distinctly another time: It shall go well with you: only deliver up your selves
to him: and in the Lords Name I tell you, that ye shall be dearly welcome: as
many as come humbly lothing themselves, wondering at the free Grace of God, and
Highly esteeming of Precious and lovely Jesus, and adventuring to hazard their
souls on him on his own terms, and to take him for their Husband and Lord: It
shall not be accounted Presumption in them so to do: nay (as it is Cant. 3.)
The bottom of his Chariot is Paved with love, and it is for the daughters of
Jerusalem: It is made for carrying and keeping Believers: leap hither (if I may
speak so) and ye will fall soft, into a sweetly Perfumed and soft bed, even in
the arms of Christ: There was never a Carpet, never a feather or doun-bed so
soft as that is: only come and cast your selves over on it: Though ye think
that ye cannot apprehend and take hold of him, He can and will apprehend and
take hold of you; and He is so very tender hearted, that he will kiss you and
even weep over you for joy, (as it were) on your neck: and if ye have no
Garments, Rings or Jewels (to speak so) to adorn you, He will give these to
you: Come forward then, come, O! come, and let it be a day of Covenanting with
him: and in sign and token thereof give up your names to him: and for
confirmation, take the Seal of His Covenant the Sacrament with your hand, and
bless Him with your heart, that so heartily welcomes you; and the blessing of
God shall come upon you that come on these terms.

A SERMON Preached after the Communion,
On PHILIP. 1.27. Only let your conversation be, as becomes the Gospel of
Christ.
THere are two great works that the Ministers of the Gospel have to do; one is
to engage People to Christ, and to persuade them to receive him and close with
him; The other is to induce them to walk worthy of him: Col. 2.6. As ye have
(says the Apostle) received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in Him. Paul
through the hand of the Lord with him, had engaged the Philippians to close
with Christ, and as it were to conclude the Contract betwixt him and them: and
now being aged and in Prison, and not knowing certainly if ever he shall see
them again, He commends this to them in a special manner, whether he see them
or be absent from them; that only they would let their Conversation be, as
becomes the Gospel of Christ: As if he had said, ye are privileged with the
Gospel, and have embraced it, and are eminent in the Profession thereof; let me
therefore beg this of you; that your Conversation may be answerable to it. The
adverb only, intimats to them, that this was so necessary and of so great
concernment, that in a manner it was their one thing they had to do, In
comparison of which, in a manner, they had no other thing else to do, whether
he were Present or absent; This in some respect, is all that he requires of
them: And the Argument whereby he presses it is, that whether he come to them
or not, he may hear of their affairs; And that he desires and expects, whether
he be at Liberty, or in Prison and bonds; that they will thus especially
testify their respect to him; which would be more refreshing and acceptable to
him, then their Communicating to him in his affliction, beyond all the rest of
the Churches, was, and for which he commends them, Chap. 4. And in the close of
the verse he instanceth Two Particulars, wherein he would have their
Conversation suiting the Gospel; or Two qualifications of a Gospel-Conversation
and walk: one is, Unity that they stand fast in one Spirit, Another is, Purity
in the Faith; that with one mind they strive together for the Faith of the
Gospel.

The First Qualification is, joint and united stayedness and stedfastness, that
they be not fleeting and wavering to and fro, easily disjointed and divided one
from another, as many light Professors are: And the Second is, that they be
studious in and striving for the Purity of the Doctrine of Faith, and serious
in the Practice and exercise of Faith; Desirable and excellent Qualifications
of a Christian, viz. Purity, Solidity, and seriousness in Religion.

We shall at this time speak of the exhortation, Only let your Conversation be,
as becomes the Gospel of Christ: Where, by Conversation, we understand the
whole of a man's carriage and walk toward and before God and men; and by the
Gospel, the whole Doctrine thereof, as it respects Faith and manners or
Practice, but here more especially, as it respects Faith in Christ, both as it
is opposed to Heathenisme, and as it is opposed to the Law or Covenant of Works:
To walk then as becomes the Gospel, is to walk answerably and suitably to it,
and in the whole of their carriage and Depo^tment, to make a manifest
difference to appear betwixt themselves and all other Persons; as they are
dignified, and as the Gospel requires.

The point of Doctrine, to which we would speak from these words, and which
lies obviously in them is; That, they who are Privileged with the Gospel,
ought seriously to endeavor, and to make it their great business, to have
their Conversation suitable to, and becoming the same. This is some way the one
thing required of all the hearers of the Gospel, of all that are Baptized in
the name of Christ: We need not stay on the Proof and reasons of it, and the
less, that none will dare downright to deny it, and that the reason^ a^e so
obvious.

There a^e three Uses of it, that we would speak a little to; The First is for
instruction, to teach us our duty: The Second is of Regra^e and expostulation,
that the Professors of the Gospel, and of the Name of Christ should be so
unlike and u^answerable to it: The Third is of Exhortation to this so very
necessary and so much called for a duty, as the Compend of all duties, which
we would press and set home by some consideration drawn from the necessity
and advantage of it.

As for the First, I think I may say, that if ye had the Apostle Paul Preaching
to you who have been Communicants yester-day, this would be the great duty
which he would enforce upon you: Only let your Conversation be, as it becomes
the Gospel of Christ. Ye will readily say, what is that? I confess it is hard
to tell, it is so very Marrowie and comprehensive, but it will be as hard to
practice it, and a great deal harder: O that we were all Breathing and Pressing
seriously and hard after it! However, we shall in the first Place, and in the
general desire you to consider these few Scriptures that hold it out, as
namely, Luke 1.74, 75. 2 Cor. 7.1. Tit. 2.10, 11, 12 1 Pet. 1.15. Philip. 3 20.

More Particularly, from other Scriptures ye may take it up in these: or if we
read and consider the Gospel aright, we will find these Five things in it,
which require a walk suitable, or a walk with respect to them: and such a walk
becomes the Gospel. 1. In the Substance of it, Our blessed Lord Jesus is (as it
were) the Text on whom the Gospel is a notable Commentary, and what he did and
how he suffered, is proposed as a fair Copy for us to write after in all
things wherein he is set forth to us as a pattern for our Imitation. 2. That
from whence the Gospel comes, and which gives it it is rise, even the Love of
the Father, and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, in whose blessed breast it
bred; and To walk as it becomes the Gospel, is to walk suitablie to that love.
3. To walk as becomes the Gospel, is to walk suitablie to the great offers of
it, and to the Promises contained in it, The exceeding great and Precious
Promises, whereby we are made Partakers of the Divine nature: To walk suitablie
to all the excellent things, the sublimelie Spiritual and divine things
Promised. 4. It is to walk suitablie to the Commands and directions of the
Gospel, in reference to all duties: having therefore (says the Apostle, 2 Cor.
7.1.) These Promises let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh
and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the fear of God. 5. It is to walk
answerablie to the obligations which the Gospel lays on us, and to the
consolations that flow from it to us: If then we would walk as becomes the
Gospel of Christ, we must have a due respect unto all these.

If it should be enquired what is it to have a respect to these in our walk? We
answer, it supposes and includes these things. 1. A likeness and conformity,
that what is called for in the matter of duty, or offered in the Promise, we
study to be like it, We all (says the Apostle 2 Cor. 3 18.) Beholding, as in
a Glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from Glory to
Glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord. 2. Our suffering none of these things to
ly by us unimproved, and our endeavoring to make the right use of them: to
suffer none of the Promises relating to Justification, Sanctification, or any
other Spiritual privilege and benefit to be useless, but to be laying due
weight on each of them: and more especially to be making right use of Christ
the Mediator, in whom all the Promises are yea and amen: (for certainly they
neither walk as it becomes the Gospel, nor are worthy of it, who make not use
of him) to be making right use of the Ordinances, word and Sacraments, and of
all appointed means of edification, Public, Private and secret, and to be
making right use of the comforts of the Gospel, whereof there is through Christ
a very large and liberal allowance on Christians. 3. It includes our
delighting our selves in the Gospel, our endeavoring to be cheerful, to be
cheered and made glad by the good things in it: A heartless drooping and
discouraged life and walk is very unbecoming the Gospel of Christ.

We may in a word, briefly sum up a Christians Conversation as becomes the
Gospel, in these Three; 1. That he shine in his Conversation, so as he may
adorn the Gospel, 2. That he improve, by the exercise of Faith, the Promises
of it. 3. That he endeavor to live on the comforts of it, and to live in the
hope and expectation of the comfort and refreshing, from the Presence of the
Lord, and the fullness of joys therein, that are coming: somewhat of all these
Three is couched in those Words, Acts. 9.31. Then the Churches had rest, and
were edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the
Holy Ghost, were multiplied: They walked in the fear of God in respect of their
Practice: and in respect of their Faith, they walked in the comfort of the Holy
Ghost; and they were Edified, grew and increased, not only in respect of their
number, but as to their Spiritual state and stature; And thus, the Peace of God
which pass^th understanding, guarded their minds and hearts through Christ
Jesus.

Or ye may look on the Gospel as calling for these Two things, in our external
and visible conversation; 1. That none get any occasion by our walk to reproach
the Gospel: that none may have it, on any just ground given by us, to say, take
up such a professor of the Gospel; O! What prejudice to the profession of the
Gospel, is done this way, by the untender walk of many of it is Professors. 2.
It is to walk so, as our Carriage may be a Commendation to the Gospel, and an
Ornament to the Profession of it, that, not only, reproachers may be ashamed,
who falsely accuse our good Conversation; but by beholding of it, they may be
made to glorify God: that we may shine as lights by our blameless walk; so
holding forth the word of Life (being practical Preachers) by our convincing
and edifieing carriage, in our several Capacities, Callings, Stations and
Relations, that they who are not won by the word, may be won to the love of
Christ, and of Holiness by our examplary conversation, and by the humble,
tender and conscientious discharge of the duties of those callings and
relations; the Husband being kind and the wife Tractable, Child and Servant
obedient, etc. Excellent directions to this purpose are given by the Apostles,
and particularly by Paul and Peter in their Epistles.

More Particularly (which yet will be but somewhat general) We may consider
the Gospel. 1. As it holds forth and calls for Holiness, and so, for a Holy and
Gospel-becoming Conversation. And 2. We would take a view of the nature of this
Holiness.

First The Gospel calls for Holiness in a sixfold extent; a failing or defect
in any of which, makes a Conversation in so far to be unbecoming the Gospel. 1.
It calls for Holiness in respect of all sorts of duties, be ye Holy (says
Peter, 1 Pet. 1.15.) in all manner of Conversation, as God is Holy: in
Prosperity and Adversity: in Religious, in Moral, and in Natural Actions; for
it is written, be ye Holy for I am Holy. 2. It is extended universally to all
Particular and individual duties and actions of all those sorts; it reaches
all manner of Conversation; The Divinely inspired Scriptures instruct the man
of God, how he may be made Perfect in every good work, as it is, 2 Timothy 3. And
a failing in thought, word or deed is unbecoming the Gospel. 3. It is extended
in respect of the subject, viz. the whole man, and Presses that he be
Sanctified throughout, So 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. The Apostle Prays, the God of peace
Sanctify you wholly, and I pray God your whole Spirit Soul and Body, be
Preserved blameless; And 2 Cor. 7.1. It puts to cleanse from all filth of the
Flesh and Spirit: It requires that the Judgments be kept sound, and that no
error or untruth be admitted by it, that the Mind be sober, and free from any
sinful distemper; that the affections be Sanctifiedly regular, and that they
debord not: That the will be straight and brought up to the straight rule of
obedience; and that the Conscience be kept tender, that it be neither darkened
nor impure; That the members of the Body be yielded as instruments unto
righteousness. 4. It is extended to holiness, in respect of all capacities,
Callings, Stations and Relations, of Husbands and Wives, of Masters and
Servants, of Parents and Children, as the Apostle Paul Heartily and frequently
does in his Epistles, namely, Col. 3. and 4. Ephesians. 5. and 6. Tit. 2. Where he
presses it upon Servants by this Argument, That the Doctrine of God may be
adorned: and on wives by this, that the Doct ine of God may not be blasphemed,
and on all thus, That the grace of God has appeared in the Gospel (for that
very end. 5. It Is extended in respect of all times and Places, 1 Cor. 15. ult.
We are Commanded always to abound in the work of the Lord: in the whole tract
of our conversation, at home and abroad, in secret and public, in prosperity
and adversity. 6. It Is extended to and requires Perfect Holiness, Holiness at
the highest pitch, So Matthew. 5. Be ye perfect as your Heavenly Father is
perfect, And 1 Pet. ^1.15. Be ye Holy in all manner of Conversation, as God
that calls you is Holy: to be at exact Holiness, even to have it perfect in
respect of degree in our design, desire and endeavor, To be Purifieing our
selves, even as He is pure (as it is 1 John 3.3.) Having Him for our Pattern.

If any should here Object. And say: to look on the Gospel thus, as carving out
a Christians duty and walk so very exactly, in this extent and at this pitch,
makes it appear to be very strict, and to differ little or nothing from the Law;
for what more does that call for? So that this Doctrine seems to be legal. I
Answer, This Objection seems to Imply a great mistake; for the difference
betwixt the Law and the Gospel, is not so much, if at all, in this; that the
Law requires more then the Gospel; but that it requires what it calls for, on
another Certification: The Law and the Gospel agree in these Three. 1. The
Gospel requires Holiness in as large an extent as the Law, so that whatever is
a sin against the Law, is also a sin against the Gospel; For Christ came not to
aboli^h but to fulfill the Law. 2. It requires Holiness at the same Pitch or in
the same degree; for the Gospel commands us to be holy as God is Holy, and to
be perfect as our Heavenly Father is perfect: It dispenses with no sin, nor
with any degree of any sin, nor with the least Omission of any duty, more then
does the Law. 3. The Authority and obligation, that lies on and binds to
Holiness, is no less in the Gospel, then it is in the Law: yea, we may say,
that the obligation is in some respect greater.

But they deffer in these Three, 1. That the Gospel takes in the Penitent,
though he has not been perfect and exact, and gives him pardon through Christ:
which the Law does not. 2. The Gospel calls for duty in the strength of
Christ, and furnishes strength for duty: but the Law now furnishes no
strength, but only supposes it; It only gives out the word of Command,
requiring of men that they walk in the strength which they had once in Adam; so
that, though the Authority and Obligation be the same: yet the manner and
Certification is not the same; if there be any breach or failing, the law
says, Thou shall certainly die: But the Gospel (as I said; admits of
Repentance and fleeing to Jesus Christ, Who took on him the curse of the Law.
3. The law accepts of no duty, if it be not exactly perfect in the degree: But
the Gospel accepts of duty, though imperfect, if there be sincerity: It accepts
on Christ's account of a man, according to that which he has, if there be a
willing mind. So then, when ye are called to walk as becomes the Gospel: ye
would know that ye are not to dispense with your selves, in the least, in any
duty that the law calls for: though the Gospel does indeed more sweetly call
for it, Its Exactors and officers being peace and righteousness: It Is the same
Holiness in the matter, extent and degree, which the Gospel calls for, with
that of the Law; though it much differs, as to the Manner of calling for it.

Secondly. That we may know, what is called for in the Gospel, as a walk or
Conversation becoming the same: and so may yet further know the nature of
Gospel-holiness, (which was the Second thing we proposed to speak to) Ye would
consider the Gospel, as it is distinguished from the law, and as it holds our
Grace: Where we would speak, 1. Of some qualifications, that the Gospel adds,
as to the Performance of the same duties, which t^^ Law requires. 2. Of some
particular duties which it does more especially call for, and which were not,
(severals of them, at least) so proper to the law.

As for the qualifications of duty, which the Gospel adds, they are these.
1. A new end; for our end in duty now is, not to gain life by it, but simply to
glorify God, as we may see. 1 Cor. 10.31. I will not say, but this end was in
the Covenant of works, but in the Gospel this is not only the main end, but
some way the only end, and the other quite excluded and thrust out; and when we
speak of the glory of God, we take in the glory of Grace and the glory of the
Redeemer, who furnishes Grace. 2. It adds a sweet Motive, viz. love to Jesus
Christ: The love of Ch is it (says the Apostle 2 Cor. 5.14.) Constrains us: It
is no more mere awe, that is the Motive, but love and love to God in Christ,
who has redeemed and bought us. 3. The Gospel qualifies our obedience and
walk, as to our undertaking thereof: that it be not in our own strength, but in
the strength of Jesus Christ: it teaches us to go through the wilderness
leaning on the Beloved, and leaving the burden of the work on him; trusting
more to him, then to our own feet or strength, as knowing that we cannot criple
out the way, nor do any thing without him, as it is. John 15.5, 4. There is a
Qualification, required in respect of the frame of our own heart, with respect
to a twofold fear, one is a filial and reverentiall fear, that proceeds from
Faith, in which we are to work out the work of our Salvation. The other is,
that it be without the fear that is opposite to the former as the word is. Luke
1.74. The Gospel calls us in our walk, to have a fear without fear, a
reverentiall fear, without slavish fear: it would have us neither to be
altogether afraid because of the Law, which has terror, nor to be without
filial fear, for that is presumption, but to have faith and fear mixed
together. 5. The Gospel qualifies our walk in spiritual duties, in respect of
our cheerfulness in going about them, which are to us (in so far as we have
corruption in us) Heavy and grievous; but the Gospel makes them easy and
light, as it is said, Matthew. 11. ult. His yoke is easy and His burden light.
Though it be a Yoke, yet it is portable and light, when Christ and the Believer
are yoked together: nor are any of His Commands grievous, as it is 1 John 5.3.
6. Though the Gospel call for Holiness, yet it makes the person to be denied to
it, It Is a Gospel-walk to be Holy, but it takes in that with it which we have
Philip. 3. To forget those things that are behind: to be denied and dead to all
our seize; and to count all but loss and dung for Christ: It was indeed a
law-walk to be blameless, but it is a Gospel walk to study to be blameless, and
pressing hard after perfect Holiness: and yet to foget it, and to be denied to
all conceit of it: and to be desirous to be found in Christ Jesus, not having
our own righteousness, which is by the Law, but the righteousness which is by
Faith.

As for the Particular duties, at least some of the duties, that are more
particularly called for in this walk and Conversation becoming the Gospel: Ye
may take these shortly. The First whereof is, a living by Faith: and that is,
when a Christian has Faith, and the exercise of it on Christ, as it were,
another life to him, for though there was a life of faith or of dependence on
God in Adam before the fall, yet not the life of Faith in a Redeemer: I live
(says the Apostle Gal. 2.20) Yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life
that now I live in the flesh, is by faith on the Son of God, who loved me, and
gave himself for me. And this is to be taken along the Christians walk, even a
Continued application to and of Christ: This is that which he first betakes
himself to, for Righteousness: yea, when right, he employs him constantly, as
He is made of God to him Wisdom Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption:
As he is said to be made to believers, 1 Cor. 1.30. The second is, the exercise
of Repentance, which was not called for as a duty by the Law, though much ruin
followed the breach of it: This was the sum of John's and of Christ's preaching:
Repent for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand: Though it be, Alace! a very much
slighted exercise: yet daily Repentance notably suiteth a Conversation becoming
the Gospel. 3. A Gospel-Conversation would be in, and with the exercise of
Hope: there was love to God under the Law, but not so properly the exercise of
hope; There was, it is true, hope in respect of the thing promised, in case
there had been no violation of the Law; but not as respecting Christ Jesus, who
is the believers hope, Col. 1.27. Christ in you the hope of Glory: I doubt much
if the exercise of hope be well known to Christians in this Generation, few
know what it is to Hope to the end, as Peter exhorts, 1 Pet. 1.13. A Fourth Is,
the denial of our selves, and the exercise of Humility; for as the Gospel
calls for the denying of our own righteousness, So for the denying of our own
wills, affections, lusts, appetits, and desires; There is another sort of
love-singleness and denyedness called for now, then under the Law; because we
are bought with a price, and are not our own, as it is, 1 Cor. 6.20. If any man
will follow me, let him deny himself, says our Lord Matthew. 16. A Fifth is,
much Mortification, That we be crucified to the World, to our self, and to our
sinful lusts; I am Crucified (says Paul, Gal. 2.) with Christ, yet I live, so
Chap. 6. He tells us that he was crucified to the world, and the World to him:
And he exhorts Christians, Col. 3.5. To Mortify their members which are upon
the Earth: Fornication, Uncleanness, Inordinat Affection, Covetousness, etc. A
Sixth is, Much Patience, Meekness, Forbearance, Long-suffering; wherein our
Lord has given and left himself for a non such Pattern: Matthew. 11.29 Learn
(says He) of me for I am meek and lowly in heart So, 1 Pet. 2.21, 22. And
hence, Meekness, Patience and forbearance are so much and so frequently called
for in the Gospel, and on Gospel grounds, as great duties becoming the Gospel,
or as special pieces of a Gospel-conversation. The Seventh, Is, a heavenliness
in our conversation, a denyedness, a holy abstractedness from earthly things,
and living in Heaven, while on earth, and a living more where we love, then
where we live: If ye be risen with Christ, (says the Apostle. Col. 3.1.) Set
your affections on things above; not on things on the earth; Which is also
called for, Philip. 3.20. By his own example proposed for our Pattern, our
Conversation, (says he) is in Heaven, whence we look for the Savior; To be
much in our affections set on the things that are on the Earth, to be earthly
minded is unbecoming the Gospel. An^ Eighth is, a great eye on Eternity, an
eye, whose looks are not bounded within time; but pierce through time, and all
the Fogs, Mists, and Clouds that are in it: It Is much unbecoming the Gospel to
have our hope much; not to say, only, in this life, or to be much taken up
about the driving of Earthly designs and projects: but it is a good
qualification of a Gospel conversation, to have an eye before us on Eternal
life, 2 Cor. 4. ult: While (says the Apostle) We look not on the things that
are seen; but on the things that are not seen, and Eternal. A Ninth is, Much
joy in God, much cheerfulness and heartsomeness; therefore believers are
willed, to Rejoice always and evermore. So, 1 Thessalonians. 5. Rejoice evermore, and
Philip. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice; which he so
much presses on them because (as it is like) he knew, that they were given to
walk droopingly and heavily, which did not so become the Gospel, as rejoicing
in God, singing and making melody in their hearts to him, Cheering themselves
in him; and delighting themselves in the Almighty. A Tenth is, Spiritual
contentment, a contented conversation is a Conversation becoming the Gospel: Be
careful for nothing (says the Apostle Philip. 4.6.) But in every thing let
your requests be made known unto God by Prayer and Supplication with Thanks
giving, and then follows downward a little, I have learned, in every State or
case to be content: I know how to suffer want, and how to abound, etc. This
conversation was very becoming the Gospel; he proposes himself as a pattern
herein to them: There are many professors of Religion, who cannot have, but
they a^e vain; and when they want, they are anxious and discouraged; It Is hard
to carry the Cup even: But a Gospel-Conversation is equal, sober and composed,
and not much up with having, nor much down with want, nor is it easily
outwitted and non plussed by the vicissitudes of those external things. An
Eleventh is, Watchfulness; a Gospel-Conversation is a watchful conversation,
and never much Surprised or moved: or thus, watching (especially over the
heart) joined with Prayer, is a peculiar duty, that a walk becoming the Gospel
calls for, that we be not found like the slothful servant, when his Lord
comes; This is a duty well becoming us who live under the Gospel, because we
have readily stronger Corruptions, and are at least under more temptations,
then those who lived under the Law. A Twelfth is, much Self-examination or
self-searching because of much corruption in us, and much guilt lying on us, is
a duty which the Gospel calls for; that we may see what comes of it; how it is
mortified and done away; and there being many Promises in our offer, we should
see what acception they get, and how they are embraced, there is hazard of
mistaking our Spiritual state, etc. All which calls us to be much in this
duty, Examine your selves prove your own selves, as says the Apostle, 2 Cor.
13.5. 13ly. The making of our calling and election sure becomes the Gospel;
when we are hovering, and at an uncertainty as to our souls estate, we are not
only to try it, but to endeavor to put it out of question; I write these
things to you (says John, 1 John 5.13.) That Believe; that ye may know that ye
have eternal life, ye would not only believe, but study to know that ye
believe, that ye may comfort your selves in it; and it is a piece of a
conversation and walk unbecoming the Gospel, to hang loose, in suspense, and at
an uncertainty, in that greatest and gravest business. 14ly. Trusting in God,
becomes the Gospel, and unbelief and distrust of God is unbecoming the Gospel;
Said I not unto thee; (says the Lord to Martha John 11.) That if thou would
believe, thou should see the glory of God? To have a gracious offer from God,
and to scare at it, as if he were not in earnest, is very unbecoming the
Gospel; when ever he Pipeth, it becomes us well to dance; and to Believe and
Credit him, when he speaks fair and comfortably. 15ly. A Gospel-Conversation
takes in and calls for, not only Holiness, but a shining examplary Holiness,
Holiness with a divine Luster and splendour on it; merely legal holiness is dim
and dark; and has little or no luster; Therefore Believers are called Children
of the light and of the day; and they are said to shine as lights, in the midst
of a crooked Generation: it is not only a Conversation not spotted, or that is
something welfavoured; but such a Conversation, that is well lyned (to speak
so) within, with the imputed righteousness of Christ, and much inherent Grace
and Holiness, and with outward self-denyed, visible Splendour and glory; Let
your light (says the Lord, Matthew. 5.) So shine before men, etc. Even as the
glory of his body, when he was transfigured on the Mount, made his Clothes to
shine, So there is something of Grace within, that makes the external actions
and carriage of Believers to shine: and words that will be very tasteless and
sapless from others, though for the matter good, will have another sort of
rel^sh and weight from them; and Prayer from their mouth will have another sort
of refreshful sweetness. 16ly. A Gospel conversation takes in and calls for
much joy in affliction and tribulation; We rejoice in tribulation, says the
Apostle; It will make the Christian take joyfully the spoiling of his goods, as
they did, Heb. 10.34. It will make men come from the presence of Councils
rejoicing, that they are accounted worthy to suffer for the name of Christ, as
it did the Apostles, Acts 5. last. My brethren (says James) Count it all joy
when ye fall into diverse temptations, or tribulations: It makes pleasant and
heartsome bearing of Crosses from God, and of injuries from men; It makes the
Christian stoop humbly and very low to these; It will not suffer him to render
evil for evil, but will put him to do good for evil, and it makes him do it on
a Gospel ground and account; because Christ frankly forgave the Christian ten
thousand Talents of his debt: he is ready to forgive, an hundred pence of petty
and inconsiderable injuries done against him. 17ly. A Gospel conversation is a
sweet, quiet, peaceable, well humoured Conversation, it makes men and women
good to live with, It has much love and pity to them that are without, it is a
good neighbor, it is a great friend to unity and a great enemy to division: it
presses hard after standing fast in on Spirit.. 18ly. A Gospel-conversation
implies a settled, fixed condition, that is not fleeting and wavering: It
suffers not Christians to be one thing to day and another thing to morrow, very
unbecoming the Gospel: a Gospel-conversation will not suffer a man to be a
temporizer, or one that comes and goes with every turn of the tide, to be of
any Party that is upmost: but puts to stand fast in the liberty wherewith
Christ has made him free: the Believers heart is fixed, and his conversation
is stable, when it is, as it becomes the Gospel. 19ly. It Is a bold
Conversation, that will scare at no trial for Christ, but will hazard and
venture far, ere it expose the Gospel to contempt and reproach; Therefore it is
said, Philip. 1. In nothing being terrified by your adversaries: It is very
loath to do or to forbear any thing, that may make the Gospel to be evil spoken
of. 20ly. It is a Spiritual conversation, or a walking in the Spirit, as the
word is, Gal. 5. Walk in the spirit (says the Apostle) And ye shall not
fulfill the lusts of the flesh, and Verse. 25. If we live in the Spirit let us
walk in the Spirit: It makes us to pray in the Spirit, to praise in the Spirit:
and by assistance of the Spirit, it puts upon endeavors to do every thing that
is called for. 21ly. A Gospel conversation is a wrestling and fighting
conversation, striving and warring against temptations without, and a body of
death within: a lazy secure, whole-hearted conversation, when a person is
lying by, and is not setting himself against, nor purifieing himself from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, but at truce with corruption, is not sure,
becoming the Gospel: Hence the Apostle, Romans 7. has such a combat with the
remainder of indwelling corruption, Sometimes complaining of: sometimes
Protesting against it, and sometimes bitterly bemoaning and crying out under
its captivating power: There being in the Believer two contrary parties, one of
Grace and another of corrupt nature, which are contrary one to another, as it
is, Gal. 5.17. A Believer in a Gospel Conversation is like Jacobs and Esaus
Struggling in the womb: It is for this cause that, Ephesians. 6. All the pieces of
the Spiritual armor are particularly described, and Christians, as Christ's
soldiers, commanded to put them on: and to have a Gospel-conversation is to be
improving all the pieces of that complete Armor of God aright, to their
several ends.

These are things (and such others) that are particularly called for in a
Gospel-walk and conversation: and if we would take a little view of them all
together, and gather the meaning of this use of Instruction, from the
exhortation, Let your conversation be, as it becomes the Gospel of Christ: the
Sum of it may be briefly given in these Four, 1. To be exactly studying
Holiness. 2. To be denied to our Holiness, as Paul was Philip. 3. 3. To be
especially taken up with those particular duties, of living by Faith, of
exercising Repentance, of aiming at and closely pursuing after Communion with
God in Christ Jesus; (which is, though a much abused duty and unworthily
prostituted in the mouths of many, a most precious both duty and privilege,)
exercising Hope, Self-denial, etc: So that we may be in case warrantably to
say with the Apostle, 1 John 1.4. Truly our fellowship is with the Father and
with his Son Jesus Christ. 4. To be much in the Exercise of all these,
heartsomely and cheerfully, and to be comforted and refreshed in doing duty,
and yet denied to all our doing: A Christian, having a suitable Conversation to
the Gospel, Sees his ills and is humbled, observes Gods goodness and Comforts
himself, and blesses God heartily for his goodness in respect of both, and
because there is hope of an outgate from all his evils, and a day coming, when
he shall be finally and fully Redeemed from all his iniquities.

The Second Use Leads us to Regrate and Expostulat with hearers and Professors
of the Gospel, of this time; Though this be the thing and the only thing that
they are called to, yet if we should go through and view the Conversation of
the most part; O! how very unsuitable and unbecoming is it to the Gospel, even
so very unsuitable, that if our hearts were tender, they would break and bleed
within us to behold it; but Alace! it is a part of our unsuitableness, that we
cannot suitably lament it: Little zeal for God, and sorrow for what dishonours
him and reflects on the Profession of his Name, are much gone from this
generation: Oh! whither shall we go, into the City or Country, to find a
Conversation becoming the Gospel? We cannot be without some conviction, that we
ought to be zealous for the glory of God, and serious in the study of Holiness
in all manner of Conversation, that the Gospel be not reproached and
blasphemed: if we be so, and if such a Conversation be a duty and a very
reasonable duty; how comes it to be so little minded and made conscience of? If
we profess Christ to be our Husband and head, our Captain and leader, ought we
not to be like him, and follow him? I take it for granted, that this will be
generally assented to, as being very just and Reasonable; and yet without
accomplishing a very diligent search into our own way, may we not find at the
first view much, very Lamentably much unsuitableness in our walk to the Gospel?
Need we descend to particulars? is not our unsuitableness obvious, palpable and
undeniable? Let me but ask our selves a few questions: are we making suitable
use of the promises and often meditating on them? Are we taken up with
delighting our selves in God, and in the great and excellent things contained
in the promises? Do we study to be like them, and suitably to improve them! Do
we study to have those poor performances of duty that we go about, so qualified
as the Gospel calls for? the lifelesness and whole heartedness, that manifestly
discover themselves, in our very hearing of these things, declare much what we
are; your Ministers are some way perplexed and puzzled how to deal with you: and
know not well whether to speak or to be silent, whether to pipe or to mourn;
what suitableness is there to the Gospel, when the conversation of many is so
spotted? So far, Alace! are we from shining, that we are rather like blind
lanthorns without light. I shall only for whetting an edge on this sad regrate
and expostulation, instance in a few of these Particulars touched on before, as
to our unsuitableness to the Gospel. 1. Do we live by faith? Alace! is there
such a life as this known by most of us? we are readily either living securely,
carelessly and unconcernedly, without troubling our selves with such matters: or
else on the other hand we give way to unbelief and will hardly admit of any
thing, that may settle and make us foot a stand: we are found often running
from one extremity to another, we are either carnally vain, light and frothy,
or we are anxious, heartless and dejected, and are very seldom found steering
a straight course betwixt extremes and stemming the port. 2. We may instance it
in the exercise of Repentance, which well becomes the Gospel: Our Lord Christ,
John the Baptist and the Apostles preached it, and it is commended to all: It
is an exercise very suitable and proper for sinners, and more especially for
such sinners, as have had many offers of Grace, and have much slighted them:
but where is it? Ah! where is it? Converts are rare in these days, and among
Converts the kindly exercise of Repentance is rare: we are generally as
wholehearted, as if we were living under the Covenant, where there is no
promise of pa^don to a penitent sinner: I mean not every sort of repentance,
for there is a worldly sorrow that works death, there is a legal Repen^ance
arising mainly, if not only from the fear of punishment: But I mean of serious
and hearty Gospel-repentance arising from the consideration of Gods holiness,
and of his Mercy and grace in Jesus Christ, that is accompanied with holy zeal,
fear, indignation and revenge, as it is described, 2 Cor. 7.3. Where is
self-denial? Is not that a rare thing? Many of us cannot bear a word
reflecting on self, neither can we quit a word once uttered by us (though it
may be somewhat rashly and unadvisedly) wherein self is Concerned, but will
needs maintain and defend it: O! what reeling and whirling about with the time
is there among us? What hard pursuing after and even chasing of self-interests
and designs? 4. Where is spiritual joy and rejoicing in the Lord? who delight
themselves in the Almighty? who bless themselves on earth, in the God of truth?
Who do really and humbly boast in Him all the day-long? who bless themselves
in, and think themselves well come to, with Precious Jesus Christ as their
Mediator and Redeemer, as their Lord, head, and Husband? who rejoice and glory
in the midst of tribulation in the hope of the glory of God? joy in external
things is much withered away from us, and it is just with God that it should be
so, since we live so great strangers to the joy of the Lord, which is our
strength; upon but a very overly trial, we will easily discover that there is
amongst us none, or but very little spiritual joy in God; I mean not only, nor
so much of sensible joy, as of our little active stirring up of our selves to
give obedience to that Command concerning rejoicing in God always and evermore.
May I not conclude then, that there is great ground of expostulation with us
all, both believers and others, who may be convinced, that this lies
indispensibly on them, even to have a conversation as it becomes the Gospel of
Christ? Ah! how little conscience is made of it: O! mourn for and Lament our
short-comings, as to this: and fall to the work, fall about it more then ever,
as your main business, to have a conversation becoming the Gospel: many already
are a reproach and a shame to the Gospel, (and it will disclaim them) and who
shall live to see it, a great many more will be so; Alace! few or none of us all
have a Conversation as becomes the Gospel, which is a Lamentation and should be
for a Lamentation.

The Third Use is, of Exhortation, that seeing such a conversation is so much,
and with such speciality called for, and yet so little seriously endeavored by
most; let me turn over to you the Apostle^ exhortation to the Philippians: if
ye would know how to behave at home and abroad, in the duties of Worship, and
in the duties of your particular callings, stations and relations, even in all
Commanded Duties; then, Only let your Conversation be, as it becomes the Gospel
of Christ: And beware of doing any thing that is unbecoming the Gospel: or that
may give ground to speak any ill of it; beware of letting the precious Promises
ly by you unimproved; but study to be like them: O study Holiness in all manner
of Conversation; which is, not only and simply to be Holy or to have Holiness,
but a Holiness influenced by the Gospel-promises in Christ, believingly
improved, as the Apostle exhorts, 2 Cor. 7.1. Not only to be externally holy,
but to be in the exercise of the graces of the Spirit within; to cleanse from
all filthiness of the Spirit, as well as of the flesh, especially to purify the
heart the fountain of Pollution, even to study to be pure as he is pure, to
aim at Holiness in the strength of Christ, in the largest extent and in the
Highest pitch, and yet to be denied to it and all vain conceit of it, even to
account it but loss, in the point of Justification before God; to be in the
Practice of all the duties of Religion Sweetly, Pleasantly, Heartsomely and
cheerfully, walking under all sorts of lots with a Gospel contentedness: This,
O! this would be a conversation worthy of, and becoming the Gospel, nay it
would make a little Heaven on earth. And we desire to to be as pressing and
peremptory in calling for this from you, as ever we urgently pressed you by any
call or invitation to receive the offer of the Gospel and of Christ therein;
and if we were to speak to you all, O Men and women, one by one, by name and
Surname, this would be our Exhortation to you; Only let your Conversation be as
it becomes the Gospel of Christ.

We come now, (as we promised) to press this on you by some few Considerations:
And First Consider the authority that enjoins it and lays it on you; and if ye
trust him, and expect the accomplishment of any promise of the Gospel from him,
then take this as proceeding from the same Authority; presume not under the
pain of Gods displeasure, and of cheating your own souls to their ruin, to
take or meddle with the promise, if ye mind not sincerely to study a
suitableness in your conversation to the Gospel. 2. Consider, not only the
reasonableness of the thing, but also the sweet easiness of it; for taking it
in a Gospel sense, it is an easy yoke and a light burden: and it is withal very
suitable and congruous to all professors of the Gospel: ought not a Minister to
be like his calling, a Merchant to be like his calling, a Tradesman to be like
his trade and calling? ought not also a Christian to be like his Christian
calling, like the Gospel which he professes? 3. Consider the ties and
obligations, that all who profess to have received the Gospel, are under: are
ye not obliged to such a Conversation, by your Baptismal Vow? which obligation,
though many of you forget, yet God will require it; Think ye that ye are free
to live as ye list, to live like the Gospel or not, or to take one Piece of a
Gospel walk, and leave another? Ye are Professedly resigned to God in Baptism,
and are by it oblidged to live every way as it becomes the Gospel; and ye must
either on the matter renounce your Baptism and deny Christ, and so deal
treacherously with him, or ye must make it your business to live like the
Gospel. 4. Consider, that this Gospel will be the rule whereby ye shall be
judged, whether ye have indeed received the Mediator, The promises and
privileges, the duties and directions, and the graces of it, and improved them
or not; in the day (says the Apostle, Romans 2.) That God shall judge the
secrets of hearts by my Gospel: If ye would have boldness when death and
Judgment come, endeavor a conversation becoming this Gospel: though your
conversation were very much becoming the law (as it is impossible now without
Gospel grace) yet will not that satisfy the Judge; for ye will be Judged both
by the law and Gospel. 5. Consider, that though the Lord had required many hard
things of you; you would most certainly have been oblidged to have performed
them; and now when he requires only this, ought ye not so much the more to aim
at it, and endeavor it? Otherwise ye bring up an ill report on this Gospel, as
if it were an unsupportable heavy burden, and most uneasiy yoke; for which ye
must answer at your peril; consider the dreadful doom and sentence of the
slothful Servant, Who said, He is a hard Master. 6. Consider the great
prejudice that a walk unbecoming the Gospel has with it; I cannot easily, nay
not at all to the full, tell you the prejudice it will bring to you; Only this
I will say, that it had been better for you, that ye had never heard the
Gospel; It had been better that ye never had been piped to by the Gospel, and
that ye had never heard any of its sweetest musick-springs, if (to follow the
Lords own similitude so far) ye endeavor not to keep all the measures thereof
in your dancing after it, in your walking conform to it: Tell me, if we may be
in earnest with you: what if ye were called even now or before night to give an
account of your improving of and profiting by the Gospel, whereof ye have so
very much, and from which ye have been so often piped unto, how utterly
unanswerable would many of you be found to be? your triffling way of walking
alone and in your families, your neglecting of Prayer in them, with the chiding
and bitterness betwixt husbands and wives, and with and amongst servants; your
omitting to instruct children and Servants in the principles of Religion; your
tippling and mis-spending your time, declare sufficiently what your Conversation
is. If any of you shall say, the conversation that you press, is a harder work
and a more difficult task then we can win at; Is it any thing else, then what
the Holy Ghost by the Apostle presses on all the hearers of the Gospel? Q!
take heed of branding a walk becoming the Gospel with so black a note, as if it
were an unsupportable yoke of intolerable hard bondage, lest it be said to you,
evil and slothful Servants, etc. if ye had been Serious and diligent in making
use of the Gospel in a Gospel way, by improving Christ and the Promises, this
work would have gone better with you, and ye had been in much better case then
ye are in now: If ye had been more in the practice of Gospel duties and in the
exercise of Gospel-graces in secre^, your visible conversation might and would
have been much more as it becomes the Gospel.

As for you that have Communicate, there is a peculiar tie upon you, you have
renewed your Covenant with God: and is there any covenanting with God but it
has this in it, That if there be thereafter a falling back such back sliders
come under the guilt of treacherous dealing with him? Let me, for a conclusion
of this Discourse, say these few things to you; First, Is it suitable, think
ye, to fast the one day for your not walking as it becomes the Gospel, and to
take unjust liberty to your selves the next day? on a fast day to spue out your
foul and abominable sins, and to return with the dog to the vomit in a few dies
thereafter? will ye be so unsuitable to your professions and confessions?
beware of that, for the Lords sake: better ye had never fasted nor confessed,
then thus to mock the Lord. 2. Many of you have been at the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, and in it ye have professed that ye have taken Christ for your
husband, which implies the tie and obligation of a dutiful wife: what, I pray,
is That, but to have a Conversation as becomes the Gospel, and to walk worthy
of the Vocation wherewith ye are called? As the Apostle Exhorts, Ephesians. 4.1.
And is there any straiter bond on earth whereby men can be bound? If, after
thus Covenanting with Christ, ye shall foully fail or fall back, will it not
exceedingly aggrege your guilt? 3. Are there not of you who have come under
some private engagements to the Lord? I take it for granted, if ye have not
been scorning God in your humiliation, and in your Communicating: I take it (I
say) for granted, that severals of you have come under particular and personal
engagements to God: If so, ye would beware of loosing those ties, and of
violating those so Solemn engagements: and the rather, that it is to be feared,
if ye keep not promise to God now, ye may never get a Communion again to renew
it. 4. I would have some of you remembering of those particular obligations ye
came under, and promises that you made to us, when you received your tokens, to
amend those faults whereof ye were well known to be guilty: most certainly
those Promises, especially so explici^ly made, will bear witness against you,
if those evils be continued in, or relapsed into: and we shall bear witness for
Christ against you, if ye shall not be answerable to your engagements: for the
Lords sake, put us not to it.

Essay in good earnest and set about the study of this Gospel-becoming
Conversation: I shall forbear to speak of encouragements to this. It will be
one good encouragment, to consider seriously, that it is a walk becoming the
Gospel and Christ in it: that it has such promises made to it: and such a
surety for every promise: that the certification of the Law is not at it: that
ye have pa^don of sin promised to you on your Repentance: and furniture at hand
for every thing called for from you. Take it in short, what ever your calling,
station or relation be: Only let your Conversation be, as becomes the Gospel
of Christ, and remember the ties and obligations that ye are under, whether
more general or more Particular, Otherwise they shall be remembered, to, and
against you. Now the Lord himself enable you by His all-sufficient Grace, to
suit all your obligations, to pay all your Vows, and to make all your honest
resolutions Practicable, relating to this Conversation becoming the Gospel of
CHRIST.

A very Heavenly SERMON Preached, if not after the Communion, yet very
pertinent for such an occasion; however it is subjoined to the immediately
preceding, because of the affinity of purposes.
On Philip. 3.20. For our Conversation is in Heaven.
THE Life and work of a Christian is a far other thing, then, for the most
part, it is taken to be and, no question, were we often thinking on, and
studying the qualifications and extent of a Christian conversation, to which
believers are called; we would walk with stopped mouths in the deep sense of
our great short-coming; and there would not be such delusion under the conceit
of self-righteousness; But the ignorance of this makes carnal men think
themselves to be something; and makes even believers themselves, that they walk
not so humbly, nor press so seriously toward the mark, neither do they Propose
to themselves, as they ought, a just and perfect pattern to follow.

Amongst other qualifications of a Christian-walk and conversation, This is one
and a very considerable one; that our Conversation should be in Heaven: A thing
we fear the most part of the Christians of this age scarcely believe, much less
endeavor, that they should live with their hearts above in Heaven, in the
lively expectation of the Saviors coming, That they should converse in Heaven
among the spirits of just men made perfect, before they come thither.

The Scope of these words is plain. The Apostle Paul has to do with the
Christian Philippians, who were much tempted, and no doubt, in some hazard to
be led aside both from the faith, and from the Practice of Religion: And the
way that he takes to keep them right as to both, is by proposing His own
example to them; as if he had said, ye will readily think, that I should be
well acquainted with the way to Heaven: Now the way that I take for my
Justification Before God, is not to seek after Righteousness by the works of
the Law, but to be found in Christ covered with his righteousness taken hold of
by Faith: And if ye would know what I do in reference to Sanctification, this
is it, I forget those things that are behind, and reach forth unto those things
that are before, pressing toward the Mark for the Prize; being constantly as
it were on the spur, that I may attain that which I have not as yet come at,
even that perfection of Holiness, that accompanies the resurrection from the
dead: And having laid this before them, as a fair copy and pattern; He improves
it, by exhorting them thus, Brethren be ye followers together of me; take the
way, that I take, both in the matter of Faith and of Practice; And he gives two
reasons why he would have them to do so; The First whereof is taken from the
danger that was in following those false teachers, Verse. 18.19. Many of whom
walk so, as they are Enemies to the Cross of Christ; That is, enemies to the
doctrine of faith in Christ, and to the exercise of it on him, and to the
Doctrine of his Cross, and also to a truly spiritual walk, Whose end is
destruction, and whose God is their Belly. The Second Reason is subjoyned in
the Text, drawn from the great advantage, which they should have by following
him, For (says He) Our conversation is in Heaven: This is the spiritual,
Heavenly and divine walk, wherein he holds forth himself, and his
fellow-Apostles as a pattern to be imitated by them, and so teaches them their
duty; We are not (as if he had said) like those false ^eachers; But our
Conve^sation is in Heaven, Therefore follow us; and he gives an instance of
this in the latter part of the Verse, From whence (says he) We look for the
Savior: He is like a person on the Watch tower, that is looking and longing
for the coming of a friend; Plainly insinuating thereby, that he looks not for
much satisfaction in this world, but was earnestly longing for and in
continual expectation of Christ's coming; to which all his hope and expectation
of complete happiness, and of full satisfaction to his soul, was closely
confined.

So then the great thing that he aims at here, is to commend a heavenly
conversation, to these Christian Philippians, and to all that should hear the
Gospel, and this excellent piece of it amongst the rest.

There are only Two things shortly to be cleared, before we proceed further;
The First is, What is meaned by Conversation here; And the reason of the
question is, because the word is so very significant in the Original, that
hardly can we get a word in our language to express it by to the life; It Is
taken from that which signifies a Town-ship, corporation-ship (to speak so) or
Burges-ship; and it implies these two things; First, a title to such and such
privileges; as those who were Romans or born Citizens of Rome, and whoever
were made Burgesses of it; had such and such Privileges attending their
Burges-ship. The Second is a suitableness and peculiar manner of living and
carrying according to the Laws of that City; as it is often said in the book
of the Acts of the Apostles, After the manner of the Romans: who had their own
laws, customs, and usages: and being applied here in a Spiritual sense, it
supposes. 1. A joint interest with the saints, (or being Fellow Citizens with
the Saints: As it is Ephesians. 2.19.) Who are all Burgesses of the Heavenly
Jerusalem, though some of them be, as it were, in the Suburbs and lower Town,
and some in the Higher; yet all here below have the same Master and Father with
them who are above in Heaven. 2. It supposes a way, walk, and conversation
like Heaven, to be peculiarly endued with a nature, inclinations, desires,
designs, and qualifications suitable to heaven: We take it here, especially in
the latter sense: because Paul proposes himself as a pattern to them to
imitat; and it holds his suitableness to Heaven.

The Second thing to be cleared a little is, what it is to have a conversation
in Heaven? I Answer, these Two are in effect one and the same, to have a
conversation in heaven, and to be Heavenly in our conversation: it is even to
have a conversation like that which Christians hope to have in Heaven, and such
as are bounden, and on their way thitherward, should have: This is a general
hint of what a Heavenly Conversation, or a Conversation in Heaven is: and
because, in prosecuting the Doctrines to be deduced from the words, we will
have occasion to explain it More Particularly, we shall say no more of it now.

The Doctrines that arise from the words, are especially these Four: The first
whereof is, that There is a sort of Heavenliness, in the Conversation of
Christians, that should be studied by them all without exception, and that
lies on them all as their duty.

The Second is, that, This Heavenliness of Conversation is in a great measure
through Grace attainable: for Paul and other believers attained it; which is
not so to be understood, as if there were an universal suitableness; or a
suitableness in all things, in sojourning Saints, to Glorified Saints in
Heaven; for in Heaven they do not eat nor drink, neither are they married nor
given in Marriage: But it is to be understood of a suitableness in respect of
qualification, conformity and likeness, in so far as is incumbent to sojourners
who are walking thither-ward.

The Third is, That, It is a peculiar and contradistinguishing mark of a
serious and suitably exercised Christian, from all other men in the world: That
his conversation is in Heaven, while that of others is not.

The Fourth is, That, It Is not an ordinary and common, but a rare thing among
Professed Christians, to have a Conversation in Heaven, Many (says the
Apostle) Walk, of whom I have told you, and now tell you weeping, that they are
enemies to the Cross of Christ: But I and some few others with me have our
Conversation in Heaven: and the many that he speaks of here, we take to be
those, of whom he speaks in the First Chapter, who preached Christ, but out of
envy, and pressed Holiness, it is like with more then ordinary fervor, being
zealous of the Law, and seeking to mix the righteousness of it with the
Righteousness of Christ in the point of Justification: yet they had not their
Conversation in Heaven, as he and some others had.

We shall not prosecute these Doctrines distinctly: seeing this is the scope of
them all, even to hold forth and commend the Necessity and excellency of a
Heavenly conversation: which we shall first clear. 2 Confirm: and then. 3. We
shall speak to the Use of it.

First Then, for Clearing what a Heavenly Conversation is, ye would consider,
that the Apostle speaks of his own and of some few other Godly persons their
conversation, in opposition to those many mentioned by him before: And it
imports or implies these Four. First it is to have Heaven proposed to our selves
as our great Scope and design, next to the glory of God; even as, to have an
earthly Conversation, is to mind earthly things, to have a bentness of spirit
toward them, and to be wholly or Mostly taken up about the things of the
World: So to be Heavenly in our Conversation, is to have the mind taken up
about Heaven, Prizing, affecting and seeking after Heaven and Heavenly things,
as the word is, Col. 3.1. Seek after, or set your affections on those things
that are above. Secondly, As it imports, Prizing and affecting of Heaven and of
Heavenly things, so it imports the taking of that way that leads to the end:
and so it is, to be in the use of all means and duties that lead to Heaven,
seek (says the Apostle, in that Col. 3.1.) Those things that are above: Set
your affections on things above, not on things beneath, or on the earth: To
hold forth the earnestness and ardency of affections that Christians ought to
have toward things heavenly: and how very much they should be with Holy care
and solicitude, busied in the use of all means, and in the Practice of all
duties, for the furthering and promoting of an Heavenly design: even as
worldly men are taken up and exercised with carking cares, leaving (as it were)
no stone unmoved to promove and compass their earthly designs. Thirdly, It
imports the having of our Conversation like heaven, to be walking like those
that are in Heaven: not to be conformed to the World, or like the men of the
world, but to be like Angels and Glorified Saints in Heaven, according to our
Capacity: as we are taught to pray, in the Lords Prayer, They will be done on
earth, as it is done in Heaven: It Is to have a native and kindly suitableness
and proportionableness to them that are glorified in Heaven. Fourthly, It
imports this, that we should be often in Heaven as to our thoughts and
affections, as to our desires and delights: Though we be living on the earth:
that we should have as it were, more then our one half in heaven: as David has
it Psalm. 25.1. Unto thee O Lord, do I lift up my soul: or as the Word is, 2
Cor. 5. Though we be absent in the Body, that yet we may be some way present in
our Spirits with the Lord; that we should make frequent visits to Heaven; that
we should have much to do there, have much Traffic, commerce, correspondence
and intercourse in and with Heaven; that (in a word) we should converse more
where we love, then where we live: which is held forth and expressed in the
Scripture, by walking with God, by having fellowship with him, by following
hard after him, and the like: a suitableness to and a converse in Heaven are
mainly meant here.

As for the Second thing proposed, viz. The Confirmation of this, that a
Christian should study this Heavenliness of Conversation; the Argument is clear
and pressing from Verse. 17. Where the Apostle exhorts the Philippians to be
followers of him, and here he tells them that his Conversation is in Heaven:
and if his Conversation was in Heaven, then certainly it was their duty and is
ours, to have our Conversation in Heaven; for he proposes himself as our
pattern in this, and we have it, from the Spirit of God, by him pressed on us
as our duty, to imitat him in this thing; It is not so singular a practice; as
to be peculiarized, Monopoliz'd and engrossed to him alone; but such as was
common to him, and other serious Christians according to their measure;
Therefore he says not, My Conversation, but Our Conversation; as if he had
said, it is mine and the Conversation of others, and of all that follow me; and
I would have you in this to follow me and none other that does not walk as I
do. If it be needful further to confirm it, ye may take this one reason,
which has several arguments in the bosom of it; A Christians Conversation
should be Heavenly, because, all that a Christian has, is from and in Heaven,
and is some way Heavenly; as will manifestly appear, if ye look, first to a
Christians nature, it is from Heaven; He is Partaker of the Divine Nature, He is
born of God, He is of the new Jerusalem, his Father is Heavenly, as he is
taught to pray; Our Father which art in Heaven, Or our Heavenly Father; to
point out, that as we have born the Image of the earthly, so must we bear the
Image of the Heavenly, as it is. 1 Cor. 15.49. Where is the elder Brother? Is
he not in the Heavenly places? As the Apostle tells us Ephesians. 2.6. His Treasure
is in Heaven; His hope is in Heaven; Heaven is the City, the Mansion, the rest
whither He is traveling, or if Secondly, ye consider the Believers calling and
his obligation: Thereby he is partaker of the Heavenly calling: (as it is Heb.
2.1.) Separated from the rest of the world, and therefore ought not to live as
the world does; He has a Heavenly law to walk by: he has Heavenly promises,
to feed and live upon, and to comfort himself in; his happiness is Heavenly;
and all the Duties that he is called to are so; of which this is the substance
and sum, even to glorify God, and to seek to enjoy him, and so to shine in his
Conversation, as others may be provoked to glorify God: are not his prayers
and praises Heavenly? and can a believer possibly go aright about those, and
not be Heavenly? to be Translated from darkness to light, to be a partaker of
the Sanctifieing spirit of God, to be a new Creature, to have the spirit of
Adoption, to have boldness of access to God, to be an Heir and a joint-Heir
with Christ etc. Are not these Heavenly? Or if Thirdly, We look to his company,
is it not Heavenly? We are come (says the Apostle Heb. 12.) To God the Judge
of all, to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, to the new Jerusalem, (which
takes in all the Saints in Heaven, and the Saints on earth) to an innumerable
company of Angels, to the general assembly of the first born, and to the
Spirits of just men made perfect. In a word, whatever we look to, whether to
the Believers nature, or to his end, or to the rule of his walk, or to the
Promises, or to his work and way wherein he is to go; all is Heavenly: is there
not an oblidging necessity on the Believer, in respect of all these, to study
to be Heavenly in his Conversation? Which is the great thing that the Apostle
Paul presses on you; and from these words is clearly pressed on all Christians.

The Uses are Four; The First whereof serves for Instruction and Infirmation to
all that bear the Name of Christ; know from this, what is the high pitch of
Holiness that ye are called to, It is even to be Heavenly in your Conversation;
are there not many who have much need to be instructed in this? Who never
walked under the Conviction of the necessity of this as a duty; otherwise, were
it possible, that the most part of men and women, who are called Christians and
profess a hope of Heaven, could or durst live as they do, some in Prophanity
Riotousness and gluttony; others in mere civility and Moral Honesty; and
others in Formality and Hypocrisy at the best? Let me ask you in good earnest,
are ye not convinced that this is a duty? or do you think that Paul was
scorning or complementing, when he exhorts to follow him in this? Or is it
possible that ye can enjoy so many Heavenly privileges, or be to any purpose
performing heavenly duties, except ye be Heavenly in your Conversation? And if
so, Mistake not Christianity, as if when ye are exhorted to be Christians, ye
were only bidden not to be profane; or only to go about the external duties
of Religion; or only to have a sort of merely Moral sincerity, and seriousness
in the performing of them; which are indeed things good in themselves, and we
do not, we dare not disallow them, but rather commend them; but ye are called
to more, to much more, and that is to be Heavenly-minded and to have your
Conversation in Heaven. I know some are so profane, and others are so
misbelievingly discouraged, that when they hear such doctrine as this, they
will be ready, the one sort to say, We cannot all be Saints; and the other,
Alace! we cannot be Saints: but let all such mouths be stopped; ye are called
and oblidged indispensibly to be Saints: and if ye be not Saints here, ye shall
never be Saints hereafter: There are also some of so distempered dispositions
and humors, that they either put off all or most duties, or at least go very
heartlesly about them, because they cannot attain perfection in them; but it is
clear from the Scriptures, that there is a kind of Perfection to be win at here
in this life, which is even this Holiness and Heavenliness of Conversation:
When ye shall be called to a reckoning, God will not ask you so much, whether
ye did not Drink drunk, Whore, Swear, Lie, Cheat, Steal, or the like, as
whether ye were Heavenly in your Conversation? and this is not to be astricted
to one, or to some few particular duties; but is the requisite qualification of
a Christian in all duties and in all his actions: whether he be Praying,
Practicing, Hearing, Reading, Buying, Selling, Eating, Drinking, etc. Or
whatever He do and be about, he is to be Heavenly in all those.

And if ye Ask more particularly; what that is? I shall show you, in what
respect a Christian may be said to have and should have his Conversation in
Heaven. And First; in respect of the inward Holy frame and Divine sent of his
heart: he should be Heavenly in that: free from those distempering Passions,
that the men of this world are subjected, nay enslaved unto and hurried with:
He should not have his affections dragging on the earth, nor his delights, nor
desires taken up with things earthly: but he should be Mortified unto and
weaned from all those things: He should not be like unto those who on all
occasions are tossed with their humors and with every wind of temptation: but
he should be so calm, Composed and sober, settled and fixed in a Heavenly
temper of Spirit, that words of reproach may not much trouble him, nor crosses
and afflictions much disquiet him: he should have such composure and sedatness
of spirit, that he may be much above the levity and unstayedness that the men
of the world are under the power of, and he should endeavor to be defecat and
purged from those impure mixtures of self-interests, that are regnant in
worldly men. Secondly in respect of his work, he should and may have his
conversation in Heaven, and that is, when he is much in the exercise of those
Graces, and in the practice of those duties, that he is to be taken up with in
Heaven: to be much in love to God, taken up with delighting in him, much in
Communion with God, Holily impatient to want him or to live without his
company; to be much in the study and searching out of his perfections: to be
studying to have the heart fixed, as it were a pillar in his house and not to
go out from him: to be much in admiring and adorning the free grace and love of
God: and to be in a Holy manner ravished with the contemplation of those: to be
much in the work of Prayer, and much in the work of Praise, saying, Worthy is
the Lamb to receive Glory, Honor, Dominion etc. Joining with the four beasts
and four and twenty Elders; saying, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty: to be much
in prizing and valuing of God, in setting out and commending him: to be in all
duties willing and cheerful, doing Gods will cheerfully and with alacri^y: to
be much in longing for the Sabbath to converse more closely with him: longing
often for privacie and retirement to pour out the heart before him: and to do
all this with Holy coveting to do it better, praying that his will may be done
on earth, as it is done in Heaven. Thirdly, A believer may be said to have his
Conversation, and you are called to have yours in Heaven, in respect of a
Heavenly walk, and as having a heavenly impresse on all your Conversa^ion: to
be walking as it were in Heaven, and as if Holiness to the Lord were written on
your foreheads: which being very comprehensive takes in these, First to have
the heart fixed in meditating on God and his law, on Spiritual and Heavenly
things, to have a sublime and divine strain of mind, not debasing it self to
pursue vanities; but kept in a close and constant pursuit after Communion with
God and conformity to him; to be in case to say with David, Psalm. 139. When I
awake I am still with thee: Laboring to leave the heart and mind in Heaven,
when ye ly down, and seeking to find it there, when ye arise. 2. To have your
affections, love, desires and delights in Heaven, or heavenly. 3. To have your
words savouring of Heaven; Ministering Grace to the hearers; endeavoring to
have your words weighty and grave in the commendation of God and his Grace. 4.
To have your hearing of the word, and your praying, carrying much of a heavenly
stamp and impression on them; hearing, as if God were speaking to you
Immediately from heaven, and praying; as if ye were even before his Throne. 5.
In your more common and ordinary Conversation, as in your Eating and Drinking,
in your recreating, and in following your lawful callings and employments, even
the very coursest and lowest of them, to propose to your selves another end,
then the men of the world do, making that your main end to Glorify God; and to
have such a heavenly and Divine way of going about these, as may be convincing,
edifieing and gaining of on-lookers; not to be predominantly influenced by
selfish humors, designs or interests, looking only, or mainly, to what may
please or profit your selves, but levelling all at the Glory of God, and the
edification and good of others, as well as your own. Fourthly, We may be said
to have our Conversation in Heaven, when we have a Holy commerce and trading
(as it were) with Heaven; as a man is said to converse in France or Spain, when
he trades and trafliques there; So, to have converse in Heaven, is Spiritually
to traffic there; to have Faith and Hope exercised in and about heaven, to
send many prayers and desires to heaven, as so many empty vessels; and to be in
the lively and longing expectation of their return full and richly laden; to
make many visits (as I said before) to heaven; and to be in all those, neither
seldom, nor transiently and at starts only, but to be frequent and more
continuing in them; and though they should sometimes return either with seeming
loss, or with very little gain, yet to keep up the trade and traffic, seeking
to make up our loss by a new voyage thither: for the trade is not always (to
speak so) alike quick. Fifthly, We may be said to converse in heaven, by our
abiding (as it were) in heaven; and this is one of the highest steps of a
heavenly Conversation. If ye shall ask How it is, that a believer, while on
earth, does or can abide in Heaven? I Answer these ways, or in these respects:
1. By having his heart in heaven, where his treasure is; For (as the Lord
says) Where a man's treasure is, there is his heart: the man (as it were) dwells
there, and if at any time he remove a little, he leaves there his great stock,
and his heart as a Factor: so, though the Christian be discoursing, buying,
selling, eating, drinking etc. Yet in all these, his heart may and ought some
way to be in heaven. 2. To have his Faith in heaven, and, as it were, never to
come out of it. 3. To have his love in heaven, folding its two arms about the
Lamb and him that sits on the Throne; holily loath to have them loosed from
those sweet Soul solacing and satisfieing embraces. 4. To have his hope in
heaven, which is an Anchor cast within the vail, and makes the soul safe and
sure amidst the greatest tempests of outward trouble, as a ship rides safely
when she has cast Anchor on firm ground, so that there is no fear she will
drive. In a word, these Four, The Heart, Faith, Hope, and Love, being in
heaven, we may say that the man's best half and Part is in heaven: his ^edder
stake is loosed, and much of his Tabernacle taken down, and he made in a good
measure meet, ready and ripe for his dissolution and for heaven: Thus ye are
called and oblidged to have your Conversation in heaven. Sixthly, A Believers
conversation may be said to be, and ought to be in heaven, when his
contentment, delight and satisfaction are in heaven; when all that he desires,
all that he delights in, and on which his soul feeds, and all that he is
comforted with, is in heaven, and he has not a day to do well, nor one
comfortable good hour, but that which is given him from heaven: and this is not
only to be abiding with, but to be delighting in God: having the peace of God
that passes understanding, guarding the heart, and His love shed abroad
therein: and having all that which entertains his life, coming from heaven:
Thus Col. 3.3. It is said, that our life is hid with Christ in God: So that the
Believer is affected with nothing, feeds upon, and is satisfied with nothing so
much as he is with that which comes from heaven: He awakes, he sleeps, he rests
there: This is to live in Heaven, and to be heavenly in our Conversation: And
this is it that ye are called and oblidged to: even to have your conversation
in heaven in all these forementioned respects: that as ye believers are of
another nature, so ye may be of another and more divine Frame of soul in your
work and walk, in your thoughts and words, in your outward duties, and in the
exercise of inward Graces, in your commerce and trading, in your contentment,
delight, and satisfaction, to be heavenly in all.

And if any shall here say, This is a very hard task: I Answer first, Can it be
hard to be in heaven? Nay, it is an ease rather, for Christ's yoke is easy and
his burden is light: and in as much as our Conversation is in heaven we have so
much true Spiritual ease and repose of soul: and it is what we leave behind in
the world, that makes the difficulty to get our Spirits scrued up to heaven,
and to be kept there: here lies the difficulty: but the more the heart and the
mind be there, we have really the more ease. 2. Will ye shift, deny or decline
the duty, because it is difficult and hard? As indeed it is to corrupt nature:
Notwithstanding all the difficulty of it, the Apostle Paul with his fellows and
followers did win to it in a good measure, and we may attain it through Grace,
according to our Measure; Is not this the way to heaven which our Lord calls
Strait, and which but few find? And yet, if ye would try and make proof of it
in good earnest: ye would find it to be not so very strait or unpassable as ye
Imagine it to be: It would be found to be waited with such delight, as would
much sweeten any hardness in it: and ye would not want an insight in those
heavenly mysteries, and the beholding your names written in heaven and in the
Lambs book of life, nor one hours feeding upon and being solaced by them, for
all he delights of the men of this world: and since it is only hard to
corruption, it should be so much the more endeavored and plied hard.

The Second Use serves for Trial, that we may know who is a Christian indeed
and a Thriving Christian; or it may serve rather to be an use of Discovery and
of Conviction; and indeed it may very easily and quickly make discovery of the
unsoundness of many, and of the short-coming of all: Need we insist on this? Is
it not a truth obvious to all, viz. That Christians are called and oblidged to
be heavenly in their Conversation? Are not these the Characters of such a
Conversation? Nay is there not yet much more requisite in a Christian, even a
divineness above what we can express? And if ye be (as ye may be) convinced
that this is a truth; then let me in the next place ask you, if your
Conversation be such? Put your own consciences to it; enquire at them whether
your trade be to Heaven, whether your peace and joy, your delight and
satisfaction be there? Would God ye would essay it, and could upon good ground
say, that it is so: But Ah! is there any that can say it without some
hesitation? Is not the best exceeding defective? Or if many of you shall say,
it is so; What then means your carnalness, your prevailing lust, distempering
humors and passions? What means your so much pleading for self-interests, this
turning (as it were) of the World up-side down for our own particulars? How
comes it to pass, that ye who are profane do spend so much of your precious
time in Tippling, and trifle away so much of it unprofitably many other ways?
Dare ye say, that ye who walk thus, are indeed followers of the Apostle Paul?
Or if ye dare not say, that ye are followers of him in his Heavenly
Conversation; can ye think or expect to dwell with him in Heaven? O! be not
deceived, for God will not be mocked: when ye reflect seriously on your selves
and on your way, will ye not find just ground for being ashamed and confounded
before God? or is there any of us all, that needs to want an errand to the
Throne of Grace, to confess and crave Pardon for our sinful short-coming in
this? I shall only speak a word or two in further prosecution of this Use, to
you that are Stout-hearted and know no changes, that have always a good
opinion and a good word to say of your selves, Who are ready to say, that ye
have a good meaning, and to think and say that ye loved God all your days; and
who at best content your selves with and sit down on a form of Religion, who
never studied to die to the world, and never made it your business in good
earnest, to Mortify your lusts, and to be holy in the inward frame of your
souls: Is this, think ye, to have your Conversation in Heaven? Would ye know
then, if ever ye have studied Christianity seriously; try it by this, viz.
Whether ye have been heavenly in your conversation; for however ye Judge of
your selves, God will most certainly Judge you according to this Rule and
qualification of a Christian: It is both sad and strange to think, how it comes
to pass, that many of you bear and bolster up your selves with a hope of
Heaven, and profess that ye have no doubt but you shall come thither, who yet
want and are void of this qualification.

I know such will be ready to Object, Who are they that come this length? To
which I shall only Answer, That, as I would be very loath to quench any smoking
flax, or to break any bruised reed (whereof our Lord and Master is very tender)
or to cast water of discouragement upon any the least spark or spunk of
sincerity, where there is any honest aiming to walk according to this Rule; So,
I cannot, I dare not but say to others, in the first Place; have ye walked
under the conviction of this as a duty incumbent on you? and have ye seriously
Proposed it to your selves as your great business in the World, to be sincerely
aiming at, and endeavoring after this Conversation in Heaven? or have ye not
rather had peace (such as it was) when ye said your prayers morning and
evening, though ye did not so much as design or aim at this throughout the
day? And can ye with any shadow of reason think, ye have attained it or can
attain it, who never seriously proposed this as a Rule to your selves to walk
by, nor never had a Conscience-disquieting challenge for such neglect and
manifest short-coming? 2. What Labor are ye at, what pains take ye to
prosecute such a design and blessed project as this? It Is one thing to pray,
to be about external duties of Religion, and to be a Christian in the letter;
and another thing to be in these duties after a heavenly manner, and to be a
Christian indeed, a Christian inwardly and in the spirit, whose praise is not
of men but of God; Is it really your honest aim, design and endeavor
(whatever be the attainment) to be as much Heavenly in your conversation, as it
is to be civil and formal, or to attend the outward Ordinances? I fear many of
you cannot say, it is. 3. What weight lies on your spirits, for your short
coming in this? Ye will (be like) say, we are all short; which is a sad truth,
for indeed so we are; but are ye really weighted and grieved for your
short-coming in this? Have there been any times taken, to deal purposely with
the Lord to remove the earthly mind, and to help to Heavenly-mindedness? Have
there been challenges and any measure of serious heart-exercise, because of the
want of a heavenly mind? and that not only sometimes at the hearing of a
Sermon, or in time of sickness, or when under some other trouble; but in your
more constant and habitual walk? Is it one of the great things for which ye
blame and find fault with your selves before God? And though your outside and
visible Conversation be blameless: yet while you look on the carnalness and
earthliness of your mind, and on the want of this Divine and heavenly frame of
soul, it makes you hang the head, marres your boldness, and (as it were) lays
your feathers: because, do what ye can, your heart will not abide in heaven: If
it be thus, It Is a token for good, and some ground of peace: but O! How rare is
this? many of you, be like, have often overly prayed, Forgive us our sins; who
never took with, nor prayed for the Pardon of this sin: but have lain down at
night and risen up in the morning, having your hearts plunged and pudled in the
world, without once minding heaven in earnest, and yet have never been
challenged for it: Q sad state!

The Third Use Serves to Reprove and Expostulat for this unworthy carriage; for
having either nothing at all, or but very little of a Conversation in Heaven: We
take it for granted, that many of us are far from it, and that all of us are
little in it; but very few even of the best are daily and constantly Conversing
in Heaven; Alace! it is but now and then with many sad interruptions. For
quickening this reproof and expostulation a little, let me propose these few
Queries to you; and in the First place, do ye not know that the neglect of this
is a sin and the breach of a Command; Be ye followers of me? 2. Is not this an
excellent duty and royal privilege, to be admitted to converse in Heaven? And
therefore the neglect of it must not only be a sin, but a great sin, even a
trampling on the Grace of God, a slighting of heaven and of a most noble
privilege and dignity. 3. Think ye Heaven to be of great worth; if so, must
not conversing in heaven be of much worth? Will ye never so much as once go to
see the house, wherein ye say ye are to dwell? Q! How unsuitable a thing is it,
that those who are but days men here, should sit down and settle on the earth
without minding Heaven, and be so confined within time, as not seriously to
mind eternity? 4. How can ye come before God with confidence and boldness, who
do not endeavor thus to walk with him? Can ye say with Holy boldness; Our
Father which art in Heaven, Whose Conversation is not Heavenly? Can ye pray for
Holiness, and say these words, Thy will be done on Earth, as it is done in
Heaven, who never studied to be heavenly in any duty, that ye put hand to? But
5. And above all, I would ask you, can ye hope to die comfortably, nay can ye
hope to die in safety, as to your souls, who know not heaven, nor what is
there, nor what is the way to it? It gives a man confidence and comfort at
death, that he has conversed in heaven in his lifetime; such a man has but
little to do, when he comes to die, he knows the way and is not afraid, he knows
the company and longs to be with them; he knows the privileges and longs for
the full enjoyment of them; he has little here, his Treasure is above in
heaven, and his heart, Faith, Love, and hope are there; his Anchor is cast
within the vail, and he would fain be ashore: sure this is the Believers both
duty and privilege; do not think, that it is only called for from some More
then ordinary Christians, and who have nothing else to do: the matter is not
so, it is most certainly a duty, to which ye are all called that have a mind to
land fairly in heaven, when ye come off the troublesome tossing and tempestuous
Sea of this world.

Now Therefore in the Last room (as the Fourth Use of the Doctrine) I Exhort,
beseech and Obtest, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, all of you that lay
any claim to the hope of heaven, that ye would, and more then ever, study to
have your Conversation in heaven; Q! Be followers of Paul and of his fellows in
this thing: Need we adduce any motives to press this? Is not the duty clear?
And is it not a most excellent duty, a most desirable qualification of a
Christian walk? Is not heaven Transcendently excellent? And is it not excellent
to be heavenly minded, and conversant in heaven? Wherein may we expect to
prevail with you, if not in bringing you to heaven? what is the thing that
should sweeten the study of holiness to you? Is it not this, even, that by
having your conversation in heaven; ye come thither? Those who are now in
heaven think it a great motive, and if it be not a motive to you, ye will one
day curse your selves that ye Neglected it: study it therefore in due time:
This is the way to be free of the encombrances of an evil World: there is no
hazard of this estate its being forfeited or sequestered, there are no
Plunderings nor quarterings here, no poverty nor pain, nor any sad evil
occurrent here; Q! what a desirable life is it to be above all those things?
And indeed in so far as your Conversation is heavenly in so far ye are above
them, and live the life of Angels.

It Is like ye will Ask, what are the means or steps by which, we may win in and
ascend to this heavenliness of Conversation? which is indeed a very suitable
and necessary question, and would God we were serious in proposing of it, and
were convinced of the necessity of it: However, let such as would fain be at
it, know, First, That they must be much mortified, and denied to
Creature Comforts: therefore Col. 3. These two are opposed, Seek those things
which are above, set your affections on things in heaven; and not on things of
the earth: to go both up and down at once is impossible: if ye would be
heavenly in your Conversation, seek to have the world little and low in your
estimation: to be not only free from the sinful intanglements of it, but to be
Mortified to things lawful: I press you not to negligence in your honest and
lawful callings, far less to lay them aside, but to a heavenly mindedness and
holy denyedness in your diligence: Use the things of this world as not abusing
them: as not being taken with them, nor glued to them: the minding of earthly
things too much clogs and keeps men's hearts, that they do not mount up to
heaven: It Is impossible, while the heart is surfeited with the cares of this
life, that it can thus sore aloft. And therefore, Secondly, Those that would be
heavenly in their conversation must lay up their treasure in heaven, For where
the Treasure is, there will the heart be also: were ye under the deep and due
conviction of the vanity of earthly things, and of the excellency of heaven
and heavenly things, and laying your reckoning soberly and seriously, that
heaven ye must have, it would be much more easy to Scrue up your affections to
it: as where men's stock and treasure is, there is their heart: even so, were
your great stock and treasure in heaven, your heart would certainly be there:
your hope, your love and delight would be there: But your seeking after
contentment and satisfaction in earthly vanities, where it cannot be found,
keeps your heart out of heaven. Thirdly, Be much in the duty of meditation and
contemplation of heavenly things: this is, (as it were) the great wheel and
first mover of the Clock, to have the mind heavenly, often conversing in
heaven, and often thinking of it, and often recounting the blessed advantages,
the glorious and great happiness that are there, even till your meditation of
God be made sweet, and till your delight in him, thereby stirred up and
strengthened, make a heavenly conversation: for little such meditation makes
little heavenly-mindedness; and when the mind is not on heaven, something that is
worse comes in the place of it; ye that know the bent and inclination of your
own minds to be naturally downward, and how natively (to speak so) it runs on
vanities; and how difficult it is to keep it, but along two or three
sentences, fixed on heavenly things: and how preternatural a motion it is, (as
it were) to make it ascend and mount upward, will easily assent to the truth of
this; It is an excellent word that David has Psalm. 139. When I awake I am
still with thee. Fourthly, We commend this to you (hinted at before) that ye
would be much in trading and Trafficking with Heaven; to be often and serious
in Prayer, frequently sending up desires thither, and bringing thence returns
of prayer in great measures of Grace; catching hold of and griping at somewhat
above you, whereby ye may be helped up that high and Holy hill; It transforms
into the same Image from Glory to Glory, to be keeping love to Christ fresh, to
have hope as an anchor cast within the veil; In a word, love to Christ and
delight in him, being, as a considerable part, so also the result of Holiness;
There must be a study of Holiness in all the Parts of it, of Holiness in all
manner of Conversation, and a Heavenly frame aimed at, and endeavored in all
duties, and in all the steps of our walk and conversation, in order to the
keeping in, cherishing and increasing of love to, and delight in him; and often
thinking on that which helps to it, viz. Let thy will be done on earth, as it
is done in Heaven; A word often in the mouths of many, but little in their
hearts: And Q! how lamentably unlike are the practices of many of you to it? We
may indeed blush and think shame to speak, and you may think shame to hear of
having a Conversation in heaven, there being so little of it amongst us; But we
must speak of it and ye must hear it spoken of: since it is a part and a great
part of our duty, and will be a part, and a great part of our reckoning: and we
lay and leave it upon you from the Lord, to be studied by you: Do not think
that ye shall ever have your Conversation in Heaven afterward, who have not
your Conversation in Heaven here; many of you that have a fair Profession of
Religion, and seem to come near to that harbor of rest and yet never enter
into it, are like to a ship that comes, as it were, with up-sails, very near
the Port, and is unexpectedly blown back to the Sea again; whereas the
Believer who has his Anchor cast on firm and sure ground within the vail, is
enabled to endure tossing, being like a tight ship that is able to ride out the
storm and to stem the Port: His Treasure is in Heaven, and there is a sure and
indissoluble knot cast betwixt Heaven, where his treasure is, and his heart.
Now from all this judge, what a mighty prejudice it is to be earthly minded,
and to slight this walk with God, and Conversation in heaven: and who are they
that dare offer or presume to come before God the righteous Judge of Heaven and
Earth, in whose sight the very Heavens are not pure, to abide his trial, who
have been puddling all their days in the world, never once seriously and
suitably minding a Conversation in Heaven? O let the consideration of eternal
Happiness on the one hand, and of Eternal misery on the other, provoke you,
and necessitat you all to study in good earnest to have your conversation in
Heaven; and ye believers in Christ and Children of light, walk in the light,
suitably to your Heavenly Father and to the hope of your Heavenly inheritance.
O! be more conversant in Heaven, before ye come to it, and where ye shall be by
and by for evermore.

A Preparation SERMON, for the Communion.
On ISAIAH. 55.1, 2, 3. -- I will make an Everlasting Covenant with you, even
the sure mercies of David.
IT is hard to conceive or express, whether the things which the Gospel
offers be the most large, or the terms on which they are offered be the most
free. There is that, no doubt, in both together, which may make the beholder
stay and wonder. Among many excellent offers of the Gospel, that which is here
is one very full and free: would to God we could look on it suitably. But
Alace! we may fear, that we shall rather leave these sweet words with a vail
cast over the Beauty, Splendor and Luster of them, then lay them forth and
unfold them as we ought, and as they call for; we would therefore look to
himself whose words they are, and beseech him to explain and make them out to
us.

That this Text speaks of the Gospel, of the times of the Gospel, and of
Gospel-mercies, we take for granted and have good reason to do so, as on other
accounts, so from Acts 13.34. Which clearly holds out to us that these Promises
are not to be understood of Temporal things: the fifth verse. with all telling
us, that the offer of this Grace Promised shall be made to the Nations.

We may take up the Words in these Four: or there is here a Gospel-cryed fair
or Market set out in Four things: First in the Wares, Wine and Milk, that which
Satisfies and is good and fatness verse. 2. Soul, life, and the sure mercies of
David, verse. 3. These are the Wares, which do all come to the same amount: if
ye would know what that is: ye may consider David two ways, one is properly
and personally, as he is the Son of Jesse and King of Israel: It Is the Covenant
which was made with him, a main Article whereof was, that out of his loine
the^e should one spring, who should sit upon his Throne for ever: and thus the
sure mercies of David, are Christ and his benefits: The other way that ye would
look on David is, as he was a Type of Christ the Antitype and Principal
Covenanter or confederating Party with God: and so in effect it turns to the
same thing: only this latter way is more clear: So then we look on David here:
as it is not unusual for the Scriptures to hold him forth, viz. As a Type of
Jesus Christ; and indeed the words following do abundantly clear it: for David
Personally considered was now long since dead and gone, and was not the witness
nor the leader of the people: Therefore it must needs be Jesus Christ that here
is meant, mainly and Principally at least: As is very clear Acts 13.34. Christ
then being looked on as here understood, The sure mercies of David, are the
sure Mercies Covenanted and bargained (to speak so) to Christ before the World
was: and it plainly implies, that there was a Covenant or bargain betwixt the
Father and the Son about the Elect before the beginning of the World, whereof
as to the benefits therein Covenanted to the Mediator, the Gospel makes an
assignation to Believers in time. 2. We have the Chap-man (to say so) or the
Merchant to whom the wares are offered: It is he that thrists, he that wants
and would have: and if any serious Poor souls should think, that they are not
suitably sensible of their wants: then, says the Lord, Let him that has no
money come, that is, plain dyvours (as we speak) or bankrupts that have
nothing. 3. We have the terms on which all are offered to sale, and they indeed
suit wondrously well with the Merchant: Come (says the Lord) Buy without Money
and without price, Hear and your Soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting
Covenant with you: There is (to speak so with reverence) not a Purse opened in,
nor a penny paid for the Assignation of this bargain: though by Christ's
satisfaction there was a very great, a very costly and dear price paid: when
Christ came to buy and make a purchase of all these Mercies for the Elect, the
Market was very high and the prices were up: but when Believers come, by the
Covenant of Grace to receive them, the Market is come down, and the prices are
fallen wonderfully low: that which stood him very dear is to be had by them
Gratis very freely, even for nothing: It Is good that Christ was at the Market
before us, He has cheapened the Prices admirably: and lest any should think,
that though there be no Merit, yet something must be to Mollify the seller,
and to commend the Merchant to him: It Is said, Let him come without Money and
without price, without money or money-worth, he that has no commending
qualification is bid come. 4. We have the Proclamation of this Market, as Grace
has choice wares and sets them out very freely to sale, so it keeps them not
close shut up; but brings them forth to public view: and to every one, Ho Come
to the waters, it inviteth all to Come (as it were) to the shore, as if some
fleet were come in with rare and rich Commodities, for which men were to pay
nothing: the Proclamation is, Come and buy without Money: and because Grace
will not easily take a nay say, there is O Ho, an Oyes Prefixed, Ho come and
buy: But because there is dullness and slowness on our part. Notwithstanding all
this, there is an expostulation added, verse. 2. Wherefore spend ye your money
for that which is not Bread, and your labor for that which satisfies not? The
Assignation of the Bargain and the offer of the wares, are again urged, Come,
and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you: And to let us know that this
is sure, He subjoines, verse. 4. I have given him for a witness and leader to
the people: That all who are sensible of their own inability to come, may be
heartned to it in hope of his help to enable them.

We shall only in short, Observe these Two Points of Doctrine From the words.
The first whereof is, that, There is a most gracious and merciful transaction
betwixt the Father and the Son for the good and Salvation of poor Souls, even
of all the elect, past before the World was. The^e are sure M^rcies bargained
to David; for they are first his; This is clear from that part of the words;
Even the sure mercies of David. The Second is, that, all those mercies are put
to sale in the Gospel to (dyvour) bankrupt sinners upon exceeding easy, low and
condescending terms.

The First doctrine is employed, viz. That the Covenant of Redemption, wherein
there were so many given to Christ, whose Price he undertook to pay, is se^led
and established, according to that John 6.39. This is the Fathers will, that of
all he has given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the
last day. The Second looks to the Administration of this Covenant, By the
covenant of grace in the Gospel, according to Verse. 40. And this is the will of
him that sent me, that every one that sees the Son, and believes on him, may
have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day: So that, what
is laid on the Son, verse. 39 As the condition of this Covenant, is in the 40
verse. made offer of to Believers by the Gospel.

The First Doctrine has two branches; The First whereof is, That there was a
transaction concerning the Salvation of lost Sinners, betwixt the Father and
the Son before the World was? A Covenant made with David, before it is or can
be declared and Preached in the Gospel, the terms whereof were resolved on, and
all the Articles of it agreed upon; The Father proposing, and the Son accepting
the bargain from eternity; as is clear, Psalm. 40.6, 7. Where, when it is, as it
were, consul^ed what shall be the Price of Redemption, It is not Sacrifices nor
burnt Offerings; but a body have thou Prepared me; Behold! come, in the Volume
of thy book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will, O my God; Which is
expressly applied to Christ, Heb. 10 7. This is easily cleared from the
consideration of the parties contracting, and of the ends for which this
Covenant was undertaken, and of the effects that follow upon it.

The Second Branch of the Doctrine is, that this as to sinners is a most
gracious and merciful, a most kind, lowing and lovely transaction, exceedingly
for the behove and advantage of Sinners. There are Four words in the Text,
Which hold out this; 1. The Nature of this Covenant is Mercy, all the Articles
of it Savor strong of Mercy to sinners; They are exempted, though Christ came
under sore strokes: whether we consider this Covenant as exacting of Christ; or
promising to Christ, it is always for sinners behove. 2. It is a Covenant of
Mercies, of many various mercies, So, 2 Samuel 23.5. It is said to be an
everlasting Covenant ordered in all things and sure; and, 2 Pet. 1.4. It is
said, according as his divine Power has given unto us all things, that pertain
to life and Godliness: Mercies of Justification, Pardon of sin, Sanctification
in all its graduall advances, of fellowship with God, of grace and Glory, even
of every good thing or good things of all sorts. 3. It Is very gracious and
merciful in respect of the excellent kind of these Mercies, they are not
common mercies, but mercies of David, bestowed upon his anointed; Christ is
furnished and filled with them, That out of his fullness we may receive and
grace for grace: even grace in a good measure. 4. They are stable mercies, not
fleeting and quickly gone; not a glance of Mercy which evanisheth, the Covenant
is everlasting, and the mercies are the sure mercies of David.

If we might Particularly go through all the parts of this Covenant, Mercy
will be found sweetly looking out in every article, clause and Circumstance of
it. Look first; more generally to the whole of it; it is all loving kindnesses
and mercies to sinners; Look to Christ's Sufferings and Death, O! what mercy
shines conspicuously there? To his qualifications for the discharge of all his
Offices; to his anointing with the spirit without measure; There is great
mercy there; to all the Promises made to him, such as these, He shall see his
seed; the Pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand; by his knowledge
shall he Justify many; He shall have a willing People, Eternally to reign with
him, etc. Are not these loud speaking Mercies? The grace and wisdom that is on
the Fathers side, and the grace and love that is on the Sons side, a^e all for
the behove and good of sinners; It Is all wonderfully behovefull; is it not
great Mercy to you believers, that you were minded in this bargain? The Lord
Christ, as God, neither needed nor was capable of any accession of Grace; he
took the relation of our Redeemer and Mediator, and as such in the humane
nature, was filled with Grace and Bowels of Mercy and Compassion, that Grace
and Mercy might look through that relation to us. Secondly, And more
particularly, look to the rise of it; It bred in Gods own bosom (to speak so)
John 3.16. God so loved the world, that He gave his only Begotten Son, that
whosoever should believe on Him, might not perish, but have Eternal life; and
the Son laid down His life out of pure love; there was no necessity on him to
do so, but what he voluntarily came under; there was no Motive from us to it,
nor had he any adviser to it. Thirdly, Look to the manner of his undertaking;
It was very readily, Cheerfully, and with ardent, vehemently ardent love; So
that we may say of it as of that Chariot mentioned, Cant. 3.10. It is made of,
and Paved with Love, for the Daughters of Jerusalem; The Elect being under the
curse, Christ out of mere love undertakes to satisfy Justice for them;
Sacrifices will not do it, rivers of Oil will not do it, The first born of the
body will not do it, nor satisfy for the sin of the Soul; What will do it
then? Grace suggests, that the Son shall become man, and do it, and the Son
says, Lo I come; O! What love and mercy are here? Fourthly, Look to the
Contrivance of it; and there ye will find much Grace and Mercy; that it is made
with a Mediator, and with a mediator that is a Surety, that the stock is
bestowed on him and put under his Custody, that the Promises are made to him
and the Price exacted from himself. 5ly, Look to the Manner of executing it;
what love, Grace and mercy shines forth in the Father, in taking vengeance on
his only begotten Son for us? What love in the Son, in yielding to take it on,
and in his leaving his manifestative Glory for a time, that he might undergo
the curse, and in his doing all this with delight? Sixthly, Look to the
confirmations of this Covenant; the Oath of God on the Fathers side, the death
of the Mediator on the Sons side; and he has freely bequeathed it, as a
confirmed Testament and legacy to us Believers, and has instituted Sacraments
to be Seals thereof; O! What mercy upon mercy! Seventhly. Consider the effects
of it; it runs in the sweet streams of Grace, into the vast Gulf and Ocean of
Glory; Wonderful mercy? Eighthly, Look to the Parties Confederating and
Covenanting; the Father, Son, and Spirit, all are here, And, it is Grace and
mercy that they Covenant, 2. Who are the Contrivers of it? Are not even they in
their deep wisdom, and in their exuberant, Superabundant and infinite Grace and
mercy? 3. What is the end of it? Even ehe Praise of the Glory of his Grace,
Ephesians. 1.5. Grace bringing forth and manifestly showing here it is great
masterpiece. 4. As infinite wisdom and love contrive, so infinite Power executs
it: and when all these concur in this bargain: when the infinitely wise God,
all the Persons of the most Glorious Dreadful and Adorable Trinity (as it were)
set themselves to set forth the Glory of free Grace, to make Angels and Saints
Behold and Admire in it infinite Wisdom and incomprehensible love, what a rare
piece must it needs be? And this is the end of it, as is clear: Ephesians. 3 9.
That all men might see what is the fellowship of this Mystery: which from the
beginning of the World, has been hid in God, who Created all things by Jesus
Christ, to the intent, that now unto the Principalities and powers in the
Heavenly places, might be known by the Church, the manifold wisdom of God.

The Second Doctrine is, That this good and gracious bargain, that is past
betwixt the Father and the Son, which is wholly mercy, is brought to the
Market and exposed to sale, on exceeding easy and condescending terms, and
that to bankrupt sinners: What Proclaims the Lord here? even this; I will give
you the Sure mercies of David: That which I and my Son have carved out for the
glory of Grace, and for a proof of the riches of my bounty, I will make all
over to you freely. Hence Ephesians. 3.8. It Is called, the unsearchable riches of
Christ; So that, whatever Christ has as Mediator, It is holden forth here;
That out of his fullness we may receive Grace for Grace, a Proportion of all the
Grace that is in him.

In Prosecuting this point, we shall show, 1. More Particularly what this
bargain is, that is put to the sale. 2. Who the Merchant is. 3. What are the
terms on which, and how it is made. 4. What is the manner how the Gospel puts
home this bargain, and lays Christ and his fullness forth upon Stands in the
Marketplace, as it were, (to speak thus with reverence of this Divine Mystery)
that there may be free access, to whosoever will come, and buy these rare and
rich Wares and Commodities.

As for the First, that ye may know what the Bargain is, and what is in your
offer in this day of the Gospel, Take it in these few Particulars; 1. All that
ever any Believer in the world had, is put to sale here; if any Believer ever
had fair Privileges, sure it was David; if any ever had a merciful bargain,
he had it; and such is this Covenant; Justification, Adoption, peace with God,
Grace and Glory; all these Marrowie, Material, massy and essential blessings
that David had, it was not another Christ, nor another Heaven, nor Another
Covenant of Grace that he had, but the same that is here. 2. Consider it
further, and we will find it to be, all that is made over to our Lord Jesus
Christ; If he had a good bargain, the spirit without measure, fullness of truth
and Grace, great Glory and Honor, being advanced to the right hand of the
Father, the same is Believers their bargain proportionably, a due and just
proportion being kept betwixt the head and the members, John 1.16. Of his
fullness have we all received and Grace for Grace: It Is not another but the same
Grace that our Lord Jesus has; yea it is not another Glory they are advanced
to; no other Table they are set down to; no other Throne they are set on; but
the same Glory, Table, and Throne. It Is to Behold his Glory, to Sit at his
Table, To sit with him on his Throne: John 17.22.24. Luke 22.30. Rev. 3.21. In
a word there are not two Covenants of Redemption betwixt Jehovah and the
Mediator, one for himself and another for the elect: but it is one and the same
Covenant for both, though with many vastly different respective considerations
and circumstances. 3. Look to the Wares and Commodities (to speak so) that are
exposed to sale in the Gospel: they are not only the Promises made to Christ,
but Jesus Christ himself is brought forth to the Market, He is the great
Promise, and far beyond all the other promises made in, and the Graces given by
the Covenant: I have given Him (says the Lord, Verse. 4.) For a witness and
leader to the People: He is the great gift of God, that Gift of Gifts, being
the Fathers fellow: Nothing in Heaven or Earth, no Person, man, or Angel can by
far, very far, infinitely far, equal him: to whom can you liken or compare him?
To us (says the Prophet Isaiah Chap. 9.) A Child is born, to us a Son is
given, and the Government shall be upon his shoulders, and his Name shall be
called wonderful Counselor, the mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince
of Peace: this is David, most substantial Massy mercy: He is called Wonderful,
because there is no Possibility for Creatures adequatly to conceive, or with
exact suitableness to express what his Name is, or what is comprehended within
his Name. 4. Look on Christ as Mediator, as God-man, Immanuel God with us:
There is put to the Market (to speak so with reverence) God himself: for thus
the Covenant is expounded and Sum'd, as frequently elsewhere in the Scripture,
so particularly, 2 Cor. 6.16. I will be their God: and Revel. 21.17. He that
overcomes shall inherit all things, and I will be his God. Now consider all
these in a Conjunction: viz. What all believers have: what Christ has, and
Christ himself; what God has, and God himself: O! what an incomprehensibly
rich and rare, great and Glorious bargain is this! and yet all is by the Gospel
brought forth, laid before the hearers of it, and made offer of to them, on
most easy and wonderfully condescending terms. May we briefly and in a few
words sum up what is in it? 1. All things that may make up believers their
Peace with God, and remove the quarrel. 2. All things pertaining to, or needful
for life and godliness, as it is, 2 Pet. 1.4. 3. All things that belong to the
comfort and consolation of Believers, even strong Consolation, as it is called
Heb. 6.18. There is no want so great, but there is a supply for it here, no
case so sad, but there is a comfort for it here; there is not any thing that
looks like a crack or uncertainty, but there is sufficient security for it
here, in this Covenant, (in this most full and wonderfully well ordered
Covenant in all things and very sure) to all who are fled to Christ for refuge.
4. There is in it what is needful and requisite to full satisfaction, to the
Solace, delight, joy and complete happiness of the persons that cordially close
with it: So that a Soul can crave no more, nor wish for more; It is even all
their desire, as David says of it, 2 Samuel 23.5. It Is Mensura voti, nay ultra
mensuram voti; it never entered into man's heart to conceive much less to desire
it. It makes the Soul say, as it is Psalm. 73.24. Whom have I in Heaven but
thee? There is none on earth, whom I desire besides thee: It has all things in
it: as it is, Rev. 21.7. He that overcomes shall inherit all things: For if
God and Christ, Grace and mercy be in it, is there any thing a missing? or can
there possibly be any thing wanting in it? May I not very confidently ask you;
Is it not a good bargain? If the Father Son and Holy Spirit, Grace, Heaven and
Glory be a good bargain; this is then most certainly a good bargain, a
wonderfully good, matchless, and non-such bargain: and is not this Gospel,
whereby all these great things are brought to the market, good news? Take heed
then that ye receive not this Grace in vain, that these wares worthy of all
possible intertainment and welcome stand not before you unbought: I say again
take heed, that ye receive not all this Grace in vain, that these Precious and
costly wares go not from the Market unbought up.

Secondly, Who are the Chap-men or Merchants? You would have readily thought
that such wares would have required mighty Monarchs, great Statesmen, learned
Philosophers, or holy Kings, Prophets, Apostles and great men; And yet the
Proclamation is (for grace comes ordinarily in the lower way) Ho, every one
that thirsts, and he that has no money: these are the merchants who are meet
for this rich Ware: Are there any that want what may make them happy, and would
fain have? Are there any that have their peace to make with God, any that have
not their interest clear, and made sure? any that are wrestling with a body of
death, and g^oaning under it? Any that fain would have sin pardoned and
subdued? Any that would have Grace, heaven and Glory, and have nothing to give
for all these or any of them, and who have spent many years labor in vain and
to no purpose, to come by them? It Is to you, even to you that all these rich
Wares and rare commodities are in a special manner offered in this cried Fair
of free grace. And to clear this a little, I suppose, there are none of you but
you are some way under one of these Three, though the external call and offer
comes indifferently to you all. Ye are either, 1. Senseless and secure; and to
you the Gospel says, How long ye fools will ye love simplicity? And how long
will ye sleep, O sluggards? As there is a Challenge and regrate here, So there
is a condition all offer made to you, in as far as it is here employed, that the
Offer is made to them. Who have no bread and have been bestowing their labor
on that which satisfies not: glutting themselves with the world, or wrapping
themselves up in the groundless conceit of their own righteousness; To such it
says, How long will ye spend your labor for that which is not bread: Or, 2.
Ye are some way affected with sin, lying under Convictions, stinged, some way
burnt up, and consumed with the apprehensions of the wrath and terrors of God;
The word which this Offer has to such is, the very first in the Proclamation,
Ho, every one that thirsts, Come: and as we expostulated with the first sort,
viz senseless secure unconcerned, proud and con eity standers aloof, so we bid
you earnestly come: and if ye shall say, your conviction has no edge with it,
it is not deep enough: We Answer, let him that has no money come: if ye have
quite given over all Hope of your Prayers and other Performances, as to making
your peace with God by them, and have in that respect utterly renounced your
own righteousness, and so, have no money, no price: though ye be not pinched
and pricked at the heart under the sense of sin and deserved wrath, as ye
would: yet come, O come. Or, 3. Ye are such as have taken with your sin and
lost state, and are in some measure, though but faintly (at least to your own
apprehension) stirring towardst Christ, and would fain be at him: up, for to
you the offer most kindly says; Hear and your souls shall live, eat and be
satisfied. The wares are not brought forth and laid before you, that ye should
only (to say so) block or cheapen, and ask the price; but also and mainly, that
ye should buy, eat and feed on them; The Gospel does not, as it were, so much
offer to make with you a bargain, as it offers you the benefit of a bargain
already made, viz. With Christ: and thus these Three take in every person that
wants, and is not, it may be, so sensible of it, and every one that wants and
would have.

For the Third, viz. The Terms on which the closing of the bargain depends:
they are holden forth in Four words in the Text, with Two qualifications: which
make up the terms. The first Word is, Come; and that supposes peoples leaving
of their present standing-place and posture, and their moving toward the
Marketplace, where the rich Ware is exposed to sale. The Second Word is, Buy;
which imports a Price put on the Market-Ware, a valuing of it, and a sort of
treating to make it ours. The Third Word is, Hearken, incline the ear, to wit,
to God, and to his word, to believe and receive it, and your souls shall live.
And the Fourth Word is, I will make an everlasting Covenant with you; which
implies an engagement by Covenant to the Lord, after hearing and inclining the
ear to his word, a striking of hands and closing with the bargain. Add to these
the qualifications, viz. Coming, buying, striking hands (as it were) and
closing the bargain, and that without offering Money or Price, Money or
money-worth, without offering or giving any thing less or more in compensation.

Fourthly, Let us see how the Gospel puts all this to the Market; so that,
where it comes, those that are called must either close the bargain, or it will
be their own fault. First, it Proclaims the Fair (as it were) to all round
about, that there are such wares to be had, and at such a Price, the rarest and
richest wares and Commodities, and at the cheapest rates that ever the world
heard tell of. 2. It does not only Proclaim, but invite and double the
invitation to come. 3. It not only invites, but puts the invitation so home,
that People must either make the price, (to say so, though it may be soon made,
there being in effect no price) and buy, or refuse the Bargain: If they will
not be at the Pains to come in to the shop, as it were, It brings forth the
wares and lays them down in the Marketplace, and (as it were) on Stands in the
street: and cries, Come, buy, come and enter the Covenant freely: and this it
does by a frank offer, by earnest and persuasive inviting, and by the easy
Conditions that it proposes the bargain on: It stands in a manner with arms
stretched out, ready to receive all comers very freely, whatever their Poverty,
wants and necessities be: It craves no more but that we willingly take what he
offers to put in our hand: The righteousness of Faith says not, who shall
ascend to Heaven, or shall descend to the depth? there is nothing now to be
suffered, nor to be Purchased by any more suffering: But the word is near thee
in thy heart and in thy mouth: It lays the ware at our very door (as it were)
So that we have no more to do, but to stoop down and take it up: but heartily
to say the word, and it is a bargain.

Now for Application: may we not resume, and say, that there is a good and
excellent bargain to be had in the Gospel, and on very good and easy terms?
It Is a Market day, and indeed it were a pity that such wares should be brought
to the Market, and that few or none should buy: that Christ should (to speak
so) open his pa^k and sell no wares. Therefore let me say a few words to you
for persuading you readily and presently to embrace the Offer of this richest
Bargain. And in the First Pla^e, we pray you believe this truth: Alace! there
is little or no faith given to it: Souls come straightened, not thoroughly
believing, that God is putting Christ, Grace and Glory, Heaven and Happiness
and all to Sale: These are days of The Son of man, in a special manner,
wherein Christ's fleet (to speak so with Reverence) is come home, the Shops are
now well furnished with Rich Commodities, all his Stands are set out and full
of Grace. Secondly, Wonder that God has condescended to make offer of such a
bargain to us: that, that which cost Christ so very dear, is offered so
exceeding cheap to us. Thirdly, We exhort and obtest you, that while these
choicest wares are set to sale, ye receive not this offer in vain: Are there
any Merchants here for such wares? Here is the Market, the wares are good and
sufficient, and the terms very easy, and the Price wondrously low, even so
low, that it comes to no Money, no Price: can ye Possibly wish a better bargain
or more easy terms? Are there any chap men that want Money, any that are
Thirsty, then Come; yea be the frame and disposition of your heart what it may
be, if you would have it righted, come; there is here that which will make you
Rich and Happy here and hereafter: are there none of you that will seriously
ask, what the Lord will say, what Christ will take (as it were) for these
wares, or what are his terms; with a sincere resolution to take them on these
very terms? Will ye not be Prevailed with to make experimental trial, what it
is to have Christ Made of God to you wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption? Are there none among you all that have sins to be pardoned, wants
to be supplied, strong and stirring Corruptions to be subdued and mortified? Is
it Possible that so many are come hither for the fashion? Are there none living
at distance from God, nor under his curse really or to their own apprehension,
that would have the distance and curse removed? Are there no weak Graces to be
strengthened? If there be any such merchants that have a mind and heart to the
wares: I say to them from the Lord, as his Herald: Ho every one that Thirsts,
and he that has no money come: This is the scope of the Gospel, and the
preparation for Christ, and also for the Communion, that it calls for from
poor Souls, that would fain close the bargain, and set their Seal to it, and
would have Gods Seal set to it to morrow by taking the Sacrament. Speak, what
say ye? Pose and put your hearts to it to declare, if they be indeed willing
and well content to make and hold the bargain on his own terms; if they be so,
(as there is all the reason in the world they should;) then I say, ye have a
good bargain: I say again speak, pose your hearts, if ye will make and hold the
bargain on these terms or not.

There are these things that do singularly commend this bargain. First, the
excellency of it; ye will go through all the Markets in the World, ere ye get
such ri^h Mercies, of so rare a kind, so sure and so cheap; ye would, belike,
think much to have so much land, gold or money; but what are those to this
bargain? Those will evanish and turn to ashes, when this will endure and abide
with you for ever: What are ye doing? Who are like so many Horse-leaches,
sucking up, and glutting your selves with the world, or living securely and
carelessly, or pu^ching up your own righteousness; is there any of those
bargains like this? we appeal to your own consciences, and nothing doubt, but
they will one day bear witness against you, that ye heard of such a bargain and
had it in your offer, and yet wilfully refused to accept of it. Secondly, Is
there any bargain more suitable for you, who have your peace to make with God;
for you who have corruption lively in you, then to have a King, Captain and
conqueror to bring it down and to trample on it, after he has as a Priest
reconciled you to God? Is there any more suitable bargain for you, who have
your own pinches and straits, and your Comforts at a very low ebb, for you who
have wants which cannot be numbered, and who cannot of your selves command one
stayed spiritual thought? If ye were perfectly righteous and fairly landed in
Eternity, ye might possibly think the less of it (though even Glorified Saints
put a great value on it, and glorious Angels admire it) but that sinners
dwelling on earth in cottages of clay, whose habitation is in the dust, should
think little of it, it is strange and even stupendous: Is there or can there be
a more suitable bargain for you that want money? Is it not exactly calculated
for your case and shapen out for you; so as in every thing it may meet with
your wants, difficulties and Objections? Thirdly, Are not the terms most
reasonable? No great thing is sought for from you; if a Lordship or a Kingdom
were offered to a poor man for a Penny, that has no money at all, it would
signify nothing at all to him; But behold here peace and Pardon, Grace and
Glory, even all good things are offered to you freely. Fourthly, Is not your
necessity such, that ye cannot be well without it? For tho ye should spend your
money, and bestow much labor, and even wear out your very eyes with weeping
and your hearts with grief and sorrow, if ye take not this course, all will
only have this Moto written thereon, Vanity of vanities, all is but vanity and
vexation of spirit: when ye come to feed on it, ye will find it to be but wind:
if peace with God, if God and Christ, if grace and Glory be necessary, then
this bargain is necessary; but if ye will continue lazy, indifferent,
Luk-warme and unconcerned in the matter; ye shall find that ye have sitten in
your own light greatly, and suffered the opportunity of the Market to slip,
which ye will never possibly recover: And therefore for the Lords sake, let
neither legal weeping, carnal fear or sorrow, hypocrisy, self-conceit, nor
mistakes of Christ and of free Grace divert you from making this bargain: but
seek Grace, come over these and all other obstructions, and while the Market
lasts, Come and buy without money and without Price. It is hard to know how
long your day shall last: There are many Countriesides and Cities, in the
streets whereof these Packs (to say so) of rich wares were opened up, Laid
forth and exposed to sale, that now for many years, yea for several ages have
not heard of them, nor the Gospel preached: what (at least in Purity and Power)
is now in Jerusalem, and in the seven famous Churches of Asia, But the voice of
Terror, and as it were, the Scriching of Owls? and seeing God is not slack, as
men count slackness, what know ye, when the Kingdom of God may be taken from
you, and given to others? And when he will cry (to speak so) Pack and go? Every
day is not a Market day, every Lords day is not a Communion day: many
Congregations in Ireland and else where have sadly found this, wherein it has
come to pass, that great scarcity and want are come where there was once great
plenty. And to press this a little further, We may in the First Place Ask,
whereat it sticks and halts? I tell you, that there either must be a bargain,
or it must (and will sometime) be known where the blame lies: were it but the
bare reading of these very words, they bring the invitation and offer to you,
and will ye dare to cast at the wares, or the terms on which they are offered?
Grace brings a good bargain to you and stoops very low with it. For 1. It will
not stand with you on bygones, if now you deal honestly, The sure Mercies of
David will cover and blot out those: and if any of you think, that ye have much
debt on your head, as who ha^h not? It will not upbraid you: the iniquity of
Jacob shall be sought for, and shall not be found. There shall be, as it were,
Scores drawn through them, your accounts shall be all dashed out by free graces
Pen: This is a cried Fair and Proclaimed Market of free grace, from which no
honest comer shall be secluded, thrust back or sent away empty; for here an
empty pur^e needs not make a (blate o) bashful Merchant. 2. Grace stands not
precisely on fore-prepa ations (where Souls honestly and sincerely come) as
that ye have not been so and so humbled, and have not such and such previous
qualifications, as ye would be at; Nay someway it excludes these, as offering
to bring money and some price, which would quite spoil the nature of the
Market of free grace; nay yet me say further, if it were possible that a soul
would come without sense of sin, Grace would embrace it: sense of sin being no
condition of the Covenant, but a Physical (to speak so) qualification of the
Covenanter, and grace is free to them that want it: and let it be supposed to
be in a person void of Grace and still in unrenewed black nature, it is there
but a splendid sin, as those shadows of Moral virtues in all merely natural
men, are; Grace can, at the instant of coming, creat qualifications: there
could readily be no qualifications in Zacheus when he was on the tree: Yet
Christ tells him, Salvation this day is come to thy house. 3. Grace stands not
on the want of any effect of Faith, where it calls to believing: it will not
stand on darkness of interest, nor on want of progress in Sanctification, nor
on things being out of order: for where it comes, it puts things in order; It
will be no relevant exception for a person that has no^ closed with the
bargain and has not embraced Christ, to say, alace! I have no love to God, to
the Godly and to his interest: because Grace can say, thou have not closed with
Christ, and so can not have the effect before the cause: come and close, and
these and other effects shall follow. 4. It stands not on degrees of Faith, nor
on the strength firmness and height of it; it will take little, even a look, or
a glance of the souls eye that sees not clearly, according to that memorable
word, Psalm. 34.5. They looked to him and were lightened: the more that souls
look to Christ, their eye grows the clearer: it will take an honestly willing
mind and hearty consent, though the ability be very little, a receiving or a
sincere minting at receiving of the offer: Him that comes, or is really a
coming, though he be not yet come, at least, as he thinks, but is, with the
Prodigal, still (as he apprehends) afar off, Will Christ and Grace in no case
cast-out: for no sooner does spiritual life stir in Faiths weakest acting and
moving toward Christ, but Grace meets it. 5. It stands on no concomitants,
though there should be many Idols and lusts raging in the person, if there be a
real consenting by Faith to the bargain, with a sincere resolution to abandon
all these, grace will not send him away empty: or if the man say, Lord I
believe help my unbelief, that is a done bargain: nay, were it to come with
many spiritual issues and sores running, and with fear to presume, and as it
were, to steal a hint of Christ; not to speak a word to him, but to touch him:
He will not be angry nor upbraid, but will say, go in peace, thy Faith has
made the whole. We may Ask yet, further to the recommendation of Grace. 1. Was
there ever a Merchant that came to the market with that purpose, to buy on its
own terms, that went away empty and without wares? If all the Congregation of
the first born were put to it, they would be ready to bear witness, that Grace
never stood with them on any qualification in them, when they came honestly. 2.
I Would Ask, was there ever any that adventured honestly on it, whom it
mis-gave? That hazarded (to speak so) and yet fell by the way, or that ever
repented themselves that they hazarded and entrusted their Souls to this
bargain? 3. Let me Ask, was there eve^ any that took hold on and griped it, in
whose hand i^ brake? The bargain and Covenant is everlasting? the mercies are
sure mercies, once sure and always sure, once rich and for ever so; It was and
is a Covenan^ well ordered in all things and sure: blessed for ever b^ the
contriver and surety thereof. Some may possibly think, that this doctrine
looks to be somewhat lax^ (or lose): But sure Grace is not laxe; for as we man
say of Gods power; Is any thing to hard for him? S^ we may say of his Grace, Is
any thing too free for it Only abuse not Grace, Prostitute it not, turn not
you^ back on it, neither turn it into wantonness; It ye loo^ on grace, and
cheapen only and do not buy; or if ye bid for one piece of it only, and not for
all; Woe unto you, that ever is was offered unto you: what would y^ be at? Is it
Holiness, Heaven and happiness, and tha^ freely? They are here; Is it Christ
and Christ freely and all that is his? He is here in your offer; wha^ means
then this whining (to speak so) and standing so much on terms, as if the way of
grace were a hard untoward unpassable way, and as if God were a ^ar^ master?
Nay, it is a good soft, sweet, easy way, and plain to them that walk in it, and
God the best Maste^ that ever Rich or Poor served, and the easiest to serv^ and
the best to please, where there is sincerity and willingness to live honestly;
he pities and spares all up right hearted servants, As a Father pitieth his
Children and a man spares his son that serves him: And if any think they find
it otherwise, it is most certainly their ow^ fault. Therefore, I beseech you,
study First, To be i^ case to take Graces wares home with you, Repentance
Faith, Hope, Love, Mortification, Meekness, Patience, etc. These things are in
the Covenant betwix^ Christ and you and set to Sale in the Market. 2. Be making
ready, for the Market is ready: many shops, (as it were) are opened and much
precious ware laid out: bring empty vessels and not a few, that ye may carry
them away full, that ye may take a Rich loading home with you: though you take
up never so much of this ware, it will never be missed nor grow the less; and
indeed it is a part and a considerable part of our preparation for the
Communion, to be rooted in the Faith of these great things and to get our
affections stretched, dilated and widened to receive them: To get the
everlasting doors cast up, that the King of Glory may come in, That when he
calls for entry, the doors may be opened at the very first knock. 3. If so be
your desires be stirred up, and your appetites quickened in any measure: there
is nothing that will more effectually and powerfully stir them up, provoke and
sharpen them, then grace believingly looked to, and improved: longing to see
his Power and Glory, as they have been seen by his people in the Sanctuary,
would notably make way for him: pleading and working with your own hearts
alone, will not do the business, but grace employed and made use of will do it
effectually and to purpose: and the more Grace you draw forth out of Christ's
fullness and drink, so much the better: It will be (to speak so) no forestalling
of the market: neither will the sweet savor of the perfume be the weaker or
less to morrow, that ye break the Box of this Precious ointment to night. Now
God himself who proclaims the Fair: sets the Market: and exposes the Rich
ware to sale, give you wisdom to Prove wise merchants to your Eternal advantage
and up making.

A SERMON Preached after the Communion,
On Psalm. 85.8. He will speak Peace to his People and to his Saints: but let
them not turn again to Folly.
IT is hard to know in Spiritual exercises, whether it be more difficult to
attain some good frame, or to keep and maintain it, when it is attained:
whether more seriousness is required for making peace with God, or for keeping
of it, when made: whether more diligence should be in preparing for a
Communion, or more watchfulness after it: sure, both are required, and it was
our Blessed Lords word, Matthew. 26.41. after the first celebration of this his
Supper, Watch and pray that ye enter not into Temptation: Here that saying
holds eminently, non minor est virtus, quam quaerere, parta tueri: No less
virtue and valor is requisite to maintain, then ^o make a purchase or Conquest.

In the words (to leave the introduction and scope) There is first, a great
mercy promised from the Lord to his People, viz. He will speak peace to them.
2. A special caveat, and advertisment given them, poin ing at their hazard,
But let them not turn again to folly: That is, Let not his People and Saints,
to whom He has spoken peace, return to sin; Let them beware of bounding and
dallying with Gods mercy, and of turning his Grace into wantonness, of cooling
in their affections to him, of slipping back to their old way, and of embracing
their old lovers and Idols; For that is folly, even in folio, to speak so.

We shall first propose Six Observations from the words, and then apply them.
First then Observe, that Sin against God i^ an exceeding great folly: It Is the
fooli^h h st and maddest thing in the world: Therefore it is here called Folly,
to wit, in an eminent way and degree: It Is that which does most, ye that which
does in effect, Only, mar and interrupt Saints peace: that which Verse. 2. Is
called iniquity, which he so graciously pardoned, is here called Folly, because
of the folly and madness that is in sin: and i^ is on this ground and account,
that the sinner is so often called a Fool, and Simple in the Book of Proverbs;
and Ephesians 5. The Apostle exhorts Christians, to walk not as Fools but as wise;
and Luke 15. The Prodigal is said, when converted, to come to himself, as if he
had been in a distraction and beside himself, all the while he was going on in
his sinful way. This may be further clear; if we look, First, To the vanity of
the matter wherein men sin; is it not folly for a man to sit tippling and
debauching away his time, to be given to Harlotrie and filthiness, to neglect
Prayer, to Curse and Swear, to let his mind rove upon things that never were
nor will be, and wherein there is no profit? There is a great vanity in the
matter of sin. Secondly, If we look to the sad effects, and bitter fruits of
sin; and to the great prejudice that comes by it; It will be found to be
desperate Madness and dear bought pleasure, which is but fancied and Imaginary,
and no real Pleasure: It marres the life of Grace and of peace with God, and
treasures up Wrath against the day of Wrath; See this verified eminently in
Ahithophel, that Prodigy of profound Policy ( Whose counsel, in those days,
with David and Absalom was, as, if one had enquired at the Oracle of God.) The
upshot of whose deep wit was rank folly, when he went and hanged himself: See
it also convincingly made good, in the rich Man in the Gospel, To whom it is
sadly and surprisingly said, Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be taken from
thee, and whose then shall those things be? And what advantage or wisdom is it.
I pray, for a man to gain the whole World, if he lose his own Soul? O Madly
foolish bargain! Thirdly, If we look to sin with a Spiritual eye, we will see
folly in the very appearance and manner of it; a wicked man in sinning is
foolish-like, or looks as like a fool, as David did, when he played the Madman
before the King of Gath, Scrabled on the doors, and let his spittle fall on his
Beard: Is it not folly to see a man Laboring in the fire, for very vanity,
loading himself with thick clay, pursuing the East Wind? He is just like a man
in a frenzy, who imagines himself to be a King, and to be riding in great
State and Triumph, when in the mean time he is a Poor naked Pitiful and
despicable creature, in the eyes of all that behold him. Fourthly, If we look
to the spring, fountain and cause of it; There can be no just nor relevant
reason given for sin; It Is therefore, no doubt, folly: Is there, or can there
be any thing that evidenceth men's folly so much, as their coming in tops with
God, their walking in the way of death, their loving simplicity (as it is Prove.
1.) And their quiting the way of Life? Now the word of God is true wisdom, and
the way of life is therein clearly holden forth, and God as our pattern; and is
there any thing more reasonable, then that we should live like, and be conform
to the word of God, and to him of whom we ought to be followers? But sin
thwarts with the whole word of God, and with God himself.

Take this passing word of Use; Study to be established in the Faith of this
truth; That Sin, whether in doing that which is evil, or in the Omission of
duty, is the greatest folly: such of you as will not be convinced of it now in
time, within a few days or years, ye shall be convinced of it to purpose and
to your eternal prejudice; The most blockish shall then see it to be folly; a
highly hurtful, prejudicial, Shameful folly, and desperate Madness; The rich
Glutton and Ahithophel and thousands more of worldly-wise-men, find it to be
so, to their Cost, in Hell: Therefore the Apostle says, Romans 6.21. What profit
have ye in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? And had we Spiritual eyes
to discern the Condition of the most part of men and Women, who evidently ly
still in black Nature unrenewed, who slight the offers of Grace, and who will
not receive Jesus Christ, the veriest idiot in the world would not be a sadder
spectacle to us, nor affect our hearts with more pity and compassion, then the
Lamentable case of the Souls of such persons would; because they forsake their
own Mercy, The sure Mercies of David, and follow after lying vanities, and
weary themselves with a vain pursuit after that which cannot profit them,
Alace for this folly!

Secondly, Observe, That notwithstanding the greatness of this folly, Gods
people and Saints were sometime deep, yea even drowned in it, and are yet in
part taken with it. Needs this any proof? Ah! sinful Nation (says the Lord to
his professing people Isaiah. 1.4.) A people laden with iniquity, a seed of
evil doers: The Ox knows his owner, the ass his Masters crib, but my people
does not know: O beastly Israel! inferior to the very brutes through the folly
of sinning against God; and says he, Jer. 2. Be astonished O Heavens; and
horribly afraid; for my People have committed two great evils, they have
forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and dug to themselves broken
Cisterns, that can hold no water: Q egregious folly and demented choice? how
many professors of religion are there, who are foolish Virgins? And how many
foolish practices are there among the Godly themselves? Let it not then be
thought strange (as a word of Use from it) that not only among external
professors, but even among real Saints, there be found many acts of folly;
though I grant it to be both sad and stumbling, when it is; which should
therefore, so much the more make them guard against the same.

Thirdly, Observe. God will sometimes speak peace to them that are given to
folly, or are often found playing the Fool. Of the truth whereof, as many as
ever heard the Gospel, and did partake of the Grace of it; and are before the
Throne, and hope to be there, are as so many proofs; witnesses and living
monuments: I shall clear what this speaking of peace is, in Three Steps; He
speaks peace to them, 1. In his offering of peace to them; and by his meeting
and treating with them in and by that offer, in his entreating or inviting them
earnestly to come to him, who have wearied themselves, and spent their labor
on that which profits not; pressing them to return, and assuring them that he
will heal their backslidings, Isai. 55. Jer. 3. Hos. 14. And preaching peace
through Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. counselling them to come and buy eye salve of
him, etc. and by his knocking and waiting at their Door for admittance and
entry, Romans 3. Are not these words of peace to a foolish Church? 2. In making
peace with some, when (as it is 2 Cor. 5.20.) He not only Prays and requests
them to be Reconciled, but really reconcileth them to himself, and says, Peace
be to you, Pardons sin, takes away the handwriting of Ordinances that was
against them, gives them a discharge of their debt: that when their sin is
sought for, it is not to be found, because He has pardoned it; and Hos. 2.
This is called an alluring, or (as the word is) a speaking to the heart. 3. In
his not only taking away the Controversy and making peace; but in his
intimating that peace, Saying to the pardoned sinner, Thy sins are forgiven
thee, go in peace, I am thy Salvation, and then the promise John 14.21.23. Is
fulfilled, when Christ breaks open doors and comes in and Sups, and dwells, his
Father and he: and one main dish that is set on the Table (to say so) is Peace,
as Verse. 27. Peace I leave with you, My peace I give unto you: It Is peace from
God the Father Son and Holy Ghost: There are some special times, wherein God
speaks Peace, such as Solemn treating times and Communion days, and other
special occasions are, when there has been more then ordinary diligence in
prayer, more then ordinary Sorrow for Sin, peace is readily spoken on the back
of it: as also trying and sadly exercising times are usually times of the
intimation of peace: In a word when and where this Gospel comes and is made
lively, Peace follows on it: and this is your time, O! tha^ peace may be found
to have been spoken to many at this occasion.

Fourthly, Observe, That, In and about those times, when God has spoken (or
very urgently offered to speak) Peace, there is often some restraint on People,
as to the prevailing of their folly: Some stop to the current of Iniquity in
it is wonted manner and measure, in some more and in some less; some more aw of
God readily being on people then: Many will have a sort of Righteousness, like
a Morning cloud and early dew, that soon passes away; Some tickling of their
affections, that quickly evanisheth; as the Lord says of many of the Jews,
that were hearers of John, Who was a burning and a shining light, that they
rejoiced in his light for a season: So Psalm. 106.12. Then believed they his
words, they sang his Praise; but they soon forgot his works, they waited not
for his Counsel; and Psalm. 78.34. When he slew them, then they sought him:
Nevertheless they flattered him with their lips and lied to him with their
Tongues, for their hearts were not right with God, neither were the^ steadfast
in his Covenant: And something of this was also, even in Christ's hearers, and
in the Galatians, who at first would have plucked out their eyes and given them
to Paul: So in the parable of the Sower, some seed springs up and has a fair
appearance, but soon withers; and other some holds out: So likewise at Fasts
and Communions, affections will be readily somewhat stirred and warmed, and
there will be many brave purposes and resolutions, such as were in the people,
Exodus 19. When they said, All that the Lord commands we will do: and they look
demure and grave like for two or three days; The Tippler keeps some days from
the Tavern; He that prayed not in secret nor in his family, will, it may be,
Pray for some time about and after such occasions; others will go further on;
And yet it is but some restraint on their sin, or some fit and flash of
affection, that is transient and quickly gone; and they turn again to folly;
and even the Godly themselves are here often found, in a great measure guilty,
as the following Note will clear.

Fifthly, Observe, That even those people and Saints, who have sometime been
given to folly, to whom God has spoken peace, and who have restrained their
folly for a time thereafter, may much fall back to folly again. The admonition
here given, Let them not turn again to folly. Supposes this: This needs not
much proof; If ye shall go through the Saints recorded in Scripture, ye will
find sad instances of it: David, after peace was spoken to him, falls into
adultery and murder; Hezekiah, after a sweet word of peace was spoken to him,
Isaiah 38. Falls into the folly of Pride and vain ostentation, Chap. 39.
Peter, after peace spoken to him denies his Master: Jehoshaphat, after peace
spoken to him, fell once and again into the same sin, and once even after he
was reproved for it; as is clear, 2 Chronicles. 18.19. and 20. Chapters: Or there
may be a falling unto some other sins, or out of one sin into another; as it
was with David: This may befall real Saints, yea eminent Saints, even Pillars
in the house of God: was there not peace spoken to the Disciples in that sweet
Sermon John 14. and 15, and 16. Chap. And yet that sad word follows, Ye all
shall be offended because of me this night; And Peter to whom that sweet word
was spoken, I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not, does foully fall
into folly quickly after; what then may befall the more Common sort of
professors, who know not what it is to stand before the least tentation? The
Reasons of this may be first, because the devil falls presently on, and seeks,
as it were, with seven worse devils to re-enter the soul, and busks this bait
of the tentation, and presents it in a new shape; old courtiers (to speak so)
and lusts set on and essay what hearing they can get. 2. Because though, by
peace spoken, tentations and corruptions may be bound up, yea and somewhat
Mortified: yet they are not slain outright, they may lurk for a time, but still
live. And 3. Because his People are ready in such a warm Sun blink to grow (as
it were) wanton, and under such a cessation from their lusts, to cast by their
arms, to grow secure, to grow somewhat too fain, and to dream of an easy
life; thus it was in a measure with David, as he confesses, Psalm. 30. I said
in my Prosperity, I shall never be moved; If they get peace for a little, who
but they? They are Lords (in a manner) and will not come unto him; or if they
win to a few tears and some liberty, they are readily puffed up, and in some sort
bid their Souls take them rest; as if they needed to trouble themselves no
more: Therefore there are new on-sets, and the Lord lets them see how vain they
are, even in their best estate: as we may perceive, in the Lords dealing with
Hezekiah, and with David, in that Psalm. 30. Thou did hide thy face says he,
and I was troubled. O! what folly, vanity and outbreaking of corruption do
often follow on the back of a seeming work of turning to God, and a tender like
frame in Professors of Religion? So Psalm. 106. It is said, that they provoked
him at the Sea, even at the red Sea: Even where and when they were in such a
frame, that they believed his Words and sang his Praise: they soon forgot his
Works, And waited not for his Counsel, which was, in a manner, at the very
Table to lift the heel against him: And O! how Sad and lamentable a thing is
it, to be unwatchfull after a Communion, and an offer or an Intimation of peace!

Sixthly, Observe, That, There is nothing more called for from a people, who
have been given to folly, and have had Peace spoken to them, then to take heed
that they turn not again to folly, To take heed that they fall not into the
same sins that they seemed to have abandoned and turned away from: that it be
not with them, According to the true Proverb, The Dog is returned to his vomit,
and the Sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire, as it is, 2 Pet.
2.22. Under which similitude, the Apostle powerfully disswades Professors of
Religion from turning again to sin, by showing the loathsomness of it: It being
as abominable, as a man's licking up again that which he has vomited. This then
is the duty that the Lord calls for: First That you should abstain from the
sins that you have been given to, such as tippling, drinking drunk, Swearing,
Sabbath breaking, neglect of Prayer and the like, and do so no more: not only
not to relapse into the same sins, but that ye abstain from every other sin: It
is not enough that a man break off from one sin, and take up with another: It
is not sufficient, though a man will not be drunk in his neighbors house, if
in the mean time in his own house he tipple, play the good fellow (as ye call
it) and mispend his time. Secondly, Ye would Consider, what engagements and
resolutions ye have come under, and that ye fall not back from them: In a word
it is, not to be as ye were wont to be: and that ye be found in no known sin,
nor defective in any known duty.

We come now to the more Particular and close Application of the whole, in
these Two Uses. The First whereof is, for Advertisement and warning, Let him
that stands take heed lest he fall, Let him not look on himself as incapable to
be stolen off his feet: Alace! Persons may be, in a manner, exalted to Heaven,
and in a very good frame, in their own imagination and apprehension, and it may
be, in some measure really; and yet be brought back to the Puddle and Mi^e
again, after they have shaken themselves and come out of it. In prosecuting
this, we shall, First show wherefore we press it, And Secondly, Wherein, or in
reference to what we press it.

As for the First, viz. Wherefore it is, that I do press this advertisement:
and indeed it is not without very good ground, as ye will easily perceive, if,
First, Ye look to and Consider the best Saints and in their best condition: how
soon are even they taken off their feet? Was not David often in a very good
spiritual condition? And yet, how soon and foully did he fall into folly? was
not Adam in a good and desirable condition, when there was no quarrel betwixt
God and him, nor any ground for it? And yet how soon was he ensnared? Was not
Peter in a good state and frame, when Christ said to him, Blessed art thou
Simon Bar-jona, flesh and blood has not revealed that unto thee, but my Father
who is in Heaven? And yet within a very little, he turns again so far to folly,
as to be the devils instrument to tempt Christ: as is clear from Matthew. 16.
verse. 17. Compared with verse. 22. Were not the Disciples in a good condition,
when our Lord had Preached to them both the Preparation and thanksgiving
Sermons, before and after the Communion? And yet they all were offended because
of him, and forsook him and fled, And that very quickly, even that same very
night; Now when such tall Cedars fall, what need have we, who are but in
comparison, silly shrubs and but as small strawes, to take warning. Secondly, If
we consider that those sins and falls were often exceeding Sudden, the same
night, in the Disciples (as I just now hinted,) and in Hezekiah, very quickly
after his recovery: exceeding foul; and exceeding Universal, as in all the
Disciples; Sometimes repeated, as in Lot, Jehoshaphat, and Peter; sometimes a
plurality and variety of them joined together, as in David and Asa, and in his
People at the Red Sea and in the Wilderness: And who knows but the same very
night, that ye were at the Lords Table, some of you were back at your folly?
And others of you before night may be. We said, not only Suddenly, but foullie;
as is clear in Adam, who when he had no corruption formerly, fell from God to
the devil (and by the way, many of you are so grossly ignorant, and woefully
self-conceited: that ye think, if ye had been in his case, ye would not have
done so.) And (as I hinted) what foul faults were David's Adultery and Murder,
and Solomon's Idolatry, at least his tolerating it, after God had spoken twice
to him? What a foul fault and fall was that of Isreal's, After their so Solemn
engagements, and fair undertakings. Exodus 19. When within forty days they
detestably and damnably danced before the golden Calfe: and what a foull fall
was that of Peter's, to forswear Christ, by denying him with an oath? And of the
rest of the Disciples, unkindly and unworthily to forsake him and flee? And who
knows, but shortly after this occasion, many of you that have been tipplers,
may grow worse, it may be, even to be found staggering in the streets? And that
others of you who prayed not before, may be heard cursing? Ye who are believers
and Saints indeed, would Observe this, and know that there is need, great need
of watching and Prayer, that ye enter not into Tentation: And if there has
been any idleness, lightness, vanity, mispending of Precious time, or the like;
guard, O guard against those: The reason why Believers fall so often in Gross
sins, is their playing (as it were) with their Petty Idols; little things given
way to lead on to greater and worse. Thirdly, Am I now speaking of any strange,
uncouth or unpresidented thing? Have ye never Observed, how ye carried and
behaved after Communions before? Can ye say, but that, as many Communions as ye
have been at, there have been as many breaches? If ye have never failed before,
ye may be secure now; but if ye have failed and Mis-carried formerlie, be the
more wary and watchful now. Fourthly, Have ye any knowledge of, and
acquaintance with your own hearts? Is your corruption dead? Are your Idols
quite slain? or are they not rather like to those strange wives, in Nehemiahs
time, (who were put away) crying on you for pity, (O! cruel pity) and weeping
on you to be admitted to come home again? And have none of you so much foolish,
fond and cruel Pity, as to side with them? Has a Communion-day, thrust out the
devil fully? Are there no living lusts, nor strong corruptions within you? Do
ye not see what a ready welcome Tentations to sin are like to get? And find ye
not a woeful propension to be glad, that the restraint and aw-band of a
Communion day is over and by? And does not this press you to watch? Fifthly,
Try but how it has been with you since the Sabbath, Is not the bent ye had
then, alreadly very much slacked? Is not much of that seeming or really good
frame of Spirit gone? Is not the great part of your work yet before you? And is
it not a greater difficulty, to make out an engagement, then to make it; to
perform, then to Promise? How is it then, that ye have in a great part laid by
your arms, as if all were done? When ye have, as Soldiers, put your selves in
battle array, and given your military Oath, and go^ten the sign and word of
command, should you quit your Post? beware of that, the matter is of greater
concernement, then ye are aware of: ye are yet but in a manner beginning.

For the Second Thing, viz. What it is wherein, or in reference to what we do
press your taking warning and being wary? And here I would have you, First, To
be aware not only of mo^e gross sins, but even of all such things in general,
which Tentations use ordinarily to make their approaches and assaults by; as
namely little sins (little I mean Comparatively) Is it not a little one? says Lot
of Zoar. O! How unsuitable was it for him, to whom the Lord had but a very
little before spoken such a great and gracious word of peace, as that; Depart
for I can do nothing, so long as thou art here: and yet the same night or the
Morrow, this escapes him; and readily, when people fall once, they fall over
and over again; but ye would be ware to seek leave to lurk and loure a while in
such Zoars; Beware to say, it is a little Sin: say not, I shall not be drunken,
but I must have leave to tipple, and triffle over the time; The devil drives
sin and Tentation, as a Carpenter drives a wedge: he will teach and Prompt you
to say, we may be cheerful and sport us a while, without regard to the matter,
Measure or season, though ye be not profane: but, once let in the point of the
wedge by a little sin, and it may become a great one ere all be done, or a
grosser one may follow, even as the great end of the wedge does the lesser.
Secondly, Beware of returning to Omissions. Some, it may be, will resolve that
they will never tipple nor Swear, nor Commit any such things; but they will, it
may be, neglect and omit to Pray as they have (belike) done these few days
past: though they go not abroad to the Tavern on the week days, nor go idly in
the fields on the Lord's Day: yet they may mispend and triffle away their time
at home, as if falling back into Omissions, were not a turning again to folly,
as well as falling back to Commissions: The confessions of many poor Creatures
(who become Publicly and Prodigiously Scandalous) on their death beds or on a
Scaffold, that omissions of duty have Predisposed them to, and brought on those
gross Commissions, may and should awake and alarm us: ye would therefore with
Holy Job Make a Covenant with your eyes and other senses, and make Conscience
to keep it. Thirdly, Beware of falling back to a secure cold-rise manner of
going about duties of worship alone or in Company, in public or in private: let
none of you think with your selves, that now this Solemnity is over, ye need
not wrestle in Prayer, nor watch so strictly over your heart, but let it gad
and rove, and not hedge it in on an ordinary Lords day, as on a Communion
Lord's Day: since there is no liberty allowed for an idle word or thought any
day, more then there is on that day: Think it not enough that ye say your
Prayers morning and evening, and that none can charge you with any offense: God
the all seeing God observes you, whether you be universal, sincere and serious
in the duties of Religion. Fourthly, Beware of neglecting Spiritual and Gospel
duties: such as, Self-examination or Self-searching, Self-denial,
Mortification and use making of Christ: The neglect of these and the like, may
be some way called Gospel-follie: It is no doubt great Gospel-follie, when
Christ (being freely and fully offered therein) is not improved for wisdom,
righteousness, Sanctification and redemption: when the power of Godliness is
not aimed at in duty: but People rest and sit down in the form thereof: which
yet in some respect is more combersome then the power: for Christ improved
makes all things go easily with us: Therefore any of you who have lo^ked on it
as folly to neglect these spiritual duties, see that ye return not again to
that folly. Fifthly, Beware of unbelief: have ye not resolved to cast out with
that evil, and resolved to be no more jealous of God, though ye should meet
with difficulties? Believers in Christ, lick not up that vomit again, turn not
again to that folly, to which there is a secret Natural bentness of heart: If
(I say) unbelief and jealousy be a folly, take it not up, turn not to it
again. Sixthly, Beware of heart-ills: possibly ye will not give way to more
gross evils: and yet suffer your Souls to be carried away after Idols, or after
vain, proud, Ambitious, Covetous, Revengeful, filthy and Lascivious thoughts:
but if in very deed Christ get the heart, he must reign in it and command the
Eye, Tongue, Ears, Hands, Feet, and all. Seventhly, Beware of falling back to
the Inordinat love of the World, and of letting the heart be too much addicted
and glued to, even, lawful pleasures and Creature Comforts, to your Callings,
Wives, Children, Houses, Lands and incomes of gain and Profit; from which there
has been possibly some suitable abstractedness these days past: ye should not
only abstain from oppressing. Stealing and deceiving, but ye would also guard
against falling back to excessive pursuing after, and (as it were) glutting
your selves with the things of this world, however lawful in themselves.
Alace! Perimus Licitis: Inordinat love to, and Immoderat pursuing after things
lawful in themselves destroy more souls, then things sinful and unlawful in
themselves do: the excuses of those invited to the Marriage of the Kings Son,
are founded not on things simply Sinful, but on lawful things, the Farm, Oxen,
and Married wise: Now the house is sweeped, and ye are in Hazard, if ye guard
not, to return to a greater and greedier feeding on those vanities: I dare say,
there are Multitudes of men and Women, who never so much hungered for the
Communion, as they have longed to have these Solemn days over and by, that
they might win back to their Callings, worldly businesses and pleasures; O what
a weariness have they been to them? As Sacred Solemnities were to those spoken
of, Amos 8.5. Who cried, When shall the new Moon be gone, that we may sell
Corn, and the Sabbath day, that we may set out Wheat? To many these days of
Fasting and Spiritual Feasting and Communicating have been as a bridle bit in
their Mouths, to restrain them from running on the Mountains of their vanity;
and who knows, but ere another Communion come, the Lord may f^ed you as a Lamb
in a large place?

The Second Use is, For Exhortation; would ye then know the duty that ye are
called unto? this is it, Let not Gods People and Saints turn again to folly,
Let not the Idler return to his Idleness; the tippler to his tippling, the
scoffer to his Scoffing; the ignorant, who have been at a little pains to learn
some questions before the examination and communion, to his negligence in
seeking after knowledge, etc. Let not this be; If ye have vomited out these and
other sins, Lick them not up again To press this Use a little, we would First
Give you some considerations from the Text. Secondly, Some directions to help
you forward in the Practice of it.

For the first, viz. Some considerations from the Text to press i^; First, Is
it not a folly to sin once? If so, sure, it is much more to relapse into sin.
Whether is it more true wisdom to abstain from those Sins, or to fall back into
them: Is it not more wisdom for you who have been given to Tippling or
drunkenness, to neglect of Prayer and the like, now to let alone sins, and to
give your selves to Prayer, then to be walking in the street on the
Plain-stones? Is it not more wisdom to be given to edifieing discourse, then to
be laughing and sporting over the time? Is it not better to come to the Church,
then to spend the time Idly, In discoursing and waiting for a Tentation? And if
your conscience assent to the truth of this, then we take witness in your
Conscience, that it does so, and this Instrument of witness will stand on
record against you, if ye shall turn to those sins and to this Folly again. 2.
Have ye been examining your selves? And do ye find, that much of your life has
been spent in folly, by Some Twenty, by some Thirty, by some Fourthy, by some
Fifthy, by some Sixty years. And every days account cast up amounts only to
folly, vanity and Madness? And is it not enough, and may it not suffice you,
that ye have spent so long time in folly, though ye spend no more so? 3. Has
not God been speaking peace to some, and given them the Intimation of it? So
that their Souls have been made to say, God is here: And have they not gotten
the bargain closed, and the hand writing that was against them torn? We hope,
there are some such among us? Nay are there any, but the Lord has been
offering peace to them, treating with them, saying Behold me, Behold me,
entreating and requesting them to be reconciled? And has there not been some
tickling of the affections of many? If so, will ye be such fools as to fall
back, and to wear out the sense of that peace and warmness, that any of you
have win to? And ye with whom God has been meeting and treating about the
pardon of sin, what a folly will it be, in place of getting a discharge, to
increase and multiply your debt? 4 Are there not some engagements on you? Or
what ever be real, is there not a profession of coming under engagements? Are
not the vows of God on some of you? Is there not some sin that has stared you
in the face, which ye have resolved to abstain from? And has there not been
some stirring and stickling of desires to perform what ye have resolved and
engaged to? And will ye break all these bands? Will ye repent and rue, that
ever ye engaged to God? If so, as ye notably play the fools, So the Lord will
be about with you, and even spew you out of his Mouth, that ye may puddle your
fill in the mire of sin. 5. Is there not a great bentness and propension in all
naturally to turn again to folly? Is there not an evil heart of unbelief,
ready to depart from the living God? I have so much Charity for you, as that
you will grant this; and when the Lord has said, Watch, and tells that He is
at hand that betrays you, will ye go securely, and not take warning? O! What
desperate folly would this be? 6. Consider what will come of it, if ye shall
fall back, if ye slacken your bent, and growing cold, turn again to folly? ye
will wear out any bit of good frame that ye have attained: ye will blur and
sully the real or supposed clearness of your interest, mar your Peace, and
become in a manner more beastly and swinish in your sinful way then before; At
the very thoughts whereof your hearts should scare, Nauseat and even grow sick.
And what will be the upshot thereof? Either ye will repent, or never repent: If
ye say, ye will repent; are ye sure that God will give you Repentance, If ye
shall hazard on some sin? Are not many given up to hardness of heart, who never
come to Repentance? Know ye what Repentance is? have ye not been already
essaying and doing somewhat at Repentance; and have ye not found it difficult
and hard to come by? And if ye shall sin yet more, will not Repentance be yet a
greater, more difficult and hard work? and suppose ye should get Repentance, ye
shall know the truth of that saying, Jer. 2. That it was an evil and a bitter
thing to depart from the Living God, and that his fear was not before your
eyes. O! what shame and confusion of face will it bring with it, to remember
that we had so Many warnings from the word without, and so many Convictions
and challenges from our conscience within, and that yet we went over them, and
with a high hand went on in our folly: will those things be little, think ye?
what pleasure or profit can ye have in those things whereof ye will be ashamed?
Yea suppose ye come to repentance (and a hundred to one if ever ye come to it)
ye shall weep and mourn bitterly, that ever ye hazarded so on sin over your
light and convictions, and over the belly of your Conscience? If ye get not
repentance (as I am afraid many never shall) what will come of it? Convictions
and challenges will wear out; the heart will grow harder, you will go on
Laughing at reproofs, mocking at exhortations to Repentance and Reformation,
and regardlesly treading on what might reclaim you; you will be angry at them
who brought you under any engagements: ye will become very Atheists in your
hearts, and as so many profaine Heathens in your carriage and when you have
lived thus for a time (and the Lord knows how long) will ye not come to die?
will not your month come on you? will not your bed take you, or ye take your
bed? and then the Conscience will either awake or be silent; if it awake, will
not this be your language, which is the language of many a poor wretched
creature? Woe is me, I have misspent my time, and have been glu^ting my self with
the World and sinful pleasures: Oh vain world! O bewitching and beguiling
world! Alace that ever I was so much taken up with it: And if the Conscience be
quiet, what will come of it? Will that fin ly on, and not be sought account of?
know ye not, consider ye not that word, Gal. 6 Be not deceived, God will not be
Mocked; As men sow, so they shall reap? Think ye that God will be inferior to
the Creature? will not your Governor or Landlord seek account of you according
to your engagement? And shall not the Lord call you to a reckoning? Yea
certainly: and the Conscience will then awake and roar on you; then the curse,
Woe and damnation will seize upon, and take hold of your Soul in death: and
devils shall carry it thither, where Hypocrites are, until the Judgment of
the great day: and then ye will say, turning again to sin was the greatest
folly and madness: And thus, whether God have a purpose of repentance to you or
not, ye shall one day rue it at all the veins of your heart (to speak so) and
shall find the folly of it, and that to your everlasting prejudice and loss,
if ye repent not.

And therefore let me press this Use upon you, and ear^estly exhort you, to let
these Considerations sink down unto your ears and hearts: Beloved, We are
jealous over you, and would God it were with a suitable Godly jeal^usie: We are
afraid that many, ere we be aware, be ^own in their former puddle, that
ignorance and Pro^anity be as rife as ever; there have been so many fits and
good appearances, and of so short continuance here^ofore: and now ye have been
making some mint: but what will come of it, if ye fall back? If these
ordinances shall do you no good, we know not what will do it: (...) think ye
were never nearer to some great Crise, to a ^ick of being lost or gained: we
have you (as it were) (...) the very place of the breaking forth of Children:
So that now, you must be either safely and fairly delivered, ^r prove
abortives: Ah! are our fasts and Communions ^o no purpose? Are all your
Purposes and resolutions, ^our engagements and seeming willingness to engage,
(...) vain and to no effect? If ye shall fall back after this and turn again to
folly; I do not much expect that any ^^dinances, or future engagements shall do
you much ^ood: we must either look for better and more fruit, ^r there will be
more barrenness and stubbornness: ^ither ye shall be more Holy, or more of that
old sin of Malignity, stoutness of heart against God, and more ^pposition to
Godliness shall bud amongst you: We ^ould from our very Souls wish you brought
well tho^ow; but are afraid there be a sticking. Why is it I pray, that we
insist so much with you, if we were not jealous over you? will ye have faces to
hold up before God, when ye and we shall be reckoned with, if ye shall sit
^hese warnings? or what heart can we have to go about ^is service amongst you,
if yet there be a sticking: and ^hen there is some wrestling to get you up the
hill (as it were) and ye run further down then ever? O! to be mightily helped
of God to travel in birth, to have Christ formed in you, and formed in you
again: Is it probable, when many of you are brought further up then before, if
ye fall further back, that ever ye will win up again? We apprehend, that there
are many of you, who shall never again, with so much moral Seriousness, be
wrought upon, if there shall not be now some abiding and effectual work; but a
turning again to Folly. It is not, Beloved hearers, the fruit of one preaching
or two, that we are now driving at; but the great scope of this blessed Gospel;
Therefore, for Christ's sake, hold at it, come forward and go not back, O turn
not again to folly: else be assured, that the Lord and your own Consciences
will bear witness, and we his Servants will also bear witness against you, (as
many of you will bear witness against us if we shall do so) If after God has
spoken peace to you: Ye shall return again to folly. Let me yet add this one
word further for pressing this; will ye but consider what we are seeking? is it
not your real good and advantage? is it any hard or unreasonable thing that we
crave of you, or any uncouth thing; or any thing but that which Abraham, David,
Paul, and others of the Saints, were desirous and studious to be at, Yea and
our blessed Lord Jesus himself was content to be at? Though he was never indeed
tainted with any folly; yet he was content and careful to fulfill all
righteousness; and what seek we of you but that ye would seek and labor to
imitate him, that ye would prevent your own loss and ruin, and give Christ a
kindly and a hearty welcome, in order to the exercise of all his Offices about
you: that his heart may be made glad, and that He may see of the fruit of the
Travel of his Soul to his Satisfaction, in the Salvation of a number of Souls
in Glasgow, O that we could get you prevailed with to be as serious in these
things, as ye are in and for the things of this present life: and that we could
get as great vent (to speak so) for Christ's Precious wares amongst you, as a
man would get for some rare Commodity: nay (may I or shall I say?) but even for
Tobacco: Alace! that incomparably Precious Jesus Christ, and his purchase, the
Everlasting Covenant, even the Sure mercies of David, should have less vent and
sale, then that and an hundred other commodities have: this is a Lamentation,
and should be for a Lamentation: always let bygones be seriously reflected on,
and see that by all means, ye turn not again to Folly.

As for the Second thing Proposed, viz. Some Directions for preventing your
turning again to folly, ye may take these few, and the Lord himself put them
home with a strong hand. First then, Walk in fear, Serve the Lord in fear, and
rejoice before him with trembling; the Wise man sees the evil, but the Fool
passes on and is confident; There is a sort of Spiritual pride, vanity and
self-conceit, reigning amongst ordinary Professors, and too much of it
Prevailing amongst Believers, that undoes them; are there any of you afraid of
Fornication and Adultery, or of turning giddy Sectaries and the like? Your want
of fear brings you into the mire, ere ye be aware; Pride goes before
Destruction and a Haughty mind before a fall: The little fear that is amongst
the most part says, that some black turn (as we use to speak) is in their
hands, or some foul fall before them: Hence the Apostle, Philip. 2.12. Exhorts,
Work out the work of your own Salvation with fear and trembling: and 2 Cor.
7.1. To perfect Holiness in the fear of God. Secondly, Observe well and lay due
weight on that exhortation of our Lord, Matthew. 26.41. (which has several
directions in it) Watch and Pray, that ye enter not into Temptation; look about
you, be not secure, stand by your Post, let nothing go out nor come in without
strict examination; and seek (as it were) after its Pass, and set (as it were)
a Sentinel at the Port of every sense; And what I say unto you, I say unto all,
watch, says the Lord, Mark. 13.37. Be not secure; watching is a most suitable
duty for Christ's Soldiers: fail not to join with it much Prayer, not for the
f^shion, but that which is in the Spirit and fervent; yet lay no weight on it,
as if ye could merit any thing by it, but go about it humbly and seriously, in
order to the entertaining the life of Grace, sit not up in it, but rather
double your diligence. Thirdly, Keep the heart well; heart-ills are the
Principal ills; Keep (says Solomon Prove. 4.) the heart with (or above) all
kee^ing; Set your main force to guard it, for there Satan keeps his Court and
head-quarter, and thence gives his Orders to the outward senses; dally not with
sin in the heart, else it will come a further length. Fourthly, Forget not your
engagements, but let the vows of God ly on you, and have due weight with you;
let not the sins that ye discovered and saw in your self-examination between
God and you, before ye came to the Communion Table, be forgotten; but remember
them, to repent of them and to renounce them; and when one knot (to say so) of
your engagement loses, cast another faster, or if a knot were weak,
strengthen it, or cast a new one; for as acts of Faith must be renewed, So must
acts of engaging to God. Fifthly, Be much in the exercise of Repentance for
your bygone folly, My sin (says David Psalm. 51.) Is ever before me; think not
Repentance to be the work of a day or two; look back and reflect on your old
sins of tippling, Swearing, enmity at Godliness, etc. For if ye wear out of the
exercise of Repentance, ye will wear in, piece and piece on your old sins,
against which Repentance is a notable bar; being much in the exercise of
Repentance keeps the heart sober and watchful, and loath to hazard on sin, and
withal makes sin bitter: But the Antinomian way takes off all restraints, and
loses the reins to sin; It Is much now to see a penitent; I wish There may be
much Repentance in secret; but for any thing that is seen, it is very rare.
Sixthly, In an especial manner, be much in Improving the strength of Jesus
Christ, to prevent your turning again to folly; do not undertake nor engage in
your own strength; but believingly lay all the weight and stresse on your
Surety, Put his name in the band, which ye give to God, for the debt of duty:
Abide in me, and I in you, So ye shall bring forth much fruit; for without me,
ye can do nothing; says our Lord to his Disciples, John 15. But how many fail
and come short here? While they go about duties, and either quite misken or
make but very little use of Christ; many know very little or nothing at all, what
it is to make use of Christ, in order to the making of their peace with God;
but O! how very few know what it is to make use of his strength to enable them
for duty, and to go through the wilderness leaning on their beloved. Seventhly,
Defer not to make your Resolutions and engagements practicable; There are many,
alace! who think Shame, it should be said, that a Sermon had so much weight
with them, as to make them alter and change their course at once; It may be
they will consent to be religious, but they must be allowed to come to it by
degrees, and to creep toward it piecemeal; but beware of that, lest it prove
in the Issue to be a shift of thy deceitful heart; Ponder these words well,
Eccles. 5. Defer not to pay what thou have vowed for the Lord has no Pleasure
in fools; And in the Holy Ghosts account, he is a fool that deferreth and
puts off one moment; O! delays are in a special manner dangerous here, and
Satan will not faill to knit one delay to another. Eighthly, Reject all
Temptations to sin and turning again to folly, with abhorrency; say with
Ephraim, What have I any more to do with Idols? Never think on them, but with
indignation and Holy disdain; for ye are undone if ye but once listen to them.
Ninthly, Be often examining, if ye be like and answerable to your
Communicating, and to your Promises and engagements; many know not how it is
with them, because they Examine not Tenthly, Walk humbly in the sense of your
weakness, trust not to your own heart; for he that does so, is reputed to be a
fool, by the Holy Ghost. Eleventhly, Be helping one another forward in your way
to Heaven. Take heed (says the Apostle. Heb. 3.12.13. That there be not in any
of you, an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God; but exhort
one another daily, while it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened
through the deceitfulness of Sin: To be edifieing to others would, through Gods
blessing; be edifieing to your selves, and help you to be in good case; to be
praying with them would stir up your selves to more Seriousness in the exercise
of that duty; to be reproving sin in them, would waken up more hatred of it in
your selves, and to be much Conversant in the duties of Mutual edification with
them that are warm in their love to Christ, to his interests and friends, and
diligent in the study of Holiness, would readily through Grace stir you up to
seek after more love and more Holiness; as he insinuats in that exhortation to
the Christian Hebrews, Chap. 10.24. Let us consider one another, to provoke
unto love and good works. Twelfthly, And in a word, endeavor to walk suitably
to your light; your own consciences will readily tell you, that it is best to
walk so, as ye may abstain from that which ye know to be sin, and to be doing
and delighting in that which ye know to be duty; The^e are very few, if any
duties of Religion, but they are one time or another, and many of them
frequently laid before you; and not a few shall, I hope, have cause of blessing
God eternally, that ever this Gospel Light was made to shine so clearly on
them: but for such of you, As detain the truth of God in unrighteousness (as
the Apostle says, some do, Romans 1) or make a prisoner of it, by setting a guard
of corrupt affections about it; Whom God gave up to vile affections; and to all
sorts of most abominable filthiness, because, though they knew that such things
ought not to have been done, yet they not only did, but took pleasure in them
that did them: I leave it with all the seriousness I can win to, on you, and
take Instruments of witness in your consciences, that ye have bad great offers,
and have made fair mints, and come under, at least, seeming engagements: if ye
have not done so, declare so much, but since ye all profess that ye have
engaged, and some have really engaged, not to turn again to folly; walk
suitably to your engagements, as ye would not have your consciences condemning
you, and God who is greater then your Consciences to condemn you. Many, I fear,
have sleeping consciences, and that will not now speak to them; but the
Conscience of every one will speak at length and not keep silence. We shall now
say no more, but Pray that this word may be Blessed of God to you.

These five following Sermons were all Preached about the time of the
Communion, the first four within a very few days before it, as it gradually
approached; the Fifth after it
On Jeremiah 50. verse. 4, 5. In those days, and in that time, says the Lord,
the Children of Israel shall come, they and the Children of Judah together,
going and weeping: they shall go, and see the Lord their God.

Verse. 5. They shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thither-ward, Saying,
come and let us Join our selves to the Lord, in a perpetual Covenant that
shall not b^ forgotten.


SERMON I.
THe repairing and making up of a breach betwixt God and a People, is a matter
of greatest moment and Concern, and when men are serious in it, O how uptaking
is it to them! Which is holden out to the life in these words; that lay forth
before us very clearly the frame and carriage of a people, which formerly have
dealt loosly and deceitfully in the matter of their Covenant with God, when
they come through his Grace to be serious and in good earnest in the upmaking
of it again.

As for the people spoken of here, they are Israel and Judah, the Lo^ds own
Covenanted People, who had dealt falsely and foully in the Covenant, and had
thereby Procured sad strokes to themselves, and had divided and separated
themselves from God, and one of them from another, Which division and
separation continued lamentably long? They are both here represented as coming
home together, Seriously endeavoring to amend and make up the breach betwixt
God and them, and among themselves.

As for the time that this relates to (In those days and in that time says
the Lord) It looks, literally and according to the Cohesion, to Babylons
Destruction, and (...) Lords bringing down that Babylonish Monarchy by the
Persian King Cyrus; In which time the People of God had some liberty to return
to their own land: Yet considering the great scope of the Words, and that this
liberty of the Jews is in a great part fulfilled in Christ; and that the union
spoken of here is such as has in it the gathering together of all the Tribes;
and withal, that the Covenant which they enter into with the Lord Christ, is
such as shall never be forgotten: We must extend the words to their Ingraffing
again into their own Olive: when all Israel shall be saved, and they shall be
graffed into their own root and Stock from off which they were broken. As for
the Scope, it is partly off encourage the Jews; This being not only a Promise of
their return, but also and mainly of their Repentance, and of their Friendship
and Reconciliation with God and with one another; In those days they that had
been far from him, and busy vexing one another, shall come, and come together:
Their work and business in coming, is to seek the Lord; and the manner of it,
is going and weeping: Praying and repenting: and although the way be somewhat
dark, and not so discernible to them: yet they go on, asking the way to Zion
with their faces thitherward: They ask how they may come to Him, worship God
again aright and perform the duties of a people inchurched to, and in Covenant
with him; And (as it were) from one Post or Town to another, they ask the way,
and get Direction from one day to another, and from one duty to another: And
their design in all is, Come, say they on the matter, we were once in Covenant
with God and with one another, but we have been unfaithful in both, now let us
amend and make up the breach in both: Let us Join our selves to the Lord in a
perpetual Covenant never to be forgotten: Let us renew our Covenant with God,
and let it be done firmly and surely, so as it may not be broken again: this
looks and has respect to Jeremiah 31.31, etc. and 32.49. 40. Where the Lord
Promises To make a new Covenant with the House of Israel and with the house of
Judah: Cited by the Apostle, Heb. 8. And it is called Chap. 32. An everlasting
Covenant: Which is not so much to be understood of mere external Covenanting,
as of saving sharing in and partaking of Christ's Righteousness for the Pardon
of sin: and of their engaging to God in his own strength to be forthcoming in
the fruits of saving Grace and Holiness in their practice: This is in Sum, the
way and course which they take; and is a short directory for what should be a
peoples carriage, when they would make up the breach of a broken Covenant with
God.

As for the Particular Scope of this place, as it relates to Israel and Judah,
their returning together, we shall not insist in it: yet from these words we
may see. First, That There is good ground for us to expect the Lords bringing
back his scattered People the Jews, and their ingraffing again into their own
Olive: The same God that persuaded Japhet to dwell in the Tents of Shem, can
persuade Shem to dwell in the tents of Japhet: As they minded us Gentiles, as a
little Sister, and were Holily Solicitous what they might do for us, we ought in
gratitude to mind them as the elder Sister, that they may turn again to the
Lord: who has given us his faithful Word for it, which cannot fail but must be
fulfilled.

Secondly, We see, that Heart-melting toward God and seriousness to make up
the breach of a broken Covenant betwixt a People and him, conduce natively to
make the hearts of those that have been divided and set at variance from one
another, in much warmness of love to unite and sweetly to join together: It Is
from this, that Israel and Judah become one Stick in the Lords hand, Ezekiel. 37.
This makes them as melted metal to run close together, as it were, into one
Lump: though it was a long continued Schism, and had much bitterness attending
it: yet when their hearts are touched with a Sense of sin and of a broken
Covenant, their former differences and animosities evanish: softness of heart
in the sense of by gone sin, would silence many things among us; that all
disputings, writings and Printings will not be able to do: Pray for this to the
Land, as the most effectual mean and way of curing out divisions, and of
uniting us in the Lord: It Joins Judah and Israel together, whose breach was
much greater, and of far longer continuance then ours.

Thirdly, We see here, that A peoples joining and running together in serious
seeking of the Lord is very Commendable and lovely, and a good token and
evidence to them of their turning to God and of Gods accepting of them: even as
bitterness and division is exceeding displeasing to God and prejudicial to
themselves and to the Work of Grace in them: This is an happy-like, hopeful and
promising day of Repentance and turning to God, that bodeth much, unspeakably
much good to a land and People.

But we come to consider the words as they do direct unto, and chalk out the
way for a people returning, to make up a broken Covenant with God, which is the
Scope. And we may take it up in these Three, First As it respects the frame of
their hearts: And O what a tender, humble, warm and mournful frame are they
represented to be in! They shall come, and go together, exciting one another,
going and weeping with their faces toward Zion. Secondly, As it respects and
holds forth the great design they have, and that is, to renew and make sure
the Covenant betwixt God and them: Though it was now broken and they want not
challenges for it: Yet they do not say, we will never enter in it again,
Because we brake it the last time we made it: But come (say they) let us make
it the more firm and stable. Thirdly, As it respects and hold out their
posture, and the way which they take in pursuing this design; There is a going
and weeping, a praying to and seeking of the Lord; in a word they seek, and
endeavor to renew their Covenant with God, seriously, diligently and humbly;
and thus they pursue their design.

First then, If we look to their frame, we will find employed in it, 1. A guilty
condition. 2. A challenging and convinced condition. 3. A repenting condition;
they are kindly affected with the wrongs done to God, and desire and use means
to have them righted.

We shall name Two or Three general Doctrines from this First Consideration of
the word, though in effect it will fall in with the Last. The First whereof is
this, That Gods Covenanted People may deal foully and falsely in his Covenant;
For their coming to renew the Covenant supposes that they had broken it; and
it is also employed in their mourning and weeping, and saying, Come and let us
join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant never to be forgotten.
This needs no further proof then the History of Gods People, their dealing with
him; which holds out clearly and convincingly the strong Propension and bent of
heart that is naturally in them to back-slide, and like a deceitful bow to
turn aside and to prove unstedfast in his Covenant.

Secondly, There is here employed A distance betwixt God and them following on
the breach of Covenant; Their going to seek the Lord says, that he is a
seeking; this is very sad, yet most true, that Sin and unfaithful dealing in
Gods Covenant will make a separation betwixt him and a People in Covenant with
him: Thus it is said, Isai. 59.1. The Lords hand is not shortened, that it
cannot save, nor his ear heavy that it cannot hear; but your iniquities have
separated betwixt you and your God: It Is very like, that many believe not this,
that sin has such influence in making separation betwixt God and sinners; but
in that day when an eternal separation shall be made betwixt God and them, It
will be undenyably made known and manifest, when many of you that now ^^rong to
the Ordinances will, if Grace prevent not, meet with that sentence (O dreadful
sentence!) depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I never knew you.

Thirdly, There is here their sensibleness of both these, 1. That they had
broken Covenant. 2. That God bad separated himself and withdrawn his Presence
from them for their breach of Covenant; though sin be very evil, and the want
of Gods Presence very sad; yet they had this good, that they were kindly
sensible of both: whence we may Observe, That Conviction of by gone wrongs done
to God, and kindly resenting of his absence, are the first rises and springs of
Repentance and turning to God; or they are the first steps of Conversion: What
is it, I pray, that all this business and stir among this People flows from?
Here it is, First, They apprehend a quarrel betwixt God and them, And next
they apprehend a distance: and this puts them seriously to mind turning to God
with weeping and supplications, and to renew their Covenant for recovering of
Gods presence: this same is the Spirits Method, John 16 I will (says the Lord
Christ) send the spirit, and the first thing he does is this; He convinces the
world of sin: so Acts 2.37. the first thing that ever (to speak so) turned the
chase in Peter's hearers was, that they were pricked in their hearts for sin;
and this did put them to an advisement, and to cry out, Men and brethren what
shall we do? And indeed there is a necessity of this, Considering the Lords
way of administering his Grace; for so long as persons are not convinced of
their sin, they are not apprehensive of a quarrel; but conviction of sin makes
them apprehensive of it, and to think, that they would be oblidged to any who
would relieve them out of that sad Condition: and while God is absent and not
missed, they sleep on; and though he be absent, yet they know it not, as Samson
knew not that God had left him, till he went out to shake himself: But when
Gods departure becomes sensible, it will make a wicked Saul to howl, and will
make a gracious tender Soul to take the Alarm hot; and we see, Cant. 3. and 5.
Where the Bride missing Christ, is put to seeking, and still missing him, her
heart is kept fluttering and on wing in Pursuing after his presence, till she
recover and find it.

As the Use of the Point, we would Exhort you to let this truth sink in your
hearts: there is a necessity of the conviction of these Two, 1. Of wrongs done
to God. 2. Of Gods absence, ere ye can be serious in the exercise of repentance
and turning to God: what is the cause that many ly still in deep security with
much debt upon their score, and ly down and rise up without Gods company? Even
this, that they never had it, and were never troubled for the want of it; they
were never convinced and made sensible of their Sin: now this conviction is
not, simply to know that we have sin, as many take it to be, who think it
enough that they know that they are sinners: but It Is such a Conviction as
arrests the sinner before God, and puts him to answer for his Sin: It Is like an
officer coming with an order to put a man in Prison for debt: be may go
confidently and stoutly enough up and down the street under the knowledge of
his debt: But when He is arrested for it by the officer, it affects him, and
touches him in the quick: so is it with a Soul thoroughly convinced of sin: Men
may know that they are sinners, but the Conscience for a time may, not much
trouble them, and they may take on more to a long day, and shift challenges and
Convictions: but when the Conscience awaketh and the law arresteth them, the
matter sinks deeper on them: would ye then know what is a suitable frame for
Fasting and Communicating? We would Commend this to you, even to Study a
thorowness of the Conviction of sin, and to be sensible of the distance that is
betwixt God and you, and narrowly to observe whether he be present or absent:
It Is very sad and much to be Lamented, that many who are ignorant of the way of
God should be so strongly persuaded of the goodness of their Condition, that
there is no access for any word so much as once to bear upon them: If we should
a^k many of you, whether are ye thoroughly convinced of your wrongs done to God,
and sensible of the distance betwixt him and you? ye would readily answer, that
ye never wanted nor missed him: he has been always your God, and ye have been
always his people: not from any strength of Faith, but from ignorance,
stupidity and carnal Presumption; yea many of you have not so much knowledge
as to cover your ignorance and Hypocrisy, neither can any gain the least
ground of you, to make you sensible that your faith and Communion with God are
unsound and delusory, because they have not had a right rise from conviction of
sin and of distance from God, putting you on to repentance and covenanting with
him. But because several persons will be ready to think and say, that they
have convictions of sin: as indeed there is much ground and reason for them: I
shall point at some convictions, for which there is Just ground, and whereby ye
may know if your Convictions have been through and sound: most whereof, if not
all of them may be gathered from the words. 1. There is a Conviction of the
want of Faith: The holy Spirits first work, John 16.9. Is to convince the world
of sin, because they believe not on him: Were ye ever convinced of your
unbelief: Many will be convinced of Sabbath-breaking, of cursing, Swearing,
lying. Drunkenness, etc. to be sins, who were never convinced of the sin of
their want of Faith, for they always had it, as they think: and what, I pray,
can such as ye do at a fast or humiliation for sin, when this is your great
sin, and ye cannot by any means be brought to take with it, though you take
with other sins; but can come boldly to the Table of the Lord as Believers, and
such as have no just reason to doubt of the soundness of your Faith, while in
the mean time, all the Faith that ye have, is but rotten presumption: This is a
most fearful condition: for so long as ye think that ye have Faith, ye cannot
think your selves to be lost: neither can ye cast your selves down with a
stopped mouth before God: nor is there access for any word from him to do you
good. A 2d. Conviction or challenge is of or for the want of a new nature? were
ye ever convinced of this? not only, of this and that and the other particular
sin, but that ye were in a sinful and unrenewed state? Nicodemus John 3. comes
to Christ and speaks him fair; but the Lord lets him know that fair words, a
great Profession, and some, yea much knowledge will not do the turn, he must
necessarily have somewhat else, even a new nature, He must be born again, else
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: He is very unwilling and loath to
digest that Doctrine; but the Lord tells him, that, that which is born of the
flesh is flesh: It were good that many of you had that word from your heart in
your Mouth, which is Jere. 31.18. Turn thou me, and I shall be turned:
Convictions of a natural state, Alace! are very rare; If any of you have had
such Convictions, try what became of them, and what followed on them. A Third
Conviction or challenge is, of or for former breaches of Covenant, For Gospel
sins and the sin of dealing unfaithfully in Gods Covenant: and can any of you
shift this Challenge, considering what ye were tied to in Baptism, and by
other vows and engagements which ye have come under since that time, especially
at the Lords Supper? How few of those have been kept? or rather have they not
been as so many ropes of Sand? And who are suitably challenged for and
convinced of such breaches, as it is employed here, that these People are? A
Fourth Conviction is, of want of Gods presence, insinuated in their Going to
seek the Lord, which imports an absence of God, and that sinfully procured by
them, for which they weep and are kindly affected: the absence of God simply
considered is no ground of challenge, it being an act of Sovereignty; but
absence procured through our sin is a great ground of challenge: Alace! the
most part know not, neither are acquainted with any such Challenge: they think
God is always with them: However, the Lord is absent, and it would well become
us to search out diligently that which has procured his absence; for whatever
may be Gods end in it, there is abundant ground of Just challenge that we may
get against our selves in it. A Fifth Ground of challenge is, in respect of
their own stupidity and ignorance, which have incapacitated them to take up the
way how to come to God for making up the breach, therefore They ask the way to
Zion: And this may be another sad challenge to many; who though their
ignorance, senslesness and stupidity have utterly indisposed and unfitted
themselves to make their peace with God, and are without knowledge of the way
how to vent their desires to him. A Sixth Challenge implied is, the want of
love to one another, and a Challenge for seen distance betwixt God and them
helps to bear in on them this Challenge for distance betwixt one another:
Therefore now they say, Come and let us join our selves: this is another
challenge, which we should not shift: it is too evident, what ever our
professions be, that we are much cooled and fallen behind in our Love to one
another. A Seventh Challenge is, lying long under a seen evil condition without
being suitably affected with it: therefore these People go now with the more
tenderness about the work of turning to God, and of their renewing Covenant
with him, that they were so long a falling to it: I suppose many of you, who
never knew what Repentance was, and others also who have been more serious then
now they are, may have this challenge: It is no Strange nor uncouth thing that
is called for from us, to fit and prepare us for Fasts and Communions, it is
even seriousness in these most plain, Common and Obvious things: and if ye can
hold up your faces and say, that these concern you not nor the Present
occasion, ye may wave and lay them aside: but if they be such things as your
Consciences convince you of: it is most necessary, that ye take time to think
upon them and lay them to Heart: and that ye study through Grace to be Humbled
for them before the Lord.

But the Observation, that we intended mainly to speak a word to at this time,
is this, that There is no amending or righting of an ill condition, but by
making sure and fast the Covenant betwixt God and us. What is the remedy of
this Peoples ill condition here, when they find themselves so far wrong? Come
(say they) and let us join our selves to the Lord in a Perpetual Covenant,
never to be forgotten: when I speak here of Covenanting, as that on which the
quieting of our Consciences, and the remedy of things wrong in our Condition
does so much depend: It is not to be understood of a bare Promise only to right
and amend things that are wrong and amiss; but it is to be understood of a
real Covenanting with God, of a real and cordial accepting of the offer of
Jesus Christ made to us in the Gospel, whereby an union betwixt God and us
through him as Mediator is made up: wherein there is Gods offer and Promise, on
the one side: and our Faith accepting of and submitting to the terms and
Conditions on which the offer is made, on the other side: whereupon there
follows a mutual closed bargain betwixt God and us: or the very bargain is
thus made up: And so, whatever way we look upon and consider our condition as
evil or sad, whether in respect of challenges for and convictions of sin and of
wrongs done to God: or in respect of darkness, uncleanness and confusion: or in
respect of Crosses and afflictions, this is the way to win at the remedy
thereof: thus David, 2 Samuel 23 5. When he is drawing near to Death, and has
many challenges for things that had been wrong in his Personal walk and in his
house, which had brought on it much affliction and trouble, and when he finds
himself very infirm, and under the want of much of that lively sense he had won
to have, he betakes himself to this, Though (says he) My house be not so with
God, yet he has made with m^ an everlasting Covenant ordered in all things and
sure^ and this is all my Salvation and all my desire, though h^^ make it not to
grow: And if we look on the Prodigal, Luke 15. When he is under a conviction of
his Sin and misery, what resolves he upon as a remedy? I will go (says he) to
my Father, and I will say; Father, I have sinned, etc. The first thing he
betakes himself to and resolves upon, is, to catch hold of the Covenant
relation betwixt his Father and him. And there is a necessity of this on a
Threefold account, 1. Because there can be no solid ground for extricating and
bringing one out of an evil condition, but by Covenanting with God; for what
else, I pray, can silence a challenge, or quiet and calm the Conscience in
respect of guilt, when it says to the person, thou have sinned and art liable
to the Curse? There is no way to get sin and the Curse removed, but by fleeing
to Jesus Christ, and closing with Gods offer of Pardon upon the account of His
Satisfaction rested on by Faith: Therefore is faith compared to a shield,
whereby we may quench the fiery darts of the devil; It Is true, says the Soul
accused of enmity against and wrongs done to God, I was an enemy to him and
g^eatly wronged him, I was liable to his curse and wra^h for sin; but he
offered me Pardon and reconciliation through the Mediator, and I have accepted
of his offer, and do rest upon Christ's satisfaction for pardon, therefore I am
Justified and shall not come into condemnation. 2. Because there can be no
peace to the Soul, till there be some through evidence that the Covenant is
fixed and made sure; for this is the way that God has laid down for making
Peace; as the quarrel and curse are founded on the breach of one Covenant, so
our peace arises upon our engaging with God in another Covenant: Hence are all
those promises, Jer. 30.31, 32, 33. and Heb. 8. which are so often repeated, I
will Pardon their iniquities, I will remember their sins no more, etc. All
which Promises being privileges of a Covenanter with God, whoever would look
for the Performance of the Promises, there is a necessity of their being in
Covenant with him, ere they can expect the performance of them and attain to
Peace. 3. Because, all that are without the Covenant of Grace are under the
curse, being liable to the breach of the first Covenant: Therefore Ephesians. 2.
These two are put together, Strangers from the Covenant of Promise; and having
no Hope, being without God and Christ in the World; and so to be without the
Covenant, is to be without Hope, and without God and without Christ.

Use, 1. Lay this for an unquestionable ground, that if ever ye be well, it
must be by this Covenant with God: is there any conviction of sin, of violating
by gone engagements to God, and of wrongs done to him? take it for a certain
truth, that things must be thus adjusted and thus secured betwixt God and you;
that ye must have pardon and peace by entering into, and making sure the new
Covenant with God on the Grounds of his own grace; That is, when God is
treating with you and declaring that he is content to close with you, on
Condition, that ye will take with your sin, renounce your own righteousness and
submit to Christ's, and be content to live to him all the days of your life that
are behind; step to and clos^ with him on his own terms: for the hearts
yielding its consent to God, is the making of the Covenant; and tha^ intitleth
to all the good that is in the Bible; In Sum it is this, if ye, (says the Lord)
accept of my offering my self to be your God, and consent to give up you^
selves to me, if ye will quit your own righteousness an^ embrace Christ's, I
will Pardon your sin, I will b^ forth coming to you for happiness, and will
sanctifi^ you and make you fit to be Partakers of it; and your making of the
Covenant sure, is your yielding to be happy on these terms, even to be
content to take Justification and Pardon of sin freely by virtue of Christ's
satisfaction, and to give up your selves to be his, to be for him and to live
to him and not to your selves; as ye get God engaged to be yours, so ye engage
and subscribe to be Gods, and to walk suitably, according to your engagement,
in his strength, to be for him and for no other, as the word is, Hos. 3. or as
it is, Isaiah 44.5. One shall say, I am the Lords, and another shall call
himself by the name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the
Lord and surname himself by the name of Israel; He shall, as it were, write
down his Name, I am Gods: This, in short, is Covenanting with God; which may be
done in hearing the word, in Praying, in meditating, and in Communi^ating; when
Faith is distinctly, at least, really and truly exercised on Gods offer and
Promise; and when upon deliberation, there is a sincere resolving with the
persons self, I will take God as be offers himself to me, and will give up and
away my self to him: and when, according to the resolution, there is actually a
yielding to God.

Use Second, Seeing this is the only way to right and unravel an evil and
ravelled condition, let me Exhort you to pitch on this as your great work, and
to aim at it as your great scope, these days that are before you; that a good
understanding may be begotten betwixt God and you, and all quarrels removed and
taken away, by declaring and acknowledging your iniquities before him, and by
Covenanting with him on his own terms; This would make much kindly
heart-melting, and would make the Communion to be cheering and refreshful; when
after a secretly closed bargain with God, we should come to receive his Seal,
and to append and put to ours: and whatever tossings and difficulties there may
be to get our selves made right here, yet we would seriously endeavor to get
our hearts brought up sincerely to say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 16. My Soul
has said unto the Lord, thou art my Lord: And to win at a settled deliberat
yielding to God, so as there may be quietness in it for the time to come.

Use Third, There is here sad ground of Expostulation with and Reproof to many:
I know not what many of you are doing: most part, I suppose, are taken up about
the outward ordinances: but as to the main thing of making up a Covenant with
God, as it is holden forth in the Gospel, I fear, that is much neglected and
misken'd: yet let me say it, though ye should P^ay and weep all these days,
without this it is impossible that ye can have Peace, or win to have a good
understanding betwixt God and you: Put your selves therefore to the trial, and
see if the frame of your Spirits be such as holds any tolerable Proportion to
the frame and posture that Israel and Judah are represen^ed to be in here: they
a^e going, we are sitting still: they are weeping, our eyes are dry and our
hearts hard: the humble mournful way of Religion, Alace! is much gone from
amongst us: again, they are renewing the Covenant: but Ah! what can we say, as
to the securing of things betwixt God and us? Are not the most part as well
satisfied with their state and Condition, as if there were nothing wrong nor
amiss in it? Alace! shall we slubber and scurf over Religion, and va^lour
selves from our selves and from others, when in the mean time our hearts and
Consciences might, if awake, tell us that we are not in Covenant with God? I
know, many of you will be ready to say, ye are friends with God: but let me ask
such, did ye ever know and believe the enmity? did ye ever apprehend your
selves to be strangers to God and without the Covenant? Did ye ever
experimentally know any good that his word did to you, as to the bringing of
you under the bond of the Covenant? Has any gracious Change followed upon it?
The truth is, many of you think that ye may go to Heaven without the word, and
the saving effects of it on your hearts: ye found them (as ye fancy) always
inclined to love God: ye suppose that ye were always in friendship with him:
which, though there were nothing else to prove it, is a manifest evidence, that
ye were never really in friendship with him. But let me ask yet further, did ye
ever know what it was, to make use of Christ's mediation, in the making up of a
Covenant betwixt God and you? It Is like, ye will say, ye prayed: but ye might
have done that, though Christ had never come into the World, and though there
had been no ground for your acceptance on his account: but I say again, what
use made ye of his mediation and sufferings? I fear ye know little or nothing
at all of this; but ye come to him, because ye imagine that he bears a goodwill
to all sinners, and is very easy to be dealt with, and that God the Father is
more inexorrable and a harder party to deal with then he; as if Jesus Christ
the Son were not as Just as the Father; Or as if God the Father were not as
ready, through a mediator, to accept of sinners, as the Son is: I would ask you
yet further, do ye think, or can ye with any Just reason think, that your
Covenant is sure, when ye know neither what it is, nor how ye have entered into
it? In the Covenant, as there is an offer on Gods side; so there must be a
receiving on yours; though I grant that oftentime^ this, to serious Souls will
be unclear, and it will b^ their burden that they have not strong enough
desires t^ have it thorough and clear; such Poo Souls would pu^ their darkness,
unbelief and undexterousness in Christ hand to be helped. But it is a sad
matter, that when w^ should be praying you to close with Christ in the
Covenant? I must be our work, and the hardest piece of it to shake many of you
out of your presumption: It Is unpleasure to us, God knows, to preach you out
of the Covenant; but your Presumption Lays a necessit^ on us, to lance you to
the quick and to search down t^ the bottom of your sores; because these must be
discovered and laid open, before there can be any Ju^ ground for the
application of consolation: if once (...) could get you brought under a
thorough conviction, the ye have been deluding your selves, we might yet ha^
sweet, lively, comfortable and refreshfull says: if (...) were in this
Posture, Going and weeping for perverti^ your ways, with your faces toward
Zion, toward G^ through the Mediator; ye might expect Gods blessi^ on these
Solemn Ordinances, and that there should (...) a Covenant made up with him
never to be forgotten. (...) be Serious in the business, and let not this
opportuni^ go by you unimproved to the best and utmost advantag^ and himself
graciously help you hereunto.

Jeremiah 50. Verse. 4.5. In those days, and In that time, says the Lord the
Children of Israel shall come, they and the Children of Judah together, going
and weeping: they shall go, and seek the Lord their God.

Verse. 5. They shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thither-ward, Saying,
come, and let us Join our selves to the Lord, in a perpetual Covenant that
shall not be forgotten.


SERMON II.
COvenanting with God, if it be real, well grounded and sure, is a business of
incomparably greatest concern and advantage to sinners; but when it is
otherwise, and only Imagined without any Solid ground; it is attended with the
greatest disapointment and Prejudice imaginable; a man in that case fancieth
himself to be in a state of Friendship and favor with God, while, in the mean
time, he is an enemy to God, and God an enemy to him; and is there any
disappointment or disadvantage in the world comparable to that? It is one great
end and design of all Ordinances, that strangers to God by nature may be
engaged to him, and made to become his Covenanted People; It was for this end
that Christ came into the world and laid down His life and shed his precious
Blood, even to bring Sinners into a Covenant of Reconciliation and friendship
with God; and therefore the Ordinance, that is now approaching, is called the
new Covenant, or New Testam^nt in his Blood.

The words have in them a short and sweet sum and compend of the gracious frame
of a People, turning home to God, to get a broken Covenant made up: Israel and
Judah having deeply declined from the blessed state and condition wherein God
had once graciously put them; Their return and Repentance is here both
Prophesied of and promised; and this is the great thing which they design in
their Returning, Even to get the knot (to say so) of the Covenant betwixt God
and them made fast and sure, so as they may never any more be separated from
him.

We shall at this time shortly name some general Observations from the words:
The First whereof is this, that There is nothin^ that People, who have any
Convictions of their sin and of their distance from God, should more singly aim
at and Seriously seek after, then to be firmly joined to the Lord in Covenant,
or to be in good terms with him according to his Covenant; For these come to
the same amount, to be in good terms with God, to be Reconciled to God, and to
be in Covenant with God, by the one we come to the other this: we say, should
be aimed at and sought after by all that are naturally born enemies to God,
Aliens and Strangers to the Covenant of Promise, without Hope, and without God
in the World, Ephesians. 2.12. Compared with verse. 1.2, 3. where to be dead in sins
and t^esp^sses, is expounded, to be Without the Covenant: But more especially
those who are touched with the sense of their sin, should have this for their
aim, design and endeavor; as we see in these spoken of here, who when they
come to any sense of their sin; this is clearly their great design and work
very seriously and closely pursued by them.

To clear and Confirm it, take these Three words, Consider; First, What state
and Condition man naturally is in. Secondly, What God is to man in reference to
that estate; And Thirdly, What Covenanting with God is: and we will find that
there is nothing which he should more seriously design and seek after. First,
Man is naturally an enemy to God, and in respect of his malicious desperate
inclination, given to thwart with God, whereby God stands as an enemy to him;
he is liable to the curse of God, and God is as an armed man against him, as
Job speaks; and he like an unarmed Child running on the bosses of his Buckler.
Secondly, Consider that God is not only an enemy, but stands stated as such
with his Curse against sinners according to that word, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things written in the Law to do them; and this Curse is
like the flaming Sword in the hand of the Cherubims, which with terror
separats betwixt God and the sinner, So that there is no access for him to God;
and if he have any thoughts of God, he is troubled with them; and all the
Creatures are armed against him, So that he can expect nothing but enmity from
every stone of the field. Third^ Consider, that Covenanting with God is that,
when by a man who is naturally at enmity with God co^eth to be in friendship
with him and has the fa^ of every thing altered; the meditation of God sweet
to him; the creatures are in league with hi^ The Angels become Ministering
Spirits to him; a Gods dispensations become lovely and do work t^gether for his
good, even those that are in themselves most terrible; Death and the Grave
becom^ servants to him; and being in Covenant with Go^ he can triumph over them
and all troubles and pe^secutions, and say that he is More then Conqueror (...)
them all, as it is Romans 8. and says the Apostle t^ such, 1 Cor. 3. All things
are yours, whether Pau^ or Apollo, or Cephas, or Life, or Death, things present
or things to come, all are yours, and ye are Christ's Is it any wonder then,
that at Poor Soul touche^ with the sense of sin be desirous and Solicitous to
b^ in Covenant with God? And therefore, whethe^ we look upon it as a duty, or
as an evidence of (...) person truly humbled for sin, it is very desirable an^
should be seriously sought after.

The Use Serves to show, That the great Scope which ye should now have before
you, is to have a broken Covenant made up with God; It should be your main
design to put this grand business to a point, that there may be no war, but a
standing League betwixt God and you: And therefore, wh^ ever they be that
satisfy themselves with going about the Ordinances and misken this, they
certainly mistake the mark; The great matter is not to come to the Communion,
neither is it to win at somewhat of heart softness, or to a little sense, which
are good; but it is really to be in Covenant with God; to be able to say on good
ground, The Lord is my God: My beloved (...) mine and I am his; And when he
says, Return backsliding Children, to be in case to answer with the heart;
^ehold we come unto thee; for thou art the Lord our God; ^his is indeed a
desirable thing; and he is an unhappie man that does not, that will not
heartily desire and seek after it.

Secondly, From their very great Seriousness in going, and weeping, in going to
seek the Lord, asking the way to Zion, and from their encouraging one another
to Join in Covenant with the Lord, Observe, that where there is any Sincerity
or begun work of Grace, it shows (...) self in nothing sooner, then in an
impulse to be at Covenanting with God and to have some clearness therein; For,
only to be in Covenant, and not to have the knowledge of it, cannot give that
peace and comfort which a present sad exercise calls for: therefore say they,
while they are going and weeping, Come and let us join our selves to the Lord
in a perpetual Covenant, that shall not be forgotten: So then, we say, that a
sincere and gracious work of God appears in nothing sooner, then in this
impulse to have the Covenant of God fixed and put out of doubt; to have this at
a Point is their great design here, and they are very serious in it; So
Isaiah. 44. where verse. 3. There is a Promise of the work of the Spirit in
Sanctifieng; and how is this work of the Spirit proved? or wherein does it
appear? Even thus verse. 5. One shall say I am the Lords, and another shall call
himself by the Name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his hand unto
the Lord, and sur-name himself by the name of Israel; the work of Gods Spirit,
wh^ he comes to Sanctify and save, is such as makes a man run and devote
himself to God with hand, heart a^ mouth, ye never saw people more quickly and
wi^ better will come to the Church at the most Solem^ occasion; then (when this
work is begun, or there any kindly exercise about it) serious Souls will (...)
ready to run with their heart to Subscribe to Gods C^venant, when the Terms of
it are laid out before the^ Only advert to these Two things in this Observatio^
First, When I speak of entering in Covenant with Go^ I mean of the hearts
closing with him by Fai h, according as he offers himself in this Gospel; when
he sait^ quit and renounce your own righteousness and ta^ mine; quit and
abandon your lusts and Idols and gi^^ your selves to me, and I will be your God
and be fort^ coming to you in all things that concern your happine^ here and
hereafter: the heart yields and says, conte^ Lord, the offer is good, and I
accept of it; and (...) wives were wont (as it is yet the custom,) to surna^
themselves by their husbands, so does the Soul, up^ the matter, in this
Covenant: Subscribe, I am God^ This is called a yielding to God, or the giving
of t^ hand to him, 2 Chronicles. 30.8. and Romans 10.3. It (...) called A submitting
to the righteousness of God. Secon^ly, When we speak of this impulse toward,
or desi^ of Covenanting with God, It Is no^ to be understood (...) every raw
wish, such as Balaam bad to be in Heaven but it is a seriously urging impulse,
an earnest hung^ and thirst and an ardent longing to have this at a point It Is
such a thirsting desire, as all the world beside w^ not be able to quench: It
makes the Soul eager in t^ pursuit of the thing, even to meet and close with
Go^ in the Covenant: It Is in effect, that which, Matthew. 5.6. is called a
hungring and thirsting after righteousness: Because it has in it a fixed
longing with Holy Pain: which Cant. 5.8. Is called a being sick of Love: It Is
such a desire as makes the heart even faint and sick for the want of the thing
desired, which can be satisfied with nothing else: no more then a very hungry
man can be satisfied, if handfuls of Gold were offered to him, it is meat he
must have. In this respect (which will be the Reason of the Doctrine) Christ
Jesus is called the food of the Soul, and the Covenant is like the Pap, whereby
Christ's fullness is Communicated and conveyed to us: for we have no access to
Christ but by the Covenant: therefore, Ephesians. 2.12. These two are put together,
being without Christ, and being without the Covenant: and Isaiah 66.11, 12.
Converts are said to Suck and be satisfied with the Breasts of the Churches
Consolation and to be dandled on her knees: Believers are like new born Babes,
whom nothing can satisfy or do good to but the Breasts: and the Ordinances
are, as it were, the breasts at which they suck, and which, are as so many
Pipes to conveigh to them Spiritual nourishment: to which the Apostle
alludeth, 1 Pet. 2.2. when he says, As new born Babes, desire the sincere milk
of the word, that ye may grow thereby: if so be that ye have tasted that the
Lord is Gracious: and then follows, to whom coming as unto a living stone, etc.
Jesus Christ is the milk, and the word the Pap that conveighs him: and as the
first thing that evidenceth life to be in a newborn Babe, is hunger after the
breast, so is it here, the Covenant satisfies the new born New creature.

The Use of the Point serves to put you to look back, and to consider, whether
ever ye have in your experience known this, wherein spiritual life shows it
self, Even to be holily fond (or browden so to speak) on the Pap^ the Regenerat
Soul cannot endure to be kept back from sucking the breasts of these
Consolations that are in the Covenant: Now it is very Probable that many will
catch at this, as a very Comfortable Mark of Regeneration to themselves, and
will be ready to say, why have we not this desire to be in Covenant with God?
And if that will be a proof of a work of grace, we wan^ it not; and these Jews
hear spoken of, before their coming to be in this blessed Frame, were ready to
boast that they were Abraham's Children, and that they had a desire to be in
Covenant with God: but it will be another sort of desire and eagerness which
they will have, When the Redeemer comes out of Zion to turn away iniquity from
Jacob. But that ye may know, what this desire and impulse that we speak of is,
and if indeed ye have it, consider these evidences of it; First, That it i^ an
ardent and vehement desire, a pressingly urgent impulse. not such as ye have
had all your days; but it^ an effect of the Spirits out-pouring, as that
Parallel place with this, viz. Zech. 12.10. clears: I will (says the Lord)
Pour upon the house of David the Spirit of Grace, etc. Away with that Grace,
with that Faith and Love which are as old as your selves. Secondly, This desire
and Impulse has such a vehemency with it as puts the man to his feet, to go
and Pray and to go weeping: It stirs him then so, as he must needs go though
he be much in the Dark, and knows not so well and distinctly whither he is
going: because Love to be in Covenant with God, will in a manner make a fool go
right to G^d: though there is reason that he should seek after help to his
infirmity: the desi^es of many are like the sluggards desire, who lies still
on his bed, and his ease slays him: This desire makes some Holy stir, and
rouzeth to diligence in the use of means. Thirdly, This desire is such, as
never dies out, till the Person be through in the point of Covenanting with God:
and therefore, though he should be put as it were to digg wells in the
wilderness, and to go from strength to strength, yet he will adventure on it
and hold on in his way: The Apostle, Philip. 3. Speaks of it as his One Thing,
and when persons are suitably serious in this, it is their one thing, and not a
piece of work only on the by: and if they may come to it in all their lifetime,
they think (as they have reason to do) that they make a good bargain: and have
gained a noble Prize: never did a man on Horse back, in a race, spur faster
then they do, that by any means they may attain it. Fourthly, The principle of
desire after Covenanting with God holds them constantly in an estimation of,
and sucking at it as the mean of their life; as the Babe cannot live without
the breasts, So they cannot live without the Covenant; they cannot rest but in
it: I speak not now what Believers are in their declinings: but when they are
in a right Frame, they have no being but in this Covenant; they must needs have
milk flowing through the Breasts of it for their nourishment; that is a cursed
life or rather death of persons, who come to the word, and ca^e not whether it
be made lively or not, and come to the Communion and care not whether they get
by it any life and comfort or not: and a cursed Faith that keeps Souls from
making use of Christ: and such is the faith of many hearers of the Gospel: Now
Covenanting is the Believers Earnest, and they are thereby made to forget their
Fa^hers house, in hope to be admitted to dwell with Christ for evermore.

Thirdly Observe, that A well qualified desire of Covenanting with God is a
good token of Conversion; or a rightly biased desire of being in Covenant with
God the language of Persons coming home to God: Come ((...) they) and let us
join our selves to the Lord in a perp^uall Covenant: The Lord se s down this as
their commendation, and as an evidence of his begun Gracio^ work in them; They,
no doubt, had woe ds of Co^nanting before: but wanted this right impulse and
desire, and therefore Sat still, but now they are much a^fected, stirred and
put to their feet; It being a^ effe^ of the Poured out Spirit on them. We sa^,
this is good token of a begun work of Grace, and of person their coming home to
God: because this impulse t^wards, and desire of Covenanting with Go^ speaks o^
these three. First, The sense of their need of him a^ that they cannot live
without him, and the stopping (...) their Mouth with Holy shame and confusion
befo^ God. Secondly, An high estimation that they have (...) him, a Judging
that they have no happiness but in bin Thirdly, It speaks out faith, in their
actual betakin^ of themselves to him for the up making of what the want and
stand in need of: There is some what of a these in the Prodigal, who when he
came to himself reckons thus with himself, 1. I perish for hunger, thi^ Points
at the sense of his need. 2. There is Bread enoug^ in my Fathers house and to
spare, which shows his Believing esteem of the fullness of God for a supply of
hi^ need, and for making him a Poor Miserable Perishing wretch completely
happy. 3. His resolution is, I will go and say, Father, etc. This holds out his
actual purpose of Covenanting with God, which has always faith in it: It is
the same on the matter with this, Come and let us join our selves to the Lord
in a perpetual Covenant.

The Use of it serves to show, what a serious or well qualified desire after
Covenanting with God is, and wherein it consists: and those things that are
marks of it, may also serve for Directions how to go about it aright. First,
This Well qualified or serious desire of Covenanting with God flows from a
two fold Conviction, 1. From a conviction of Peoples sin and breach of Covenant
formerly, and of their distance from God: whereof we spoke somewhat the Last
day: we are afraid that many of you think you desire, when yet ye never knew
a^ight your guilt in breaking Covenant, nor took up aright the distance betwixt
God and you: It Is one sort of desire that a whole man has to speak with the
Ph^sitian, and another which a sick man has: it is of the latter that we mean
here. Secondly, From a Conviction of the want of Gods Company: These here know
now, though they be Abraham's seed, that yet they are nevertheless naturally
enemies to God and Christ and without both, and therefore they seek him, and to
make a Covenant with him. There are some that pretend to be seeking God and
Christ, and yet they have him, they think, always in their hearts: But speak
soberly, did ye ever want or miss him? It may be, at the one word ye will say,
we hope not, and at the next word, Perhaps, too often: and it is still but a
guessing at the best: when the Prodigal came to himself, he saw that he had
been (to speak so) in the wrong close. Secondly, This well qualified desire
has a kindly heart softness with it, which is a good, though a very rare
thing: They go here weeping, and when they are a saying these words, Come and
let us join to the Lord in Covenant, their tears are trickling down: It Is a
good and hopeful desire, which is expressed with the tear in the eye:
proceeding from a suitably affected heart: There are Alace! many of our desires
that do not kindly affect, neither do they make any change: the heart remains
dead, stiff and hard under them. Thirdly, This well qualified desire puts on to
diligence, and is not like the sluggards desire: therefore they go and seek the
Lord: they are eager and earnest in the matter and are taken up with it: This
desire will make the man sometimes forget to eat his bread and it may be to
Pray seven times a day (what if I had said twice seven times?) and very often to
with draw from all company, at least, that is not edifieing and profitable, and
to retire to the fields or to the Chamber, quietly to lay, as it were, a chase
by the pursuit of Faith to the finding out of Gods Company: It will make him
and her go to the poorest body in all the town or village, that is gracious, to
ask the way to Zion: this is also a very rare thing: ye all know the way to
Heaven, as ye think, and this makes you foolishly confident, till ye run your
selves into the mire and into the pit at last, if Grace, by making a saving
change, p^event not. Fourthly, This well qualified desire is a humbling desire,
there is no pleading here with God, of the privilege of their Relation they
have ^o Abraham, and to the Covenant made with him: they cannot find in their
hearts, nor have they confidence to do that: they Judge themselves to be very
unlike him, and they carry humbly toward one another, glad to ask the way at,
and to get some knowledge of it from one another, how they may win forward:
they are like the Spouse, who says to the Daughters of Jerusalem, Cant. 5. If
ye see my Beloved, tell him that I am sick of Love, take my Commendations (as
if she had said) to him and lay out my case before him: such serious and humble
Souls will be glad to take help in the way from any body that can give it,
which says, that they are diligent and Painful. Fifthly, This desire, as it
may, is always setting forward; they are going and asking the way; and though
they have a strong tide (as it were) against them, yet the wind of their own
desire and impulse steereth them through and makes them Stem the Port; and
though they make but flow progress, yet it is always toward Zion. Sixthly,
This desire is a Peremptory and (to say so) an illimited desire, and that in a
twofold respect, 1. In respect of coming at God. It must have him and will not
submit to the want of him, Communion with him it must have. 2. In this respect,
that it makes no Conditions with God of its own, but is heartily well content
to take him on his own terms: This indeed is a notably good mark of a well
qualified desire, when a Soul desires not so much to be at Heaven as to be at
God, and when it is (as I Just now said) content to take him on his own terms:
many will desire God and Heaven, but with some such secret reservation as this,
that they get leave to brook their lusts and Idols, that they may have liberty
to tipple and triffle away their time, to take their fill of the World, to be
in credit and reputation and to pursue after some one thing or other in the
World; or at least they must be allowed to go about the establishing of their
own righteousness: but this desire is waited with the abandoning of all Idols,
without any allowed exception or reservation, and with the renouncing of
self-righteousness also in the Point of Justification; and therefore it is
called, Submitting to the Righteousness of God; It says not a word against the
terms of the Covenant, but holds all: these things were good to be seriously
thought on, and sought after, in our approaching to the Table of the Lord, to
renew our Covenant with him; and where they are not in some measure, our
desires will not be found to be of the light kind; it were therefore very
suitable for you, to think, how ye may get your hearts quickened and warmed
with vehement and unquenchable desires after this covenanting with God, and
after the water of life; O! know ye any thing of this? There are some who have
found it in experience and who can represent it better to themselves then we
can exp^ess it; ye who have had your hearts Panting for God, for the living
God, as David says, his heart did, Psalm. 42. Can tell what raw wishes were
before, and tha^ the Grace of God works such desires as have another sort of
edge on them, and have a holily disquieting and restless hunger for the breasts
of Gods Covenant, and cannot rest nor be satisfied, yea no not live without
them.

Fourthly Observe, That A people or person may have some sincere desires after
Covenanting with God, and yet have much weakness, many infirmities and fears in
the accomplishing of that their design. Many poor puzzled and perplexed souls
may have this honest desire, and yet not know well how to put the thing in
Practice; even like unto these mentioned here, who are going toward Zion to
join themselves to the Lord in Covenant, and yet are asking the way: they have
covenanting with God in their eye as their great scope, but are ignorant in a
Considerable measure of the way; yet they sit not still till they get the way
(as it were) described on a Card to them: but they rise and make forward as
they may. I nothing doubt, the truth of this Doctrine is known in experience by
some Serious, though much tossed and puzzled Souls, who have some honest and
earnest longings after him and after Covenanting with him: who yet know not
well how to win at him, or how to make this Covenanting Practicable: thus the
honest well meaning Daughters of Jerusal^m ask the Spouse, Cant. 6. Whither is
thy beloved gone, that we may see him with thee? There was a sincere desire
after him and a fixed Purpose to be at him, and to decline no Labor nor pains
in order to coming by him: yet they know not well whither to go for finding of
him: even like honest Mary, who John 21. would fain have Christ, and comes to
the grave to seek him, and missing him weeps; and when the Angels speak to her
to comfort her, that will not do it: She continues still weeping, and tells the
cause: They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him:
It was an evidence of the honesty of her desire, that though she knew not where
he was: yet she could not be diverted by any thing from a mournful restless
and diligent Pursuit after his presence. This may Proceed Partly, in the First
Place, from believers their infirmity, and their not being thorough in the
knowledge of Gospel Mysteries: from their ignorance of the Parties and
conditions of the Covenant, of the nature, Properties, and promises of it: If
they knew how kind and condescending the Lord is: how near he brings his Word:
How little he will take of their hand: how solid the Covenant is; how sure the
cautioner is, and how their Part of the Covenant is undertaken for as well as
Gods; they would not have such doubts and fears; hence, Romans 14. They who are
weak in knowledge are said to be weak in faith, Because through their Ignorance
they have many doubts: This makes me to think, that if many of you had
sincerity and seriousness in the great concern of your Salvation, ye would be
much and almost inextricably Puzzled, how to Rid your selves in many things ye
would meet with in your condition, because of the abunding of your ignorance;
ye cannot Alas! tell what Repentance is, what closing with Christ in the
Covenant is, what Christ's offices are, and what use should be made of them; and
therefore if ye were put in^o any strait or Dump through the sense of sin, it
needed be no great wonder that ye should be in much confusion and did not know
what to do to get out of it. It were good, therefore, that ye studied the
knowledge of God and of the Covenant; that if ever God do you good, ye may have
some clearness and distinctness in the way of the Remedy of your evils, and of
extricating you out of your difficulties. But that which keeps many quiet, is,
Alace! their own Presumption grown to a great height, and the devils rocking
them fast asleep in the cradle of Security: it is a wonder to see so many very
confident of Peace with God, who yet know not how it is come at: when God
touches your Conscience, ye will be put to cry, what shall we do? Because of
your ignorance. Secondly, It proceeds partly from want of experience; hence,
though some, it may be, have light and knowledge: yet wanting experience of the
thing, they are at a stand and know not what to do in this or that case; Just
as if a man were to go to London, and were informed of all the Towns and Posts
in the way; yet when he comes to advance in his Journey not having gone the way
before; he is often in doubt whether he be right; So it is with many, who from
literal knowledge can tell what faith and Repentance is, but when their
Spirits are Jumbled (to speak so) confused and put through other; the matter
looks far otherwise upon them: and they are like a man who coming to a shallow
and safe foord of a River that is mudded, yet fears to take it, because he has
not ridden it before: whereas another that has gone through it, can confidently
hazard on it; and indeed it is no Marvel to see much of this even amongst
Believers. A Third, cause or ground whence this may proceed, is, prejudices at
the way of God, and of persons at themselves: men have naturally a sort of
Gospel of their own that they cannot go by, till someway they be constrained:
and when God puts them to it, they are at a stand: as for instance, there is
this Prejudice in some, that they think none can go and warrantably take hold
of Gods Covenant till they be so and so humbled: that they cannot go with
Convictions and Challenges, till they get some more deep heart-work, or be in a
better and more tender frame, Hence Peter says to Christ, Luke 5. very
unreasonably, Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord; whereas David
reasoned otherwise and much more Pertinently, Psalm. 25. when he says, Pardon
my iniquity, for it is great: and hence the question arises, what shall we do?
and when they are bidden believe: they Object, Ah! we are sinners, and have
evil and hard hearts, and are unhumbled: look what Passed betwixt Peter and his
heaters, Acts. 2. He lays out before them their horrid guilt in crucificing
Christ: they are Pricked in their hearts, and cry, what shall we do? He bids
them Repent and be Baptized, which takes in Faith, and verse. 41. It Is said,
that such as were kindly touched, Gladly received the Word; Now I pray, what if
they had objected can we that have even now, or a very li^le since, had our
wicked hands embrewed in the precious blood of Christ Believe on him? Come away
(says he on the matter) for there is no other way to Pardon and Peace with
God: there was much of this in the Primitive times amongst the Christian
Romans, Corinthians, Galatians, and Hebrews, many Prejudices at and wrong
conceptions of the Gospel and Covenant of Grace: and therefore they would have
patched up a Gospel of Grace and of works: they would have brought in the
Ceremonies of the Law and established a self-righteousness: and this in
particular is one great Prejudice that the devil Labors deeply to possess
the minds of wakened sinners with, even to make them think that it is
Presumption for them, though they would fain do it, to come to Christ and by
Faith to close with him, unless they be so and so qualified: as long as they
are secure, he makes them take their Presumption for Faith: but the next day
when they are wakened and exhorted to betake themselves to Christ by Faith, he
calls that also Presumption: and indeed, as it is Satan's manner to drive
Sinners on extremes, So it is our way to run into extrems: that which made us
call our Presumption Faith, is the same which makes us call our Faith
presumption: because we lay it for a ground, that it is our honesty or good
disposition, and so and so qualified frame, that must commend us to God: and
therefore while we conceive that we have that, it is the ground of our
presumption, and when the Conscience is wakened and we find that we want that,
we cannot believe. A Fourth Cause or ground whence this, in some, may proceed,
who would fain believe, is not so much their darkness and ignorance of the way,
as the backwardness, frowardness, and deceit of their heart, that will not, for
them, come up to it: such are puzzled and perplexed what to do, because they
cannot get it well done and as they would: such are like a good Archer that can
shoot well, but has a deceitful bow, which when he has put his Arrow on the
string and has drawn it to the very head starts aside and makes him quite
miss his mark the fault and defect is not in the man's skill, but in the Bow:
we the rather make use of this Comparison, that the Holy Ghost does so in the
Scripture, resembling our heart to a deceitful bow that turns aside: So that,
they who are acquainted with their own hearts, know not what to do with them,
how to guide them, and bring them up unto or bold them at any thing that is
good; and though, it may be, they could to good purpose give directions to
others in such a case: yet they find their own hearts very untractable to admit
of them, as if they did not suit or meet with their own case. This is indeed a
very puzzling difficulty, yet to such perplexed Souls there is no new
direction to be given, but the renewed exercise of faith, and to put the
directions, which they know, in practice; and when one shot (to speak so)
misgives, to essay another, not to seek (as it were) a new string, but to cast
a new knot on it, and if two knots should slip, to cast a third, improving more
that Grace of ^he Covenant to make them hold better; Therefore, Acts 2 When
those pricked in their hearts ask, what they shall do, Peter bids them Repent:
they were begun to do so, and he bids them be doing and go on: ye then that are
indeed serious, and to whom your short comings are really your Souls burden,
would not think it any uncouth, strange or extraordinary thing, to find desire
and affection running far before your light and practice, (though ye would
endeavor to have them foot-side) a Christians desire may be a days Journey
(as it were) before himself, as to his attainment: and indeed in some respect
it would not be good, if it were otherwise, for it is no good sign of progress
in Gods way, when the desires of Persons go no further length then their
Practice, or when they their Practice falls nothing short of their desires:
both in that case are to be much suspected: for even eminently Holy Paul sees
himself to be behind, Philip. 3. when he says, I think not my self perfect,
but one thing I do forgetting things that are behind and reaching forth to
those things that are before; I press toward the mark: Where he came one Post
in his attainment, His desire was ten, in a manner before him: and so is it
with those people here spoken of, Come (say they) Let us Join our selves to the
Lord; they find themselves to be behind, and endeavor to work themselves up,
and to draw themselves, and one another forward: we must now draw to a close,
and shall therefore but touch the following Observations and pass them in a
word.

Fifthly Observe, that in Peoples covenanting with God, their desires and
designs will be much sooner Proposed and laid down, then they will be got
accomplished and put inexecution, or then they will win to satisfy themselves
therein: although an Union be betwixt Christ and them, yet they are not
satisfied, till they be somewhat clear and distinct about it: they are like
the Prodigal, who being in another and strange Country, says first, I will
go, then he arises: and, I will say to my Father, before he actually speak to
his Father himself: calling him Father: Some real acting of Faith Preceeds his
more distinct ct satisfieing acting of it: there is a faith in resolving to
believe, before there be a resting of Faith or stayed believing: and yet it is
Faith that begets that same resolution: if the Prodigal had not had some Faith
of enough in his Fathers house, and of his Fathers affection, he would not have
resolved to go home: and these people mentioned here would not have set their
faces toward Zion; if they had not had some begun stirrings of Faith.

Sixthly Observe, That it is a good token to be asking seriously the way to
Heaven, though the askers be not so clear in it: there is some ground to think
that such Persons are in the way, and if they hold on and fo low the directions
of the word, they may come thither: It is far better to be dissatisfied and to
ask the Way: then not to ask, and yet to be satisfied with our own knowledge of
the way.

Seventhly Observe, that Persons may fall very far short of their desire, and
have much infirmity, and may meet with many puzzling difficulties how to
accomplish what they would be at: yet where a serious and longing desire is
wakened after Covenanting with God, they should go forward and follow it forth.
This people are short of what they desired, and yet they go, and they know not
(as it were) where to set down the next foo^ till they ask the way, yet they go
on still asking: there is no disputing here, but forward we should go: I
suppose these here spoken of might have had several difficulties started and
several obstructions laid in their way, yet on they go: as, First This, that
they were Covenant breakers: yet they, taking seriously with it, step over
that, and say notwithstanding, Come let us join our selves to the Lord in a
Covenant. Secondly, they might have thought, that it was a very long Journey,
and that they would never be able to go through to the end of it: besides that
they were under the dominion of strange Kings who were Heathens: So it may be
said on the matter, and is often said to serious Souls, that would fain
believe, can ye believe? It will not be with you: are ye not under the feet of
many Tyrannous lusts? And how will ye win free from them? yet they resolve and
must, yea dare not but resolve to go forward: and the reason is, because they
resolve to take with their guilt and to make use of the Covenant for answering
and silencing of challenges: and they resolve also, if the Journey be long, to
make use of the Covenant for strength to make them hold on and hold out in it.
The weak Believer when such doubts are started, should make use of the Promises
of the Covenant, such as these; Faithful is he who has called you, who also
will do it, 1 Thessalonians. 5.24. Return back sliding Children, and I will heal your
backslidings, says the Lord; and then follows, Behold we come unto thee; for
thou art the Lord our God. Jer. 3.22. They yield themselves to the Lord. A
Third Difficulty is their ignorance; they might have said, we know not the
way, and how can we think to come where we desire and design to be? (as some
will be ready to say, we can tell some words of the Catechism, but Alace! We
know not what it is to believe) yet they sit not still for all this, but as one
Remedy of their ignorance, they ask the way to Zion with their faces
thitherward. And if ye Ask here, how can their faces be thitherward, when they
are a king the way? And at whom do they ask the way. The Gentiles amongst whom
they live know it not, and they have no other to ask at? I answer, they are
hanging on God, and taking their Marks and meaths of the way, as he gives them
from his word; and there is a most sweet word for such, Isaiah 35.8. where the
Lord speaking of this way, and calling it the way of Holiness, he says, The
way faring man, though a fool, shall not err therein: It Is the heartsomest way
that can be; O! but it be safe for the wayfaring sinner, for the seriously
seeking Soul, to have the face toward God, for making up of Peace with him:
upon the one hand, the Lord hedges up such persons their way with thorns, that
they shall not find their lovers; and upon the other, he constrains them to go
right forward; He leads the blind in a way they know not, and makes darkness
light before them: are there not severals of you brought far through this day,
and ye know not well how? He brought you to Faith very insensibly, and trained
you on piece and piece, and yet ye cannot tell well how; but ye know certainly
that it was He that did it; and in this Case, O! but it be good, singly to be
given up to Gods leading and guiding; who leads his flock like a shepherd, who
gathers his Lambs with his arm and carries them in his bosom, and gently leads
them that are with young, as it is, Isaiah 40.11. The Lambs would run wild and
ruin themselves, if left on the Hills: but they are under the good Shepherds
oversight and tutorie (to speak so) who brings home the lost sheep on his
Shoulders (as it was even now said) gathers the Lambs with his Arm, and gently
leads them that are with Young; which not only says, that he drives not hard,
lest they cast the young; but that, as the Nurse leads the little Child,
(otherwise then Ladies use to be led, by a gentle touch of their hand or arm)
by the arm holes or by the tugs, when the Child knows not how to go and cannot
stand on its own feet, even so leads he such; I taught (says the Lord, Hosea
11.) Ephraim also to go; taking them by their arms: when a poor Body has
Christ a forming in the heart, he will gently lead such an one and deal
wonderfully tenderly with the person: ye who come honestly to him may
confidently yield and give up your selves to be his and guided by him, though
ye be both weak and know not the way well; if ye can but cast a look to him (to
speak so,) or be sweetly silent before him, allowing him to be doing and to
take his o^ way with you; if you lay your selves humbly in (...) dust, and wait
what he will do to you, he will acco^ that Believing; The Lord is good to them
that wait him, to the soul that seeks him; says Jeremiah Lam^ 25. To wait on
Gods leisure, is a saying much abu^ but it is very good and commendable here;
It is g^ that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the S^^vation of the
Lord. Be not afraid, sincere and exerc^ Souls, I say be not afraid, when he is
(as it we^ pouring you from vessel to vessel and putting you^ his own holy and
wise ends, in some confusion, so ye know not well what to do, or to what hand
to you; he is wondrous tender of you in that Case, will have a special care
that ye Mis-carry not. The a very sweet Subject, if we could speak suitably
(...) Himself bless it to you.

Jeremiah 50. Verse. 4.5. -- Going and weeping: they shall go; seek the Lord
their God.

Verse. 5. They shall ask the way to Zion with faces thither-ward, saying, Come,
and let us our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Cov^nant shall not be
forgotten.


SERMON III.
IT is like, that, at the first reading of these Words will approve both the
design that this People ha^^ engaging themselves to God in Covenant, and (...)
endeavor to have their engagement so solid and sure, as it may not be broken
any more, but may hold for ever: we take it for granted also, that ye will
Judge, that the disposition and frame of Soul wherein they are, while about
this great Business, is very becoming and ^uitable for such as have dealt
unfaithfully and foully in ^he Covenant of God, and are from the Conviction
^ereof stirred, and put upon Resolutions to engage with ^^m of new and to enter
again into a Covenant with ^^m; we Heartily wish, that it were a piece of our
Exercise this night, before our approaching the Table of the Lord the next day,
to compare the frame and Set of our hearts, with what these words hold forth
this Peoples frame and disposition to be.

We need not now speak to the Scope of the words, it being so clear, and having
been touched at before. There is here a People Prophesied of, who are to be
brought to Repentance and Covenanting with God in the Latter days, whose
Spiritually good and desirable frame is described; They shall go weeping and
seeking the Lord, each of them stirring up another, having this for their
design, and the Language of their hearts, Come and let us Join our selves to
the Lord, in a perpetual Covenant never to be forgotten.

That which we would now speak a little to, is, Two Generals very much becoming
a people who design and ^^end to Covenant firmly with God: and seeing it is ^t
this time, in a more especial manner, our professed design to close the
bargain with him, and in evidence ^hereof, are (if the Lord will) to partake of
the Sign and Seal of the Covenant, as supposing it to be indeed a closed
bargain, or at least that it is seriously desired ^^y us that it may be so;
they will not be unsuitable for ^ou to hear and make use of them.

The First General then is this, that Covenanting wit^ God, when People are in
earnest in it, will be a very up taking, exercising and weighty business. This
is clea^ here, if ye consider how these People go about the work; they a^e in
very good earnest; and there a^^ several evidences of it; they are weeping and
going: the^ are seeking the Lord; asking the way to Zion with the^ faces
thitherward; and every one of them S^irring u^ another to renew the Covenant,
and to cast the knot (...) firmly, that it may be A perpetual Covenant never
(...) be forgotten, and such as may never loose or be broken again; whence the
general is clear, viz. that when People mind in earnest the making up of a
breach betwixt God and them (which is done by Covenantin^ with him) it will be
an exercising and uptaking bu^ness to them. Ye may consider some Scriptures for
confirmation of this, which will also hold out what it is and namely, Matthew.
11.12. The Kingdom of Heav^^ suffers violence, and the violent take it by
force, The Lord is speaking there of men's making Peace with G^ through himself
the Mediator, by which they are broug^^ to Heaven; and he tells, that it is a
most serious bu^^ness that will abide them brangling (to speak so) a^ using of
violence; Luke 13 25. strive to enter in at (...) strait gate, for many will
seek, and shall not be able: is a narrow gate, and there must be thronging and
thr^ing, to win in at it: men will be put to a sort of Ago^^ as the word
signifies: consider also Paul's word, 1 C^^ 9.24. So run as ye may obtain,
insinuating, that the is a sort of running, wherein men are not in earnest,
(...) indifferent whether they get the Prize or not; a^ therefore he would have
them making earnest of it; as he Proposes his own practice as an example and a
C^pie to them, I therefore run, not as uncertainly; so figh^ not as one that
beats the Air: but I keep under my Body, and bring it into subjection, lest
that by any me n^, when I have Prea^hed to others, I my self s^o^ld be a cast
away: these are the expressions of a man, who is in good earnest in this
business: and his seriousness therein is Proposed to you for a Pattern, what
way ye should run and fight: the like word we have, Philip. 3.13. This one
thing I do, (it is an up-taking work to me) Forgetting those things that are
behind, and reaching forth to those things which are befo e, I press toward
the mark, for the Pr^ze of the high ca ling of God in Christ Jesus: and verse.
11. If by any means (says he) I might attain unto the Resurrection of the
dead: every word has it is own weight to make it out, that it is so his one
thing, that he cares not what it cost him, so be, he may obtain it.

That which we would say further on this point shall be a word of Application
in these Two or Three Uses. The First whereof serves for Instruction; would ye
know what is required of you as a direction to duty at this time; And would ye
know if things be right in your preparation for the Communion? This maybe a
Mark to discern, and a direction on the matter; even to be serious, and to make
it an uptaking business, your One thing, to be about it, as such an occasion
and work calls you to be. And if ye shall ask, wherein consists this
Seriousness and uptaking exercise, in Covenanting with God? I shall Sum it up
to you in these Four, which comprehend it. First, The man is taken up, in
respect of exercise in his Conscience; convictions become fresh, Challenges are
put home, he is pricked less or more at the very heart; there is something
within him that gives him a Conscience-alarm, that puts in his hand a Libell,
and assures him of an appearance before Gods Tribunal: and indeed unless some
thing of this be, men will not be in earnest; and it is clearly implied in the
Text; For there are here sharp Challenges, that make this People weep, and that
extort tears from their eyes. Secondly, There is a seriousness in respect of
the work that it has on Peoples hearts and affections; there will be a
kindling of desires to have Covenanting with God at a point, with a holy fear,
lest they miscarry in the doing of it; and these put together do much take up
the man, and make him seek after through acquaintance with his own Spirit, which
he finds to be so fickle, inconstant and backsliding; and thus, apprehending
the work to be great and difficult, he is put in Holy fear and Jealousy over
himself, lest he mar the matter and make it worse with himself; as it is said
of Godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.11. What carefulness, what fear what indignation,
what vehement desire, what zeal, what revenge it wrought in them: Now when
these are tumbling (to speak so) through other in the man, and he has an inward
wrestling to have the work secured, and is afraid lest it miscarry; Is it
Possible, but he will be serious and much taken up? and this is also implied in
the words; Come (say they) And let us join to the Lord in a Perpetual
Covenant; There is a desire to have the Covenant at a point, and they fear it
slip, while they are casting the knot; therefore they say, let it be a
Perpetual Covenant never to be forgotten: It Is good to fear in the very time.
Thirdly, This seriousness is in respect of Peoples duty; It makes them pray
that never prayed before to Purpose; It makes them examine themselves, Meditat,
Read and conferr that never knew before what it was to be taken up with those
duties: Therefore we find this People going and seeking the Lord and exciting
one another: they are put to their feet, and to reaching forward, so that they
leave nothing undone, whereby they may attain the end. Fourthly, This
Seriousness appears in the manner of their going about duties: there is another
edge, then was wont to be on their prayers, Self-Judging, and wrestling with
God: they are much like to Jacob: they will not let the Lord go till he bless
them: they will still wrestle, though it should be all the night: they cannot
find in their heart to part with him on any terms: and (as the word is, Isaiah.
64.) they shall stir up themselves to take hold of him: they are not only
going but weeping: they are not for the fashion in the work: they seek the Lord
and stir up one another to do so: May we then ask you, are ye thus in earnest
making for the Communion? Nay (for this is not all) are ye thus in earnest
about Covenanting with God? which must preceed and go before, if things be
right: It were good preparation, to have our very hearts moving and fluttering
(as it were) within us to be at this.

The Second Use serves for Expostulation with many that pretend a desire and
design of Covenanting with God, and that they would be at Heaven: but yet were
never in good earnest, to have things at a point betwixt God and them, and to
make sure a Covenant Interest in him: The most part are, Alace! taken up with
poor, low and insignificant things, with unnecessary things comparatively: If
they be sick, they will be in earnest about the means of their health: if they
suffer any loss in their estate, they will be serious to have it made up: if
their credit be impaired, they will be much concerned to have it repaired: they
are carried forth with a sor^ of Bentness toward those things: but Ah! where
is there a man or woman amongst many, with their faces toward Zion in a
Serious manner and with a resolute purpose, that peace with God, Holiness and
Heaven they must have? Here is the great stop and stand: and is it possibly,
think ye, that ye can have peace in your going about duty, while ye are not
serious, no^ strive to win in at the strait gate, when ye exercise not your
selves to Godliness, when ye never (to speak so) cast your coat, nor Strip your
selves naked, as it were (as the word, 1 Timothy 4 7. Sign fies) for that great
work: when ye do not run and wrestle, as those who mind to obtain? but are
entangled in the things of the World and languish with laziness in every thing
that is Spiritually and truly good: how few are there under much exercise about
the case of their Souls, afraid le^^ they miss the mark and prize: with
Jealousy over themselves, lest they mistake the way to Heaven? How few are
there, who have it for their One thing, to be fi^mly Joined to the Lord in a
perpetual Covenant? It Is my fear that amongst all the great Number that are
here, there be but very few to be found who are in earnest in this great
business. I shall hint at a few sorts, that are not in earnest. First, Such who
are very serious to be at the external ordinance of the Communion, and who
will, it may be, take it ill, if they be kept back from it, who yet never
troubled themselves, nor were seriously taken up with Covenanting with God, and
with the study of Holiness in all manner of Conversation, or how to come by the
enjoyment of his special and gracious presence: they can be year and day, nay
many years, without it and never miss it, not be troubled with the want of it:
Alace! It is not seriousness to be at the Communion, without this, which will
profit you; and even ye that are not admitted to the Communion, are called to
this. A Second Sort are such, as are indifferent in all religious concerns;
they care not for the Communion, and would not be very desirous of it, if it
were not a shame to them, and some reflection on them to be debarred from it;
they think, that whatever in Religion goes beyond their Job, is but
preciseness, Niceness, Vanity, Conceit and Fancy; such never knew what it was
to be troubled with doubting or Tentations about their Souls state, or the
truth and reality of their Grace, nor what it was to be under any exercise of
Conscience on the account of much sin and Guilt; nay they are glad and can
boast themselves that they were never under any such serious exercise. A Third
Sort is of such, who are very civil in their carriage, but they have no more;
and if Heaven may be bad with Ceremonies and fair fashions, they will be in it
as soon as any; but they cannot endure to be at pains beyond their ordinary, to
take hold of it, to do violence to there own negligence, to take the Kingdom of
Heaven by force, nor in the least to amend their Pace, and to be Serious, come
of it what may: These are a dangerous company, they have Communicated many
years, and were never debarred, and so, think that all is well with them; and
that they may fit still and be at peace: I shall only say to such that, that
was not David's way, nor Paul's way, not the way of any of the Saints, nor the
way that Christ Commended to his hearers: and I trow, he will not chalk ou^
another way to you; nor take you to Heaven in a wa^ by your selves, or in a way
of your own: O be not deceived, for God will not be mocked. A Fourth So^ are
those who have been orde^ing and dispatching their external businesses, so as
they may win to the Communion without distraction by them; but they have taken
little or no pains at all to put their hearts in order; little or no time in
Se^ret betwixt God and them, to examine and try, whether matters, as to their
Soul^ state and frame, be right, clear and distinct; It Is the alone direction
that the Apostle gives, 1 Cor. 11.28 Let a man examine himself, and so let him
eat; That (...) serious man who puts himself to that Comprehensive and
up-taking exercise in earnest, who proves himself if he be in the Faith; whose
heart smites him that h^ has not taken as much time in Secret, as he has done
in coming to a preaching: It may be, many have com^ four or five miles to a
preparation Sermon, who y^ never Seriously once looked within themselves to
(...) how matters stood betwixt God and them: O sad, Lamentable and
Soul-ruining neglect!

The Third Use Serves for Exhortation: and let m^ Exhort, Beseech, and Obtest
you, to study to be in goo^ earnest in this business; Believe it, the business
of Covenanting with God, so as, from this time forth, ye may have it made sure
and clear that ye are Gods and that God is yours, is a thing of greatest
Concernment: of infinitely greater, then if Kings and such as are called
Pro^ectors were sending Ambassadors to treat with you about making you great
in the World. To press this a little, let me Ask you, in the First place, what
think ye will come of it, if the Covenant be not made siker betwixt God and
you? Ye will most certainly live and ly still, yea even die strangers to God,
liable to his curse and wrath ready to be inflicted on you: O lay this to
heart, if ye Believe that God will call you all to a reckoning, and that he
will say to such of you as a^e not in Covenant with him, Depart from me, I
never knew you; Yea, suppose there were not such great ground of fear as to
that, as indeed there is: can ye promise to your selves Gods hearing any of
your Prayers, the performance of any Promise, or the accepting of any duty off
your hand as service to him, till ye be in Covenant with the Lord? And think ye
nothing or but little of this? Secondly, Consider the great prejudice that
follows on not Covenanting with God, and that will attend many in the visible
Church; Many (says the Lord, Luke 13.) Will seek to enter, who shall not be
able; The solid Faith of this would make many Congregations to tremble: for
it is not only many profane persons, but many of them that countenance
Ordinances, yea many of them that have preached and prayed to the Edification
of others, and many of them who have heard Christ preach in their streets, and
who have countenanced faithful Ministers, and furthered the work of God, and
who have had indignation at others that did not so; who will not be able to
enter; this word, with that other which we have, Psalm. 78.34. where there is
such a seeming seriousness and personating of many Graces of the Spirit, and
yet nevertheless, it is but a flattering of God with the mouth and a lying to
him with the tongue, (which is a very rife and common thing amongst professos,
amongst such as profess Covenanting with God) should put us in fear. And
Thirdly, Consider this, that ye have naturally such hearts as others have, that
a^e ready to beguile you, and to back slide and slip ou^ from God; and are not
those beguiles and disappointments of others written for our warning and
advertisments? And if any of you should say, we hope there is no such ground of
fear as to us. That Is but a bewraying of your Ignorance and senselesness; for
those who are best acquainted with their own hearts will tell you, tha^ it is a
ticklish and di^ficult business to deal truly and thoroughly with God: Do ye not
know, that many take a counterfeit for grace? And were ye no^ hea^ing lately,
that many Hypocrites have personated almost (if there be need to say, almost)
every Grace; surely many o^ you will find it true one day, that the heart is
deceitful above all things and desperately wicked: and that ye have etred and
played the fools egregiously, and in nothing mo^e then in trusting your own
hearts: for says the wise man, He that trusts his own heart is a fool.
Fourthly, Consider, that it is now come to a Nick and pinc^ with you, that
either ye must close the Covenant wi^h God, or put your selves farther under
his Curse, and eat and dri^k damnation to your selves: because ye have mis-kent
Gods Covenant, and sligh^ed Covenanting with him, and so have come as enemies
to his Table, without making your friend-ship with him: we declare to you, that
e^e the morrow at this time many of yo^ will either have a bit or a Miss of the
greatest bargain a d of the greatest concernment that ever was made betwixt
parties: and although ye should not eternally incapacitate your selves for
Covenanting with God, which many may do, and bring themselves under such a sad
sentence, that they shall never hencefo^th be quickened nor awaked any more:
yet ye may make your bands stronger, and may make the business of your
Covenanting with God far more difficult to your selves then now it might be.

The Second general Observation is this, that a soft, tender and melting heart
is a good and suitable frame for Covenanting with God: would ye then know, what
is a fit frame for Covenanting with God? It Is even this, a heart melting frame;
they shall go weeping as they go; they have much seriousness, inward stir and
warmness of heart, and that makes it to me^t, and (as i^ were) flow down before
the Lord; this is according to what we have, Zech. 12.10. I will (says the
Lord) Pour upon the house of David, and on the inhabitance of Jerusalem, the
Spirit of Grace and supplications, and they shall look to him whom they have
pierced, and shall mourn and be in bitterness as one is for h^s first born:
even when they are coming home, and asking the way to Zion with their faces
thither ward, and about to enter in Covenant, they are mourning; Hence, Isaiah.
44.3, 4, 5. And elsewhere, even almost where ever entering into, or renewing of
the Covenant with God is spoken of, the out-pouring of the Spirit is spoken of
also; a pouring water on him that is thirsty and floods of the dry ground:
bringing Rivers out of Rocks, etc. for preparing a People for the Lord. And
this will be the more clear, if we consider, that softness and melting of heart
gives a man a right imp^ession of himself, and a right impression of God and of
his free Grace and goodness; and it makes the man to become folding, tractable,
Pliant and yielding to God, and also makes way for much Spiritual sense and
comfort, and for Gods ref^eshfull manifesting of himself to the Soul that is so
pliable and tender: thus the Lord says, Hos. 2.14. I will allure her and bring
her to the wilderness and speak comfortably to her, or to her heart, as the
word is; Alluring speaks pliableness, and that has Gods Comfortable speaking
to the heart following on it.

The First Use of this point serves to give you another Mark for Trial, if
things be right and in good case with you, for Covenanting with God: and as the
upshot of all, to commend such a desirable frame as thi^ to you: would ye know
the^ further, what is a right frame for Covenanting with God? Here it is, even
to have a heart melting within, to have a soft tender and mournful disposition
of Soul: and would ye know what this is? We think that from the words it may be
gathered to consist in these five or six things that concur to it. First,
There are some pricking challenges for sin and wrongs done to God: they humbly
acknowledge, take with and are made sensible of these. Secondly, There is some
missing and sensibleness of the want of Gods presence, and of the want of
Communion and Fellowship with him: ^hey know not well where he is, but they are
a king after him. Thirdly, There is an ardent affection and serious desire to
be at him and in Covenant with him, a heart filled with love to God, whereby it
is softened and made to flow down, as wax by the fire is melted, and the
hardest iron made soft. Fourthly, There is a Holy fear and carefulness, whereby
the heart is kept from growing cold and indifferent as to this condition, and
from settling and sitting down in it; such a fear and trembling as old Eli had,
1 Samuel 4. for the Ark, whereby he was kept in a fright: here is going and
weeping, with a Holy fear lest the Covenant be again broken. Fifthly, There is
a self loathing, kindly humiliation and exercise of Repentance, which
especially appears in this weeping: when serious looking into the persons own
Condition so affects the heart, as it fl^ws, either in tears without, and in
sighs and groans within, or in the latter without the former. There is a Holy
indifferency as to their external lot, and an absolute submissiveness to the
will of God to be dealt with and disposed upon as himself thinks fit: If so be
they be admitted into a Covenant with him, they are sweetly Submissive to the
terms, let God do with them what he will, they know it will be well, if they
get once within the bond of his Covenant, and that it will never be well with
them, if they be without it: Though this be somewhat general, yet it will be
found to be a near yea a narrow trial: If so^tness of heart bespeak a good
frame and fit for Covenanting with God: Ah! where is it? The little
heart-softness that is amongst us is one o^ the neck-breaks of Religion, and
marrs our growth exceedingly: what shall we say or think of our condition, when
we call to remembrance the seekers of God of old, who watered their couches
with tears and made their beds to swim: who mingled their drink with tears and
their meat with weeping? O! what is become of that now? or what Religion is
this that we have in these days, in comparison of that which they had, who
were so serious and so much affected and heart-wrought with their Religion,
when we are so chil-cold and frozen, when our hearts are scarce kindly warmed,
much less softened and melted? It is no wonder there be much lamenting for the
want of sense and life, when there is so much heart-hardness the contrary of
this heart melting softness.

But it may be Asked here: How comes it to pass, that the People of God are now
so unlike that which Gods People were wont to be: so little softened, contri^,
and melted? I speak not of external weeping and shedding of tears: for there
may be much of that, where the heart is but little softened, though not
ordinarily: often when the heart is inwardly melted, external weeping in some
Measure follows, though the one of these may be and is some times without the
other: neither do I speak of that softness which is peculiarly requisite for the
Communion: but of that which is called for in our ordinary walk, to make us
folding, yielding, and pliable to God, ready to receive any impression that he
will please to stamp on us: what (I say) can be the causes of the want of this.
Or that we are not in it as Gods people were wont to be? I answer First, It may
be, that Professors now have much more conceit of their Profession, and content
themselves better with the form, and with the Gospels being clearer now then it
was in former days; and God resists the proud, yea even pride in the Godly:
Trembling and such other evidences of tenderness in several of those Saints
mentioned in the Scripture, are not much to be found with us, we are Alace!
very unlike them; a sharp word from God would have made the strongest of them
to tremble, nay the Godly are several times in the old Testament descri^ed to
be tremblers at the Word; but we, very generally, are bolstered up, in a
manner, with much stoutheartedness and self conceit, as if we were ab^ve
challenges, fears, doubtings and puzzling cases of Conscience: David, Job, Paul
and others of the Saints, who had not such ground for that sort of exercise, as
most of us have, may I not say, as all of us have? yet were more in it then we.
Whence this comes, were worthy of our serious enqui^y. It Is probable that Pride
and Self conceit have much influence upon it. Secondly, We fear that Christians
now a days have much betaken themselves to the external deckings and adornings
of religion, with neglect, in part at least, and to the Prejudice of Religion
it self, of the soul and substance of it; The Godly of old were single and
Plain in Religion, (as Jacob is called a plain Man) and taken up with the power
of Godliness; but many now are so much taken with gifts and are so fond of
them; that a Covenant interest, self-denial, Mortificati^n and the like, take
them up the less: Many of you are at more labor and Pain to hold up a Name,
then to mortify such a lust, as is a Self-seeking humor, or to have matters
tho ough and clear betwixt God and you. Thirdly, They made mo^e and greater
account of Communion with God then we do, seeking after it as a thing they were
taken up with, which now, Alace! is much neglected: b^cau e we bear that our
Salvation does not depend simply on intima^ and familiar fellowship with God,
we are the less careful and solicitous about it; whereas of old, the want of
it made them Sick of Love, as the Spouse is, Cant. 5 And what longing, fainting
and out-crying is there for it, Psalm. 42? It was a Prison to them to be in a
Palace wanting Gods Company: This is a main thing that softens peoples hearts,
even to have the Lord manifesting himself to have the light of his Countenance
lifted up, and the beams of his love and good will shining warm on us; too much
seeking of great things for our selves, for g andure or greatness in the world,
in makin^ godliness some way to be gain and counting gain (as it were) to be
Godliness: Alace! it is not much our care to have victory over the World, and
that it may have li^le of our heart and Christ much of it: It Is not the design
that we drive with suitable vigor, even to be Heavenly minded and to brook a
soft heart: Love not the World (says the Apostle, 1 John 2.15.) Nor the things
of the World, for whosoever loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him:
They so far overcame the world, that they suffered joyfully the spoiling of
their goods, knowing in themselves, they had a better and an enduring substance
in heaven, as it is Heb. 10.34. But the wicked, and men of the world, having
what heart can wish, even waters of a full cup are wrung out to them; Gods
People turn in thither, and will needs essay and try the comforts of a present
world, what satisfaction they can yield them, as we may see Solomon did, to his
great p^ejudice: for the things of the world in a great measure got the upper
hand of him, and that after the Lord had appeared to him twice: It were good
and much to be wished that many of you did espy this evil in your selves: the
Scripture insists much in it, as that which men's hearts are mainly carried out
after: and yet we can get none almost convinced of it: Men will be got
convinced of gross out-breaking evils; but of this evil, the most earthly
minded worms cannot be gotten convinced: nay even good people are hardly got
convinced of it: but ye are not in the less hazard of it: and we wot well, it is
a plague in the Generation that we live in, and has much defaced Religion as
to it is beauty, in the face of the Conversation of many: Ah! how much are they,
in this, conformed to the word? And how Lamentably little behave they like
Pilgrims and Strangers in it, as the Saints did of old?

As A Second Use of this point, We have ground here to Commend to you the
study of a Soul-fixing and fastening condition: as ye would not make an unsure
bargain with God, endeavor to have this softness and melting of heart: This
thing is that which makes a man to sit alone and to keep silence before God,
Lam. 3.27. And so to be in a posture of meeting and covenanting with him: such
of you as know nothing of this, and are not afraid of being hard, cold and dead
at such an occasion, are in eminent hazard of losing a good bargain: and woe to
Security and hardness, that has that as the fruit of it: and in the by we may
say that there is a Woe abiding many of you, who have no Serious thoughts of
this frame, and especially at such a time. Therefore let me Exhort you to
compose your selves, as having to do with God, and as having Gods love and
favor, and his hatred and wrath laid together in the balance, and as having
life and death set before you, and seriously to seek after such a soft and
tender frame of Soul that fits for Covenanting, for renewing the Covenant, and
for comfortable communicating.

But some may Object and say, It is very sad, if this be peremptory, that
persons who would rightly renew their Covenant and Communicate, must be in a
Soft and melting frame. Answer, It Is useful, and it is needful, nay in some
measure it is Simply necessary: What shall we then do that want it? for Answer,
I wish many were asking the question from serious Minding, prizing and longing
after the thing: for the want of Softness proceeds often from this, that we do
not seriously mind it, otherwise, the want of it would much affect and afflict
us, and would put us to ask after it, and God would not fail to give them
direction that were thus asking the way to Zion. Yet for your help in this
matter, I would say these three Words. 1. Once take a view of your case and
labor to have a distinct look of it: what lusts are up, what challenges may be
Tabled, and keep a good count of them. 2. Endeavor to have faith in Exercise
on Gods Covenant and promises, and be sure that the Promise is sicker that ye
lay hold on and see that ye make Use of it according to the Covenant: which is
done, when with your Souls ye take hold of it: and that is not, nor shall not
be reckoned presumpti^n, when ye bestir your selves from the Faith of Gods
Covenant and Promises, laying the weight of that which ye would be at on the
Promise, cleaving thereto for attaining of it, and in time, through Gods
Blessing, your unsuitableness shall piece meal wear away, and ye shall become
tender: and any bit of softness and tenderness that ye win at, cherish and
watch over it. 3. Make this a particular errand to God, having your Eye on the
Covenant of promises, and on this Promise in it in Particular, and on other
promises of this Nature and to this purpose, as, concerning taking away the
stony heart and giving a heart of flesh: of giving you a new heart: of making
you to loath your selves, for all your abominations: apprehending, receiving
and closing with Christ in the Covenant for attaining of it as a fruit of his
purchase: for it is not gotten but in the Covenant: and therefore it is
remarkable that this Scripture is set down Promise-wise, They shall come, the
Children of Israel and the Children of Judah together: your Heavenly Father who
knows that ye have need of this thing (as it is Matthew. 6.32.) will give his
holy Spirit to them that ask him, as it is Luke 11.13. And ye would credit and
trust him with the performing of that Promise to you: and endeavoring to be
Serious in having this for your task and work, ye shall find it made good for
you and to you.

Jeremiah 50. Verse. 5. -- Come, and let us Join our selves to the Lord, in a
perpetual Covenant that shall no^ be forgotten.
SERMON IV.
IT is a most desirable design and worthy to be driven vigourously by us all,
to the prosecution whereof it would very well become us to stir up and rouse
our selves and one another, according to the Laudable Practice of these here
mentioned, even to hasten toward a closure of the Covenant of Grace betwixt
God and us: to have it sounding loud in our ears, and to have it as the
Language of our hearts whetted to an edge in pursuit of the thing. Come, let us
Join our selves to the Lord, in a perpetual Covenant that shall never be
forgotten: It should be the great work and business of a Communion-Sabbath in a
special manner, as it is our professed design this day, to close and make
sure this Covenant and blessed bond betwixt the Lord and us.

Having spoken somewhat formerly at several occasions to these sweet words. I
shall not now trouble ^ou either with the division or explication of them: but
shall instantly propose Six or Seven Observations from them, and then speak a
word to the scope, and to the Application of them, in the close: and though it
be but a short word from each of them that we have to speak; yet they will be
found to be very Concerning to us, and therefore we would take the more exact
notice of them.

The First Observation then is, that There is such a thing as distinct
Covenanting, or mutual engaging in Covenant betwixt God and a poor sinner.
This is clearly holden out in these words as their Scope; It were to no Purpose
for them to say, Come and let us Join our selves to the Lord in a Covenant, if
there were not such a thing as a Covenant union of God and sinners. The
Scripture is full to this Purpose, and the treaty of ordinances is kept up for
this end; as we have it, Isaiah 55.1, 2, 3. Ho every one that thirsts come to
the waters, etc. Incline your ear and come unto me, Hear and your Souls shall
live, and I will make an everlasting Covevenant with you, even the sure mercies
of David. This is the Scope that the Ordinances aim at. In Prosecuting of this
a little further, we shall, First, Explicat what covenanting is, in general.
Secondly, What this covenanting with God is, 1. In respect of the parties. 2.
In respect of the terms thereof. And 3. In respect of the ground on which it is
founded. And Thirdly, To the form of this Covenanting.

First then, Covenanting in general may be cleared, from what-Covenanting
among men is: Which is a mutual engaging of two parties on Mutual terms; the
one Party offering such a thing on such terms and conditions; the other party
accepting on those terms and Conditions On which the offer is made: as we see
in a contract of Marriage, the man engages to be the Woman's, on condition that
she be his, and she engages to be his wife; as he engages to be her husband,
and each engages to perform suitable duties to the other; And we make use of
this the rather that the Scripture alludeth to it in this matter.

Secondly, We are to consider Covenanting, as it is betwixt God and a sinner:
for we are not now speaking of the Covenant of works betwixt God and Adam;
wherein there was made an offer and Promise of life upon condition of Perfect
Obedience; So that if he did that which was Commanded him, he should live, but
we are now speaking of Gods Covenanting with a sinner; for that is the Covenant
spoken of here: It is indeed a great wonder that ever there should have been a
Covenant betwixt God and a Creature; But a greater wonder that there should be
a Covenant betwixt him and a sinful creature: whatever is spoken in Scripture
of the Covenant of Grace, belongs to this Covenant. First, The Parties in this
Covenant are God and the sinner, Gods Creature, but a sinful creature; It Is
the Lord Jehovah, and we the house of Israel, and we the house of Judah.
Secondly, The terms of the Covenant are not, Do this and live, though the
Promise be the same, for it is life that is offered; yet it is not on the same
terms; for though the life be as good as that which was promised to Adam; yet
the terms are far better: The substance of this Covenant we have set down, Jer.
30.31, 32, 33. and cited Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. unto which this same invitation
does here relate; I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel and with
the house of Judah, not according to the Covenant that I made with their
Fathers; But this shall be it, I will write my law in their hearts, and I will
be their God, and they shall be my People, etc. And Come (say they here) and
let us join in it: His engagement is to be their God, and their engagement is
to be his people, and the terms follow; which are on Gods part, free
forgiveness of sins through the Righteousness of Christ imputed to them, through
whom they are accepted, as if there had never been a quarrel. And on their
Part, by faith to take hold of him and of the Pardon of sin, which separated
betwixt him and them, through Jesus Christ, as he offered to them; Therefore,
Romans 10.6. It Is calle^ the Righteousness of Faith, opposed to the Righteousne^^
of the Law, spoken of befo e; and what says it? says not, who shall go up to
Heaven? nor who shall d^scend into the depth? But the word is nigh thee, even
i^ thy mouth and in thy heart, that is the righteousness Faith, which we
preach, that if thou shall confess wi^^ thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thy hear^ that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be save^
That is, if ye make suitable use of Christ for your Fea^ with God, and give up
your selves to him to be (...) Servants, ye shall get peace and Pardon of sin
here, a^^ E^ernal life and Salvation hereafter. These in short a^ the terms on
which God offers himself to sinne^ Thirdly, The Ground of this, and how it
comes to pa^^ tha^ such a Covenant is accessible, is the Mediators i^terposing
in a Covenant of Redemption with the fath^ concerning elect sinners; wherein he
has procured the Covenant of Grace betwixt God and sinners, by (...)
Performing the condition required of him in that C^venant; for this Covenant of
Grace and Reconciliati^^ is nothing else, but the result of the Covenant of
R^demption and the execution thereof; we had never (...) ground to say, that
there is a way laid down for (...) peace with God, except there had been a
Covenan^ Redemption betwixt him and the Mediator; where the Mediator undertook
to satisfy Justice for the sins the Elect, by bearing their iniquities; and
has the P^^mise of being Satisfied for the travel of his Soul, by seeing of a
seed, and by his Justifieing many through Fa^^ in him; as it is Isaiah 53.11.
This gives the rise to t^ Covenant of Grace betwixt God and sinners; and
the^^fore these two are put together, Isaiah 55.3. Ino^^ your ear, come unto
me, hear and your Souls shall live, and I will make an everlasting Covenant
with you, even the sure mercies of David; That is, the sure mercies of the
Messiah; the assignation whereof, even of the Purchase of Redemption made by
him, is by Covenant made over to the Believer in him, and therefore when we
speak of this Covenant, it always supposes and implies Christ, who Isaiah 42
6. Is called the Covenant; because he is given for the ground of Covenanting
betwixt God and sinners; it being by him and in him, that God and sinners meet;
there being a gulf (as it were) betwixt sinners and God, he has made himself
the bridge on which sinners may come over and meet with God; and the Covenant
brings us to Christ; as under the Law, Christ was typed out by the Mercy seat
and the Arc, wherein the law was put, to show the linking together of Christ
and the Covenant: the efficacy of the Covenant flowing from Christ, and the
Covenant giving us a title to Christ, and making Christ accessible to us: It
lays (as it were) a Bridge to us to step on, and makes an open door to us to
enter in by on Christ, and by Christ to the Holy of Holies through the vail,
which is his flesh.

Thirdly, As for the Form of this Covenanting, it is, as in other Contracts,
God making the offer; and the person accepting it; Gods offer is in the word of
the Gospel, wherein he says, Come and I will made a Covenant with you: as the
Apostle has it, Romans 10. The word is near thee, even in thy Heart and in thy
mouth: and the Sum of it is, If ye Believe in Jesus Christ, ye shall be saved;
the proposing whereof in the Gospel, is the laying of Gods offer before you,
and it is as really Gods offer, as if audibly he were speaking to you from
Heaven, as he once spoke the Law on Mount- Sinai: It being his Authority, by
which Ministers are sent treat and close this Covenant with you: As it is, 2 C^
5. We are ambassadors for Christ, as if God were beseec^ing you by us: we pray
you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God: That is, be friends with him by
enteri^^ in Covenant with him: and he shows us the grou^^ of it: For he who
knew no sin, was made sin for us t^ we might be made the Righteousness of God
in him: Go^ offer is, I am Con^ent to be thy God, and to make (...) that is
mine forthcoming to thee for thy good, upon condition thou quit thy own
righteousness and beta^^ thee to my Son the mediator for righteousness and lif^
The sinners Covenanting is his formal and distinct, (...) least, his real
consenting to that offer on these term saying with his very heart, I am content
to have God (...) be my God, not by virtue of any thing in my self, b^ by
virtue of Christ's satisfaction, which has procur^ access to sinners for peace
and Reconciliation with Go^ and this is called a Submitting to Christ's
Righteousnes^ So then, there is a devoting of the Soul to God, a hear^
consenting to give it self away to him to be saved a^ Sanctified, to live to
him and to his Honor; as i^ Isaiah 44.5. One shall say, I am the Lords, and
anoth^^ shall call himself by the name of Jacob; and another she Subscribe with
his hand unto the Lord; As if it were sai^ whose are you? and the person should
say, I am God for, as plainly and distinctly, at least as really and sol^ly, a
person wrought upon by Gods Spirit, gives (...) Answer and return to Gods offer
in his Covenant, a^^ resignes himself to God, as if Paper were laid down before
him, and he should subscribe his Name with (...) hand to be Gods. There is an
obligation really tak^ on, and a consent plainly given: the person with ^very
heart Subscribing the Contract; which, 2 Chr^ 30 8. is called a yielding or
giving the hand to God. He comes with stretched out arms in the Gospel, and
says, Man or woman, who find thy self lost, close with me in my Son Christ,
and thou shall be saved; and our consenting is, our hearts catching hold of
that word and yielding to him, as one striking hands with another, with whom he
has before been at odds and variance; in sign of his being content and
satisfied to be reconciled to him, and of his being so in very deed.

The Second Observation is, That This covenanting wi^h God has with it or in
it a near union and Conjunction with the Lord. Let us (say they) Join our
selves to the Lord in a perpetua^l Covenant; the word ^o ning has in it a
special Emphasis, being such as is used to set out the conjunction that is
betwixt the Husband and Wife; for this cause (says the Lord) shall a man leave
Father and Mother and cleave to his wife, and so the wife cleaves to her
husband; Thus the word is, Genesis 29.34. Now shall my Husband be joined to me;
therefore she called his name Levi, which flows from this root, Added or
Joined, In prosecuting this point a little, we would speak shortly, 1. To the
nature of this Union. 2. To the properties of it. First, As to it is Nature, we
would consider, that there is. 1. A legal union, wherein by contract and bond
there is a transferring of the interest of one Party to another; which is
here; for God becomes the sinners God, and the sinner becomes Gods own, as his
portion and Property; Even as in marriage, the Husband is the wifes, and the
wife is the Husbands, and the Relation stands, though they should be in
Several Kingdoms. 2. There is a Mystical union, which is spiritual and more
Mysterious, wherbey God becomes one with Covenanting sinners, and they become
one with him; God by his Spirit dwelling in the Covenanter, and the Covenanter
dwelling by faith in God: which flows from the former mutually transferred
right or legal union, and follows on it: In which respect it is said, 1 Cor.
6 17. He that is Joined to the Lord is one spirit; He is Gods Temple, and God
by his Spirit dwells in him: by this one spi it, is meant a Spiritual
conjunction, Union or Communion whereby God takes hold really of the Soul by
his Spirit, and the Soul takes a real hold of God by Faith: they do mutually
embrace each other, as the Husband does the wife by virtue of their Union. 3.
This Union implies a nearness, a friendliness, an intimacy and familiarity,
and it is opposed to distance and estrangement from God: The Covenant really
entered into, is like a bond to keep the believer near God, glued (as it were)
and straightly joined to him: or it is a cementing with God, to speak so: By this
Covenant God and sinners are made near and knit to one another and kept from
ever Separating: There is such a near and strait Union betwixt Christ and
Believers, as is betwixt the foundation or cornerstone and the house, yea as
is betwixt the vine and the branches, Ephesians. 2. John 15.

Secondly, As for the Properties of this Union by Covenant, a few of which we
shall only now touch at, not having access to enlarge, as this Subject by it
self, would require. 1. It is with the Lord himself, not with any benefit,
common gift or Grace or Mercy, these fo^low the union with himself, the
Covenanter becomes one Spirit with him (as is said,) and says the Apostle,
Ephesians. 5. we are flesh of his fl sh and b^ne of his bon^. 2. This Union is in
and through Christ, by whom it is made up: he being the Temple and Tabernacle
or meeting place wherein we meet with God: So that we are not anxiously to
enquire, nor curiously to dispute here, how our union with God, and with the
Mediator do differ: we unite with God in him, and upon the Grounds of his
Redemption, in which respect, our union with God is more Mediat. 3. This Union
is very friendly, most firm and indissoluble: It Is a wonderful near and sure
Union. It is an inexpressible union, and therefore we must here give over
speaking further to it, only looking to a word of it, John 17.21, 23. in the
21. verse. says our Lord: That they all may be one, as thou father art in me
and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: It Is such an union by the
Believers being in God and in the Mediator, as is that, whereby God and the
Mediator are one, though no parity is here to be understood, but a resemblance
only: and verse. 23. I in them and thou in me, that they may be made Perfect in
one: I in them, here the union is most Immediate: and thou in me, there the
Union is more mediat, viz. by Gods being in the Mediator dwelling in the
Believer, and the Believers dwelling in God, (the fullness of the Godhead being
in the mediator) by his meeting with God through faith in the Mediator: and
indeed, were there no more but this, It says that this Covenant is a good
bargain.

The third Observation is, that Union with the Lord by this Covenant is
accessible to a runaway Sinner, that has perverted his way, upon his coming
aright to close with him therein on the terms of it. Who are those coming here
to Join in Covenant with the Lord? It is, even those spoken of Jerem. 3.6, 7.
Backsliding Children, Treacherous dealers, who are bidden return, and he will
heal their backslidings: which could not be, if this Covenant were not
accessible to sinners: nay let me say, there is scarce any sort of sin, but the
Lord out faceth it in his Covenant, as we may see, Jer. 3. where the Lord
says, Thou have played the harlot with many lovers, thou have spoken and one
evil as thou could; yet will thou not from this time cry unto me, my Father?
If we look to the grosness of sin, were it like Scarlet or Crimson, Isaiah
1.18. It shall be made white like Snow and wool: if ye be willing and
obedient, says the Lord, to close a Covenant with me, ye shall eat the good of
the Land. In the propounding of the Covenant, he will take away that exception
of the grosness of sin, which might stand in the sinners way, were it even
rotten Hypocrisy, detestable indifferency and luk-warmness in the matters of
God, putting the Person in hazard to be spewed out of Christ's Mouth, yet he
says even to such (if they will indeed take his counsel, and be content to
have their deadly evils removed and their wants supplied) I counsel thee to
come and buy of me Eye Salve, Gold, and Garments: and Behold I stand at the
Door and knock, if any man will open the door, I will come in to him and Sup
with him and he with me. Only take this word of Advertisment here, and then I
shall clear and confirm the Doctrine further: when then we speak of sinners
access to God by this Covenant, we mean, that there is access, only on
Condition they take with their faults and come weeping, heart-broken and
someway suitably affected with their sin; these only are the persons that may
comfortably expect this access, he seeks after such, though he will find none
such till he make them such. For further clearing and confirming of it then, we
would consider these Four things. 1. Gods end in the Covenant, which will make
out this, that there must be access to a runaway sinner by this Covenant to
union with God, when he comes home to him in the way of Repentance and
Believing; because his end in the Covenant is to save Sinners, often spoken of;
to Justify the ungodly, Romans 4.5. To dwell with Rebels, Psalm. 68.18. To get a
Name and a Praise to himself of being gracious: as it cannot admit of, nor let
in a sinner, but on this Condition; So it cannot but accept of a sinner having
this condition. 2. We would consider Gods contrivance of the covenant in making
it suitable to such an end, so as it may make the Riches of his Grace to shine,
and may be effectual for the gaining of Souls; and therefore, 2 Samuel 23.5. It
is said in this respect, to be ordered in all things and sure: and Jere. 31.33.
compared with Heb. 8. The substance of it is set down compended in a few words,
I will Pardon their iniquity and remember their sin no more, etc. 3. We would
consider the administration of the Covenant; It Is not in an immediate way, as
that first Covenant made with Adam was, wherein there was no mediator, neither
was there need of any; but it is in a mediat way by a surety and Mediator, who
has taken on and engaged for the debt of the Covenanting sinner, and has
under taken for his thorow-bearing: now why is this administration and
dispensation? But because the Principal debtor is a bankerout and not able to
Satisfy for himself; therefore he has access to come and get Pardon, and to
be friends with God through the Mediator. 4. We would consider all the
Properties of the Covenant, especially the freeness of it, and we will find
that they speak out this; It Is a Covenant of Sure Mercies, Isaiah 55.3. And all
the Promises and Articles of it respect sinners, and hold forth this, that
there is a way laid down, how a sinner at feud with God, may get this Union
made up by Covenanting wi^h him.

The fourth Observation is, that Covenanting with God is a very short cut for
the quieting, peace, and happiness of a treacherous back sliding sinner:
Therefore, when these People here spoken of are, in their Holy heat and
warmness, stirred up under the conviction and sense of their guilt: as the
short cut to come to peace and a happy condition, they say, Come and let us
Join our selves to the Lord in a Perpetual Covenant. It Is the accepting of
Gods offer, and being content to be his on the account of Christ's
righteousness, that they Propose to themselves as the ground of their calm,
quietness, and happiness. This Observation implies these Three things. First,
That Covenanting with God, does fully make the Covenanter happy, though
formerly he has been a miserable sinner; and O! This is a good bargain, that
makes a sinner completely happy: It makes him to say, Whom have I in heaven but
thee? and there is none upon the earth that I desire beside thee: Psalm. 73. I
shall name a few Scriptures to show the full happiness of a sinner that enters
in this Covenant: The first whereof is, 2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not
so with God, yet he has made with me an everlasting Covenant well ordered in
all things and sure, and this is all my Salvation, and all my desire: It Is
mensura Voti, even all that heart can wish: and these words being considered as
David the sweet singer of Israel his last words, when he is a dieing, they
clearly imply a commendation of this Covenant as full for the happiness of a
sinner. Another passage is, Revel. 21.7. He that overcomes shall inherit all
things: How is that? even thus: I will be his God and he shall be my Son, that
is, in substance; I will declare my self to be in Covenant with him, This is
the compend of the complete happiness of Glorified Saints in heaven, and the
begun happiness of Believers, of Sojourning Saints here on earth, in a less
measure and lower degree; for in Heaven God will be all and in all: and is not
this a good bargain, and good to sinners? which commends it the more. A Third
Place is, Romans 8. Where it is told us, that nothing can be laid to their Charge,
But it is answered in this Covenant. They have a Cautioner to pay their debt,
and to strengthen them for their duty: I will (says he) be their God and they
shall be my People: I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not
depart from me: I will pardon their iniquities, all bygones, and heal their
backslidings, they shall not get leave to go from me: would ye be pliable and
yielding to Gods Covenant; I will put my law in their inward parts and write it
in their hearts, and a new heart will I give unto them, and will cause them to
walk in my Statuts and to do them. Secondly, The Doctrine implies, as it is a
full Covenant, or makes the Covenanter fully happy: So it makes him sickerly
and surely happy: 2 Samuel 25.5. It Is a Covenant well ordered in all things and
sure, who ever by Faith betake themselves to Christ's righteousness, and lay
hold on this Covenant, may expect Communion with God as certainly as Adam
before the fall had it for it is the same God that promises who is as faithful
as ever he was: Hence it is called a word tried as silver in a furnace seven
times, a pure word that comes out of the furnace always as massy and weighty
as it went in: and the ground of the Covenant being Christ's satisfaction, it
makes it Sure. Therefore he ^s called a tried Corner stone, a sure foundation.
Thirdly, It implies, that, as it is a Sure, So it is a compendious and speedy
way to happiness and of deliverance to the Sinner, which makes much for Gods
praise: He is a very present help in time of trouble, or a speedy help, Psalm.
46. So, Psalm. 32.5. I said (says Dav^d) I would confess my trangression, and
thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin: Immediately (as if he had said) upon my
confession, without longer delay: and Romans 4.7. This Psalm is made use of, to
demonstrat the Righteousness which is by Faith in Christ.

The fifth Observation is, That sinners who are lying under a quarrel with God
and have the offer of a Covenant, should betake themselves to it, and without
delay p^t a close to the bargain betwixt God and them. Come (say they here) and
let us join our selves to the Lord, in a perpetual Covenant, whereby is holden
out, that when a sinner has access to the Covenant with God, he should flee to
it and take hold of it quickly. In this respect, covenanting with God is
compared to fleeing in to the City of Refuge, Heb. 6. That which I mean, is
first, that a sinner, who has this Covenant in his offer, should take no other
way for Justification and freedom from sin and wrath, but hold to this only and
seek to be Justified by it. 2. That he should do it speedily: when the word of
the Gospel says Come, he should answer, Lo I come unto thee; when God by the
Preaching of the Gospel makes a gracious declaration, that he will accept of
lost sinners that come to him, and says, This is the day of Salvation, this is
the accepted time; as it is, 2 Cor. 6.3. and when by his ministers he waits
on you, inviteth and wooeth you, ye should presently, without delay or demurr,
close with the offer and accept o^ the invitation.

The sixth Observation is, that Those who are convinced that they have sinned
and would fain be in Covenant with God, should endeavor to have it throughed
and made sure, to have it an absolutely closed and ended bargain. This is very
clear in this peoples practice, who concernedly say, Come let us Join our
selves in a perpetual Covenant never to be forgotten, they think they cannot
get it made sure enough, and therefore they join, never to be forgotten, to
perpetual, they Judged that it could not Possibly be made too sure: which
manifestly says, that when God gives an opportunity to enter into or renew a
Covenant with him, we should be Holily solicitous, in very good earnest, and
greatly concerned to have it made sicker, as the words is, Nehemiah 9. verse.
last, We make a sure Covenant and write it, and our Princes Levits and Priests
Seal unto it, that word Isaiah 44.5. Is remarkable to this Purpose, One shall
say, I am the Lords, and an other shall call himself by the name of Jacob; and
another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord; That it might stand (as it
were) over his head, as being formally and explicitly engaged in, with heart
and hand: and they that know how fickle and inconstant their hearts are: and
how prone to deal loosely and unfaithfully in Gods Covenant, have good reason
to look to this, that all be sure work; that they get not the shell for the
Kernel, and go not down to the grave with a lie in their right hand.

The Seventh Observation is, That There are sometimes beside other times,
wherein some People beside others have it pungently Put to them to enter in,
and to renew their Covenant with God. These here spoken of, who say (having
Gods pressing call to it, before they said it o^e to another) Come and let us
join to the Lord in a Covenant; are put to it more then others, and at this
time more then at another: in a word People are then put to it in a mo^e
especial manner, 1. At such a time when the Gospel is clearly, convincingly,
and powerfully Preached unto them, Preaching of the Gospel being Gods way of
meeting and treating with sinners, and the Ministers and Preachers thereof
being as his ambassadors Commissioned and sent forth by him to treat, and
close a treaty with sinners, on the terms c^n^ained in their Commission: which
when they with suitable concernedness and earnest^ess do, their hearers are the
more put to it. 2. They are thus put to it, when some stirring and warmness of
affection toward Covenanting wi^h God is wrought in them; or when their own
frame, through Grace, Presses them on to it; as we may see it did in this
People. 3. When the Lord o^tener then once or twice, in frequently renewed
opportunities of thy kind. Puts People to it; and more especially in the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper; the very fight and offer of the elements in the
Communion speak plainly, on the matter, to the Communicants, are ye indeed in
earnest in the great business of covenanting with God; Since ye are now to
receive the Seal of it? If ye be not, ye notably Profane the Ordinance, by
setting a Seal to a blank charter: It is therefore called the Covenant; This is
the Cup of the New Covenant: Because it puts you in mind of the Covenant, and
puts you to it, whether ye will really engage in it: It is like the Kings
appointing a day for sealing of Pa^dons to Rebels; his Proclamation first Puts
them to it, to accept of the Pardon; Next the heralds put them to it: and then
Lastly the set and fixed time or day of the sealing, puts them Most of all to
it: and so it is with you in this Ordinance, that we are by and by to be about.

We come now to the Application of all, wherein we shall not insist on all
things that these Doctrines Minister ground for: but shall Pitch on some most
Useful, and which are the great Scope of the Text and of the day.

And in the First place, I would Beseech you to endeavor to gather and compose
Your selves, and gravely to ponder what it is, that this day ye are Pressingly
called to; It is even this, Come and let us Join our selves to the Lord in a
Perpetual Covenant, never to be forgotten. Know and Believe, that there is such
a thing as Covenanting with God; That God is dealing with you to Covenant with
him; and that it is a good bargain: To you is this word of Salvation sent: And
ye should be very Seriously thinking how to get it accepted and made use of;
how to receive this offer by Faith, and how to get your selves given up and
awa^ to him; because in this Covenant (as I showed before) there is a Mutu^ll
engaging; God offers himself and all that is in him to be ours, and to be made
forth c^ming for our good: and we by Faith close wi^h the offer, and give up
our selves to him to be at his dispose: have ye any serious thoughts of this?
But your selves to it, and we in the Name of the Lord put you to it, for we
cannot well proceed any further, till ye be at some point in this: are ye in
earnest? Is this your errand in being here to day? If not, why are ye come
hither? Is it to see how the day goes, or is it only to get your Communion, as
ye use to speak? Alace! what is that? It Is to Covenant with God, and ere ye
depart this Place, to put it to a point, that it may be a closed bargain, that
should be your errand.

And therefore in the Second Place we tell you, that the great God is content
to Covenant with poor, fectless and sinful C^eatures, whereat ye may wonder,
and say, Is it so in very deed that God will dwell with men on earth? Will he
indeed Covenant with men, with sinful men, with Treacherous dealing men, with
backsliders? Yea we tell you, that it is so; he is content to be your God, and
that ye possess all things in him, content to pardon you all your sins, to give
you Grace and Glory, even every good thing: to enter you heirs to a Kingdom,
and on good and easy terms: to do it freely without Money, and without Price,
If ye be but indeed content to accept of His offer on his easy and very
reasonable terms: and may not your very hearts laugh within you at the hearing
of the glad tidings of this Covenant, and that God is yet content to make it up
with you? O how sappie and Massy is this! and that is a very sweet word to
this Purpose which we have, Psalm. ^7 6. God, even our own God shall bless us,
which may make the Believer smile: This relation of our own makes the blessing
double: and it flows from this formal, a^ least, real Covenanting and union
with God, and the Believer has a right to this and all things: He has here an
offer and another sort of right, then he has to his house and land or cloths,
it is aright to God, that gives a right to these things, I mean a Spiritual
right: for we speak not now of that which is civil: let us, therefore, stay
our selves and wonder, and be stirred and affected with it, that the infinite
and alsufficient God is content to make this good bargain, and even now to make
it with us Sinners, even with insignificant and unworthy us.

Thirdly, We make Proclamation of this bargain to you, and avouch, that there
is Salvation offered to sinners, and to be had through Jesus Christ: the Lord
allows and warranteth us to make this Proclamation, as well as he did
Jeremiah, when he says to him, Chap. 3.12. Go and Proclaim these words toward
the North, return thou backsliding Israel, and I will not cause mine anger to
fall upon thee, for I am merciful, says the Lord, and will not keep anger for
ever: He allows, nay he Peremptorily Commands that ye should be put to it:
and therefore when we have laid the Covenant before you: what say ye to it,
what will ye do? We must have an answer from you: ye have his word and Oath for
confirmation of it: O Believe and take hold of it, and ye shall get the seal
from us as his Commissioners; who treat with you, according to our Commission,
in his Name; And here we must be particular, and be ye particular with your
selves: take and receive what we say to you with a warrant, as the word of the
Lord, for it is no less his Word now, then it was when Jeremiah and the other
Prophets spoke it, when the Apostles spoke it, yea When Christ spoke it
himself: It Is the same Covenant and the same word, that this day is preached to
you; The Lord calls us to stir up our selves, and to say in good earnest, Come
let us join our selves to him in a Perpetual Covenant, 1. The party inviting
is the Lord Jehovah in the Mediator, and sure he is a most, yea the most
excellent Party; thy maker (says he Isai. 54.8.) is thy Husband. 2. There are
in this Covenant excellent Promises: God is content to be your God and to take
you for his people and Spouse, to Pardon your iniquity, to heal your
backslidings, to Sanctify and save you, and to make you eternally happy: and
are not these desirable? 3. It calls you to give your selves up to him: and
indeed it is very reasonable, that if the husband give himself to the wife, she
should give her self to him. Are ye then content to treat with God in the
Mediator, and to be his on his own terms? It is good to meet and treat with God
in him. Have ye any ground to except against this? Does it please or displease
you? say to it, tell your mind? For I declare to you, that if ye get him to be
yours, you must needs be his. I fear many of you stand and stick at this,
notwithstanding the high reasonableness of it: is this, think ye, an evil,
disadvantagious, or Prejudicial exchange? whether is it better that the one and
only true God reign over you, then that Satan and a multitude of strange
Lords, your Lusts, taking the Throne (as it were) by turns, should reign over
you? It Is both sad and stupendous, that ever this should be suffered once to
come in question or debate; and yet, Alace! it is this, or some thing like this,
at which it will stand: either ye will not take God for your God: or ye will
not give your selves to him to be his People, on his own very reasonable and
easy terms? and I trow, ye will make no better. I would, therefore, yet again
put you to it: for it is the very thing that ye are called to, the great
business of the day, and it is come even to the shock.

And therefore, labor to be at a point, whether ye will close with him or not:
If ye will sincerely say, we take the Lord to be our God, and give our selves
to him, to be his People and servants: then we say to you, and assure you in
his Name, that this Cup, that by and by ye are to drink, shall be according to
his warrant, The new Covenant in his Blood. And to press you to the thing, let
me but Ask you a few Questions. 1. Is there not need of Covenanting with God?
Are there not many sins on your score? Is there not a quarrel betwixt God and
you? Is not this bargain meet and suitable for you, which holds out remission
of sins and peace with God? are ye not urgently called to it? And what ground
of challenge will it be, think ye, that this was in your offer, and on very
free and easy terms, and ye would not accept of it, but would needs destroy
your selves? 2. If there be sin and a quarrel, is there not a necessity to
have it taken away? Have ye laid your account and resolved not to be solicitous
and careful, whether ye be friends with God or not? And if ye will not say
that, why do ye not enter this Covenant? 3. Is there any other way to get sin
pardoned and the quarrel taken away, but by making sure your Covenant with
God? David or any others that were saved, were they saved any other way? This
Covenant was all his Salvation and all his desire. 4. What will ye say in the
day of the Lord, when the Trumpet shall sound, and he shall call you to an
account for refusing his free and Gracious offer; when there will be no more
treating with you, when he shall say, and make your own Conscience say to you?
It was plainly told you, that there was a quarrel standing betwixt me, and
you; It was told you, that I was willing to enter into a Covenant with you, and
to remove that quartell, I sent my Messengers unto you for this end, but ye
made light of the matter: Say to it, O say to it; ye must say something, Yea or
Nay; ye are not left to be indifferent and to keep up your selves in this
matter; I tell you if ye say not Yea, ye say Nay; and as the Apostle speaks,
Acts 13 46. Ye pass sentence on your selves, and judge your selves unworthy of
Eternal life: It Is interpretatively a saying, that ye will not have Heaven and
life through Christ: and therefore, as ye would not destroy your own Souls, I
beseech you, nay I obtest you in the Name of the Lord and for his sake; accept
of this Covenant. We tell you and as the Apostle has it, we say, Be it known
unto you, that through Jesus Christ remission of sins is Preached to you: He
has purchased life and Salvation to sinners, And to you is the word of this
Salvation sent: Give, O give your consent to the bargain, and that is all we
seek of you.

Now to Prosecute this a little, and to put you yet further to it, because it
will ly before God, whether we have put you to it or not, and whether ye have
accepted of this Covenant or not: whether we were in earnest in Proposing it,
and whether ye were in earnest in closing with it: Consider, 1. The Persons
whom we put to this, and the things that we put you to. 2. The terms on which,
3. The grounds from which, and. 4. The qualifications and directions whereby.

First, As for the persons whom we put and press to this Covenanting with God:
It Is not those only who have gotten their tokens warranting them to come to the
Table, nor those only that are debarred and so have got no tokens: but it is all
of you, Those who are afar off and near hand: but differently: To the tender
Soul, we say, come forward: to the secure we say, Humble your selves and then
come and join in this Covenant. The thing we call you to, is to take the Lord
to be your God, and to give up your selves to be Gods, we call you to take God
to be your Master, and your Father, your Savior, your Head, your Husband, your
Friend, even your all, and that is no ill nor small offer: and we call you to
give up your selves to God, to forsake your Fathers house, and all your kindred
and to cleave to him: to join your selves to the Lord, as the Text has it: and
as it is said, The Prodigal Joined himself to a certain Citizen, So ye would
join your selves to the Lord, and be beholden to him for your life.

Secondly, As for the Terms, they are in short: that Seeing God says, accept
of my Sons Righteousness, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters: ye would
freely accept of it, and take and put Christ's Righteousness in the place and
Room of self-righteousness which was in the Covenant of works: found your plea
before God on nothing that ye can do, but on Christ's doing and suffering for
you, which now by Faith ye resolve to adhere to, and resign your selves to him
without any reservation, to be guided and saved by him, in his own way.

As for the Third, How, or from and by what grounds we put you to this: or
rather how does the Lord put us all to it? First, Ye are put to it by his offer
in the Gospel: which, in discretion, calls you to give him an answer; he cries,
Come unto me, and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure
mercies of David, And does he not require an answer? And is it not incumbent to
us who speak to you in his Name, to crave your answer? We declare to you all,
that ye may if ye will, come to be joined with God in Covenant, and may be sure
to be accepted of as his, if ye come aright; Now, what say ye to it? either ye
must look on this as a cheat or cunningly devised fable, or if ye dare not look
on it so, ye must accept of it and make it welcome. Secondly, Ye are put to it,
in this respect, that the Lord brings you now and then under some conviction of
the necessity of your peace with God; something within you says, that peace
with God is worth the having and needful, that this is a good bargain, and
that ye have need of it, and there are now and then some raw resolutions to put
it to a point; and it may be there is something presently that puts you to it;
and if not, so much the more ye would put your selves to it; lest the Kingdom
of God be taken from you. Thirdly, Ye are put to it by this same Sacrament; is
it possible that ye can take the Communion for a Seal and confirmation, except
ye Covenant with God before; If ye will not Covenant, ye prove your selves to
be Treacherous dissemblers in going to the Communion, and to be liars to God;
when he presents and offers his Covenant: ye profess to take his offer and to
close the Covenant with him, but ye refuse, as it were, to take the Pen in your
hand, or do throw it away: when he presents to you the Cup of the New
Testament, ye drink the Wine and spill the Blood, and so become guilty of the
Body and Blood of the Lord, when ye despise it, and will not make use of it,
nor Covenant with God that ye may get the use of it. And therefore, Fourthly,
Know, that ye are put to it presently and peremptorily, and that the Lord will
take it for a refusal and for a scorning and despising on your part, if ye do
it not; and do ye think it a little matte^ to have such a guilt lying on your
score? what kno^ ye, if ever God shall offer to Seal a Covenant with yo^ again?
and therefore we put you to it peremptorily as to these Three. 1 As to the
thing, that when he invites, ye come, when he offers, ye receive and give the
Lord your answer, not a nay say, but a yea, as ye wi^ be answerable: and upon
your saying Yea to this Cov^nant on his Terms, we declare in his Name, that
(...) says Yea in taking in the sinner that flees unto him. 2. As to the whole
of the thing; for ye must not half Gods Covenant; but as ye accept of God to be
yours, so ye must give up your selves to him to be his; and as ye take Christ
for paying of your debt; So also ye must take him to help you to do your du^ie;
take all therefore, and submit your selves entirely to him in this Covenant. 3.
As to the time, ye must do all this presently; for the Lord does not allow us
to give you an hour, or to promise to treat with you one hour after this; It Is
now, come and let us join our selves to the Lord; It Is no difficult thing that
ye are called to; It Is to believe with the heart, and to confess with the mouth
our Lord Jesus Christ, as it is, Romans 10.9. The Object is Christ: the Condition
is Faith, whereby he is griped and taken hold of, and which goes out toward
him in the word: And so ye have no more ado, but when the offer and Promise
comes out, to accept and subscribe, and to say, I am the Lords, I will be his,
to be saved by his Righteousness and made Holy by his Grace, both which are
contained in the Covenant; I am content to be beholden to him both for Holiness
and happiness; and it shall be a bargain. The Lord himself persuade you to do
so, and that presently without delaying, dallying, or shifting and off putting.

Now it may be, that some think this to be a good bargain, but they know not
how to make it sure and siker, so as it may hold for ever. And therefore this
is the last thing, that in the 4th. Place, we would speak a little to, viz. How
shall a person Covenant with God, and know that he has done so in very deed?
(for the Directions how to Covenant are so many evidences of Covenanting, when
performed:) For Directions then in this matter; we would in general, in the
First Place, have ground to suppose and take it for granted that ye know what
ye are, even sinners, and that Sin has laid the Foundation of a quarrel
betwixt God and you; and that ye know what he is a designing and doing by this
Preached Gospel, even to bring sinners into this Covenant, and to have an union
made up betwixt him and them: but ye will, belike, say, I know not how to make
it sure: there is no answer to this, but, be doing, till ye get it made su^e,
for your unsureness must flow, either from something on Gods side, or from
something on your side, ye dare not, I suppose, say that it flows from any
thing on Gods side, or if ye should, this is the way to make him sure (to speak
so;) and if it flow from something on your side, he bids you, return back
sliding Children, and he will heal your back slidings, and make it sure. But in
the Next Place and more particularly, consider, 1. Your end and design, what
ye^ would be at; ye may have some general aim at something that is good in it
self; but that is not enough, i^ must be something more Particular and
peculiar: Is (...) to get God to be your God? Does that fill your eye^ Is it to
get your back slidings healed as well as pardoned? That is right, if your aim
be to have God and Sp^rituall good; I mention this the rather, because some may
love God and the Covenant, for some tempora^ good; whereas others love him and
his Covena^^ mainly for a Spiritual good, and think themselves we^ come to and
made up thereby. Wherein lies the d^ference will ye say; I answer in a word, to
love G^^ and the Covenant only or mainly for temporal me^cies, is ill aod
selfish: but to love God and his Cov^nant, to be made thereby really happy in
the enjoyme^^ of him, and to be made conform to him in Holines^ is good and
desirable, and neither selfish nor servile a^^ mercenary: as it is no
unkindlie-like token in a wife to love her Husband, to be delighted in him, and
to like well to enjoy his company: so it is a kindly like Mark for a soul to
love God, on the account of the happiness and Holiness that are to be had in
him, and from him: Love to God shoulders not out all regard and love to our
selves simply, but it shoulders out love to lusts, and all inordinat love to
self and to every Idol, nay it is inconsistent with true love to God not to care
whether we be happy in the enjoyment of him or not. 2. Consider how, and by
what means, and on what terms ye seek to come at that end: are ye secure, and
senseless of your sin and misery without God? It Is very like, that ye make but a
blind bargain whereof ye will have no real advantage; but have ye any kindly
touch of your sin and misery, and of your need of a Savior; and have ye
recourse to him, as one Able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God
through him, and who lives for ever, to make intercession for them? Ye may know
somewhat of your sincerity in Covenanting with God by the way that ye come to
him. 3. What use make ye of the Mediator, when ye are come to him? Is your
peace with God, and your hope of holding by the bargain grounded on him? Do ye
lay the weight of all the good ye expect on his mediation, on his Satisfaction
and intercession, on his purchase? Do ye hold all through him? That Is a good
token. 4. Are ye content to give to God, as well as to take from him? To devote
your selves to him for Service as well as to enjoy him and Happiness in him?
This also is a good token, as well as a direction. 5. Are ye in much Holy fear
and Jealousy of backsliding; and is it in your eye and aim purposely to
Article this with the Lord, to put his fear in your heart, that ye may not
depart from him; many persons will sometimes in a warm fit, or in a good mood
(as we use to speak) come far on, as Agrippa did, but quickly fall off, and
return to their wonted bias, c^ldness and indifferency; therefore in your
Covenanting with God, there would be much Holy fear, lest it be not sound, lest
it bold not; let your Soul say, now I am absolutely and unreservedly given away
to God, not by Morgage or Wodset only (to speak so) but without reversion, even
for ever. 6. Ye wou^d come to close actually with God himself in Covenant: many
come to the word and Sacramen^ to get, as they think, some good, but come not
to the Covenant, to be really an^ perpetually Joined to the Lord himself. 7. Ye
would seek after some heart-warming, by Gods Spirit within you, and some lively
exercise of your faith in him, a^ ye see to be in this Peoples case. 8. Persons
that ar^ in earnest will be much affected with bygone slips, failings and
unfaithful dealings with God, and are afraid o^ falling back and of dealing
loosly with the Lord; an^ this puts them on to be more Solicitous and careful
to take on the mo bands, and to cast the knot the faste^ because the heart is
deceitful; Come (say they here and let us Join our selves to the Lord, in a
Perpetual C^venant never to be forgott n; They are not content wi^ a Covenant,
except it be siker; the heart protests against it self if it shall draw back,
and resignes and r^nounces its liberty to do so any more, if it may be ca^^ed
liberty. 9. A person would aim to have him se^^ sure and satisfied as to this,
that he has really given h^ consent, that he may have quietness in the
assurance (...) its being so; yet not laying the weight of his Peace o^ his
clearness and assurance: but because his comfo^^ much depends thereon,
therefore he will endeavor (...) have any blank filled up, and the business
put to a poi^^ he comes to this Covenanting with Holy fear, self-suspition and
jealousy: and goes from it with fear; and as he is attended with this fear in
Covenanting, so in receiving the Sacrament the Seal of the Covenant; Come (say
they) and let us Join our selves to the Lord, in a perpetual Covenant that
shall never be forgotten; O! So sure as they would have it; ye who shall through
Grace come thus, shall find the Lord Jesus waiting and rea^y to welcome you.

But it is like, ye will Ask, how is the Sacrament made useful and helpful in
this joining to the Lord in Covenant? I Answer in general, as to the Believer,
that all the Promises are his, and it Seals all the Blessings of the Covenant
to him, Because the condition of the Covenant is found in him; Even as a pardon
given to a Rebel on condition he lay down his Arms, when he does lay them down
and accepts of the Pardon, the Seal is appended to it, which makes it firm and
sure. But what if the persons doubt of their having entered into the Covenant?
Answer 1. They are either such as are mere strangers to God and have no desire
after nor respect to the Covenant, those are under Gods curse and shall get no
good of the Sacrament, because they resolve not to take Christ to fulfill the
condition of the Covenant in them, and are not in earnest to be in under the
bond of the Covenant; yet if even such would seriously resolve to fulfill the
condition, or rather to take Christ to help them to fulfill it, they should be
welcome: or they are such as are doubting, though they have some honest desire;
such would remember, the bargain is Mutual, and they must engage to God, if
they would have God engaged to them; and if ye have not done it before, do it
even now, and the Sacrament shall be useful and helpful to you, in these
respects more Particularly. 1. For sealing this general trut^ If I believe in
Christ I shall have eternal life; In which respect, it is like a pardon offered
to a Rebel on cond^tion he lay down his Arms; he would first see it i^ writ,
and then he would have it Sealed, well (sai^^ the King) ye shall get it Sealed.
2. It Is useful a^ has influence in a Moral wa^, to make you accept. Pardon,
and to enter in the Covenant; In which r^spect, it is an argument, as to allure
the Rebel to acce^^ of the Pardon, So to persuade and assure him, that o^ his
acceptance he shall have it actually and certainl^ when it is holden forth
Sealed: for, says the Lord, (...) the Sacrament, ye have my Covenant, and here
I a^ ready to seal it. 3. It furthers our joining in Covenan^ In respect of its
clear holding forth and manifesting the blessings of the Covenant; the word
says, that ye a^^ Sinners, and that ye will get nothing that is truly goo^
but in and through Christ: and that God is content (...) Covenant with you, and
to Pardon your sins through him: and the Sacrament brings Christ and the
blessin^ of the Covenant to be some way visible and sensible (...) you: and the
Go^pel tells, how it is done. 4. In the Sacrament the Lord condescends in the
most forma^ way to Covenant: for in it he says take you my Sou^ blood to wash
you who are guilty and filthy: and you^ taking is, as it were, a striking of
hands with him, an^ a saying, content Lord, let this blood wash me: and thi^
looking to the word of institution, which gives foot in to Faith, and
exercising Faith thereon as your warran^ your Faith is helped to take hold of
Christ by and (...) the Sacrament. 5. It helps to close with the Covenan^ by
letting you see the grounds of the Covenant, wher^on it is bottomed and built.
If thou should say, Thoug^ God would Covenant with me, I will not keep: The
Sacrament holds out Christ as Cautioner, that has put himself in our Room and
engaged in our Name to make us forthcoming, and if thou should yet say: will
God indeed accept of the like of me? It says, here is a broken and bleeding
Savior and Mediator to lead thee to God, a Savior who has made himself a
propitiation for sin: and hereupon the sinner may be strengthened to take hold
of the Covenant, because in the Sacrament he sees Christ himself laid as a
bridge, on which he may come over to God, and his rent flesh as the Vaill
through which he may, as by a new and living way, enter into the Holiest.

Jeremiah 50. Verse. 5. -- Come, and let us Join our selves to the Lord, in a
perpetual Covenant that shall no^ be forgotten.
SERMON IV.
THere are Two main and Mighty uptaking Businesses, to the People of God; The
one whereof is, how to win to be in Covenant with God, to be friends and in
good terms with him. The other is, how to stand to, and keep Covenant with him,
and to live as being made friends with him according to the obligation that
lies on them. This is the great design of all preaching, to bring them within
the Covenant, who are without: and to make those who are within the Covenant,
to walk suitably to it; and as these are never separated on the Lords side: So
should they never be Separated on our side therefore these People are brought
in here Saying Let us Join our selves to the Lo^d in a Covenant: and not only
So, but there are Two words added by them, to show their earnest desire to keep
and stand to the Covenant: The one is, A perpetual Covenant: the other, a
Covenant that shall not be forgotten, the impression whereof may never wear
away: and this we conceive to be their meaning, 1. Because to forget the
Covenant, in Scripture, is to deal falsely in it, and to forget the Covenant and
to break it, are the same. 2. Because it is (as we take it) opposed to their
fear of false dealing in the Covenant: as if they had said, we were once in
Covenant with God, but we did deal falsely in it and forget it: Let us now
therefore Join our selves in a perpetual Covenant never to be forgotten, Let it
be a constant and standing, a lasting, even an everlasting bargain.

This being the meaning of the Words, we shall speak to Four Observations from
them (the Substance whereof ye have heard touched on already and these are.

First, That The great hazard which a People Covenanting wi^h God are in, is to
slip and slide from their tie and engagement to him, and to forget the Covenant.

The Second Is, That The great ev^dence of right entering in Covenant with God,
i^ to be serious and much concerned in keeping of it, even as much as in
entering into it.

The Third is, That The great design and duty of a Covenanter with God is,
never to forget the Covenant, but freshly to remember it, So as to be
answerable to it in Practice.

The Fourth is, That The great mean whereby this design is got prosecuted and
this duty pe formed, is adhering and cleaving to God, accor^ing to the
Covenant. Let us (say they) Join to the Lord in a Covenant; In this respect,
adhering to him in it is the mean to keep Covenant; So as we may never fall
from it.

The First Observation then is, that The great hazard that a People Covonanting
with God a^e in, is to slip and fall from their engagment to him: or There is
such a Covenanting with God, as people may soon forget and fall from: a
Temporary and unsiker Covenanting, that holds not: A perpetual Covenant never
to be forgotten, Supposes that there is a sort of Covenanting that slips like
a knotless thread (to speak so) and abides not. This is sadly verified in the
experience of many common professors of Religion, and often even of the Godly
themselves in a measure; Even now there will be a bargaining with God, and
within a little they will forget it: Peter says, Though all should forsake
thee, yet will not I, And yet within a very little he is found sleeping, and
that same night denies and forswears his Master: so Deuteronomy. 5. the People say,
all that the Lord has Commanded us, we will do, and the Lord says, they have
well said, O that there were such a heart in them: and yet within the space of
little more then forty days, they set up a golden Calf for their God: So Psalm.
78.34 35, 36, 37. When he slew them, then they sought him: they retu^ned and
enquired early after God: they remembered that God was their Rock, and the most
High their Redeemer; but they did flatter him with their mouth, and lied unto
him with their Tongue, for their hearts were not ri^ht with God, neither were
they steadfast in his Covenant, they abode not by the mint and essay which they
made. But I think this is beyond any need of Proof; we rather stand in need to
have the impression of it made deep upon our hearts; and to go from the work we
have been about with Holy fear and jealousy over our selves, bespeaking our
selves thus, what if this engagement, we have come under, hold not, but prove
like the hanging down of the head like a Bulrush for a day? Serious thoughts of
this hazard would through Gods blessing, further the exercise of watchfulness a
great deal more; when Carnal Self-Confidence and fearlesness creep on and take
hold of us, we (as it were) lay aside our Armor, foolishly fancying that there
is no hazard, but that all will be well; were there more of this Holy fear,
there would not be such frequent surprises; have ye not often been surprised
and proved unstedfast in Gods Covenant? And since ye have so many and clear
proofs of the truth of this Doctrine in your own sad experience, is there not
the greater need of Holy fear and watchfulness?

The Second Observation is, That, Those who are sincere and Serious in
Covenanting with God, will be no less so, in keeping of and standing to it.
Where People are sound and Honest at the heart, it will be no less an uptaking
work to them, how to keep Covenant, then it was to get it entered in; Therefore
these here mentioned have it as one piece of their Seriously uptaking business,
how to be joined to the Lord in Covenant; and another, how to get it stood to,
so as it may be a perpetual one never to be forgotten: the Same reasons that
prove that there should be, or that there is Seriousness in making and closing
the Covenant, will also prove that there should be, and will be seriousness in
endeavors to keep it; for if the Person honestly mind to enjoy the Blessings
Covenanted, he must and will endeavor to keep and stand to the Covenant; If he
honestly mind and sincerely desire to be in good terms with God through the
Covenant, he must and will endeavor to stand to the Terms of the Covenant, and
breach of Covenant will waken a Challenge. If it be a Principle of true saving
Grace that puts a person to desire to be under the bond of Gods Covenant; that
same Principle will make him desire and endeavor to abide under that bond, and
to keep faithfully to him; Thus David says, Psalm. 119. verse. 29.30. I have
chosen the way of thy precepts; and I have stuck unto thy testimonies: There is
a choosing of the Covenant and Testimonies, and a design of sticking to them,
when upon choice closed with.

The Use of this Point serves for Instruction: would ye fain have a mark of
your honesty in Covenanting with God? Here it is, and we know no better mark or
evidence to give you then this, even to be serious and much concerned in
keeping Covenant: God will never account that man to be a true Covenanter; that
will cast his law behind his back. The Apostle James Chap. 1. Speaks of two
sorts of men that are bearers of the word, and be compares the one sort, viz.
Forgetful hearers, to a man, Who beholding his natural face in a glass, goes
away, and straightway forgets what manner of man he was; but the other sort are
such, Who are no^ only hearers but doers of the word: that man (says he) shall
be Blessed in his deed: It is not the sayer, but the doer and the keeper of the
words of the Covenant, that is blessed: as many as Seriously engage to God, are
put on (as we said before) with as much seriousness, in endeavoring the
performance of their engagement, as to come under it: I speak not of a Perfect
performance or fulfilling of engagements without any the least defect, that is
not to be win at here: but of Serious minding and endeavoring, in the Lords
strength, the Performance of that which we are engaged to: For there is a great
difference betwixt men's failing and slipping of infirmity, and their sinning
with allowance: the former shows a body of Death to be yet remaining, and may
consist with faithfulness in Gods Covenant: but the latter speaks out a
Slothful careless and negl^gent undervaluing of God and of his Covenant: let
never such a man cloak himself with the pretext of being in Covenant with God,
nor Palliat his palpably gross and voluntary breaches of Covenant, with the
pretext of infirmity, who does not seriously drive it as his great design, to
be fai^hfull in Gods Covenant.

Now would ye know, wherein this Seriousness in keeping and Performing Covenant
consists. Ye may take it in these Characters. The man that is Serious in
performing his engagement, 1. His heart is taken up with it, and there is an
ardent longing to be answerable to the Covenant that he is entered into with
God; His greatest wish in all the world is, as to be in it, so to be faithful
in keeping it; therefore says the Psalmist, Psalm. 119.5. O that my ways were
directed to keep thy statuts; and this is given as a mark of the Blessed man
who is undefiled in the way: and says he verse. 6. Then shall I not be ashamed,
when I have respect unto all thy Commandments; which is a reason of the former,
and a confirmation of it; he designs to be short in his obedience to no
command, and he does not allow himself in his short-coming even as to degree,
but is constant in pursuing his design always even unto the end. 2.
Seriousness in performing appears, by kindly acknowledging the impression of
the weightiness of the eye and obligation that the Covenant lays on Persons; it
someway affects and burdens them, so that they walk not so lightly as others do
under the obligation and debt of the Covenant; though it be a friendly debt,
and also a Privilege: Their burden is not, that they are under the obligation,
but how to get it performed, thus says the Psalmist, Psa. 56.12. Thy vows are
upon me, O God: they take on vows to God, and keep them on, and walk, as being
under them: this is a main thing to be looked to in keeping Covenant. 3. This
seriousness in performing, appears in the fear that persons have of going wrong
and Mis-carrying; they are afraid to break to God: neither are any so
suspicious of them, as they are of themselves, knowing by sad experience, that
their hearts are deceitful above all things: and this is a very native
evidence, considering what we heard of our sickleness, which cannot be without
the impression of fear. 4. It appears in a Holy carefulness and diligence to
prevent that which they fear: lest at any time they let a buckle slip (to speak
so) and lest that which they feared come on them, their fear puts them to
diligence to prevent the thing feared: This makes them to fast and Pray, and to
be watchful over themselves in loose and untender company, and to eschew them
as far as they can, and to hazard some loss, rather then to put themselves
under a snare; watching and praying lest they fall into the sin of dealing
falsely in Gods Covenant. 5. It appears in the sharpness of challenges, when
any thing miscarries in their hand: They are soon challenged for the very first
beginnings of a breach: a wrong look will affect them: therefore faith Job,
Chap. 31. I made a covenant with my eyes, why then should I look upon a maid?
And the heart, while tender, will loath and scare at the least thing that has
the remotest tendency toward a breach, were it but the appearance of evil:
Any the least guilt soon touches and smites them, not only that which is
their own, but even that of others: Thus good Ezra says, Chap. 9. Should we
again break thy Commandments, and Join in affinity with the People of these
Abominations? And he lies in the dust before God mourning, because of this. 6.
It appears in respect of the exercise of a persons Faith: as It Is an uptaking
work and business to honest Souls, to get their Faith founded rightly in
closing the Covenant with God, that they be well grounded in believing: So it
is no less an uptaking and exercising work, to be improving their faith on Gods
Promises, to make them forthcoming according to their engagement and for
keeping Covenan^: which is the Apostles exercise, Gal. 2.20. To live by Faith
on the Son of God: I am (says he) Crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live,
yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh,
is by Faith on the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me: and try it
who will, they shall find it to be an uptaking work, rightly to exercise Faith
for entertaining of Spiritual life, and for preventing a Covenant breach with
God. It may be, for as many Professed Covenanters as are here, that but few of
you know much, if any thing at all, what it is to be taken up with being
Answerable to the Covenant according to your engagements: this, no doubt, makes
much unsound work, that ye do not singly and seriously design this: that ye
reach not forward, that ye bear not down the b^dy, and bring it under
Subjection lest ye come short here. If ye were suitably serious, these
Characters and evidences might be as so many directions to you: there would be
much watchfulness in doing; ready entertaining of challenges and convictions:
much heart melting under the sense of wrongs done to God: and the very
appearances of evil would he scared at and appear terrible. There is an evil
readily incident to many Professors of Religion, that they would fain be at
marks of a good Spiritual state and of being in Covenant with God, but such as
would not disturb their carnal confidence, ease, and laziness, nor put them on
to painful diligence: but we have no such marks to give: neither dare we for
the fear of God, and because of the hazard of Souls, assign any such; there
being none such given or assigned in the word of God: nay let me tell you, that
if there be not Painful diligence and Faithfulness in keeping Covenant with
G^d, it will darken the light of any other mark that can be given; and no
doubt, it is this negligence and unfaithfulness that makes many good marks,
clear in themselves, dark to many Christians, while they give not diligence to
make their calling and election sure, and give not all diligence to add one
Grace to another, and one degree of Grace to another: It is also the cause of
uncomfortable walking, yea of uncomfortable Communicating: but to be sincere
and serious in owning our Covenant-engagements, and faithfully forthcoming in
the Fruits thereof, and in a cor^espondent conversation, is a mark that will
give comfort, and some quietness at least, till Comfort come: the Lord will
comfortably confess such as faithfully confess him.

The Third Observation is, that It is and will be the great study of Persons
really entered in Covenant with God, to have it an abiding bargain, a
perpetual Covenant never to be forgotten: This is their design as well as
their duty, that their Practice and walk may be suitable to the Covenant. And
it being the main thing implied in the words, and that which we intend to
insist on: I shall in the prosecution of it, speak a little to these three. 1.
To what it is to aim to have Gods Covenant perpetual, and never to be
forgotten. 2. To the reasons and the ground that there is to press this. And 3.
To some motives and encouragements for exciting to it.

For the First, viz. What it is to study to have Gods Covenant Pe^petuall and
never to be forgotten? We take it up in these particulars. First, That those
entered in Covenant would drive the great design of the Covenant; which it
Summed in these Two words, To have God to be ours, and our selves to be Gods;
It Is even that which we have in Answer to the first question of our excellent
Catechism, What is Man's chief end? To enjoy God, and to glorify him; to enjoy
him as our own God, and to glorify him, by acknowledging our selves to be his,
and by devoring our selves to his Service, as being a People formed for
himself, to show forth his praise; This should be vigorously driven, as the
great design of the Covenanter with G^d; and it would be a notable help to
keep Covenant: even to live and walk, So as we may have Gods Company: for what
Use serves Gods Covenant unto us, and our entering therein, if we continue as
great strangers to him as before? If this be not driven as our design, we
forget wherefore we Covenanted. Secondly, There would be a minding of our own
obligation in the Covenant, as the condition or mean by which the end, viz. The
enjoying of God, is come at; which is in a word, to be his, to walk before him,
as he wills Abraham to do. Walk before me and be thou Perfect, God himself is
that which the Covenanter should Principally aim at; and walking before him is
the mean appointed for coming at that end; in short, what ever the Covenant
says in reference to our duty; as to abandon Lusts, To be Holy in all manner
of Conversation: to be watchful: to glorify God in our Bodies and Spirits
which are his, etc. Is that which we are tied to in the Covenant, and which we
would seriously drive at as our great design. Thirdly, There be a minding and
remembering of Gods engagement to us in the Covenant, which is a part of it, as
well as our engagement to him; and never to be forgotten by us: Return (says
the Lord, Jer. 3.) Backsliding Children, and I will heal your Backslidings:
Return, for I am Married to you: I will be your God and guide even unto Death:
I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, etc. And this minding and remembering
of Gods part of the Covenant, is a crediting of his Promise; Many Believers
mind and remember their own part of the Covenant, but forget that God is tied
to them: which is to Remember, not a Mutual engagement, such as the Covenant
bears out, but only our own Particular engagement, which makes us have so many
failings on our side, and does very much weaken our hands in duty; because we
lay not the weight of our performances on God that has Promised, who is
faithful and will also do it: We will find it to be frequent and familiar to
the Saints men ioned in Scripture, to mind Gods part of the Covenant as well as
their own, and Particularly to David in the Book of Psalms, who says, Thou
have made a Covenant with thine anointed: Thou have laid help upon one that is
Mighty: art not thou from Everlasting our God? Lord remember thy Covenant, that
is the Covenant that God has made with his People; and often else where. The
great weight of a Believers life and consolation lies here: Alace! what would
our life, or our engagement be, and what would our Comfort and Hope be, without
his engagement to us in the Covenant? And if this be not suitably minded and
remembered it will prove but a very heartless bargain. Fourthly, It implies
this, Seriously to endeavor to conform our Practice to the many great
Obligations that we ly under to him, and which Gods offer and Covenant do on
many accounts call us to. This is a short hint of what it is to keep and do the
Covenant of God, and to Perform it always even unto the end, to have his
Covenant Perpetual, and never to be forgotten.

As for the Second. To wit, the grounds and reasons of this, and whereby it may
be pressed. First. We would think of and believe the reality of Gods Covenant,
the reality of the promises in it, and of all that is spoken of it; and would
put our selves to it, if indeed we look on it as such. The truth is, it is the
Language of our unbelief, that we scarcely think God to be in earnest; as if
all that is spoken of this Covenant were but a cunningly devised Fable: If we
really believed, that by his Blessed Covenant, we may be brought to enjoy God
and to be made conform to his Image in Holiness: to have our vile bodies at
last made conform to his Glorious Body, etc. And that as certainly we shall be
possessed of such great and glorious privileges by keeping this Covenant, as
we a e certain that this world is yet standing; such a Faith would prove to us
the evidence of things not seen, and the Substance of things hoped for: and
would be a notable inci^ment and sharp Spur to Holy activitie in, and to quick
dispa^ch of called for duty: O! But it be a good and real ^argain, and will
have wonderful following, to all that keep it: and whether this be now
Believed or not, it will be found a little hence, that this bargain was one of
the best that ever was heard tell of in the world. Secondly, We would seriously
bethink our selves, what will come of it, in case there be Grossly unfaithful
dealing, and unstedfastness in Gods Covenant. I shall only name these five
things that will follow on it. 1. Much sin. 2. Much shame. 3 Much reflection on
God. 4. Much wrath, and. 5. Much want of peace, and much anxiety in the
Conscience, that is guilty of this sin. 1. I say, much sin: better there had
never been a Covenant in your offer, and that ye had never protest your
entering into Covenant with God: It Is better (says the wise man, Eccles. 5.5.)
not to vow to God, then to vow and not to perform: It had been better that many
of you had been crushed in your Mothers belly, or that ye had been born Turks
and Pagans, and had lived and died so, then to be found among them that deal
falsely in Gods Covenant, The grossest sins of Pagans are in some respect as no
sins in comparison of this, John 15.22. 2. There will be much shame before God,
even shame and confusion of Face, everlasting shame: they shall rise from the
dead to shame and everlasting contempt, Dan. 12. Sinners will have much shame
ere all be done, for every sin, But such as have wickedly betrayed their trust
to God, and after they had made Profession of entering in Covenant with him,
have dealt Perfidiously and falsely in it, will be in a manner hissed at amongst
devils and reprobat Pagans, who never had such offers, neither made such
Professions: and their condemnation will be acknowledged to carry eminent and
conspicuous desert in it: Because such had a good bargain, and dealt
treacherously with God, and quite married it to themselves: they have often also
much shame amongst men; even here: The man (says Christ) That hears my sayings
and does them not, is like unto a foolish builder, that built his house one the
sand: and elsewhere he resembles rash engagers in professed Covenanting with him,
to men who sit not down to count the cost, that begin to build, and not being
able to finish, expose themselves to the Mockage, Scorn and Derision of all
that pass by: Such and such a man (will some be ready to say) was a great
Professor, but now behold what is become of him, take him up yonder, he seemed
once to have some tenderness, but now he is quite turned aside, and become
gross and loose: Men of any Moral honesty and ingenuity will be ashamed to
break their word and to violat their engagements one to another in worldly
matters: how much greater shame is it to break to God, and to deal falsely in
his Covenant? 3. It has deep reflections upon God: for the Covenant-breaker
says on the matter, that it repents him that ever he made it, for he has
never gotten good of it, and that God has not been faithful in keeping to
him, and that therefore he thought himself loosed from all its Obligation: Now
will any of you dare to say, that the Covenant is not a good bargain, or that
God is not a good, responsall and faithful party to deal with? What iniquity
have your Fathers found in me (says the Lord to his Professing people, Jer.
2.) that they are gone so far from me? Come (says he Micah 6.) Before the
Mountains, and let the Hills hear my Controversy with you, what iniquity have ye
found in me? wherein have I wearied you, testify against me. Sure, all that
depart from God, rub reproach on Gods Covenant as a bad bargain, and on God as
a bad and unfaithful party to deal with: O high and horrid practical Atheism
and Blasphemy! Doubtless such will find that they have played the fools
egregiously in Committing these two great evils, in forsaking God the Fountain
of living waters, and in digging to themselves Cisterns, even broken Cisterns
that could hold no water: O! If ye could Imagine, what ye will think of it ere
long, when ye will not get a drop of watter to cool your tongue, because ye
said by your practice, that God was not worth the having, And to the Almighty,
depart from us, we will have none of thee, neith^r will we have the knowledge
of thy ways. 4. Much want of peace and much anxietie will follow upon it, even
the penitent and converting People of God, Jer. 3.20, 21. have much bitterness
on this account of Treacherous dealing in Gods Covenant: a voice of weeping and
Lamentation is heard on the mountains, the Children of Israel saying, we have
perverted our way, we have forsaken the Lord our God, how much more bitterness
of another nature, how much more Smart, vexation, Anguish, Agony, and gnawing
of Conscience shall impenitent sinners have, on account of their false and
Perfidious dealing in Gods Covenant? This will make the hearts of many to quake
and tremble for terror: If ye get Repentance, it will be a heart-break to you;
and if ye get not repentance, much heart less heart-break and crushing is
abiding you in the end for evermore; and O what trembling of heart, failing of
eyes, and sorrow of mind may be betwixt and that! 5 Much wrath will follow on
it in the day of the Lord, if it be continued in; and judge ye with^n your
selves if there be so many aggravations of, or so many threatenings against any
sin, as of and against unfaithful, and false dealing in Gods Covenant; this
sin has made the Jews to lie, these Sixteen hundred years and above, Scattered
among all Nations as a curse: Therefore make it your great design and business
^ow, to be Faithful to God, and to have the Covenant with him, A perpetual
Covenant, never to be forgotten.

As for the Third, viz. Some motives and encouragements to excite you to be
Faithful in Gods Covenant and to study to have it A perpetual Covenant never
to be forgotten; consider in the First place, that it is a singularly good and
nonesuch bargain to them that keep Covenant, there is no bargain more lovely
to them that keep touches with God; It Is (says dying David, 2 Samuel 23.) all my
Salvation and all my desire, It has all things in it that my heart can wish;
we make a pitiful and poor life to our selves through our undervaluing Gods
Covenant; the Believer, by improving of it, might have (as we use to speak) a
Lords life, yea a Kings life, yea a life infinitely preferable to the life of
all the great men, and Monarchs on earth; having all things, though Possessing
nothing, as it is, 2 Cor. 6.10. and says the Apostle, Philip. 4. I have all, I
abound and have no lack, while, in the mean time, he was living on a little
Charity from others; we might have a good li^e here and hereafter: does it not
exceedingly Commend Gods Covenant, that neither Sickness, Poverty, Reproach,
Contempt, Persecution, nor Death it self, though violent and Bloody, can mar
this excellent life? when the Covenanter comes to Judgment, Who can lay any
thing to his Charge? It is God that Justifies, who shall condemn him? He has
a friend before him, Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and is in
good-terms with God; The great advantage of it in this life and in that which
is to come (for godliness is great gain, having the promise of both) may
abundantly commend the Covenant and Faithfulness in it: I am persuaded, there
is no suitor or wooer to court and put in for the sinners heart and affection,
that can possibly out-bid Gods Covenant, can the Lust of the eye, the Lust of
the flesh or the Pride of life, can Profit, Pleasure, or Preferment make such
Proffers? Is there such advantage to be had in serving them, as there is to be
had in serving God? By the one, Ye bring forth fruit unto Holiness and in the
end reap Eternal Life; but by the other, Ye sow to the flesh, and shall of the
flesh reap Corruption, a poor and hungry Harvest. Secondly, The very keeping of
Covenant with God, is in it self an advantage? It has a great reward in the
bosom of it; for it puts the Person to love God, to delight in him, to place
its happiness in him; to study. Holiness and Mortification of Sin; and is there
not great advantage in these? can ye think or say, that there is any prejudice
in these and such things as these, namely to be blameless in your Conversation;
to be sincere and not a Hypocrite, to be serious and not Luk-warm? I am
persuaded, that if ye will but put it seriously to your own Consciences, ye
will be forced to say, that Sincerity in Religion is better then Hypocrisy,
and stedfastness in Gods Covenant, then Treachery, and what more do we call
for? And Therefore let me, on this ground, and as ye would not come in Tops
with your own Consciences, beseech you to study Faithfulness in the Covenant:
Gods Covenant has a great advantage of the hearers of it, and of professed
engagers in it, even a friend in their bosoms, viz. Conscience, that will side
with it, and say, that it was a good bargain, that the terms were very
reasonable, and that no prejudice could come by it, but unspeakably much
advantage; and will tell the man, that it would have been his honor and for his
profit, to have kept it and to have been faithful in it; why then, will the
Lord say, did thou deal falsely in it, and renounce it? The wretched man's
Conscience will answer, that there was no shadow of reason for it, it was plain
Folly and madness, for to keep and do Gods Covenant and Commandment, is Peoples
wisdom before all Nations; Deuteronomy. 4. It is a sad matter, that when men may have
that which is infinitely preferable to what they are so eager in seeking after:
even true Riches, Pleasure and honor, Peace that pasteth all natural
understanding, Joy unspeakable and full of Glory, and every good thing, by
Covenanting with God and by faithful dealing therein, that they should not
drive this as their great design, and make it their great work and uptaking
business; O That there were such a heart in them (says the Lord, Deuteronomy. 5.)
That they might fear me and keep my Commandments always, that it might be well
with them, and with their Children for ever: Men are ready to say, we must
provide for our Families, and under that Specious pretext they shift this main
work; but Ah! fools that they are; there is no way comparable to this, to
provide for families and Children, even to have themselves and their Children
entered into Gods Covenant and made to deal faithfully in it; this engages him
to provide for and become tutor unto the Man's Children; and is there not great
encouragement here, to have every good thing bestowed, and all carking care and
anxietie concerning our selves and Children removed? Thirdly, We would
consider, that God is a singular good Party to deal with, very tender of them
that aim to deal honestly with him; he is indeed severe and terrible, when he
becomes the avenger of a broken Covenant; but he is most tender toward honest
engagers, who sincerely endeavor to keep touches with him, he is no rigid
interpreter of their actions, but is ready to put the best sense on them that
they are capable of; Like as a Father (says the Psalmist, Psalm. 103.) Pitieth
his Children, so does the Lord Pity them that fear him; He is a father that
will take little off the hand of his Children, when he knows them to have a will
to the work, when he will not deal so with others; all his ways are mercy and
truth to them that keep his Covenant and his Testimonies; It Is not meant of
such as keep it Perfectly; for so they needed not Mercy, but of them that
honestly design and endeavor to keep it; and may not that encourage to be
faithful in Gods Covenant, that he is so easy to please? Fourthly, Consider,
that he has graciously stuffed his Covenant with Promises meet for the
thorow-bearing of them that would fain keep Covenant: if it be an evil heart
that will not love God, which troubles them, the Promise is, I will Circumcise
their heart and the hearts of their seed to love the Lord their God; Whereas no
others, who are without the Covenant, or deal unfaithfully in it, can expect
the performance of any such Promise. If it be a back sliding heart, the Promise
is, Jer. 3.22. I will heal your back-slydings: If it be the fear of departing
from God that troubles them, the Promise is, Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear in
their heart, that they shall not depart from me; If it be the dominion of sin
that they fear, the Promise is, Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have Dominion over
you, for ye are not under the Law but und r Grace: that is, under the Covenant
of Grace: And if it be fear of the Prevailing of Satan's Tentations that
troubles them, the Promise is, The God of Peace shall bruise Satan under your
feet shortly: May we not then take heart to be faithful in this Covenant? Yea
he has also condescended to come under this engagement too, even to make us
forth coming in the Covenant, I will call (says the Psalmist, Psalm. 57.) Upon
the Lord who performs all thing for me: It might have been said to David, how
will thou get all done that thou have undertaken? He answers, I will call upon
him who performs all things for me; And so I will get them all done and
Performed, so as I may hope to be accepted on the Mediators account and for his
sake. Fifthly, Consider the Mediator of the Covenant, who is surety and
Cautioner not only for believers debt, But also for their duty; Therefore he is
called, Heb. 7. The surety of this better Covenant; and when Christ and we are
engaged in one bond, there is ground for us to expect that something will be
got done, tho the principal debtor be not much worth, yet the Cautioner is
Worthy and infinitely responsible. Sixthly, Consider, that there are already
many, who have passed through the troublesome Sea of this world and have been
Marvellously helped; and it is but a little, and all you honest engagers to the
Lord will be through the same Sea, and fairly set on Land; your warfare ere long
will be at an end, the prize will be got without any more fighting: what is
your fighting, sighing and walking heavily, clothed, as it were, in mourning
for a little time? It Is but for a few years, and it may be to some of you not so
long; and within a little space, The day of refreshing from the presence of the
Lord will come; a relieving of you from your post, a loosing of you from your
bonds, a final discharge from your warfare will come; and a new song will be
put in your mouths, and Palms in your hands: O but faithful dealing with God
in the Covenant will have a heartsome outgate! when ye shall come ashore, all
tears shall be wiped from your eyes and sorrow and sighing shall flee away: and
ye shall meet with that word, O warm word! Come ye faithful Servants, enter
into the joy of your Lord: ye will not always fight and wrestle, neither will
ye be always tempted and troubled; rest and repose is a coming it is even at
hand: then one ray of his Coun^enance will be infinitely more heartsome,
refreshing and satisfieing, then all these things that ye are now called to
abandon and part with, can possibly amount to: Christ's first welcome to his
Fathers house will eternally banish the remembrance of all the sad things that
ye meet with in this world

The Fourth and last Observation is, that The great mean of securing a
Covenanter and making him steadfast, is, Faith exercised on God, or adhering to
him by Faith, by virtue of this Covenant: It is not, to lay weight on or trust
to our own strength: but seeing God has made a promise of thorow-bearing, to
undertake the duties that we are called to in his strength, trusting to his
Faithfulness, and to his furnishing of us, according to the Covenant: As, when
poor sinners are Summoned to appear before God, and they have no righteousness
of their own, they are to step forward trusting to Christ's righteousness: So
when they are called to duty, and they have no strength of their own to enable
them to a suitable discharge thereof, they are to consider that God is
faithful, who has promised and who will also do it: and indeed Believers have
found in their comfortable experience, that when they have adventured on duty
with a believing look to Gods Covenanted strength, they have found it go
sweetly and surprisingly well with them: Thus it is said of those worthies
mentioned, Heb. 11. That through faith, they wrought Righteousness, as well as
they did all other things thereby: This also is it, which the Lord inculcateth,
John 15. abide in me (says He) and ye shall bring forth much fruit: as the
branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine, no more can
ye, except ye abide in me, for without me ye can do nothing: Where it is clear,
that it is not enough, that we be in Christ, but that we must abide in him, and
have continual dependence on him for the influences of life and strength
derived from him.

Ye then that would be faithful in Gods Covenant, and would have it Perpetual
never to be forgotten, must especially make use of this mean: make Conscience
of all other appointed means; Watch and pray that ye enter not into Tentation;
but see that ye neglect not this mean; which if ye do, the Watchman will watch
in vain: and your grip or hold will be unsiker, if ye make not use of him to
make it sure, and to keep it so. And therefore, 1. Mind seriously and
constantly what ye are, in and of your selves; even fickle, fectless, weak,
feeble and unconstant creatures, not daring to undertake any thing in your own
strength. 2. Remember what God is; and that ye have a worthy, able and
responsall Cautioner. 3. Remember that ye are engaged in a Covenant never to be
forgotten: forgetting is the first rise of unfaithfulness. 4. Remember the
Promises that God has made for your thorow-bearing, and let faith be exercised
on them; Join with diligence and watchfulness a suitable exercise of Faith. 5.
Take a serious look, every day when ye go to pray, of your resolutions and
engagements, renew them frequently and seriously in his own strength; and be
casting the other knot; and put the heart distinctly to say, this was my
bargain, and I will through Grace abide by it; and then go and pray over it,
that ye may be made faithful in your thus Covenanting with God, that ye may be
enabled to pay your vows and make your honest resolutions Practicable;
levelling at this as your Scope and design in all duties: I have said such a
thing and have not kept my word, Lord forgive it for Christ's sake: I am engaged
in this and that and the other duty, Lord help me to perform. And for your
furtherance in humiliation and soft walking before God, look on all your sins
as aggravated by this unfaithful and treacherous dealing in Gods Covenant: and
on all duties, as those which your Covenant with God binds you to depend on him
for strength to be Communicated to you according to the Covenant, for going
about them suitably and acceptably: and within a little while ye shall get a
fair pass to be gone, and a full discharge of all that ye were trusted with
according to the Covenant. And the Lord help you to be faithful, so that it may
be betwixt God and you in very deed, A perpetual Covenant that shall not be
forgotten.

A SERMON Preached Immediately before the Communion,
On Matthew. 26. Verse. 28.29. For thi^ is my Blood of the New Testament, wh^^ is
shed for many, for the Remission of sins. But I s^ unto you, I w ll not drink
henceforth of this fruit (...) the Vine, until that day, when I drink it new
w^ you in my Fathers Kingdom.
ALthough we had no more to do at our meeting together in this place to day,
but to Read and he^ these same wonderful words, If our hearts were in suitable
spiritual frame, knowing and considering, wh^ we are about and doing, we would
be in a Divine Ra^ture and Transport of Admiration at His love, a^ kindled into
a flame of Holy zeal for his glory, by then O What sweet and happy words are
these from our di^ing Lord Jesus Christ his mouth! Eye has not seen, e^ has
not heard, Neither has it entered into the heart (...) Man to conceive, what
things the Lord has prepared f^^ them that wait for him. And indeed there is a
sum o^ them in these words, they being a Compend of t^ Testament and legacy
which our Lord has left to h^ friends: O Sinners, be of good cheer, there are
goo^ news and glad tidings of great joy here; Here is t^ new Covenant and all
that is in it, and Remission (...) sins in Particular, as the Legacy: Here is
Christ, whi^^ makes this Covenant Savoury: and it is confirmed (...) his
Death, who is the Testator thereof, Which makes it sure: Here is Heaven and
Eternal glory, and what would you have more? This is (says he) my Blood of
the New Testament Which is shed for the Remission of the sins of many: Which
holds forth the Promises, and the convey of them: the Legacy and how it comes
to us: I will not (says he) Drink of this fruit of the Vine, until I drink it
new with you in my Fathers Kingdom: There is Heaven, the heartsome up shot of
all: Remission of sins comes to sinners Covenant wise, through Christ's Blood:
and by closing with Christ, and making Application of this Blood, sinners come
to get Remission of sins and all the benefits of the Covenant: and are brought
at last to Drink the new wine of Heaven, and to Drink it new with Christ, even
to share in his Glory, to have one feast and Glory with him: And truly if there
were no more to be said, we may most confidently say, that these are wonderful
glad tidings, which our blessed Lord Jesus has left to be the great subject of
the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the Scope of the Sacraments.

We shall 1. Open up the words a little. 2. We shall draw some Doctrines from
them. And then, 3. Insist in the Application.

First, Then for Explication. From the 26. verse. is set down the Institution of
the Supper of the Lord: wherein we have. First, What Christ did. Secondly, What
he Commands the Disciples, and us in them to do. Thirdly, He Explicats in these
words, what he has been doing, and Command to be done: This is my Blood
(says he) of the Ne^ Testament, etc. As if he had said, would you kno^ what it
is that I am doing: There was a Covena^ made long since betwixt my Father and
me, concerning the elect; wherein I condescended an^ transacted to take on man's
nature, and in that natu^^ to suffer and satisfy Divine Justice for their sin^
and this is the Commemoration of my Satisfaction according to that Covenant,
and the exhibiting an^ giving to you a confirmation of your interest in a^ the
blessings of that Covenant, whereof Remissi^^ of sins is one, and a main one:
He needed, as wou^^ seem, to have said no more, but that he was goi^ to suffer
and to suffer for this cause, Even to pu^chase Redemption to sinners: but he
will furth^^ show his Disciples and in them all Believers in hi^ That this came
not to pass by guess, but accordi^^ to an old Covenant and Eternal transaction
the past betwixt Jehovah and Him: and so adds the S^crament to be a
Commemoration and a more f^ Confirmation thereof to Believers, of all that
purchased by it and Promised in it. In the 29. ve^ He has two words further,
one of warning, anoth^^ of encouragement: 1. One of warning, I say u^ you,
henceforth I will not drink of the F^uit of t^ Vine: As if he had said, take
heed what ye are d^ing, make this Communion very welcome, and (...) it confirm
and strengthen you against the trials the are coming: for I will have no more
Communion with you after this manner in this World. 2. word of encouragement
and consolation: because they might think and say, Alace! Lord, what will
become of us, if we shall have no more Communions with thee? Be not (says he to
them on the matter) discouraged, We shall yet have more and more intimat
Communion then ever we had here on earth: There is a day coming, when we shall
have a sweet Communion in the Kingdom of Heaven together, when we shall drink
it new, when we shall have the thing signified, Even Communion without the
intervention of Ordinances, in the full Harvest of joy in God, in his Kingdon.
Then, verse. 30. As if he were going to a Triumph, He and they sing a Hymn or
Psalm: Partly thereby to teach us to be cheerful: and partly to show that
singing of Psalms is not unsuitable for this action.

To make the former words and what we are to say on them a little more clear: We
would in this Sacrament, which here the Lord Explicats, Consider Three or Four
things. First, Christ's Offer: Wherein there are Two things, viz. The outward
and visible signs, the Elements: and the inward invisible thing signified by
them, Which is Christ's Body and Blood: In the Offer then in short, We have not
only the Element, or sign, but the thing signified and represented by it: Even
as in the word of the Gospel, there are these Two, viz: So many words made up
of Letters and Syllables, and the matter Contained in them. Secondly, Consider
the receiving of Christ's offer, wherein there are Two things, 1. The act of
receiving the Element by the hand. 2. The hearts receiving what is offered in
and by the Elements: Even as in hearing the word, There is the giving or
lending of the ear to the voice of words, that they may be understandingly
heard, and there is the receiving what is spoken, by Faith in the heart: As
Christ holds forth both in his offer, so the Believer would both ways receive,
by the hand the Element should be received, and by Faith the thing signified
should be received. Thirdly, Ye would consider this Application of the thing
signified in a twofold respect, 1. As it holds out the entering of us into the
Covenant in order to the receiving of the Pardon of sin, when the Sacrament is
Considered complexly with the word. 2. As it Applies Christ and the benefits
that come by him for our consolation: Christ is to be received in the former
respect, before he can be received in the Letter: we must needs receive Christ
in his offer, ere we can receive any benefit that comes by him: Therefore the
word goes along with the Sacrament, that we may get a gripe and catch hold of
Christ by the Covenant: for they that are without the Covenant are without
Christ and all saving benefit by him: But where Christ is received, and Faith
closes with him as he is offered, The Soul may warrantably make Application of
him, Not only for Pardon of sin, The Particular benefit here expressly
mentioned, but for all the other benefits of the Covenant: Whereas they who
have not faith, have nothing, and receive nothing: but are deeply guilty through
their not receiving, but rather rejecting and despising of Christ and his
benefits. Fourthly, Ye would consider this Sacrament, as it seals directly our
warrant to receive Christ and his benefi^s, or as it seals our Application of
Christ and his benefits, for it may be useful for both, and is actually so to
believers: In the First respect we offer to you a good security for your
Salvation, on condition of your receiving Christ; But in the Second Respect the
security is sealed simply, as baving Gods seal appended to it, to all who have
received him. Thus the tree of life was a seal of the Covenant of life by works
to Adam, if be stood, but it was not a confirmation that he should have life by
the Covenant, except he fulfilled that which was called for in it: So
Circumcision was a Seal of the righteousness of Faith to Ishmael and other
visible Church Members, as well as to Isaac, in the First Sense, that is, that
the security was good; But to Isaac and Believers, It was not only a Seal or a
Confirmation that the security was good; and sufficient in it self; but a Seal
of Confirmation, that it should be good to them: Therefore in coming to partake
of the Sacrament, We would premit always our closing with Christ; And then we
have not only Gods word and Oath, but also the Sacrament for his Seal of
Confirmation of the Covenant. In a word, Christ does offer here to all a Pledge
that he will make good the Covenant; And it is the great guilt of many
Professors of the Gospel, that they close not with him in his offer, so as to
make use of it: Which makes them guilty of the body and Blood of the Lord:
which they neither would nor could he guilty of, if this were not in their
offer: but it is more to Believers, who have by Faith closed with Christ; this
Seal of the Covenant accreweth to their security, who have taken Gods word and
rested on it; The Believer then, is not only sure in this respect that he has
a good warrant to trust and lea^^ to, that is, a Sealed Covenant; but also that
it will no^ fail him in Particular, So that he may say, I know i^ whom I have
believed: And we would not divide these things that God has so wisely and well
conjoined, viz Closing with Christ and the Covenant in the right way according
to the terms thereof; and taking this Se^ of confirmation of it.

Now in the Second Place I come to give you a little view and short se^ies of
the Gospel in several Observations from the words; that we may have to that
which we more particularly aim at, To wit, the Use of all.

First Then, Observe, That all men and women, eve^ the Elect not excepted, are
sinful, and as such, Considered before God; So it is said, Isaiah 53.6. All we
lik^ sheep have gone astray; This is the Object of the Gospel, sinners; the
Persons for whose behove Christ hat^ made his Testament, and to whom he has
left his legacies, are sinners: even sinful men and women, an^ the more sin be
in them, the more Grace shines in God^ croosing of such, and in Christ's dieing
for such, and no^ choosing nor dying for fallen Angels: It Is sinners (I say)
who are the Object of Christ's Testament.

Secondly, Observe, That there is a grand design lai^ by God from eternity for
the saving of many sinners, an^ for Procuring to them Remission of sins, the
fruit of the ancient Counsel of the Blessed and glorious trinity. And this is
it, which Christ aims at in all his Ordinances, to get sinners pardoned, and
freed from the curse due to them for sin, Reconciled, Justified, Sanctified,
and brought to drink the new Wine of Heaven. This is laid down by Jehovah, as
the Basis and foundation, whereon he has reared up a Magnificent and Glorious
Superstructure of the Riches of his most Soveraignly free Grace, for making it
to shine forth conspicuously and radiantly throughout all ages.

Thirdly, Observe, That there is a Covenant well ordered, suited and fitted to
promove this great and Glorious end and design of saving sinners: A covenant
so contrived, as it may well suit the saving of sinners, and procure unto them
the Remission of sins: There is a transaction betwixt God and the Mediator, a
Surety and Cautioner is Provided to take on the debt of the elect, and to
satisfy Justice to the full for all their sins: and this is one Article of the
Covenant, that the Mediator should undertake thy debt, O Believer, and Satisfy
for it: He was (says Isaiah, chap. 53.) Wounded for our Transgresions, bruised
for our Iniquities: the Chastisment of our peace was on him, and by his stripes
we are healed.

Fourthly, Observe, That according to this Covenant and transaction, our
blessed Lord Jesus has really, actually and fully satisfied for the sins of
Believers, according to his undertaking: So that, as in the Counsel of God,
that great trust was put on him, and he undertook the work of sinners
Redemption; So, now it is, Father I have finished the work, which thou gave
me to do: The covenant is exactly fulfilled on my part, not one Article of it
is unfulfilled: all that was committed to me is now fully performed, Hence it
was his last word on the Cross, it is finished.

Fifthly Observe, That by the Application of the Blood of Jesus through a
sinners closing with him and interessing himself in him: He may and does obtain
Remission of sins, and partake of the benefit of Redemption Purchased by his
Blood, even of all the benefits of the Covenant: Therefore when he has said,
This is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for the Remission of the
sins of many: He turns over the words (...) them, and tells them, that they
shall drink the fruit of this Vine new with him in his Fathers Kingdom: As it
was made sure, that Adam was to have life on the condition of perfect
obedience: so it is as sure to a sinner taking with his sin, and betaking
himself to, and closing with Christ and his Satisfaction, that he shall have
Pardon of sin, and all the Benefits of this Covenant, even to eternal Glory,
secured to him.

Sixthly Observe, That as our Blessed Lord Jesus Christ has Purchased this
Redemption and Remission, so he is must willing, desirous, and pressing that
sinners, to whom the Gospel it offered, should make use of his righteousness
and of the Purchase made thereby, for this end, that they may have Remission of
sins and eternal life. For not only is the security good, sufficient and sure
in it self, The Testament being confirmed: But he is (to speak so with
reverence) Passionatly desirous that sinner should endeavor on good ground to
be sure of it in themselves: therefore he kindly puts it in a Legacy, makes
serious offer of it, and strongly confirms it to all that embrace it.

Seventhly, Observe, That It is to Testify this his willingness that sinners
should make use of his purchase, and lay hold on his Righteousness, on Remision
of sins and life through him, and to promove the acceptance thereof among
sinners, that he has instituted this Ordinance of the Communion. Take ye, Eat
ye, etc. For this is (as if he had said) the end of the institution of this
Sacrament and the reason of it, even to be a sign and Seal of confirmation to
many of the Remission of sins through my Blood: This was my design in laying
down my life, to get many sinners Pardoned, and this is the, end of the
institution of this Precious ordinance of my Supper, to apply it to them, and
to confirm them in the Faith of it.

Eighthly, Observe, That They who would partake aright of this Sacrament for
their confirmation as to the Pardon of their sins and their sharing in the rest
of the benefits of Christ's purchase, would first close with Christ in the
Covenant, and make that the way of their making use of this Sacrament, to
confirm the bargain: Therefore is it called the Cup of the new Covenant in his
Blood, this is the sine quo non, even closing with Christ in a Covenant: else
the Sacrament can do no good: it is the great thing that admits sinners to have
right and access to Christ's purchase: the writing must first be Subscribed, and
then Sealed; the bargain made and then confi^med.

Ninthly, Observe, That they who have the offer of the Gospel, and are admitted
to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, would be so present, serious and every
way in a posture suttable to that action, as if they were never to have the
offer or occasian of another Communion. As the Lord said to Elijah the Prophet,
arise, Eat, for thou have a long Journey to go, So says the Lord to the
Disciples, and in them to us, Henceforth I will drink no more of the fruit of
the Vine, till I drink it new with you in the Kingdom of my Father: Ye will get
no mo Communions with me here, and therefore go rightly about this, Improve it
well, and let a foundation be laid here of a solid standing interest in me,
that ye may be ready to meet with the trials that are coming.

Tenthly, Observe, That sinners who receive Jesus Christ on the terms he is
offered in the Gospel, and take the Sacrament for a confirmation of their
interest in him, and in his Pucchase, though they should never have another
Communion in this world may confidently expect a joyful one in heaven: I tell
you (says he) for your consolation though I drink no more of the fruit of the
Vine with you here, yet the time comes, when ye and I shall drink it new in
the Kingdom of my Father.

Eleventhly, Observe, That honest Communicants sensible of sin, and content to
take Christ on his own terms, are called to be cheerful, and to cheer
themselves in the lively hope and expectation of Heaven: And a Believer, though
a sinner, that takes this way, should take his communion as a Seal and Pledge,
confirming him in the Faith and hope of his being ere long to have an e^ernal
and unin errupted Communion with Christ in Glory.

In these Observations Ye have a short hint of the Treasure that Believers have
in Christ: and from them ye may gather, what a full Christ, a full Covenant,
and good bargain ye have, who have really closed with him: ye have a most
liberal and Richly boun^ifull Mediator, who has put all these great things and
many mo into his Testament to sinners, offered to them in the Gospel and Sealed
in the Sacrament of his supper, to all them that take him and rest Satisfied
with him: for which satisfaction there is all the reason in the world.

And therefore to come, in particular Application, to the Use of all: There is
^ere good and large ground to speak a little to these Three 1. To Bring forth to
you the good news of Salvation through Christ. 2. To Exhort and press you to
embrace and accept of them with gladness of heart, to make welcome this
Faithful saying worthy of all acceptance, that Christ came into the world to
save sinners. 3. To Comfort and solace sinners, that have betaken themselves to
Christ, in the abundant consolation of this Covenant, and in the administration
of it, and in the Mediator the great subject and Substance of it: and seeing it
may well be said here, who is sufficient for these things? ye would have an eye
to him, who can make this Gospel to savor sweetly, and even triumph: The
Commission to preach it is his; the Ordinance and Institution is his; and if
there be any appetite for your food amongst you, any sense of sin and desire of
Communion with Blessed Jesus here, and of Communion with him in Heaven
hereafter, Look, O look up to him and beseech him to Breath on his own
Ordinance, and to back this word with life and power.

The First Use Then, serves to bring forth to you this day the good news of
Salva^ion through Jesus Christ. O sinners, by this G^spel and Testament of
Christ, and by the Administration of this Ordinance, we have good news to tell
you; This is the New Testament in his Blood which is shed for the Remission of
the sins of many. I shall endeavor to hold forth to you the goodness and
gladness of these news and tidings in these Three: and would to God we had
sensible sinners to Believe, receive and welcome them. 1. That there is a good
bargain through Christ to be gotten by sinners. 2. That sinners, by accepting of
Christ, have sufficient warrant and good security for applying to themselves
and making use of this good bargain. 3. That Christ is most willing and
desirous that sinners should close with this bargain, and make use of him and
of his Righteousness for at^aining the Pardon of sin, and for making themselves
happy everlastingly.

For the First; Sinners, here is a good bargain to you through Christ, glad
tidings of great Happiness, fear not (says the Angel to the Shepherds, Luke
2.10.11.) Behold I bring you glad tidings of great joy, which shall be to all
People; for unto you it born this day in the City of David a Savior, which is
Christ the Lord; Yea we have these good news to preach to day, Behold to us
has died a Savior, and he has made his Testament, and has lef^ a most
ample, Rich, comfortable and Blessed Legacy; and is not this a good and full
bargain? Which will be clear if ye consider, First, The real wo^th of it: is
there any thing a sinner can stand in need of, but it is here, or any ill that a
sinner can be under, but there is here a remedy for it? Is it the sense of
sin, feat of Justice, felt Wrath, the Apprehension of Hell? Here are glad
tidings, Remission of sins by the Blood of Christ, This is the one Express
Article of the Testament here; We tell you, sinners there is a Savior whose
life has gone for sin, and there is a free absolution to be had by virtue of
his Blood, to all who will lay hold on it. Secondly, Ye have the Covenant to
make it sure, and Remission of sins is Particularly mentioned in it for your
satisfaction; Nay look what ever further is in the Covenant, and ye have it
also upon your closing with Christ, according to his Divine power he has
(says the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.3.) given unto us all things that Pertain to life
and Godliness, and verse. 4. Exceeding great and Precious Promises are given us,
Promises of Justification and Sanctification; what a bundle of Promises have
we, Ezekiel. 36. I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and wash you from all your
uncleanness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you, and will cause you to
walk in my statuts and do them, etc. There are Promises of subducing of the
Body of death, of circumcising the heart, of causing to love God, of putting
his fear in the heart, of healing back slidings: These and many mo are Articles
of this Testament, which as they are very comforting, so are they very frequent
and abundant in the Covenant; This word of God is, as it were, the Index and
Catalogue of them; and in effect, there is not a Promise in the word of God,
but it is here. Thirdly, There is yet something more; and that is, the Promiser
himself is left in Legacy, Which no other Testator does; This is my Body (says
he) That was broken for you: Open your mouth wide and I will fill it: I will be
thy God: That is the comprehensive Article of the Covenant, and the great Gift,
the Gift of gifts: and we may very safely say, that as he could not swear by a
greater then himself, So he could not give a greater gi^t then himself: would
God there were suitable conceptions and apprehensions of this non-such Gift;
and that he in whom the fullness of the God head dwells bodily, were looked upon
as being thus in our offer, and were Cordially closed with by Faith; that is a
great word, which we have, Revel. 20.7. He that overcomes shall inherit all
things: and how is it performed and fulfilled? I will be his God; this is all,
and without this there is nothing. Fourthly, Having this Gift, is there any
thing that can be added? the Text says, Heaven: not that Heaven is more then
Christ, but this is it, that Christ enjoyed in Heaven is more, then Christ
enjoyed here on earth; I will drink it new with you (says he) in my Fathers
Kingdom: The flood gates are there (as it were) opened; and the heart enlarged
and made capacious to let in the fullness of God to the filling of the Glorified
Believer, even to the very brim; Therefore is Communion with Christ said to be
Now in Heaven: We may have Christ here, and Believers have him; but this is an
addition, when we have our husband not only in right, but have access
Immediately and most intimatly to converse with him, and he to converse with us:
When the Queen shall be brought unto the King in Raiment of needle work, and
taken into the Kings Palace with gladness and with joy, and the Virgins her
Companions with her: When there shall be a putting of unbelief to shame and an
Eternal Banishment of it, and a Completing of Believers Satisfaction: the eye
of the most profoundly exercised and experienced Believers never saw, their ear
never heard, neither were they ever able to conceive the thousand part of these
abundant consolations and heart ravishing joys, that shall flow from the
Presence of the Lamb and of him that sits on the Throne, When there shall be
no interveening Ordinances, nor Temple in that higher House, but the Lamb shall
be the light thereof: and yet all this is offered to sinners, and put in
Christ's Testament to them, to the end it may be made sure. And Lastly, As all
these other things do Concur to make out the excellency of the Bargain; So
does this in a special manner; that the price is paid, that they have nothing
to lay down, but may come and take all freely without money and without price.

Secondly, For furthering and strengthening the consolation, ye would consider,
that the Believer who receives Christ as he is offered in the Gospel, though he
be a sinner, yet he has a most sufficient, excellent and unquestionable
security for, and right unto all these good things, that our dieing Lord Jesus
has comprehended in his Testament: Believing sinners, what security would ye
have? ye have Christ's word, I say unto you, etc. Ye have Christ's Covenant and
Testament; This is the Cup of the New Testament in my Blood; and now the
Testament is Confirmed and Sealed, so that neither man nor Angel can annull nor
alter it; Our Lords Testament being Sealed it stands legally registered in the
Court Books of Heaven; and it stands legal on these terms, that a sinner who
takes with his sin, disclaims his own righteousness, and betakes himself to
Christ's Righteousness, putting it in the room of his own, for his Justification
before God; may be sure of Christ's legacy and of Heaven: as it is sure, that
Christ suffered, and Instituted this Sacrament for his Confirmation in the
Faith of it; the accepting of Christ, the submitting to his righteousness, the
yielding to the Covenant, and closing with him on his own terms, gives him a
right to Heaven and all the Riches contained in his Testament. To make out
this, as being the very thing of the Comfortable Application of all that has
been said, and of what we are further to say; I shall offer these four grounds;
The First whereof is, some clear Scriptures, that hold forth so much, viz. That
as really they shall have life who rake Christ and his offer, and close with
him; as he really suffered and Satisfied the Justice of God for their sins. The
First of these Scriptures is Heb. 7.25. Wherefore he is able to save them to
the uttermost that come unto God by him; He is an able Savior, able to the
uttermost, and there is not a point of Latitude, longitude or altitude beyond
the uttermost; He is able to save them all, and what all? All that will come
and make use of him, and give him the credit of his Offices; all that will come
unto God by him. A Second is, Romans 5 20. Where the Apostle out-reasons sin, for
holding forth the triumph of Free Grace; Where sin abounded (says he) Grace
did much more abound; That as sin has reigned unto death, Even so (and indeed
it is an excellent So) might Grace Reign through Righteousness unto Eternal
Life by Jesus Christ our Lord: though we would endeavor to our utmost to
unfold these words, we could not unfold all that is infolded in them; did sin
make sinners liable to death, and Triumph over them? So Grace has erected a
Throne, by Christ's Righteousness, not by inherent Holiness, and has Triumphed
over sin: the way how Grace gives out its orders and obtains its end, Is not by
our Righteousness, but by the Righteousness of Christ, through Faith in him;
Justice (to speak with reverence) is off the Throne, and Grace orders and sways
all, in making Application of Christ's Purchased Righteousness to believers. The
Third Scripture is Acts 13.38. Be it known unto you, therefore, Men and
Breth^en, that through this man is preached unto you the forgivenness of sins;
and verse. 26. To you is the word of this Salvation sent; O glad tidings to the
greatest sinners! Through the man Christ is Preached to you Remission of sins,
and by him all that Believe are justified from all things from which ye could
not be Justified by the Law of Moses. What are ye owing? Or what can the Law,
Justice or Satan claim? ye are Justified from all these things: and when he
speaks thus to despisers with a Be it known unto you, That the offer is made to
them, we may on good ground turn it over to you, and say, Be it known unto you,
that through Christ Jesus, ye may have Remission of sins, and be Justified from
all things from which ye could not be Justified by the Law of Moses, According
to the terms of the Covenant: Let your libell be as long as it will; Grace is
on the Throne and will receive you. Secondly, Consider, that the great design
which the Lord drives in the business of Redemption and publishing of it in the
Gospel, Is, that Remission of sins and Life may be made sure to lost Sinners
that came to Christ: Why I pray, was the Covenant made? was it not for this
end? As it is, Heb. 8. This is my Covenant (says the Lord) that I will make
with the house of Israel, I will be Merciful to their unrighteousness, and
their sins and Iniquities will I remember no more; no more, O sweet sound! What
is the design of the Mediator in his Sufferings? Is it not this? So John
10.10. I am come, that they might have Life and have it more abundantly, and
John 17. For their sakes I Sanctify my self, that they also may be Sanctified;
and here, the new Covenant in his Blood is for the Remission of the sins of
many: and this being the mean for attaining the end. It is Impossible, that it
can misgive or fail. Thirdly, Consider the Contrivance of the Covenant, and ye
will see, that it is impossible it can fall; Heaven and Earth shall sooner
fail, then one Title of this sworn and confirmed Covenant: It cannot fail on
the Mediators side, for he has Paid the price already; Neither can it fail on
Jehovahs side, He will not fail to make Application of Grace to sinners, nor be
unfaithful to the Faithful Mediator; And since upon the one side, Justice had
access to exact of Christ the full price, even to the least farthing, by virtue
of the Covenant of Redemption, when he became surety; will not the same
Covenant, on the other side, make it out, that Grace shall have as good access
to Pardon the sinner, for whom be undertook? For he (says the Apostle, 2 Cor.
5.) was made sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him; If the Covenant (which is one) has had the
designed effect in and on the Mediator, as to his fulfilling all that was
undertaken by him therein; shall not the Promises made to him, as namely these,
Isaiah 53.10.11. He shall see his seed, the Pleasure of the Lord shall Prosper
in his hand; by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, take
effect and be fulfilled? Doubtless they will most certainly and infrustrably.
Fourthly, Consider the great experience which the Saints have had of the truth
of this in all ages; are there any this day before the Throne, Blessing the
Lamb and him that sits thereon, or any that are on their way thither ward; But
they are so many wi^nesses of this Truth, that closing with Christ has good
Security for Remission of sins, and for Eternal life? There shall never be one
who shall have it to say, I trusted to this security, and it failed me: and
hereupon rises the sweet Song, Worthy is the Lamb to receive Power, and
Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing, Revel.
5.12. Nay even those in the Pit shall bear witness to this truth; for (says
the Apostle, 2 Cor. 2.15.) We are unto God a sweet Savor in them that are
saved and in them that Perish; to the one we are the Savor of Death unto
death: and to the other, the Savor of Life unto life; And in the preceding
words he says, Thanks be to God which always causes us to triumph in Christ;
He makes the Triumph of the Faithful Ministers of the Gospel, some way, to be
in them that are damned, by his taking Vengeance on them, for despising His
Grace offered: and they are made to see, that it was a sure bargain to them
that through Grace embraced it. And it this be so Good a bargain to them that
embrace it, and so very siker and sure, What, I pray, are we seeking? But that
this good bargain and the sufficient security thereof may be taken hold on, as
it is proposed: alter not the terms of it; and indeed it would be very
unreasonable to presume to do so, or so much as to desire an alteration of
them: for though we had them at our own contriving, We could never, by very
fat, contrive them so well: Nay let me say, if Angels were Preaching to you,
they would think it a Privilege to have access to mention His precious Name.
Now seeing it is the Great design of the Gospel to have sinners closing with
Christ on his own Terms: O do not frustrat the Grace of God: And seeing Grace
makes offer of Life Life and of Remission of sins to sinners, to save them
freely: let Grace get such sinners to save as it is seeking, and it shall be a
bargain.

Thirdly, To prosecute this yet a little further: ye would consider, that, as
there is a good bargain to be had through Christ and by Faith in him, and as
there is good security for it: so it is our Lords delight and good Pleasure,
and he is very desirous that sinners should make Application of it by Faith,
receive and rest on him and his righteousness, for making themselves eternally
Happy: We are not speaking of such a Happiness and security, that the Lord will
be angry at you if ye take hold of it: but of a happiness and security, that he
is seriously willing ye should receive: And he does most earnestly beseech you
to take hold of this Covenant on these Sweet and easy terms, that ye be
Heartily content and well Pleased with it. O sensible sinners, do ye indeed
believe this, when we Preach to you, that our Lord Jesus is as desirous to have
you saved, as ye are; and that his righteousness be closed with, as ye are to
have it? Nay more: that there was never a Soul more hungry and greedy (when
with a heart chock-full of desires after it) to Communicate, then he is
seriously willing to admit such a Soul to Commonion with him? Then, as ye would
do him a Pleasure (and it is all that ye can do) keep not a distance but step
to, and take what he Offers; not only the Sacrament, but himself in it, for
your head, Husband and Lord: and that ye may not Scare-stand, nor halt, to do
so: Consider, that there is not only a warrant to come, but that he calls you
to come, and is ready heartily to welcome you; come on his call; and his call
is no less broad, then the call of the Gospel; there is a warrant given you, on
your hearing of the Gospel, and quiting of your own righteousness, to receive
Christ and his Righteousness, and to admit of him to the exercise of his
offices about you according to the Covenant: And indeed we know not a truth of
the Gospel that has mo confirmations then this has, viz. That Christ the
Mediator is very willing and desirous, that sinners close with him, and get the
good of his Purchase. For the making out of which, take these following
Considerations. First, what is the great design of the Covenant, but this? As
we have it. Isaiah 61 1, 2, 3. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because
he has anointed me to Preach good tidings to the meek, He has sent me to bind
up the broken hearted, to Proclaim liberty to the Captives, to give to them
that mourn beauty for Ashes, the Oil of joy for Mourning, and the Garment of
Praise for the Spirit of Heaviness; and this is called the Proclaiming of the
acceptable year of the Lord: Wherein all the three Persons of the Blessed
Trinity concur, as is clear, verse. 1. Consider, Secondly, All his Offices, and
ye will find that they Preach and Proclaim the same thing; his Name is Jesus
because He saves his People from their sins: He is King, Priest and Prophet for
this end: and what says his Preaching and Corrospondent Prayer, John 17.
Father I will, that they whom thou have given me, be with me, but that he would
fain have them there? And what shall I say? Is there any proof of it, that can
be given beyond His Death? I lay down my life (says he) for my sheep; The
Salvation of lost Elect sinners went very near his heart; Therefore, when none
in Heaven nor on earth can help, then says he, Lo I come to do thy will, O my
God. Thirdly, Consider, with what Pleasure and delight he went about the work
of Redemption; As is very clear in that 40th. Psalm, where he heartsomly says,
Lo I come, I delight to do thy will: I even hasten to undertake it; And when he
is come, he says, John 4.34. It is my meat, to do the will of him that sent me
and to finish his work: and what work was that? Even to lay down his Life, to
gather the lost sheep of the house of Israel; to take away the seud that was
betwixt God and them, and to Reconcile them to him: and when it comes to the
very push of actual laying down his life; He will not open his month to divert
it: though he might have commanded more then twelve Legions of Angels, yet he
would not do it: for this cause (says he) Came I into this World. Fourthely,
Consider the end of all the Ordinances; wherefore are they instituted? what
says the word, but that Through this man is preached unto you forgiveness of
sins? What say Ministers, but that We are Ambassadors in Christ, stead,
beseching you to be Reconciled unto God? Which evidenceth Plainly, that Christ
would fain (to speak so) have peace made betwixt God and sinners, and them
saved: and what says the Sacrament, but even the words of the Text? This is
the new Covenant in my Blood shed for the Remission of the sins of many: And
can we think on the end of these Ordinances, but we must also think on Christ's
willingness, that sinners should make Application of him and of his Purchase?
Fifthly, Consider further, How he esteems of a sinners coming to him, There is
(says he) Joy in Heaven at the Conversion of a sinner: We may say, that it is
the gladness of his heart, when any sinner comes home to him: Therefore it is
said, that the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand, and he shall see
of the travel of his soul and be Satisfied, Isaiah 53.10, 11. It is
Satisfaction to him for all the Travel of his Soul, to see sinners coming in
and getting good of him: and in the Song. He is said to feed in the Gardens and
to be gathering lilies; Yea, that the day of Souls being espoused to him, is
the day of the gladness of his heart. Sixthly, Consider, how weighted (to speak
so with reverence to him) our Lord is, when sinners will not make use of him,
it is accounted by him, as it were; an affronting of him, Even a troading of the
Blood of the Covenant under foot, and an accounting of it to be an unholy
thing, a sort and degree of doing despite to the Spirit of Grace: He who could
look sometimes on the wrath of God and not shed a tear; yet, when he came to
Jerusalem, weeped over it: And upon the other hand, O! what complacency has he
in a sinners coming home to him, which makes him sweetly smile and rejoice.
Seventhly, Consider his exceeding great forbearance toward sinners, while they
are straying, and his exceeding hearty welcoming of them, when they return.
Let an inquest (to say so) be led on his Procedure with all the hearers of the
Gospel, that are here on earth, and with all that are in Heaven and hell, and
all of them will be constrained to subscribe to the truth of this, that he is
full of long-suffering: Does he not spare even the vessels of wrath fitted to
destruction? And does He not, only spare his own, but Pity them as a Father
pitieth his Children? And that wonderful wescom of the Father to his Prodigal
Son is nothing to Christ's welcoming of a repenting sinner, being but a dark
Resemblance of it; He casts not up to him his bygone faults, Neither says,
what is this you have done, miserable wretch? No such word; but This is my Son
that was dead, and is alive, that was lost and now is found: Believe it, O
Believe it, (which is the very scope of the Parable) Our Lord Jesus is as glad
in a Holy way at a sinners coming home. Eighthly, Consider, how easy our Lord
is to be pleased with any honest mint or essay that is made of returning to
him; He is so very willing, that a sinner make Application of his
Righteousness, that where there is reality, he will (as it were) take half a
Faith for Faith, were it even, but like a Smoking flax or bruised Reed, or a
grain of mustard seed; He will take a sincere resolution to confess, for the
confession of sin; which is clear, Psalm 32. I said (says David) I will
confess my Transgression, and thou forgav^st the Iniquity of my sin: If he had
proposed the offer of life on such terms, as would have wearied us all our
days, we ought to have Judged him willing that we should partake of it, for it
cost him very dear; But when it is not Abraham's Faith only, but any Faith how
weak so ever, if sound, that he graciously accepts; How does it set forth his
great willingness? Him that comes to me (says he) I will in no wise cast out;
The word is doubled in the Original I will not, Not, to show the holy
passionatness of our Lords desire, and his exceeding great willingness to have
sinners closing with him; So Isaiah 45. Salvation is promised even to a Look,
look unto me all the ends of the Earth and be Saved; and if sinners cannot well
look, think but honestly and let their heart yield and it shall be a bargain;
He that is athirst let him come, Revel. 22. And if there be scarce the pain of
Hunger or Thirst, The Spirit and the Bride say come, and whosoever will, let
him come and take of the Water of Life freely; And this willingness is nothing
else, but the thought and desire of an heart consenting to accept of his offer:
Or if this be not little enough, there is less yet, Psalm. 37.7. Rest in the
Lord, the word (as it is on the Margent and Psalm. 62.1.) is, be silent to the
Lord; If the heart cannot so well and distinctly say Amen to the bargain, Let
it (as it were) hold its tongue or hold its peace; let it be silent, say
nothing against it, or give a silent quiet answer, or by way (...) Approbation,
and Acceptance, keep silence; and (...) shall be accep^ed: O wonderful
stooping! Does n^ this declare and manifestly Preach the exceeding gre^^
willingness, that our sweet Lord Jesus has to Communicate and apply his
purchase to sinners? Ninthl^ Consider the Persons on whom he confers the offer,
a^^ the manner how he Prosecuts it; and it may yet furth^^ hold forth, how
seriously willing he is that sin should welcome it, and be made up by it; who
(...) pray, are called, Luke 14 21? It Is the Poor, the Blin^ the Maimed, the
Halt, the Lame, etc. And are the any that can say, they are worse? If thou say,
I can (...) nothing, I am Maimed and cannot come: The Gosp^^ bids call the
Cripple, and provides Him a Chariot of (...) wood of Lebanon, Paved with love,
and having ((...) speak so) all the Seats and cushions of it of love, Ca^^
3.10. And gives stilts or crutches of Grace to under prop, and Eagles wings to
carry them: If thou be (...) confused body, and worst not what to do, it bids,
ca^ the Blind; If thou be Poor, Blind, Miserable, Wret^ed and Naked: and yet
having conceited and fa^ci^^ that thou wast Rich, Thou art not excluded for all
that (...) for, Revel. 3.18. Laodicea consists of a Hypocritie Pack, and
company of Lukewarm Professors, w^^ are so loathsome to Christ, that He
threatens to spe^^ them out of his mouth: And yet to such, even to suc^^ he
says, I counsel thee to buy of me, etc. And if the be invited, who can exempt
or exclude themselv^ from the offer or bargain? Do not these things mo^^
Convincingly and Irrefragably demonstrat his willin^ness? When there is not a
sinner that is either Poo^ proud, vain, Hypocritical, etc. But he is included
(...) the call of the Gospel? Tenthly, Consider his urgen^ and pressingn^ss in
making and bearing home the offer: O how long-suffering is He! And with what
Patience does he wait on? It Is not an Embassage, that is broken up, if it be not
presently closed with, as a hastie-man does: but All the day have I stretche^
out my hands to again-saying people, Isaiah 65. Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often
would I have gathered thee, etc. Matthew. 23. How does wisdom stand and press her
invitation, Prove. 1 20. and 8.1, 2. etc. Ezekiel. 18.31.32. Turn you at my Rebuke,
why w^ll ye die? Luke 14.23. Go to the high ways and compel them to come in.
1 John 3.23. This is his Com^andment, that ye believe on the Name of the Son of
God: It Is not left as an indifferent thing at sinners option, to do or not do,
but the same Authority, that enjoines keeping the Sabbath and that forbids
Cursing and Swearing, does lay on this Command of Believing, Come to the
Wedding, Beleve, man and woman, and be saved: and what is all this to the
bowels of Mercy, Grace, and Love that are in him? His Belly is like Ivory,
overlaid with Saphirs: His face is white and Ruddy, a part whereof this is: and
yet it is nothing (to speak so) to the principal copy, which is his heart,
that is a great depth, even the very Center and Element (as it were) of love,
God is love (says John) as if he were nothing else but love: and what a love
must it be, where he is (to speak so) turned into love in the person of Christ?
Angels cannot to the full consider of it nor conceive it: Your hearts cannot
reach it: sure there is much, wonderfully much ground here to lay it for an
undoubted truth, that our Lord Jesus is exceedingly desirous of the Salvation
of sinners and of many sinners: and is in a great readiness to make his
Righteousness forthcoming to them, and heartily to welcome all that come to him.

The Second use is of Exhortation: and ye may at first blush see, whither it
runs, Even to stir us up to accept of and embrace these good news with glad
hearts, is there here a good bargain and a sure way through Faith to make use
of it? And is Christ so willing to Communicate it? What shall I say to you! Is
it not a pity to miss it? Nay would ye do Christ a pleasure? then lay weight on
his Righteousness, and give him sinful Souls to be saved by him: if we sought
great or hard things from you to please him, would you not judge your selves
oblidged to grant them? But when he says on the matter, give me your Souls to
be saved, and I shall account that Satisfaction to me for all the travel of my
Soul: O How unspeakably great is your Obligation readily and cheerfully to
grant so loving and reasonable a request l If such a gracious offer had never
been made. It would have been, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? And there
would have been a mighty great scaring and trembling to draw near: but when it
is not, to the Mount that cannot be touched, not to Moses that we are called to
come, but to a Savior, whom ye cannot please better then, Nay not at all, but
by receiving of him, and whom in some respect ye cannot displease at all, if ye
receive him, let me beseech and obtest you, as ye would not be found guilty of
treading this blood of the Covenant under foot, and as ye would not for ev^r
debar your selves from Remission of sins with him; make use, O make use of this
Propitiation for sin and for procuring your Pardon and peace; would to God this
were the fruit of such a days work; for indeed it is our great work, and the
very scope of all our Preaching; And behold, I Proclaim to you, that Remission
of sins is to be had through his Blood, and that there shall not be any
upbraiding of you, nor casting up of bygones, if ye will indeed receive him and
close with him, on his own sweet, easy and very reasonable terms: O then sit
not this urgent Call, and the day of your merciful Visitation.

And to press this Exhortation a little, Consider, that Grace has a Throne and
shall triumph in this Gospel either in your g^ining, or in being avenged upon
you for your despising of its richest and freest offers: Let us, I Pray, reason
the matter with you a little? And First, Are there not sinners here? There is
not a design in this Gospel to save any others but sinners; and if so, to you
is this Salvation set, who by Nature are sinners, enemies, and at feud with
God: The Doctrine of this Gospel carries in its bosom Remission of sins: would
to God ye were suitably affected with sin, and Judging your selves, that so ye
might be in some Capacity to receive it. S^condly, Tell me what is it that ye
would be at? Is it Remission of sins? It Is here: would ye have the Covenant and
Promises? here they are: Is it Christ himself that ye would have, because ye
dare not trust to a promise without a Cautioner? Here he is: or would ye have
Heaven and be Eternally happy? It Is also here. Consider then, I beseech you,
what is in your Offer: dare you say, that the security is not valid, good and
sufficient? And if ye should, there are many witnesses in Heaven against you,
and also the Sacrament on Earth, which now is offered to confirm you: This
bargain therefore, and its security must be receiv'dr else woe unto you for
ever: This word which we now Preach, Nay these stones shall bear witness
against you, that our Lord Jesus was willing to save you and every one of you,
and ye would not: And therefore your Blood shall be required at your own hand,
and He found without any the least Culpable accession to it. Thirdly, Ye are
either to Communicate to day, or ye are only to be hearers and Spectators:
whether the one or the other, Is there not a necessity that ye close this
bargain. If ye be to Communicate, will ye take the Bread and wine and misken and
slight Christ? If so, ye will eat and drink your own Damnation: would you have
the Character of a right Communicant? This is it, that ye renounce your own,
and trust to his Righteousness, and take the Sacrament for a confirmation of
your interest in it: If ye come thus, ye shall be welcome, for this Ordinance is
appointed for this very end: if ye be not to Communicate, this word of the
Gospel comes to you: though ye have secluded your selves from the Sacrament,
either through Ignorance or scandal: It might be a sweet Communion to you, If
yet Christ get a welcome, and it should, I assure you in his Name, make way to
a new communion here or in Heaven. But Fourthly, I would a little mote
particularly beseech you to consider, that ye must either give Christ a welcome
or not, a yea or a naysay, a grant or a denial, for there is no mean or middle:
This day shall not pass and go by without a hit or a miss (to speak so) Christ
will not knock at your door, and nothing follow or be done: It will either be,
that Christ was at such a time (ruzed or) commended, and made offer of, and his
People would have none of him: or that the heart opened as the heart of Lydia
unto the Lord, and that Salvation came to the Soul, as it did to Zacheus his
house: your time is but short and uncertain, Ye know not if ye shall come
another Sabbath to hear: some that now speak to you, and some that hear are
daily removed: And this bids you make haste to creep in to him quickly without
longer delay, while his arms are stretched out to receive and embrace you:
There are several sorts among you, that keep at a distance from Christ: but I
would have all of you soberly to think, whether ye will say Yea or Nay: There
is here what may silence and satisfy any Soul that thwarts with the call of
God: Can ye say, that there is any better bargain, any better security, or any
heartier call and invitation? Let us come and reason together says the Lord
(Isaiah 1.18, 19) Though your sins be as Crimson, they shall be as white as
Snow, though they be red as Scarlet, they shall be as Wool: if ye be willing
and obedient ye shall eat the good of the land, but if ye refuse and rebel ye
shall be destroyed. Our Lords Blood is of that efficacy, that it can make
Crimson and Scarlet-colored sins, white, white as Snow and Wool: Why do ye
then linger, stick, stand or halt?

Ye will, it may be, Object and say. First, I would fain come, if I durst: but
Consider, I pray you, that it is Christ and the Covenant, and Grace on the
Throne that call you: and this is their voice, Thou have spoken and done evil
as thou could, yet return unto me: and therefore fear and tremble, yet come:
fear and bring your sins with you to the Fountain to be washen, and to a skirt
of his love, to be covered thereby: and you shall on your coming be cleansed
and covered. But it may be, ye will Next Object and say, I would fain come, but
I cannot come, for Answer, Let me ask you, Is there a Soul in hell this day
that can say I would fain have come and could not come? That which we seek of
you is, to make no long, tedious or toilsome Voyage, if there be honesty: it is
only, that when Christ is come to you ye will be willing to receive him, and if
ye thus come, ye are Believers: Do not, I beseech you, mistake, in thinking
(and thereby obstructing your own coming) that persons must first be Believers
and then come to Christ, No, but first ye must come with the little glimmering
that ye have, and ^ame as ye are, and it will go with you; his Chariot is
waiting for you, and the very Cripplest of you that cannot come of your selves
to Christ; if ye be willing to close with him on his own terms. He shall come
to you.

But it is like, some will in the Third place. Object and say, Alace, I am very
indisposed to come. For Answer I shall grant, it may indeed be true: but yet
consider who are invited, it is the Poor, Blind, Halt, Maimed, Wretched and
Miserable: O what unfitness have such! and yet none of them are excepted
against: I would have none to be presumptuous and vain: but if indeed ye would
fain come, ye cannot come so indisposed, as the bargain will on that account be
cast: It will not be the want of a Disposition that shall cast it, else the
Cripple and Blind, and Luke warm Laodiceans had never been invited: whether is
a suitable disposition of your own making or of Christ's? Sure it is of his: and
can ye expect ought from him without coming to him, or Believing in him? But
Fourthly, Some will Object and say, Alace I have often come and broken away
again, How can I then Believe that I am invited? For Answer, I would desire you
to Consider, whether that Objection tends, Even to question the truth of the
Gospel; our Lord Jesus says, He came to save sinners, and ye say I would fain
know if that be true or not; if ye be Poor, Blind, Miserable, Naked, etc. And
have need, He commands us to invite and call such; and it is the way of unbelief
to make them scare at Christ and stand furthest a back from him, who have most
need to draw near to him; if ye have come and broken afterward, Come again: and
where a knot has not holden, cast a new one: But alace! There is a sort of
Careless Atheists and secure Hypocrites, whom this Gospel strikes dead: and
carnal worldlings, who have no serious thoughts of what is coming: I would
pose such, and ask you, Care ye for your Souls? care ye for Remission of sins?
Or care ye for the enjoying of God? If ye do, then sure, it is unspeakably of
your concernment to consider and close with the call and offer of this Gospel:
And if there be any of you, that have loved your Idols, and after them will go,
I would desire you in soberness to say to it, will ye prefer any Idol to
Christ, the Creature to the Creator, the temporal finfull being of your body to
the Eternal well-being of both Soul and Body? If ye will, then be sure, that
this Conviction, in your Judgment and Conscience, will go along with such a
cursed Resolution, that Christ and Heaven were the absolutely best Bargain.

The Third Use Serves to Cheer and Solace sinners, that have betaken themselves
to Christ, O All ye who are glad to hear tell of such a Savior, and whose
heart is even now content to take him and to Renounce all Idol^ for his sake:
We have, First; Remission of sins, No^ only to offer, but even to proclaim
freely to you; H^^ that believes is past from death to life, and shall not com^
into condemnation: There is no Condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus,
who walk not after the flesh, bu^ after the Spirit, as it is Romans 8.1. If ye
say, what will become of the sins that we are now under the guilt of? I answer,
they shall be freely forgiven: in those daye^ and at that time (says the Lord
by the Prophet Jeremy Chap. 50.20.) The Iniquity of Israel shall be sought for
and there shall be none, and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found:
for I will Pardon them whom I reserve: When all the books shall be cast open,
there shall be nothing found to Charge upon a Believing Elect, It Is God that
justifies, who shall condemn? sin as Pardoned to you it was to Abraham and to
David: and Heaven is made as sure to you, as it was to them, who are now in it:
ye have the same Surety, the same Savior, the same Covenant. Secondly, What
Promise would ye have? I know ye need many; but is ^here any of all the
Promises that is not in the Covenant? Yea, ye have the Covenant and Christ
both, for He is given for a Covenant to you, All things are yours, (as it is, 1
Cor. 3.) Whether Paul or Apollos or Cephas, or the world, or Life or Death, or
things present or things to come, all are yours, and ye are Christ's; Ye have a
title and right to all the Promises, and may comfort your selves in the assured
hope of the Performance of them: O! That many were in capacity to receive this
consolation. Thirdly, There may be a wearisome time here, and who knows what
trials and Scatterings may overtake you, What times may go over you, ere ye get
another Communion? It were best then, that ye who seriously mind to cleave to
Christ and his Covenant, were making for them: and therefore lay up this
Consolation, O Believers, Comfort your selves in this Blessed bargain, ye have
Christ and Remission of sins, take the Sacrament as a Seal thereof: There is a
day coming, when ye will drink it new in the Kingdom of Heaven; O cheer your
selves in the hope of it, and for the time in this Resemblance of it, when ye
see a poor man personating our Lord Jesus Christ, and by his warrant offering
him to you: The day is coming when there shall be no Resemblance, no Temple, no
Ministers, no Ordinances, no Sacrament: but ye shall drink of that new wine, the
grapes whereof grow on Christ Jesus the Tree of Life in the midst of the
Paradise of God, Even the wine of the Consolation of Glory, that will keep you
in a continual Holy Ravishment, when all fears shall be wiped away, and ye
shall have fully Satisfying Blessedness in the Immediate vision and fruition of
God: And since it is so, Let the joy of the Lord be your strength: There shall
not a Believer come to the Lords Table this day, but there is a day coming when
he and she shall drink it new, without interruption Eternally, in the Kingdom
of Heaven: Father (says Christ, John 17.) I will, that these whom thou have
given me, may be with me, where I am, to Behold my Glory: and again, the Glory
which thou gave me I have given them: and says he, Revel. 3.12. I will write
upon him my new Name, and the Name of the City of my God, etc. That is, the
Communication and Participation of the Glory of the head, as the Members are
Capable. Labor, O Labor to have your Appetits Sharpened and your longing
desires quickened to taste of this new wine: It will be fresh, strong and sweet
there: And seeing the Lord allows you such consolation, take it, and take the
Sacrament as a Pledge of it: and think with thy self. O Believer in Christ,
what shall I, sinful and unworthy I, ere long sit with Christ at his Table in
Glory? and is this a sign and Representation of it under a vail? What manner
of Person ought I to be in all Holy Conversation and Godliness? ought I not to
love him much, and to continue with him in all his Tentations. The Kingdom will
Superabundantly make up all: The very first draught of this new Wine will make
sighing and So^row for ever to flee away: Let your Souls be comforted in what
ye have, and in the expectation of what is coming. There are great things
coming; ye have a Rich and liberal, a free and frank bestower, and notably
good Security. Come therefore all of you to the due use-making of the Covenant
and of the Sacrament in reference to this end. And the Lord himself, that calls
you, enable you to come aright, that it may be a closed, Sealed, and confirmed
bargain betwixt him and you this day, that ye may have ground to say, This is
the day which the Lord has made, we will be glad and rejoice in it,

A Thanksgiving Sermon after the Communion, the last that ever the Author
Preached, on such an occasion, at Glasgow.
On Matthew. 26. Verse. 29. But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of
this fruit of the Vine, until that day, when I drink it new with you in my
Fathers Kingdom.
SERMON II.
OUr Blessed Lord Jesus is now near taking leave of his Apostles, and preparing
them for the storm they were to meet with; and for the consolation of them and
of all his followers to the end of the World, He instituteth this Ordinance of
the Communion, to be His Love-token in His absence; that all his People might
be confident of his respect to them, as well as to those then Present; and that
all of them might thereby be put and kept in the Remembrance of him, till his
coming again.

He has given them a Massy and marrowy Sum of the Gospel in the words
immediately Preceding; This Cup (says he) is my Blood of the New Testament
shed for the Remission of the sins of many; To which he subjoyns, partly for
warning, partly for Consolation, these now read, But I say unto you, I will not
drink henceforth of the fruit of the Vine, till I drink it new with you in my
Fathers Kingdom: as if he had said, though now we be sitting here at the
Communion Table heartsomely together, I tell you, that I and ye will have no mo
Communions here on earth; The particle But is to give them a watchword; and
yet according to his blessed manner and wont, he has the best word hindmost,
and tells them glad news on the back of it; For they might say, Wo's us, sweet
Master, will we never meet again at a Communion? think not so, says he; we
shall yet meet again and have a sweet Communion in Heaven: This then is a very
heartsome dismiss: though he sends them away, advertising them of a storm
coming, and though they knew not well what was before them; yet he heartens and
encourages them with a Promise, that they shall have this Wine new, or the
thing signified by it, with a far other relish, in Glory: and that then he and
they should have good days of it: I shall say no more to the exposition, scope,
or Division of the words. Take this one Doctrine from them, and then a few
things on the Connection, for Use.

The great Doctrine, Then, employed is this, That Believers will have a sweet
Communion in Christ's Fathers Kingdom, in Heaven. This is Expressly in the Text,
and confirmed by other Scriptures, as namely, Luke 22.29. Ye are they that have
continued with me in my Temptations, and I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my
Father has appointed unto me: That ye may eat and Drink at my Table in my
Kingdom: This is that Communion, even a partaking of Christ's Glory in his
Fathers Kingdom, and with him in it; and John 17. verse. 22. The Glory which
thou gave me I have given them; and verse. 24. Father I will that they whom
thou have given me may be with me to Behold my Glory, which thou have given me;
which words set forth, not only the certainty of the thing; a glorious place
and day, and the excellency of the Feast, but also a sort of Peremptoriness in
reference thereto, Father I will, says he: when he Prayed, that the Cup might
depart from him, he does it Conditionally and with submission; but when he
prays for Communion in Glory to him and his followers, there is no Submission
(to speak so) because it was according to the Covenant of Redemption, and
therefore he is absolut and Holily peremptory in it, And the Father hears him
always: So in the Epistles written to the seven Churches of Asia, Rev. 2. and
3. It is Promised by our Lord, to him that overcomes, that he will give him
the hidden Manna, the white stone, and New Name; to sit with him on his Throne:
Let all Believers on earth be gathered together, they cannot tell what this is,
what a Manna what a Communion this will be; it quite transcends all experience,
all expression and conception: Only in the Text 'its called, 1. Wine, which is
a very cordial thing, it is Meat indeed and Drink indeed. 2. It Is called new
Wine; we taste of it here, but it is new and has another relish there. 3. It Is
in a sweet place, not in any Earthly house or upper Chamber, not in a material
Temple made with hands, but in Christ's Fathers Kingdom, that new Jerusalem,
that Tabernacle of God, where God dwells with Angels and Glorified Saints;
the City paved with pure Gold; the Gates whereof are Pearl; the foundations of
the Wall whereof are garnished with all manner of Precious stones; which has
no Sun, but the Glory of God and of the Lamb is the light thereof. O Believers,
who have some of you, but Cot-houses, smoky holes here, ye shall have Mansions
of Glory there, admirably good accommodation: it is with excellent and non such
company, even with Christ; For he says, that He will drink this wine new with
us in his Fathers Kingdom. It Is a great matter to get leave to sit down with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, David and the Prophets Elijah, Isaiah, Jeremiah,
Ezekiel, Daniel, and the rest of them; with John the Baptist, with Paul, John,
Peter, and the other Apostles, and with the whole Congregation of the
firstborn; but it is more, to drink the new wine with Christ himself, in
heaven, who is (to say so) the very heart of Heaven. This Communion has in it
these Five notable qualifications. First, It Is immediate: all our Communion here
is mediat, Ordinances and Ministers interveen and come betwixt us and him; and
there is need of Faith in order to it; but in that Communion above, there is no
intermediat mean, there we shall see his face, as it is said, Rev. 22.4. There,
is no Temple, no Ministers, no Preaching, no light of candle or Sun there, but
the Lamb and the Lord God who enlightens it; the Tabernacle of Ordinances will
then be taken down, every thing which is in part will be done away, when that
which is perfect is come: The Lord shall feed, and the Lamb shall lead us by
these living waters. Secondly, There is in it a sharing of the same Glory with
the Mediator, He and we shall drink of one Cup, sit at one Table, and sit on
one Throne, Rev. 3.21. We shall partake of Christ's Glory: I will (says he)
John 17.24. that they Behold my Glory; there we get eminently The new Name and
the Name of the City of Christ's God, Rev. 3. there his Name will be in our
foreheads, Rev. 22.4. And our vile bodies will be made conformable to Christ's
Glorious Body. Phil. 3.21. Our spirits will be made pure as he is pure; when we
shall be raised in incorruption, we shall bear the Image of the Heavenly Adam,
and our bodies shall be made Spiritual: It cannot be told what this will be, to
be made Partakers of Christ's Glory, when the fullness of the God head shall be
Communicated to us Ojectively, and when God shall be all in all. Thirdly, It Is
a Communion satisfieing completely; If Christ's Communion be full, ours shall be
full; in this Communion none shall complain of desertion, none shall desire
more of the Spirit, or more consolation; for it shall be full; then shall we
Satisfieingly know the love of Christ that passes knowledge, and be filled
with all the fullness of God; this water of Life will Satisfy to the full the
greatest thirst of such as long for Christ; there shall not be (to speak so) an
empty Corner in the most capacious Soul; thou Poor hungry and thirsty, Empty
and indigent Believing Soul shall then be full and kept full (according to
Creature capacity) to the very Brim; and thy heart that is now narrow and
straightened, shall be widened end enla ged then, to take in this sweet and
Satisfieing: there shall not be one vessel in Glory, but it shall be filled
brimfull with the new Wine of these strong Consolations of God, being dilated,
Capacitated, Elevated and enlarged for that very end. Fourthly, This Communion
is uninterrupted, there shall be nothing to mar it, no Cross, no Sin, no
Temptation to sin, For no unclean thing enters within the Gates of the new
Jerusalem, no Curse no Cry in those Streets, no weeping, no Sorrow, no sighing
for any thing past, nor Horror nor fear from the apprehension of any evil
coming: nor any the least mis-turning of the Lambs Song of Praise; the heart
shall (to speak so) be so stringed and bended, as it shall never again slack in
its bent, but be still kept at its highest note, our Harps shall never hang
any more on the Willows, but we shall keep them still in our hand chanting the
Praises of the Redeemer to that new Heavenly Tune never heard on earth, with
Psalms of victory in our hands and Crowns of Glory on our heads, following the
Lamb whithersoever He goes. Fifthly, It is an Eternal communion, we shall
drink for ever with him and be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of his
house, and made Holily drunk with the River of his pleasures, with whom is the
Fountain of Life, and in whose light we shall eminently see light; whose Well
of life is always running, in Whose presence is fullness of joys, and at his
right hand Pleasures for evermore; though through all Eternity thousands and
Millions will be drinking of this new Wine, yet it shall never be the less, but
is and shall be still fresh and flowing.

Now for Application; Let me ask you, do ye believe this, that there is such a
day coming, and that these are the true and Faithful sayings of God? O! If ye
all that hear me this day did indeed believe it; the belief of it, sure, is
very suitable and would make a very sweet life; ye will never be Holy, ye will
never aright fear nor love God, ye will never hate sin, nor be heartsome in his
Service, neither will ye be truly thankful, till ye really Believe it: I am
afraid, if Atheists, Earthly Wretches, drunkards, Tipplers, Cursers, Swearers,
Hypocrites, etc. Were singled out and Separated from among us, they would be
found to be but a small number who Believe this: Do ye or can ye Believe it,
that have your Portion in this life, and seek no more? Nay, believers, if ye
indeed Believe it, why are ye so heartless? Why envy ye the poor prosperity of
the men of the world? Why do ye not press after this mark and Prize? If ye
believed it suitably, your hearts would laugh within you, your Spirits would
rejoice, your faces would some way shine; and what is spoken of this day, would
have a Divine splendour and luster in your eyes; If you believe it, why is it
not your work and business to live so, as ye may hope to drink of this cup of
this new Wine with Christ in Heaven? Though ye should drink water all your
days, this Wine will abundantly compense that; though now the bread of some of
you be but brown, this feast of truly Royal dainties is before you: our
Christian friends that are gone are feeding sweetly on it. Long, O Believers to
be with them, and take it not ill, though ye be here somewhat straightened and
kept scarce, and have but a little portion, a small pittance and scant measure
of the things of this world, when others fare well and Sumptuously, live high,
are Gorgiously apparelled: Your Feast and Royal Robes are before you. The Rich
and great men of this world, whose portion is in this life care little for Poor
bodies that seek G^d: care ye as little for their portion as they care for
yours; they shall not, a little hence, get a drink, nay not a drop of cold
water, when ye shall drink this new Wine, this Royal wine in abundance: Christ's
Servants shall eat, when they shall be hungry, his servants shall drink when
they shall be thirsty: they shall sing for joy of heart, when the others shall
mourn and howl for vexation of spirit: as it is Isaiah 65.13. O seek after
clearness of interest in him, that ye may thoroughly Believe, Love, and long for
this life. This heartsome Communion with Christ in Heaven is reserved for them
that keep Communion with him here on earth, and to them it is here promised: I
will not say, that none can get Heaven, but those who get the Sacrament: but
this I dare boldly say, that those who have not Communion with Christ here,
shall never get Communion with him hereafter: and whoever Communicate honestly
here shall have Communion with Christ in Glory: be ye comforted who believe in
Christ, who Covenant honestly with him, and who hope in his mercy. For He and
ye together shall have a completely full, immediate, uninterrupted and eternal
Communion in Heaven, that shall new end. Need ye to be confirmed in the truth
of this? hi^ word may serve you, and ye have the Sacrament besid^ he has left
his word to hearten poor Believers und^ all their inward and outward troubles,
under their Sp^ritual maladies and bodily sicknesses and infirmities, a^ to
assure them for their comfort that there is a go^^ life coming and be has
given the Sacrament as a pledg^ of it: will ye then consider seriously, whether
this wo^^ belong to you, and if ye may with his allowance hea^ten your selves
from it, that there is a day coming the ye shall get Communion with Christ in
Heaven: H^ does not mean, that all that get the Sacrament get the Communion,
For Judas, who not unprobably got the Sacrament, is excluded. Would ye know
then, wh^ have been honest Communicants to day, that may expect this Heavenly
Communion? And me thinks, tha^ every one of you, that has any serious concern
for yo^ Souls, will be roused here, and greedily longing for marks and
evidences of that. But if any of you would be at evidences to make you secure,
I declare I have none such to give you: But I shall hint at Two or Three which
may be as directions in duty to you who min^ honestly: The First whereof is,
Luke 22.29. Ye ar^ they that have continued with me in my Temptation, an^ I
appoint unto you a Kingdom: here it is clear, that the^ Two go together, viz.
Continuing with Christ in hi^ temptations, and Coming to his Kingdom: In a wor^
it is not to be religious for the fashion, but in earnest: is not to be
Religious for a day or two, or in some trials only, but to continue in it, and
with him in h^^ Temptations, what ever they be: Not only to be R^ligious, when
religion is countenanced, but when it discountenanced, and persecution is met
with for it sake, and when there are many snares and temptations to draw you
away; it is a steadfast abiding with Christ in trying times, Summer and Winter so
to say: If a blast of trial and temptation come, and ye grow giddy and
wavering in the truth, Or if a spirit of Profanity come (and look for it, and
lay your account with it) and ye be ready to laugh and give in your taunt,
gybe, and mock with the Profane, against the power of Godliness and the Godly,
away with your Religion, it is not a continuing with Christ in his Temptations:
This ma^k puts you to work (and such marks are safest,) To him that over
comes, is a word often repeated, Rev. 2. and 3. and set always before the
Promise of Glory and Communion with Christ in Heaven: On such and on such only
will Christ write his new Name, and set them on His Throne. A Second Mark is,
Ye that do indeed keep Communion with Christ here and war against your lusts,
without any allowed peace, truce or cessation of Arms, till ye get them
brought down, routed and ruined by an entire victory, shall partake of this
Communion in Glory: If ye do not delibera^ly give up with Christ to keep
company with Idols, ye may have hope: but the unbelieving and fearful, that
cannot endure to look a Lust nor a trial for Christ in the face: and who, it
may be, are just now wearying of such a day and Sermon, and it is even as a
prison to them to be restrained so long from worldly businesses and pleasures,
are utterly excluded from all hope, while they remain such Serious Souls will,
belike, here say, we are fighting, but we come not speed; I Answer, Let not
that discourage you, if there be hope to come speed in end; continue in the
fight, and you shall come speed; Christ is thy Captain and a Captain of
Salvation, at whose back none fell, so as not to arise. A Third Mark is, John
17.6.7.8. Where Christ is Praying for the Disciples that they may be admitted
to this Communion, an^ says he, I gave them the words which thou gave me and
they have received them; The Believer receive^ Christ's words and keeps them,
and makes exception against none of them; when he takes one word, he cast not
at another; he takes not one piece of the Covenant of Grace and rejects
another; but universally he approves and accepts of all Christ's words, and more
pa^ticularly, and in a special manner, of the Command o^ believing; Thus
speaks the Psalmist, Psalm. 119.128 I esteem all thy Commandments concerning all
things t^ be right; So says Christ of the Disciples, I have given them thy
words and they have received them; and particularly (as if he had said) I
proposed a special suit to them, that they would be friends with thee, and be
reconciled to thee through Faith in me; and they received that word, Therefore
Glorify them. Ye may Possibly think these marks difficult, but would you have
a Religion that will put you to no pains? Such marks are high and hard indeed
to flesh and Blood, and to you^ lusts; but what loss is in mortifying these? Is
it any prejudice to you to receive Christ's words and to keep them, and to
follow him in his temptations, when an hundred fold more then ye can lose is to
be gotten by so doing? And therefore we declare to you from the word of the
Lord, if ye resolve not to live, as having on yo^ the wedding garment, we
cannot say that ye shall ea^ and drink with Christ at his Table in his Kingdom.

In the Next place, According to the Method Proposed, Ye would consider the
Connection, and how thi^ Purpose comes in; even thus, as if the Lord had said ye
have now an excellent Communion-day; but ye and I will have no more together in
this World; whence, Observe, that the best Communion day that Gods People have
here has a BUT in it, or something that makes it appear defective; Only in
that Communion in Heaven there in no But, no defect: And it implies. First, His
saying to them, ye have now been at the Communion, but ere long ye shall meet
with Temptation and trouble; and as he said, so within a very little it came to
pass. So may I say, we are here now, but do we know how soon a temptation may
assault and prevail? The Tempter is waiting on and has, it is like, given in
his Petition for a Permission to essay such and such a person, by some suitable
Temptation, ere to morrow; and he offers, it may be, to make his Hypocrisy to
be discovered: and it will be a sad Matter, if any of you stumble and be
overtaken with the temptation. Secondly, It looks to the scattering that was
coming; we will not (as if we had said) be all together at the Communion again;
For it is written, I will smite the shepherd and the Sheep shall be scattered.
It is more then Probable that we shall not all drink and eat at one Table
again; are there not some both Ministers and People dead and gone since the
last Communion? And ye may want some of both, ere ye get another: and may there
not some sad diversion, trouble or Confusion arise, to the offending of some
and laying of them aside? Nay, some may be offended at these same Ordinances:
Satan has many ways to break in upon us: nay let me tell you, that a cloud of
persecution may come and cover us, that we shall not dare to come, or may
scruple to come to such an Ordinance, though we be now datted and (as it were)
Dandled on his knee. Thirdly, It may look to their being deprived of Christ's
company and bodily presence. And who knows, but there may be a cloud of
desertion on Ordinances, and a vailing of Christ's presence? I forewarn you that
it is to be seared; which says, we should keep him well while we have him, and
not stir him up till he please, as the Brides frequent desire and resolution is
in the Song. Fourthly, It may look to death that is coming, and will put an end
to all Communions here: after which there will be no more Communions on Earth.
And indeed, it is suitable, that ye were now bethinking your selves, what if we
never get another? Ought we not then to feed well on this? If any thing have
been amiss or wanting, Labor to get it made up: O Believers in Christ, take
hom a Sealed Covenant with you, and read it over and over again: If any defect
has been on your part, write it yet in: for if any blank be, it is certainly on
our side and not on Christ's: and indeed, it is Gods great mercy, that a Seal of
his Covenant may be useful a long time after it is gotten: slighted Baptisms
and abused Communions may be yet useful, if we could make the right use of
them: and I do not question but this Communion did the Disciples more good
after Christ was gone from them, then it did now when he was with them at
Table. Fifthly, It may look to Eternity. Now we are living men and women on
Earth but within a little, we will be gone, and our place will know us no more;
very probably, within Twenty, Thirty, Forty or Fifty years, we shall be
either drinking of this new Wine in Heaven above, or of that Cup of the unmixed
Wine of the wrath of God, having no rest day nor night. O Profane Atheist,
unbeliever, hollow hearted Hypocrite, and slighter of Christ all thy days,
what a bitter draught will that be, when God shall put into thy hand the Cup of
his I^dignation? which shall be for ever poured out unto thee, and shall never
come from thy head. O drunkard, tippler, and belly God, be think thy self, how
that draught will go down with thee: The Lord with his one foot on Earth and
the other on the Sea, with an uplifted hand to Heaven, has Sworn, that within
a little, time shall be no more. Ye that are young People may, if ye will, follow
the sight of your eyes and the way of your own hearts, and may take you
Pleasure in the days of your youth, but know and remember that God will bring
you to Judgment: Your time is wearing away, and ye will wear away: it is but a
little, and ye will hear no more Preachings, and get no more warnings. O take them
in time, if ye be wise, and the Lord persuade you so to do.

In the Third place, The scope both of the advertisment and consolation is
observable, when he was giving them the Cup and told them, that it is the Cup of
the new Testament in his blood, He subjoins, but I say unto you, I will not
drink henceforth, etc. This he does, First, because he would send them away
advertised and assured, that There is a father Ben (to speak so) a more inward
room in Religion, then the most lively and comfortable Ordinance here on earth
does afford: a higher and more intense spiritual Practice, then any outward
part of Religion: He would have them to go away thinking with themselves, that
all is not done that may be done, that all is not win at, which may be had,
that they are not yet Holy enough nor happy enough. O place not, for Christ's
sake, Place not your Religion here, I was at the Sacrament, or I got my
Communion: Woe to that empty sound, and to them who lean all their weight on it:
ye may come and abide here for a time, and go away leaving the marrow of the
matter behind you: all is not yet done. A Second Reason is, Because he would
have them parting and going from the Communion wi^h some thoughts of death, of
their approaching change and passing out of time, and of Eternity its quickly
Marching upon them: And indeed, it were good going from the Communion, and from
every other Ordinance, with such thoughts as these, Death is fast coming on me,
and I will be soon gone, (says our Lord on the matter to the Disciples) and ye
will ere long follow me, and it is not these Ordinances that will be your life
in Eternity: It were good that we came to the Lord Table, to Preaching and
Prayer, and went away as dieing Men and Women: this would lay much of our
Pride, deaden us to the world, and make us endeavou^ to hold a loose gripe of
all things in it, and would kee^ us under the kindly sense of the
changeableness, uncertainty and short continuance of them all: and might be of
more use and worth to us, then Twen^ie thanksgiving Sermons: Labor then to go
from every Ordinance, as if ye were not to enjoy another. A Third Reason may
be, that our Lord would lead in his followers (...) look after some stamp of
Heaven, and of the Glorious Communion that is a coming, on their Spirits, and
would have them going from the Ordinances with such thoughts. Alace! we have
very few such thoughts, Our conversation is very little or not at all in Heaven:
Believers, think and think often, that these rags will be rent off us, and we
shall be set down on the Throne with Christ in that Raiment of needle work. It
is a good token, when a person goes from a Cummunion, from Preaching and
Prayer, more Divine and Heavenly, making every Ordinance the step of a stair
(as it were) to ascend upward, having a high esteem of Heaven, and a hea^
Holily eager and bent on it, content, nay desirous (...) be gone, when ever He
shall see it meet: and till the^ putting on and keeping on the whole armor of
God making for one assault of temptation after another Heavenly in his whole
walk, in his actions words and thoughts. As ye would not, O Believers,
interrupt your Communion with God in Christ, study to be Heavenly in your
Conversation: for says the Apostle, Phil. 3.20. Our Conversation is in Heaven,
from whence we look for the Savior: Lay aside (as if be had said) your earthly
mindedness, away with that; and be Heavenly in your conversation; for our
Conversation is such; and Believers are described to be such as Love Christ's
appearing. A Fourth Reason May be, that our Lord would hearten and Comfort his
Disciples and send them away refreshed; Yea it is, to Root out their unbelief,
and to arm them against approaching trials: So then, First. our Lord Jesus
Allows Believers to go from the Communion, and proportionally, from every
Ordinance rightly come to, cheerful and Comforted; and therefore he leaves
them with this word, telling them that they will have hard and sad days; but
withal bids them cheer themselves in the assured expectation of a day coming,
when He and they shall drink the Wine new in Heaven: Our Lord would have
Believers humble, thinking on Death and making ready for it daily; yet be would
not have them tortured with the thoughts of it, but cheerful, as having his
joy for their strength; though he would not have their joy carnal, but
Heavenly: And it is the Token of a right Communicant and of a good hearer of
the word, when a Person goes away from it more Spiritually cheered and more
Heavenly minded. Secondly, There is nothing that can be more heartsome,
cheering and refreshing to the Believer, then the lively hope of Communion and
of a seat on the Throne, in Heaven with Christ; and it is the mark and
Character of a believer, to have no lower design. Alace! for the senseless way
of hearing the word and of Communicating customary to many, who have no other
nor higher design, then to partake of the outward Ordinance: it is a heart some
thing to go from the Table of the Lord with this sweet and Heavenly Meditation,
Christ and I will meet again ere long at a table in Heaven. Thirdly, The
thoughts of Heaven and the hope thereof may well sustain a Believe, were there
never so many BUTS and wants in their present condition here: We will not be
long together, says He, there will be a scattering; but this may keep you from
weeping and mourning as those who have no hope, that the day comes when we
shall meet again, and never, part asunder: It is really a wonder, that we have
so few serious and solacing thoughts of coming to Heaven: there are none who
look for a Rich loading, coming home by Sea, but they will comfort themselves
in the expectation of it; why do we not then comfort our selves in the thoughts
of Heaven, since we profess to have a hope of being there? even because we are
carnal and earthly: and it says, that we either think Heaven little worth, or
that it is an insufficient and unvalid right, that is to be had to it, or that
we do not really believe it: all the silver and gold in the world comforts not
a poor body, because he has no hope to come by it; So there are not a few
hearers of the Gospel, who bear much of Heaven and of the hope of it, that
never refreshes them. A Fifth Reason may be to waken up longing desires, and
to sharpen and put an edge upon an appetit, in his followers, after Heaven, and
to teach them not to place their happiness in any thing on this side Heaven:
otherwise he would never have put their Satisfaction to a term so far off: but
he overleaps (to speak so with reverence) all the brave days, that they had and
were to have here, and gives them this for their full satisfaction, that the
day is a coming when he will drink the Wine new with them in his Fathers
Kingdom: and would have them in their flight, never resting nor sitting down,
till they be there; For he sends them away hungering for that Communion Table:
And we would yet again exhort and beseech you to study to be in case to go from
the Communion and from every Sermon, having some serious thoughts of Heaven and
longings for it; believing that the day, the joyful day is coming, when Christ
and ye will meet and never shed or separat again: when ye shall be with him,
where he is, and be set with him at his Table, and on his Throne, never to rise
off it any more again: Blessed be God, that that desirable day is coming.
Believers in Christ, cheer your selves in the hope of it: If there be any of
you (as Alace! I fear there be very many) that relish not this blessed change,
there is a sad and Sorrowful change before you. O be busy, very busy to have
your interest in Christ, and the hope of Heaven well secured, by Union and
Communion with him here; that so ye may have the well grounded hope of Heaven,
and may frequently draw Comfort from it: And, O that we could sunder so. The
little inch and moment of time, that we have, will soon and very quickly wear
away, and be at an end: Go then, my dear friends, wi^h this well fixed
resolution, that ye must needs, in Gods own way, have Heaven and be eternally
happy in the Soul-satisfieing and ravishing enjoyment of that fullest and
sweetest, never to be interrupted Communion, that will be there: And thank God
and Christ the Mediator for the least measure of the well grounded hope of it;
and make it your business to have your Conversation suited to and smelling
strong of that blessed hope.

FINIS.

