THE RESULT OF A DIALOGVE concerning the MIDLE-STATE of SOULS.

Wherein is asserted The Ancient Doctrine of their Relief, obtainable by
Prayers, Alms, etc. before the Day of Judgment.

By F. D. Professor of Divinity.

Printed at PARIS, Permissu Superiorum.

For the Right Honorable and Learned, Henry Lord Arundel of Warder, etc.
The Mecoenas of all Learning and Virtue.
May it please your Lordship,
SOme Aristophanes, removing the controversy of the Midle-state of Souls out
of the Schools, and improvid ently thrusting it (in English) into the hands of
Ladies, whose curiosity is not always proportioned to their capacity, has
been isntrumental of great Scandal. Hence upon entreaty of such, who may
command, I interposed, endeavoring to clear the state of the Question, as I
thought, without violence, it might import; this occasioned a reciprocation of
Epistles, wherein I would gladly prevent all misunderstandings, as also in the
Synopsis of our Tenets, which I formerly gave in such matters, which were
esteemed proper for the times.

The Result I present to your Lordships most judicious view, also to your noble
Patronage. If it conduce to any good, I shall be sure of the guerdon I hope
for. Your Lordships hereditary goodness will pardon my boldness, encouraged
by your known Virtue, and great love of Truth, who ambitiously subscribe, what
by many titles, my duty obliges me to be,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most devoted servant in all duty, F. D.

A Table of the Chapters.
CHap. 1. Relief in Purgatory is the Doctrine of holy Church 1 Chap. 2. It is
not matter of Opinion 11 Chap. 3. Why the Resurrection is inculcated 15 Chap.
4. The senses of Greek and Latin Liturgies and Fathers 24 Cha. 5. Traditions
alone cannot prove faith in all Articles 45 Chap. 6. Charity consists with
Purgatory. The various operations of Charity. Wherein consists the chief
penalty of Purgatory? 48 Chap. 7. How a soul, according to others, can change?
Of the horror of Doomsday. Whether it is to be prayed for? 67 Chap. 8. Whether
a soul can be changed by God, and how, in Purgatory? The true state of the
controversy explicated 89 Chap. 9. The state of the Question further
explicated. The difference betwixt an instant of time, and aeviternity
declared. The resolution of the Question fully given, as to change of souls 99
Chap. 10. Scriptures and Traditions must be obeyed. How one can satisfy for
another? Whether, and how, other virtues besides charity, avail toward Heaven?
117 Chap. 11. How corporal afflictions can satisfy for sins. Whether a
probable Opinion may be followed 127 Chap. 12. The design of the Treatise 140
The Result of a DIALOGVE concerning the MIDLE-STATE of SOULS.
CHAP. I. Relief in Purgatory is the Doctrine of holy Church.
IN our last Epistolary Conference concerning the sense of the General Council
of Florence, and of Pope Benedict the eleventh, his Bull, against those who
hold, that none went to Heaven till the day of Judgment; you much insisted,
that neither of them defined a Redemption out of Purgatory before the great
day. The Greeks there called it (...). It must be confessed, that their
principal design was the condemnation of Joh. 22. his error, which though he
recanted, yet to prevent any resuscitation of it, it was judged necessary
conciliarly to condemn it. In discussing, or rather explicating the latitude of
this, they descended to particulars, Who and When each sort went to Heaven,
either at, or after their deaths, according to their several conditions; and
therein delivered their sense of this, as being in part involved in the former.
So that it was a Conciliary Declaration of the Churches Doctrine, as to this:
that is, of the whole Christian World, as all prior or posterior Doctors, not
violented (for it is easy to mis-apply, and even elude the Fathers with
voluntary glosses out of Chamier, and other such like blasted Authors) and the
universal tradition orally delivered, and the constant practice of all
Catholics, declare.

See in S. John Damascen almost all the Greek Fathers, even inclusively, from
great Dyonisius to himself, and some of the Latins also are recorded in him,
who all assert this, and say, that from our Lords Disciples it descended, and
obtained in, and through the whole Church of God with great profit to the dead.
And that you may clearly by one understand the received interpretation of the
rest, see there the story of great Macarius, who had from God this Answer: Quo
tempore, inquit, mortuorum causa preces offers, tum sane nonnullius solatii
sensu afficimur. Thus a dead man's skull answered him. We must not then expect
Doomsday for an answer of our Prayers. Nay, S. Damascen says, it is a new,
absurd doctrine, suggested by the Devil, Pia omnia opera, quae mortem
sequuntur, nullam omnino defunctis utilitatem afferre: and truly his ingenuous
sense is, that to deny any profit by them before the day of Judgment to the
dead, descends from the Devil. I refer you to all the Fathers in him; whence
you will see how they are violented for the contrary by others.

It is a most unquestionable rule in this matter, as to the affirmative, though
a posteriori (as we speak) amongst all probable Doctors, who have the honor to
have their memories celebrated in the Fasts of the Schools, That whatsoever is
declared in a General Council, which is received, or not impune resisted by
Catholic Doctors of the age wherein it is celebrated, is by all Christians to
he admitted in the same degree in which it is there declared. Which Rule comes
home to all points by Sectaries now controverted, as I have particularized in
my System: and especially compels us to an acceptance of this present Article,
according to the same place it obtained in the Council of Florence, and the age
wherein it was celebrated. The first I have specified as far as this place
permits. The later is evident by all Writers then, and ever since, in the
Church: though Marcus Ephesius, an eminent Greek Schismatique, if not rather an
Heretic, who was present in the Council, recalcitrated in vain against it, in
some particulars, but not against this at all; which still confirms us in it.
Gennadius, the Patriarch says, this Council was, ubique promulgatum, and ab
omnibus gentibus receptum: only vulgares quidam homines, and indocti did
contradict. He adds, if any capable of reason resisted, it was pravity of mind,
not learning but foolish presumption and vain glory, which moved it. Here he
glances at Marck, and others deceived by him. All this faithfully applied,
irrefragably declares our obligation to accept this truth accordingly.

And moreover as to us in particular, the general resistance made against this
new Purgatory, by all at the very first dawning of it in our insulary
Hemisphere, as being a novilty opposite to what all from their infancies had
learned, convinces the same. Nay Mr. Whites Sonus Buccinae will infer so
much, and alone suffice according to him, to prove matters even of Faith. But
let us go further: if every person from hence to Cades in Spain, and from
thence to Rome, and from thence to Constantinople, and from thence to
Jerusalem, through both Churches were asked, whether in their prayers for the
dead, they do not hope to help them to Heaven before the last day? every one
would assert it.

CHAP. II. It is not matter of Opinion.
THerefore most certainly the hope of present easing them, was not grounded on
matter of Opinion, which intrinsically involves actual fear, or doubt, of the
truth, else they would have prayed faintly: but it is a traditionary doctrine,
and under that notion, by all understood. Hence we never read in Scriptures,
Councels, or Fathers, any one clear assertion (as sufficiently appears in those
which are most urged) That all those that go to Purgatory must be necessarily
detained there, without any relief, till the day of judgment; which sure were
impossible, if there had been any fluctuation in it, or if they had been of
that opinion, as some gently persuade us.

That some things have been delivered to posterity in the Church, which could
never obtain more authority then opinion, I have made evident in my System,
even in grave Subjects of which number this was not: but how to distinguish
such from doctrines of a higher nature, in case Holy Church did not conveigh
clearly their qualifications with them, as in some cases, evidently it did and
in others it did not, as there I give instances; then the only way is to
return to general Councels, that they according to their office may
conquisitione facta, after the example of the Apostles, juridically appoint to
each their seats, where all must acquiesce, as here was done conformable to all
antiquity, as I have declared, and shall more.

CHAP. III. Why the resurrection is inculcated.
THe Holy Scriptures indeed, our B. Lord, and especially, B. St. Paul, and
since them, holy Church, and Fathers, most pressingly inculcates the truth of
the general resurrection, as being the basis of our hope, the motive of piety,
and good works; all which would be adjudged fruitless by the generality of men,
if it were not for this: though even Aristotle, who with the rest of his
friends of Athens would have laughed to have heard Saint Paul Preach, and
assert it; yet they would judge virtue to carry and bring with it a present
reward, for which it should be embraced: but our expectations are infinitely
higher by our believed, and hoped for resurrection; and therefore it always
produced proportionate effects in Gods holy Martyrs, and Saints, especially in
those first times, as the course of Gods providence required, and therefore
there was a necessity effectually to settle this radical doctrine, as also of
the last judgment to inculcate a just fear, as S. Paul did. This other of
relief of souls, in, and out of Purgatory, being of far less concernment, as to
the generality of mankind, and being as it were a particular of it, or
subalternate to it, needed not so strong and frequent inculcation, though holy
Church did not take it up upon vulgar and light hear-sayes, but with, and by
the Apostles Praedications: which, according to S. Augustines Rule, are
sufficiently proved by the Churches Doctrine, and practice. The holy Scriptures
themselves, as interpreted by antiquity also declare it, which are obviously
known: Neither do the Texts, though brought with violence, touch the contrary;
nor were ever so interpreted. Some mistake also arises in this business, from
not observing, that holy Scriptures, and from thence holy Church, and the
Fathers frequently understand by Resurrection, even the assumption of souls to
Heaven without the bodies, and therefore S. Aug. calls the later of soul and
body, the perfect resurrection, as condistinct from the former, in his care of
the dead, c. 6. But here we treat of the Churches practice and doctrine; which
are clear even amongst the Greeks as well as Latins: You know, that
according to Mr. Rushworth, and Mr. White, (whose authority cannot be denied by
you) the public practice, or oral conveyance, demonstrates universal
Tradition, and consequently Christian Truths.

Therefore when I look upon the anxious solicitude, with which now, and in all
former ages, good Christians, Greeks and Latins, have prosecuted their friends
deceased with their Prayers, Alms-deeds, which all Christian Monuments declare:
methinkes it were strange now at length to have all resolved into a cold
Oblation, or Prayer for Doomsday: wherein their particular Allies are no more
concerned, than all others: and so all the pious endeavors of friends are of
no effect, as relating to what they intended in order to particular persons,
but might as well be contracted into a general Prayer for all the dead, against
not only orall tradition, but the manifest writings of the most ancient and
learned in the bulk of the Fathers; as S. Aug. is sufficient testimony for all
the rest, in his Treatise of this subject, styled by him, A care of the dead,
where he supposes it to be the common sense of the whole Catholic Church,
that particular persons dead, who have acquired merit in their life time, by
which such things may be rendered profitable after death, do receive benefit by
what is done for them religiously after their decease: and he speaks clean
through the whole Book of actual benefit, profit, help, advantage, availment,
and rest to be procured for the souls. And lest we should gloss it for the
souls in their reunion with their bodies, he frequently speaks
condistinctively of the soul as separated from the body, or as it is when the
body is dead; and he says, that then it receives succor: which, as he shows,
and I have said, was the practice of all Churches in their public Liturgies.
I do not esteem it constancy, but obstinacy, to intort antiquity to our sense
against their own.

CHAP. IV. The senses of Greek, and Latin Lyturgies and Fathers.
AMongst the Greeks, I observe in their Liturgies, that sometimes they pray
with Tertullian, de Monogamia, that the dead may have refrigerium, that is,
some ease, as S. Greg. Nazian. his Liturgy p. 34, in the Rubric. Other times
they pray, that they may be put into a place of light sommess, where sorrow is
banished and groaning, etc. as in S. Basils Liturgy. Sometimes that they may
rest in Abraham's bosom, as in S. James his Liturgy. All these intimate a
change, a present relief, though not always a release, as the style evidently
imports: which destroys your very ground; for you teach that no prayers can
relieve, or change them till Doomes-day. S. James in his Lyturgie prays, that
God would cause the souls to rest with the Saints. You say, he means, that
they may not rest, or have ease, or lightsomness, etc. till after the day of
judgment. Besides, they constantly pray for the remission of their sins, as in
S. Basils, and the rest; this is not for the resurrection: and finally they
pray for all, who died in communion of the faithful, and for particular persons
recommended to the Priest, in each particular, exactly agreeing with the Roman
Church.

Hieremias, their Patriarch, follows them, and the sense of both Churches
frequently appears to be, that by their prayers they may obtain present ease,
ut a poenis releventur, says the Council of Florence in the decree in
Gennadius.

There was a question amongst some of the ancient, whether souls (except of
Martyrs) had a facial sight of God before the last day: the progress of it I
have examined in my System. Hence some spoke warily, touching the full release
out of Purgatory; which involves a going to Heaven; but all agreed as to our
present ease, and relief by Prayers, Almsdeeds, etc. The not observing this,
has made a misunderstanding of some of the Fathers in this matter.

Truly sometimes they pray expressly, that they may enter Heaven before the last
day, as St. Ambrose upon the death of Theodosius: Dilexi, and ideo prosequar
eum usque ad regionem vivorum, nec deseram donec fletu, and precibus inducam
eum, quo sua merita vocant, in montem Domini sanctum, etc. he will never leave
praying, till by his prayers and tears he has brought him out of Purgatory to
Heaven. We need no more for both Churches: he a great Latin Bishop well
acquainted with the sense of both Churches, promises this for the Greek and
Latin Emperor, in presence of the Emperor; also a Grecian born, and of the
Court where were present as well Greek as Latin Prelates, and Doctors. If this
had not been the public sense of all Churches in their obsequies for the dead,
there wanted not Zelots then, and after, who would have reprehended this
public attempt, which you call Novelty, by them adjudged Piety.

St. Chrysostom Homil. 41. in 1. ad Cor. after a long discourse says thus: Si
Jobi illius liberos patris victima purgavit, (Job. 1.5.) quid dubites e nobis
quoque si pro dormientibus offeramus, solatium quiddam ill is accessurum? This
some comfort concludes a present change upon our Prayers: this cannot signify
Heaven, where is no such diminutive, as quiddam solatium: this surely cannot be
Doomsday; which agrees with Saint Augustines, Neque negandum est, defunctorum
animas pietate suorum viventium relevari, cum pro illis sacrificium Mediatoris
offertur, vel eleemosynae in Ecclesia fiunt, etc. 9.2. ad Dulcitium: and in his
Enchyridion to Lawrence c. 110. as elsewhere he distinguishes three sorts of
the dead, whereof the middle are only capable of this help, and in his Care of
the dead, c. 4. he tells us, that Christians in their Prayers recommend the
third (...) by the (...) Saints. (...) take them (...) ^^mpany when (...) rise,
according (...) you; but S. Aug. dre^^nd not of that goodfellowship, but
present ease, for surely S. Aug. his easing them is a present change. I could
render it fastidious to the Reader, if I should bring in particular the sense
of Greek and Latin Fathers, which, in reading them, I have noted. And though
some Critics do not give a due esteem of S. Gregory the great, and Venerable Bede their Histories, which Baronius elegantly defends; yet no man of reason
can doubt, much less deny, but that their loud approbation of the particular
releases of souls, and the worlds not resisting their truth, abundantly declare
the sense of the whole Christian world to have been, That by Prayers souls
might be delivered out of Purgatory, before the last day. Nay, they did not
only not resist them, but both Greeks and Latins positively approved of them.
For Pope Zachary had his books of Dialogues, without any restriction, in so
high esteem, that he himself with his approbation, translated, and recomended
them to the Greeks. And S. John Damaseen, and other Greeks, with much reverence
received, and often cited them, as I have frequently noted: and therefore no
wonder, that Venerable Bede, following our first Christian Master, St. Gregory
(though he himself sharp-sighted) gives more examples of the like; as also S.
John Damascen. These two (considering the eminency of their virtue and
learning, and both great Searchers of antiquity, and both received as Assertors
of truth in their respective East and West Churches) may alone suffice to
witness the Churches Doctrine. Now (as S. Aug. c. 10. in his Care of the Dead,
says) if we should say, that these things were false, we might be thought to
use more boldness than became us, both in regard of the writings of some
faithful Christians who report it, as also in regard of the testimony and
sensible experience of those, to whom such visions have happened. May not this
justly be applied here?

Also consider who St. Gregory, Pope Zachary, and St. Chriso stom were, and
(...) carry on their backs both the Latin and Greek Churches. And hence the
Council of Florence in the very Decree (as I have noted in another Book)
speaking for, and in the name of both Churches, says: We define, etc. that
those souls, who, after they have contracted the blemish of sin, are purged
either in their bodies, or, being uncloathed of their bodies, are presently
received into Heaven: and Pope Benedict says, Before the resumption of their
bodies. We can require no more as to the Doctrine of both Churches; since, as
you see, the Decree is consonant to both.

It Is true that the Roman Lyturgie in the Sequentia does wonderfully inculcate
the horror of Doomsday, partly to move us living to a right apprehension of our
concernment in it; partly that the dead may receive comfort before the last
terrible day. Neither can the words have any other sense: for certainly the
souls in Purgatory are not ambiguous of their judgment in that day, as all
Christians agree: and therefore the Church concluding, prays to God, to give
all the Faithful rest from henceforward, to prevent the rigor of that
fearful day.

It Is truly a mistake to say, the Greek Church did not admit this Doctrine
before the Council of Florence, since it is most evident, that their Doctrine
was not at all changed, or disliked even upon examination, as to this of
easing, and delivering souls out of Purgatory, or translating them into
Abraham's bosom by Prayers, etc. but only in the beginning was examined how far
they agreed with Pope John's error against the facial sight of God; and this
was amended by common consent. Nay, their practice was never questioned, or
doubted of: which was, and is, the same with the Latins, as has been showed;
and therefore Cyril repeating, and expounding the manner of their Lyturgies,
says: (...), etc. That is, We believe that it will be a wonderful help to the
souls, for whom supplication is offered of this holy and terrible sacrifice.
Can any man refer this wonderful help to a cold expectation of Doomsday? And
hence we see in the third action of the General Council of Calcedon, how the
process was admitted of Ischyrion against Dioscorus for not having distributed
faithfully, the abundant Alms by Legacy left to Monasteries, for the souls of
the deceased, which uniformly agrees with the Modern practice of both Churches;
and therefore doubtless the sense of both Churches, as now they appear evidently
to be the same; so in all antiquity they were uniform, as to hope of relief by
prayers, especially by Masses, as there is clear, and in many private Latin
Synods.

Neither can it be other than a great Sophism to accuse the Roman Churches
Offertory, as if in praying to deliver the souls of the Faithful a poenis
inferni; which is a general term signifying both, and so used, it should import
any thing else here, than from the pains of Purgatory to life: which cannot
have any other sense than of Purgatory, since there is no redemption in Hell;
and the souls for which they pray, die no otherwise.

Again, the Church in the Collects prays to give them refrigerii sedem, etc. a
seat of refreshment, which speaks our Purgatory. These and all other Texts
assure us of the Churches sense of praying to deliver them before the great
day: however by strengh of wit the clearest actions may be in order to weaker
judgments made dubious, as we see in Courts, the best causes by corrupted
advocates, so clouded, that they seem unjust. But the knowledge of this is so
universal, that here may be said what St. Augustine, lib. de duabus anim. c.
12, says of liberty: Nonne ista cantant and in montibus pastores, and theatris
Poetae, and indocti in circulis, and docti^ in Bibliothecis, and Magistri in
scholis, and antistites in locis sacris, and in orb terrarum genus humanum.
All sorts of Christians, each in their several postures, and vocations witness
this truth.

CHAP. V. Traditions alone cannot prove faith in all Articles.
THis was S. Hieroms, and all the Fathers one (though not only) constant test
of new doctrines. And you professedly esteeming the testimony of the present
age to conveigh certainly the sense of the precedent, do, and must consequently
hold it to be an infallible test, to discern even matters of Faith: so that ad
hominem this were strong, if we had only the present age. But surely
Scriptures and Traditions are the adequate source of Christian truths in the
received opinion of Doctors. And the Council of Trent in the first Session
seems to suppose it in order to the general. And truly all the former Councels
did no less. Neither can I see that your Topic alone will salve all
occurrences, and therefore St. Paul refers the Thessalonians, to his Epistles
and Sermons jointly: and S. Irenaeus l. 3. c. 4. shows the necessity of both:
So S. Aug. and the rest.

But by endeavoring to infringe any pretense of a definition, as to this of
helping souls in Purgatory before Doomsday, you struck upon a medium, which, if
not rightly understood, is of an ill consequent.

CHAP. VI. Charity consists with Purgatory. The various operations of charity.
Wherein consists the chiefest penalty of Purgatory.
FOr the purport of your discourse seems to hint at this, that a necessity of
retention of souls out of heaven till due penal expiation be accomplished, will
enervate the dignity of charity. Cicero lib. 3. de finibus says notably,
speaking of Philosophy: Hujusmodi dicere ornare velle, puerile est: plane
autem, and perspicue expedire posse, docti, and intelligentis est viri. Your
almost connatural obscurity renders you sometimes to be misconstrued, to your
prejudice. It is true, that charity, if perfect, is a sufficient disposition to
glory; at least as far as relates to exclusion of punishment for former
transgressions: which easily concludes, a soul dying in that perfect condition,
not to need any other temporary expiation. But the middle sort of Christians,
who only have their concernment in Purgatory, according to Saint Augustine and
the Council of Florence, though they die indeed in charity, yet is supposed not
to be so intense, as wholly to dispose their souls for present bliss. And
therefore in order to such, the Church asserts further expiation, and penal
detention, necessary for a longer or a shorter term, according to the secret
rules of Gods wisdom: wherein though our time is not the measure of spiritual
substances, or sufferings, which have no parts to answer to the parts of our
time, and therefore are not greater, or less, for the extrinsecal, and
disparate consideration of a shorter, or longer continuance, precisely as to
time; yet their inward necessity of existing in that condition of separation,
not only from their bodies, but from the sight of God in the dregs of sin, till
God changes them, is highly penable, as being always present to their
intuition, and affection: whereas in bodies, where every thing is measured by
motion, it would be far less, as having succession of parts, than now being
altogether, according to the nature of eviternity, which surely renders it
incomparably greater, than if it were by one part after another. And though it
is indivisible as to its essence, and existence, being spiritual; and therefore
cannot be measured otherwise than by a proportionable in-divisible measure, as
now I will suppose against some others; yet it has co-existence with the parts
of our time, as Aristotle 4. Phys. says: Idem nunc secundum substantiam
differt secundum esse: that is, although an instant is the same indivisible in
order to it self, yet it differs as compared to time. And hence a soul, which
has been in Purgatory twenty years, is truly said to have been longer there
than another, which was separate from the body yesterday; and consequently has
suffered the hard consequences of it, even altogether so long.

If we speculate this a little further, we find, that as indeed the soul being
in-divisible, it has an in-divisible measure; yet as that instant, or measure
called Aeviternity, is always and altogether present; so there is always
present in it a priority, which we call of nature. As Agents which are free, in
the same real instant, when they resolve to do any thing, have a priority of
nature, wherein it is not affirmable, that they do resolve, but are as it were
about to do it: and this continues so long, as the real instant it self does.
And therefore Aristotle will tell us, that the will, even when it does decree
any thing, it has power not to do it, that is, as referring to that priority
of nature. Whence follows even in your own principles, that the soul, which
went to Purgatory many years ago, is now as capable to have an act which it
never had, as then, and therefore it may be as truly said to have an act this
day, which it never had; and consequently may as truly be said to be changed.
But this whole matter is fitter for the Schools to dispute, then for
Chatechizers to instruct in matter of Faith: of which more hereafter.

You seem under a pretense of putting a due estimate upon an abstracted or a
Metaphysicated charity (for such yours almost seems to be) very much to
undervalue her operations in such penal acts, or passions, as holy Church
presents to our belief in the dead. Nay, even all other corporal afflictions,
and austerities in this life, voluntarily undertaken, you are thought to judge
superfluous (if not superstitious) and derogatory to charity.

You know how far our neighbors have, by urging this, reduced all Christian
duties of this kind, to such a pure worshipping of God in spirit, that there is
no visible footstep of any old austerities amongst them: and even all these old
symptoms of Christianity, are with them by a new sort of Chemistry, evaporated.

It seems certain, according to the received doctrine of great Divines,
(wherein you do not wholly dissent) that all souls, which depart from their
bodies, in a capacity of Heaven, at their separation, do appretiate God above
all, and do heartily desire, that they had never placed any created object in
his room; which is, never to have sinned mortally. Which doctrine methinks is
consequent to St. Thomas his opinion of infants in their first act of reason,
applying themselves to God. And this act, as I said, is esteemed naturally
indelible in the dead, according to their state, with which is consistent a
desire of fulfilling Gods Laws, in order to expiation of former sins: nay, that
is inconsistent with it self, without a desire of compliance with Gods
ordinances, in this and every other kind. Whence follows, that their sufferings
after death, are voluntary, as relating to their former acts of conformity to
Gods orders, and the virtual or habitual durance of it; howsoever by some, so
palpable a truth is denied.

The whole universe therefore having been deformed in some manner, by our
deordinations, it must be reformed by our pennances. For, according to Divines,
Infligitur poena, ut ordinetur culpa: and it is so, even following nature. So
that the order of the Universe, by Gods original position of causes, exacts
this method of us. Therefore there is no necessity, which some are affrighted
at so much, to attribute their penal detention to revenge in God; (though it is
but quaestio de nomine, as diversely taken) since it is consequent to our
peccaminous acts, to be liable to it; especially holding, as truth seems to
convince, that the relics of the sins themselves, or those very sins, of
which the souls were guilty in death, remain till the change of the souls after
Purgation. Which doctrine is very conformable to Scotus; who holds, that venial
sins after proportionable punishment in hell it self, cease to be; that is,
after the remorse and punishment, proportionable to such sin, cease; which, as
I have noted elsewhere, is Origen's and Gregory Nissenes clear doctrine: for
they both seem to admit that only Purgatory. I said punishments, for which we
now call punishments, as to the minds remorse for sin, in time of nature we
would call effects of sin, as I showed, de Mundo.

Its true, we have not injured God in our sins, who is above, and beyond, the
spheres of our most malicious activity; but our selves are principally
endamaged in mortal sins, by losing all title to Heaven, or at least, by
diminishing it, as in venial. Which loss caused by violation of his Laws,
must be repaired by charity, directing to submit to, and to keep Gods
Commandments, according to that Text of our Savior: If you love me, keep my
Commandments: whereof one is, to submit to his orders in Purgatory, wherein
this voluntary due chastisement at last will procure remission of those sins,
which remain, at the least in their dregs.

Charity indeed has God himself, under the noblest motives, for its immediate
object; but it is exercised, not only in a naked wishing, or willing well to
God, which is to love him; but it breaks out into a hearty compliance with all
his orders. Hence St. Peter, John the last Chapter, v. 15. being demanded,
whether he loved God? to his triplicated affirmation was as often subnected;
Feed my sheep, etc. So that this love has a great extent, though it always
terminates in God, as it begins in him. St. Paul also, 1 Cor. 13.4. tells us
summarily, but pathetically, the further operation of charity: Charitas patiens
est, benigna est, etc. whence will follow, that charity can be exercised, in
following any of Gods orders, in respect of the living, or the dead, as in
those St. Paul speaks of, 1 Cor. 15.29. who were baptized, that is, suffered
for the dead, as the Text clearly speaks.

It is not then any indignity to charity, that good Christians dying invested
with it, should be exercised afterward in expiation of former deordinations,
by their passive compliance with Gods orders; which, dying in charity, they
could not but desire. This divine order being fulfilled, and expiation being
effected, the soul is rendered, through Gods mercy, capable of her hoped
supervestition of eternity.

CHAP. VII. How a soul, according to others, can change. Of the horror of
Doomes-day. Whether it is to be prayed for.
I will now suppose that borrowed principle out of Aristotle's Schools, that
the soul is not capable of any change, once separated from the body, as having
not the fancy, whence the changes were occasioned. Which doctrine although I
have taught in my System, and so do St. Thomas in his School, Henricus de
Gandavo, and others, as to natural causes; yet it will not reach so far, as I
conceive, as to build a consequence, so remote from the common sense of
Christians, as this of all souls, which do not immediately go to Heaven, or to
Hell, their prestolation of the last day in Purgatory, and that then upon the
reunion of their bodies, our blessed Lord shall represent to our corporal eyes
his most blessed humanity: of which he made us not capable during our long
expectation in the souls separation: upon sight whereof they shall fall into
raptures of divine love, etc.

The whole complex taken altogether, is the product of a great wit, possessed
of much learning, and, if kept within the Schools (as we use frequently
impossible suppositions) might exercise wits with profit, and applause, as I
believe was intended: but where it touches upon a noble particle of our
Religion, as here, the putting it into a vernacular Idiome is dangerous, and
against the Council of Trent, in in this particular, Sess. 25. Apud rudem vero
plebem difficiliores, ac subtiliores quaestiones, quaeque ad aedificationem non
faciunt, and ex quibus plerunque nulla fit pietatis accessio, a popularibus
concionibus secludantur: incerta item, vel quae specie falsi laborant,
evulgari, ac tractari, non permittant, etc. This comes home. We are forbidden
to move these questions in English.

Prayer for the Dead, as for such as are helped by it, being in an indigent
condition, is one of the most universal, most constant, and most solemn
practices of holy Church, as all Monuments declare: which by this your
speculation is rendered, speaking really, of no use; as being resolved by you
only into a Prayer for Doomsday: which will be terrible, whenever it comes;
as holy Church intimates in the Sequentia: Cum vix justus sit securus; and
quantus tremor est futurus. I am sure S. Hierom had a formidable apprehension
of it, when he says, He heard perpetually the fearful sound of the trumpet:
and you hear how holy Church describes it, even in order to the just, in
respect of whom, S. Paul in the 10. of the Hebrews calls it, Terribilis quaedam
expectatio judicii, a terrible expectation of judgment: and hence S. Hilarious
in Psalm. 113. Quomodo desiderabile potest esse judicium, in quo nobis est
indefessus ille ignis obeundus? etc. How can that day be an object of our
Prayers? etc. The very Saints themselves must pass through that last fire, but
as silver and gold: which can stand against the severe test: and this being
done, they must be Judges of us sinners. The Apostle says both. Out of which
if we weigh the inexplicable severity of that day, Desiderare quis audebit?
who, with S. Hilary, dare pray for it? and yet your main position is, that this
is only prayed for, and that, till that great day, the Saints, though in an
indigent condition, are not capable to receive any refrigerium, or ease, as the
Fathers speak, and expressly prayed for in all the Churches Liturgies. Which is
indeed a comfortless tenet to all Christians; and it touches too near upon
the Church, and her doctrine, though most Sectaries will applaud it.

Shall I tell you how near it presses upon this Article? Truly (besides what I
said in the former Chapters) I know not possibly, how to render the prayers of
holy Church for the dead, of any considerable use at all, as applied to, and
for them, either in particular, or in general, as they are condistinct from the
faithful living. I spoke before, that this tenet renders prayers for particular
dead persons useless, as not at all corresponding with the design of their
friends, which evidently was, and is intended by all, in order to obtaining of
ease and relief of such souls, for which they pray. But now by further weighing
the necessary consequences of this tenet, it seems evidently to conclude, all
prayers for the dead, in effect useless, even as offered in general, or for all
in general, as well as for particular persons.

The reason is; first, because if we pray only for the general Resurrection,
(as you say) this concerns them not any more, nay, less, as being dead, than if
they were living: because they are already sure of a happy resurrection; and in
some degree, though yet in a state of punishment, as it were already possessed of
it, or at least, upon entering into it.

Secondly, the concernment of the general resurrection, in order to Heaven, is
so urgent in respect of the faithful living, and being yet wholly in the
clouds, in respect of our knowledge, or any certainty of it, that our Prayers in
true charity, ought to be far more fervent and constant, for all the faithful
living, as being in more necessity, than for the dead, or at least, for them
both together, if this be all we are to pray for, by the Churches definition.

Whence methinks it concludes, that the Article of praying for the dead, either
for particulars or generals, is upon very slight grounds pressed, and observed
by holy Church in your principles, surely they convince, that the same prayers
which are offered for the dead, ought to be offered, either for the living and
dead together, or else principally for the living. Whence follows, that there
is no need at all of this article, referring to the dead, as I said,
condistinct from the living; if there be no hope of present relief or release,
till the general resurrection. I do but give you a hint, that you may further
reflect upon it. This done, I proceed to the ground it self of your assertion.

Indeed the great Masters of the World, and of the Schools, S. Augustine,
Alexander Hales, S. Bonaventure, Scotus in his book de anima, and many other
eminent persons, not esteeming themselves to desert Aristotle, teach us, the
souls have a natural capacity of some change without the body.

One ground is, they conceive the impossibility of change to be derived
originally from the negation of matter (which Aristotle asserts principium
corruptionis) which is supposed to accompany all spiritual things: but if
materiality be consistent with the limited simplicity of our souls, as they
endeavor to prove in Aristotle's principles; since they have individuation, and
some composition, in their separated state from the bodies, as they conceive to
be clear in Metaphisical speculations: which if true, their consequence is
easy for what relates to the nature of the soul.

Do you examine this: it wants not great weight, even the force of
Demonstration, in their judgments.

Again, S. Bonaventure holds Aeviternity to have a sort of divisibility; which I
shall explicate in due place: his reason is, because otherwise it will argue
souls, and Angels to have actually infinite durance, being their durance
continues in infinitum, as all suppose which he esteems a great absurdity to
assert of any finite thing; as arguing infinite virtue to require infinite
durance together: which will conclude them to be infinite in essence; which is
against all our suppositions.

In the same manner will as easily be concluded, that a separate soul has
actually an infinite knowledge of things; since the instant of aeviternity,
which is immutable, and altogether, continues in infinitum, and consequently
has infinite objects present: of all which the soul actually, and by its
connatural power, produces knowledge together: which argues infinite vigor.

St. Bonavent. and the rest, esteem both these repugnant to a creature; though
you should say, that each is derived from God: for still it stands that the
soul from its own nature, though derived from God, is infiniti vigoris: which
Aristotle justly appropriates to God. Examine this, and weigh well, whether it
does not imply contradiction?

I assure you that these pressed home, will sooner be heightened to a
demonstration, than most of those, which are urged for the contrary, with loud
intonations of demonstrations. But if in Mathematics, which are rendered
pervious to our senses, we cannot reach to demonstrations, but upon swallowing
many suppositions without proof, what can we vaingloriously boast of, in these
remote objects?

Its true, that a soul separate, cannot produce new habits in it self by acts,
as now we do, by reason it has all possible disposition already, as being
determined by nature to it; yet it is consistent with its aeviternity, that the
soul have some new acts, at least in order to supernatural objects. Thus far S.
Thomas, Scotus, and all agree; as Angels in holy Scriptures are recorded to
have had in diverse occurrences.

St. Thomas, Henricus, and others, to make this good, invent a sort of time;
which they call, tempus discretum, (though Aristotle never heard of it) to
measure them by, that is, where there is not a continuation by parts, as in our
time, but each instant follows without ties. But I think there is no need to
explicate one obscurity by a greater: for indeed it is hard to conceive what
one indivisible added to another, will have for the quotient, but punctum;
which will leave us where we were. And therefore staying in this rode, I think
it clear, that the souls have acts; and that, according to their natures, they
are measured by aeviternity, in its proper sense; as Scotus, and the rest,
teach: though Aristotle out of a false principle of the souls absolute
dependence upon the Fancy, denies a separated soul to have any act at all: but
Avicen says better, following Platoes, and, as he contends, Aristotle's
doctrine, as I have done in the System, that the soul has the species of all
things within it self.

Others conceive, that without them, it has actual knowledge of all: and
therefore, as to natural objects, the soul in state of separation has
knowledge of all; and consequently (as they think) is easily proved not to be
subject to change in them: and which is very considerable, Mr. White goes no
further, l. 4. lect. 4. Constans itaque est, nullam mutationem ex naturae vi,
in anima separata posse existere.

CHAP. VIII. Whether a soul can be changed by God, and how, in Purgatory? The
true state of the controversy explicated.
BUt when we speak of the soul in Purgatory, we speak of a supernatural
condition: in which case, notwithstanding its spirituallity, it is moveable by
objects of a superior order, (neither do I remember, that Master White
questioneth this) of which it has not connaturally any species. Neither does
the production of any thing to a being after it had none, hinder it from being
spiritual, or aeviternal: else Angels, and our souls created in time, though
not successively, or in the parts of time would miss of both.

For example: what repugnance is there in the soul to be moved, if God shall
please to present his blessed humanity to it in the state of separation, as
well as when it is again joined to the body? truly I doubt not, but it would
produce a far more noble, and more intense act, of the love of God in its
separation; being far more powerful then, when it is united to the body, when
it works only by help, and order, of the fancy: as it must do according to
course of nature, at the first apparition of that blessed object; being the
soul is supposed not to be yet beatified.

I see not that spirituality renders the soul incapable of that happiness: and
it is certain, that St. Paul thought it not so: whence he cries: Sive in
corpore, sive extra corpus, nescio. He would have known, if his soul extra
corpus, that is, in her spirituallity, had repugned to the vision.

If it be replied, that this is supernatural.

Is it not so, that the soul at last is reunited to the body; when you
conceive it shall love God more intensely? Nay is it not so, that all ill
affections, which it carried out of this world, shall remain till the reunion,
and then be abolished? What natural reason will reach this? Nay, what
principles of Religion will teach us, that the souls of good Christians (for so
they must be) shall be detained in Purgatory, so many ages comprehended in
aeviternity, as till Doomsday to no effect in order to the souls; since the
very dregs of sin, with which they parted from the bodies, and their ill
affections, are not at all corrected or purged, by occasion of that state, but
remain till after the reunion in all their degrees of intention? so that their
remainder there, seems useless, and indeed purely vindicative: against which
you much insist.

Again, the whole state of the soul here treated, is supernatural, that is,
under another series of causes, then being with the body. That the soul
continues in the state of sin, or dregs of it, wherein it is at the time of
separation, and in a continual remorse, or sting of conscience, according to
that of St. Luke, c. 18. to the rich man: Recordare, quia recepisti bona in
vita tua: Remember what good things thou receivedst in thy life. Also in a most
afflictive, and almost a vexatious desire of Heaven: from which, as they know,
sins, or the dregs, retard them. All this is natural to it: but that this state
is temporary, and relating, or tending, to a change of eternal felicity; and
that it is poenal, that is, inflicted, as such, is above nature. (I meddle not
here with, what other punishments, do, or may, accompany this state.) No wonder
then, if in this supernatural condition, it has, when God pleases, these
supernatural visits, by ways, which we know not; in which, the soul is subject
to mutation: this I conceive sufficient for the matter here treated, which is,
the souls change in order to Heaven.

To deny this to the souls, is not to call in question their natural power, in
which we are already agreed, as to the negative; but Gods power, in order to
them, which in our conference you granted.

Whereas it may be objected, that still here is no diversity of parts, as an
Agent and a Patient, in an indivisible soul: which is required in all actions,
even to avoid contradiction.

To this is replied, according to Aristotle, 3o. de An. versus fin. as Roger
Bacon and Gulielmus Parisiensis, and others, interpret him, that God is
therefore, as intellectus agens, who illuminates our understanding by a
spiritual light, as the Sun does our sight, in order to bodies; and so actuates
it, in order to knowledge of things, whereof it is capable: and therefore he
says, that intellectus agens is separated a possibili, substantially; and that
it knows all things; and that it is always in act, etc. which are proper to
God, as they think: and indeed to make the understanding to be agens and
possibilis, it is a riddle, being it is to make it Agent and Patient to it
self, although indivisible.

CHAP. IX. The state of the Question further explicated. The difference between
an instant of time and aeviternity declared. The resolution of the Question
fully given, as to change of souls.
IF you ask me, how a Soul, by the power of God can be changed, from a not
knowing to a knowing, in the same instant, without contradiction?

I answer first, that our souls are indeed indivisible in their essences; as
not having quantity; and in the production of their acts, or operations, in
state of separation; as being not done by motion: they are also indivisible in
their durances; or the measures of their durances are indivisible; that is, not
by parts: with which is consistent, that their measures are not instantaneous,
as ours are; but are capable, and disposed, upon Gods continuated, and, as it
were, connatural influence, as the beams in respect of the Sun, to include the
whole presentiality of aeternity, by reason that the length, or shortness of
duration does not at all change the measure in it self; provided that it be
altogether.

It is therefore a great disproportion, rather a collusion, to argue from the
consideration of an instant of our time to aeviternity: they both agree in
this, that they are indivisible; that is, they are not capable of succession of
parts: but the reason of this in each is wholly different.

The instant of time is therefore so, because Physically speaking, it is nothing
else but a ^egation, or termination of some thing, and has therefore no
duration at all A^vum, or aeviternity, is not capable of succession, as being,
as the former is, indivisible, and altogether, but yet has infinite durance,
according to the way expressed, vertually including infinite instances,
according to which it is conceivable to have mutation without contradiction;
because its durance or existence now, though altogether, or not by parts, is
not by virtue of the same conservation, or influx, it has from God, as applied
before; but it has, in a manner, a new dependancy of him, else both it, and
its measure would cease to be: this is both Scotus and S. Bonaventures solid
way of explication of this abstruse difficulty. And truly I believe St. Thomas
and Henricus their tempus discretum, well weighed, will fall into it. And
verily Aeviternity seems in this to differ from aeternity, that it does not
necessarily involve an impossibility of ceasing to be, or of requiring a
continuated, or, as it were, a new dependence of the divine influence, without
which it would cease: Whereas, whatsoever is essentially aeternal, is repugnant
to any imaginable change; and therefore it can only be asserted of God.

I could answer secondly, that in the operations of Angels, or souls considered
as to the simple notion of their aeviternity, there may be succession, or
mutation, without contradiction (which Scotus grants without restriction.) My
reason is, because the assertion, or negation of any operation, is in respect
of diverse instances, or aeviternal measures.

For example, the existance of a soul is its own measure, as not being distinct
from it: the operations have, or are, each theirs, as being indivisible, as
well as the soul. Hence, although the soul, as to essence and existence, is
immutable, as naturally its measure is; and so each operation is, whilst it is,
or its aevum is: yet the soul, as to operation, or under operation, may,
without contradiction, admit some change, as lying under other aeviternities,
or measures, which accompany the Acts, as I have said. Whence follows, that the
soul is not rightly said to be not knowing, and knowing, in the same, or in
order to the same instant, or aevum; but it is not knowing, as measured by the
soul's own aevum, and it is knowing, considered as to the measures of the Acts,
which as I declared, must be distinct from that of the Soul: and hence it may
have new Acts.

Thirdly, I answer, that rightly putting with Scotus, that Aevum, or how you
will call the measure of Angelical, or Animastick Natures, is not distinct from
the things measured. You know in bodies the measures are extrinsecall as being
from the motions of the bodies of the Heavens, but here is no such extrinsecal
Gnomon in respect of spiritual substances. We need not therefore seek, whether
they may have succession of Acts in one instant, to avoid contradiction, which
so much affrights us: but we only are to look upon the nature of the Acts
themselves, whether there is no implicacy in them to co-exist with one another,
or to succeed each other? Which sure there is none imaginable. Neither do you
allege any here. It is not hard then to conceive, that a Soul has many Acts;
since also, as I said above, an aevum can co-exist to an infinity of instances;
namely, as long as an Angel continues.

I hope, out of all this I may safely conclude, that a separated soul may have
mutation in its Acts, especially as S. Thomas speaks 2.2.9.58. a. 11. Quantum
ad ea, quae eis divinitus revelantur, nihil prohibet, intellectus Angelorum
esse in potentia.

My solution therefore is, that the Angels, or Souls, without contradiction,
are capable of revelations, or whatsoever motions from God, that is, in any
supernatural way; in order whereunto nothing hinders them to be changeable, and
this, as I said, is sufficient for our principal assertion of the souls
capacity of change, in Purgatory.

To this may be objected, that the soul is a pure act, as admitting no
composition; and therefore the acts are not different from the essence, and
therefore not mutable.

It is as easy replied, that it is repugnant to the nature of a creature to be
that, which Divines call a pure act, first as having a potentiality to a not
being, and having a dependence upon composition; or having some actual
composition, or componibility. Also to have been produced out of nothing,
carries with it a defect of that simplicity, which is a pure act, as having
necessarily a quo, and quod. And truly in this very thing, an Angel (which is
the noblest of creatures) differs from God, that it is not its own act, and
therefore in a potentiality to acts: which can not be said of any but God. This
is as to the general.

Besides, the considerations of a soul, render it far inferior, as being
compounded Metaphysically, which is real. Besides, as cannot be denied, it is
ordinable to a Physical composition, as to be a part of the compositum, or
whole man: which excludes the being a pure act: for matter, and form, are
therefore not simple enough, as to this (though otherwise simpliciter
simplices, as Scotus speaks) because they are componible betwixt themselves.

Being advanced thus far, you will give me leave to tell you, that I do not
conceive it to be out of ignorance of the nature of a soul (though it is
thought so) that all Divines grant this sort of mutability; which is consonant
to holy Scriptures, Councels, Fathers, all Schoolmen, and Christian reason, but
it is rather out of a non advertence of the inconsistency of holy Churches
doctrine, confirmed by universal practice of relief of souls out of Purgatory
before the great day, that now the contrary is so much pressed by some, as not
considering their subjection to Gods powerful mercy.

A modest man would rather say with St. Augustine, treating almost of this
matter, for it is in his treatise of the Divination of Devils, cap. 6. Rem dixi
occultissimam audaciore asseveratione, quam debui: I have been more bold than
wise to speak confidently in these remote subjects. Let us therefore return to
the souls proceeding in Purgatory. For as to the other objections (which
ordinarily are alleged) they have more Water, than Salt.

In order indeed to increase of Charity, the soul has in Purgatory some
disposition, as being already invested with it; but by reason first, that it is
extra viam; by reason also of the dregs, which cause, and accompany its present
condition, it is not expeditely disposed, but at length, according to Gods
orders, by presenting forceably some supernatural object, or motive, or some
other way, the obstacles are removed, and the soul easily intended to such a
charity, rather charity to such a degree is intended in the soul; which joins
it to glory; each by ways unknown, as being unnecessary to the Churches
present condition, to know Gods ways in the souls relief; importing nothing to
the advance of Piety; which as you will confess, is the border of revealed
truths.

CHAP. X. Scriptures, and Traditions, must be obeyed. How one can satissie for
another. Whether, and how, other virtues, besides Charity, avail toward Heaven.
THat learned persons use their abilities to declare the true sense of
Church-customes, where there may be mistakes, is the office of Christian
Divines, and highly worthy their endeavors: and the Council of Trent enjoynes
Prelates to do it in this particular, as St. Thomas, St. Bonav. Scotus, and the
rest, do. But to call general, old customs themselves into question, or to
bend them to our speculations, is, in St. Augustines esteem ( ep. 118.) the
greatest madness in the world. His words are, insolentissimae insaniae est. His
reason is, because, Quae universa tenet ecclesia, ab Apostolis praecepta, been
creduntur, quanquam scripta non reperiantur; as he rightly teaches against the
Donatists, l. 5. c. 23. It is enough, if holy Church avoucheth any thing: yet
you press this so far, as you seem to censure the public sense of all
Christians, of novelty.

St. Augustine, and St. Hierome, when they happened upon any Texts of Holy
Scripture, which they found too hard for them (which was frequent) they imputed
it to their want of reason; and not to the Scriptures want of Truth. Hence St.
Hierome Q. 8. ad Algasiam, speaking of St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans, says:
Totus hic Apostoli locus, and in superioribus, and in consequentibus; imo omnis
Epistola ejus ad Romanos, nimiis obscuritatibus involuta est. The whole Epistle
was above his reach, yet he durst not, in the least, question the truth, but
confessed his own weakness, and besides many other places, in his thirtieth ep.
which is, to Oceanus speaking of Fabiola, her pious desire to understand some
passages of holy Scripture in the book of Numbers, he tells her questions to
him: To which, he thus recounts his answer. In quibusdam haesitavi, in aliis
inoffenso pede cucurri, in plerisque ignorantiant confessus sum. He confesses
he was not able to salve the proposals, even of a woman, by reason of the
intricasies in the holy Text, yet he submits to all. And no less in holy
Churches Traditions, or universal customs, as you have heard St. Augustine,
whereof this is one.

Most Christians therefore having not at their deaths (as is supposed) so
intense a charity, as could perfectly ordinate their faults (as Martyrs and
great Saints are justly believed to have) hence after this life (that every
coinquination, as St. John speaks, may be expurged) they are exercised in a due
satispassion, in conformity to Gods orders, before entrance into Heaven. Which
though formally can only be performed by themselves, yet aequivalently by
satisfaction tendered by the Church Militant, and her children, it may be
estimated Theirs, as all Courts of Justice, especially where there is a
commixtion of Mercy, as in this case, will admit. Although I know no Law, or
express institution of God for this, whereby it may be expected in rigor of
justice, or ex condigno, as we speak, That one man's Act, shall be accepted for
another, but only by way of Petition, and impetration; which the children of
holy Church use, especially for the faithful departed.

When therefore all Christians, even from the time, when charity it self in our
blessed Lord dwelt amongst us, did, and do, acknowledge Christian Religion to
be a poenitential, and humble Religion, as the Roman Persecutors exprobrated to
our Primitive Martyrs; they did not, neither do we, prefer external Penances,
and Humiliations before Charity, the Queen of Virtues: which only amongst
Theological Virtues stands the shock of Eternity, and which qualifies, and
enhances our Acts, in order to it; insomuch that although Prayers, Fastings, or
Alms-deeds, do avail, in order to Heaven, and for satisfaction of sins, as the
Council of Trent, Ses. 14. declares; yet it is requisite, that they be
commanded, or ordered by Charity; though the wise Council does not expressly
determine this. Therefore we all desire, according to the Laws of God, that
Charity, which is free, according to the Apostle, may not be straightned in its
operations; but, as circumstances invite, let it be employed (...) one, by
curing souls; in another, by curing bodies; in a third, by corporal Pennances;
in a fourth, by suffering for the dead, or in the dead, by suffering for
themselves, in each, according as the Spirit of God directs. As in the
Collations of the Fathers, Col. 14. C. 4. Nestorius the Abbot, speaking of his
Religious, says: Some choosing the care of the sick; some begging for people
in misery, or teaching the ignorant; or giving alms to the poor, etc. were
every one glorious in their several pieties: so that they were pieties, that
is operations of Charity.

CHAP. XI. How corporal afflictions can satisfy for sins? Whether a probable
Opinion may be followed?
IF we admit not this, we shall with Erasmus his Version, content our selves
with his (...) that is, if we will, for the future commit no more Theft,
Adultery, or the like, there is no need of wearing sackcloth and ashes,
fasting, or any penitential works, though flowing from Charity, to take away
the dregs of sin, and so appease God offended for them; against all Scriptures,
and sense of all Christians: which is indeed Calvin's Libertinism, never known
before in the world, nor, as I presume, by you intended: expressly also against
the Council. of Trent, Sess. 13. and 14. which I entreat you to peruse; for it
condemns with Anathema to say, that Fastings, Prayers, and Alms, or other pious
works through Christ, do not satisfy for temporal punishment due for our sins;
that is, after the guilt of them is taken away by the Sacraments.

I do not say this, as if corporal austerities, or indeed any thing else of
ours were in their own natures proportionable satisfactions in order to God,
for our violations of his Laws; but as all sins, even those which are purely
mental, or that have not proceeded further than the will, are truly, even in
Aristotle's grounds, operations of the whole man; for, Actiones sunt
suppositorum. Thus far Reason will carry us, that even the Body should be
instrumental in abolishing those guilts whereof it was partaker, and sometimes
a shrewd Suggestor. Whereupon we know, the most speculative Divines, as Scotus
his School, and Cajetan, with many others teach, that even the sensitive, that
is, the corporeal part of a man, has a capacity of venial sin in it self; and
as of sin, so of goodness. Whence they rationally teach, that a man, who does
not only intend, but effectually gives Alms, or the like, does add a degree
of goodness, and consequently may hope for a greater reward, than if he had
contained himself within the bounds of his Will.

Whence will further follow, that corporal afflictions, even in themselves, may
properly serve as emanations from a soul afflicted for sin, or as exercises,
of which the body is only capable, flowing from the love of God, as surely they
are, in a true contrite spirit.

And in this kind in holy Writ, they are by true Penitents sometimes
voluntarily undertaken, other times by Gods orders inflicted, and accepted, in
order to remission of sins; and this not always miraculous, as the Texts of
holy Scriptures show. If it were miraculous (as sometimes it is, and you have
well pondered,) it is so far from enervating, that it demonstratively confirms
Gods acceptance of the Churches Doctrine and practice, as to corporal
afflictions, to the end assigned: as is also clearly showed in the place quoted
of the Council of Trent: as also Sess. 6. c. 14.

And hence holy Church by Gods orders injoyns Sacramental pennances (these I
know you do not reject) which are deletory of the dregs of sin, that is, they
may exercise the soul in intending Charity infused by God upon sorrow, and the
efficacy of the Sacrament. By which means is often wrought an absolute
extinction of sin, that is, even of those veleities, which frequently trouble
us after the height of our former mortal malice, by help of the Sacraments
(derived from our blessed Saviors Passion) was extinguished and pardoned.

As concerning some seeming excrescencies, which you, and some others carped
at, and the like Sir Thomas More also jested at, I believe no judicious
Catholic will pretend, that they have strict acquaintance with Church Orders,
but are only a sort of begottery, into which, Devotion, not well regulated,
easily degenerates. But you must not, under this pretense, laugh at all
inferior sorts of Piety and Devotion, which are to be proportioned to each
capacity.

I conclude as to this with St. Augustine, l. 12. de Civit. c. 15. treating of
Angels: Vereor ne facilius judicer affirmare quod nescio, quam docere, quod
scio. I had rather be not knowing, with submission to holy Churches orders,
than swell in a vain opinion of my knowledge, in prejudice of the least of
them. And this must be, except we would hear from the spirit of God, ivistis in
adinventionibus vestris: ye have left me, and walked in your own inventions.
Christian Religion does not receiv estrength, by the weakness of our reason,
but our reason is elevated by the strength of Christian Religion. And therefore
how apparent soever it is, it must vail bonet, if a contest be interjected.

And therefore Master White in his Controversie-Logick, and his fourteenth
reflection teaches thus, consonant to Vincentius Lirinensis, speaking of
Origin and Apollinarius their failings, and falls: How mean and pitiful a
change it is, to fall from the splendid authority of the whole Church, to the
obscure authority of a private Doctor be he what he will. Surely it deserves an
Egyptian Pyramid to perpetuate it against all innovations, and particularly,
against this which we have rejected.

Yet there are a sort of Opiniators, as Cicero calls them, who fancy each
strong fancy of theirs, to be demonstrations: to which all, who will not
incur the note of ignorance, must subscribe, as well in Morals, as in
questions, touching faith.

Whereas St. Augustine, l. 1. Retract. c. 21. disputing learnedly, and largely
of the sense of our Lords words to Saint Peter, super hanc Petram, etc.
concludes thus: Harum duarum sententiarum, quaesit probabilis, eligat lector.
Antiquity then did not disalow probable opinions: nor presently fancy their own
conceits to be demonstrations; much less forbid others to follow such, which
they judged probable. Which is now too much cried down, and truly as to Morals,
I conceive I have demonstrated in my Enchyridion Dial. that probability is
enough.

CHAP. XII. The design of this Treatise.
WHereas you say, I dare not assert the contrary opinion of the souls
continuing in Purgatory, till the day of judgment to be Heresy.

It is easily replied, first with Bellarmine, that to prescribe any term to
particular persons, and much more to the general, that is, to determine months,
or years, non nisi temere definiri potest, it is a great temerity; because, as
he says solidly, it is resincertissima: there is nothing more uncertain in all
Christian principles. For indeed here is neither reason, nor revelation to
conduct us. He spoke upon occasion of Scotus his opinion, who thought,
according to the measures he made of Gods mercies, that none would stay in
Purgatory above ten years. Which weak ground brought Origin into his error, of
promising a period to the pains of Hell. Thus great wits, still produce by
strength of fancy, new grounds, and thence often new errors into the Church;
but to assert a detayning all souls in Purgatory till doomesday,
notwithstanding the Churches Suffrages, Alms, and pious helps, is, for ought I
can see, a novelty; and if so, it is easily proved to be a falsehood: for
amongst the ancient, (...), and (...), were almost equal crimes, as
accompanying each other.

To what you demand further, it is easily rejoyned from our blessed Saviors
example: Quis constituit me Judicem? I am no Judge of Controversies. That is
referred to S. Peter's chair. Therefore I dare not indeed presumptuously censure
other Catholic Doctors opinions, whose persons, and learning I justly
reverence. Keeping my self therefore within the bounds of the Schools, my
design is only to vindicate the Churches Doctrine, and constant practice (as I
am able to understand it) from ignorance, and Novelty. In this none can justly
blame me. Neither ought any to conceive themselves to be particularly concerned
in it; the rather, because I do not believe (when they speak clearly of their
long Purgatory) that they intend any further, than in order to natural causes:
in respect of which, as the Souls are not capable to be changed, as you
learnedly, and truly teach, after, and with Mr. White; so by force of such, or
by order of Nature, they cannot change their posture from Purgatory to Heaven:
which is a great truth.

If any will go further, I say with St, Paul: Non sic didici Christum: I must
leave them: yet with St. Hieroms Proviso, in his Dialogue against Pelagius, l.
3. In dogmatibus disserendis, non persona, sed causa quaerenda est. I touch no
man's person.

Scotus teaches his followers, (treating St. Cyprians case) to be modest in
their tenets, conceiving there may be venial sin, in being too forward, or
heady, even before Canonical declarations, or determinations: and St. Hierome,
Apol. l. 2. says: Si quaestiones de animaestatu in Vrbe commotae sunt, quae
est ista qucrimonia vel querela, quae utrum recipi debeat, Episcoporum judicio
derelinquitur? This must be decided by Bishops: chiefly by the Bishop of Rome:
as he teaches against Ruffinus in the same Apology; and in his 67 Epistle to
Theophilus he says notably: Scito nihil nobis esse antiquius, quam Christi
jura servare, nec patrum transfer terminos, semperque meminisse Romanam
fidem, Apostolico ore laudatam; cujus se esse participem Alexandrina Ecclesia
gloriatur: We must all glory to submit to the decisions of Rome, when
Patriarckes themselves are taught to do it. According therefore to our friends
desire, I only let him know, for prevention of mistakes, what I have learned
in Scotus, and St. Thomas their Schools; and what was the substance of our
amicable Collation; in nothing (as I hope) violating the laws of true
Christian friendship; which I hold sacred, as being consistent with that well
measured Gradation: Amicus Plato, amicus Aristoteles, magis amica VERITAS.
Which method, as you know, was religiously observed by learned Sir Thomas More,
in his sharp congresses with Tindal, when he objected his great friend Erasmus
his version (reduplicating in vain the notion of a friend) against the sense of
Holy Church.

FINIS.

