CHARACTERS IN BLOOD, OR, A Bleeding Savior, Held out to a BLEEDING SINNER.
WHEREIN He may know whether he has been called, by, and followed after the
Leadings of the Spirit. Being a draught of the Spare hours of a Lover of the
Faithful. By R. Dyer.

LONDON, Printed for W. Redmayne, at the sign of the Crown on Addle-Hill, near
Carter Lane, 1676.

To all those, into whose hands this may fall, whether Teachers or Learners.
MY earnest Request to all, is that you would take every one his Portion, as
you find it according to Truth; what is not Truth, let that be returned to me,
or blotted out, but if thou find'st it truth when brought to the test, of Holy
Write, then I advise thee to receive and embrace and put it in practice, and if
thou do not resolve so to do, lay it down and go no further: whether it be
reproof to any, or consolation to any, be sure not to reject it: it may be it
may meet with some that will cry tear it, cut it, burn it, to the Law and to
the Testimony Man, if it agree not with that, I say so too; but if it agree
with that, take heed, as for thy life, thy Soul, Man, or Woman, what thou do,
whatever Men say Man, that is insignificant, thy great concern is to bearken
what God the Lord speaks, if he speaks Peace man, say not thou there is no
peace; and if he say return no more to folly, take heed and venture not, for
Gods speaking Peace to any, admits of no liberty of Sin, though this be the
very guise of Professors at this very day, I shall say no more to thee now,
only beg thee to be serious, and not dally with the things of thy soul.

R. O.

1 Cor. 5.7. For even Christ our Passover is Sacrificed for us.


THere is not a necessity of opening the design of the Apostle in this Chapter:
therefore I shall not take up time nor room in it, but in the Words you may
please to take notice of five things:

First, Of a Passover.

Secondly, Who the Passover is: and that is,

Thirdly, The Service to which he is appointed, and that is to be slain or
sacrificed, this may be proved else where, as 2 Acts 23.

Fourthly, The end for which he is slain: that is,

1. To declare the glory of Gods grace.

2. To work our Salvation.

Fifthly, Here are the persons for which all this is done: and that is for
Believers, and that is gathered from those little words, (us) and (our,) for
even Christ (our) Passover is Sacrificed for (us:) what (us,) Paul and the
believing Corinthians; time is precious with me, or else I might a little show
you the import of a Sacrifice, and what it does denote, and also show the
necessity of poor Believers, Offering a Sacrifice. But I entreat to be excused
here, and that I may discourse a little Methodically; let me gather up my
design in a plain conclusion from the Words, though many may be drawn clearly
out of them, and it is this: that the sins of Believers are passed over or
acquitted, by virtue of the Sacrifice of the Lord Jesus; I shall

First, Prove this to be truth from the Word of Truth.

Secondly, Show a little why it is so.

Thirdly, Improve this point for Soul advantage.

First, Prove that Christ is a Sacrifice for believers sins, 3 Romans 25. Whom
God has set forth to be a propitiation: By virtue of what, or through what,
why his blood: through Faith in his blood, Pray you mark, he does say through
Faith in him; no, then he might have done away sins, and not have dyed and
bled; I! but it is through Faith in his Blood, not through the Virtue of his
Life, but through his Death: and if you read on, you shall see that this was
for the remission of sins, or the passing over of sins: for it will bear that
sense; so in Romans 5.6. In due time Christ dyed, what for: not to be an example
only, not for the testimony of his Doctrine, but (for) the Ungodly: he (dyed)
and he (dyed) for the Ungodly: yea, says Paul and the believing Romans, Verse.
8. When we were Sinners Christ dyed for us; Mark this for sinners, not for the
righteous, and them that be perfect, but for sinners; and while they were
sinners, (us) that are now Believers were Sinners, when Christ dyed for (us,)
us believers that are now justified by Faith, Verse. 1. so Heb. 9.12. Not by the
Blood of Bulls and Goats, not by the tears of our repentance and sorrow, no nor
by our blood, but by his own Blood, not our own, but by his own Blood; whose
blood, Christ the High Priest, who has obtained eternal Redemption for (us,)
and Verse. 15. For this cause he is the Mediator, what cause, that by means of
death he might redeem the Transgressors that were under the first Testament,
and Ver. 26. But now once in the end of the World, has he appeared to put away
sin, by the Sacrifice of himself, not to bring the news of sinners putting away
sins by the sacrifice of themselves, but by the sacrifice of himself, and he
was offered to bear the sins of many, Verse. 28. where are they then that take
upon them to assert, he did not bear believers sins, are not these plain words,
need they any interpretation, and here is not one single Text only, but it is
the whole scope of the Apostle; many more might be produced, but I Will only
mention one more, and then I hope their Sandy Foundation will be shaken, that
build on their own faith and repentance, as if that bear the burden of sin from
us; 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his (own self) bear (our) sins (in) his (own) body on the
Tree; here it is plain as words can make it; certainly thou must renounce thy
reason to deny so many plain sillables, this the Prophet David prayed for, and
do thou think the Spirit of God does things in vain, in the 2 Samuel 24.10. O
Lord take away the iniquity of thy Servant, so Job 7.21. And why do not thou
take away my iniquity: Do thou think sin and the burden of it can be taken
away, and not be born on no back, shoulders, or arms, how then should it be
taken away: and if it must be taken and born away, do thou think the Holy God
the infinite; first, being absolutely considered in his own essence and nature,
in an abstractive sense, disunited to the Humane nature, do thou think the
Godhead purely considered, will come under sin to bear it away; no, purity it
self is to pure to look on sin, much less to touch sin as it were; no, no, poor
deluded Creature, God in his simple essence and being cannot bear sin, but
clothing himself with our nature, he can bear sin away: for which cause he is
called the Lamb of God, that takes away Sin, John 1.29. A Lamb is queit and
dumb before the Shearer: which place will well serve to expound that place,
Isa. 53.7. Which thou will not have understood of Christ, least it should like
the Flood in the Gospel sweep down thy whole Building together: here is comfort
for believers, but they that do not believe this, are condemned already, John
3.18. By this time soul thou see it plain, that Christ is a sacrifice for sin
if it be not, would God I might speak with thee, but I proceed to what is next.

Secondly, Why does God Passover and aquit believers sins: why negatively, not
for our sakes, nor any faith and repentance in us, for there is nothing
naturally in us, that may be an argument to move him to pity us, unless this
be one (that there is none) but he does aquit sins first of all, to declare his
mercy and good pleasure; It pleased the Father that in him should all fullness
dwell, and it is his pleasure that of that fullness we all shall receive the
grace of Pardon, we are not his people, because we please him, but because it
pleases him to make us his people, 1 Samuel 12.22. God had decreed to call a
people to himself, God saw his poor people fallen, and lost, and undone, and
his bowels yearned over poor man, he see poor man in his Blood, as it is Ezekiel.
16.6. Then God pittyed him, and made a Covenant with his Son, that he should
break the Serpents head, Genesis 3.15. When man had broke his Covenant, then it
was that God in his love and his pity redeemed him; then he was pleased to make
a New Covenant, and by his Mercy, Wisdom and Power, to consecrate a New and
Living Way for the Salvation of poor Souls; even by a Covenant that he made
with his Son, Heb. 10.20. What infinite Free Grace was here, that would save
them that would not save themselves, and what does this declare but his
attribute of Mercy, the good pleasure of his own Heart; but I must use brevity,
and proceed,

Secondly, Believers shall be aquitted for the glory of free grace, you will say
it may be this is all one, nay stay there too, I say it is to declare his great
Name, or to get himself a great Name, this is that Joshua urges God with, to
show himself, Josh. 7.9. And what will thou do unto thy great Name, so Jer.
14.7. Though our iniquities testify against us, yet do it for thy Name sake,
it is a good plea for poor sinners, and so God says, Ezekiel 36.22. Be it known to
you I do it not for your sakes; No, for whose sake then, why, Verse. 21. For my
Holy Names sake, God stands wonderfully upon the honor of his great Name, he
will get him a name of praise; a name of Grace, and a name of Power, and a name
of Wisdom, to declare his grace in the misterious way, though these poor
shallow empty pated men, would bear us in hand, that God does forgive sins in
an ordinary way, even as men forgive one another; but then wherein would God
get himself a name of Wisdom, in the Salvation of Souls, that were only to get
a name of Mercy and Power, etc. I dare say such silly empty Creatures as they
would think they had wisdom enough to pardon faults in such a way; but herein
will God get himself a name of wisdom, in saving souls in a very misterious
way, therefore Christ is called the Wisdom of God, Luke 11.49. and 1 Cor. 2.7.
Alas in an ordinary way, poor shallow man could have found out a way to forgive
men, I but herein does Gods name of wisdom appear in his Son, who is the wisdom
of the Father, he will declare his name of wisdom by going beyond all men's
wisdom, to acquit sins, that is another reason.

Thirdly, He will acquit sinners, because it is the nature of his Covenant so to
do, it is according to the tenor of Gods Covenant, though some times he may
aflict them with a Rod, for their Pride or Wantonness, etc. yet (says he) my
Covenant will I not break with them, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my
Mouth, Psalm 89.34. Therefore Jeremiah pleads with God in prayer, Jer. 14.21.
Break not thy Covenant with us; What Is the Covenant? Genesis 17.7. To be a God to
thee and thy Seed after thee, who are his Seed but believers, for he is the
Father of the Faithful; Romans 4.16. so in Jerem. 32.40. I Will make an everlasting
Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good, but
I Will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall never depart from me, poor
souls, it is possible they may sometimes slip out of the way, and go astray, I!
but they shall never depart from me so, but they shall again own me for their
God; it may be I may frown on them sometimes for their iniquities, I! but my
loving kindness will I not utterly take away from them, so in Ezekiel. 36. about
the 18. Verse. God was furious with them, but yet in Ver. 28. he would be their
God, and they should be his people, they are his people still, he will perform
the Covenant made of old with them, Exodus 3.6. I am the God of Abram, Isaac,
and Jacob; who were these? why, all of them believers, and thou art their
brother that art a believer, and oh the goodness of God, that though we fail in
performing our part of the Covenant, yet he never fails on his part; he is the
same yesterday, to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8. And the Covenants that he
makes abide for ever, I Will make an everlasting Covenant with them, to thy Seed
too; I, but how long does this Covenant stand firm, for term of years? no, no,
man, it is for ever, it is an everlasting Covenant, and established Covenant too,
Jerem. 32.40. Genesis 17.7. To believers is it established; they are the Seed of
Abra'm, though they were born of Abra'm after the flesh, yet they are not
accounted Abra'ms Seed, or Children, if they be unbelievers and haters of
Christ, so Christ tells them, John 8.39, 40. If you were Abraham's Children, you
would do the works of Abraham; but now you seek to kill me, so did not Abraham:
it is clear then that they are Abraham's children that are so by Faith or
Imitation, so that you see it is the nature of the Covenant that sins should be
acquitted, that they may be a people in Covenant with him, and he a God in
Covenant with them, these things may be profitable to you, but I intend not
narration, but perpensation, or a due search of our state, whether we are of
that number for whom Christ dyed, and for whose sins he was sacrificed and
slain.

It may be some will say, I, Christ dyed we know, but what are the singular
advantages to us of his death, and if we be of that number of his beloved ones;
why, that might be brought in here, to encourage thee to try thy self, but I
shall give it thee (God willing) in a word, of consolation in the close of my
thoughts on the Text; but before I go any further, I cannot but break out into
a use of admiration! and first then beloved, here is the Free Grace of God, in
giving his Son a Sacrifice for those that believe, John 3.16. God (so) loved
the World, how (so) why so as (one said) there is not such another so, with
(so) great love that he gave his only begotten Son, and 'twas (so) freely too:
without the least motive to take with his love, (so) loved the World as was
unexpected by them, (so) and in such away too; that could never have been
thought of, or contrived by all the wisdom of all the Heavenly Host, it was
looked on as a demonstration of the love of Abraham, to give up his Son a
sacrifice to God, and truly 'twas love indeed, I am afraid few in our days have
such a love, to give up a Son that he loved, Genesis 22.2.12. I, but this was but
to give up the worse to the better, the Creature to the Creator, but this was
more: God gave his Son, the better for the worse, the Creator to dye for the
Creature, oh infinite immense love, that God should give his only Son, the Son
of his delight, Behold my Servant in whom my Soul delights; and more then
that, he delighted to give him to dye, here is admirable Free-love too: and it
pleased the Father, or the Father took delight or complacency in bruising his
Son: Oh the free-love of God.

Secondly, Let us here admire the love of the Son, that he should offer himself
a Sacrifice for sinners, that he that was offended should dye for offenders;
yea, that we should have the offended set offenders free, yet this he did for
enemies, Romans 5.10. It may be for a friend, or a good man some, one or other
would dare to dye, as in Ver. 7. But was it ever known that any dyed for an
enemy; yea, that he should lay down his life himself, not by constraint but
willingly, all the world could not take away his life from him, so he says
himself, in Matthew. 26.53. Think thou that I cannot now pray to my Father,
and he shall give me more then twelve Legions of Angels; they would soon have
delivered him, or himself could have delivered himself; no, but he does it
freely without compulsion or force, John 10.18. No man takes it from me, but I
lay it down of my self: I have power to lay it down of my self, and power to
take it up again. Where art thou now that say Christ is not God? was there
ever any Creature that had power to lay down his life of himself? Paul in the
strength of Christ, in Gods strength, could do all things, and in that strength
could be not only willing to be bound, but to dye, but he had not power to lay
down his life of himself; and if it should be thought that any had power to lay
down his life, yet no man has power to take up his life again when he had laid
it down; nay more, is it warantable for man to give his life of himself, and no
man take it away: I, but says Christ, no man takes it away; surely none
that is a Creature has this love of the Son; me thinks this should endear our
hearts to Christ, and make us cry out in the vehemence of our affections, as
David did of the Law of God, Ps. 119.97. Oh how love I thy Law, it is my
meditation all the day. Oh how love I the Lord Jesus, when we want words, then
oh how! oh how! love I the Lord: He is my Meditation all the day, yea, when I
remember him on my Bed, in the night watches, Psalm 63.6. Then my Meditation of
him shall be sweet, Psalm 104.34. And it would be sweet indeed, if we could
thus apply him to our selves, and say with David and Isaiah: Oh Lord, thou art
my God, Psalm 140.6. Isa. 25.1. This word (my God) is a sweet word, as when
Jesus said to Thomas, be not faithless but believing, John 20.27. Thomas
answered, and said, (my) Lord and (my) God. So in the 13. Verse, when the two
Angels in white asked Mary, plain-hearted Mary; What is the matter Mary, why
weepest thou? Why, says she, because they have taken away my Lord; How should
this comfort poor souls, and how should this endear souls to Christ, and make
them willing to go through any difficulty, when they can say he is (my) Lord;
the very thoughts of Christ did make the Spouses heart so rise within her, that
her tongue could not be silent, but she would be setting out his excellency as
she was able, and when she had not words, when her Rhetoric failed her to
express her self, she cries out as one in an extacy, at such a raised rate, the
is (altogether) lovely; and believer let me ask thee, (for others know it not,)
is not Christ (altogether) lovely, in his love, and in his Free Grace, as I
have said; and oh! that by the freeness of his love and grace, that any poor
soul may be persuaded, that there is nothing on his part to be done in a way of
merit; no, no believer, Christ has purchased eternal Redemption for thee, Heb.
9.12. And therefore there is nothing for thee to do, but answer his love with
thy love; and that cannot be better known then by living to his praise, and
rejoicing in him, and singing his praises, as David says, Psalm 81.1. Sing
aloud, not only rejoice, but sing, and sing (aloud,) Make a joyful noise to the
God of Jacob, that is to the God of believers; yea, Verse. 2. Take a Psalm and
Sing: but may a poor foul say I know this work, (or rather joy) for Saints, but
how shall I know whether I am of this number of believers, true I here of
glorious things for the Saints, And glorious things are spoken of thee, oh!
thou City of God; but this is that which marr's all my joy, I do not know
whether I am a believer? but what shall I do to know this, that shall be my
work as fast as I can come to it; but before I give any Carracters of the
Saints of God, I would a little show some of the various ways that God takes in
the bringing home of his chosed to himself, and it may be this may a little
satisfy thee, and it may be thou may find out thy state by this, and truly
we should try our state by any means: we must examine our selves, Solomon
says, Prove. 27.23. Be thou diligent to know the state of thy Flocks. And
should not we be diligent to know the state of our souls, and it is knowable,
else why does the Apostle say, Examine your selves, whether you be in the
Faith, 2 Cor. 13.5. And give all diligence to make your Calling and Election
sure, 2 Pet. 1.10 Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord,
Lam. 3.40. Let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing
in himself, and not in another; If he find his work sound, if his work be the
work of God, if he has believed in this Lord Jesus Christ, that is sacrificed
for us: then shall he have great rejoicing in himself (alone,) and not in
another; if a man examine himself (alone) and find his state good, he shall
have rejoicing (alone) what ever others think or speak it matters not much; if
he find upon due measure and search that his work be right, he shall have
rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another; in Gal 6.4. Now it were in vain
to bid us try our state, if it were not to be known, and I hope none dare be so
bold as to charge the Spirit of God with Vanity. But now a little to hint at
the various ways that God uses as means, to bring back lost man to himself.

First, He does it by a strong hand from Heaven: thus he did to Paul with
thundrings from Heaven, as you may read at large, Acts 9. Poor Paul was amazed,
he was in a storm, there arose Euraclidon upon him; how is it with thee poor
soul, did thou ever find thy self tossed in the Tempestuous Waves of Divine
frowns immediately darted out from the Almighty, wast thou ever smitten down as
it were on thy face, wast thou ever sensible of Divine anger against thy sin,
try as thou read, but briefly.

Secondly, Sometimes poverty and want is the means that God uses, so it was
with the Prodigal, Luke 15.15. When he was so hungry, that he would have eat
with the Swine, then it is said, He came to himself: though this is but a
Parable, yet it teaches us that it is Gods way, by poverty to bring home his
children to his house; try how it is with you, (I confess) I am afraid when some
people are brought to great straits, then they will get into the fellowship of
the Saints, that so they may be provided for, and indeed coming in, in such
condition, their state is to be suspected, therefore look to it, for this is
but too follow Christ for the Loaves, and is no less then hypocrisy: but if
thou art sincere, and thou find'st upon due search thou have no such design
it is well for thee, God brought thee low.

Thirdly, God uses to show his people Visions, to bring them to their
considerations, as with Cornellius, Acts 10. beginning, God did send him to a
secondary means, he must hear Peter what he shall tell him, but the Vision that
he saw, was the first step to his conversion: this was the Vision of an Angel,
that he saw at the ninenth hour of the day. Have none of you met with the Angel
of the Covenant at any time, that has told you, you must go to Peter, to some
faithful Minister, to inquire what you shall do, but this is not very frequent
in our days.

Fourthly, Sometimes God compasses men round with outward troubles,
distresses, and afflictions: he does afflict them with enemies, to bring them
home to himself; this way God took with Manasseth, who was as wicked a man as
any you Read of; yet such is the power of God, that he has his way to bring
him home to himself; he has the hearts of Kings in his own hands, which are
for the most part the untamedst hearts in the World, yet he turns them as the
Rivers of Water, which way he pleases, Prove. 21.1. As he did this King, 2 Chronicles. 33.12. When he was in affliction, he besought the Lord his God, and
humbled himself greatly, note, here God brought him down, before he would
humble himself, and he prayed to the Lord, and it is said he was entreated of
him, how is it with you Sirs, try I pray you.

Fifthly, Sometimes God brings them to read the Scriptures, and there he sets
in and takes hold of their hearts; thus it was with that Eunuck of Ethiopia, a
man of great authority under Candace, Queen of Ethtopia, who it is said had the
charge of all her Treasure; note here by the way, that God calls some great
men, rich men, though Christ tells us, it is hard for rich men to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 19.23. Yet he does not say it is impossible; for the
next words almost says, With God all things are possible, and though the
Apostle says, Not many Mighty, nor many Noble are called, 1 Cor. 1.26. Yet he
does not say, not (any) for this Centurion, and this Eunuck that I speak of
even now, were called, And among the Chief Rulers many believed on him, John
12.42. But to return, pray you excuse a little my extravagancy, I say by
reading the Word, this great Man was in Gods way, and God sends Phillip to
second his endeavors, to open the Scripture to him, and so he Believed and was
Baptized, as you may see in Acts 8. from the Verse. 27. to the end, this may be
witnessed by History: that of Austin, and others; but I forbear, have any of
you, to whom these lines may come, found a word by reading, take hold on your
hearts with power, let experience speak, I must not enlarge necessity lies
upon me.

Sixthly, Sometimes souls are called by the Preaching of the Gospel; and indeed
this is Gods most ordinary way, For Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17. And
God has ordinarily two voices in Preaching or speaking to sinners, to bring
them in.

First, By the voice that show them their sins and strikes thee down, or if you
please by a terrible voice, the voice of his terror does sometimes sound, as
that word: The same Jesus whom you have Crucified, he is made both Lord and
Christ, Acts 2.36. It Is as dreadful a word as could have been spoken, for it
smote them to the very heart, and made them cry out: What shall we do, this
voice made them a terror to themselves, this very voice did then shake their
Earthly hearts, it shaked them so, that they were never settled again, until
3000. of them were set down safe in Christ, but then

Secondly, God speak sometimes by a sweet still voice, after the fire of Christ
love is stirred up to them, there comes a small still voice, then the voice of
the Turtle is heard in our Land, a sweet mild voice; by this voice Lydia's
heart was opened. Ah! when souls have the love of Christ spoken to their
hearts, then the very love of Christ constrains them, some one way and some
other ways are brought over to Christ, by Preaching; yea, by hearing the word
Preached, there were 3000. souls, Acts 2. and Acts 4. 5000. souls brought to
Christ, these were glorious Sermons, that were the means to convert so many
souls: and Acts 15.7. says Peter, God made choice among us, that the Gentiles
by my Mouth should hear the Gospel, and believe. So Ephesians. 3.8. Unto me who am
less then the least of all Saints, is this grace given, that I should Preach
among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ, to make men see what is
the fellowship of the Mystery: Making men see, is the very first work upon a
soul from God, now by the Word Preached, men's eyes are opened, therefore Psa.
19.8. The Commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes, and Christ
first opens the eyes of the Blind, and men are turned from darkness to light, I
cannot stand to quote you the Text's for all this, but you that are wise are
aquainted with it; and indeed on the contrary, they that are lost, The God of
this World has blinded their eyes, And if the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them
that be lost: They that are not called, have their understanding darkened
through the ignorance that is in them, Ephesians. 4.18. What say you, have your eyes
been opened? have you by the Word been made to see these things? and is there a
constraint laid upon you, to walk in the Laws of Jesus? it is the general
consent of all I think, that Faith comes by hearing and preaching plainly, not
with the enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and
of Power, 1 Cor. 2.4. But if all these voices and ways do not bring over souls,
for God does call and knock once, yea, twice, yet man perceives it not, he
knocks by word, by mercy, by affliction, yet he has another way, and that is

Seventhly, By a dream in a Vision of the Night when deep sleep falls upon
men, in slumbrings on the bed, what then, then he opens the ear, and seals
their instruction, that he may withdraw man from his purpose, and hide Pride
from man, thus he keeps back the soul from the Pit, Job 33.15. I am not
altogether ignorant, what some might say of this Text, but certain I am, God
has his ways hidden to men often times; and I have been told by some serious
souls, that I hope are precious in the Lords sight, in some dark Country, what
the Lord has wrought, even in this way, therefore fear not; oh soul! thou art
safe from the Pit, that art called even this way, thus now I have hinted a
little at the ways that God does take to call home his Election. I Will now a
little show you how God does in his ordinary way begin and go on step, by step,
in his most ordinary way; and if it be a little disorderly, as to place, pray
you put that to my charge, or bear if you can with me in so doing, I Will put
things together:

First, God does awaken men and open their eyes, and therefore they are put
together by the Apostle: Awake thou that sleep, and immediately it follows,
and Christ shall give the Light, Ephesians. 5.14. And as I said before, Preaching is
to make men see, Ephesians. 3.9. So when Christ came, the first thing we read he did,
was that the Blind received their sight, Matthew. 11. And so when Christ begun to
Preach, Luke 4.18. What is the first work, to recover sight to the blind,
therefore it was Prophesied of him, that he should be a light to the Gentiles,
Isa. 42.6. to light them that they may see what a condition they are in.

Secondly, When God brings them to see their condition, then he brings them
next to a willingness, to be out of that dangerous state in which they are:
when he sees himself a lost fallen son of Adam, in a state of wrath; nay more,
when he sees what he has done against Christ, that it is he that has taken
Christ, and by wicked hands has Crucified and slain him, then he wrings the
hands, and is ready to tear the hair, then is there no way of escape: And this
will in the

Third Place put him a doing, then with the pricked Jews and the Jailer, Acts
2.37. Acts 16.30. What shall I do to be saved? Is there any hope for me? then
the sold would fain be doing somewhat to pacify Gods wrath; Oh! then, will
the Lord be pleased with thousands of Lambs, or with ten thousands of Rivers of
Oil: then shall I give the fruit of my body, for the sin of my Soul, as in Mic.
6.7. Then duty, prayer and fasting, and any thing, if that will stop Gods mouth
(be it with reverence spoken) then do any thing, run any way; prithee soul take
heed now, for now thou art in danger of miscarrying: I am very much afraid,
here many a soul has run a ground and split, when they have been smitten, and
could not for want of skill, know where to rest; they have fallen in with that
poor deluded people to rest on their own repentance and their fastings, etc.
Lord pity such poor souls: I have had credible information of some that have
thus been wrought upon and carried away; Oh Sirs, here is your greatest danger:
Oh! now for a skilful Pilot to direct you, or else you sink and are undone,
they lean to their own weak understanding, and not to Christ; and others there
are when convinced, do divert the conviction, by seeking after satisfaction
some other way: as Cain looked not after a Savior, but went to Building a
City, and so wore off the impression that was made on him, his heart was taken
up with some inferior good, like him David speaks of, Psalm 52.7. That made not
God his strength, but trusted in the abundance of his riches, Instead of making
the name of the Lord his strong Tower (which is Christ) Prove. 18.10. He made
his riches his refuge or City, therefore take heed now soul, and look about
thee for a right remedy. That brings me to the next step.

Fourthly, God brings a poor soul to see a remedy, he then gives them a sight
of his Son, by presenting him to their eye, they see before it is true at first,
but that was their dreadful state, but that was but a glimmering sight or light
to this, that sight so exceedingly terrified them, that they feared and quaked,
and made them shriek out: Oh, what shall we do; That sight did not show them as
remedy; it is the sight of the remedy, and an apprehension of the possibility of
attaining that remedy; that does give a little hopes to a poor soul, when the
soul sees there is Balm in Gilliad, and that there is a Physician there, this
makes the poor soul look and long a little: and looking and viewing Christ, the
soul will then loath it self the more, when it sees it self so much unlike
Christ? before it may be the soul heard of Christ by the hearing of the ear:
but now my eye sees thee, wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and
ashes; when the soul sees Christ in his doing and suffering, and that so
freely, from no other spring then his own love! verily, then the poor soul
thinks the worse of it is self, and says, I am not worthy; it is true I am a
little Stung by this fiery Serpent, sin; but how shall such a defiled eye as my
eye is, look upon such a glorious, bright and splended object as yonder brazen
Serpent is, Numb. 21.9. That stands upon the pole, where Purity it self does
hold it up. But then a step more:

Fifthly, When Christ is presented and held out to a poor soul, then when the
soul begins to see it is own unworthiness, then it will be much fearing that it
shall not be accepted, will he (think you) entertain me; then Christ shows not
only his beauty, but his willingness too, to embrace thee, and says, do you
think I am unwilling? Alas, that is the great complaint I have to make of you
-- You will not come to me, that you may have life, John 5.40. Alas man, there
is no want of will in me, but in thy self, I have done all that I can to make
thee willing, which is a clear proof of my willingness; I have showed thee that
there is a necessity of coming to me, he that is stung cannot be healed, unless
he look unto me, I have showed thee that there is no cure any where else, no
acceptance, no duty pleasing to God, unless you come to me; no, no, man thou
can do nothing without me, John 15.5. And that there is neither name nor
thing under Heaven by which you can be saved but by me, Acts 4.12. If I had
told you there had been any cure by your own Faith, or your own Repentance, or
any thing else, then indeed you might have said I was not willing, because I
told you, you might seek remedy else where; but I tell you I am very willing,
yea, and I do wait for your acceptance of the love that I have declared to you.
Oh, that you would not be unkind to me, nor so cruel to your selves, as to keep
me out of your hearts any longer; I profess I am not willing of your ruin, but
rather that you would be healed, I have life for dead souls, I have light for
dark souls, I have strength for weak souls, I have holiness for pulluted souls,
I have ease for pained souls, I have health, saving health for sick souls, I
have bread for the hungry, and drink for the thirsty, clothing for the naked, I
have Salvation for lost souls: nay, what have I not that good is, and this I
have revealed and declared: I have brought life, yea, and (eternal life)
immortallity to light through the Gospel, and yet notwithstanding all that I
have showed to manifest their necessity; and my own willingness; yet I am
forced after all to complain that there is none, (or hardly any) that stirs
up himself to take hold on me, me and my light, me and my life, me and my
righteousness, though they see all their own righteousness to be as filthy
Dunghill rags, yet they will not stir up themselves to take hold on me with my
all, Isa. 64, 7. Come poor trembling sinner, come take hold of my strength,
come thou that sin is ready to burn up thy spirit, I have water that shall
allay that heat, come buy of me Wine to pour into thy wounds, come man without
money of thy own righteousness, or thy own merit; come without thine own
worthiness, and when a poor soul is brought to see this indeed, why then in the
next place:

Sixthly, The Soul even leans on it is Beloved, then Lord I am thine, and will
be thine, then it runs, hastens to this strong Tower wherein it shall be safe,
Prove. 18.10. Now the soul is lodged safely in the bosom of it is beloved; Oh
soul, who ever thou be that stand'st trembling and art afraid, thou art not
worthy, I tell thee, he want's not thy worth, but thy willingness to accept his
worth, therefore prithee give thy consent this day, this present hour before
thou stir one foot out of the place, never talk of asking counsel of friends,
nor biding them farewell that; are at home, as he in the Gospel; (now) says
God, I never told thee another time, nor too morrow, But now is the time, the
accepted time, 2 Cor. 6.2. And too day if thou will hear my voice, Heb. 3.7. Oh
now, say as his children that had back sliden from him, when he bid them
return, Jer. 3.22. Behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God; If
it has not been done before, let this be the Marriage-day: let the knot be
knit this day, do not put him off tell to morrow; he may leave thee to morrow
to the hardness of thy heart, and thou may dye in thy sins and be damned.

It may be, some poor soul may now say: but I have not observed this all along
in my soul, therefore I doubt it is not well with me? it may be so soul, yet
there may be some that have, and some can remember, the manner how, the place
where, the time when, God did call them to himself, and yet notwithstanding
thou have not taken such special notice of Gods way, yet Christ may be as truly
thine as his. I! this would rejoice my heart, indeed (would thou say if I
knew it,) but how shall I know it: truly this leads me to the thing, I promised
you to try my self, and you according to the measure and rule of the Law of
liberty; and here I would persuade thee, to fall to the work of examination,
and bring thy self to the Touchstone of the Word; and if I speak not according
to the rule, say that is mine, but if it be according to the Word, take heed
thou reject it not, for by that Word thou must, and I must stand or fall; I,
and presently too, do not put it off. If thou would have present comfort to
thy soul, or if thou would know thy danger; to it presently: Oh, I am afraid
they that are so loath to come to the Sanctuary weights and measure, will at
last when they are broughtt to it, be found with that (motto) on their
foreheads, as is left on Record, touching the trial of Beltshazar that wicked
man, Dan. 5.27. (Tekel) thou art weighed in the Balances, and art found
wanting. Prithee Soul, come to the Sanctuary-scale betimes, that if thou should
be found to light, thou might have time to get weight, before the Market time
be over and done; and here in this trial I shall not confine my self to that
one (only) distinguishing Carracter, that I find some Learned faithful men in
the Church of Christ, do give out as the only distinguishing Carracter for
souls to Judge their state by, and that is whether God the Father, God the Son,
God the Spirit, or else some inferior thing, (be it what it will or can be) be
a man's or souls chief good, and the only object of his delight and happiness.
In plain English, whether or no upon due search (as we say in cold blood,) that
is when a man (on the one hand) is not lifted up in any way from the Earth,
from the consideration of trouble that sometimes are met withal among terrene
things: nor on the other hand, when a man lies pressed hard with some violent
temptation, that he seems to take little delight in God: as Job, Jeremiah, and
David, when Gods hand pressed them fore, these are not times for a man to pass
a right Judgment of his state, and he that thus and then judges himself,
judges only according to appearance, and not a righteous Judgment, John 7.24.
And the Scripture does plainly lay down a rule thus to judge a man's state by:
namely, whether or no a man love God so as to leave all (not by constraint,
but) willingly out of the love to God, and so is a clear and distinct Carracter
of a man's state, what it is as may be easily cleared from, Matt. 10.37. Luke
14.26. And though it be of absolute necessity that we know this, else we can
never have any sollid and true joy in our hearts, or else as the Apostle says
to the Gallations: we shall never rejoice in our selves alone, yet I am
persuaded that not one of many is able thus to judge of his state, though as I
said even now, it is that that is our chief concernment as we value a well
grounded peace. But with subordination to this great and grand Carracters, I
hope to hold out from the Word of Truth, many simptomes of a Heaven born soul,
or of a soul for whom Christ is Sacrificed, as the Phrase in the Text is:

First, It Is a good sign Christ is thine, if thou have heard the voice of
Christ, My Sheep, says Christ, hear my voice, he does not say the Goats, or
the Flocks of the World, or the Devil hear his voice, but my Sheep hear my
voice; thou will say this was hinted at before, when it was said that one of
the first things that Christ does is to open blind eyes, and to unstop deaf
ears, but I am not speaking of that now, but of hearing Christ voice, so as to
know it from a stranger, for so says Christ, a stranger they will not follow,
John 10.5. Now if thou have that skill to know thy Lords voice it is a good
sign, thou have had some intimacy with him, I mean so know it as not to be
deceived by a conterfeit voice, but I Will be brief.

Secondly, Have thou been made willing to follow Christ; They that follow me in
the regeneration, ye shall sit upon Thrones, Judging the Tribes of Israel. Try
whether you are willing to follow Christ in duty, in ordinances, in
afflictions: If any man take not up his Cross and follow me, he cannot be my
Disciple; Why so, because none is a Disciple, but such as follow Christ, Luke
14.27. Matthew. 10.38. He that takes not his Cross, that is, take it willingly,
readily, for he does not say take it when it is not laid on him, for Luke says
bear the Cross in that prequoted Text, which does intimate that he must have it
put upon him; try now man as thou go, art thou willing to suffer shame for
his Name, art thou willing to follow Christ, not only to his exaltation, but to
his persecution, not to the Crown, but to the Cross, it is a sign thou art a
Virgin, then if thou art willing to follow Christ wheresoever he goes, Rev.
4.14. Into a Prison as well as a Palace. I put in this here, because it follows
the hearing of Christ's voice, My Sheep hear my voice, and they follow me. If I
do set down things disorderly, not arising higher step by step, (for indeed
when a Christian can follow Christ, he is come to a good degree,) excuse me in
this for two reasons:

First, In that my time is but borrowed, or redeemed, if thou knew how
hardly, thou would not say I offered thee that which cost me naught.

Secondly, Because I would now rather find out consolation, then windy
ostentation, which is but to savor after the flesh, I can but hint at things,
pray you enlarge them in your own Meditations.

Thirdly Have thou a Holy fear of God upon thee, David cries out Psalm. 34.10.
Oh, fear the Lord all ye his Saints, intimating, that none but Saints know how
to fear him, he does not say be afraid, but fear him; there are two sorts of
fear:

1. There is a slavish fear, arising from the apprehension of wrath, of
punishment, such a fear as arises from guilt, thus it was with Adam, when he
had sinned, Genesis 3.10. I heard thy voice in the Garden, and I was afraid, he
did not fear the Lord before he offended him, but he was afraid of his wrath,
when he had offended, by the way take notice sinner: (if thou should cast thy
eyes on this,) thou that dare sin boldly without fear, thou will afterward be
afraid, yea, and tremble at the sight of wrath.

2. There is a fillial and childlike fear, or if you please a conjugal fear,
and this arises from the goodness of God: They shall fear the Lord and his
goodness, in the latter days, Hos. 3.5. From the consideration of forgiveness,
God should be feared, There is forgiveness with thee that thou may be feared,
Psalm 130.4. It Is a fear of the right stamp: to fear him as one would fear to
displeases ones only friend that one loved; as it is with those that are in
Love, they will rather run the hazard of any thing then displease them; if
their love be true, oh, this is the fear that God calls for, and gives a
blessing to: Blessed is the Man that thus fears the Lord, Psalm. 112.1.
Therefore pass the time of your sojourning here in fear, 1 Pet. 1.17. Why must
it be in fear, why it follows, Forasmuch (or because) ye (know) you were not
redeemed with corruptible things, but with the precious Blood of Christ. Oh
Sirs, ye are they that know you were redeemed, Pass you the time of your
sojourning here in fear; It Is true, a fear of the loss of Heaven should quicken
us to diligence, as Heb. 4.1. Let us fear least a promise being left us, any of
us should fall short of it, I! but the fear off ending God is the truest Gospel
fear, and is surely the product of the Spirit of God, and so is a good sign in
them that have it, that they are them for whom Christ is Sacrificed.

Fourthly, Have thou received Christ, is he come in, it may be thou do not
remember the opening of thy heart to him so punctually as some may do, but does
thy soul find that all his enemies are made to stoop and give way before him;
when Lydia's heart was opened, how sweetly did she embrace Christ (in his
Apostles) and constrain him to come in, all other her lodgers were made to give
place I Will warrant you; can thou say Christ (in) me the hope of glory, if
thou can it is well; time was he was without and stood and called, as Cant.
5.2. Open to me my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my head is filled with Dew, and my
locks with the drops of the night. By the way let us look back on the patience
of Christ, it may be it may raise our hearts a little, he is not like furious
man, that will be gone if they will not hear at the first or second knock, he
will in a spleen be gone, but Christ waits tell his head is wet with the Dew,
etc. methinks this should make us willing to wait on him, it may be he does not
presently answer all our requests; It may be with Paul, thou and I have some
thorn in the Flesh, that we have sought God for the taking of it away, and we
begin to be impatient, and to say we have waited, and prayed, and looked long
and yet it is not taken away, we looked for peace, and behold no good, we looked
for healing, and behold trouble, and we begin to fret and say as Jehoram King
of Israel, did when trouble began to arise, and the Famine increase, 2 Kings
6.33. Behold this evil is of the Lord, what should we wait for the Lord any
longer. Ah poor soul whoever thou art I pity thee, that have been at any time
in this sad temper, but stay thy self soul with this, that Christ waited tell
his head was wet with the Dew, etc. And to what end did he, and does he wait,
but to be gracious, so he says, Is. 30 18 And therefore does the Lord wait,
that he may be gracious unto you. Note, the force of that word (therefore) for
that very end that he may be gracious? Oh! how long has he waited for you, it
may for some ten, twenty, thirty, forty years, and yet he says he will wait,
Therefore will the Lord wait, not only has, but will wait; Oh, why then
should not we wait then for him.

I! but do thou find after all this waiting that Jesus Christ is come in,
thou will say it may be I would have Christ for my Savior.

First, Have thou received him for thy Priest, the Priest's under the Law, were
changed by reason of mortallity, but this man because he continues for ever,
has an unchangeable Priesthood; but art thou able to say, thou art willing to
cast thy self on him to bear away thy iniquities, I tell thee he is able to
bear them, there is help laid on one that is mighty, and he is able to save to
the utmost all that come to God by him, Heb. 7.25. And he is not one that
cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was tempted as we
are, that he might the better succor them that are tempted, and because of
this Priesthood, We may come boldly to the Throne of Grace, Heb. 4.15. Heb.
2.8. Alas we durst not have looked God in the Face, had not Christ been our
Priest, and undertaken this, but now we may come boldly and plead Christ with
him; Oh, who shall condemn, it is Christ that dyed, Romans 8.34. Yea, when he let
Angels go, those noble Creatures, yet he condescended to take on him the Seed
of Abra'm, he would be a Priest for poor lost man, Heb. 2.16. Yea, he by this
bare our iniquities into the Wilderness of forgetfulness, Lev. 16.21. And truly
we had need of one to bear away not only the iniquity of our transgression, but
to bear the iniquities of our services, he is the Antitipe of Aaron the Priest,
to bear away the iniquity of our Holy things, Exodus 28.38. When poor Believers
are troubled with vain thoughts, and their Spirits are wandering in Prayer, or
Hearing, or Meditation, or Reading; These Worm eaten services, the worms of
evil thoughts will be creeping in, and eating out the heart of our prayers, yet
Christ will bear away the iniquity of these Holy things, yea, when not only
vain, but wicked thoughts come in: as in Prove. 5.14. I was almost in all evil
in the midst of the Congregation; Yea, thy very secret sins, which made David
cry out: Cleanse me from my secret sins, Psalm. 19.12. Yet he is a Priest to
bear away all sorts of sins, The blood of Christ cleanses from all sins. Now
Soul try thy self, art thou willing to have Christ for thy Priest? do not
deceive thy self, it is not so easy to take Christ for thy Priest, it is no
small matter to come of from thy self.

Secondly, Have thou received Christ for thy Prophet to teach thee; All Gods
Children shall be taught of the Lord, Isa. 54.13. And a Prophet shall the Lord
thy God raise up unto thee, of thy brethren, him shall ye hear in all things,
Acts 3.22. And this was of old Prophesied by Jacob, Genesis 49.13. The Scepter
shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, until
Shiloh come: and to him shall the gathering of the people be: (this Shiloh was
Christ,) and this gathering of the people to hear him, begun to be fulfilled,
Luke 19.48. For all the people were very attentive to hear him: or as some
margins have it, they hanged on him; Now art thou willing to hear him, and to
hang on his lip, to be taught by him, and none other, and to hear no other
Doctrine then what he Teaches; do thou indeed take him for thy Prophet, and
with the Apostle, Gal. 1.9. Do account him accursed that brings any other
news of Salvation; This is a second way we should receive Christ. But I proceed
to the next:

Thirdly, Do thou receive Christ for thy King, to Rule and give thee Laws as
well as teach thee, Isa. 33.22. The Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King,
not only King to save us, but our Lawgiver to rule us: He is our King and he
will save us, we must not think to be Kings our selves: Alas, what can we do,
but he will save us, save us from sins, Matthew. 1.21. And he will save us from
our enemies too; the people of Israel did not save themselves by their own arm,
but by the Lords arm, and by the Lords right hand, Psalm. 44.3. so in Hos. 1.7.
I will have mercy on the House of Israel, and will save them, (How) by
themselves, by their own arm, not so, the Text tells you by the Lord their God,
and it is Christ that is that horn of Salvation, in Luke 1.69, 71. That will
save us from our enemies, and from the hand of them that hate us, and it is he,
in Isa. 63.1. That is Mighty to save, and as he will rule in the Salvation of
his people, so he will rule secondly in the destruction of his enemies, Jam.
4.12. As he is able to save, so likewise to destroy: He shall Rule his enemies
with a Rod of Iron, Psalm. 2.9. Psalm. 110.2. God will send the Rod of his
strength out of Zion, and he shall rule in the midst of his enemies, and Verse.
6. He shall wound the heads of many Countries; Though the proud ones of the
World say, this man shall not Reign over us, yet he will bring them into
subjection, whether they will or no; have but a little patience believer, and
it will come to pass; but besides this Christ will be King in thy Soul, to
tread down Sin and Satan, and art thou willing to have Christ King in thee to
this end, art thou willing he shall tread on the neck of every lust and
corruption; then do thou receive him as King aright; art thou willing he
shall bring into captivity, every thought to the obedience of himself, 2 Cor.
10.5. Do thou receive him to give Laws too: and art thou willing to follow
the Laws of none other Lord; alas, when he has given thee Laws, there is no
other Law for any other to make after him; an excellent place to this purpose,
is that in Eccl. 2.12. For what can the man do that comes after the King; he
says before: I turned my self to behold Wisdom, Madness, and Folly, what was
that, why in the latter end of the Verse, even that which is already done; I
turned my self to behold Wisdom; Wisdom in the King to act Laws for his people,
and when I saw the wisdom of that King; I thought it was both madness and folly
to think to act with more wisdom, for what can the man do that comes after the
King, it is an interogation implying anogation, what can the man do that comes
after the King? truly nothing who has either wisdom or power to act after the
King: if it should be of the Laws of the Church; why that is already done: now
soul, have thou received Christ to be thy Priest, Prophet, and King: thy Priest
to offer for thee, thy Prophet to Teach thee, and thy King to give Laws too,
and Rule over thee, and to deliver thee from thine enemies Spiritual and
Temporal, yea, from Wrath to come; why if so, thou have some ground to hope
Jesus was Sacrificed for thee.

Fifthly, Have thou Faith, precious Faith as Peter calls it, 2 Pet. 1.1. It Is a
good sign thou belongest to the Lord, for that is it I drive at in the main, to
give thee a little hope that thou art precious in the sight of God, and art
within the compass of electing love, or one for whom Christ dyed, faith now is
a precious grace: and it may be precious upon a double account:

1. In respect of the giver.

2. In respect of the Virtue of the Grace it self.

Oh, what a precious God is the Giver of this gift; he gives perfect gifts, and
what a precious grace is this when given by God; it is of an inestimable value,
it is that, that does make the Saints rich, (rich in Faith) Abraham's faith was
counted to him for righteousness, Romans 4.5. And he that believes on the Son,
has everlasting Life, John 3. last: Not he may have it, but he has it
already, it is made sure to him, this faith is of a large extent, and will do
mighty things: it will remove Mountains of sin and corruptions into the Sea of
forgetfulness, Yea, what ever we ask in Faith, it shall be given us, Mark
11.24. And as Faith is the greatest and powerfullest grace, so unbelief is the
greatest sin, Christ says he will send the Spirit to reprove the World of sin,
and what is that sin you may be in? John 16.9. Of sin because they believe not
on me, so they could not enter in, because of unbelief, Heb. 3.19. And without
Faith it is unpossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. So that you see unbelief is our
greatest evil, but in a few words Faith will help us do these things:

1. It will help us to give up our selves to God, for to follow him, this was
that which made Abraham go up out of his own Country, Genesis 12.4. Though he
knew not whether he went, as it is repeated, Heb. 11.8. Faith will do more then
we can express; it will carry a soul forth, above fear and above reproach,
above good and bad report, through Fire and Water, how did it elevate the
Spirits of those Champions for Christ in that little Book of Martyrs, Heb. 11.

2. Faith will enable us to receive Christ and good things from him that Christ
may dwell in your hearts by Faith, (how) by Faith, Ephesians. 3.17. And good things
from him too: it was by faith that Sara'h had strength to conceive Seed, and to
bring forth a Child, and by Faith Elizabeth and Mary bare the two greatest that
ever were on Earth, Heb. 11.11. and the first of Luke: many more of this kind
might be urged, but I hasten; Ah soul, to thee that believe all things are
possible, therefore if thou find this Spirit of Faith in thee, it is a good
sign Christ is Sacrificed for thee.

Sixthly, It is a good sign thy sins are aquitted, if Christ be of an
inestimable value to thee, he that had found this Pearl of Price, sold all that
he had to buy it. Matthew. 14.46. There are many precious in the World, many
precious Friends and Relations, yea, more then these there is, that good name
(so much gazed after among men,) That is more precious then fine Gold, and all
other precious things, Prove. 22.1. Eccl. 7.1. Yet all these and all he has,
does he not value at the rate that he value's the Pearl of Price: Oh unto you
that believe, to you that Christ has been Sacrificed for, Christ is very
precious; Ah soul, is Christ more precious to thee then all things, has he the
highest room in thy heart, higher then thy Teacher! I speak to thee that do
as 'twere deifie thy Minister.

And thou Minister, if it should fall into thy hand to peruse this: has Christ
a room in thy heart higher then they that sit in the highest seat in the
Meeting: I speak to you that are partial and have such respect to persons, you
that the great ones do so seat themselves about in their attendancises on the
Word, I tell you a man may love Christ more then sinners, and yet not love him
more then Saints, especially them that bring you in your greatest revenues,
you will say, is there any such as these? If you should, I would answer you by
another question: what means your bearing with great ones, great faults when
you will rebuke the poor of the Flock sharply for a smaller faults, but you will
(it may be) say I am out of my way, well to return, how do thou prize Jesus
Christ above all things, then it is a good sign Christ is thine, and thou art
his; try as thou go along, for this is indeed the only distinguishing
Carracter of a Believer; Enlarge it in thy Meditation.

Seventhly, They that have Christ slain for them, will not do as the multitude
do, neither as the multitude of oppressors, nor as the very multitude of
professors do, Exodus 23.2. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil, alas
there be many, very many too; too many professors go on in an evil way, in the
neglect of many duties, and in many evil ways and unwarrantable paths, and have
no Scripture light to guide them; they take up things on trusts, it may be
because such and such do so, but the true Believer will not do so, He knows
many be called but few chosen, Matthew. 20.16. And narrow is the Way, and
straight is the Gate, Luke 7.13. Poor soul, thou see the great numbers of the
World running after their lusts, and taking their swing in ungodly ways, in
excessive eating and drinking, and rioting, I! and the professing world too,
they are posting on as fast, (though in a more pleausible way,) in their pride,
and ambition, and haughtiness, in their conformity to the foolish fashions of
this World, which vanish away; Oh, how many in England that (are glorious
professors) are Non-conformists to the Worlds worship, that yet at the same
time are real Conformist's to an Harlots attire, and other professors are
posting as fast after the world as if indeed it were their only happiness, and
all this because there are so many do so, and yet counted Saints, but now if
thou art one that do not delight in the way of the multitude, it is a good
sign God has set thee apart for himself.

Eighthly, He that Christ has dyed for, will be good in bad times and bad
places: so it was with Noah in the old World, so with Lot in Sodom, and Joseph
in Egypt; I need not quote these places they are so well known: thus it was
with Nehemial, with those Sabbath Breakers, and with Job in the Land of Vz: and
so with David, Psalm. 120.5. Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesech, and dwell in the
Tents of Kedar; so in Revel. 2.13. It Is spoken of the Church of Pergamus, I
know thy works, and where thou dwell, even where Satan's Seat is, this was a
bad place, and yet there thou hold fast my Name, and have not denied my
Faith Note here, Satan's Seat was the place where the Devils Servants did
Tiranize over the Saints, and yet in that wicked place they held fast the
Faith, these were some of those Virgins that are spoken of in the Rev. 14.4.
That were not defiled with Women, Virgins, what were they? them that were never
Married, were they them that vowed Chastity? no that is not the meaning of it,
but they were clean from being defiled with false Worship, they did not meddle
with Idols and false Worship, and this is called in the Rev. 14.2. Fornication;
he speaks there of Fornication by Idolatry, and they were not defiled with this
Womanish worship, which is else where called no less then Whoredom, Hos. 2.2.
Let her put away her Whoredom out of her sight, what did she commit Whoredom
with Men? no, Ezekiel 6.9. will clear it, With their eyes they went a Whoring
after their Idols, now these were they that were not defiled with Idols, and
therefore are called Virgins; Oh, who would defile ones self with such filth,
but if thou keep thy garments pure in such a day, it is a good sign Christ has
clansed thee.

Ninethly, It Is a sign thou art a servant of Christ, when he calls thee to his
work, and thou do not stand parlying with him, whether it may be for thy
advantage or no: when Christ calls men to his work, they often times consult
whether it be for their advantage, or for their profit, or their honor, or
their safety; and they stand parlying with Christ, under pretense of prudence,
and for their security; but now his servants will go readily about his work,
they will not stand parlying whether they shall or shall not go about his work;
this is no vain notion of my own brain, I Will give thee Scripture for it: Look
in the Gal. 1.15. Verse. 16. When it pleased God to call Paul by his Grace, and
to reveal his Son in him, to preach among the Heathen, what then, did he plead
and say will it be for my safety, will it not be prudence to forbear a while to
see the event of things, no says Paul: But immediately I conferred not with
Flesh and Blood, I did not stand but went into Arabia, etc. Now soul, can
thou say thou go to Christ's work without parlying, it is a good sign Christ
has called there.

Tenthly, It Is a sign thou art one that Christ is Sacrificed for, if thou
delightests in the will of God, says David, Thy Law is written in my heart,
how does that appear, why I delight to do thy will, one that delights to do the
will of God, it is a good sign Gods Law is written in his heart, now the will of
God is made know in his Law, and therefore he that delight in the Law of God,
does delight in his Will, And blessed are they that delight in his Law, Psalm.
1.2. And that delights in his Commandments; No less I am sure then fourteen
times in the Psalm 119. does David express his delight in the Law, Statutes,
and Testimonies of God, as you may see with a cast with your eye in 14.16, 24,
32, 35, 47, 54, 70, 77, 92, 111, 143, 162, 174. Verses, besides the many places
more in the Psalms, ah soul do thou delight, and delight greatly in the Law
of God. But I would not be too tedious.

Eleventhly, It Is a sign thou art Gods, if thou do what thou do for God
willingly, Psalm 110.3. Thy people shall be a willing people in the day of thy
power, when the power of the Lord takes hold on thy heart, thou will be willing
to serve him, and in 1 Chronicles. 29 9. A willing mind and a perfect heart are put
together: and if there be first a willing mind, then thou art able to do but
little for God, yet it is accepted, 2 Cor. 8 12. These things might be much
spread or expatiated, but time is very precious with me.

Twelfthly, It Is a good sign thou art a child of God, if thou do desire to
enjoy the ordinances of God, as thou wast wont to do, such an expression David
has some where, so in Psalm. 27.4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, what is
that, That I may dwell in the House of the Lord: That is in the assembly of the
Saints, and so in Psalm. 26.8. Lord I have loved the habitation of thy House,
and the place where thine honor dwells; He had experience what God was used
to communicate there; why David, could you not rather love the place where all
your Courtiers and Nobles, and where are all the Royal retinue? Oh no, I have
loved the place where thine honor dwells: This was that which made the
Apostle Paul exhort them in Heb. 10.25. Not to forsake the assembling of
themselves together, there be some do forsake the assembling of themselves
together; I, but says Paul, do not you do so, why, he knew that there Christ
was used to display his Banner of Love over them, in thy presence is fullness of
joy, Psalm. 16. ult. I, a little kind of Heaven there, to them that know it,
these know somewhat of the worth, of Spiritual Bread and Food for souls, that
makes them rather desire the Bread of affliction, and the Water of adversity,
then that their Teachers should be removed into corners, Isa. 30.20. They know
it is sad when there is no Vision in the Land, 1 Samuel 3.1. And indeed it must
needs be sad, for there the people perish, Prove. 29.18, so in Amos 8.11. When
the Famine of the word of the Lord shall come, they shall wander from Sea to
Sea too and fro, from Country to the City, as they do in a small measure at
this day, to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it, and in Verse. 13.
In that day shall the fair Virgins and young Men faint for thirst; Ah, how many
are there that are but new born Babes and Virgins, and young Men in Christ, how
do their souls hunger and thirst, and seek after some to break the Bread of
Life to them, and can find none, their souls are ready to perish, and they long
to go into the Lords House, into the assembly of his people; Oh, how do they
sigh, and sob, and groan; and Lord in thy bowels hear their cry, and groanings,
and come down and deliver them, and send them Bread, without cockle of Men's
inventions, and mildew of Sophisticated and corrupt Doctrine: but if thou art
one that desire the ordinances of God and to he in the assembly of his
people, it is a sign thou art a child of God, prithee soul bring thy self to a
trial, it is very sad if thou can find no looks, nor longings after any thing
of God.

XIII. It Is a sign thou art a child of God, if thou love the Word of God,
mark do thou love the Word of God, it is a sign thou art one of the children
of God; Oh says Job, I have esteemed, or I have hid or laid up the Word of his
Mouth, for so it may be read, more then my necessary food, or my appointed
portion; he esteemed it so that he hid it or laid it up in his heart; oh what a
soul was here, that had rather be without Bread, than without Gods Word; so
David in the Psalm. 119.97. wants words to express it, and therefore (sighingly)
he lifts up his voice and (says,) Oh how love I thy Law, so Ver. 113. I have
vain thoughts, but thy Law do I love; Yea, though wicked men hate it, and make
it void, yet then will I love it the more, which is intimated in that word,
(therefore,) thy Servant loves it, Verse. 127. And in the Verse. 140. thy Word
is very pure; I, tried or refined, therefore thy servant loves it, because his
Word was pure without Sophistication, therefore David loved it; Ah soul, do
thou love the Word of God, as it is a naked pure word, it is a sure sign thou art
Gods, and therefore may take peace to thy soul: Oh soul, peace to thee, so in
Verse 165. Great peace have they that love thy Law, note great peace (have)
they, not (shall) they, but (have) they that have thy Law thou that love Gods
Word; it is a good sign that word has spoken peace to thee, thou art Godly, and
God has set thee apart for himself, Psalm. 4.3. Examine as thou go along
soul, and take comfort as thou find'st it in thy poor soul; Oh, if God by his
Word will but speak peace to thee, it will be that that passes understanding.

XIV. It Is a sign thou art one for whom Christ is Sacrificed, if thou can
venture to follow Christ, which way soever he goes, Rev. 14.4. These are they
that follow the Lamb whethersoever he goes, and it is said these are Virgins,
chaste Virgins, Spouses of Christ are not only willing to follow Christ into
Paradise, but whithersoever he goes into the Desert, or into the Wilderness,
whithersoever he goes.

XV. It Is a good sign thou art a friend of Christ, if thou can cordially pray
for thy enemies, this too many is a searching one, (this I am afraid is a hard
saying who can bear it,) thou do not come up to thy Lords order, if thou do
it not, If thy enemy hunger give him Meat, and if he thirst give him Drink: for
in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire on his Head, Romans 12. last. The
meaning is those good things done to him, will be like fire, that is heaped
upon metal to melt it down, that is, shall be even disolved into another
nature, it will melt the heart, Mat. 5.44. Pray for them, for whom, for them,
them that are our friends, them that pray for us, no for thy enemies, them that
despightfully used you, this ever and anon Christ hint's at; Forgive them that
trespass against you, I say some, we will forgive them, but we'll swear we will
never forget them; take heed that is of the flesh, but to forgive thy enemy, is
not only to be Christ's, but to be like Christ, Phil. 2.5. Let this mind be in
you which was also in Christ Jesus; Ah, how happy a soul art thou that can do
this, but do not mistake soul: I do not say make him thy friend, no, I should
be loath to make my mortal enemy my bosom friend, or my familiar friend, as
David speaks Psalm. 41.9. Yet notwithstanding this, we should pray for them, and
that will be pleasing to God, and if we please God (as certainly we shall) in
thus doing, who can tell but God may (at least) make our enemies to be at peace
with us, Porv. 16.7. Oh soul try thy self, can thou pray for thy enemies,
it is a good evidence thou art one for whom Christ is sacrificed.

XVI. Can thou trust and wait on Christ, I put these together, for the one is
as it were the evidence of the other, for he that wait's on God, surely does
trust him, else why does he wait on him, Psalm. 84.12. Blessed is the man that
trusts in thee, Blessed (is) he, he (is) in a state of grace, that trusts
God for soul and too, it is no better then hypocrisy, to say we trust God with
our souls, and cannot trust him with our bodies; Paul, could trust God with his
life, In whom we trust, he will yet deliver us, 2 Cor. 1.10. Oh then trust in
the Lord, and wait on him too; And blessed are all they that wait for him. Art
thou in any distress, and God does not yet deliver thee, wait on him, he will
come, this was the temper of good Jehosaphat when he was in distress, 2 Chronicles.
20.12. When he knew not what to do, but (says he) our eyes are upon thee, Ah,
I Will wait on thee however, this was a good sign it is well with a soul,
multitudes of Scripture witnesses this.

XVII. Can thou rejoice in the grace of God in others; this is sad to tell;
some seem to have grace themselves, and yet do not love to see grace in others,
at least they cannot abide others should exceed or outshine their grace, they
hate to see others come up to any degree of grace more then they; I am apt to
suspect the truth of their grace, that thus envy others grace; but sure I am,
it is a sign of a good soul that loves to see, and rejoice in the sight of the
grace of God in others, take one clear Text for this, Acts 11.23. Barnabas when
he came to Antioch, (where the Disciples were first called Christians,) when he
had seen the grace of God, was glad; Oh soul, do thou see any thing of the
grace of God in others, of the Image of Christ in others, and art thou glad and
rejoycest to see it, it is a sign thy grace is true.

XVIII. Can thou in any measure commit thy concernments to God, Psalm. 37.5.
Commit thy way to the Lord, do thou throw thy concerns on him, or roll thy
self on him, so the word signifies; Ah poor soul, have thou a burden of care
and trouble on thy back: cast it on him, for he has bid thee do so, and such a
place you shall find: 1 Pet. 5.7. Casting all your care on him, for he cares
for you; Put thy trouble off to him, for he will bear it; soul, do thou find
thy heart taken off from a carking distrustful care, it is well for thee; but I
hasten to the next.

XIX. Do thou long for the accomplishing the glorious promises of God to the
World: the world is now much out of order, so much, that the whole Creation
groaneth, but do thou long to have it set to rites; there are promises of
Christ's Kingdom set up: not in word only, but in power; my friends whoever you
are, I must tell you there is a King to Reign in Righteousness, Isa. 32.1. Yea,
his dominion shall be from Sea to Sea, all Kings shall fall down before him,
and all Nations shall serve him, Psalm. 72.8.11. Let them be never so Potent
Princes, and never so stout and populous Nations, yet they shall all fall down
before him, and in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall be for
an Ensign of the people, Isa. 11.10, In that day, what day, why this does refer
to Gospel Times the latter days, And my Servant David, shall be their Prince
for ever, As you may read at large, Ezekiel. from Verse 22. to the end of that
Chapter; who that David is, I shall not now stand to discourse, only I would
desire you to compare Jeremiah, from Verse 15. to 22. together with first of
Luke 32.33. Verse. and besides this promise, he has promised great things to
his Church and People, Psalm. 72.7. In his days shall the righteous flourish,
They shall not be under the hatches then, Then she shall have Judges as at the
first, and Counselors as at the beginning, Isa. 1.26. Then the Mountain of the
House of the Lord shall be established in the top of the Mountain, and many
things more, Isa. 2.4. first Verses, then there shall be that, that good
Hezekiah longed for in his days, Truth and Peace, 2 Kings 20.19. Yea, and then
shall the great light break forth, that they shall not need to teach every man
his Neighbor, this will be a day that they shall know from the greatest to the
least, that their sins are forgiven them, Jer. 31.34. What will those do then,
that say that Teaching is a Trade, when all shall know, they shall not need too
Teach every man his Neighbor, there be many in our day would hide all the
knowledge in their own Studies, and would not have the ordinary people to know
so much, certainly these do not long for this promise to be made good, let them
take heed, least they be found none of the number that Christ was slain for,
for Light is promised, the light of Christ shall shine, The Earth shall be
filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea; That is an
universal light shall break forth, Hab. 2.14. And there is Holiness to the Lord
promised to be written on every Pot and Cup in the Lords House, and on the
Bells or Bridles of the Horses; Holiness not only in Worship, but in Men's civil
employments, the very Carmen and Drawmen (as a Holy Man says) shall speak of
his Kingdom, and talk of his Power, there shall be a Spirit of Holiness poured
out universally, Zach. 14.20. Then shall iniquity be put too an end, and then
transgression shall be finished, that is the day the iniquity of Israel shall be
sought for, and shall not be found, Jer. 50.20. And there is promised an Union
among the Saints, they shall serve the Lord with one consent, Ephesians. 32.9. There
shall be no more heart burnings and divisions among them, but the children of
Israel and Judah shall go together, weeping and seeking the Lord, Jer. 50.4, 5.
Are not these glorious promises soul, these and many more are made, which I
shall not stand to multiply; here are glorious and precious promises, that the
Saints shall enjoy in this world, and if not we a succeeding Generation may, we
will not limit the Holy one of Israel, but live in the Faith of it, that he
will make good every word in (his) time: Ah, that it may be said of us in an
after age if we see it not, as of them, Heb. 11.13. These all dyed in the
Faith, Now if thou longest for this glorious day and promises, it is a great
sign thou art one of his; it is a good sign he was slain for thee in his
humiliation, if thou do long for his exaltation, it is not likely his enemies
should desire his coming and his glory; therefore comfort thy self, if thou art
one of them that pray, and believe, and hope, and long, for this glorious day:
but I proceed to the next, which will require great grace, strong Faith.

XX. Art thou willing to suffer for Christ, nay, joy in tribulations, I put
them together, though they might have been divided, for it is a higher degree
required to joy in suffering, then barely to suffer; Paul, (when the Holy Ghost
restified) in every City saying; bonds and affliction wait for me, yet says
Paul none of these things move me, they do not trouble me, I do not lay them to
heart, So that I may finish my course with Joy, Acts 20.24. And says he in
Acts 21.13. I am ready not to be bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem, for
the name of our Lord Jesus, When his friends came and hanged about him, and
cried pray you Paul, pray you Paul, go not in danger; Oh says Paul, what mean
you to weep, and to break my heart; I am ready, not only to be bound, but to
dye at Jerusalem, And so Phil. 1.29. It is given to believers not only to
believe, but also to suffer, Matthew. 5.12. Blessed are they that are persecuted
for Righteousness sake, and 1 Pet. 3.14. If ye suffer for righteousness sake,
happy are ye, nay, if ye be but reproached for the name of Christ happy are ye,
Pet. 4.14. And if you hold fast till the Death, I Will give you a Crown of Life,
Revel. 2.10. And in Revel. 12.11. They loved not their lives to the Death, no
they did not value their lives for Christ: so in Acts 5.41, 42. They went from
the presence of the Counsel, (how) rejoicing that they were counted worthy to
suffer shame for his Name; Oh soul, art thou willing to suffer shame for the
name of Christ, not that it is shame indeed, to suffer for Christ, but it is an
honor, and so it may be understood: art thou willing to suffer for Christ,
then happy art thou, For the Spirit of God and of Glory rests upon you, 1
Pet. 4.14. And then for the other thing, to joy in tribulation, that is a
degree that is above bare suffering, take that Text in Romans 5.3. We rejoice in
hope of the Glory of God, Is that all, no not only so, but we glory in
tribulation also; It Is a clear sign, that if thou can suffer for Christ, thou
art happy, and it is a clear or rather more clear, when thou can glory in
suffering for Christ; see how it is with you.

XXI. Is thy heart born up under any affliction, and live above the troubles
of this life, and do not murmur nor repine at the hand of God, take a Text
for this, because I should be loath thou should ground thy confidence on any
opinion of mine, Isa. 33.24. The Inhabitants shall not say they are sick, the
people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity; They shall not say
they are sick; the sense of pardon does take away the sense of pain, the sense
of sin being taken away, does carry them above the sense of sickness; Oh
precious Word, worthy to be writtn in Carracters of Gold, this is a high and
noble degree of grace, I do confess.

XXII. Can thou go on cheerfully in thy way, where God has set thee; can
thou go on comfortably in thy Calling, and about thy Employment that God
calls thee too: It may be thou look on this with a slight eye, I know not
how it is with thee, but I profess I find this as hard as any, when the Eununch
was brought home to God, in Acts 8.39. It Is said he went on his way rejoicing,
It made the poor man so cheerful, that he went on his way rejoicing, but I Will
not stay on this; try how it is with thee soul, if I can but a little help
thee, I have what I aim at.

XXIII. Art thou willing to do good, and to communicate to others thy poor
brethren the Saints, this they did in the Acts 2.44.45. They had all things
common, they sold their possessions, and parted to them that had need; Oh what
is become of this Spirit in our days: where shall a man find an old Church in
so glorious a Spirit as this young Church was in, oh it is sad to tell how the
bowels both of People and Ministers too, are shut up at this day, and he is
noted to be none of the Lords Children that Has this Worlds good, and sees
his Brother need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him. 1 John
3.17. Understand this aright, he does not say to any one, no, but sees his
Brother in need, Thy Brother in Christ, and it is a right Spirit to be ready to
distribute, willing to communicate, not to be haled to it, as a Bear to the
Stake, but to be ready and forward, as Paul speaks of them in 2 Cor. 9.2. For I
know the forwardness of your minds, for which I boast of you to them of
Macedonia, that Achaia was ready a year ago, To be so ready to give that you
rather wait to grive, then to be asked, this is a good sign of thee.

XXIV. Does thy heart rise within thee against sin, and the filthy conversation
of the wicked, and the company of the wicked too, I put altogether, for it is of
the same Impost, the soul of that righteous Lot was vexed, and was moved within
him, To see the filthy conversation of the wicked, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. He see their
sin and his heart did rise to see their unlawful deeds, and to hear their
Ungodly Oaths and speeches, and indeed this is the true nature of a child, to
have his heart risen within him, when his Father is wronged, thou may ('it is
possible) rise against sin in thy self, as it is an enemy to thy own welfare,
and as 'twill ruin thee, but this is not so clear a mark thou hate sin, as
when thou hate sin where ever thou see it, the true child will not only
hate that he himself shall wrong his Father, but that others should wrong him,
that he hates too; the very affection of a child cannot but stir to see his
Father wronged, which brings to my mind a story I have heard of, a Dumb-son of
Cresus, that seeing one about to smite his Father, the affection in him broke
the bars of his speech, and made him cry out, (to the astonishment of others,)
in these words: O kill not Cresus, thus the genuous child's affections will stir
within him, if his Father be smit at; Oh soul, is it thus with thee, is thy
soul vexed and grieved to see the dead of the wicked, and do thou loath the
company of the wicked, they that are Gods, care not for the company of the
wicked, in Jer. 15.17. Isat not in the assembly of Mockers, so David, Ps. 26.4,
5. I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with dissemblers, I
have hated the Congregation of evil doers, and (will) not sit with the Wicked,
Note the expression (will) not sit with them, his (will) is not with them, that
is, his delight is not in them; poor man, he was fain to be with them, and a
great while too, which put him to complain in Ps. 120.6. My soul has long
dwelt with him that hates peace, if I do but speak of peace they are for war,
I would be quiet, but they are all for fighting, A poor soul must of necessity
be with them sometimes, I, but I (will) not, I delight not to be among them, I
do not love their company, I care so little for them, that I would not be
buried with them, that seems to be intimated in that Psalm. 26. quoted even now,
Ver. 9. says David there, Gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with
bloody men, gathering what is that, by it is meant burying, it is a word that
was used in Old Testament times, Genesis 25.8. Abraham dyed in a good old age, and
was (gathered) to his people; So David says, Gather not my life with wicked
Men, I never loved their company in my life, nor do I desire to have it when I
dye; now soul, is it thus with thee, it is a good sign thou art a child of good,
because thou hate the Image of the Devil.

XXV. Do thou prefere Gods work before thy own employment, before thy own
advantage; if thou do, it is a good sign thou art a child of God, this Spirit
was found in Nehemiah, when Samballat and Geshem sent to him, he sent them word
back again, That he was doing a great work, and he could not come down, Nehem.
6.3. Why should the work cease whilst I leave it, and come down to you; Oh, how
many thousand of professors in our age, does this one Text condemn, how many
professors in our days will not only leave Gods work when they are sent for,
but will leave the work of God without being sent for; Men are so far from
giving Nehemiah's reply, that they plead for leaving Gods work, to follow their
own, and the devil has not forget his old trade of transforming himself into
an Angel of light, he can tell them it is lawful to provide for their Family,
and they are worse then Infidels that do not, but this Nehemiah might have as
many excuses as thee, who ever thou art, and yet Nehemiah would not leave the
Lords work, no, he preferred the Lords work and esteemed it a great work, this
Christ would have all his children do, Matthew. 6.33. Seek ye first the Kingdom
of God and his righteousness; I, and that is the work that should be done in the
first place before all other things, try how it is with thee, if it be thus,
it is a good sign thou art a child of God.

XXVI. Have thou in any measure overcome the World, and do thou seek the
things above; I put these together, for they are of the same import, it is a
sign thou art quickened with Christ, if thou seek the things that are above, and
gett'st the world under thy feet; this made Moses contenin the Treasures in
Egypt, alas he valued it not, Heb. 11.26. so John 1 5.4. He that is born of
God overcomes the World, and as they have overcome the World, so they seek the
things of another; Paul would have the Corinthians live in the world like Men
and Women of another World, 1 Cor. 7.29. It remains that they that have Wives,
be as they that have none; no, why should they run away from them; no that is
not the meaning, but they should sit loose from them, if God call for them, be
as willing to part from them, in his fear without repining at Gods hand, as if
they had none at all, And they that weep as though they wept not, and they that
rejoice as though they rejoiced not, and they that buy as though they possessed
not, and they that use this World as not abusing it; Note well, the Apostle
does not say you shall have no Wives; nor you shall not weep, nor receive, nor
buy, nor use this World; no, but take heed how you have, and do things in the
World, as if the Apostle should say, I would not have your hearts set on these
things, We should use the World to carry us to our Fathers House; but we must
take heed you rest not here; Arise, arise Man, this world is not thy rest. Get
wings man and fly up, live like men of another world in this world, such a life
as this did Paul live, when he said, Our conversation is in Heaven, Phil. 3.20.
Why Paul are not you among the Saints on earth, and among men on earth, yes,
but converse in Heaven, I trade about Heavenly things; my thoughts Heavenly, my
affections Heavenly, my conversation Heavenly, my words they are Heavenly too;
they are such as are a Paradox to the Men of this world; the men of the world,
speak of the world, and the world hear them, but said the Apostle, We are of
God; and they that know God hear us; and they that are not of God hears not
us, no poor Creatures they know not what we say; 1 John 4.5. if you speak of
God, the world know not what you say, these are out of their reach; therefore
Christ said to the poor blind Jews, You do not understand my speech, (why)
because you cannot bear my Word, in John 8.43. 'Twas a mystery that he speak to
them, therefore Paul says, 3 Cor. 2.14. The natural man receives not the
things of God, because they are Spiritually discerned, Talk to him of Meat and
Drink, and Sleep, and ease, and the pleasures and sports of this life; and this
he hears and knows, this is sensual, not spiritual, Jude 19. This his sense
understands talk to him of a Kingdom that consists of Meat and Drink, this
he is willing shall be his Heaven; but alas poor carnal man, thou art mistaken,
The Kingdom of God consists not in Meats and Drink, Romans 14.17. But now soul,
have thou overcome these sower things, and is thy heart set on Heaven, have
thou thy heart soaring aloft, I am afraid the most professors of this age are
great strangers to this, and many other things, that are the life of
Christianity, what ever specious pretenses they may make, yet their very
practices speak it out to loud; but if thou art one whose life is in Heaven,
then thou art one of wisdoms children, For the way of life is above to the
wise, Prove. 15.22.

XXVII. Art thou a new creature, then it is a sign thou art in Christ. Are all
old things done away, the old Companions, the old lusts, the old love of the
folly of this world, is turned into the love of Heavenly things, 2 Cor. 5.17.
It may be thou can not shed tears so plentifully, why man repentance does not
so much consist in that; but is thy nature changed, and do thou abhor thy
self, as Job 42.6. Do thou find in thee a hatred to thee way of wickedness,
that thou wast wont to love, and a love to the things of God; that of old thou
wast wont to hate, do thou loath sin, and loath thy self for sin, it is a good
sign thou art in Christ, it may be formerly thou would not have this man to
reign over thee, but now give me Christ or else I dye, formerly thou were
alive and active in sin, But now thou art dead to sin, and alive to God, Romans
6.11. Now you do not allow your selves willingly in any known sin; Oh soul is
well with thee thou art pure in heart, though not perfect, yet in part.

XXVIII. Have thou a spirit of prayer and supplication poured out upon thee,
when Paul was converted to Christ whom before he persecuted, Ananias was bid to
go and enquire for Saul of Tarsus, for behold he prays, why did he never pray
before, possible he might utter words before, but he had not the Spirit of
Prayer before, there be many from the invention of memory, or in a form seem to
pray excellently, that yet do not pray in the Holy Ghost, Acts 9.11. And you
know Jude speaks of praying in the Holy Ghost, Jude 20. So that men cannot pray
but by the Holy Ghost; Men may as I said mumble over a form of words it may be,
I, but a man cannot pray, but by the Holy Ghost, it is the Spirit of God that
will help souls to pray, to confess sin, and to plead promises; the Spirit
helps our infirmities, with groans that cannot be uttered, he that has the
Spirit, can come to God as a Friend, and say, Father I have need of such and
such mercies, I have need of strength against sin, and such and such
corruptions are like to overcome me, he that has the Spirit of God is the
Friend of God, as Abraham was called the friend of God often times: take one
place for the rest that comes next to my hand, 2 Jam. 23. Now a friend of God
can go and plead with God, and say Lord, such and such sins and corruptions are
to hard for me, but Lord thou have said, Micab. 7.19, 20. Thou will subdue our
iniquities, and cast our sins into the depth's of the Sea; Oh Lord, perform the
truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham that thou have promised (yea sworn) to
our Fathers in the days of old, Now soul, if thou do find in thee a Spirit of
Prayer and Supplication, that thou can plead with God, in his promises; as I
have instanced here in one; why then, it is a good sign thou art thy self called
of God, and precious in his sight, but I would hasten toward an end of these
things.

XXIX. It Is a good sign thou thy self art in Christ, if thou art willing to
bring others into Christ, grace is of a diffusive nature; it will spread it
self, Peter, (says Christ) when thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren,
Luke 22.23. It may be this is of a second conversion, and you know Paul speaks
of traveling in Birth again till Christ be found in the Gallatians, Gal. 4.19.
It seems to intimate they were born before, but were turned aside to crooked
paths, for says Paul Verse 20. I stand in doubt of you, but I will not
dispute it here, but leave it to the sober wise, but however, When thou art
converted, strengthen thy Brethren, that is, do what thou can to convert and
confirm others in their most Holy Faith; Wherefore Brethren edify one another,
as also ye do, 1 Thessalonians. 5.11 Grace will beget, and strengthen as many as it
can; it will draw others what may be to the good ways of God; Come, says
David, and I will tell you what God has done for my soul, His spirit was full,
it was ready to break before it had vent; and thus it was with the Woman of
Samaria, when she had once heard Christ, She run into the City and says: Come,
oh come, and see a man that told me all that ever I did; She was willing they
should know all that ever she knew of Christ, and so says Paul I would thou
were such as I am, except these hods, Acts 26.29. Oh, how did his soul long
for the conversion of others, in Romans 10.1. My hearts desire and prayer for
Israel, is that they may be saved; Soul, is it thus with thee, do thou know
thy friends and relations to be in an unconverted estate, and do thou long
and pray they may be converted, Is thy fellowship with the Father, And do
thou desire their fellowship may be with you, with the Father, and the Son
Jesus Christ, and do thou declare to others what thou have seen and heard of
Jesus Christ, that thou may draw them into fellowship with Jesus, 1 John
1.3. If so, it is a good sign thou art one in Christ.

XXX. And lastly, If thou art in Christ thou love the Saints of Christ, not
love them barely as they are men, but as they are Saints, a man may love
another, but not upon the account as he is a Christian man, he may love him as
he is of a sweet behavior and carriage, or as he is a relation, or as an
aquaintance, or as a friend that may be profitable to a man in the World; I,
but I speak of love to a Saint, as he is a Saint, and therefore Christ says,
He that gives to a Prophet; not as he is a man or a friend, But as in the name
of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward, Matt. 10.41.42. Now I say, if
thou love Christ's Disciples thus, thou art in Christ, and Christ says, by
this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples; how so, why, If you love one
another; John 13.35. This Spirit was in Moses, which made him say, If thou will
not forgive their sin, blot me out of thy Book, Exodus 32.32. Which Book we
would with submission say, it is the Book of his Temporary Life, and truly this
was great love that he would lay down his life for Israel, in this he was a
Type of our Lord; so David had a great love to the Saints, and a delight in the
Saints, Psalm. 16.3. To the Saints, and to the excellent in the Earth, in whom
is all my delight, Had David nothing else to set a little of his delight upon,
yes, David was a King, he had a Crown and many things else to have delighted
in, but to the Saints and to the excellent, in whom is all my delight, David's
delight was all on the Saints, and that with good reason, because they were
most excellent; Why had not David many mighty Men of Valor that were excellent
ones, you may see a whole Catalogue of David's Worthies in the 1 Chronicles. 11.10.
to the end; and were none of these Noble Princes of valor (that were in his
Court) his delight; no says David, to the Saints in whom is all my delight;
and it will appear by the delight he had in the company of them that fear the
Lord, Psalm. 119.63. I am a companion of all them that fear thee, Not of Nobles
and great Men, of whom then: Of all that fear thee, why David, there be some
poor Men that fear God, do not thou think scorn David (being a King) to
company with poor Men, no says David, I am a companion of all that fear thee,
and it is so with others too, (says David) Verse. 74. They that fear thee will
be glad to see me, or when they see me: the Saints be glad to see one another,
therefore David says again, Verse 79. Let those that fear thee turn unto me,
be they poor or rich, be they those that fear thee, Oh, let them turn unto me;
be they Servants, or any I Will keep them company that fear the Lord; I, but
David would it not credit thy Court to keep Ranters and Swearers, for the World
says, he is no Gentleman that cannot swear, no says David I Will keep no such
as they are, My eye shall be on the Faithful in the Land, they shall dwell with
me, Psalm. 101.6, 7. But for those that work deceit, they shall not dwell in my
house, nor he that tells lies shall not tarry in my sight: This was the
Spirit that was in David he loved the Saints, let them be poor or rich, be they
Masters or Servants, All that fear thee, I am a companion toe: by the way, give
me leave one word to those ones of this age we live in: Sirs, how many will
David's practice condemn, he was a companion of all that fear God, he was a
King, and it may be thou art some Trades man, and yet thou think scorn to
converse with the poor Saints, if he be some of the great ones of the City,
then thou art a companion of such, but if a poor Saint come to thee, then thou
art in have, or some one or another stay for me; this is a sad Spirit that is
crept in among us in these days. And from this also may Ministers themselves be
rebuked, and that sharply too; truly among you, men of low estate, are low in
esteem, for ought I can discern, else what means this courting of the great
ones, while the poor of the Flock stand by disregarded; and when a poor man
comes to speak with you, I am busy, come another time; when at the same time
if a great one comes, then make all ready to give them entertainment, and all
possible respect showed them: Sirs, what does this come short of that charge,
Jude 16. Having men's persons in admiration, because of advantage; If it be not
really so, I appeal to you, whether or no you do not give others just occasion
to judge so: Oh Sirs, precious in the sight of the Lord are all his Saints, and
so should they be to you, excuse me that by the by; I return to the Apostles
evidence, they were also of that Spirit to love the Saints, 1 John 4.19. We
love him, because he first loved us: Ah, but how shall we know that we love
him, Verse 20. He that says he loves God, and hates his Brother, is a liar,
How shall we know who loved God, Verse 21. He who loves God, loves his Brother
also, and Chap 5.1. Every one that loves him that begat (that is God) loves
him also that is begotten of him, Soul, do thou love him that is begotten of
God, then thou do love God, love God, may many a man say, why I never saw
him, how then should I love him, Chap. 4.12. No man has seen God at any time,
Exodus 33.20. No man can see God and live, but in John before quoted: If we love
one another, God dwells in us; and his love is perfected in us, Note his love
is perfected, or completed in us, Ah soul do thou love thy Brother; Saint
indeed, it is a good sign thou art a child of God: it may be thou think thou
have but little grace, it may be but as a Mustard Seed, it is but as a spark of
fire in a great heap of ashes, a spark of grace in the midst of a great heap of
corruption, or it may be thou do not shine in the sight of others so
eminently, it may be thou can not discourse nor pray so excellently to
appearance, as some can; I, but do thou love the brethren, then I Will assure
thee it is very well with thee, who these brethren are, Christ tells us, they
are they that do the will of the Father, Mark. 3.35. not thy natural brother,
if he has not grace, he is not thy brother in Christ; It Is well with thee if
thou love the Saints, so says the same Apostle, 1 Epist. John 3.14. And with
that I Will wind up all as to these things; We know that we are passed from Death
to Life; Why, how do thou know, John, we know by this, Because we love the
Brethren, do thou love the Brethren of Christ above and beyond all other men,
and as they are the brethren of Christ merely upon no false account, but only
as they are the Brethren of Christ and the Family of God, and as they are the
Citizens of Heaven, it is a sure sign thou art a child of God, and to use the
Phrase in the Text: One for whom Christ is sacrificed. Thus now I have gone
over those Carracters that have been found upon some one of the Saints or other
that are found in the Word, and though it may easily be discerned that they
might have been contracted, yet let such remember I design (if the Lord will)
the relief of some poor soul that is ready to give up all hope, and not what
will be spoken either in praise or dispraise.

For he that will adventure in this sort, must not mind men's good or bad
report, examine thy self therefore soul, by what is before thee; and if thou
can not find all these things in thee, yet if thou findst but here and there
one, if God set in by his Spirit, thou may find a little relief to thy poor
trembling soul; and if thou art found sincere before the Lord, thou art a
righteous one, one that Christ the Righteous is slain for, and so comfort is to
be ministered to thee, and that leads me to a use of consolation; Say ye to the
righteous it shall be well with him, Isa. 3.10. So in Eccl. 8.12. Surely it
shall go well with him that fears God, Here is comfort soul for thee if in
Christ, who eyer thou art, if thou art born of God, though but a day old; yet
surely it shall be well with thee, art thou in doubt touching thy condition, as
in Dent. 28.66. Does thy life hang in doubt before, and thou fear day and
night, and have no assurance of thy life, of thy pardon, of thy Salvation, why,
behold God has bid me tell thee, (to which he has added this word of
assurance,) (surely) it shall go well with them that fear God, thou say
(surely) there is no pardon for me, no peace to me, and surely it shall go ill
with me at last; Ah poor soul does thy life, thy pardon haug in doubt, and have
thou no assurance of thy life, why, yet surely it shall go well with them for
whom Christ dyed; but what consolation is there to be ministered to such, truly
abundance, more then I can tell thee of, 1 Cor. 3.9. Eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, neither can the heart of man conceive, what is prepared for them that
love him; but, says the Apostle in the next words: It Is revealed to us by the
Spirit, it is the Spirit of God oh soul, that reveals the consolation of God
to thee, it is the Spirit that shows things, (and so comfort) that is to come;
and though I cannot tell thee all thy comfort, yet I Will tell thee some of thy
comfort, for it is God that comfort us in all our tribulations, that we may
be able to comfort you, which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we
our selves are comforted of God; but in a few particulars, I Will show thee some
of the consolation that pertatineth to thee:

First, I will show thee a little what thou shall be delivered from.

Secondly. What thou shall partake of and be privileged too: very briefly.

First, Thou shall be delivered from the vengeance threatened against the
wicked; Ah soul, let me tell thee, it shall be ill with the wicked; Isa. 3.11.
It Is true, the Godly man may be afflicted for his sin, for God does not
willingly afflict nor grieve the children of Men, Lam. 3.33. No it is for some
sin he will visit you; sometimes the Godly Man shall not go altogether
unpunished, Jer. 30.11. But here is their comfort, I will not make a full end
of you, no many at time, has he turned away his anger, and did not stir up all
his wrath, Psalm. 78.38. It may be he let out a little of his anger, like the
leakings of a Floodgate, but yet he did not let open the Floodgates of his
wrath, that the full stream might sweep all away before it; but now he opens
the Floodgate upon the wicked, he reserves them for the stroke of wrath, he
takes away the wicked with his stroke, The wicked is reserved (till when) tell
the day of destruction, Job 21.30. Yea, he shall be brought forth to the day of
wrath, or as the Hebrew is, the day of wrath's, That is more then one, wrath
upon wrath, one upon the neck of another, oh wicked man hear, and consider, and
tremble, if these lines fall into thy hands, that there is wrath upon wrath for
thee, and whilst' thou live in thy lust, and thy sin, thou do but Treasure
up wrath against the day of wrath, Romans 2.5. Yea, wrath to thy (soul) man, as
you may see in Verse 9. I put in that now because I have met with some that
have disputed it, that only the bodies of men shall be punished, and not the
soul: Oh, but here is a word, that there is not such another in the whole Book
of God to confute thee, so emplatically laid down, Terribulation and anguish
upon every soul that does evil, upon every soul of man that does evil. Where
art thou now that wilt cavil against the souls being punished? where is the
soul that shall not suffer now? if it be of an evil man; Oh I am afraid the
hearts of many speak this: that the soul shall not suffer, as does plainly
appear by their lives; but it is clear as the day, that the wicked shall suffer,
Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that
forget God, Oh thou that forget God, God will not forget you to turn you into
Hell; and make; you that forget God, shall have the same, portion with the
wicked, God's wrath is hot against them that forget him; hearken you that
forget to pray to God; Mark what is your doom, nothing but wrath, Jer. 10.25.
Pour out thy wrath (or fury) on whom, on the Heathen that know thee not, and on
the Families that call not on thy Name; Oh, hearken you prayerless Families,
you are reckoned with Heathens on Gods account, count your selves what you
will, wrath shall come upon you, certainly sinners shall be destroyed, if wrath
will do it, Psalm. 37.8. The transgressors shall be destroyed together, and the
end of the wicked shall be cut off, You that have transgressed together, you
that have been unclean together, you that have been jovial, and carous'd it
together, profaned my day together; why, you shall be destroyed together, and
your end shall be to be cut off; and he that hardens his neck against this or
other reproof, shall be destroyed without remedy; a Godly man has Christ for
his (remedy,) I, but a wicked man has no remedy, he never looks after Christ
for his remedy, and therefore he shall be destroyed without remedy, Prove. 29.1.
Oh Sinner, there are hundreds of threat's against thee, but I shall stand to
give thee but one nore, Isa. 1.28. They that forsake the Lord shall be
consumed. Not (may) be, but (shall) be, consumed, a Godly man may be afflicted,
but be shall never be consumed, God will not make a full end of him, but a
wicked man may be, shall be consumed, but now oh soul thou that art in Christ,
thou shall be delivered from all these threatenings, much more from the things
threatened, that will unavoidably come on the wicked; and when ever thou
read any threatenings else, (that would require abundance of time for me to
recite) thou may look on them, and say, these I am delivered from: and is
not here comfort soul? soul, remember I have told thee, a Godly man may be
afflicted, but a wicked man shall be consumed; I Will wind up this head with a
Sentence: they that hold thee Faith of Christ may suffer persecution, 2 Timothy
3.12. But they that cast off the Faith of Christ they have damnation. 1 Timothy
3.12. That Is the first thing for thy comfort.

Secondly, Thou art delivered from sin, from the power of sin now; and shall be
delivered from sin perfectly, they for whom Christ is slain, have their sin
taken away, if not out of their conversation; yet out of their consciences, 1
Cor. 15 3. For I delivered to you first of all how that Christ dyed for our
sins, that was it that made Paul triump and say, Oh Death where is thy sting,
now the sting of Death is sin, and Christ has taken away that, therefore he is
called a Lamb, that takes away the sins of the World; and his name is called
Jesus, For he shall save his People from their sin, Mat. 1.21. Now oh soul, is
it not a mercy to be saved from thy sins, is not this comfort for thee, thou
do not save thy self, but another loves thee, Mark (he) shall save (his)
people, not save himself by the light within himself, but he shall save his
people, that is, those whom the Father gives him; Now if sin does sometimes
overthrow thee, yet Christ will help thee up again, that it shall not destroy
thee; thou shall be the Conqueror at last: and therefore, though the Devil and
Sin, does upon some advantage foil thee, yet say to him in the words of the
Church, Mic. 7.8. Rejoice not against me oh mine enemy, when I fall I shall
arise, I have one to help me up: When a wicked man falls, he cannot rise again,
he has none to help him up: but here is comfort for the Godly man, he has one
to help him up: Solomon says, Eccl. 4.9. Two are better then one (why so) for
if they fall one will help up his fellow, but woe to him that is alone; Woe to
that man that falls, and has no strength to rise again, and more he has none
to help him up; woe to him that is alone, but the Godly man has another to help
him up: now soul, have thou this Christ, is he indeed slain for thee, here is
comfort for thee then: thou art delivered from sin, that it shall not ruin
thee; though it may wound thee, yet thou shall overcome; yet do I not speak
this to sew Pillows under professors Elbows, as if it were tolerable to fall
by sin, nor will this bolster up any professor in wilful sin, under a
pretense of failings; oh what a sad thing is it to see a professor shake the
head in the Congregation, as if the Word affected his heart, and yet he will
pursue the World hotter then the Devil does pursue him with temptations, or as
if there were no other happiness then these; and what a sad thing is it to see
in the refined'st Congregation, foolish Pride with an impudence face, place it
self in the uppermost Seat; Oh what outstreched necks are there, and what, a
great deal of laying on of apparel, Oh how sad is it to tell, that professors
and their Families come as gaudy as the profanest Gallants, and what scraping
acquaintance will there be with these, and for ought I see, these find as good
acceptance with the Preacher as any, nay with many more; for these are like
themselves, and their Wives many of them are as Modish as the Court, in their
white Shoos, and white Coats: like so many Mag-pyes, or fools in a play; and
indeed professors in general are too too guilty in laying out for the back;
Sirs, let me ask you all one question: and answer your consciences, if not me,
as you will one day answer the great God: do you think Gods poor people do not
stand in more need of relief, than your backs do of toys? I do not ask you so
much whether it be an odious thing in the sight of God, and true Christians,
but I ask you what answer you will give, when the eternal God shall say, I gave
you or made you Stewards, of so much of the worlds goods, (I say Stewards) for
the proudest of you all have nothing of your own, for all you say I have
riches, I have this and that, but what answer will you make; which will it be
best, to be able to say, I laid it out on Gallantry and Grandeur, to make a
pompous show; or else to say, I have laid it out on the poor members of Christ:
and indeed it is observed, that at Collections for the Poor, that the finest
folks give the least; I am not ignorant of your many evasions and tricks to
favor your Pride, but though you may put of me, with these; yet remember how
will you be able to answer the eternal God, the searcher of all hearts; you
that are the Lords Ministers, me thinks you should loath such persons when you
meet them; as I have read of a great Man, that was such a lover of Justice,
that when he met an unjust man, he would vomit up choler; methinks you that
love plainness should vomit up choler, when you meet Pride and not complement
it: I would not have thus disgressed, but that professors are saying (when they
are forced upon it,) this is our failing; this is a gross failing to follow the
multitude to do evil, and to do as the most do, but yet remember still
believer, if thou fall'st thou have a help, a Savior to save thee from thy Sin.

Thirdly. Thou shall be delivered from sorrow, it may be poor soul, thou art
now sorrowing and morning, thou have on thy black Suit, though it may be for
thy breakings with God, and thy untoward walking, art clothed with black own to
the ground; Jer. 14.2. Well, but bear up soul, the day is hastening that there
shall be no more such complaints; There shall then be no more oh my back, my
head and heart, for all sorrow and sighing shall fly away, Isa. 35. last, And
God shall wipe away all tears from thy eyes, Revel. 21.4. For there shall be no
more sorrow nor mourning: For so it may be read, now it may be indeed of such
Ointment that run down Aarons Reard, even to the skirts of his Garments, Psalm.
133.2. Tears it may be are pouring down to the ground, yet if thou be one that
Christ is slain for: all this shall be done away, thou shall see no more sorrow
nor fear, and will not this a little comfort thee.

Fourthly, Thou shall be delivered from Wrath to Come, do the thoughts of death
and darkness terrify and afright thee, why Jesus that is slain for thee, Has
delivered thee from the power of darkness, Col. 1.13. Oh what a mercy is it,
but he will (yea he has) Delivered from Wrath to Come, 1 These. 1.10. And is
not here comfort soul? let this bear thee up that art in trouble, it may be
thou feel some of the wrath and fury of an enraged enemy here, for a time:
but here is matter of rejoicing for thee, they cannot make thy sorrow last
long, and the wrath that is to come, that Jesus has delivered thee from; thus
now I have showed thee what thou shall be freed from by Christ.

In the next place. I would a little show them what thou art privileged unto;
and indeed I can show thee but little of it, oh what tongue can tell what it is
indeed.

1. Thou art privileged to be a Son of God, and what dimensions of Glory is
this, it is to be an Heir and a joint Heir with Jesus, To sit on the same Throne
with him, and have a Crown put on thy head by him, Romans 8.17. And thus it is
with believers, John 1.12. As many as recieved him, to them gave he power to
become the Son of God, To them gave he power, or right, o^ privileged, (for
the Word will bear it) to become the Son of God, And let me say this, it is no
small honor, nor no small privilege to be a Son of God, Gal. 3.26. For we are
all the children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus; and in Ephesians. 1 5. Having
Predestined us unto the adoption of Sons, or Children, by Jesus Christ, And
oh what an honor is it to be a Son, or a child of God, which made the Apostle
John 1.3. admire, oh it is a wonder, Behold what manner of love is this, that
the Father has bestowed: or conferred, upon us, that we should (be) and not
only (be) but be called the Children of God, or Sons of God; and is not this
comfort for thee oh soul, that art a child of God; it is looked upon as no
small honor, to be the son of a Prince, but what is it to be a son of the
Prince of the Kings of the Earth.

2. Thou have a right to all the promises of God: and there are given to
believers exceeding great and precious promises, 2 Pet. 1.4. And all are made
to them in Christ, look through all the Book of God, and you will find
abundance of promises, why they are all made to him that is in Christ, and in
Covenant, For all the promises of God in him, are yea, and in him Amen, 2 Cor.
1.20. That is they are all made through him indeed and in truth; and is not
here comfort oh soul, to have all the promises to be thine, thou have a right
to them all.

3. All things shall work together for good unto thee, Romans 8.28. All things
this is strange language will some say, marry, it may be will every man say,
will work for good, but affliction will come some times; and will that work for
good: yes David could say, It was good for me that I was afflicted, Psalm
119.71. I, and God will bring the evil designs of wicked men; to work for the
good of his Saints, I might have gathered this up into particulars; but spare
me that; but to return, God will work good out of the evil will of other men to
the Saints, Genesis 50.20. Says Joseph to his brethren that sold him, but as for
you (malicious you: envious you;) you thought evil against me, but God meant it
unto good, God can bring good out of evil to his Saints, nay let me say more,
God can bring good out of the sins of his Saints; I speak not this to encourage
thee to sin, it is a sign thou art a child of the Devil and not of God, if thou
sin that grace may abouned; But God makes the sins of his people serve, to
humble his people; Oh, says the Church in Mic. 7.9. I will hear the
Indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, Oh, it makes a soul
silent from complaining; yea, it humbles him, and so it works for good to the
Saint; now soul, is not this a comfort, when all things shall work together for
good to thee.

4. Thou art honorable in the sight of God, Isa. 43.4. Since thou wast
precious in my sight, Precious by virtue of my Sons precious Blood and
Covenant, applied by a precious Faith, Since thou wast precious in my sight,
thou have been honorable, A man in the sight of Men may be honored, I, but he
that is Christ's is honorable, and precious; Yea, his very Blood shall be
precious in Gods sight, Psalm. 72.14. And is this no privilege oh foul, and
does it not comfort thee, but I hasten to the next, and as fast as I may
toward a close of this.

5. The things of this life are blessed to thee, therefore David says, Psalm.
37.16. A little that a righteous man has is better then the riches of many
wicked, The little the righteous man has is as gold, but what the wicked man
has is like dross, what compare is there between gold and dross, a little gold
is much better then a great Mountain of Dross and Dung; alas a wicked man when
he is fullest is inneed, he has some little crevice that want's filling, so
Job says, Job 20.22. In the fullness of his sufficiency he shall be in
strait's, not only in his sufficiency, but in the fullness of his sufficiency,
if a wicked man has much substance, yet there is a canker eat's at the root:
and therefore as one observes a shilling will go as far with some, as five will
with some other, but the righteous is blessed in this, that his store is
increased in the spending, the little that the righteous man has, is like the
handful of Meal in the Barrel, and the Oil in the Cruse, that did increase in
the pouring forth, 1 Kings 17.12. Oh Sirs, there is many a man that has an
estate, and never enjoys it, he knows not which way it goes; but the little the
Godly man has increases, and does him good, when he eat's and drinks, in the
strength of his meat, and drink, like Eliah goes for many days; and is not this
a mercy, but may some say; you say that we have is blessed to us: but we have
but a very small pittance of these things below, we are fed it is true, we
cannot deny, but it is as we say, but from hand to mouth, to that let me add.

6. The day is hastening that the righteous shall inherit the Earth, Much
Scripture looks this way: I Will only hint a few, Mark 10.30. Though a man loose
all for Christ sake; yet he shall receive an hundred fold, I, but when, mark
the next words, Now in this time, note that this time, is meant the time of
this life: Matthew. 5.5. The meek shall Inherit the Earth, and if my Memory fail
not, no less then six times is the same thing hinted, nay spoken plain in the
37. Psalm. how this shall be, and when, I shall not now stand to dispute, but
they shall enjoy peace in it; and none shall vex and trouble them, I Will give
you one Text, not to trouble you with more, Isa. 32.17, 18. The effect of
righteousness shall be quietness, and mark it, this is meant of a time the
Saints shall have here, and if you observe it, it is the time of Christ's
Kingdom, Verse 18. And my People shall dwell in a peaceable Habitation, and in
sure dwellings, I, but though your dwellings may be sure; yet you may be
disturbed, no the next words says in quiet resting places; ah soul is not this
comfort that thou shall live in peace, but I forbear any further proceeding on
these things, least they should not be born; among the Godly themselves,
'twould be sad Sirs; if any of you should fall short of this for want of faith
in it, but another privilege is this:

7. All your prayers shall be heard, the wicked may pray as long as they live,
yea, tell their hearts ache, yet God will not hear them, Esek. 20.31. As I live
says the Lord, I will not be enquired of by you, (you) what you, Verse 30.
Them that have been polluted after the manner of your Fathers, Hear this, you
that plead for the Whoredom of your Fathers, which whoredom is meant Spiritual
whoredom, oh how many are there that go on in Idolatrons and in Ceremonious
ways, and can give no reason for so doing, but because their Forefathers did
so, hearken what God says to you that say; thus did our Fathers, and shall we
be wiser then our Fathers, God will not be enquired of by you, or hear you when
you pray to him, for it is all one, but now Godly Men's prayers are heard, I Will
give thee Scripture, for on my word I desire to urge nothing on thee, and if
the Word speak it tremble man to doubt it, or to contradict it, Jer. 29.12.13.
Then shall ye call upon me, and pray to me, and I will hearken unto you, and ye
shall seek me and find me; when you search for me with all your heart, Note
that (ye) and (you,) what you? why, (you) that are my people, that are in
Captivity, Verse 14. Poor soul, are you in Captivity, and in Bondage, and in a
weary Land, do Taskmasters impose burdens upon you, does the scorching heat of
affliction come upon you, why the man Christ will be as the shadow of a great
Rock in a weary Land, Isa. 32.2. Nay, does the wrath of God begin to break out
upon the world, yet yet seek the Lord all ye meek of the Earth; Why, what if we
do, it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lords anger, Zeph. 2.3. Is the
Lords anger breaking in upon the Nation, does he begin to frown upon us with
plagues, why, yet seek the Lord, do others dye and go down to the grave apace,
why, seek the Lord and ye shall live, Amos 5.6. Would thou have more comfort
then this; if thou will but seek him, his ears are open to thy cry; His ears
are open to their prayers, 1 Pet. 3.12. And are thy prayers heard, and will not
this comfort thee a while; Stay but a little, and he will give thee the desire
of thy heart, Psalm. 37.4. What Is that, why that leads me by the hand to the top
of all thy comfort, which is the last.

8. A Crown of Glory, and to be for ever with the Lord, art thou loaded with
trouble and suffering here; thou shall have a Crown of glory, shall outweigh
all thy suffering, for the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to
be compared with that glory, Romans 8.18. And our light affliction, which is but
for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory;
Oh the Dimenssons of this glory, it is glory, and it is a weight of glory, and
it is an exceeding weight of glory: nay! it is a weight of glory that will last
as long as eternity, For it is an eternal weight of Glory; 2 Cor. 4.17. It Is not
short that will soon begone, neither is it a light and fethery thing; like the
things of this world, that the wind will blow away; but it is a weight that will
outweigh all that ever we met with in our way to it; You shall have joy
unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. There are things unspeakable, here
we cannot see, nor are we able to utter the unspeakable things that are above,
we cannot see the beauty and that splendor of the Majesty of God, I might ask
you whether you do believe. Blessed are they that have believed and have not
seen, (but Faith is the evidence of things not seen,) If thou believe, thou
shall see greater things then these, greater things then these, earthly drossy
things, nay be they the best things thou can imagine, thou shall see greater
things, John 1.50. For thou shall see God: Thou shall see him as he is; see him
thou will say, I see him now in his Creation and Providence, and all his great
and wonderful works: I, but thou shall see him as he is that is as he is in his
glory, Alas his glory is veiled now, but thou shall see him as he is in his
glory, 1 John 3.2. Alas, now we can only see him in the glass of his Word and
dispensations, but then Face to Face, 1 Cor. 13.12. Ah soul, to be in (and to
see) the presence of God, is a Heaven on Earth: nay more, it would be a Heaven
in Hell; Oh, what a transporting sight would it be to see the Vision of the
Almighty, to behold the beautifical Vision, it is that which has such an
influence, that had Adam beheld it, he had not had room to turn aside to sin,
(as some are of opinion,) it is so glorious, so bright that not only Moses, but
the very Angels cover their Faces at; surely here is the Crown of all, In thy
Presence is fullness of joy, says David, psa. 16.11. Possible thy fleshly part
does please it self in the presence of thy relations, thy Wife, thy Children;
thy Parents, etc. and thou may think there is reason to rejoice in them; nay,
it may be some may rejoice in the presence of their companions in wickedness,
it may be thou may rejoice in thy cups, or in thy Harlots, of in the
presence of them that are thy Brethren in iniquity: nay, it may be in the
company of them that help to bring thee in some of the Worlds gain, though it
be by lying, and unwarrantable, nay cursed ways, oh, but here is the only true
ground of rejoicing, God is the chief good, and he that has him has all, and
therefore in his Presence is fullness of joy, It Is a joy that strangers shall
not intermeddle with, Prove. 14.10. I tell thee, thy joy shall be such, that
strangers to God, strangers to Christ, and to the Covenant, shall not
intermeddle with; these indeed may have a little shadow joy, but no substantial
joy, a little fethery, but no solid joy; they may have some what may tickle the
fancy, but nothing that will revive the heart, they may have joy, but none of
(thy) joy; strangers shall not intermeddle with thy joy, there is a joy
peculiar to the Saints, others may have joy, but it may be taken from them, men
may take it from them, but thou shall have joy in his presence, that no man
shall take away, John 16.22. Wicked man may have joy, as they think in their
Wine, and their Women: but an Allarm of War, the sound of a Trumpet at the Gate
of their Court, or the voice of Fire, Fire, as was but lately experienced, will
put a damp to all their mirth, and terrify them in the midst of laughter; Oh
hearken to this thou voluptuous wretch, that will sell all and venture thy soul
and all, for a little pleasure, what if (when the glass of Wine is in thy hand)
thine enemy should stand at the door with a naked Sword in his hand, and thou
should be made sensible of it, would it not make thy countenance change, and
thy face to gather paleness; Ah, but thou that art a believer needst not fear,
for neither persons nor things shall damp nor take thy joy from thee, here is
great support for thee still, soul, thou that art in Christ, thou that art one
for whom Christ dyed, shall have all this joy, and glory, and much more; and
prithee do not take my word for it, but take Christ's own word for it, and with
that I will conclude this use, John 17.24. Father I will, thou will Son, what
will thou, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I
am, to behold my Glory, not be with my people, and my Ministers, which many
place much of their happiness in, I wish they do not Idolize them, not be with
my Angels above, which is a degree higher, but be with me where I am, is not
here encouragement, that you shall be and do as Christ does, when a Child, a
Servant, or Soldier, sees the difficulty that some times lies before him,
and he thinks he shall sink under the weight of it, yet what new resolutions
does it put into him, when he shall hear the Father, Master, or Captain say:
come my Children, come Servants, come Soldiers, though the work be difficult,
yet still remember you are with me, and you shall do no worse, nor fare no
worse then I; why soul, is this comfort to hear such words, on a Cross, what is
this then to have such words on a Throne, to hear Christ say on a Cross, you
shall do no worse then I: that is no small comfort, but how much more, when
Christ says, you shall be on my Throne with me to behold my glory, time was
indeed it may be when thou saw my Servants Blood shed for their Testimony of
me, and brought before Kings and Rulers for my name sake; ah, but now there is
an end of that sight with thee, thou shall be with me to behold my glory; well
soul, it is possible thou may have troubles without, and corruptions within,
yet here is comfort for thee; these shall have an end, thou that art in Christ
may therefore lift up thy head; For thy Redemption draws nigh, Luke 21.28.
And now a word of exhortation and I have done; I have but three things to
exhort and persuade Saints unto, and as many to persuade sinners to, and I have
done, because I doubt I am tedious; and I beseech you all to suffer the word of
exhortation, which first speaks to the Saint on this wise: if it be so that
the sins of believers are passed over by Virtue of the Blood of Jesus.

First, Then be exhorted and persuaded to mix nothing of thy own with Christ's
Blood; men are exceeding apt to be doing themselves; Oh no soul, there is
nothing in thee that will help thee, unless it be to damn thee; it is him, and
him alone, that must save; there are men that are sprung up lately, that would
be their own Saviors, and yet thy will cry glory to others, as I heard one of
them say not long since: glory, glory, to the Blood that purchased us, and yet
they will tell you that the Blood of Jesus has no virtue nor efficacy to Save,
what confusion and contradiction is here among them, that say other Teachers
Teach contradictions, but a little, to note the expression, and their solly in
betraying themselves: sometimes they say, the Blood of Jesus was no better then
that of Peter and Paul, why what vettue had their blood to purchase a people;
it is true, their prayers might avail much, and their exhortations might prevail
much, but wherein did their blood purchase us? If thou say it did confirm
their Doctrine to us, that is not purchasing us: and besides, their Doctrine was
sufficiently testified by the Miracles they wrought; do thou know what a
purchase is? is it not the obtaining of any thing, by a price of equal value to
what is purchased? and do thou think the blood of one man is of equal value,
to purchase a thousand men's souls; and besides this, I take notice of that word
(glory) to the Blood that purchased us: will thou dare to ascribe glory to the
Creature, why, that is Idolatry, prithee mark the dillemma; thou art fallen
into, if thou said, Christ dyed only to confirm his Doctrine; I answer thou
say also, thou art purchased by blood, if thou say Christ was not God but
Man: I answer, thou say glory to the blood that purchased us; thus out of thy
own mouth will I judge thee, for this I heard one of their public Teachers
speak on his knees in their public Meeting in Devonshire House, thus these
silly souls would make us believe they are so perfect in their order, when
indeed they are imperfect therein, I do not speak this with any delight, no I
beg the Lord would open their eyes and undeceive them, and saint I would say to
thee, what ever others do; yet let Christ be all in all to thee, 1 Cor. 1.30.
It Is him who of God is made wisdom to guide and direct thee in all thy ways;
and it is he that is the righteousness to cloth and cover thee, all thy own
righteousness is to short man; and it is he that is Senctification to cleanse
thee, and though thou art called upon to cleanse thy self, yet it is not by the
might and power of thy own repentance, but by my Spirit said the Lord; and he
is redemption to redeem thee from sin and wrath, as has been shown thee; what
ever some may tell thee, assure thy self no less then that blood is a price of
value to lay down, and the Apostle says, We are bought with a price, I confess
this looks strange to humane reason, but remember man, and forget not, it is a
mystery, Great is the mystery, and if you observe the Gospel calls not so much
for wisdom and reason about this mystery, but it calls for Faith, for pray you
mark in Ephesians. 3. where this Mystery is once and again mentioned; and that it had
lay hid from the beginning of the world: bat now I bow my knee sait Paul, that
this Mystery may be made known, how and in what way, why says Paul this way,
Verse. 17. That Christ may dwell in you hearts by Faith; as if the Apostle
should say: it is true under the administration of the Law, our Salvation did
depend very much on our own working out, then 'twas do and live; but here was
no mystery in that, the Mystery was hid then in a great measure; I, but now the
mystery is to be revealed, and now Faith is called for, That Christ may dwell
in your hearts by Faith: Alas, the way of doing is no mystery at all, if I have
wronged my Neighbor, in any case, humane reason presently finds out this way,
and faith I will one way or other requite him; but here is no Mystery to pay
the damage or work it out; no Salvation comes not this way by working, but by
believing; and I am persuade many souls do run themselves into errors, because
they look so much at Salvation in a way that suits with their humane reason,
and consider not that it is in a misterious way that we are Saved; but oh soul,
what ever thou do, look to Christ, and lean not to thy own understanding; oh
man in thy self is nothing, But in him is all fullness, 1 Col. 19. Reply on him,
being nothing of thy own; He that will be his Disciple must deny himself,
Matthew. 16.24. Thy self cannot save thy self, no, he is every way able to save
thee; he needs not thy help, it must be Christ, God has laid help upon one
that is Mighty, Psalm. 89.19. This is spoken of Christ, and says Christ, If you
are comely, it is through my comeliness that I have put upon you, You it may be
think to wash your selves and adorn your selves; and make your selves beautiful
and comely, no, no, It Is my comeliness that I have put upon you; All this he
speaks, because he is very jealous of his own glory; Oh says he, My Glory will
I not give to another, Isa. 42.8. And so Jeremy says, The way of man is not in
himself, That is, the way of man to Heaven, to Glory, is not in himself, but in
Christ; Alas it is not in man to direct his steps, Jer. 10.23. And therefore in
all our ways we should acknowledge him, he will have man have nothing to do in
his own Salvation, it is true, man must move in the strength of God; but he must
not look to himself, who must he look to then? he himself tells you, Isa.
45.22. Look unto me all ye ends of the Earth, And he ye saved; no, may we not
do somewhat our selves? no, no, said God: why Lord? For I am God, and there is
none else, Plainly intimating that none can save but God himself; oh then, take
heed of bringing in any thing with Gods Salvation, in the time of the Law, God
commanded, that men should not wear a Garment of diverse sorts, as of Woollen and
Linen together, Deuteronomy. 22.11. An excellent word to teach us that we should not
wear the Woollen of our's (which will gall to the bone) with the Linen of
Christ's own righteousness; no, he would have us have nothing of ours for
righteousness, but all his for righteousness, and on that do thou trust, though
he kill thee, as Job speaks, Job 13.15. Yet trust in him for he will save by
himself, therefore take heed and mix nothing with Christ's blood.

Secondly, Be persuaded not to draw back from him, if any draw back his soul
will have no pleasure in him, Heb. 10.38. Ah soul, I know not so well what thou
have, as I know what I have, but I have (mine iniquity) and I do fear so have
thou, few that ever I met with, but had (one) beloved above all other, this is
that David kept himself from Psalm. 18.23. I kept my self from mine iniquity; Oh
take head that (thine iniquity) do not draw thee back, but follow the Lord, and
keep on his way, not only begin but follow on, Hes. 6.3. Then shall we know if
we follow on to know the Lord: there is the mark of the prize of the high
calling in Christ before, but take heed and look forward, for if thou look back
there is Hell behind at thy heels, if thou draw back it will be to perdition;
Oh, that we may never draw back, for if we do the fault will be ours, for God
if he has begun a good work will go on to perform it; or as it may be read
finish it, Phill. 1.6. Let us then go on after Christ, and not draw back from
him, but

Thirdly, And lastly to the Saints, live as it becomes those that are called
by him; and make profession of him; has he loved thee with an everlasting
love, and therefore with loving kindness has he drawn thee, Jer. 31.3. And
will thou not answer his love by thy Life; Oh soul, will thou not stand for him
and own him in bad days: will thou not plead his cause against all enemies that
plead's thy cause with the Father, has God given thee a gift, oh, improve it
for Christ; thy Lord he has dyed for thee, and wilt not thou live to him? does
he appear before God for thee, and wilt not thou appear before Men for his Name
sake? it is sad to see how men sneak away and diseart Christ's cause, under fine
specious pretenses; it is not prudence to do things say they, when Authority
would not have it so, and so they have a pretense to cover themselves with that
pretense; this kind of Spirit was found in some of old, in Holy Philpots time
(said he) some persons make themselves a Clock to keep of the Rain, with
pretense of obeying Magistrates, whom we ought to obey, though they be evil and
wicked, but says he such must learn to give Caesar his, (and God his) due, and
with Peter obey the higher powers in the Lord, etc. this he speaks by reason of
the cowardness of their Spirits in their Masters cause, but oh soul, that I
could prevail with thee and my own soul, to stand to Christ's cause; Oh, I call
Heaven and Earth to witness this day, bear witness all ye that see or hear of
this, that I call upon you to plead Christ caused, and hold fast his Name, and
not run away, and leave Christ; oh live as those that become the Gospel in this
very thing: oh, sad it is to tell, there be some that in this respect have cause
the very adversary to speak reproach fully, and to blaspheme, and as these are
cowardly in Christ's cause, so there are others very debauched in their
practices, would to God there were no cause to say professors keep loose
company; many there are that keep a Club with vain Fellows: I, and I am afraid
many times drink to excess, oh take shame to your selves who are guilty, this
is loathsome in the sight of the truly Godly, and I tell you, you give them just
occasion to judge you Hypocritical and rotten at the heart: and to spare no
rank; let me be plain with you, who take it upon you to be the Lords Watchmen,
you of the Ministry, it is sad that you that should be reproevers, should fall
justly under reproof, or rather (for I am on exhortation now,) you that should
exhort others should need be exhorted, and yet what lives do some of you lead,
I am ashamed to say debauched of you; Oh, instead of a holy self denying life,
how many of you, live an Earthly flesh pleasing life? and how are your Families
trained up? instead of the School of Christ, it may be in a Dancing-School, or
at the Music, is this a life that becomes Professors? but by this time I
think I hear some of you begin to say, is not it lawful to recreate our selves:
I am not minded here to answer all the cavils that the flesh will raise, but
this I Will said, Paul said indeed. All things were lawful, that is as I conceive
with respect to conscience of his own, but not expedient, that is with respect
to conscience of another, and to my knowledge there are some hardened by your
practices; Oh how sad is it to see Ministers Wives, Children, and Families, as
well as other Professors come into the Congregation, and instead of being
patterns of piety, are patterns of Pride, that instead of having it said of
them; they were Modest, and adorned with meekness and humility, in modest
apparel, shameful, it might be said they were proud, high-minded, and clad in
gaudy Robes, like pictures set to sell: but I leave you to dispute it with one
that will nonplusse you in all your disputations, and silence all your
objections; but Saint, thou that art truly such, what ever others do, though
they Eclipse and darken the Glory of God and Religion, yet do thou let thy
light so shine that others may see thy good works and glorify God: Oh soul,
have a shinning conversation, so says the Apostle, Phill. 1.27. Only let your
conversation be as becomes the Gospel, Art thou Christ's, live as one that
would honor Christ, it will be an honor to Christian profession, it will be
a comfort to those that were instrumental in begetting thee to God, they will
be able to stand up one day and say, behold here I am, and the Children that
thou have given me, Heb. 2.13. Oh, I call upon professors now to adorn
Religion, when the wicked scorn it, do you adorn it, and you that are members
of Churches, I do not say of Christ, for it does not appear by you: how do you
honor Christ when there is no order nor government in your Families? no
Justice, no pity, or if any but a mere carcass: instead of having the Master
in the Family at even, when the duty of his particular calling is over, he is
in the Coffee-house, which may justly be called the Night Exchange, not so much
to Traffic as to quaffe it; instead of an exhortation to thy Family and
Servants, it may be thou sit telling, or else hearing a merry jest among thy
Company, or at best instead of thy Bible in thy hands, asking thy Children and
Servants what is God, or Christ, or the Holy Ghost, it may be thou sit with
Cards in thy hands, asking who deals, who leads the Table, or what is Trump:
Sirs, take it how you will, I speak not groundlesly, is this to honor Christ,
and the profession of Religion: Oh, let it not be told in Gath, nor published
in Askelon: Oh, never wrong Religion so much, as to take the name of profession
on you, and yet live so like sensuallists under your profession.

But I leave you to the Lord, and according to my promise, speak a word to
Sinners, to poor Sinners, and what have I to say to you: but the Lord pity
you, I may say to you (now we have been speaking of the sins of true believers
being passed over, and aquitted by the Sacrifice of Jesus,) poor sinners I may
say to you, what is this to you, you have neither part nor lot in this matter,
yet would I persuade you to do these three things:

First, Pray to the Lord, seek to him; but you will say, thou said before God
hears not sinners,: I answer it is true, not with an ear of acceptance, thou
whose person is not accepted, can not have thy Sacrifice accepted, yet it is
not the less thy duty to pray, because thou findst not acceptance; if thou
lie in the hands of an enraged Enemy, thou will not say it is in vain to
entreat him, before thou have entreated him, before thou have tried him: no,
but thou will beg the more, and the harder, by how much the more thou think
he is enraged, and will thou not much more cry to God, who is more ready to
hear then thou art to ask, Jonah 3.8.9. Cry mightily to God, Why will he hear
us? why, who can tell, if thou can not pray in Faith, (as one says) pray
that thou may pray in Faith, in Jerem, 65.1. He has been found sometimes of
them that sought him not, and now can thou tell but he may hear thee that
pray'st to him, as well as thou can; pray, perhaps thou shall have an answer
of Grace, and a return of Peace and Pardon, this was the very counsel that was
given by the Apostle to that wretch Simon Magus, Acts 8.22. Else why should I
give it thee, if it had not foundation on the Scriptures of Truth; but I hasten
to a close.

Secondly, Break of thy, sins by repentance, when thou have got a sight of thy
state, then break of thy old Companions and Sins; Sinner let me put one Text
before thee, that after all that can be said, to prevail with thee, yet wilt be
merry in thy sins, and with thy old jovial companions, if the joyful news of a
Savior will not allure thee; yet, oh that the vengeance of God might amaze
thee, oh hear it with trembling, Mallac. 4.1. Behold the day comes that shall
burn as an Oven, and all the proud, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble,
and the day that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of Hosts; that it
shall leave them neither Root nor Branch; Oh hearked to this Sinner, behold it,
look well, and consider it, the day comes (and apace too) and that day that
comes, is a burning day, a more dreadful burning then that of Jerusalem, or of
London, and who can abide this burning, who will this burning be upon, this
burning as of an Oven, that has Walls to keep Men in, that there will be no
escape; why in general, all ye wicked of the Earth, but especially and
particularly, all the Proud ones: Oh hearken you proud ones, will your pride
endure the fire, will your Gay-gaws, your Bracelets, and your Necklaces, and
your Round-lies like the Moon, and your Crispin-pins abide the fire, I doubt
your rushing Silks will not abide the burning; nay more, it will burn you Root
and Branch, and least thou should put me of and say: thou tellest us so, but
we will not believe thee, I tell thee sinner, I call not on thee to believe me,
believe the Lord, it is the Lord that says all this, therefore it is added in
the end, says the Lord of Host, Oh sinner, it is not I a poor perishing
Creature like thy self, but it is the Lord of Host; Oh, hearken now sinner, God
stands and says it, even now in the close of the Old Testament, therefore be
advised, taked notice of his words, why what does he say? why, he says all the
wicked of the Earth, or all Earthly wicked ones, shall be burned up with the
Earth, and all proud ones shall be burned, surely God always speaks with
amazing words to the proud, which made a learned and Holy Man cry out, God
loathes and hates all manner of wickedness, but it is never said he resists any
sin but pride, pride is so odious in Gods sight, that he not only hates it, but
resists it; and this I say note Sinner, the Lord says it, but if thou art in
thy wits, and art come to thy self, I would hope thou art not past all hope of
recovery, and with that I Will conclude.

Thirdly, And lastly, Do not give up all for lost, hearken to him sinner, he
calls thee, he tells thee, He has no delight in the death of a Sinner, he does
not delight to destroy thee, Ezekiel. 33.11. It Is true thou have no delight in our
death, but art thou willing we should live? yea, he bids thee come, come
whoever will come for the Water of Life, he stands (if I may so say) even as
one in the latter end of a Market, and says come Chapman, come now and buy of
me, be sure you do not forget the only Commodity that you should buy: do not
think it to dear (for as we say the best is best cheap,) and to urge them to
buy, he uses this argument, it is the later end of the day the evening draws on,
come buy now for I am just going to pack up my Wares, and there are none other
such: now come then and buy, or else thou art undone; excuse me in borrowing
the Shopkeepers Rhetoric: thus in the closing up of the Book, our Lord seems
to stand and say, come buy Life, nay rather then carry it away with him again,
he says come take, I Will give it you, if you will but take it, oh wonderful,
shall the Pearl of Price be offered thee Gratis; for thanks (as we say) and
shall we not take it? Oh wonderful, that the best Commodity: Life,
Righteousness, Pardon, Peace, should be at such a low price, nay, at no price,
and yet not received, and which is more that any man should have it, too; that
would but take it, whosoever, a word of a large extent, he forbids none, but
bids any, whosoever will, not only the Prince in his Robes, but the Beggar in
his Rags shall he welcome, not only the Rich, but the Poor, not only the
Noble, but the Base, not only the Beautiful, but the Deformed, not only the
Free, but the Band-man, not only my Lord, but his Man is here invited, not the
Strong man only, but the Weak, not only the Learned, but the Unlearned and
Ignorant, not only the Wise, but the Simple, and them that want understanding,
are bid to turn in hither; Oh how free and how full is the invitation, even
beyond expression, and yet how sad is it, that Sinners should put our Lord,
nay, force him to make complaint, and say ye would not come to me, that ye
might have Life, nay, you were so far from coming to me, that you would not
take Life of me, when I brought it to you, oh that ever sinners should be thus
besotted and bewitched, let me say to you as Paul to the Gallatians: Oh foolish
Sinners, who has bewitched jou; and to testify his willingness, that it is
real, and not a complement he does declare in diverse Scriptures, that he is not
willing any should perish, that are willing to receive him, take one instead of
many, 2 Pet. 3.9. He is long suffering to us ward; not willing that any should
perish; (no, what then,) but that all should come to repentance, oh sinner
whoever, or whatever thou art, as ever thou would look God in the Face that
made thee, or Christ that has offered Salvation to thee, or as thou love thy
soul do not refuse nor slight, but accept and receive the Salvation that is
offered.

And remember I Will tell thee, I have written this in love to thee, to persuade
thee, and I tell thee if I am found a slighter, or neglecter of this offer,
this will be a swift witness against me, and if thou art found a Despirer and
neglecter of this Christ, that is Sacrificed, both I, and it, shall be forced
one day, (and that day may be very near) to witness against thee; remember, if
thou have read all of these Lines hitherto, and wilt now at last despise all,
and cast all off, and wilt resolve to keep thy sins, and wilt have none of
Christ, thou will one day rue that ever thou readst thus far: Oh, remember thou
have had warning, therefore seek the Lord while he may be found, he may be
found yet, Grace is offered, the Door is not shut: therefore to day, Now or
Never, Man; the Night comes when no man can work, take the present time, it is
a sad day of calamity in the World, God and Man's Sword is drawn against us: and
thou carriest thy life in thy hand, and now my heart even aches, to think
whether I shall loose my labor, and thou thy God, and thy Soul; but be not, oh
for the Lords sake be not so cruel to thy self, nor so unkind to Christ, but
receive him that offers himself to thee, and if thou entertainest him, thou
may assure thy self, he is a Sacrifice for thee, as well as for Believers,
whom I have been endeavoring to comfort here, and they shall be sure to sing
Hallellaiah for ever. saying Glory, and Blessing, and Honor, and Praise to
Jesus our Passover; who is Sacrificed for us.

Consider of what I have Written to thee, and the Lord by his Power persuade
thy soul to close with him.

FINIS.

