ACT Anent Suppressing Conventicles, etc.
Edinburgh, the ninteenth day of December, One thousand six hundred eighty and
three years.

THE which day, Forasmuch as the Lord Provest, Bailies and Council of
Edinburgh, taking to their serious consideration, how zealous and careful his
Sacred Majesty, has been since His happy Restoration, for suppressing all
Conventicles, Unwarrantable meetings, and Conventions of His Subjects within
this Kingdom, by several laudable Laws and Acts of Parliament, made against the
same: And also that by the 17 Act of of the 3d. Session of His Majesty's 2d
Parliament, It is expressly Statute and Ordained, That all Magistrates of
Burghs-Royal shall call before them all such as are Burgesses, as shall be
guilty of keeping Conventicles: and proceed against them by Fyning, or
otherwise according to Law, and that they make an account of their diligence to
His Majesty's Privy Council, and that they be careful in putting their Acts to
due Execution against the ^^^pers of Conventicles, conform to the Trust and
Power committed to them, and that an account of their Proceedings be returned
yearly to His Majesty's Privy Council upon the first day of July, under the
pain of 500. merks, for each years Failie: They therefore being sensible of the
Duty and Trust committed to them by His Majesty and Estates of Parliament; and
that it is absolutely necessary for His Majesty's Service, and for the
peaceable and quiet Government of the good Town; and that all effectual means
be taken for suppressing of Conventicles within the City and Privileges
thereof, which tends so much to the prejudice of the public Worship of God, to
the scandal of the reformed Religion, and is the reproach of His Majesty's
Authority and Government: And also, that the slow progress hitherto made, in
discovering and suppressing of Conventicles, Unlawful-Baptisms and Marriages,
and entertaining of Intercommuned and vagrant Persons, did proceed from this,
that there was no due Incouragment or Reward promised and allowed, to such
persons as should discover any Conventicles or Unwarrantable meetings within
this City and Privileges thereof. Do therefore unanimously Statute and Ordain,
That any person who shall discover any Conventicle, that shall be kept within
the said City or Privileges thereof, or Unlawful-Baptisms and Marriages, and
entertaining of intercommuned and vagrant Persons, to any of the Magistrates
within the same; so that the said Conventicle be actually attatched, seized
upon, and found in the place discovered, and that the said Unlawful-Baptisms
and Marriages, and the entertaining of intercommuned and vagrant Persons be
instructed, the said persons discoverers shall have for their reward for each
Conventicle, Unlawful-Baptism or Marriage, or the entertaining of any
intercommuned and vagrant Person that shall happen to be discovered, the sum of
threescore pounds Scots money; and whosoever shall discover any persons, whose
Residence is in the Country, that comes to the City to lurk, and absents
themselves from their own Paroch-Churches, and withdraws from the public
Worship in the City, shall have for each person twelve pounds for their pains;
And in regard that the Lord Provest, Bailies etc. intends a vigorous Execution
of His Majesty's good Laws against separation and withdrawing from the
Established public Worship. They do hereby require all the Citizens and other
Inhabitants whatsoever in the said Burgh and Jurisdictions thereof, duly to
attend the public Ordinances and Worship; Certifying all such as shall absent
themselves, or withdraw therefrom, that they shall be impartially Fined
according to Law. And for encouragment of these who shall delate any person so
withdrawing, who are not contained in the Lists given up to the Magistrates by
persons authorized for that effect, shall have six pounds Scots instantly paid
unto him, providing always the person or persons so delated, be convicted
guilty of withdrawing as aforesaid. And Ordains this present Act to be
Proclaimed through the City by Touck of Drum, and Printed that none pretend
ignorance.

GOD save the KING.

