AN ACT For the better Suppressing of THEFT Upon the Borders of England and
Scotland, AND For Discovery of HIGHWAY MEN, and other FELONS.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster, the 17th day of September, An. Dom.
1656.

seal of the Commonwealth

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone Church, 1657.

AN ACT For the better Suppressing of THEFT Upon the Borders of England and
Scotland, AND For Discovery of Highway Men, and other Felons.
WHereas the Inhabitants of both Nations that live near to the Mountains, and
in Dales and Marish and other obscure places upon the Borders, having been long
accustomed to Idleness and Theft, whilst the two Nations were under several
Governments, and cannot be brought off from their old evil and accustomed
manner of Living, by reason of the situation of their Habitations and
Dwellings near to the great Bogs and Mountains, and Large Waste Grounds between
England and Scotland, having thereby such opportunity, not only at home to hide
themselves and their Prey or Booties of stolen Goods, but also of Conveyance
over the said Bogs, Mountains and Large Wastes out of the Nation where they
commit these Felonies, into the other Nation, where their Persons and stolen
Goods are oftentimes sheltered and received by persons of their own bad
Quality and Confederacy, these Bordering People of both Nations thus serving
each other by turns, so as it is very hard to bring these People to be
responsible to Justice, or to get them apprehended upon Justices Warrants to be
brought to Trial and Judgment, whereby they remain much encouraged and
emboldened to continue in that their base and loose course of Living by Theft,
to the great Infesting and Damage of the Bordering Counties of both Nations;
For Remedy whereof, Be it Enacted by his Highness the Lord Protector and this
present Parliament, and it is hereby Enacted and Ordained, That as to all the
Bordering Counties and parts of England and Scotland, (viz.) The Counties of
Northumberland, Cumberland, and Westmerland, or any parts or members of them,
any or either of them, and the parts and places lying on the North side of the
River of Tyne, commonly called and known by the names of Bedlingtonshire,
Norhamshire, and Islandshire, the Town and County of Newcastle upon Tyne, the
Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and the Bounds thereof upon the English side; The
Counties or Sheriffdoms of Berwick, Roxbrough, Selkirk, Pebles, Wigton and
Dumfrieze, upon the Scottish side; That it shall and may be lawful to and for
the respective Justices of Peace within any of the said respective Counties,
Shires and Sheriffdoms, who also are hereby required, that once a Year at
least, any two or more of them, (whereof one to be of the Quorum) do, and shall
hold a private Sessions for the ends and purposes hereafter specified and
declared, within all and every respective Hundred, Ward or Liberty within the
respective Counties, Shires and Sheriffdoms aforesaid, whereof they shall give
at least Fourteen days warning to the Inhabitants of the time and place of
their Sitting, by notice to every Parish within the respective Ward, Hundred or
Division, and also Proclamation in the next Market Town in open and full Market
time, where at the place so appointed by them, they shall have power to call
before them the Constables and Churchwardens, or other Parochial Officer or
Officers, to give in upon Oath a perfect List of the Names of all such persons
within the several and respective Parishes of the said Counties, Shires or
Sheriffdoms, as live idely, and can give no good account how they maintain
themselves, or that are of bad fame, and not having any visible Estate, real or
personal, to the value of One hundred Pounds Sterling Money, which may render
him or them responsible; all which persons the said Churchwardens and
Constables, or other Officer and Officers aforesaid, shall also upon Warrant
from any of the said Justices, summon to appear before them the said Justices
at the time and place by them appointed, and to bring with them, and every of
them, two sufficient Sureties, each to be bound to his Highness the Lord
Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and his
Successors, in a Recognizance, not exceeding the sum of Fifty pounds for each
Surety, nor the sum of One hundred pounds for the principal Person thus to be
secured, nor under Ten pounds for each Surety, nor under Twenty pounds for the
person to be secured that he shall be of good behavior, and upon any occasion
so requiring, he will and shall from time to time make his personal Appearance
within Fourteen days after the delivery of the Warrant of any Justice of Peace
for that County, either to himself, or to either of his Sureties, requiring him
or them to answer to any Treasons, Murders, Robberies, Felonies or other
Misdemeanors whatsoever; All which Recognizances the said Justices of Peace in
their respective Counties, Shires and Sheriffdoms, are hereby authorized to
take the Acknowledgement of, and in case of Forfeiture, return the same into
the Public Exchequer at Westminster or Edinburgh respectively; And in case any
such person or persons cannot, or shall not find such Security, That then the
said Justices are hereby authorized and required to commit him or them to the
Common-Goal for the said County, Shire, or Sheriffdom, there to remain without
Bail until the next Quarter Sessions for the Peace, where they the Justices of
Peace for the said respective Counties, Shires or Sheriffdoms, are hereby
authorized and required, and empowered by Order of Court, to continue him or
them in Prison, or commit him or them to the House of Correction, until such
time as he or they shall procure such Security as beforesaid, or otherwise to
transport him or them to some of the Plantations in America, belonging to this
Commonwealth, not to return for seven years without License from his Highness
the Lord Protector or his Successors, under the penalty of Felony: And in case
any such person or persons make default to appear at the time and place
appointed, having lawful Warning given as beforesaid, and the same testified
upon Oath, That then the said Justices of Peace shall, and are hereby
authorized, required and empowered to proceed against him or them as
beforesaid, whenever he or they shall be found and apprehended.

And be it hereby further Enacted, That the said Justices of the Peace shall at
the next Sessions for the Peace (after the taking of such Recognizance) deliver
all and every of them to the Clerk of the Peace for the said County, Shire or
Sheriffdom, who is hereby required to file up the same upon a File, and the
same safely keep; And that the said Justices Clerk shall not take above Three
shillings for any such Recognizance for any one person, whereof the one Moiety
for themselves, the other Moiety for the Clerk of the Peace for filing and
keeping the same; And that the respective Clerks of the Peace shall not take
above Six pence for the Search and a Note of any persons Name, and the Names of
his Sureties, of any that shall require the same; nor that any such person or
persons (to be bound by Recognizance as beforesaid) shall be put to the trouble
or charge of Renewing his or their Recognizance or Recognizances, but the same
to continue of force during their Lives, except in case of Death of any Surety
or Sureties, or their declaring their unwillingness to stand longer bound,
except the Justices of Peace for the respective Counties in open Sessions of
the Peace, or Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer at their General
Jail-delivery, the Judges of Assize, or Judges in Criminal Causes in their
respective Circuits, or some of them, shall find just cause to release such
Recognizance or Recognizances; For which end all and every of the said
Recognizances shall be called once every year or oftener (if occasion shall
require) at the respective private Sessions for every County, Hundred, Ward,
and Liberty or Division, within any of the said respective Counties, Shires and
Sheriffdoms, and the persons bound to make their personal appearance, the Clerk
or Crier not taking above Four pence for calling any one Bond.

And be it hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if at any
time or times hereafter, any person or persons shall commit any offense or
offenses within the Nation of Scotland, which by the Laws of the Nation of
England is, are, or shall be declared or adjudged to be Petty-Treason, Murder,
Manslaughter, Felonious burning of Houses and Corn, Burglary, Robbing of
Houses by day, Robbery, Theft, or Rape, and do, and shall fly or escape into
the Nation of England, and be, or shall be apprehended within any of the said
Counties of Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmerland, or any parts or members of
the same, or within the parts or places lying on the North side of the River of
Tyne, commonly called or known by the names of Bedlington-shire, Norham-shire,
and Island-shire, the Town and County of Newcastle upon Tyne, and the Town of
Berwick upon Tweed, with the Bounds and Limits thereof, That then it shall and
may be lawful for the Justices of Assize, or any one of them in absence of the
other, the Justices of Jail-delivery at their Jail-delivery, or any four of
them, or the Justices of Peace in their General or Quarter Sessions, or any
four of them, upon due and mature Examination of the said Offense and Offenses
in open Sessions, and pregnant Proofs of the same, by Warrant under their Hands
and Seals, to remand and send all and every such Offender and Offenders into
the Nation of Scotland, there to receive their Trial for any the Offenses
aforesaid by them there committed.

And it is hereby further Enacted, That if at any time or times hereafter any
person or persons shall commit any Offense or Offenses within the Nation of
England, which by the Laws of the Nation of Scotland is, or shall be declared
or adjudged to be Petty-Treason, Murder, Manslaughter, Felonious burning of
Houses and Corn, Burglary, Robbing of Houses by day, Robbery, Theft, or Rape,
and do or shall fly or escape into the Nation of Scotland, and be, or shall be
apprehended within any of the said Counties or Sheriffdoms of Berwick,
Roxburgh, Selkirk, Pebles, Dumfreeze or Wigton, That then it shall and may be
lawful for the Judges in Criminal Causes, or any one of them, the Justices of
Peace for the respective Shires or Sheriffdoms, or any four of them, upon due
and mature Examination of the said Offense and Offenses in open Sessions, and
pregnant Proofs of the same, by Warrant under their Hands and Seals, to remand
and send all and every such Offender and Offenders into the Nation of England,
there to receive their Trial for any the Offenses aforesaid by them there
committed.

And for the better and more effectual Discovery and Prosecution of Thieves and
Highway Men, Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That such person or
persons who shall at any time from and after the Four and twentieth of July,
One thousand six hundred fifty seven, discover to any Justice of Peace or any
other Officer of Justice, any person that has committed, or shall commit
within England, Scotland, or Ireland, any Robbery on the Highway or Burglary,
or that has or shall feloniously break open any Dwelling House, or feloniously
enter into any such House, or there use any violence upon any person, or steal
any Money or Goods, and shall apprehend or cause to be apprehended such
Offender, upon Conviction of such Offender so apprehended upon such Discovery,
shall have a Reward of Ten pounds for every such Offender so apprehended, and
convicted; And all and every Sheriff and Sheriffs of the respective Counties or
Sheriffdoms where such Conviction shall be had, be required upon the
Certificate of the Judge, or under the Hands of two or more Justices of the
Peace before whom such Conviction shall be had, to pay unto such person or
persons who shall discover and apprehend such Offender, or upon whose Discovery
such Offender shall be apprehended, the Reward aforesaid of Ten pounds for
every Offender so apprehended and convicted, out of the Public Moneys received
by him in that County, and the same shall be allowed unto him upon his Account
in the Exchequer.

And be it further Enacted and Declared, That any person or persons that shall
discover any Felon or Felons, (commonly called or known by the name of
Moss-Troopers, residing upon the Borders of England and Scotland, or any Tories
in Ireland) who upon such Discovery shall be apprehended and convicted of any
Common-Felony (Petty-Larceny only excepted) shall, upon the said Conviction,
have the like encouragement of Ten pounds; And all Sheriffs of the respective
Counties where the Fact shall be committed, and the party convicted, shall make
payment thereof accordingly.

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone Church.

Anno Dom. 1657.


