AN ACT FOR Limiting and Settling THE PRICES FOR WINES.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster, the 17th day of September, An. Dom.
1656.

seal or coat of arms of the Commonwealth

EDINBVRGH: Reprinted by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone Church, 1657.

AN ACT FOR Limiting and Settling THE PRICES FOR WINES.
BE it Enacted by his Highness the Lord Protector and this present Parliament,
and by the Authority of the same, That for one year, to be accounted from the
Fifteenth day of August, One thousand six hundred fifty seven, No Canary
VVines, Muscadels, or Alligants, or other Spanish VVines, shall be sold by
Retail, at any Rate, Proportion or Price, exceeding Eighteen pence the Quart.
And that no Gascoigne or other French Wines whatsoever, shall be sold by
Retail, at any Rate, Proportion or Price, exceeding Seven pence the Quart. And
that no Rhenish Wines whatsoever, shall be sold by Retail, at any Rate,
Proportion, or Price, exceeding Twelve pence the Quart. And according to these
Rates, Proportions, and Prices, for greater or lesser quantities, by Retail,
all and every the aforesaid Wines shall and may be sold, and at no other Rate,
Proportion, or Price exceeding the same respectively, upon pain and penalty,
that every person within England, Scotland, and Ireland, who shall utter or
sell any of the said Wines by Retail; that is to say, By the Pint, Quart,
Pottle, or Gallon, or by any other greater or lesser Retail-Measure, at any
Rate, Proportion, or Price, exceedng the Rates, Proportions, and Prices hereby
respectively limited and appointed, do and shall for every such Pint, Quart,
Pottle, Gallon, or other greater or lesser Retail-Measure so sold, forfeit the
sum of Five Pounds; all which aforementioned Forfeitures shall and may be
recovered by Original Writ of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information; in which Suit
or Suits no Wager of Law shall be admitted, nor any Protection or Essoyn
allowed. The one third part of all such Forfeitures shall be to the use of his
Highness the Lord Protector, and his Successors, and the other two third parts
to the use of such person and persons as shall sue and prosecute for the same.

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone Church, 1657.


