Anno Regni JACOBI II. REGIS Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Primo.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster the Nineteenth Day of May, Anno Dom.
1685. In the First Year of the Reign of Our Most Gracious Sovereign Lord JAMES,
by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland King, Defender
of the Faith, etc.

I7 R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to his most
Sacred Majesty, Anno Dom. 1685.

Anno Regni Jacobi II. Regis
An Act for Settling the Revenue on His Majesty for His Life; which was settled
on His Late Majesty for His Life.
WHereas by an Act of Parliament made in the Twelfth year of his late Majesty's
Reign of Blessed Memory, and Confirmed in the Thirteenth year of His said
Majesty's Reign, Entitled, A Subsidy granted to the King of Tonnage and
Poundage, and other Sums of Money payable upon Merchandise Exported and
Imported, A certain Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage, according to the Rates
therein mentioned, and Rules and Orders thereunto annexed, was given and
granted unto His late Majesty for His Life:

And whereas by an Act of Parliament made in the Twelfth year of his late
Majesty's Reign, and Confirmed in the Thirteenth Year of His said Majesty's
Reign, Entitled, A Grant of certain Impositions upon Beer, Ale, and other
Liquors, for the Increase of His Majesty's Revenue during His Life, several
Rates, Impositions, Duties and Charges upon Beer, Ale, Cider, and other Liquors
therein mentioned, were given and granted to His late Majesty for His Life: The
Commons in Parliament Assembled, do Give and Grant to Your most Excellent
Majesty, the aforsaid Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage, and the several Rates,
Duties and Impositions upon Beer, Ale, Cider, and other Liquors in the
respective Acts aforsaid: And do most humbly beseech Your Majesty that it may
be Enacted.

And be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice
and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this Your
present Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same, That the aforsaid
Subsidy of Tonnage and Pondage, and the several Rates, Duties and Impositions
upon Beer, Ale, Cider, and other Liquors aforsaid, be Levied, Collected and
Paid unto Your Majesty during Your Life: And that the aforesaid Acts, and every
Article, Rule and Clause therein mentioned, from the Sixth day of February last
past; And also that an Order of the Commons in Parliament Assembled, made in
pursuance of the Rules and Orders annexed to the aforementioned Act of Tonnage
and Poundage, for settling of Officers Fees, Dated the Seventeenth of May One
thousand six hundred sixty two, and Signed by Sir Edward Turner then Speaker,
shall be of full force and effect to all Intents and Purposes, during Your
Majesty's Life, as if the same were particularly and at large Recited in the
Body of this Act.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That one Act of
Parliament made in the Twelfth Year of His late Majestiees Reign, Entitled, An
act to prevent Frauds and Concealments of Customs and Subsidies; As Also one
Act made in the Fourteenth Year of His late Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act
for preventing Frauds, and Regulating Abuses in His Majesty's Customs, be of
full force and effect during His Majesty's Life, which God long Preserve.

FINIS.

