Anno Sexto and Septimo Gulielmi III. Regis.
An Act to Prevent Counterfeiting and Clipping the COIN of this Kingdom.
WHereas it is Manifest that of late Years the Current Coin of this Kingdom
has been greatly Diminished by Clipping, Rounding, Filing and Melting the
same, and likewise many False and Counterfeit Coins have been Clipped for the
better Disguising thereof:

And for as much as it is Apparent that these Practices of Diminishing the
Current Coin is very much occasioned by those who Drive a Trade of Exchanging
Broad Money for Clipped Money, and by other Arts and Devices.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in
Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That from, and after
the First Day of May, which shall be in the Year of our Lord, One thousand six
hundred ninty five, if any Person or Persons whatsoever, shall at any one Time
or Payment, Exchange, Lend, Sell, Borrow or Buy, Receive or Pay any Broad
Silver Money, or Silver Money Unclipt, of the Coin of this Kingdom, for more in
Tale, Benefit, Profit or Advantage than the same was Coined for, and ought by
Law to go for, be Lent, Sold for, Borrowed or Bought, Received or Paid, shall
Forfeit the Sum of ten Pounds for every twenty Shillings that shall be so
Exchanged, Lent, Sold, Borrowed or Bought, Received or Paid, and so in
proportion for any Greater or Lesser Sum, One Moiety thereof to His Majesty,
and the other Moiety to the Person who shall Sue or Inform for the same, to be
Recovered (with Costs of Suit) by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information,
wherein no Privilege, Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed, nor any
more than One Imparlance.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid. That no Person do or
shall presume to cast Ingots or Bars of Silver, in imitation of Spanish Bars or
Ingots of Silver, nor do Stamp any Mark or Impression upon any Ingot or Bar in
Likeness of the Spanish Marks or Impressions, upon pain that the Person herein
Offending, shall for every such Offense Forefeit the Silver so cast, and also
the Sum of Five hundred Pounds, one Moiety to his Majesty, and the other to the
Informer, to be Recovered, as aforesaid.

And for the better preventing the Clipping, Diminishing or Impairing the
Current Coin of this Kingdom; Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That if any Person whatsoever shall Buy or Sell, and knowingly have in his
Custody or Possession, any Clippings or Filings of the Current Coin of this
Kingdom, he shall for every such Offense forefeit the said Clippings or Filings,
and also the Sum of Five hundred Pounds, One Moiety to his Majesty, and the
other to the Informer, to be Recovered, as aforesaid, and shall be also Branded
in the Right Cheek with a Hot Iron with the Letter R, and until payment of the
said Five hundred Pounds shall suffer Imprisonment.

And be it further Enacted, That no Goldsmiths or other Person whatsoever,
shall, from and after the said first Day of May, Transport, or cause to be
Transported out of this Kingdom of England, into any parts beyond the Seas, any
Molten Silver whatsoever, but such only as shall be Marked or Stamped at
Goldsmith-hall by the Wardens, some or one of them belonging to the said
Company of Goldsmiths; which Mark or Stamp the said Wardens are hereby
required to provide, and therewith to Mark or Stamp all such Silver as shall be
proved before them, or one of them, in such manner as is hereafter mentioned to
be lawful Silver, nor unless a Certificate be first had and obtained under the
Hand of one or more of the said Wardens, of Oath having been made before him or
them, by the Owner or Owners of such Molten Silver, and likewise by one
Credible Witness, that the same is lawful Silver, and that no part thereof was
(before the same was Molten) the Current Coin of this Realm, nor Clippings
thereof, nor Plate wrought within this Kingdom; which Oath the said Wardens, or
any of them, are and is hereby Required and Authorized to Administer, and
likewise to make and grant a Certificate thereof, without Fee or Reward, an
Entry of which Certificate shall be duly made by the said Wardens, in a Book to
be kept for that purpose; And in case any Person whatsoever who shall offer any
Molten Silver to be Marked, as is aforesaid, shall not prove by his or her Oath,
and likewise by the Oath of one Credible Witness, that the Silver offered to be
Marked is lawful Silver, and that the same was not before the Melting thereof
the Current Coin of this Kingdom, nor Clippings thereof, nor Plate wrought
within the same, then and in every such Case it shall be Lawful, to, and for the
said Wardens, or any one of them, to Seize and Detain such Molten Silver so
offered to be Marked, until such time as such Oath and Proof shall be made, as
is aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted, That if any Person whatsoever shall ship, or cause
to be shipped or put on Board any Vessel any Molten Silver, not Stamped or Marked
by the said Wardens, or one of them, and without Certificate first obtained, of
Oath having been before the said Wardens, or one of them, of the Lafulness of
such Silver in manner, as is aforesaid, (which Certificate shall be shown to
some one of the Commissioners of the Customs for the time being, before any
Cocket be granted for the Exporting such Molten Silver) in such case, it shall
and may be lawful, to and for any Officer or Officers of his Majesty's Customs,
to seize such Silver so shipped, and put on Board, one Moiety whereof shall be
to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and the other Moiety to the Officer
and Officers so seizing the same.

And be it further Enacted, That if any Broger, or Broker, not being a Trading
Goldsmith or Refiner of Silver, shall buy or sell any Bullion, or molten
Silver, every such person shall suffer for every such Offense, Imprisonment for
six Months, without Bail or Mainprize.

And for the better Discovery of Offenders in the Premises, Be it further
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be lawful, to and for
one or more of the Wardens of the said Company of Goldsmiths, with any Two or
more of the Court of Assistants of the said Company, within the Compass of the
Weekly Bills of Mortality, and to and for any two Justices of the Peace within
any County, City, or Town Corporat out of the Compass of the Weekly Bills of
Mortality, to enter, into the House, Room or Workshop of any person, who shall
be suspected to be Guilty of buying or selling unlawful Bullion, and to search
for the same; and in case the Occupier or Occupiers of such House, Room or
Workshop, shall refuse to permit the said Warden and Assistants, or Justices to
make such search, as aforesaid, it shall and may be lawful to such Warden and
Assiants and Justices, with the assistance of a Constable, to break open any
Door, Box, Trunk, Chest, Cupboard or Cabinet, in order to search for, and
discover such Bullion, as is aforesaid, and in case the persons so searching,
shall at any time find any such unlawful Bullion, the persons so finding the
same, are hereby required to seize, as well such Bullion, as the person and
persons in whose possession the same shall be found; and the said Wardens,
Assistants and Constables, shall bring him and her before the next Justice of
the Peace, who shall, upon Oath made of such finding, which Justice within the
Weekly Bills of Mortality, and the said two Justices without the said Bills of
Mortality, shall and may examine the person so brought before him, or found by
them respectively, upon Oath, whether the Bullion so found, be lawful Silver,
and whether the same was not (before the melting thereof) the current Coin of
this Realm, or Clippings thereof; and in case the said person so examined,
shall not prove by his or her Oath, or by the Oath of one credible Witness,
before the said Justice and Justices respectively, that the Bullion so found is
lawful Silver, and that the same was not before the melting thereof, the
current Coin of this Realm, nor Clippings thereof, then and in such case the
said Justice or Justices respectively, shall commit the person so examined to
Prison, and shall secure the Bullion so found, and shall likewise oblige the
persons that can give any Evidence concerning the same, to enter into a
Recognizance, to prosecute the said Offender and Offenders; And in case such
Offender and Offenders, in whose possession such unlawful Bullion shall be
found, shall not upon his, her or their Trials on an Indictment for melting the
current silver Coin of this Realm, prove by the Oath of one credible Witness at
the least, the Bullion so found to be lawful Silver, and that the same was not
the current Coin of this Realm, nor Clippings thereof, then, and for want of
such Proof, such Offender shall be found guilty of the Offense contained in
such Indictment, and shall suffer Imprisonment for the space of six Months,
without Bail or Mainprize.

And whereas the Coin of this Realm is of late much Clipped and Counterfitted
for want of due Encouragement to be given to such persons as shall Discover the
same. Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that from and after the said
first day of May, One thousand six hundred ninety five, all and every person
and persons, who shall apprehend and take any person or persons, who have
Counterfeited any of the current Coin of this Realm, or that for Lucre or Gain,
have Clipped, Washed, Filed, or any ways diminished the same, or shall bring,
or cause to be brought into this Kingdom, the Dominion of Wales, or Town of
Berwick upon Tweed, any Clipped, False or Counterfeit Coin, and prosecute such
person or persons, until he, she or they be convicted for any such Offense,
shall have and receive from the Sheriff or Sheriffs of the County, where such
Conviction shall be made, for every such Offender so convicted, the Sum of
forty Pounds (without paying any Fee for the same) within One Month after such
Conviction and Demand thereof made, by tendering a Certificate to the said
Sheriff or Sheriffs for the time being, under the Hand or Hands of the Judge or
Justices before whom such Traitor or Traitors, Offender or Offenders, as
aforesaid shall be Convicted, Certifying the conviction of such Traitor or
Traitors, done within the County of the said Sheriff or Sheriffs; and that such
Traitor or Traitors, was or were taken and prosecuted by the person or persons,
claiming the said Reward, which Certificat as aforesaid, the said Judge or
Justices, are hereby Required to give: and in case any Dispute shall happen to
arise, between the persons apprehending, and prosecuting to Conviction such
Traitors as aforesaid, touching their Right and Title to the said Reward, that
then the said Judge or Justices so respectively Certifying as aforesaid, shall
in and by their said Certificat, direct and appoint the said Reward to be paid
unto, and amongst the Parties claiming the same, in such share and proportions
as to the said Judge or Justices shall seem just and reasonable: And if default
of payment of the said Sum or Sums of Money shall happen to be made by any
Sheriff or Sheriffs, such Sheriff and Sheriffs so making Default, shall Forfeit
to the person or persons to whom such Money is due as aforesaid, double the Sum
or Sums of Money he ought to have paid, to be Recovered by him or them, or his
or their Executors or Administrators, in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record
at Westminster, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, wherein but one
Imparlance, and no Effoign, Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed, with
treble Costs of Suit by him, or them Expended in recovery of the same.

And it is hereby further Enacted, that all Sheriffs, their Executors or
Administrators, upon producing such respective Certificats, and the Receipts
for the Money by them paid in pursuance of this Act, shall be allowed, and are
hereby Empowered to deduct upon their Accompting with His Majesty, all Moneys
(other than the double Sum or Sums of Money and Costs of Suit) which they shall
Disburse as aforesaid, without any Fee or Reward whatsoever.

Provided always, that if upon the Account of any Sheriff or Sheriffs, there
shall not be Money sufficient in the hands of such Sheriff or Sheriffs to
Reimburse him or them such Moneys paid by him or them, by virtue of this Act,
That then the Sheriff or Sheriffs having so paid the said Moneys, shall have
the same Repayed by the Lord Treasurer, or Commissioners of His Majesty's
Treasury for the time being, out of the Revenue of the Crown, upon Certificat
from the Clerk of the Pipe to that Effect.

And be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, that if any person or
persons, being out of Prison, shall, from and after the first day of May, One
thousand six hundred ninety five, be guilty of Clipping, Coining,
Counterfeiting, Washing, Filing, or otherwise diminishing the Coin of this
Realm, and afterward discover two or more person or persons, who already have,
or hereafter shall commit any of the said Crimes, so as two or more of the
person or persons Discovered shall be Convicted of the same, any such
Discoverer shall himself have, and is hereby Entitled to the Gracious Pardon
of His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, for all ^uch his Crimes which he or
they have committed at any time, or times before such Discovery made: and if
the person making such Discovery be an Apprentice, he shall be Deemed and
taken, and is hereby declared a Freeman, and shall have, and may exercise any
lawful Trade, Profession or Mystery, with all Liberties and Privileges, and in
as full and ample manner, as if the said person had served the full time of his
Apprenticeship; any Law, Statute, Custom or Ordinance, to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case any Seizure
shall happen of any Bullion shipped to be Exported, and a Doubt arise thereon
whether the same be English or Foreign Bullion, that then the Proof shall lie
upon the Owner, Claimer or Exporter of such Bullion, that the same is Foreign
Bullion, and had not been melted down in this Realm of England, Dominion of
Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case any Person
or Persons enter or ship any Bullion, allowed by this Act to be exported beyond
the Seas, other than in the Name of the true Owner and Proprietor or Importer,
the Exporter thereof shall forefeit the same, or the full Value thereof, one
Moiety to his Mejesty, his Heirs and Successors, and the other Moiety to the
Person who shall seize or discover the same.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted, That this Act, or any thing
therein contained, shall not extend to prohibit the Exportation of such Bullion
as shall be Licensed by his Majesty (such Licenses being Entered in the Books of
the Custom House for the Port of London) so as the same be Exported before the
first day of January, One thousand six hundred ninety five, and do not exceed
Seven hundred thousand Ounces of Silver, to be applied for the Payment of his
Majesty's Forces.

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Prin^r
to His most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1695.


