To the Right Honorable the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses Assembled in
Parliament.
The Answer of the East-India-Company, to Two Printed Papers of Mr. Samuel
White, One Entitled His Case; The other, A True Account of the Passages at
Mergen.
NOT to trouble the Honorable House with hard Reflections upon the
Complainant, or Rhetorical flourishes which prove nothing but his passion and
want of solid grounds to support his Complaint, or justify himself. We shall
only exhibit to your Honors the plain proofs of Fact, we have received from
India; which we presume will evince the Complainant, not only to be a very ill
man, but a great Interloper, and a great Enemy to this Kingdom in general, and
the premeditated contriver of the deaths of those English Men, whom he and his
Accomplices had first inveigled into the King of Syam's service, and afterward
destroyed in a time of Truce, by wicked Arts, particularized in the annexed
proofs; when he observed they were resolved to return to their duty to His
Majesty, and the public service of their own Country.

By the annexed proofs, we think it will likewise appear how little distinction
he made between the King of Syam's Estate, and his own; and how often he
pleased to call Ships and their whole Ladings sometimes his own, and sometimes
the same Ships again the King of Syam's, as would best serve his present
designs; and therefore he might as well say he acquired three times the Estate
he claims, as half of that he pretends to have had.

The annexed proofs we think do likewise detect his forgeing Commissions under
the King of Syam's Ministers Seals, to justify his making War upon the
Companies Allies, Subjects of the King of Gulcondah; by his own private
Commission, not only without the King of Syam's consent, but expressly against
his Order. In which War so made by his private Commission, several Towns were
burnt, many Men killed, Ships and Vessels rifled, taken, and destroyed: and
amongst them diverse of the Companies Subjects under His Majesty, Inhabitants of
their City of Madrasse, some of whom he made Slaves, and all this not only to
the damage of the Company above 30000 pounds, but to the great scandal and
dishonor of the English Nation, English Deserters being employed by him in
those Lawless and Injurious attempts.

By the Dutch Laws in India who are a Nation as tenacious of their Liberty, as
any people upon Earth, and by the Laws and practices of all other European
Nations; there a Deserter or Interloper is not only to be confiscated, but to
suffer death: although the English Judicatures in India have never proceeded in
such Cases, further than according to their Charters to condemn such
Interlopers Ships and Goods, one half for the use of His Majesty, and the other
half to the Companies use. And if they should not have power so to do, the
whole Trade of India would unavoidably fall to the Dutch and French, as has
been made evident in many hearings at the Council Table in the Two last Reigns,
as well as in more ancient times, and by several Treatises in Print.

As to the grounds of the War with the King of Syam, occasioned by his Grand
Vizier or Chief Minister Constantine Phaulkon, who was a poor Fellow, formerly
Stewards Mate of a small ship of the Companies. We humbly conceive there will
be no doubt made by considering Gentlemen, but that the grounds of that War
were not only just but very cogent; considering His late Majesty King James
moved by the necessity of the Case, gave Commissions of War under the great
Seal of England, against the King of Syam and His Subjects, notwithstanding
Phaulkon had made a strong Confederacy between his Master and the French,
turned Papist himself; and as the Company are informed sent his Son to be
Educated a Papist in France, made curious Presents of great value to the Pope,
the late King James and His Queen, and also to the French King. But if your
Honors think it proper to require further satisfaction, touching the reasons
of that War, and the success of it, the Company will be ready to present your
Honors with a larger Narrative thereof.

That Phaulkon and his Creatures Mr. White, Burnebey, etc. were kind to some of
the Companies Servants at Madrasse, and to the Captain of the Curtana,
especially, who was at last made his own entirely contrary to his duty, as
appears evidently by the annexed proofs, and in many other instances to
particular persons, the Company believe may be true. And it is one of the
particulars that they did justly complain of to His late Majesty, That Phaulkon
by great Rewards, as well, as by great wages, and kind inveigling Words, did
endeavor to indulge many of the Companies Servants, Commanders and Seamen, but
all with a design of corrupting them from their Fidelity, Duty, and Service to
the Company, that he might in time become strong enough in European Seamen and
Soldiers, with the Aid of the French King, English Interlopers, and English
and Dutch Fugitives; to oppress first the English Company in India, and at last
the Dutch. But on the other hand, such of the English as he found true to the
Company, and their common Country, he used with the greatest contempt and
barbarity imaginable; as particularly Mr. Potts, he caused to be beaten by
Cofferies or Negroes, which is in India understood, accounted, and intended to
be a public affront to the Nation of which any person so abused is a Member.
Mr. Strange, Mr. Crouch and others, which he could not draw to his Lure, he used
with the greatest unkindness. Captain Lake in a strange manner he brought to
his death, of which a more particular account shall be given if it be required.

As to what was formerly Printed in any News Papers (which is not pertinent to
this Case) the Company say in truth, They never gave out any Paper or any
Intelligence to the Secretaries of state, but what were exactly according to
their advices from India. And if the first advices from such remote places,
prove not exactly correspondent to the Events, and all the Circumstances of
Fact, They do not conceive themselves blameable for such mistakes of their
advisers. But they cannot by the later advices or the proofs annexed, see any
considerable Error in these first advices they received from India, more than
that a very few of the Companies Soldiers or Servants perished in that
Massacre, with the rest of their Contrymen, that had been formerly
Interlopers or Deserters.

On the whole matter, and in answer to all other Complaints of Interlopers; The
Company say, they have done nothing but what they conceive they are warranted
to do by their Charter, and which they thought themselves bound in Conscience
to perform to the utmost of their power for the public good of this Kingdom
and of Posterity; which They have more zealously pursued than any proper
Interest of their own, or of the Adventurers; well knowing that the Navigation
of this Kingdom, and indeed of all European Nations, depends most upon the
support of the East India Trade, and that the East India Trade cannot possibly
be supported without Interlopers and Deserters be corrected and discouraged, by
inflicting the several Penalties on all Transgressors of that kind. And this
agrees to the Wisdom of all Nations that have spent a serious thought
concerning the East India Trade; which is the true reason that neither a
French, Dutch, Danish or Portugal Interloper, without the Consent of their
proper Companies, or the respective Sovereign of those Countries, was ever
heard of to the Companies knowledge, to sail from Europe into those Eastern
seas. The reason of which consent of Nations in this matter is as manifest as
the Sun at noon day. For that the English Company having now and necessarily so
many Towns, Forts, and Garrisons, Ships of War and Tenders, cannot maintain
them under the expense of 200000 l. per annum. Besides the infinite Charge of
Presents, Buildings, Guards, and Demorage of ships that must frequently attend
and be releived, and recruited for it may be 6, 7, or 10 years together before
such a Fortification or New settlement will be strongly fixed, so as to be able
to defend it self without shipping often in the Road, and in a condition to
produce any revenue toward the public Charge.

As to the Sovereign or Despotical Power exercised by the Company in India,
which the Complainant plays with in his Printed Papers. The Company say, and
all wise men in the Affairs of India know, that the Company exercise no power,
but what they had by their Charter, neither have any power by Their Charter
other than such as the Dutch have by their Rocktroy or Charter. Or if the
Company should have less, it would be impossible for them, whenever the Dutch
should be out of humor, to maintain the remainder of the English Interest in
India, but all would be lost as easily as the Spice Islands were in the last
age, and Macassar or Bantam in This, it being as impossible to defend the
English interest without equal powers from our Sovereigns, as the Dutch Company
have from theirs, as it is to fight the French with a great Army not under the
discipline of Martial Law.

The Company do not desire to boast of the success God Almighty has given to
their just Arms, nor of their present condition. But since there are so many
Detracters who for private ends take the Liberty of discoursing what they
please to Gentlemen, very knowing in other Affairs, though unable to disprove
them in this Foreign business (which they have not occasion by their
acquaintance or converse in affairs of those Remote parts to be experienced in)
have thought fit to add to this a brief account of the present state of the
English interest in India, and of what has been transacted for the public
good and honor of the English Nation these last 7 or 8 years, which they
humbly hope will be found to be more than ever was performed by the English in
India in the whole time foregoing, since the first Institution of the
East India Company in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and that the
Estate and Power of the East India Company is now double to what it was in any
former age.

To the Accusation of Captain Andrews, The Company think it is enough to say at
present, That he is a known ingenuous worthy man, and a great lover of his
Country, and that he had His Majesty's Commission under the great Seal of
England, to make War against the King of Syam and his Subjects, and there is
no doubt, but according to his duty he would fight, kill and slay, all that
made resistance on board any Syam ship, whether the Resisters were natural
Syammers, or English or other European Deserters in the King of Syam's service,
against their Native King and Country. But the Company do not believe Captain
Andrews did any thing unworthily, or beyond his Commission as is suggested.

The Case of the Company is very hard (or rather the Condition of England would
be very deplorable) if those very men, the Interlopers, and their Adherents,
that by an unparalled Instance of Presumption, never heard of before, in this
or any other Christian Nation, by diverse Ships made such a Combustion in India,
as occasioned the loss of Bantam to the Dutch, the Rebellions of Bombay and St.
Helena, the subduction of all the English Privileges by the Native Kings of
India, and consequently great Wars and Bloodshed, to recover those Rights to
the English Nation, should now hope to be received, as the Asserters of the
Rights of the People of England, as if our unvaluable Liberty should be
Converted into Licentiousness, and the Ruin of our common Country by a
Toleration, to join with Heathens and Papists in actual Hostility against this
Kingdom, to destroy the English Interest in India. It is not long since the
Company faithfully defended the English Interest in the Case of Bantam against
eminent Dutch Civilians, and the Mercenary Ferocity of the late Lord
Chancellor, of which Contests the Arguments on both sides are extant in print.
That was no sooner over, but they were forced by Arms to reduce the Rebels of
Bombay and St. Helena; and after that was over, to engage in a dangerous War
against two great Princes, the Great Mogul, and the King of Syam; The latter
being supported by an Alliance with France as aforesaid: In which Wars, God was
pleased to give them extraordinary Success beyond their own hopes and the
Opinion of all men, English and Foreigners, that were acquainted with India,
and the power of those two Great Princes: And now after the Company had at
their great Expense, and with God's wonderful Blessing, settled the English
Interest in India upon a more regular, strong, durable, and better Foundation,
to the great Honor of the English Nation, than ever it was since Queen
Elizabeth's days. The very same sort of men that occasioned all those Disorders,
Rebellions, Confusion, War, and Bloodshed, have the Confidence to appear, to
accuse the Company for their strenuous and lawful endeavors grounded upon the
Kings Prerogative and Authority extra England, Wales and Berwick to vindicate
the Honor and Interest of this Kingdom in those remote parts of the World.

The Company hope all Gentlemen know that the Government of those Eastern parts
of the World are merely Despotical, and that the never sufficiently to be
admired and beloved, Common and Statute Laws of this Kingdom are plants too
precious to be understood or grow so far Eastward, or in any other soil, but
that of our Blessed Native Country; As also that the Company have no power to
press or compel any Englishman into their service, all that go thither are
Petitioners for their Employments or Volunteers, and must be presumed to go
upon the Companies own Terms, and the Companies Laws there established by His
Majesty's Authority. Besides which, the Company never send any such Volunteers
abroad of any degree, but if when they come to India, or have stayed any time
there, although they be formally bound by Indentures for 5 years, if at any
time they like not the Laws, Usages, Rules or Customs of the Company or the
Country; the Company gives them Liberty to return home at their own pleasure,
notwithstanding their aforesaid Indentures, they paying the Companies Charge of
their Transportation out; so that no Englishman can pretend to be enslaved or
oppressed in India by the Company, as is untruly suggested, except even in his
own sense he be willing before he goes out and continues to be willing so to
be, after he comes there.

The annexed proofs do make it not only suspicious, but too manifest that
Captain Weltden Commander of the Curtana, though he was true to his Trust at
his first Arrival at Mergen was afterward corrupted by Mr. White's Arts, for
which Captain Weltden was intended to be questioned by the Court of Admiralty
at Madrass.

The Companies General of India, Sir John Child, who has lived about 35 years
in that Country without ever seeing his own, is a Person of known Sobriety,
Wisdom, Truth and Courage, esteemed and beloved by People of all Nations in
India that have so much Ingenuity as to acknowledge Virtue in an Enemy;
something whereof will occur to every man's Observation, that knows he managed
that hazardous War against the Mogul with such success and moderation that he
took almost all the Mogul's and Subjects Ships sailing in and out of Surrat,
without spilling a drop of their Blood, and dismissed the Prisoners with Cloths
and Money in their Pockets, which gained such a Reputation to our Nation, even
amongst the Moors themselves, that they became universally Advocates and
Solicitors to the Mogul for the Pacification. Upon which unconstrained, he
delivered back all the Moors Ships, except Abdul Gophor's, who was a great
Incendiary toward the War, and who is therefore left by the Mogul to the
General's further Revenge, notwithstanding the Peace made with his great
Majesty, and all the rest of his Subjects.


