ANNO XVII. Caroli Regis.
An Act for the better Raising and Levying of Mariners, Sailers, and others,
for the present guarding of the Seas, and necessary defense of this Realm, and
other His Majesty's Dominions.

WHereas the late Act, entitled, An Act for the better raising and levying of
Mariners, Sailers, and others, for the present guarding of the Seas, and
necessary defense of the Realm, and other His Majesty's Dominions, is found by
experience to be ineffectuall for the supply of the present expedition now
intended for the defense of all His Majesty's Realms and Dominions, by reason
of sundry restrictions and doubtful limitations in the said Act: And forasmuch
as it highly imports the safety of all His Majesty's said Dominions, that
several Fleets of Ships be with all possible speed set forth to the Seas, and
all manner of diligence he used therein, for the raising of Mariners, Sailers,
and others, to that purpose,

Be it therefore enacted by the authority of this present Parliament, That the
Lord Admiral that now is, shall and may, at any time or times between the
first day of February 1641. and the first of November 1642. by himself, his
Vice Admiral, Commissioner, or Commissioners, or other Officer or Officers, or
any of them, Levy, and Impresse such, and so many Mariners, Sailers,
Watermen, Chirurgions, Gunners, and Ship-Carpenters, as shall be requisite and
necessary for this present expedition or for any such further defense of the
Realm, or any other of His Majesty's Dominions; Which said Mariners, Sailers,
and other such persons so to be Levied and Impressed, as aforesaid, and every
of them, shall have paid and delivered unto him upon such his Impressing, by
the person that shall so Impresse him, for Conduct money, for every mile from
the place where he shall be so Impressed, to the Ship or place to which he
shall be appointed to make his repair, the sum of one penny, and the like sum of
one penny for every mile from the place of his discharge unto the place of his
abode, and shall be allowed for his Service the best Wages and entertainment
which have or has been allowed by His Majesty, to any such person or persons
respectively, at any time within three years fall past. And if any Manner,
Sailer, Watermen, Surgeon, Gunner, or Ship-Carpenter, shall wilfully refuse
to be Impressed, in, or for the said Service, or shall voluntarily hide and
absent himself at the time of such Press, to avoid the said Service, That then
every such person so offending shall suffer Imprisonment by the space of three
months without ^ail or Mainprise.

Provided always that this Act shall not extend to the pressing of any Master
of any Ship or Barque, that has the charge of any Ship or Barque, or unto any
Masters-Mate, or Ship-Carpenter of any Ship or Barque that is in employment at
the time of the said press.

Provided always, and be it enacted, That no Money, or other reward, shall be
taken, or any corrupt practice used by any the persons authorized by this Act,
in or for the Pressing, Cha^ging, Sparing, or Discharging of any person or
persons to be Impressed by force of this Act, under pain of forfeiture of
twenty pounds by the person so offending, for every such offense; the one half
to His Majesty, His Her^s and Successors, the other half to him that will sue
for the same, to be recovered by Action of debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information
in any of His Majesty's Courts of Records, or before the Justices of Assise,
Oyer and Terminer, Jail-delivery, or the Justices of the Peace of the County,
City, or Town-Corporate where such offense shall be committed, at their
general quarter Sessions, wherein no Wager of Law, Essoign, Protection, or
Injunction shall be admitted or allowed.

Provided always, and be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that
one other Act entitled, An Act for the better raising and levying of Mariners,
Sailers, and others, for the present guarding of the Seas, and necessary
defense of the Realm, and other His Majesty's Dominions, made in this present
Parliament, and now in force, and every Article, Clause, and Provision therein
contained, be from the first day of February in the year of our Lord God one
thousand six hundred forty one Repealed and made utterly void and of none
effect. (*)


