AN ACT FOR THE Better Observation OF THE LORD'S DAY.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster, the seventeenth day of September. An.
Dom. 1656.

Reprinted at Aberden, by JAMES BROWN. 1657.

AN ACT FOR THE BEtter Observation OF THE LORD'S DAY.
FOrasmuch as God has appointed one Day in seven to be kept holy unto
himself, and that in order thereunto man should abstain from the works of his
ordinary Calling, and has entrusted the Magistrate amongst others, to take
care thereof within his Gates; And whereas it is found by daily experience,
that the First day of the week (being the Lords Day, and since the Resurrection
of Christ to be acknowledged the Christian Sabbath) is frequently neglected and
profaned to the dishonor of Christ, and Profession of the Gospel; Therefore
for the better observation of the said Day, and preventing in some measure such
Profanation thereof for the future, Be it enacted by his Highness the Lord
Protector, and the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and
Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, that whatsoever person or
persons within this Commonwealth shall be found guilty according to this Act,
of doing and committing the Offenses herafter mentioned upon the said Lords
Day, that is to say, Betwixt Twelve of the Clock on Saturday night, and Twelve
of the Clock Lord's Day night, shall be adjudged, deemed and taken to be guilty
of profaning the Lord's Day; That is to say, Every person being a Waggoner,
Carrier, Butcher, Higler, Drover, or any of their servants traveling or coming
by Land or Water, into his or their Inn, House or Lodging within the times
aforesaid; And every Innkeeper, Victualler, or Alehouse Keeper, who shall
lodge and entertain any such W^ggon^r, C^rrier, Butcher, Higle^ Drover, or
their servants, coming and traveling as aforesaid; Every person using or
employing any Boat, Wherry, Lighter, Barge, Horse, Coach or Sedan, or
traveling or laboring with any of them upon the Day aforesaid (except it be
to and from some place for the service of God, or except in case of necessity
to be allowed by some Justice of the Peace) Every person being in any Tavern,
Inn, Alehouse, Uictualing house, Strongwater-house, Tobaco-house, Cellar or
Shop, (not lodging there, nor upon urgent necessity, to be allowed by a Justice
of Peace) or fetching or sending for any Wine, Ale or Beer, Tobacco,
Strong-water, or other strong Liquor unnecessarly, and to Tipple within any
other House or Shope; And the Keepers or Owners of every such Houses, Cellars
or Shope-keeping or causing to be kept their Doors ordinarily and usually open
upon the Day aforesaid; Every person Dancing, or prophanly Singing or Playing
upon Musical Instruments, or Tippling in any such Houses, Cellars or Shops, or
elsewhere upon the Day aforesaid, or harboring or entertaining the persons so
offending; Every person Grinding or causing to be ground any Corn or Grain in
any Miln, or causing any Fulling or other Mills to work upon the Day aforesaid;
Add every person working in the Washing, Whiting or Drying of Clothes, Thread
or Yarn, or causing such Work to be done upon the Day aforesaid; Every person
setting up, burning or branding Beet, Truf or Earth, upon the Day aforesaid;
Every person gathering of Rates, Loans, Taxations, or other Payments upon the
Day aforesaid (Except to the use of the Poor in the Public Collections) Every
Chaundler melting or causing to be melted, Tallow or Wax belonging to his
Calling; And every Common Brewer and Baker, Brewing and Baking, or causing
Bread to be baked, or Beer or Ale to be brewed upon the Day aforesaid; And
every Butcher killing any Cattle, and every Butcher, Costermonger, Poulterer,
Herb-seller, Cordwayner, Shoemaker or other persons selling, exposing or
offering to sell any their Wares or Commodities, and the persons buying such
Wares or Commodities upon the Day aforesaid; All Tailors and other Tradsemen,
sitting or going to sit, or carry any wearing Apparel or other things. And
Barbers Trimming upon the Day aforesaid; All persons-keeping, using or being
present upon the Day aforesaid at any Fairs, Markets, Wakes Revels, Wrestlings,
Shootings, Leaping, Bowling, Ringing of Bells for pleasure, or upon any other
occasion (saving for calling People together for the Public Worship) Feasts,
Church-Ale, May-poles, Gaming, Bear-beating Bull-baiting, or any other Sports
and Pastimes; All persons unnecessarily walking in the Church or Churchyards,
or elsewhere in the time of Public Worship; And all persons vainly and
profanely Walking on the Day aforesaid; And al persons Traveling carrying
Burdens, or doing any worldly labors or work of their ordinary Calling on the
Day aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of profaning the Lord's Day.

And it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person being of the
age of Fourteen years or upwards, offending in any of the premises, and being
convicted thereof by Confession, or the view of any Mayor, Head-Officer or
Justice of the Peace, or upon the Testimony of One or more Witnesses upon Oath,
before any such Mayor, Head-Officer or Justice of the peace in the County,
City, Division or place where the Offense shall be committed (which Oath the
said Mayor, Justice of Peace or Head-Officer, shall and may administer) shall
for every such Offense where-of he shall be so convicted, forfeit the Sum of
Ten shillings: Besides which Forfeitures, all and every person and persons
selling, exposing or offering to sell any Wares or Commodities upon the Day
aforesaid, and in like manner duly convicted, shall have their Wares and
Commodities so sold, exposed, or offered to be sold, seized and disposed of as
is by this Act appointed.

Provided, and it is hereby Enacted and Declared, That nothing in this Act
contained, shall extend to the prohibiting the dressing of Meat in private
Families, or the dressing or Sale of Victuals in a moderate way in Inns,
Victualing-Houses, or Cooks Shops, for the use of such as cannot otherwise be
provided for, or to the Crying or Selling of Milk before nine of the Clock in
the morning, or after four of the Clock in the afternoon from the Tenth of
September till the Tenth of March, or before Eight of the Clock in the morning,
or after Five of the Clock in the afternoon, from the Tenth of March till the
Tenth of September yearly; Nor to hinder any other works of Piety, Necessity or
Mercy, to be allowed by a Justice of peace.

And whereas many Navigable Rivers or Waters extend themselves into, or are the
Bounds of more Counties then one, by reason whereof, some Doubts have been
raised, whether the Justices of the Peace of any County lying on the one side
of such River have any, or how far they may have Jurisdiction or power upon or
over the same; Be it therefore enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Justices of Peace of any such County, or the Constable or other Officers of any
Parish, lying on either side of such River, shall have Power and are hereby
authorized and required to put this Act in execution, for the apprehending and
punishing of all Watermen, Barge-men, or other persons whatsoever, who shall
on the said Day be found contrary to this Act, Traveling, Rowing, or Working
in or with any Boat, Lighter, Barge, or other smaller Vessel on any part of
such River, and the said Boats, Lighters, Barges and other Vessels, shall seize
and stay, or cause to be seized and stayed until Twelve of the Clock of the
said Night, and until the Penalties hereby inflicted on such Person or persons
as shall be discovered to have offended therein be duly paid and satisfied to
the Officer or Officers of that Town or Parish (on either side such River) as
shall first discover and attempt the persuing, seizing or staying thereof.

And it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Elections, Swearing and
taking of place of Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Aldermen, or other Officer
whatsoever, to any City, Borough, Town-Corporate, or any other place within
this Commonwealth, that after the First day of August next ensuing, by virtue
or color of any act of Parliament, Charter, Custom, Prescription or otherwise,
should or might fall out to be upon a Lord's Day, And all Commissions and
Courts, which by means of any Adjournment or other cause; And all Returns of
Writs which shall fall out to be upon any Lord's Day as aforesaid, shall be, and
ar hereby authorized and required to be kept, had and done, sat upon, and
executed upon the next day which shall ensue such Lord's Day; And all Mayors,
Recorders, Stewards, Town Clerk, or other Officers or persons whatsoever, that
have, or after the said First day of August next, shall have Power and
Authority to Elect Swear, or give any Charge or Oath for taking any such Place,
Oath or Office, or to keep any Courts, shall and may, and are hereby authorized
and required to make such Elections, give such Oath and Charge, and take such
Oaths, Places or Offices, or keep such Courts as abovesaid, upon the day next
ensuing such Lord's Day; And that all Customs, Rents and Services due to Lords
of Manors, which by virtue of any Custom Prescription, or otherewise, are, or
ought to be done performed and paid upon any Lord's Day, shall after the said
First day of August next, be done, performed and paid upon the day next
following such Lord's Day, and shall be as valid and effectual to all intents
and purposes whatsoever, as if the same had been done upon the said Lord's Day;
And that all Rents, Some of Money, Covenants and Conditions, payable or
performable upon any Lord's Day, shall and may be paid and performed upon the
day next ensuing such Lord's Day, and that such Payment and performance thereof,
shall be as good and effectual to the Law, to all intents and purposes, to
save all Penalties, Re-entries or Forfeitures whatsoever, as if the same had
been made and performed at or upon the day limited or appointed in or by any
Bond, Lease, Covenant, Indenture or other Deed or Agreement whatsoever, Any
Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary hereof notwithstanding: And that no Fair,
Market, or Proclamation of any Fair or Market shall be had, made or used upon
any Lord's Day, but upon the day next ensuing; Nor shall any person or persons
serve, or cause to be served, any Writ, Process, Warrant, Order, Judgment or
Decree (Except in causes of Treason, Felony, Breach of the Peace, and
Profanation of the Lord's Day) upon pain that every person and persons, Bodies
Politic and Corporate, offending in any the particulars last mentioned, shall
forfeit the Sum of Five pounds, to be recovered in Name of the Lord Protector,
by Bill, Plaint, Writ or Action of Debt in any Court of Record, or upon
Information or Indictment before the Justices of the Peace in the open
Sessions, who have hereby Power to hear and determine the same, and to be
disposed; viz. One Moiety to the use of His Highness the Lord Protector, and
the other moiety to the use of him or them that will sue or prosecute for the
same; And that the service of every such Writ, Action, Process, Warrant, Order,
Judgment or Decree shall be void to all intents and purposes whatsoever.

And whereas many Fairs and Markets are kept upon Saturdayes and Moondays,
whereby is often occasioned the profanation of the Lord's Day, It is hereby
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every person and persons
resorting to sell or buy Commodities in any such Fairs and Markets, shall in
due time come to, and depart from the same, and strictly observe the Laws and
Rules of the Markets, that the observation of the Lord's Day may not thereby be
violated, upon pain that every person traveling to or from such Fairs or
Markets upon the Lord's Day, and duly convicted as aforesaid, before one or more
Justices of the Peace, who have herby power by their own view, confession of
the parties, or the Oath of one or more Witnesses (which Oath they may
administer) to bear and determine the same, shall forfeit for every offense the
sum of Ten shillings.

And to the end this Act may be duly observed and henceforth put in execution,
Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every Mayor,
Head-Officers, and Justices of Peace within their respective Counties, Limits
and Jurisdictions, are hereby Enjoined and Authorized from time to time under
their Hands and Seals, to appoint and require such Churchwardens, Overseers of
the Poor, Constables and other persons within their several Jurisdictions as
they shall think fit, to seize and secure such Wares and Commodities as shallbe
be sold, exposed, cried, or offered to Sale contrary to this Act upon the Day
aforesaid, and to search for, discover, secure, apprehend and bring before
them, or any other Justice of Peace of the County or place where they shall be
apprehended, all and every person and persons whom they shall find profaning
and violating, or shall know or be informed to have profaned and violated the
Lord's Day in any the particulars herin mentioned, or shall have just cause to
suspect for the same; which said Warrant so received, the said Constables,
Tythingmen, Churchwardens, Overseers of the poor, or either of them to whom
the said Warrant is or shall be directed, shall make publication of in the said
parish Church or Chapel Fourteen days before execution of the same, and
after such publication, and end of the said Fourteen days, the said
Constables, Tythingmen or Overseers of the poor so authorized, and every of
them, are herby required and authorized, to do and perform their duties
accordingly, without expecting any particular Warrant for the same, upon such
pains and penalties as are hereafter in this Act inflicted upon wilful
neglectors of their duty.

And for the better execution of the powers aforesaid, The Constables,
Churchwarden or Overseer of the Poor so authorized, are hereby required and
authorized, to demand Entrance into any Dwelling House, or other place
whatsoever suspected by them to harbor, (...) of suffer to be any person or
persons profaning the Lord's Day; And if such Entrance be either wilfully
delayed or refused, all and every person or persons so delaying or refusing,
being convicted thereof (as by this Act is appointed) shall forfeit the sum of
Twenty shillings

And all Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor, and Constables within their
several Limits, are hereby Enjoined and Authorized upon their own view and
knowledge, as well with Warrant as without, to seize and secure all such Wares
and Commodities sold, exposed or offered to be sold, and to apprehend, secure
and stop all offenders against this Law, with their Horses and Carriages (if
any such shall be) and after apprehension, to bring such Offenders before any
Justice of Peace, to be dealt with according to the Directions of this Act,
unless the Offender shall forthwith pay the Penalty forfeited by this Act to
such Officer.

And it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Children or Servants
under the Age of Fourteen years, offending in any the offenses within this Act
mentioned, and thereof convicted before any Mayor, Head-Officer, or any one or
more Justices of the Peace as aforesaid, the Parents, Guardians, Masters,
Mistresses or Tutors of all such Children and Servants, shall forfeit the Sum
of One shilling for every such Servant or Child so offending and thereof
convicted aforesaid unless such Parent, Guardian, Master, Mistress or Tutor,
shall in the presence of the Churchwardens, Overseers for the Poor, or other
Officer, or one of them, give or cause to be given unto such Child or Servant
so offending due Correction.

And to the end that no profane licentious person or persons whatsoever, may
in the least measure receive encouragement to neglect the performance of
religious and holy Duties on the said Day, by color of any Law or Laws giving
Liberty to truly Tender-Consciences, Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That all and every person and persons shall (having no reasonable excuse for
their absence, to be allowed by a Justice of Peace of the County where the
offense shall be committed) upon every Lord's Day diligently resort to some
Church or Chapel where the true Worship and Service of God is exercised, or
shall be present at some other convenient Meeting Place of Christians, not
differing in matters of Faith from the Public Profession of the Nation, as it
is expressed in the humble Petition and Advice of the Parliament to his Highness
the Lord Protector, where the Lord's Day shall be duly sanctified, according to
the true intent and meaning of this Act, upon pain that all and every such
person or persons so offending, shall for every such Offense, being thereof
convicted, forfeit the sum of Two shillings and six pence.

And it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person being the
Minister or public Preacher of, or in any Church, Chapel, or public
Congregation within this Commonwealth, and officiating and doing his Duty
therein upon any Lord's Day, or at any othertimes, shall be molested, hindered, or
disturbed therein by any person whatsoever; And if any person or persons shall
after the First day of August next ensuing, maliciously, wilfully, or of
purpose molest, let disturb, disquiet or otherwise trouble any such Minister
or Public Preacher in the doing and performing the Duty of their respective
Places, or in his going to, or returning from such place, or make or cause to
be made any public disturbance in any part of the Lords day in any of the
places aforesaid, It shall and may be lawful to and for any Churchwarden,
Overseer of the Poor, or Constable of the Parish and Place where such
Molestation, Disturbance and Disquieting shall be, and they are hereby enjoined
to apprehend all and every person and persons offending therein, or in case of
escape before such Apprehension, for the Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor,
or Constables of any other Parish or Place where such Offender shall: be found,
to apprehend them and every of them, as well without Warrant as with Warrant,
and bring them before the Mayor, or any Justice of the Peace or Head-Officer
where any such person and persons shall be apprehended; And if such Mayor,
Justice or Head-Officer shall find cause upon his own view, Confession of the
party, or the Oath of one or more sufficient Witnesses (which Oath he shall
have herby power to administer) then he shall commit such person to Prison,
there to remain without Bail or Mainprize until the next General Sessions of
the Peace to be holden for the County, City or place where the Offense shall be
committed; And if upon Information, Presentment or Indictment, such person or
persons shall at the General Sessions of the Peace (who have hereby power to
hear and determine the same by Confession or Oath of two or more sufficient
Witnesses) be found guilty for maliciously, wilfully, or of purpose molesting,
letting, disturbing or otherwise troubling such Minister or Public Preacher,
or making any disturbance as aforesaid, every person so convicted, shall
forfeit the sum of Five pounds, One moiety to the use of his Highness the Lord
Protector, and the other moiety to him or them that will sue or prosecute for
the same; or at the discretion of the said Justices, shall be sent to the house
of Correction or Workhouse, to be set to hard Labor, with such moderate
Correction, as in the discretion of the said Justices shall be thought fit, for
some time, not exceeding six months.

And it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all persons Contriving,
Printing or Publishing any Papers, Books, or Pamphlets for allowance of Sports
and Pastimes upon the Lord's Day, or against the Morality thereof, shall forfeit
the sum of Five pounds, or be committed to the house of Correction as aforesaid.

And it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case any Wares or
Commodities shall be seized and secured for being sold, exposed or offered to
be sold contrary to this Act, and the Offenders therein convicted as aforesaid,
All such Wares and Commodities, or the value thereof, at the discretion of the
Mayor, Head-Officer or Justice, shall be disposed of to the use of the poor of
the Parish where such Wares shall be first feized, Saving that it shall be in
the Power of such Mayor, Justice of Peace or Head-Officer, out of the same to
reward any person that shall Inform, or otherewise Prosecute any person for the
said Offense according to their discretion, so as such Reward exceed not the
Third part of the Wares and Commodities so seized, and so as no Reward be given
to any person upon whose Oath only the Offender shall be convicted; And all
Sums of Money, and Forfeitures not otherewise disposed of by this Act, shall be
employed for the use of the Poor of the Parish where the several Offenses shall
be committed, Saving only that it shall be lawful to and for any Mayor, Justice
of Peace or Head-Officer, out of the said Forfeitures, to reward any such
persons that shall Inform, or otherewise Prosecute any persons for the same,
according to their discretion, so as such Reward exceed not the third part of
the Forfeiture, and so as no reward be given to any person upon whose Oath only
the Offender shall be convicted. Provided always, That no person or persons
shall be impeached or molested for any Offense within this Act, unless he or
they be thereof convicted within One Month after the Offense committed.

And it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Mayors, Justices of the
Peace, Head-Officers, the Governors of Inns of Court and Chancery, all Masters
and Governors of Schools and Families, and the Governors of the Company of
Watermen for the River of Thames (who for the purposes in this Act mentioned,
shall have the Power of Constables upon the said River, and upon any Keys,
Wharfs or Banks thereof) and all other Officers and persons herein concerned,
are hereby enjoined and authorized within their several Limits and
Jurisdictions, to see this Act put in due and speedy execution, upon pain that
all and every person and persons neglecting to do his and their respective
duties, in putting this Act in due and speedy execution, being thereof duly
convicted by Bill, Plaint, Writ or Action of Debt, in any Court of Record, or
upon Presentment, Information or Indictment before any Justices of the Peace in
their open Sessions (who have hereby power to hear and determine the same
(shall forfeit the sum of Five pounds; one moiety whereof shall be to the use
of his Highness the Lord Protector, and the other moiety to him or them that
will prosecute for the same.

And it is hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Writ of
Certiorari shall be granted or allowed for the removing any Action, Suit,
Presentment, Information, Indictment, or any other Proceedings against any
person for offending against this Law; And that in any Action brought against
any Justice of Peace, Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, Constables, or any
other Officers or persons whatsoever, for acting or doing, or commanding to be
acted or done, any matter or thing in pursuance of this Act, or for being
aiding or assisting thereunto, the Defendant in every such Action shall and may
plead the general Issue, and give the special Matter in Evidence, and upon
Nonsuit of the Plaintiff, or Uerdict passing for the Defendant, the Defendant
shall have and recover his and their treble Costs.

And it is lastly Enacted, that the Churchwardens, or other Officers of every
Parish within this Commonwealth, do at the charge of the Parish procure one or
more of these Acts to be safely kept in their respective Parishes; and the
Ministers of each parish are hereby enjoined in every year, that is to say,
Upon the first Lord's Day in March yearly, immediately before the Morning
Sermon, to read, or cause to be read this present Act.

Provided, That this Act shall not extend to authorize or empower any Constable
or Officer, without the special warrant of one or more Justice or Justices of
the peace, to enter or demand Entrance into any House upon pretense of
execution of his or their Office by virtue of this Act, other then into
Taverns, Inns, Alehouses, Tobacco-shops Uictualling, houses or Tipling-houses
Any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

October Quarter Sessions 1657.
ORdered that this Act of Parliament be forthwith Reprinted for the benefit of
the Shire of Aberdene.

Ordered by the Court. Christopher Powell, Cler. of the Peace.


