Decree of Separation, The Apothecaries of Edinburgh, Against The Chyrurgeons
there.
AT Edinburgh, the 24th day of March 1682 years. Anent the Libel first intented
and pursued before the Provost and Baillies of Edinburgh, and thereafter
Advocat of consent of both Parties Procurators after-named, to the Lords of
Council and Session, and which Summonds is raised at the instance of Mr. James
Nisbet then Deacon of Chyrurgeons of Edinburgh, and in name and behalf of the
remanent Brethren and Friends Chyrurgeons and Barbers of the said Burgh,
against Patrick Cunninghame Apothecary in the said Burgh, Touching the said
Defender his hearing and seeing of himself Unlawed and Fined by Decree of the
said Baillies, for his alleged Operating in Chyrurgery, he not being a
Freeman of that Trade and Calling, as in the said Libel, Summonds, or Precept
raised in the said Matter at more length is contained. As also, anent the two
mutual Summonds and Actions of Declarator, raised and pursued before the said
Lords, the one thereof being als well an Action of Reduction as Declarator at
the instance of the said Patrick Cunninghame and haill Freemen Apothecaries in
the said Burgh, Viz. John Kennedy Visitor, James Foulis elder, Robert Campbell,
Hugh Neilson, Thomas Dalrymple, John Hepburn, James Aikenhead, John Foulis
younger, Mr. Alexander Hay, Mr. James Macmath and James Lothian, Freemen
Apothecaries, Burgesses and Gild-brethren of the said Burgh of Edinburgh,
lawfully entered, admitted and received, to whose great hurt and prejudice in
the free Exercise of their Employment as Apothecaries, the Acts, Ratifications,
and other Writs after-mentioned, are alleged, purchased and procured, at the
least are made use of by the said Chyrurgions, against the said Apothecaries,
to the prejudice of the just Privileges of their Employment as Apothecaries,
and their assiduous attendance upon the Kings Subjects their Patients in their
said Employments, as for the Health of his Majesty's Subjects is requisite;
and swa having good and undoubted Right to Pursue the Action of Reduction and
Declarttor underwritten, against the said Mr. James Nisbet present Deacon of
the Chyrungeons, Alexander Pennicook, John Forest, George Scot, James Hopki^k,
William Semple, Robert Kennedy, Thomas Scot, James Cleiland, Thomas Edgar, John
Carmichael, and Peter Norie simple Chyrurgeons and Chyrurgeon Barbers in the
said Burgh; And sicklike, Thomas Kincaid, William Borthwick, John Joissie, Hugh
Broun, George Stirling, David Pringle, James Ogilvie, Walter Turnbull, and
James Crawfoord Apocary-Chyrurgeons in the said Burgh; and als against Sir
Thomas Murray of Glendoick then Clerk Register, and Mr. Alexander Gibson of
Adistoun his Deput, and the Provost, Baillies, and Town-Council of the said
Burgh of Fainburgh, and Mr. James Rockheid of Innerleith their Town Clerk for
their Interests, and all others having or pretending to have Interest in the
said matter underwritten, Toutching the said Chyrurgeons and others Defenders
in the foresaid Action, their bringing with them, exhibiting and producing
before the said Lords of Council and Session. Imprimis, An Ratification
alleged past by the pretended Parliament 1641 years, whereby certain
Privileges, Writs and Rights, are alleged ratified to and in favors of the
Chyrurgeons of Edinburgh, and particularly giving them Power to take,
apprehend, and imprison unfreemen Contraveeners of their Privileges, ay and
while they enact themselves under the pain 20 pounds Scots toties quoties,
which Ratification is dated the (...) day of (...) one thousand six hundred and
forty one years foresaid. Item, An Act of the Town-Council of Edinburgh, of
the date the (...) day of (...) one thousand six hundred and forty three
years, Wherein the applying of Cere-Cloaths are decerned properly to belong to
the Chyrurgeons. Item, Another Act of Town-Council of Edinburgh, dated the
(...) day of (...) 1655. Whereby the several Distempers therein enumerat in the
whole Cure, and Accidents of the samine, are allowed to Chyrurgeons allenarly.
Item, An Act and Ratification past in favors of the Chyrurgeons in his
Majesty's late Parliament 1670 years, or of whatsoever dates, tenor, or
contents the samine are of, to be seen and considered by the said Lords, and
to have heard and seen the samine reduced, retreated, rescinded, cassed,
annulled and decerned and declared, to have been from the beginning, to be now
and in all time-coming null, and of none avail, force, strength, nor effect,
with all that has followed, or may follow thereupon, and the said Pursuers
reponed and restored in integrum there-against cum omni causa, sicklike as if
the samine had never been made given nor granted in return natura. And whilks
Acts, Ratifications and others above-written, being swa reduced, the said
Defenders to hear and see it by Decree of the said Lords found and declared,
that it shall be no ways lawful for them to molest and trouble the Pursuers, or
their Successors, in the free exercise of their Calling and Employments as
Apothecaries, as they questionably are, and formerly have been in use of
exercising the samine, until the said Lords shall by the advice and council of
disinterested, learned and capable Physicians, and with a due regard to the
Interest of his Majesty's Subjects, shall in their Decree to follow thereupon,
prescrive such Rules and Orders for the regulation and distinguishing of the
said two Callings of Apothecaries and Chyrurgeons, as the said Lords shall in
Justice, and by Advice foresaid, think most fit and proper for the health, ease
and convenience of his Majesty's Subjects, and due encouragement, preservation
and improvement of that so noble and necessary Faculty of Medicine, in all the
parts and branches thereof, in due and beseeming order within this ancient
Kingdom. And which two Callings of Apothecary and Chyrurgery being sua
distinguished by the said Lords as said is, all such Apothecaries and
Chyrurgeons who take upon them to use and confound both Callings, while as yet
undistinguished, to hear and see themselves decerned and restricted to make
their choice and election, which of the said two Callings they will exercise
and practice in time-coming; And to hear and see themselves decerned liable to
observe the Rules and Orders sua to be prescrived, either as simple
Chyrurgeons, or simple Appothecaries without confusion of the two Callings in
one, as should be determined by the said Lords thereintill, as also to hear
and see it found and declared, that the making and applying of Cerecloaths does
only belong unto the Apothecaries, and that the Chyrurgeons ought neither to
make or apply the same, and als that it is lawful and leisum to the Apothecaries
to use Phlebotomie when the samen is asked upon occasion of inward distempers,
and to give Dyetts and Medicaments at all occasions; As also to hear and see it
found and declared, that it shall not be lawful or competent upon any pretended
contraventions of the said Rules, to trouble or molest the members of either
calling, except they be taken in the Act of contravention per manus injectionen
in crimine flagranti as is allowed to and practiced by other Trades and
Incorporations allenerly; And that it it shall not be lawful to parties to give
their Oaths for any such alleged contraventions, and to hear and see it found
and declared that the Defenders have done wrong to molest and trouble Patrick
Cunninghame and of the parties abovenamed, in withdrawing him from the
necessar atendance upon Patients, His Majesty's Subjects, by acquiring him to
atend a Law suit for giving his Oath, upon pretense of his contraveening of the
alleged privileges of the Chyrurgeons, not as yet by His Majesty, or the
said Lords upon a full hearing of all parties concerned, Cleared, Settled, or
Determined, and to hear and see themselves decerned to desist and cease from
all further troubling of the said Patrick, or any other Freeman Apothecary
within the said Burgh of Edinburgh, for giving of their Oaths upon any such
like account, in all time coming, and that for the Reasons and Causes following
in the first, because the Noble and Supreme Faculty of Medicine is in it self,
a free and liberal science, and ought in all the Branches thereof, be keept and
used als freely as any other liberal Science, with a just Respect to good
ordour, and the decent constitution of the Kingdom, seeing the Admistrators
thereof have nixt under GOD and great care of the Health and Lives of the
Subjects, under Diseases and Distempers; and therefore ought not upon any
needless or freevelous pretenses. be by unnecessary legal Pursuits withdrawn
from the assiduus attendance upon their Patients, for gratefying the humor or
interest of a few for their own Interest and ends concerned; And therefore all
Limitations or Restrictions upon the Phisician Apothecary, or Chyrurgon, either
in their common or proper Employments as contrair distinguished one from an
other does belong and ought only to be given by His Majesty and his Supreme
Judicatories as the King, and they with the advice of able, learned, skilful
and disinteressed Physicians, shall find most consistant with His Majesty's
honor, the Laws of the Kingdom, and most convenient for the ease, health and
convenience of His Majesty's good Subjects, and so ought not to be presumed
upon, to be determined and discrived by Acts of Particular Burghs and their
Councils, the Members whereof are many times Persons altogether ignorant of the
very names and terms of Art used in Physic Pharmacie or Chyrurgery, and so
very unfit and unqualified Judges, to set Limits and Marches betwixt Pharmacie
and Chyrurgie, or to prescrive Rules to the Physicians Pharmacian and
Chyrurgeon in their proper or distinct Employments; and therefore that pretended
ratification Abovewritten, past in the pretended Parliament 1641. ough^ to be
rescinded, because it contains a Clause for apprehending incarcerating,
enacting that such apprehendit should not use Chyrurgical operations, which
upon many supervenient exigencies, they may become oblidged to, especially if
they be Freemen Apothecaries of Edinburgh; And that the foresaid ratification
was but sureptitiously purchased by the Chyrurgeans, from the said pretended
Parliament without calling of the Physicians or Apothecaries thereto. And
hearing them for their Interest there against at the least, the same ought to
be Restricted to unfree men, Jurney-men and Apprentices, and that only when
they are sealed upon in crimine flagranti, and not to be extended to Skilful
and Experienced Freemen Apothecaries, als weel lawfully admitted Burges and
Gild-Brethren of Edinburgh, as Masters of Public Appothecaries Shops there.
Secundo, And for the Reasons foresaid the Abovementioned Towns Act in anno
1643. ought to be reduced, because it is given a non competenti Judice as said
is, and it is against common sense and reason, to think that the Application of
a Cere-cloath to a dead Body, whereupon there is no Anatomical dessection used,
can be a Chyrurgical operation, and so ought never to have been decerned to
belong properly to the Chyrurgeons, exclusive of the Apothecaries; and seeing
the Subject matter of Chyrurgery is to mend, recover and restore Luxations
fractors and dissolutionem continuii, it is rediculous to allow the Apothecarie
the making of Cereclothes, and yet to deny him the Applacation thereof, to the
said Body of his own Patient, when no antomical dissection is used, which tends
to nothing but to extort and oppress the good Subjects, and to render the
making of Cere-cloaths, in favors of the Apothecaries altogether elusory and
ineffectuall, for seeing by a late Invention, some Apothecaries have crept in to
be Chyrurgeons, such Chyrurgeons will never make use of Cere-cloaths made by
simple Apothecaries, but will force the Friends of the Defunct to make use of
Cere-cloaths, to be made by themselves, as has been several times of late
experimented in sundry Instances, to the great Expenses and Extortion of the
Subjects, and to the detrement and discouragement of the simple Apothecary.
Tertio, The Towns Act in anno 1655. Above-written ought to be funditus reduced,
not only because it is an high incroatchment upon what properly belongs to His
Majesty and his Highnesses supreme Judicatories as said is, for the Council of
a Burgh to presume to take upon them to find and declare what property belongs
to Chyrurgie and Pharmacy as contrair distinguished from an another, but that
the samen being pronounced in the time of Usurpation is in it self most unjust
absurd and unwarrantable: As first, In turning all the Distempers therein
innumerated Statutory in Favors of the Surgeons allenarly, which is but
merely narratory in the Act 1643; and these contraverted as indifferently used,
als well by the Appothecaries as by the Surgeons of the Burgh, as in finding
the Consent and Concessions alleged for a few Appothecaries in anno 1643,
Binding upon all Succeeding Appothercaries contrary to all Law and Justice, and
in debaseing of the Honor of the Physician in his directive faculty in
prescriving diet and Medicament, and all other requisite for perfecting of the
Cures of the Distempers therein-mentioned with their accidents, which near
comprehends all Physic to the Surgeons allenarlie, and to none others for
which no shadow of Reason can be given, except the unwarrantable Gratifieing of
the Surgeons, for the countenancing and continuing of the Factions designs
of the then Magistrates, those endeavoring what in them lay to Establish in the
time of an Usurpation, a certain Mock Borrow College of Physicians, by
Inhancing all Physic and Medicine, als well in the directing, compounding, and
operating parts thereof, by this their Act 1655, procured before the Erecting
of the Appothecaries, who was by the Towns grant being Erected, ought only to
Enjoy the Priveledges by the acclaimed as proper, and only competent to their
Art and Calling. And therefore, the said pretended Acts, Ratifications and
others respective above-written, ought and should be Reduced, Retreated,
Rescinded, Cassed, Annulled, Decerned, and Declaired to have been from the
Beginning to be now, and in all time coming Null and of none avail, Force,
Strength, nor Effect with all that has followed, or may follow thereupon: And
the said Pursuers Reponed and Restored in Integrum there against, cum omni
causa; Sicklike, as if the samen had never been Made, Given nor Granted in
rerum natura; and whilk Acts, Ratifications and others above-writen being sua
Reduced, the said Defenders to hear and see it by Decree of the said Lords,
found and declaired that it shall be no ways lawful for them to molest and
trouble the Pursuers, or their Successors in the free exercising of their
Calling and Employments as Appothecaries as they presently are, and formerly
have been in use of Exercising of the samen, until the said Lords shall by the
Advice and Counsel of dis-interested Learned and able Physicians, and with a
due regard to the Interest of the Subjects in their Decree^ ^o follow hereupon,
prescrive Rules and Orders for the Regulation and distinguishing of these two
Callings of Appothecaries and Surgeons as the said Lords shall in Justice,
and by Advice foresaid think most fit and proper for the ^ealth, ease and
convenience of the Subjects, and due Encouragement, Preservation and ^^^roving
of that so Noble and necessary Faculty of Medicine, in all the parts and
Branches ^^theof, in due and beseeming Order within this ancient Kingdom; and
which two Callings of Appothecary and Surgery, being sua distinguished by
the said Lords as said is, all such Appothecaries and Surgeons, who take
upon them to use and confound both Callings, whilk as yet undistinguishbd, to
hear and see themselves Decerned, and Restricted to make their Choice and
Election, which of the said two Callings they will practice and Exercise in
time coming, and to hear and see themselves Decerned liable to observe the
Rules and Orders sua to be prescrived, either as simple Surgeons, or simple
Appothecaries without confusion of the two Callings in one, as shall be
Determined by the said Lords thereintil, and also to hear and see it found and
declared that it shall not be lawful, nor competent upon any contravention of
the said Rules to trouble or molest the Members of either Calling, except they
be taken in the Act of Contravention, per manus injectionem in crimine
flagranti, as is allowed to, and practiced by other Trades and Incorporations
allenarly, and that it shall not be lawful for to Force Parties to give their
Oaths, for any such alleged Contraventions, and to have heard and seen it
found, and declared that the Defenders have done Wrong to molest and trouble
Patrick Cunninghame one of the Pursuers abovenamed, in withdrawing him from
his necessary Employment and attendance upon his Patients His Majesty's good
Subjects, by requiring him to attend a Law suit for giving of his Oath upon
pretense of his contraveening the alleged Privileges of the Surgeons, not
as yet by His Majesty, or the said Lords upon a full hearing of all Parties
concerned, cleared, settled or determined, and to hear and see themselves
decerned to desist, and cease from all farther troubling of the said Patrick, or
any other free men Appothecaries within the said Burgh of Edinburgh, for giving
of their Oaths upon any sicklike account in all time coming and that for the
Reasons and Causes above-written as the said Summonds of Reduction and
Declarator; more fully bears, and the other of the said Summonds at the
instance of the said Doctor James Nisbet, then deacon of the Incorporation of
the said Cherurgeons, Alexander Pennycook, Thomas Kincaid, James Cleiland,
Walter Turnbulls, John Joyssie, William Borthwick, and George Stirling, then
Masters of the said Incorporation, and Thomas Henderson present Box master of
the samen; for themselves; and in name and behalf of the remnant Brethren and
Freemen of the Cherurgeons and Barbars of Edinburgh, their instances Against
the whole Apothecaries and others unfreemen in the said Burgh of Edinburgh,
viz. John Kennedy Appothecary there, John Foulis elder Appothecary there,
Robert Campbel Appothecary there, John Hepburn Appothecary there, Mr. James
Mackmath Apothecary there, Hugh Neilson Arpothecary there, James Aikenhead
Appothecary there, James Loudoun Apothecary there, Patrick Cunninghame
Appothecary there, Mr. Alexander Hap Appothecary there, John Foulis younger
Appothecary there, Thomas Dalrymple Appothecary there, Walter Porterfield
Appothecary in the Cannongate, George Mackalla Apothecary in Leith, Edward
Cunninghame Periwig-maker in Leith, James Robertson Barbar there, John Broun
Garidner in the Abbacy of Holy-rood-house, Andrew Jackson Gairdner at the West
Port, James Hughson Gairdner at the Pleasance, and George Bell Cherurgeon in
Edinburgh, Euphan Bartine and John Biglie her Spouse indwellers in Edinburgh:
the which Summonds mak^th mention, that where the Lord Provost, Baillies and
Council of the said Burgh of Edinburgh, by their Seal of Cause under their
common Seal, of the date at Edinburgh the 1. day of the Month of July, and
year of GOD 1505 years, for the good and onerous Causes therein mentioned, did
gift and grant to the Cherurgeons and Barbars within the said Burgh of
Edinburgh, for the time being, and to their Successors, the Rules, Statutes and
Privileges underwritten, consonant to reason, known to His Majesty and His
Highnesses Pregenitors of glorious and worthty Memory, and to the profit of the
said good Town of Edinburgh, and all his Majesty's Subjects and Leidges, viz,
Imprimis, That the said Cherurgeons might yearly choice amongst themselves, an
Kirk master or Deacon and Oversman, to whom the whole Brethren of their Craft
should obey for that year. Item. That no manner of person should occupy or use
any points of the said Crafts of Cherurgery or Harbor Crafts within the said
Burgh of Edinburgh, but he that bees first an Burges and Freeman of the said
Craft, and that he be worthy and expert io all the points belonging to the said
Craft, diligently and advisedly examined and Admitted by the Masters of the
said Craft, for serving of his Majesty's Leidges and Neighbors of the said
good Town, and als, that every Freeman who is to be made a Freeman and Master
amongst the said Cherurgeons, should be examined and proved in their points
following, that is to say. That he knew Anatomia, Nature and Complexion, and
every member of humane Body, and likeways than he knew all the Veins of the
samen, that he may make Phlebotomie in due time, and als, that he knew in whilk
member the sign has Dominion for the time, in respect every man ought to know
the substance and nature of every thing he works, unless he be negligent; and
als, that the said Surgeons and their said Successors should have once in
the year an condemned man after he be dead to make an Anatomia of, wherethrough
they might have Experience ilk one to instruct another, and that none within
the said Burgh haunt, use nor exerce the Craft of Surgery, without he be
expert and know perfectly the things above-written: and what person that should
happen to be Admitted Freeman or Masters to the said Crafts, or should occupy
any point of the samen, should pay his Upset at his Entry, with an Dinner to
the Masters of the said Crafts, at his Admission and entry amongst them,
exceptand every Freeman Master of the said Crafts, one of his lawful gotten
Sons to be free of any Money paying, except the Dinner to be made to the
Masters after he be Examined and Admitted by them as said is. Item. That no
Master of the said Craft shall take any Prentice or fied man to use the
Surgeon Craft, without he could both Read and Write, and the said Master of
any of the said Crafts that takes any Prentice, should pay at his entry 20
shilling Scots Money, and that no Master of the said Cr^ft should reset nor
receive any other Masters Prentice nor Servant while the Ish of his Terms be
run, and who that does in the contrair thereof, als often as he fails, should pay
20 shilling but favor. Item, That every Master that is received Freeman to the
said Crafts, should pay his weekly Pennies, with other dues mentioned in the
sad Seal of Cause, and every Servant that is a Fied man to the Masters of the
said Craft should pay ilk week one half penny, and that the said Incorporation
should have power to choice their own Officer to pass with them, for
ingathering of their quarter and weekly pennies, and to pass before them at
their Occasions, and gatherings, sicklike as other Craffts within the said
Burgh of Edinburgh has, and that one of the Masters of the said Crafts, should
pass with the Officer of the samen, at all times needful, and lift and raise
the said Quarter Payment fra every person that owe the samen, and give any
disobeys, that they might Poynd and distrenie them, therefore having an
Officer of the said good Town with. Item, that no Master nor Freeman of the
said Crafts, Purchass any Lordship in contrair the Statutes and Rules above
Written in hindering Skaithing of the Crafts foresaids, orcomon weell thereof,
under the Pain of Tinsel of their Freedoms. Item that all the Masters, Freemen
and Brethren of the said Crafts, reddily obey and come to their Kirk Master
and Deacon, at all time when they shall be required thereto, be the said Officer
for to hear quarter Compts, or advise any thing concerning the common weel of
the said Crafts, and whosoever disobyes the samen should pay twenty Shillings
Money foresaid, as the said Seal of cause of the Date foresaid containing
diverse and sundry others Heads, Articles and Clauses at mair lenth proports.
Likeas his Majesty's Royal Progenitor, James by the Grace of God, King of Scots
by his Letters of Ratification, given under his Privy Seal of the Date at
Edinburgh the 13th day of October, 1506 years, direct to the Provost and
Baillies of the said Burgh of Edinburgh, for the time being or that should
happen thereafter, to ^e for the time, and to all and sundry others his
Officers, Leidges and Subjects Ratified, Authorized, and confirmed for him and
his Royal Successors, the foresaids Rules and Statutes, contained in the Seal
of Cause abovementioned, and the samen Seal of Cause granted to the Masters men
of Chyrurgeon and Barbar Craft, in the haill Points and Articles thereof, after
the Form and Tennor of the samen, and straightly Charged and Commanded the said
Provost Baillies, and others his Officers Leidges and Subjects, that they nor
none of them should take upon hand to do or attempt, any thing in contrair or
breaking of the said Statutes and Rules, or his said Confirmation, made and
given thereupon in any ways in time coming, under all the highest Pain, and
Charge that after may follow. Atour, if any of the said Crafts-men, disobyed
or did any ways come in contrair the said Satutes, the said Provost and
Baillies then present, and thereafter that should be recommended to Compel them
to obey and fulfill the said Statutes, as effeirs in all things after, the
Form and Tennor of the said Seal of Causes, under the pains foresaids, as
the said Letters of Ratification of the Date foresaid at more tenth bears. And
sicklike Mary Queen of Scots, be her Letters of Gift under the Privy Seal of
the said Kingdom of the Date the 11th day of May, the year of God, 1567 years,
for the Causes therein nominat, gave and granted License to all, and sundry
Chyrurgenos, Inhabitants of the said Burrows of his tRealm then present, and to
their Posterity for the time being Chyrurgeons, whilks should be able and
qualified Persons, and who after Examination before the Deacone and Brethren of
that Occupation, within the said Burgh of Edinburgh, that should be found able
and worthy, To use and Exerce the said Craft and no others, that they should
naught bear Armor, nor pass in Battle in any Hoasts, Roads gathering
Assemblys, Wapon shawings or Weirs, to be made by the Kings and Queens of the
said Realm, or their Successors, or their Lieutenants or wairdanes be Burgh
Sea or Land, within the said Realm, not out with the samen and alse License,
to them fra all Compirance, and passing upon any Inquests or Assyzes in Actions
Criminal or Civil, Justice Heirs, Justice Courts, Shireff Courts, Burrows
Courts, or others for Serving of the Breives, apprisings of Lands or any other
manner of Actions whatsoever, except sua far as concerns the Judgment, and
fight of their said Craft, allenerly Eximand, and Discharging them there Frae
in all time coming, and witted and granted the said Chyrurgeons then present,
and their Posterity of that Occupation, nor none of them should be called, nor
accused therefore, nor Incurr any Danger or Skaith there through in their Lands,
persons or Goods or any otherways in time coming, notwithstanding of any Acts,
Statutes and Proclamations or Charges special, or general made or to be made
in the contrair, or any pains contained thereintil, anent the whilk the said
Queen did dispense, with them and their Posterity for ever, Discharging them
and their Successors. Chyrurgeons being for the time of all Action Crime, that
may be impute to them or any of them, their throw discharging also, alland
sundry our Admirals, Wardens Lieutennants, Shireffs, Stuarts, Crowners,
Justices, Justice-Clerks Thesaurer, Thesaurer Clerks, Provosts, Aldermen, and
Baillies of Burrows, and all other Officers, and Ministers of the Laws and
their Deputs present, and to come of calling Attaching, Arresting, Summoning,
Adjourning, Poynding, Troubling or Intrometting with the said Chyrurgeons then
present, and their said Successors of that Craft, or any of their said Lands
or Goods in any ways in time coming, for the said remaining at home, or not
passing upon Assizes or Inquests as said is, (except as is before accepted) and
of their Offices in that part for ever, as in the said Letters of Gift of the
Date foresaid at more length is contained. And in like manner, His Majesty's
dearest Grandfather King James the 6th. of ever Blessed Memory, by his Letters
of Ratification, superscribed with his Majesty's Royal Hand, and subscribed by
the Lords of his Majesty's Exchequer, of the Date at Greenwich the 6th. day of
June 16^3 years, Ordained a Letter o^ Confirmation to be past under the Seal of
the said Kingdom of Scotland, in Favors of the Incorporation of the said
Chyrurgions of Edinburgh and their Successors, Ratifying their Rights and
Privileges in manner after-mentioned. And accordingly his Majesty's dearest
Grandfather, by His Letters past and expede under the said Privy Seal of the
Date foresaid, Ratified, and for His Majesty and His Highness Successore,
perpetually Confirmed. The said Letters made and granted by the said Provost
and Baillies of Edinburgh, and Council thereof, under their said common Seal of
Causes, of the Date abovementioned, to, and in Favors of the said
Chyrurgions and Barbars of the said Burgh of Edinburgh, from all and sundry the
foresaids Privileges, Freedoms, Liberties and Immunities above-written, at
length specified in the said Seal of Causes, and Ratified and Approved, and for
him and his said Successors, perpetually Confirmed the foresaid Letter of
Ratification and Approbation, made and granted by the said dece^^ King James
the Fourth, of most worthy Memory, under the Privy Seal of the s id ant ent
Kingdom of Scotland, of the Date foresaid whereby the foresaids Rules, Statutes
and Privileges, contained in the said Seal of Causes, are confirmed, and in
like manner Ratified and Approved, and for Him and His said Successors,
perpetually Confirmed the said Letter of Exemption, made and granted by the
said deceast Queen Mary his dearest Mother of worthy Memory, under the Privy
Seal of the said Kingdom, of t e Dare abovementioned, Exeeming the Chyrurgions
from bearing of Armor, passing in Battle, and from Reads, Hosts, and
Gatherings, Assemblies, Wars, and Weapon-showings, and from passing upon
Assizes and Inquests in Actions Criminal or Civil, and containing the other
Privileges above mentioned, together with all Acts and Decreets given by the
said Provost and Baillies of the said Burgh of Edinburgh, in Favors of the
Deacon and Brethren of the said Chyrurgions and Barbars within the said Burgh
of Edinburgh, with all that has followed, or may follow thereupon, in all and
sundry Heads, Clauses, Articles, Conditions and Circumstances thereof, after
the Forms and Tenors of the samen in all Points, as the said Letters of
Ratification of the Date foresaid, containing a Dispensation anent the Validity
of the foresaids Writs thereby Ratified, and the not Inserting thereof, and
several other Heads and Clauses at more length proports. And as the said
Provost, Baillies, and Council of Edinburgh, by an Act made and granted by
them, of the Date the 20 Day of August 1575 years, mentioning, That after
Advisement had by them, with the Supplication given in to them by the Deacon
and Brethren of the Chyrurgions and Barbar-Craft, bearing, That it is specially
provided in the Seal of Causes, and others, Gifts and Privileges, that none
should Occupy, nor use the said Craft, nor no Point thereof, unless he were a
Freeman of the said Craft, within any part of the Privileges of the Burgh.
Nevertheless the hail Apothecaries of the said Burgh, daily use and exerce the
said Craft of Chyrurgery, they neither being Freemen thereof, nor privileged
thereto, neither having Speculation nor Knowledge thereintill, to the great
hurt of the Leiges who in their Maladies may come to their hands. Therefore the
said Provost, Baillies and Council of Edinburgh, Ratified and Approved the
foresaid Gift under the Seal of Causes, of the Date above-written, and for more
strengthening thereof, and haill Causes therein contained, they by their said
Act, Discharged the said Apothecars, and all others not Freemen Chyrurgions,
not tried not admitted by them, of all using and exercing the said Chyrurgion
and Barbar-Craft in time coming under the Pain of 40 shillings, so often as they
be apprehended in contraveening of the said Gift. And ordained the Officers of
the said Burgh of Edinburgh, to concur with the said Chyrurgions and Barbars,
and their Officer, in Poynding for the said Unlaws, as the said Act at more
length bears. And further, the said Provost, Baillies, and Council of
Edinburgh, by another Act dated the 10th day of September 1641 years,
Considering that it is as well expedient for the good of the Leiges who Reside
out with the Burgh of Edinburgh, and not within the Liberties pertaining to the
said Burgh, That in the Ma^ter belonging to the Art of Chyrurgery, they be
provided with skilful and honest men, and not left to the Arbitriment and
Imposture of Women and Ignorants. Therefore the Provost, Baillies, and Council
of the sa d Burgh of Edinburgh, did inhibit and Discharge all and sundry
persons whatsomever, not being Freemen of the Chyrurgions of the said Burgh of
Edinburgh, and who have not given sufficient proof of their qualification and
knowledge in the said Art of Chyrurgery, of all using and exercising of any
point of the said Art, within the Bounds and Privileges pertaining to the said
Burgh of Edinburgh, and appointed the Magistrates of the said Burgh to be Judges
in all Controversies which should arise betwixt the Inhabitants of the said
Bounds, and the Brethren of the Chyrurgeons and Barbar Craft foresaid, as in
the said Act of Council of the Date foresaid at mo^e length is contained Attour
His Majesty's deceast Father King Charles the First of ever blessed Memory and
His Estates of Parliament, conveened in Anno 164^ years, by Act of Parliament,
Entitled Act and Ratification in Favors of the Chyrurgeons and Barbars of
Edinburgh, Dated at Edinburgh the 17 Day of November 1641 years, ratified and
approved, and for him and his Successors, perpetually confirmed all and
whatsoever Privileges, Liberties an^ Immunitie^, made, given and granted by
the Provost, Baillies and Council of Edinburgh under the Common Seal of Causes,
of the Date, the 1st Day of July 1505 years to and in Favors of the said
Chyrurgeons and Barbars of the said Burgh of Edinburgh, and specified in the
said Sale of Cause, and also ratified and approved the Letters of Approbation
and Ratification, granted by K. James the Fourth of most worthy Memory under
his Highness Privy Seal, of the Date, Tenor and Contents abovementioned. And
sicklike ratified and approved, and for him and his said Successors,
perpetually confirmed by Letters of Approbation and Confirmation made and
granted by the Deceast K. James the sixth, His Majesty's said Grand Father,
under his Privy Seal at Greenwich of the Date above-written, whereby his
Deceast Grand Father willed and granted, and for him and his Successors,
Decerned, Ordained and Declared the foresaid Letter under the Common Seal of
Causes of the said Burgh of Edinburgh, and Letter of Ratification thereof, made
and granted by K. James the Fourth to be good, valid and effectual to the said
Chyrurgion and Barbars in all time coming, together also with the said Act,
Dated the tenth Day of September 1641 years, whereby the said Provost,
Baillies and Council of Edinburgh did Inhibite and Discharge all and sundry
persons who were not Freemen Chyrurgion-Barbars, from using or exercising any
point or part of the Chyrurgion or Barbar Craft, as well with out the Burgh of
Edinburgh and Liberties thereof, within the haill Bounds of the samen, as
within the said Burgh of Edinburgh it self, and whereby the Magistrates of the
said Burgh are declared Judges competent to all Differences that may atise
betwixt the Inhabitants of the Bounds of the Liberties foresaids, and the
Brethren of the said Craft. And further, His Majesty's said Dearest Father of
ever blessed Memory, and his Estates of Parliament considering the manifold
inconveniences that did arise, by reason of a number of Merchant Men and
Women, who at their own hands without Liberty, never being bred in the Art of
Chyrurgery, take upon them to exercise the Duties and Points of that Art within
the Suburbs of the said Burgh of Edinburgh, to the great hazard and loss of the
Lives of many good Subjects, and to the great hazard; hurt and prejudice of the
Brethren of the said Craft: Therefore His Majesty's Dearest Father with Advice
and Consent of the said Estates of Parliament, did Discharge all and
whatsoever persons (except the Free, Men of the said Craft in Edinburgh) to use
and exerce any Point of the said Art of Chyrurgery within the said Burgh of
Edinburgh, or any Suburbs about the samen or belonging thereto, and
Jurisdiction thereof, with power to the Deacon and Masters of the said Art then
present, and to their Successors in all time thereafter to come at all times
convenient pass, search, take and apprehend all such persons, exercing the said
Art within the said Burgh, Suburbs and Jurisdiction thereof foresaid, not being
Freemen of the said Art within the said Burgh, and to cause them set Caution
to desist in time coming, and if they failie, to unlaw them in the Sum of
Twenty Pounds Scots Money toties quoties: And this was ordained to be done with
concourse of the Magistrates of the said Burgh of Edinburgh, and the said
Magistrates are ordained to be Judges in all contraversies that should arise
hereanent, betwixt the said Chyrurgions and Barbars, and any within the said
Bounds, and als are ordained to concur with the said Chyrurgions and Barbars,
to the effect foresaid, als the said Act of Parliament of the Date foresaid at
more length proports. Moreover, the said Provost, Baillies, and Council of the
Burgh of Edinburgh, by their Act Dated the 8th Day of December 1643 years,
mentioning, that Forsomeikle as, it having come to the knowledge of the
Provost, Baillies and Counsel of the said Burgh that there were diverse
Differences likely to arise betwixt the Deacon and Brethren of the Chyrurgions
on the one part, and the Apothecaries of the said Burgh upon the other part,
and especially anent the cureing of all kind of Imposthumes, Ulcers, Fractures,
Dislocations; Cancers, Imbalming of Dead Corpse, Applying of Spara-Draps,
Cureing of Varrol, Scurvies, Water-Cankers, Diseases of the Hernia, Buboes,
making of Phlebotomie, applying of Ventoses, Fomentations, Loch-leeches,
Canters, Vesicatores, Applying of Plasters, and all other manual Operations,
which were thought by the said Chyrurgions properly to pertain to their Art,
and yet were used indifferently by all the Apothecaries within the Burgh of
Edinburgh, and thereby was like to grow to an great Rent and Division betwixt
the said Chyrurgions and Apothecaries, which the Provost and Baillies and
Counsel of the said Burgh foreseeing, and being willing to preveen the samen:
Therefore they appoint certain persons of their own number to Conveen before
them both the said Parties, and to try and cognosce what did properly belong
to the said Chyrurgions, and after conveening of both Parties, and hearing of
them, and considering their Righls, and after Report of their procedure to the
said Council of Edinburgh, and after calling and compearing of both the said
Parties, and their consenting to the said Report, the said Provost, Baillies,
and Council of the said Burgh of Edinburgh, Decerned and Declared, that the
Application of Cere-Clothes to Dead Bodies within the said Burgh of Edinburgh
and Liberties contained in the said Chyrurgions Gift, should properly belong to
the said Chyrurgions, and that it should not be lawful to any Apothecary nor
their Servants in their Name to apply the said Cere Cloth, nor to them to
direct any to apply the samen: And ordained the said Chyrurgions if they
should be employed by the said Apothecaries, to apply any Cere-Clothes made by
them, not to refuse the samen: And also Decerned and Ordained that all manual
Operations and Applications about Dead or Living Bodies of Men, Women or
Children, should properly, and only belong to the said Chyrurgions, And
Discharged the said Apothecaries and their Servants from the using and
exercing of any Operations or Applications in the particulars Above rehearsed,
about the said Bodies of Men, Women or Children, as the said Act of the Date
foresaid at more length proports, And als the said Provost, Baillies and
Council of the said Burgh of Edinburgh by another Act, Dated the 20 Day of
April 1649 years, Taking to their consideration the prejudice which the
Freemen Chyrurgions and Barbars of the said Burgh did sustain by the Un
Freemen Chyrurgions and Barbars in the Cannongate, Leith and other Suburbs and
Pendicles of the samen, They did therefore by the said Act require the Baillies
of the Cannongate, Leith, and others Suburbs within their Jurisdiction, ilk one
of them for their own parts to be assistant to and to concur with the Deacon of
the Chyrurgions and Barbars within their several bounds foresaid, and that none
should exercise the said Craft, nor put out Signs nor Basins, while they
obtained Liberty from the said Craft, and were subject to the Orders and
Injunctions of the Deacon and Freemen of the said Incorporation of the
Chyrurgions of Edinburgh, as the said Act at more length proports. Likeas, the
said Lord Provost, Baillies and remanent Council of the said Burgh of
Edinburgh, by an other Act Dated the 27 Day of June 1649 years, appointed the
Deceast John Denholm then one of the Baillies of the said Burgh to go down to
the Cannongate with Umquhile James Borthwick, then Deacon of the Chyrurgeons,
and to see Course and Order taken with the Unfree-Men, there, and with the
Unfree Men Barbars in the Cannongate, conform to the foresaid Act and Order, of
the Date the said 20 Day of April 1649 years foresaid, and that in respect that
the Baillies of the Cannongate had slighted the said Ordinance, as the said Act
of Council of the Date foresaid at more length bears: And sicklike the said
Provost, Baillies, and Council of the said Burgh of Edinburgh by an other Act,
Dated the 8th Day of the Month of July 1649 years, did call before them Robert
^riest* Andrew Robertson, John Stevenson, and William Burn Barbars of the
Cannongate, and being demanded by the Council of the said Burgh of Edinburgh,
what Right they have to exerce the said Art of Chyrurgery and Barbar Craft
within the Cannongate, They absolutely denied that they did exercise any point
of Chyrurgery, but Barbar-craft allanerly and ingeneously declared in presence
of the said Council of Edinburgh, that they had no Right to exercise that
Craft, and that neither they nor that Calling were ever erected in an Company,
not subject to a Deacon, but that they and their Authors and Predecessors did
exercise the Trade at their own hand allanerly, without any Freedom,
Tollerance, War and, Power, or Authority had, or obtained fr^e any of their
Superiors in time bygone, and therefore the Provost and Council of the said
Burgh of Edinburgh, Fand and Declared that the foresaids persons Barbars in the
Cannongate, had no Liberty to exercise the Trade within no part of the Bounds,
pertaining to the Jurisdiction of the said Burgh of Edinburgh, as in the said
Act of Council at more length is contained. And likewise the Baillies of the
Cannongate by their Act, Dated the 22 of August, 1649 years foresaid, Ordained
the Barbars of the Cannongate to take in their Signs, until they become
obedient to the Deacon and Trade of the Chyrurgions of Edinburgh; and
accordingly Robert Priest, John Stevenstone, Andrew Robertson, John Bowstone,
Robert Yule and Andrew Turnbul, Barbars in the Cannongate, Compeared before the
said Baillies, and willingly, and of their own accord, did in Obedience to the
foresaids Acts and O^ders, submit themselves thereto, and were willing to
subject themselves to the Deacon and Craft of the Chyrurgeons of Edinburgh,
their Orders and Injunctions as in the said Act at more length is contained.
And in like manner, the said Provost, Baillies, and Council of the said Burgh
of Edinburgh, by another Act Dated the 12th day of August 1649 years, relative
to the foresaids Acts above-written, mentioning, that notwithstanding of the
said Acts, the Baillies of the Cannongate had done no Diligence against
Unfreemen; therefore the said Provost, Baillies, and Council of the said Burgh
of Edinburgh, ordain the Baillies of the Cannongate Regality and Barony of
Brughtoun the Baillies of Leith, Barony of Portsburgh, and other Pendicles
within the Jurisdiction of the said Burgh of Edinburgh and their Successors, or
their Officers in their Names, within their several Bounds respective foresaid
to give their Concurrance to the Deacon of the Chyrurgions and Barbars of the
said Burgh of Edinburgh, in taking Order with the Unfreemen Chyrurgions and
Barbars, and all such as were Disobedient to their Orders and Injunctions,
within their several bounds respective above written: and especially ordained
the Baillies of the Cannongate to Discharge the Persons above-nominat, and the
Barbars within their bounds and all other persons whatsoever, from taking upon
hand to exercise the said Art of Chyru^gery or Barbar Craft, and from putting
out Signs and Basins in time coming, till they obtain Liberty from the
Chyrurgions, and Barbar-Craft of Edinburgh, under the Pain of Imprisonment of
their Persons, and paying of 20 lib. of Unlaw toties quoties, and farther
Censure as effeirs. And sicklike, ordained the Baillies to take in their Signs
and Basins, and to compel them to Obedience. And in case the said Baillies
should happen to neglect or slight their Duty, then, and in that case, the
Magistrates of the said Burgh of Edinburgh, or the Deacons of the said
Chyrurgions and Barbars of Edinburgh, with Concurse of the Officers of the said
Burgh of Edinburgh, are Authorized by the said Act, to pass to the said Burgh
of the Cannongate, and respective places foresaid, and to Discharge the said
Unfreemen and to compel them, and all other Persons whatsoever, exercising the
said Trade of Chyrurgery and Barbar-Craft, to the Obedience of the said Act.
And gave Power to search and apprehend Unfreemen, and use Probation against
them as accords of the Law, and to do all and whatsoever other things requisite,
for curbing of the said Unfreemen, and bringing them to due Obedience or
Punishment; and ordained the said Act to be extended against all Unfreemen
within the haill Bounds of the Privilege, and Jurisdiction of the said Burgh
of Edinburgh, Pendicles and Suburbs of the samen whatsoever, in time coming, as
the said Act at more length proports. And farther, the Baillies and Council of
the said Burgh of the Cannongate, by an Act Dated the 2d day of August 1649
years, did Statute and Ordain Robert Priest, Andrew Robertson, Robert Yool,
Robert Paterson, William Wairsdail, John Forsyth, Andrew Turnbul, William Burn,
John Mackmath, Charles Scot, William Wright, John Bouston, Alexander Smith, and
John Stevenstone, Unfreemen and Barbars in the Cannongate, to take in their
Signs and Basins, and to exerce no part of Chyrurgery, nor Barbar-Craft within
the Cannongate, nor Privileges thereof in no time coming, while they obtain
Liberty, and were subject to the Orders and Injunctions of the Deacon and
Freemen of the Chyrurgions and Barbars in Edinburgh, and ordain the Upsets and
Entries of all that should obtain Liberty, to exerce the Trade within the
Cannongate, to the Will and Discretion of the Deacon and Trade of the
Chyrurgions and Barbars of Edinburgh, and their Successors, and also ordained
that the Prentices of such as should enter, and give Satisfaction to the said
Deacon and Trade of the Chyrurgions of Edinburgh, should pay no more for the
Burgessships than other Prentices, they always showing a sufficient Testimonial
that they are Booked in the Books of the Incorporation of the Chyrurgions and
Barbars of Edinburgh, and no otherways, as in the said Act at more length is
contained. Moreover, the said Baillies of the Cannongate, by another Act Dated
the 7th Day of February 1649 years foresaid, did Decern and Ordain their haill
Barbars of the Cannongate, to compear before the said Deacon and Craft of the
Chyrurgions of Edinburgh, within their conveening houses in the said Burgh of
Edinburgh, and there to subscribe an Act in the Chyrurgion and Barbar Crafts
Books of Edinburgh, to underly and be subject unto all their Decreets and
Ordinances bygone and to come, and to give their Oath before the said Deacon
and Craft for that effect, and that betwixt the date of the said Act and the
13th day of the said Month of September; with Certification to all these
Unfree-men, who did not compear and give satisfaction to the said Deacon and
Craft in Edinburgh, and that they should be left to the will and pleasure and
disposing of the said Deacon and Craft in Edinburgh for their Upsets and
Entries, and all other Dues that should happen to be imposed upon them by the
said Deacon and Craft, and all other Unfreemen in time-coming, as in the said
Act of the date foresaid at more length is contained. Attour, The said
Baillies of Cannongate, by another Act dated the 10th day of February 1654
years. Did Statute and Ordain, that every Prentice of the Barbers in the
Cannongate should pay no more but 10 Pounds Scots Money for their Burgeship of
that Burgh, the said Prentices always showing an sufficient Testimonial that
they were booked in the Books of the Incorporation of the Chyrurgeons and
Barbers of the said Burgh of Edinburgh, and an sufficient Testimonial of the
Deacon and Incorporation aforesaid that they have served out their Time fully
with their Master: And farther, the said Baillies did Statute and Ordain, that
the haill Prentices of the Barbers of the Cannongate, their Designations and
their Burges Tickets, should be Barbers allanerly, and not Chyrurgeons, as the
said Act at more length proports. And farther, the said Provost, Baillies and
Council of the said Burgh of Edinburgh, by another Act dated the 27th of June
1655 years, Did declare their said Act above-written, of the date in December
1643, to extend to the whole Apothecaries, and their Servants, present and to
come, as if they were specially insert thereintill; and also, that the
Apothecaries, Unfreemen of the Chyrurgeons has no liberty but as Burgesses. And
sicklike, that the Operations and Applications contained in the Act of December
1643, upon the living and dead Bodies of Men, Women and Children, and the
curing of the Diseases therein-mentioned, as Tumors, Wounds, Ulcers, Luxations,
Fractures, curing of Verols, etc. and their accidents, by Operations
Applications, Diet, Medicaments, and what else requisite to the complete Cure,
belongs properly to the Freemen Masters Chyrurgeons of the said Burgh of
Edinburgh, being tried in Theory and Practice, sworn and admitted to the
degrees of Mastership in Chyrurgery before the said Incorporation allanerly,
and no other person whatsomever: And therefore did Statute and Ordain, that
whatsoever Apothecaries, or their Servants, or any other persons whatsoever,
who are not Freemen Chyrurgeons of the said Burgh of Edinburgh, should be found
guilty of using or exercing any Cure, Operation, or Application Chyrurgical
foresaid, or any part or point of their Calling, within the said Burgh of
Edinburgh, Liberty, or Jurisdiction thereof, that they should be punished, and
liable in payment of the said Unlaw of 20 Pounds Money foresaid, conform to the
Act of Parliament, so often as the samine shall be proved against them pro ut de
jure, upon Complaint one or more ipso facto without any further Process of Law:
And seeing that William Jackson, Servitor to John Hamilton Apothecary was found
to have contraveened the said Act of December 1643, the said Provost, Baillies
and Council, ordained him to pay the said Unlaw of 20 Pound toties quoties for
ilk Fault, and referred the further Censure of his Misbehaviour to the Baillies.
Likeas, The said Provost, Baillies and Council, did by the said Act, Ratify
and Approve the whole former Acts of Council made and granted in favors of the
Chyrurgeons of the said Burgh of Edinburgh, as if the samine had been specially
insert in the said Act; and ordained Intimation thereof to be made to the
Apothecaries, or any others concerned therein, that none might pretend
ignorance of the samine, as in the said Act at more length is contained.
Conform to the whilk Act, the said William Jackson being fined by the Baillies,
in the Sum of 40 Pounds Scots Money for two Faults committed by him, in
applying of Couters and letting of Blood at two several times, being upon a
single Complaint, the one Fault confessed by himself, and the other refused by
him to declare, upon being referred to his Declaration, and having paid the
foresaid Sum of 40 Pound to the Baillies of the said Burgh of Edinburgh, they
did send by the hand of James Gray one of their Officers, the Sum of 20 Pounds,
as being the equal half of the said Fine, to the deceast William Burnet Deacon
of the Chyrurgeons of the said Burgh of Edinburgh for the time, to be applied
by him for the use and behove of the said Incorporation of the Chyrurgeons,
conform to their Seal of Causes, Rights and Privileges abovementioned, as
authentic Instruments taken thereupon in the Hands of Robert Adamson Nottar
Public, of the date the 10th day of September 1655 years, at more length
proports. And in like manner, the said Provost Baillies and Council of
Edinburgh, by another Act dated the 25 day of Feb. 1657 years, proceeding upon
an Supplication given in to them by the Apothecaries and the
Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries of the said Burgh of Edinburgh, did Statute and Ordain,
that from thence-forth no person should be admitted to the Profession and
Practice of the Art of Apothecary within the Burgh of Edinburgh, or Liberties
thereof, but such as (having obtained the Freedom of being Burges and
Gild-Brother of the said Burgh) should make their Address by Petition to the
Council for their Recommendation to the Apothecaries and the
Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries, and their Succe^^o^s for their Trial and Examined, and
that Report should be made by the Appothecaries and Appothecarie Surgeons
and their foresaids to the Counsel of their Abilities and Qualifications in the
said Art, in which case the Counc l is to admit them to that Profession; and
for that effect the Council of the said Burgh of Edinburgh, gave Power, Warrant
and Commission to the said Appothecaries, and Surgeon Appothecaries, and
their foresaids in all time coming, to Try and Examine the Abilities and
Qualifications of all such Persons who intend to converse with, profess and
practice the said Art within the said Burgh and Liberties thereof, being
recommended in manner foresaid; And did Statute and Ordain that no manner of
Person, or Persons whatsoever, within the said Burgh and Liberties thereof,
should not presume nor take upon hand to profess, nor practice the said Art of
Appothecary, or any part or point thereof privately or public y, who should not
be admitted and found Qualified in manner above-written, under the pain and
punishment of the Contraveeners in their Persons and Estates: And sicklike, did
Statute and Ordain, That the Baillies, one or more for the time, with the Dean
of Gild, and two or more of the Appothecaries and Chirurgeon-Appothecaries, and
their foresaids, to be nominat and appoin^ed by the Council, being Persons of
most approven Integrity and Skill, should from time to time visit the
Sufficiency of all sorts of Drugs within the said Burgh of Edinburgh and
Liberties thereof, and Seize upon such Drugs as they should find insufficient,
and Report the samen to the Council, whereby the Havers and Users thereof may
be condignly punished in their Persons, Estates, according to the Quality of
their Fault, and their Fines and Penalties to be applied to the Use of the Good
Town of Edinburgh, as the said Act of the Date foresaid at more length
proports. And als the said Provost and Baillies of the said Burgh of Edinburgh,
by their Act dated the ninth day of November 1660 years, mentioning that it
pleased the Council of the said Burgh of Edinburgh, to make choice of the
deceast Arthour Temple Surgeon, to be one of the Captains of the said Good
Town of Edinburgh: And seeing that by the Laws and Customs of most part of
Kingdoms and Nations, Men of that Profession are allways Exeemed from any such
Charge and Office; Their Calling being such, wherein the very Lives of People
are concerned, besides that the said Incorporation of the Surgeons having
many and diverse ancient Rights, Liberties, Privileges and Immunities granted
to them and their Successors; and Ratified by Kings, Queens and Parliaments of
this Kingdom. And therefore, the Deacon and Brethren of the said Incorporation
of the Surgeons, by Their Supplication given in to the Council of the Good
Town, did desire that they would make choice of others to be their Captains,
and to Supply their other Offices and Places of that sort, and that the
Surgeons might be Free thereof in all time coming, and that they might have
the full Employment and peaceable Possession of all their several Rights,
Privileges, Immunities and Exemptions granted and Ratified to them, and
Ratified in manner abovementioned. The said Council of the Good Town of
Edinburgh, having taken the said Supplication to their consideration, did find
the samen Just and Reasonable, and necessar for the Good of the Leidges, and
for the Encouragement of the Surgeons to the due Ties of their Callings; and
therefore, did grant to the said Surgeons, Freemen of the said Burgh of
Edinburgh, and their Successors in that Calling, that they should be free of
all the Offices, or any Charge of that kind in all time coming; As also, that
they should have the full Employment and peaceable Possession of all their
other several Rights, Privilidges, Immunities and Exemptions granted, or
Ratified to them by the Kings, Queens and Parliaments of this said ancient
Kingdom of Scotland, or by the Good Town heretofore in their Favors, within
the said Good Burgh of Edinburgh, or Liberties thereof. of whatsomever Date or
Dates, as if the samen had been Repeated, and specially Insert in the said Act,
and that for them and their Successors, Surgeons Freemen of the said Burgh
in all time coming. And did Statue and Ordain that none should Molest them
thereintil, nor prejudge them of the same in time coming, under the Pains and
Penalties, notwithstanding of any Acts, practices, or any other thing else to
the contrair, as the said Act at more length bears; Likeas, in an Court of
Justiciary of the said Kingdom of Scotland, holden within the said Burgh of
Edinburgh, upon the ninth day of March 1674 years, by the Right Trusty and
well beloved Cousin and Counselor John Earl of Athole (now Marquess of Athole)
His Majesty's Justice-General of the said Kingdom for the time, and Sir James
Foulis of Collingtoun Knight, Sir Robert Nairn of Strathurd Knight, Sir John
Baird of Newbyth Knight, and Sir Thomas Wallace of Craigie Knight Lords
Commissioners of Justiciary, John Joissie Deacon of the Surgeons of the said
Burgh of Edinburgh for the time for himself, and in Name and behalf of the
remanent Members of the Surgeons, and Surgeon Apothecarie, within the
said Burgh of Edinburgh, did present a Petition, showing that notwithstanding
of the manifold Liberties, Privileges, Immunities, and Exemptions granted to
the said Incorporation of the Surgeons in manner above-written, Exeemand
them from passing upon Assizes and Inquisits Criminal and Civil, yet
nevertheless several Members of the said Incorporation were daily troubled and
molested by the Officers of the Court of Justiciary, and Summonds to compear
upon Sizes without respect to their exemptions, as the said Petition at more
length bears; The said Lord justice general, and Lords Commissioners of
Justiciarie, having considered the foresaid Petition, together with the several
rights, Exemptions and Ratifications produced for instructing thereof, did
discharge all Messengers at Arms, Macers of Court of Justiciary and other
Officers whatsomever, from Citing and Summonding of any of the Cherurgeons of
the said Burgh of Edinburgh, to pass upon Assizes and Inquests in Actions
Criminal in time coming, and that conform to their Gifts and Rights above
specified, as an Act of adjournal made thereanent in favors of the said
Cherurgeons more fully bears: and sicklike in an other Court of Justiciary
holden within the said Burgh of Edinburgh, by the said Sir James Foulis, Sir
Robert Nairn, Sir John Lockhart of Castle-hill, Sir John Baird, and Sir Thomas
Wallace above designed Lords Commissioners of Justiciary, upon the 29 day of
July 1674 years, anent criminal Letters raised, used and execute at the
instance of Margaret Dalmahoy, Relict of the deceast James Ra^stone Glasier in
the Cannongate, James, Margaret, Kathrine, Agnes and Helen Ralstone his
children for themselves, and in name and behalf of the remnant Kin and Friends
of the said Defunct, and his Majesty's Trustee Counselor Sir John Nisbet of
Dirltoun, Knight then His Majesty's Advocat for his Highness interest in that
matter, and William Mason Mason in the Cannongate, then Prisoner in the
Tolbooth of Edinburgh, diverse and sundry of the Freemen Cherurgeons of the said
Burgh of Edinburgh, being called to give their opinion, whether the said
deceast James Ralstone did die of wounds mentioned in the said other criminal
Letters, and they having given in their opinion in Write thereanent, it was
alleged by the Advocats for the Pursuers, that no respect could be had to the
foresaid report, unless the said Cherurgeons were compearing personally and
Deponing thereanent, and therefore craved that the said Chyrurgeons might be
unlawed for their absence, unto which it was answered, that the Chyrurgeons
could not be unlawed nor forced to Depone, nor give their Oath anent their
opinion, they being jurati magistri, and so the Oath given at their admission
behoved to have credit, as to what concerned the skill and faithful discharge
of their Employment, the Lords Commissioners of Justiciary having considered
the Premises in respect that the Chyrurgeons cited in that case were not cited
as Witnesses to the Fact, but to give their opinion upon the quality of the
wounds, and therefore by their Interloquitor refuse to unlaw and amerciat the
absent Chyrurgeons, as in the Decree and Process led and deduced thereanent,
and extracted under the Sign and Superscription Manual of Mr. Robert Martine
Clerk to the said justice Court at more length is contained: and farther, His
Majesty and Estates of Parliament of this ancient Kingdom of Scotland, being
conveened in Anno 1670 years, and taking to their consideration, that the Art
of Chirurgerie is an ancient worthy and free Art most necessary for the healths
and Lives of the Subjects, and that the said Incorporation of the Surgeons
and Barbours of the said Burgh of Edinburgh. are an able and famous
incorporation, whereby the Leidges have found large experience to their great
advantage, both in time of Peace and War: and that Pharmacie is an ancient free
and necessary Art for the health of the Leidges, and that the Brotherhood of
the Apothecary and Cherurgeon Apothecaries of the Burgh of Edinburgh are an
able and famous Brotherhood, and have given good proof thereof, Therefore, and
for certain other good causes and considerations, his Majesty and the Estates
of Parliament by an Act of Parliament dated the 22 day of August 1670 years,
ratified and approved, and for his Majesty and his Successors, with advice and
consent of the Estates of Parliament, perpetually confirmed the whole Acts,
Gifts, Grants, Rights, Privileges, Liberties, Immunities above and after
mentioned, to wit, the said Act made given and granted by the said Provost
Baillies and Council of the Burgh of Edinburgh, under their common Seal of
cause, to and in favors of the Surgeons and Barbours of the said Burgh of
Edinburgh. dated the 1. day of july 1505 years, and whole Rights Privileges
and Liberties and Immunities therein contained, and als the said Letter of
Ratification and approbation made and granted by King James the fourth of
worthy memory, under his Highness Privy Seal, of the date the said 13 day of
October 1506 years, and sicklike, the said Letter of Exemption made and granted
by the said deceast Queen Mary, of the date above mentioned, eximand the
Surgeons from bearing of Armor, passing in battle in any Host, Reads,
gatherings, Wars, Weapon showing, and from all compearing and passing upon
Inquests and Assizes in any Action criminal or civil, and in like manner, the
said Letter of confirmation and approbation made and granted by King James the
sixth, his Majesty's Grand Father, of most blessed Memory, under his Highness
privy Seall of the Date at Greenwitch abovespecified, confirmed to the said
Chyrurgeons and Barbars, the said Act and Seall of Causes, Letters of
Ratification granted be King James the Fourth, and Letter of Exemption foresaid
granted be the said Deceast Queen Mary, and likeas the foresaid Act of
Parliament made and granted be his Majesty's Dearest Father of Eternal Memory,
with advice and consent of his said Estates of Parliament, to and in favors
of the said Chyrurgeons and Barbars of Edinburgh, of the Date the 17th day of
November, 1641 years. And farther his Majesty with advice and consent of the
said Estates of Parliament, Ratified and approved, and for his Majesty and
his said Successors, perpetually confirmed to the said Chyrurgeons and Barbars
of the said Burgh of Edinburgh, that the Acts following, viz. Ane Act granted
be the Provost, Baillies, and Council of the said Burgh of Edinburgh, against
Unfreemen Dated the said 10th day of August, 1649 years. Item, ane other Act
granted be the said Provost, Baillies and Council of the said Burgh of
Edinburgh in their favors, anent their Rights, Privileges, Liberties, and
Immunities, and Prohibiting of Unfreemen, Dated the 22 day of June, 1655 years.
And also ane other Act anent the said Chyrurgeons, and Barbars their Rights,
Previledges, Liberties, and Immunities and Exemption of the said Chyrurgeons
fra Watchings Wardings, and others mentioned in the said Act granted to them,
be the said Town Council of Edinburgh, Dated the said 9th day of November, 1660
years. And farther his Majesty for himself and his said Successors with advice
and consent of the said Estates of Parliament, Ratified Approved and
Confirmed, the foresaid Act granted be the said Provost, Baillies and Council
of the said Burgh of Edinburgh, under the Seal of Causes, in favors of the
Appothecars and Chyrurgeon Appothecaires, anent Visitors, Examination of
intrants, and Prohibiting of Unfreemen to Compone Drugs, and others therein
mentioned, of the Date the said 25th day of February, 1657 years, and one other
Act granted by the said Provost, Baillies and Council of the said Burgh of
Edinburgh, for conveening, Regulating, and ordering of the said Brotherhood,
Dated the first day of April, 1659 years. As also an other Act containing ane
Oath tendered be the said Town Council of Edinburgh, to the said Intrants, at
their Admissions Dated, the 18th day of March, 1664 year, and the haill Rights,
Privileges, Liberties, and Immunities respective contained in any of the said
Gifts, Grants, and Acts gaanted in favors of the Incorporation of the said
Chyrurgions and Barbars, and of the said Brotherhood of the Chyrurgeon
Apothecaries, and Apothecaries, or that may be any ways interpret, or conceaved
in any of their Favors. His Majesty's with advice and consent of the Estates
of Parliament, Ratified and approved, and for his Majesty and his said
Successors, perpetually Confirmed all other Gifts, grants, Decreets, made and
granted be his Majesty's Royal Predecessors, and all Acts of Parliament, Acts
of Borrows, and all and every one of the Acts of Courts, and Town Council of
Edinburgh and others, and any Ratifications thereof, in favors of the said
Incorporation of the Chyrurgions and Barbars, and Brotherhood of the
Apothecarie Chyrurgeons, and Apothecars of the said Burgh, and every one of
them, their Successors, Children, Prentices respective, anent their Rights
Liberties Immunities and Privileges of the said Incorporation and Brotherhood
respective of whatsomever Date, or dates Tenor or Contents, the samen be or
bear with all that has followed or may, follow thereupon in all and sundry the
haill Heads, Points, Articles, Clauses, provisions circumstances and conditions
of all the said Acts, Gifts, grants, Decreets, Ratifications and others
particularly and generally abovementioned, granted in favors of the said
Incorporation and Brotherhood, or any of them after the Forms and Tenors of
the samen in all Points, dispensand with the Generality of the said
Ratification. And his Majesty with advice and consent of the said Estates of
Parliament, Decerned and ordained the said Ratification and Confirmation, to be
alse Valid, effectual and sufficient to the fornamed Persons, and their
Successors respective, as if all the said Gift, grants, Acts of Parliament,
Acts of Borrows Decreets, and Acts of Court and Town Council of Edinburgh and
others, and Ratifications foresaids, were all and every one of them at length,
and verbatim specially and particularly Insert, engrossed and contained in
the said Ratification. Whereanent, and anent all other defects and
imperfections, that could be proponed or alleged in all Objections of Law,
that could be moved against the samen. His Majesty with advice and consent
foresaid, not only Dispensed, But also Renunced and Discharged the samen for
ever, and gave full power to the said Chyrurgeons and Barbars and Brotherhood
foresaid, of the said Chyrurgion Apothecaries, and Apothecaries of the said
Burgh of Edinburgh, and their said Successors, to make use of all the said
Acts, or any of them without prejudice of one to other to their best behoof
and advantage, as they shall think fit, and for effectuating better of the haill
Premises and ends foresaids. His Majesty with advice and consent of the
Estates of Parliament, ordains the Magistrates and Council of the said Burgh of
Edinburgh and their Successors, to maintain the said Surgeons aforesaid,
their Children, Apprentices and Servants, in their hail Rights, Liberties,
Immunities and privileges whatsomever, granted in their favors;
notwithstanding that any of them should exerce any other thing besides, as
Burgesses and Gild-brethren, and as if they did not the samen; And sicklike
ordained the said Magistrates of the said Burgh of Edinburgh and other Judges,
Sheriffs and Magistrates of the said Burgh of Edinburgh and Sheriffdome thereof
and their Officers to assist and concur with the Deacon and Brethren of the
said Incorporation of the said Chyrurgeons and Barbars, and with the visitors
and Brethren of the Brotherhood of the Chyrurgeon Apothecaries, or any of them
and their said Successors Respective, against any Person or Persons, who should
exerce or practice any point or part of the said Art Respective within the
Liberties of Edinburgh, or any other place within the Sheriffdome thereof,
without license or freedom from them, under the Respective Seals and Clerks
hands; the Major party being an quorum, and against any person or persons who
contraveen any of the Respective Rights, Liberties and Privileges within the
Bounds foresaids; As also, any persons amongst themselves, Contraveeners of
their own Acts and orders thereafter, and to exact Fynes, Unlawes and Penalties
therefore, from them and from other Transgressors as aforesaid, and to search,
take, apprehend, p^ynd and waird them for the samen, the one half of the said
Fines of unfreemen, to belong to the Council of Edinburgh, and the other half
of the said Incorporation and the Brotherhood foresaid Respective, and if any
person should find and apprehend themselves prejudged or wronged aither by the
determination of the said Incorporation or Brotherhood Respective, contrair to
the Laws, Rights and Liberties, privileges and power granted to them, or
either of them, that then in that case, they should have the recourse of the
Magistrates and Council of the said Burgh of Edinburgh, who may determine in
these cases for both parties, as in the said Ratification and Act of Parliament
at more length is contained, by virtue of the whilk Seal of Causes,
Ratifications thereof, Letters of Exemption granted by Queen Mary, Letters of
Confirmation and Approbation granted by King James the sixth His Majesty's
Grandfather, and Act and Ratification of Parliament granted by King Charles the
first, His Majesty's Father of eternal Memory, and hail other Acts, Gifts,
Grants, Decreets of Court and Town Council of the said Burgh of Edinburgh, and
His Majesty's Ratification and Act of Parliament, granted in manner
Abovementioned, and be virtue of several other Acts, Gifts, Grants, Acts of
Town Council, and Court of the said Burgh of Edinburgh, Acts and Decreets of
the Town Council and Court of the Cannongate, and Acts and Decreets of the
Sheriff Courts of the Sheriffdome of Edinburgh, and Acts and Decreets of the
Baillie Court of Leith, Portsburgh and Poterraw, and Acts and Statutes made by
the said Incorporation of Chyrurgeons and Barbars of the said Burgh of
Edinburgh, amongst themselves, and by the said Brotherhood of the Chyrurgeon
Apothecaries, and Apothecaries among themselves, not above expressed nor set
down, and whilks are all holden as hereintill insert and expressed, as a part of
this principal Lybel brevitatis causa. The said Incorporation of the said
Chyrurgeons and Barbars of the said Burgh of Edinburgh and
Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries, Pursuers above-nominate, for themselves and in name
and behalf of the said Incorporation, and their said Predecessors the Freemen
Chyrurgeon Barbers and Chyrurgeons-Apothecaries of the said Burgh of Edinburgh,
have been in peaceable Possession of the foresaid Rights and Privileges
contained in their said Seal of Causes, Gifts, Grants, Acts, Decreets, and
others particularly and generally abovementioned, past all memory of Man. And
they and their said Successors Freemen Chyrurgeons and Barbers of the said
Incorporation, they ought and should have the only Right and Privilege to use
and exerce the haill Operations and Applications contained in their said
Gifts, Grants, and others Writs and Rights, and particularly the haill
Operations and Applications contained in the said Act of (...) December 1643,
upon the living and dead Bodies of Men, Women and Children, and the Curing of
their Diseases specially in their said Rights, as Tumors, Wounds, Ulcers,
Luxations, Fractures, curing of Verrols, and others above-written, and their
Accidents, by Operations, Applications, Diet, Medicaments, and what else
belongs thereunto, properly appertains to the Freemen Masters Chyrurgeons of
the said Burgh of Edinburgh, being tried in Theory and Practice, sworn and
admitted to the Degrees of Mastership in Chyrurgery by the foresaid
Incorporation allanerly, and to no other person or persons whatsomever.
Nevertheless, It is of Verity, that the persons after nominate, simple
Apothecaries, Unfreemen Chyrurgeons, Unfreemen Barbers, Perewig-makers,
Gardiners, Country Leiches, Women, Ignorants and Impostures after designed, als
well who have their actual Residence, Dwelling and Abode within the said Burgh
of Edinburgh and Liberties thereof, and bounds contained in the Gifts, Grants
and Privileges abovewritten, as these who Lurk, Skulk, Haunt and sometimes
come within and sometimes without the Bounds foresaid, and who are Vagrants,
viz. John Kennedy Apothecary Burges of E inburgh, John Fowlis Elder, Robert
Campbel, Hugh Nielson, James Aickenhead, James Laudin, Patrick Cunninghame,
John Hepburn. Mr. James Mackmath, Mr. Alexander Hay, John Fowlis younger,
Thomas Dalrymple, and Patrick Hepburn Apothecaries Burgesses of the said Burgh
of Edinburgh, Walter Porterfield Apothecary in the Cannongate, George Mackala
Apothecary in Leith, Edward Cunninghame Peiriwigmaker in Edinburgh, James
Robertson Barber there, John Brown Gardener in the Abbay of Holy-Rood-House,
Andrew Jackson Gardener in West-ports burgh, James Heughson Gardener in the
Pleasants, George Bell pretended Surgeon in Edinburgh, Euphane Barton
indweller in Edinburgh and John Bigle her Husband for his Interest (...) Wilson
Relict of the Deceast Hary Burn and Johanni Baptista Quarantini and Johannes
Michael Philo Montibanks and certain other persons unfree Women Gardiners and
Montibanks within the said Burgh of Edinburgh and Liberties thereof who are
holden as herein repeated brevitatis causa, daily and continually take upon
them to use and exerce the Practice of Chirurgerie, and all other Points and
Practices used and exerced by the Surgeon Barbers and Surgeon
Apothecaries within the said Burgh of Edinburgh, and als to use and exerce the
hail Rights, Liberties, Immunities, Privileges belonging to the said Pursuers
Freemen foresaids, albeit they have neither Right nor Interest to the same; And
therefore it ought and should not only to be found and declared by Decree and
Declarator of the Lords of Council and Session, that the said Pursuers and
their Successors the Freemen Masters, Surgeons and Barbers of the said Burgh
of Edinburgh being tried in Theory and practice Sworn and admitted to the
Degrees of Mastership in Chirurgerie by the said Incorporation, and the
Surgeon Apothecaries of the said Burgh of Edinburgh, have the only good and
undoubted Right to bruick, enjoy and possess, use and practice the hail Rights,
Liberties, Freedoms, Privileges, Operations, Applications and others contained
in their Acts, Seals of Cause Exemptions, Ratifications, Decreets and other
Writes particularly and generally abovementioned granted in their Favors and
to use and exerce the hail Operations and Applications upon the Living and Dead
Bodies of Men, Women and Children, and the cureing of all Deseases, Incident
and Accident to them particularly and generally abovementioned and their
Accidents by Operations, Applications, Diet, Medicaments, and others
whatsomever belonging thereunto, and that the samen properly appertains to the
said Pursuers, Freemen and Masters foresaid and to their Successors Freemen
and Masters being tried in Theory and Practice, and Sworn and Admitted to the
Degrees of Mastership in time coming in manner above-written, and to no other
person or Persons, and farther it ought and should be found and declared by the
Decree and Declarator of the said Lords of Council and Session, that the
said Pursuers may by themselves their Deacon, officier and others not only
apprehend any of the said Defenders, if they can take them flagranti delicto,
but that they may also cause cite them before the said Provost, Baillies and
Town Council of Edinburgh or other Magistrates thereof, for contraveening any of
the foresaids Privileges, Liberties, Freedoms and others above-written, and
refer the Contraventions foresaid to the Oaths of the said simple Apothecaries
and others Contraveeners and Defenders above nominat, if the said Pursuers
think fit or to use all other manner of Probation against the said Defenders
and Contraveenrrs foresaids pro ut de jure, and it ought and should be found
and declared, that the said Defenders and all others concerned, shall be
holden bound and oblidged to depone upon all the matters of Fact, that shall be
particularly referred to their said Oaths in their respective Pursuits. that
shall be intented for the Contraventions, before the said Magistrates of
Edinburgh, and als it ought and should be found and declared, that the Provost,
Baillies and Council of Edinburgh are the only Judges competent in the first
instance to the said Pursuits to be intented against all Contraveeners, for
contraveening any of the said Pursuers Privileges abovespecified, and to
discuss the same Summarly, according to the Custom of Burgh; And the Pursuers
their contraverted Practice in vindicating the Privileges, but also, the said
Defenders abovementioned, and all other Unfreemen, Gardiners, Women and others
whatsoever, ought and should be decerned by Decree of the said Lords of
Council and Session, to desist and cease from all using and practiseing and
exerciseing of any Point, Part or Prctaice belonging to the said Pursuers, and
ought and should be discharged by Decree foresaid, from taking upon them to
Use, Exerce, or Enjoy any of the Rights, Liberties. Privileges, Immunities and
Exemptions given and granted to the said Pursuers, and properly belonging to
them and their Successors, after the form and Tenor of the said Acts, Seals of
Causes, Ratifications, Exemptions, Gifts, Grants, Acts of Parliament, Decreets
and other Writs particularly and generally abovementioned in all Points as is
alleged as the said last Summonds and Execution thereof likewise more fully
bears, the said Mr. James Nisbet for himself and in Name and behalf of the
remnanent Brethren of his said Trade, pursuers of the foresaid Lybel, as
likewise pursuers in the foresaid Action of Declarator raised at their
instance, and Defenders in the other Acton raised against them, Compearing be
Sir George Mackenie his Majesty's Advocat, Sir John Lauder, and Mr. Colen
Mackenie his Majesty's Advocats, their Procurators, who for instructing the
foresaid libel produced in presence of the said Lords, ane Condescendence made
by the Surgeons upon the several acts of Contraventions done by the said
Patrick Cunninghame, whereby he had usurped upon the privileges only belonging
to the freemen Masters of the Art and Trade of Chyrurgery within the said
Burgh and Liberties thereof. 1. The said Patrick Cunninghame within this half
year or thereby, did cure Barbara Hasty daughter to umquhil Heastie Stabler in
Edinburgh of an broken Head, by applying Plasters thereto and otherways. 2. The
said Patrick Cunninghame did open an Vein to, and let Blood of the Lady Lee
younger, within these five or six Months or thereby. 3. The said Patrick
Cunninghame applied Plasters to the said Lady Lee her Arm, the same being
strained or hurt by some Accident or other at or about the time foresaid. 4.
The said Patrick Cunninghame opened an Vein to, and let Blood of (...)
Servitrix to the said Lady Lee within five or six Months or thereby. 5. The
said Patrick Cunninghame opened a Vein to, and let Blood of the Earl of
Carnwath, and applied Lochletches one or more, and Cauters one or more to the
said Earl, within the space of three years or thereby. 6. The said Patrick
Cunninghame opened a Vein to, and let Blood of (...) Semple daughter to umquhil
John Semple of Balgone, and applied two Couters to her within the space of this
half year or thereby. 7. The said Patrick Cunninghame did frequently pance and
dress (...) within the house of (...) at the head of the Cannongate who had a
wound in his Breast within these three or four yeass or thereby. 8. The said
Patrick did apply several Plasters, and that frequently to umquhil William
Cunninghame elder Merchant in Edinburgh his fore-foot, within these three years
or thereby, the said Patrick Cunninghame opened an Vein to, and let Blood of
umquhile Henry Cunninghame and his Spouse, and applied Couters, Plasters and
Ointments to them within these three years or thereby, as the said
Condescendence extent in process more fully bears, as also for verefying and
instructing the Points and Articles of the foresaids Summonds of Declarator,
and the Rights of privileges of the said Incorporation adduced in presence of
the said Lords the particular Writs underwritten, conform to an Inventar
thereof, whereof the Tenor follows, viz. The Seal of Cause, dated the 1. of
July 1505, erecting the Chyrurgeons into an Incorporation under the Town of
Edinburgh their Seal of Cause. Item, Letters of Ratification thereof by King
James the Fourth, under his Privy Seal, dated the 13 day of October 1506 years.
Item, Letters of Exemption by Queen Mary under her Privy Seal, dated 13 May
1567. years. Item. Signatur by King James the 6th. subscribed by the Lords of
Thesaury, ordaining an Letter of Ratification to the above-written Rights, to
be exped under his Privy Seal, dated 6 June 1613 years. Item, the Ratification
following thereupon by King James the 6th, under his Privy Seal, dated the 6 of
June 1613 years foresaid. Item, An Act of the Council of Edinburgh in favors
of the Chyrurgeons, dated 10 of September 1641 years. Item, An Ratification in
Parliament of the above-written Rights in favors of the Chyrurgeons, dated the
17 day of November 1641 years. Item, An other Act of the Council of Edinburgh
in favors of the Chyrurgeons dated the 8 of December 1643 years. Item, An
other Act of the Council of Edinburgh against unfree-men in the Cannongate,
Leith, and other Suburbs, dated the 20 of April 1649 years. Item, An other Act
of the Council of Edinb. against the Barbers in the Cannongate, dated the 27 of
June 1649 years. Item, An other Act of the Council of Edinburgh against the
Barbers in the Cannongate, dated 18 day of July 1649 years. Item, An Act of the
Council of the Cannongate against their Barbers there, dated 22 day of August
1649 years. Item, an Act of the Council of Edinburgh against the Unfreemen in
the Cannongate, dated 12 day of August 1649 years. Item, Two Acts of the
Council of the Cannongate against Unfreemen there, the one dated the 2d of
August 1649, the other dated the 7 of September 1649 years, both upon one
Parchment. Item, An Act of the Council of the Cannongate in favors of the
Apprentices of Barbers there dated 10 of Feb. 1654 years. An Act and Decree of
the Council of Edinburgh in favors of the Surgeons against the
Apothecaries, dated the 27 of June 1655. Item. An Instrument Deacon Burnet
against William Jackson anent his two Fines, the one the 10 Septem. 1655. Item,
An Act of the Council of Edinburgh, erecting the Chirurgeon-Apothecaries,
Apothecaries into an Brotherhood under the Town of Edinburgh their Seal of
Causes, dated the 25 Feb. 1657 years. Item, Exemption by the Town of Edinburgh
in favors of the Surgeons, dated 9th November. 1660 years. Item, An Act of
Adjournal in favors of the Surgeons, dated the 9 day of March 1674 years.
Item, An Extract of the Process pursued before the Lords of Justiciary by
Margaret Damahoy, against William Mason, dated the 29 of July 1674 years. Item,
An Ratification in Parliament in favors of the Surgeons, of their hail
Rights. dated the 22 of August 1670 years. Item, An Act of the Council of
Edinburgh against John Savage Unfree-man, dated the 4 day of July 1638 years.
Item, An Act of the Baillies of the Cannongate against William Steven
Unfree-man, dated the first of January 1653 years. Item, Condescendence by the
Surgeons upon the Deeds of Contravention committed by Patrick Cunninghame,
Item, an Summonds of Declarator the Chyrurgeons of Edinburgh against the haill
Apothecaries and others Unfreemen, with the Executions thereof, of the Date
1681 years, as the said Condescendence extent in process more fully bears as
also for verefying and instructing the Points and Articles of the said Summonds
of Declarator, and the Rights and Privileges of the said Incorporation adduced
in presence of the said Lords the particular Writs above specified, and the
said Patrick Cunninghame Defender in the foresaid Libel, and he and the
remanent Apothecaries of the said Burgh, Defenders of the foresaid Action of
Declarator, raised at the said Chyrurgeons their instance. and Pursuers in the
other Action of Reduction and Declarator raised at their instance against them.
Compearing by Sir George Lockheart, Sir John Dalrymple, and Mr. David
Cunninghame Advocats their Procurators, the foresaid Lybel and mutual Summonds
of Declartor raised by both the said Parties in manner above-re-hearsed with
the Condscendence abovewritten, and particular Writs and Evidents produced for
Instructing the said Surgeon Apothecaries their Rights and Privileges in
manner above-specified, together also with the several Debates and
Interlocutors following thereupon in manner underwritten, and together with
the several Supplications and Answers made thereto, with the Instructions of
the samen given in by either Parties in manner, and to the effect
after-mentioned, being all at length heard, seen and considered by the said
Lords; and they therewith being well and ryply advised; The said Lords of
Council and Session, have found and declared, and hereby finds and declares
that the Surgeons have the only Right of Phibotomie within the Town of
Edinburgh, and upon the Burgesses thereof, except in the cases of Necessity and
charity, and that where there is no Incision made upon dead Bodies, and that
there is only Wrapping of the Body required, the Apothecaries makers of the
Cerecloths may wrap the Bodies, but where Incision is made, the Application is
proper to Surgeons of the Cerecloths to the Body; And finds and declares
that the Employments of Surgery and Pharmacy being two distinct Employments,
and both requiring a great deal of care and knowledge, shall hereafter (within
the City of Edinburgh, and Liberties thereof) be Exercised by distinct Persons,
and that one and the same Person shall not Exercise, or be Employed in both
Employments; and that albeit Surgeons may buy and sell Samples as any
Drogests or Merchants may do, and Compone such Drogs as are necessar for
Chirurgical and External Applications, yet that they cannot compone any
Medicament to be taken internally by the Mouth, exceptand always from this
Declarator, all the present Chirugeon Apothecaries that are presently actual
Masters in both Employments, and does actually keep Shops within the said Town
of Edinburgh, or Liberties thereof, as to which Bounds this Declarator extends:
And no farther, as alse, have declared, and Ordained the said Surgeon
Apothecaries Masters, who as said is, are allowed the Exercise of both
Employments during their Lifetime, and James Muirhead, John Lauder and Thomas
Edgar, who are declared to be in that Condition, albeit they be not as yet
actually entered Masters in both Employments, and to declare their Election
betwixt and Tuesday next; And if they do not betwixt and the said day, the
said Lords Decerns them to sit only at the Surgeons Table as the Eldest and
first erected Trade; and have found, and finds that no Master can hereafter
take Prentices to make them Freemen in Edinburgh in any of the said two
Employments, except that at which they sit at the Table; and that all the
Prentices already entered are to be Free only in that Employment and Trade, at
which their Masters sits at the Table; Because that after the said Libel first
intented before the said Magistrates of Edinburgh, being Advocat of consent as
said is. There was an Supplication given in to the said Lords by the said
Patrick Cunninghame, Showing that where the Supplicant was lately Warned by one
of the Town Officers to Compear before the Baillies in their Justice of Peace
Court on the Afternoon, at the Instance of Mr. James Nisbet, present Deacon of
the Surgeons of the said Burgh, to be unlawed and Fined for alleged
operating in Chirugery, and in which Procedure he was Informed, the Baillies
would upon his Appearance Summarly prove his Delict by his Oath, and
immediately Charge him to the Tolbooth, without so much as allowing him an
formal or written Libel with the benefit to Answer there against, and so fix a
fault of contravention of their alleged Privileges upon him, by no other way
of Probation, but a present judical Oath, which is, and ought to be Sacred to
all, and more deliberately digested before given, then immediately to be
Administrat to, and pressed upon one hurried, but from off the Streets hoc vel
maximae atento, that the Supplicant was herein Challenged for no nottar
particular, or nominated Crime, but most what of Picque to please the Humors
of the Surgeons in regenerali dubia and invidiosa, their Privileges and
manner of proving the Contraveening, and incroaching thereupon, having never as
yet been by the said Lords of Council and Session, the only Judges compent
thereto, lawfully as is requisite declared, whereupon (with all just respect to
the Magistrars and their Authority; but because of the strange and unlawful
Methods of the Chirurgeans probation) having in a Bill of Advocation meaned
himself to the said Lords, the Lord Forret then Ordinary, was pleased to fist
Procedure till the 24th. Instant, as the foresaid Bill and Signature thereupon,
here present to show Testifies: And we seeing the Point did resolve in that
whether or not, the Petitioner was obliged summarly by his judicial Oath to fix
delict, and we to Fine and unlaw upon the Petitioner at the humor of, and when
ever called by the Surgeons; whereunto it was humbly conceived, that the
Petitioner could not be obliged by Law but that if they insist against the
Petitioner for operating in Surgery, the burden of the probation lies upon
them, and without a particular Statute and Law for that effect, it was humbly
conceived no Subject can by the act of any inferior Court or Incorporation, be
obliged to give his Oath upon a delict, either for affixing any Stigma upon the
Petitioners reputation, or damnifying the Petitioner in a pecunial Fine, and as
the Petitioner has neither seen by what ground law or warrant, the Surgeons
come to be authorized thus summarly to exact Oaths, so might the said Lords
but consider the danger of the Subjects, and what a door of temptation such
methods and practices may open to perjurie, especially when Chirurgical
operations and operating in Chirurgerie, are so ambiguous terms, that the
ultimum and minimum terms of them has never yet been defyned; and it is hard
for the Petitioner who served his Apprentiship to James Borthwick, and with him
learned and saw something of Surgery, when he is with a Patient, be he never
so near a Friend, or poor or indigent person who may be in a dangerous
condition, and of an earnest mind to breath a Vein or such like, especially
performing the samen gratis, to know how to give an summar Oath upon
Chirurgical operations, for in its latitude it reaches to the least plaster
for a cutted finger or scratch of a Pin, and although the Surgeons should
have foisted in the taking of an Oath, in some acts of the Town Court, yet the
samen cannot in Law be done, either by acts of their own calling, or Acts of
the Town, to introduce upon his Majesty's Leidges, such a strange and unusual
and dangerous manner of probation, and although some such latent Acts might be
ratified in the ratification of the Surgeons Right and Privilege, yet
Ratifications nihil novi juris addunt, and are still given salvo jure
cujuslibet; and this case being of so universal concernment to his Majesty's
Subjects to prove delicts, and so from them exact Fines upon Oaths first, but
imposed by and molded in inferior Courts Judges and Incorporations, for their
own advantage therein concerned, as the said Supplication more fully bears,
which being read in presence of the said Lords, and they having heard seen and
considered the samen, remitted the consideration thereof to the Lord Forret one
of their own number, before whom the Bill of Advocation of the foreread Lybel
was presented, and to call the Deacon of the Surgeons before him to have
answered thereto, and to have done therein according to Justice, and in case of
difficulty to have reported: and thereafter in obedience to the foresaid
ordinance, both the said Parties having compeared before the said Lord Forret,
by their respective Procurators above named, the said Procurators for the
Deacon for himself, and in name and behalf of the remnant Brethren of his
Trade, for instructing the Rights and Privileges of the said Incorporation
produced in presence of the said Lords, the particular Writs above written
conform to the Inventar thereof, particularly above narrated, with the foresaid
Condescendence upon the several Acts of contraventions done by the said Patrick
Cunninghame, and thereafter repeated the foresaid Lybel, and craved Decree
conform to the said Condescendence, To which it was Answered and alleged for
the said Patrick Cunninghame, and remnant Apothecaries of the said Burgh, by
their Procurators above named, that they were not oblidged to debate until the
Act of Advocation were given out with the Process, and the samen seen and
returned, and come in by course of the Rol^. Whereunto it was replied for the
said Chyrurgeons, that notwithstanding of the said alledgeance, the Defenders
must either debate, or then the Pursuers must have Decree, because the cause
being advocat of consent of the Pursuers, and esto there were an Act of
Advocation put up and Extracted, yet the only ground whereupon the Pursuers did
Advocat was, that it was agreed to, that the cause should be instantly
discused, and the Lord Ordinary thereupon did cause the Pursuers to produce the
Writs, whereupon they found their Privileges, and two several dyets appointed
by the Ordinary to debate, and the above written Bill was opponed given in by
the Defender himself, wherein he craved the point might be instantly discust,
and the Lords thereupon remitted the same to the said Lord Forret to have heard
both Parties, and discussed the same, or Reported. To which it was Duplyed for
the said Patrick Cunninghame by his said Procurators to the foresaid Reply,
They opponed the constant Practique in the like Cases, and the Bill and
Deliverance thereof did only relate to the Reasons of Advocation; which Dispute
above-written, being heard and considered by the said Lord Forret, he made
Avisandum thereupon to the haill Lords. And upon Report thereof made by him to
them, wherewith the said Lords being well and ripely advised, they ordained
the Cause to be summarly discussed (without attending the order of the Roll, in
respect the said Defender Patrick Cunninghame did desire the same in his Bill,)
and before the said Lord Reporter, and thereafter conform to the foresaid
Interloquitor, the Cause being again called in presence of the said Lord
Forret, and both the said Parties compearing by their respective Procurators
abovenamed, the Pursuers Procurators repeated the particular Condescendance
above-written given in by them by way of Libel, and craved Decree against the
said Defender, in respect he refused to depone. To which the Defenders
Procurators answered and alleged, That there could be no Process summarly
sustained upon any such Condescendance, there being no previous Citation or
Libel, and the Pursuers Seal of Cause and other Rights produced cannot state
them in any better condition then the rest of the Incorporation in Edinburgh,
who are not in use, nor cannot summarly attack any person, but red-hand, or
flagranti crimine; and the Town of Edinburgh cannot indulge the Chyrurgeons
with any Priledges, contrary to Fundamental Laws, which the Pursuers pretend to
by the summar procedure, in calling free Burgesses, and conveening them to
depone super inquirendis. Whereunto it was Replied for the said Pursuers, that
the foresaid Alledgance ought to be repelled, in respect of the Pursuers Rights
stating them in their Rights, with their Privileges, which cannot be taken
away summarly: and the Pursuers by virtue of the said Rights, have been in the
constant use of exercising their said Privileges against all Unfreemen, and
the circumstances of their Calling, was the ground whereupon the said
Privileges were granted, it being impossible to attack Unfreemen in their
Calling, as in other Incorporations. And which last Dispute above-written,
being also heard and considered by the said Lord Reporter, he made Avisandum
thereupon to the said Lords; and they upon Report thereof, made by him to
them. Declared they would hear the Cause debate in their own presence, and to
that effect ordained the same to be enrolled in the Roll of Causes to be
discust; and accordingly the said Action being enrolled, (and having come in by
the course the Roll of Causes to be discust,) was called in presentia; at which
time both the said Parties having likewise compeared by their respective
Procurators abovenamed, the Procurators for the Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries
repeated the foresaid Summonds of Declarator raised at their instance, and for
instructing thereof, repeated the production formerly made by them of the
particular Writs abovementioned, which are of the several dates, tenors and
contents respective libelled upon in the foresaid Summonds; As also, they
repeated the foresaid Action before the Baillies of Edinburgh, against the said
Patrick Cunninghame, for the particular Contraventions condescended on, and
craved he might be holden as confessed, in respect he refused to depone. Which
Action being Advocat. They then insisted in the same, as likewise in the
foresaid Action of Declarator of the Chyrurgeons their privilidges, upon the
several privileges contained in the Seal of Cause, and other Rights granted to
them by the Town of Edinburgh, who by their Erection have power from the King
to grant the same, and which Seal of Cause is ratified by King James the 4th,
under the privy Seal, upon the 13 day of October 1506, and by King James the
6th likewise under the privy Seal upon the 6th of June 1613 years, and the Act
of Town-Council dated the 10th of February 1641 years, and ratified in
Parliament the 17th of November the same year, and several other Acts of the
Town-Council in their favors, for the better exercising their Calling, which
are all ratified in parliament upon the 22 day of August 1670 years, and
whereof they have been in the controverted possession, as is instructed by
several Sentences before the Town-Court of Edinburgh against the Contraveeners,
wherein they craved it might be declared, that the said Chyrurgeons have the
sole privilege of the exercising of Chyrurgery, and that all others Unfreemen
might be declared, and that they might call the Contraveeners before the
Magistrates, and use all legal probation against them, and that summarly,
conform to their Rights and Customs of Burgh, and the abovenamed Procurators
for the said Apothecaries likewise Repeated the foresaid Summonds of Reduction
and Declarator raised at their instances, by way of Defense: In which they
insisted, Primo, Upon that Conclusion of the foresaid Summonds, that they
cannot be obliged to depone for their Reasons, 1. That it might involve the
persons alleged Contraveeners in Perjury, seeing it cannot be imagined that
they can remember every individual Act. 2. It would oblige them to discover the
Diseases and Conditions of their Patients, which were absurd and contrary to
that Secrecy which their Calling obliges them to. Tertio, all the other Trades
within the Town, and in all other places, that have as great Privileges as the
Chrurgeons can pretend to, are not allowed to call them Freemen upon Oath, as
to their Encroachments upon their several Trades, but all that is allowed them,
is to Sease the Work, and if they can deprehend them in the Act, to punish
them. Secundo, they Insisted in the second Ground of Declarator, viz. That the
Chyrurgeons might hold them by their own Trade, and might not exercise the Art
of both Chyrurgery and Pharmacy for their Reasons. Primo in no well governed
City, one and the same Person is allowed to Exerce distinct Trades. Secundo, if
the same were allowed here, the Chyrurgeons being both Chyrurgeons and
Apothecaries, would render the Apothecaries Employment as de facto. They do
altogether insignificant, seeing they as Burgesses can be Apothecaries when they
please, and the Apothecaries cannot be Chyrurgeons, without they serve an
Apprentiship, or Marry a Chyrurgeons Daughter, albeit they were never so well
qualified, and the Art of Pharmacy being the nobler Art, as being conversant
about the Inside of the Man, ought to have rather greater, as less
Encouragements as Chyrurgeons. Tertio, they Insisted on the third Ground of
their Declarator, viz. That the Liberty of making and applying of Searcloths to
dead Bodies, should be declared proper to them, in respect that the Searcloth
is a Drug, and is not made use of for any Chyrurgical Operation, being applied
only to dead Bodies. And Insisted likewise upon the fourth Ground of
Declarator, viz. That it should be Declared, that the Apothecaries has the only
Privilege of Administrating of Physic inwardly; and that Phlebotomy common to
them, is the Chyrurgeons, in respect that Phlebotomy is often requisite in
Inward Distempers, with which the Chyrurgeons does not meddle, and sometimes
must be so speedily Administrat, as cannot admit of so much time as to send for
a Chyrurgeon, without eminent Danger of the Patients Life, as in Plurasies and
other violent Diseases. To which it was Replied for the Chyrurgeons, That
notwithstanding of the Defense, Patrick Cuninghame must Depone, or be holden as
confessed, nor cannot be Declared, that the Contraveeners of the Chyrurgeons
Privileges, shall not be obliged to Depone, in respect that by the Pursuers
their Seal of Causes, it is expressly provided that they may use all legal
Probation against the Contraveeners, and that the Oath of Party is a legal
Probation, cannot be contraverted. Secundo, They have been in constant
Possession of this manner of Probation, the Deeds of Contravention being always
within closs Doors, and often under silence of night perfected in a sudden, and
leaves not Work behind it that may be apprehended as other Manual Trades does.
And it is of no Weight, to pretend that it would be the Occasion of discovering
Patients Diseases, for any that has a mind to conceal their Diseases may employ
a Freeman, and so not incur the hazard. But to take off all Caval, the Pursuers
do Declare, that they are content it be Declared, that Unfreemen should not be
obliged to Depone upon Contraventions in general, but where the Acts are
particularly lybelled, as is particularly ^one in Patrick Cuninghames case
here, which is a Confession more as in Law can be required, seeing Oaths in
general, are frequently taken in things of less concern, as Mul^^^-O^ths,
cutting of Wood, killing of Fish, etc. As to the second Ground of the
Declarator, viz. Chyrurgeons should not be Apothecars. It is answered. That the
same is absurd, for their Reasons. Primo, For Erecting of the Fraternity
produced, (for they are no Trade, and have no Seal of Cause as other Trades
have) any Burgess of Edinburgh if he were a Black Smith, if free to be an
Apothecary, if he be able to undergo a Trial, and it were strange to allow it
to all Burgesses, to deny it to the Chyrurgeons, who of all Burgesses are
presumed to understand it best. Secundo, By the Erection of that Fraternity, it
appears that the Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries were the great Procurers, And that
they taking to their Consideration, that the Leiges were abused by unskilful
Persons, taking upon them to sell and prepare Drugs, did procure the said
Erection of a Fraternity, excluding unskillful persons that could not bide a
Trial. Tertio, By the said Erection of the Fraternity, it appears that the
Apothecars were so far from being considered as a Trade, that they have not
power of their own Trial, but the Entrants must apply to the Town Council, and
they appoint the Tryers; and they pay no Money for their Freedom, nor do they
enter their Prentices amongst the Trades but in the Gildrie as other Merchants
do; and though they were a Trade as they are not, it is absurd to pretend, that
if a man serve a Prentice, or otherways acquire his Freedom in two Trades, he
may not serve in both or either as he pleases, as Merchants, Tailors, and
several other Instances. As to the third Ground of Declarator, viz. That the
making and applying Cere-Cloths should be declared proper to Apothecaries, It
is answered, Primo, The Pursuers oppones the Seal of Causes and other Rights
Lybelled, whereby all the external Applications of Men's Bodies is declared
properly to them. And the pretense that a Cere-Cloth is a Drugg of no Weight
for the same may be pretended of all Plasters, which uncontravertedly belongs
to the Chyrurgeons. Secundo It is already determined by the Town-Council, who
by King and Parliament are declared Judges in all these controversies, who have
allowed the making to Apothecaries, and the application to Chyrurgeons. And
have provided, that if the Chyrurgeon refuse to apply the Cere-Cloths the
Apothecaries makes, then the Apothecaries are free to apply themselves, which
is more as the Apothecaries could in Law acclaim the Application being properly
Chyrurgical, even where the Body is not eviscerat, where Chyrurgical
Instruments is necessar for stopping the Opens of the Body, and making
Incisions, in particular cases where a Chyrurgeons skill is necessary, and
Embalming is always used in all Bodies, and Ligators, which are not only
proper, but is one of the singularest Arts of Chyrurgery. And it is of no
Weight that it is a burden to the Leidges, seeing it is very well known, and is
provided by the Act of the Town-Court, That the Chyrurgeons are to be employed
by the Apothecaries, and gets their acknowledgement from them, which they
cannot refuse. Likeas, as there are many that being both Apothecaries and
Chyrurgeons, where the Leidges desires only to have one employed, To the Fourth
Ground of Declarator, viz, That it should be declared that the Apothecaries
have the only Application of Medicine inwardly. As Likeways have the use of
Phlebotomie, common with Chyrurgeons. To which it is answered, That by the
Erection and by all the Rights Lybelled, the Chyrurgeons have the sole power of
Applications, Operations, and Medicaments, requisite for completing the Cure
of those Distempers, which are particularly narated in the Act One thousand six
hundred and forty three. And it were absurd to say that they could have the
sole Cureing of a Distemper, and not the power of applying what is necessar for
it, either outwardly or inwardly. And all that they pretend to, is the
application of Medicaments for Cureing of the Distempers contained in their
Rights, which are known by proper distinct Names to be such as falls under the
Chyrurgeons skill, in all places of the World, And it was never before alleged
that Phlebotomie was not properly a Chyrurgical-Operation. And it is but a
Frivolous pretense, that in some cases as in Pluracies it can admit of no
delay; For it is well known, that within Edinburgh it is more easy to find a
Chyrurgeon as an Apothecary, nor did ever the Chyrurgeons trouble any
un-Free-Man in drawing of Blood in cases of necessity, nor using of the first
Pansing upon broken Legs or Arms, which is always permitted to be done by them
that are nearest: and then Chyrurgeons is to be called at the second
Application: Whereunto it was Duplyed for the Apothecaries by their
Procurators, That albeit by the Seal of Causes the Chyrurgeons has several
privileges; As power to make Freemen by Prenticeships, to keep a Box, and yet
the particular ^riviledges now insisted on are not there expressed, and so are
to be determ^ned by the Lords. To the which Duply above-written, The said
Procurators for the Chyrurgeons opponed their former Reply, and their Rights
whereupon they Found, which does sufficiently determine all the points now
contraverted, and remitted the same to the said Lords their Consideration,
Which haill Dispute above-written being heard and considered by the said
Lords, they before adviseing thereof, Recommended to the Lords Register Newtoun
and Castlehill, to call for Dr. Stevenson Elder, Dr, Hay, and Dr. Balfour, and
to hear their Opinions as to the points contraverted betwixt the Chyrurgeons
and the Apothecaries with their first convenience, and thereafter to report.
Thereafter there was a Supplication given in to the said Lords by the said Dr.
James Nisbit Deacon oi the Chyrurgeons of Ed nburgh for himself, and in Name of
the remanent Masters and Brethren of the said Incorporation, Showing That where
in the mutual Declarator raised by the Chyrurgeons, and Chyrurgeon Apothecaries
against the single Apothecaries, and by them against the Petitioners. The
Petitioners having Founded upon their Seal of Cause, and particular Acts and
Privileges granted to them by the Town Council of Edinburgh in conformity to
their Seal of Cause Anno one thousand six hundred and forty three, and one
thousand six hundred and fifty five, long before the Settlement of the
Fraternity of the Apothecaries, Having undoubted Right and Privilege to
exercise all manual Operations and Applications upon the Living and Dead Bodies
of Men, Women and Children, and that exclusive of all persons within the Burgh,
who are not Freemen of their Art: And containing also several Specialities,
whereunto the most eminent Apothecaries at the time were consenting, and to
which all of them since have Acquiesced and Confirmed, except a few Claudistine
Contraventions, of which when notice was had, the contraveeners were Fined, and
being informed that the Petitioner upon consideration of the Debate; Have
thought fit to recomend to some of the said Lords, their number to call three
Physicians and hear their Opinion anent the proper Bounds, and limits of these
two Arts. As to which the Petitioners humbly represent, to the said Lords. 1.
That if the Chyrurgeons, and Apothecaries had been erected in ancient and
distinct Crafts or Arts, within Burgh in general Terms, viz. That such an
Society and Company, should be Chyrurgeons, and such an Society and Company
Appothecaries, and that a question had then arisen betwixt them in any Point or
Points, which each of them had contended to be ane Proper Point of their Arts,
or to be common to both; That in such a case of general Gifts and concessions,
their might be some ground of Calling Physicians to give Opinion in what might
be proper to either calling or common to both, but here it is uncontravected,
that the Chyrurgeons have most anciently formed and erected Corporation and
Craft, enjoying Privileges and Freedoms, which no Burges nor Gild Brother in
Edinburgh can partake of, unless he Serve an Apprentiship in the said Art, or
be the Son, or Marie the Daughter of ane Freeman, and on the other side, that
the Apothecaries were never ane distinct calling or Art, but allenerly Burgeses
and Gild Brother, and had never any Privilege beyond ane Burges and Gild
brother, so that any Gild Brother might have Set up for an Apothecarie when he
pleased, until the year 1657 that a trial was thought fit and necessar, in
order to which they were Erected in a Brotherhood, jointly with the Chyrurgeon
Apothecaries. And whereof, notwithstanding of their Erection any Gild Brother,
who can bide a trial may be a Member at pleasure, and that the Chyrurgeons have
and enjoy their calling and Craft, not only in general, as a Craft, but also in
a clear Designation of the Subject of their Calling, viz. All Operations and
Applications about the bodies, etc. And more particularly in the Cureing of the
specialitys expressed in their Gifts, and grants, and that Exclusive of all
others, in that they could humbly conceave their is no necessity to call for
the Opinion of Phisicians anent the Bounds or Limits of their Callings, seeing
their Gifts, and Grants, does alse specially, distinctly, and clearly design
the same as Men's Wits, or words can express; And therefore since he questions
not whither ane Apothecary may not have alse good Skill, to apply an Serecloth,
or draw Blood as a Chyrurgion has, neither was the question whether ane
Apothecary, qua Apothecarie may apply Plasters, as well as make them, or cure
Tumors Verrols, and such like, but that the only question is whether manual
Operations and Applications upon the Bodies, etc. And particularly Phlebotomie
Application of Serecloths Cureing of the specialitys mentioned in their Gifts,
is not only proper and due to them, to exercise by their special Gifts, and
grants Exclusive of the Apothecaries and all others, the interpretation of
their Rights, and grants needs not the Opinion of ane Physician, when the Terms
and expressions are clear, for though all the Physicians of Scotland, should
affirm that an Apothecarie, qua talis may aply an Searcloth, draw Blood, Cure
the Verrols swellings orwher^, yet certainly the said Lords in point of Right,
must find that the Apothecaries of Edinburgh cannot do the same, because the
Town of Edinburgh, who by their Erection from his Majesty, are entrusted to
give particular Seals of Cause, Rights and Privileges to Crafts and Callings
Exclusive of all others, having given these Privileges to Chyrurgeons in clear
and express Terms, and they having enjoyed the same now, these two hundred
years Exclusive of all others, the same eannot be taken from them, without
Violation of their Rights, even although the Privilege of its own nature, were
Consonant to the nature of Pharmcie, or of a mixed Nature equally applicable to
Pharmacie or Chyrurgerie, and far less can these Privileges be drawn in
question by a Fraternity Erected, within these twenty four years, who have not
the Privilege to exclude any Burges that can bide a trial, and then the
Chyrurgeons Privileges, are specially declared be the Town, before their
erection and consented to be the Apothecaries, and bruiked and enjoyed both
before and since the erection, be the Chyrurgeons Exclusive of all others until
this time. 2. The Petioners humbly Represents to the said Lords, that it is
noture and known, that the Apothecaries have a greater dependence upon
Physicians than Chyrurgeons have, for Chyrurgeons do and may by the Privilege
of their Art and Calling, operate without any dependence upon Physician, and
needs not, nor are they bound and tied, to call for any Physician, but if they
please whereas an Apothecarie qua talis, neither ought nor can Administer
Physic without the advice of an Physician, and the dispensatorie Art in the
practice, thereof, absolutely depends upon the Physicians Recept, so that with
all deference and respect to the Physic ans, the Chyrurgeons have just reason
to suspect, that they will be more favorable in their opinion to the
Apothecaries, and ready and willing to enlarge their privileges, who have so
absolute an dependence upon them; And it is notour and known, that the
Physicians have frequently endeavored to Erect themselves in a College, and
to extend their own privileges, to the Impairing of both, and therein they
have been still opposed by the Chyrurgeons and Chyrurgeon Appothecaries, and
thereupon may be presumed to bear the Supplicants no good will, craving that
the said Lords would be pleased to consider the grounds of the Supplicants
Declarator in jure as the samen is founded upon their Seall or Cause, Gifts,
Grants and Acts, and their immemorial Possession, which the Supplicants humbly
conceaves, are very clear and express, and which ought not to be altered upon
the opinions of Physicians, but must be judged according to the Law of the
Kingdom, and the nature and conception of their Gift, as the said Supplication
more fully bears, which being Read in presence of the said Lords, and they
having heard and seen and considered the samen refused to give their Answer in
jure until the said Lords should Report; But they recomended to the
forementioned Lords, in their said last Interloquitor, to call the three
Physicians therein named with Doctor Burnet upon Monday next thereafter, and to
have heard their opinion on the contraverted points; And to to have made report
thereof on twesday following, in obedience to the which ordinance and
Interloquitor above-written; The said Lords nominated as said is, having
called and taken the opinion of the said Physicians, anent the contraverted
Points, contained in the two several Declarators Abovementioned; And
thereafter upon Report made by them to the said haill Lords in presentia
wherewith, and with the haill Dispute Above-written, they being well and reiply
advised; The said Lords of Council and Session, found that the Chyrurgeons has
only Right of Phlebotomie within the Town of Edinburgh, and upon the Burgesses
thereof, except in the caises or necessity and charity: But Declared, that they
would hear both Parties, if the said privilege should extend to strangers
living within the Town, or to Burgesses living in the Suburbs, but found that
where there was no incision made upon dead Bodies, and that there is only
wrapping of the Body required, the Apothecaries, makers of the Cere-cloath may
wrap the Bodies, but where incision is made, the Application is proper to
Chyrurgeons of the Cere-cloaths to the Body, and as to the other two points,
viz. The probation of the contraventions by Oath, and the seperating of the
Trades and Incorporations of Chyrurgerie and Pharmacy, the said Lords declared
they would thereafter hear both parties thereupon, and thereafter, there was an
other Supplication given in to the said Lords, in behalf of the said
Chyrurgeons, Showing, that although the Petitioners do not contravert, but
that if the matters concerning the Cere-cloaths, had not been decyded by the
Town of Edinburgh, there might have been place for consulting with Physicians,
as to Cere clothes; and to whom the Application thereof should belong, so that
the Petitioners conceives the said Lords their Interloquitor as founded upon
the nature of the Thing, and the Opinion of the Physicians was no way
controverted, but it was humbly represented to the said Lords, that this
Debate was founded upon the Privileges granted by the Town of Edinburgh, as
having Right from his Majesty to grant the same, is yet entire, and that
because neither did the Lords read and consider at the advising of the Cause,
the Right founded upon by the Town of Edinburgh, nor was the said Interloquitor
at all consistant with these Rights, for it could not be denied, that his
Majesty or the Town as having Right from him might have allowed no
Apothecaries, but have granted all their Privileges to the Chyrurgeons, and
therefore a fortiori they might have restricted the Appothecaries at their
erection to any particulars they pleased, and which is more, they ought to have
restricted them, and they could not have taken from the Chyrurgeons the jus
quesitum by their Seal of Cause and other Rights. 2. That Point, viz. whether
these Privileges of the Chyrurgeons should hold only inter concives, was never
debated and if it had, the said Petitioners could by most unanswerable
Arguments evinced, that these Privileges should extend to all the Privileges
of the City, as the Liberties of Baxters, Tailors, and all the other Trades
does, and even the Jurisdiction of the Magistrates is extended to all within
their liberty and not restricted ad concives, and the said Lords Jurisdiction
is extended to all who are in Scotland and not restricted to Scots men, or
where were ever the Petitioners heard to debate why the Opinion of Physicians
should not be taken in that case, so that that Point should be yet allowed to
be debated, the said Lords never refusing to hear parties even after
Interloquitor upon points that were not debated, and this was als great an
Infringment upon their Liberties as that which was pleaded by the Apothecaries,
and in which the said Petitioners are als much concerned, Craving therefore
that the said Lords would be pleased to stop the extracting of the said
Interloquitor till the Petitioners be heard upon these weighty points in which
they and all the Trades in Edinburgh, yea and the Town of Edinburgh it self,
and all the Burghs of Scotland are so much concerned, according to Justice as
the said Supplication also more fully bears; Which being likewise read in
presence of the said Lords, and they having heard, seen and considered the
same, notwithstanding of what was therein represented, Adhered to their said
former Interloquitor, and refused to stop the extracting thereof, and
thereafter the said Action of Declarator pursued by the said Apothecaries
against the Surgeons being again called in presentia, and both Parties
compearing by their respective Procurators above named. the Procurators for the
said Apothecaries repeated their Summonds, as to the point that the Callings,
viz. Pharmacy and Surgery should be separat they being two distinct Trades
and Employments of their own Natures, and that attending and following of
either being sufficient to take up any man, and the confounding of both these
Trades being a late abuse crept in since the year 1649 years, and was allowed
by the Magistrates to conciliat favor with the Deacon of that Trade to favor
them in the Election of the Magistracy, and therefore these two Trades and
Employments ought to be separat and declared distinct, and the present
Surgeons and their Successors, who do jointly exercise both employments
should make their Election and be restricted to one of these in time comeing
and discharged to take an Apprentice with respect to both employments, but only
to be Booked as Apprentice in the Trade and employment of Pharmacy or
Surgery as their Masters have elected and chosen the same. Secundo, There
ought to be a Distinction betwixt their Trades as well as all other Trades, and
the Trade or Surgery being erected with a Seal of Cause and distinct as any
Trade in the Kingdom, ought not to be confounded, and that this ground of
Declarator would be sustained in other Trades as uncontraverted; And therefore
it ought to be sustained in this, it being a Confusion inconsistent with the
policy and interest of the Kingdom. Tertio, The Declarator is founded upon King
James Decree Arbitral which is the foundation of the Right, whereby all Trades
are ordained to be Erected and distinguished from others: To which it was
answered, for the Surgeons by their said Procurators, that the foresaid
Declarator could not be sustained as to the point of Separation of these two
Employments of Apothecary and Chyrurgeons First, Because Chyrurgeons by ancient
Seals of Cause are erected a Deaconrie as one of the Trades of Edinburgh with
Liberty to receive Apprentice and to make them freemen. Secundo, As Burgesses
and Gild-Brethren they were in a Capacity to exercise the Employment of an
Appothecary before the Erection of Apothecaries in a Fraternity, which was by
an Act of the Town-Council of Edinburgh in Anno 1657. and any man in Edinburgh
that was a Freeman before the said Act, might have exercised Pharmacy without
any Trial, and may until this Hour upon their byding a Trial, and being found
qualified, and Pharmacy is not a Trade or erected by a sale of Cause as other
Trades, but an Employment, which by the Constitution any Freeman that is found
qualified may exercise. Tertio, The present Surgeon Apothecaries are
eminently fitted and capable for exerciseing both Employments, and whereof they
and their Predecessors have been in Possession of Exerciseing of both past all
Memory and thereby has prescribed a right of both. 4. That if the K. had power
to erect this Trade with Priviledgs he has Delegated it to the Town, and if the
Town have power, the Chyrurgeons have it by their Seal of Cause: and it is most
consistent with the Interest and Condition of the Nation, that the Leiges
should not be forced to employ both a Chyrurgeon and Apothecary when one may do
both. Quinto, It were Destructive of the Town of Edinburghs Power, by their
Charters of Erection, to have Right to Erect Deaconries, and to Appoint the
Regulat the several Trades within the Burgh, and to conjoyn and separat them as
they think fit. Likeas, the Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries their Privileges are
Ratified by King and Parliament; and His Majesty in his late Patent granted to
the Physicians, does acknowledge Chyrurgeon-Aoothecaries, in whose Privileges
are Settled and Reserved by the said Patent, and Appoints them as joint
Visators with the Physicians of the Drugs, to be sold or made use of, Whereinto
it was Replied for the Apothecaries by their said Procurators, That these
Pretenses sounded upon by the Chyrurgeons, were most Frivolous, and the
Apothecaries Declarator for the Separation of these two Employments, was most
Just and Rational: and though the Chyrurgeons did make a Clamor and Noise, as
if it were a Matter of State and Government, and did Alarm the Town of
Edinburgh as if their Charters of Erection and Privileges were Impugned, and
Invaded; yet all such Stuff and Pretenses is nothing but the common Methods of
amusing of Clients, or the willful and ignorant Mistakes of Lawyers, that must
now reduce all private Debates to Politics of Government, which is foolish and
impertinent Nonsense. For primo, The Declarator concerns none but the private
Right and Interest of the Apothecaries and Chyrurgeons. Secundo, Albeit the
Town of Edinburgh by their Charters of Erection from His Majesty, and His Royal
Predecessors, has power to Erect Trades and Deaconries; so likeways all our
Royal Burghs of the Kingdom have the same. Tertio, There has been nothing more
ordinar than Declarators before the Lords of Session, of one Trade against
another for their respective Liberties and Privileges, which the Lords of
Session have always Determined according to Law and Justice, without the least
Invasion of the Charters of Erection granted to Royal Burrows; nay, have many
times sustained Declarators, decerning the Magistrates to Erect and Incorporat
Trades unto Deaconries, and to give them an Interest in the Government of the
Burgh, notwithstanding the Government had been otherwise exercised past all
Memory, and which the Lords of the Session and supreme Judges of the Kingdom,
may, and ought to do. Quarto, That as to the old Rights and Seal of Cause, the
foresaid Declarator did not at all Impinge, for there was nothing therein as to
Pharmacy, and as to what the Chyrurgeons have obtained from the Town of
Edinburgh of late, it was ultra vires, and the Town could not join other Trades
inconsistent or inconvenient to be joined, there being not two Trades or
Employments within the Town of Edinburgh, that are more contra distinctione one
from another, than Chyrurgery and Pharmacy: and therefore, according to the
Practice, Example and Policy of the Town of Edinburgh, and of all other Royal
Burghs, as all other Trades which are distinct in their nature, are separat and
not confounded, and cannot be exercised but by one; so there is the same and
greater Reason for the Separation of Chyrurgery and Pharmacy. And as to the
King, his making mention of the Surgeon Apothecaries in the late Signature,
imports nothing, it being a simple Designation, and there being an Deacon, does
not import that there can be no distinct Trades, for there are several Deacons
in Edinburgh that have many distinct Trades under that Deaconrie, as the
Wrights have Plaisterers, Cowpers, Bowers, Club-makers, and many others, and
the Surgeons cannot pretend that they exercise the Trade of Pharmacy upon
any distinct Right or Privileges granted to them by their Seal of Cause, or
any Deed of the Town prior to the Erection of the Fraternity of Apothecaries,
but only as Freemen in the Town, and have the same Right that all Burgesses
have of being Apothecaries, if found qualified, and as to that which is
pretended upon the Chyrurgeon Apothecaries, there having been in Possession of
exercising both these Employments past memory of Man, and that they have
prescribed a Right of both, and that any Burgess might have exercised the Art
of Apothecary, and sold Droggs before the Erection of the Apothecaries in a
Fraternity in Anno 1657. The pretense is most unwarrantable. For Primo, It is
evident by the Report of the Physicians, it was but a late Abuse, and no such
thing was known or practiced but during the late Troubles, and James Borthwick
was the first man that ever attempted or practiced the same. 2. The Employment
and Art of an Apothecary is most grossly taken and confounded with that of a
Drogist, which is but a common Merchant, which any Burgess or Gild brother may
practice, by bringing home and selling Druggs as other Merchandice, whereas the
Art of an Apothecary consists in the Knowledge and Composition of Druggs. 3.
Although the Chyrurgeons could pretned to any possession of exercing both
Employments, that any such Possession being contrary to, and inconsistent with
the public Laws of the Kingdom, and the public good and Policy of the
Nation, and the interest of his Majesty's Subjects, can never prescribe any
Right, but the Law looks upon each possession to be nothing but coruptella and
vetustaserrores, and can never induce any prescription, especially seeing there
is not so much as the pretense of any Title or Right produced before the
pretended Act in anno 1657, erecting the Apothecaries in a Fraternity, and even
that Act does no ways authorize or allow the same person to exercise both these
Employments or confound the same but only declares that none should exercise
the Employment nor Art of Apothecary, but such as should be thereafter found
qualified and tried by the persons mentioned in the said Act, and their
successors amongst whom there were Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries at that time, but
the said Act does no ways allow, authorize or confound these two Employments to
be exercised by one and the same person, or hinder the Apothecaries to crave
Redress against the same, which they now do by this just Declarator, and which
as being a public Interest, and actio popularis quivis depopulo competit, it
being against the Public Interest and Policy and Prudence of this and all
other Nations, that distinct Trades and Employments should be confounded even
though the Act of the Town Council anno 1643. and 1655, sustain the
Apothecaries their Declarator as to the Point of Searcloaths, although they
were expressly excluded from Application of Searcloaths by the said Acts, so
the Lords of Session ought to sustain this Declarator as to the Separation of
these Employments, though there were an express Act of the Town Council of
Edinburgh to the contrair, as there is now being contrair to the public good
and Interest, and to the Acts and Constitutions of the Burgh as to the case of
all other Trades, and the Town of Edinburgh by their Chartours of Erection,
having greater power in relation to other Mechanic Trades than they can or
ought to pretend to Pharmacie or Chyrurgerie, which are mere liberal Arts and
Employments, and to be regulat and determined by the Lords of Session as the
supreme Judges, with the due respect of the public good and Interest of the
Subjects, and Policy and Prudence of other Nations; To which it was Duplyed
for the Chyrurgeons by their said Procurators, that the Town of Edinburgh in
the year 1649, with consent, and at the earnest desire of the Apothecaries,
having determined the Chyrurgeons Right as to the Points controverted by any
posterior Act 1657, the Town could not by the erection of the Fraternity of
Apothecaries, do any Deed in prejudice of the Chyrurgeons, tho the said
Erection did impinge upon their Right, as it does not, and this Declarator
raised at the Apothecaries instance, being in effect a Reduction not only of
the Chyrurgeons Right, but of the Towns Privileges, the same cannot be
sustained by way of Declarator, but there must be Summonds of Reduction raised.
2. By the foresaid Erection of the Fraternity, no Burgesses of Edinburgh are
excluded from being Pharmacians and Apothecaries, providing they can undergo a
Trial, and since any Burgess may be, why not the Chyrurgeons who are alwise
willing to be tried, and cannot be supposed but to be best qualified in respect
of the Contingency of the Employments. 3. By the said Erection of the
Fraternity, the Office of Apothecary is not settled as any distinct Trade, but
continues as a part of the Gildrie, and the Entrant enters as Merchants, by
applying first to the Council without any Distinction, except as to the Trial,
for they pay no Composition, whereas the Chyrurgeon Apothecaries their
Apprentices, before they receive them, are severely tried in the Greek and
Lattine Tongues, and must serve five years to the Trade and thereafter be three
years in their Study and Traveling before they can be tried to be a Master.
4. In the foresaid Erection, the Apothecaries has acknowledged the Surgeon
Apothecaries their Right, and have homologat and consented thereto by joining
with them in the Petition, whereupon the Act followed, and by which Act of
Erection, it is expressly provided that the Apothecary Surgeons, at least
some of their Number appointed, shall be Examinators to the entrant
Apothecaries: As likeways, they Joined together in obtaining an Ratification of
Parliament in anno 1670, of the foresaid Act; and so the Surgeon
Apothecaries having both Privilege and prescription of their Possession by
virtue of the said Decree Arbitral, and Homologat by the said Act of Erection,
their Right and privilege of vending and componing Drugs, cannot be taken from
them without doing them unjustice, and the pretense of the Conclusion and
inconsistencie of the Calling; is ridiculous, the Trade of Apothecaries being
no particular Calling; and the Surgeon by his Art and Calling being oblidged
to understand, and qua talis most be necessitat to have Skill, both of Drugs,
Herbs, and other Chemical Extracts for the Cure of those Diseases that are the
proper object of the Calling; and the Surgeon Apothecaries not being now in
acquirendo jure, but in the Possession of Rights and Privileges Secured to
them by Law, and Possect, past all Memory, the samen can by no means be taken
from them: And as to the haill Points now contraverted are Establishkd by Law;
The King who has the sole Power has divolved it upon the Town, who have already
Regulat and determinat their Points, and the endeavoring to alter their Rights
now determined by Authority were to unhing the Government upon apprehensions or
Reasons, that, there might be a better Government, which would be a preparative
to unhing all the Rights of King and People; and this beside the convniency and
Interest of the People, that they be not compelled to Employ two when one may
serve; and the sustaining of this Declarator will be a preparative to all the
Trades to quarrel the Constitutions of the Trade, and what the Town has done in
this, is Ratified by King and Parliament, and that with the knowledge and
concourse of the Apothecaries, so that it is more as an ordinary Ratification:
As likeways, the King by the Patent granted to the Physicians, has appointed
the Surgeon Apothecaries to be joined with the Physician in the trying of
the Drug, which was not done in Style or by chance, but was under Debate, and
Quarreled before the Council; and the Reservation in the said Patent is only as
to Physicians, and not as to Apothecaries, and by the Act of Council it is
declared that the Surgeon Apothecaries, the^r Right shall be Ratified by the
King, and to all the point of prescription is opponed and joined, which is
strongest in point of privilege of any thing in the World; and the Immemorial
possession is by consent publicly open and owned in all the Judicatoris of the
Nation. Quinto, It was Triplyed for the Apothecaries before the said
Procurators, that the Arguments founded upon the antiquity of the Surgeon is
no Argument at all, for albeit of Old, the Surgeons were the only Doctors
als well as Apothecaries; yet now seeing we are Civilized, and are Subject to
the Diseases of other Nations, so the Supplicants policy has allowed of these
Remedies, which in other Nations are exercised by several persons, all which is
cleared by the Report by the said Lords their Order taken thereanent of the
Customs of other Nations, and as by particular Acts of Parliament; it is
provided that the different Trades should be exercised by different persons; So
by the Custom of Edinburgh, in all other Trades, it is observed, as cannot be
denied, and their Trades as being of greater concern, ought rather to be
distinguished; and it is a Mistake to say that they are by their Erection
confounded, for the Apothecaries adhere to their Erection and Seal of Cause,
for the Erection is for the Chirurgeon-Barbars: And as to what is alleged,
that the King did give the Power to the Magistrates to dispose and determine the
Trades within the Town. It is Ansered, that the Power was not absolute and
unlimited, but secundum bonum and aequum, the King has given the same Power to
all the Royal Burghs in Scotland; and yet the Lords of Session Decerned the
Magistrates of Burntisland, and gave the Burgesses thereof, Deacons and Gildrie,
though the Magistrates thereof did Oppose it; and there is nothing in the
Prescription founded upon, for before the year 1649, this Surgeon Apothecary
was never heard of, and their first Writ is in the 1657 year of GOD; and
although their Arguments as to the Town of Edinburgh, their having already
determined might als well have been applied to the two points of Blood letting,
and application of Cerecloths, which notwithstandig the Lords have already
determined in, and it were absurd to prevent That the Town of Edinburgh by
virtue of the power given to them, have power to confound Trades and
Employments without control, or to do any thing inconsistent with reason or the
Interest of the people, and if they should do it, the Judge Orinary may and
should redress it, but this debate is not contrary to any thing in the
Erection, but most consistent and requisite for the simple Chyrurgeons, in
whose favors the Erection is, for now neither the simple Surgeons nor
simple Apothecaries can get a Prentice, seeing the Prentice for the same C^arge
and Pains can acquire both Trades; And the conclusion of this Declartor is not
only that the Surgeon Apothecaries now, are not only to Elect of one of the
Employments, but likeways it was craved, that thereafter they might be
discharged to take Prentices with relation to both Trades, or to pretend to
Freedom in both, and it is no weight that the Expenses of the Leidges is
greater by employing of two persons, for it is very well kown that the
Surgeon takes both for his Drugs and Pains exorbitantly, and all the
exorbitant privileges were given the Surgeons by the Magistrates, upon the
account of their Interest in the Election of the Magistrate, and what is now
craved by the Apothecaries, is not only consistant with the Laws and Customs of
other Nations, but agreeable to the Policy of this Burgh in all other Trades,
and is much more observed in London, and well governed Cities, and all the
Possession that the Surgeons can pretend to before the year 1657, can operat
nothing, seeing it wants a Title which is necessary for Prescription: Thereafter
there was an Supplication given in to the said Lords, by the said Apothecaries
and simple Surgeons of the said Burgh of Edinburgh; Showing, that where to
that Action and Declarator first intented at the instance of the Apothecaries,
against the Surgeon Apothecaries, and now concurred in by the simple
Surgeons, as to that point or separa^ing the two Callings and Employments
not to be exerced by, or confounded in one person, and which single point has
been formerly fully Debated. It was therefore humbly craved, the said Lords
would advise the point, and give their Answer therein in jure, especially seeing
the said Apothecaries, Raisers and Pursuers of their own Declarator, did
humbly conceive they were not pro loco et tempore concerned to insist any
farther in the other undetermined points of their Declarator, while the said
Lords should be pleased to give their determination in the point of Separation,
as the said Supplication more fully bears, which being read in presence of the
said Lords, and they having heard seen and considered the samen, Declared that
before advising of the point as to the Separation of the Employments, they
would hear the Parties upon the points reserved to be determined in their said
last interloquitor; and therefore ordained both parties Procurators to be read
at the next calling, and accordingly the said Action being again called, and
both parties compearing by their respective Procurators above named, the
Procurators for the said Apothecaries repeated the conclusion of their said
Declarator, as to the other two points not yet insisted in, viz. Primo, That it
should not be lawful for Surgeons to trouble Apothecaries, and put them to
their Oaths upon alleged Contraventions, and their exerceing of any operations
proper to Surgeons, but only according to the practice and observance of all
other Trades, to deprehend them in the Act of Contravention, and which the
Apothecaries craves no more against the Surgeons in case of their
Contraventions, and exerceing the Employment of Apothecaries. Secundo, That in
so far as concerns the Members of the College of Justice, and others his
Majesty's Subjects residing in, or repairing to Edinburgh, not being Burgesses,
they may without any restriction, make use either of Apothecaries or
Surgeons, and that the Acts of the Town Council of Edinburgh relating to
Privileges of either of the said Employments, can take no further place but
inter concives. To which it was Answered for the Surgeons by their said
Procurators, that the foresaid Declarator, as to these two points now insisted
on cannot be sustained, because as to the first, that the proveing the
Contraventions by the contraveeners their Oaths, as a thing (...) in cases more
ordinary, and less importance, as in the cutting green Woods abstracting of
Multers, and lately by an Act of Sederuut, it is appointed that the Magistrates
shall be Burgesses before them, and referr the Contraventions of the selling of
Vivers at greater Rates than they allowed to the Contraveeners Oaths. And here
there is nothing to say as in other manual Trades. And as to the second point,
it were against Reason to leave the strangers to the mercy of unskilful
persons, while the Burgesses are privileged for that they shall be served by
skilful persons. Secundo, All the Town of Edinburgh has the Right, and are in
the possession of providing for strangers while they are in the Town, in all
other things, and why not in this. Tertio. The Physicians their Parent does
bear them to all persons within the Town als well strangers as others. And the
Chyrurgeons Trade should be in reason as far extended, especially, seeing their
Rights and immemorial Possessions does carry them to it. And by the late Act of
Parliament Merchants are allowed to be put to their Oaths for in-bringing of
Good Uncustomed or prohibit, which is in effect a Theft. Whereunto it was
Replied for the Apothecaries, That this manner of Probation cannot be allowed;
for it would ruin both the simple Apothecaries and the simple Chyrurgeons. And
therefore until that point of the Separation of the Trades should be first
determined, and then the Decisions as to the manner of probation would be equal
to both. Secundo, The general interest of the people is, That it shall not be in
the power of any Trade to discover or bring in question His Majesty's Leidges,
as being subject to Diseases; which it may be they would think shame of, yea so
much as to have it suspected, tho by the event it should not be proven. Tertio
It is contrair to the inviolable Observance in the case of all other Trades who
cannot prove any pretended Contraventions, either against unfree Men or Members
of other Trades, except per manus subjectionem; and that they were actually
deprehended in the Act of Contravention. Quarto, If the contrair were
sustained, that it might be lawful for the Trades to raise Process against
Unfree-men, or one against another upon pretended Contraventions of their
respective Privileges. It behoved to kind a Fire amongst the Trades, and each
of them to ruin and destroy others by calumnious Processes. Quinto, It behoved
to open a Door to all Calumny, Prevarication and Perjury. Sexto, There is a
great Difference betwixt the case of general Laws or Poenal Statutes, the
Contraventions whereof may be proven by Oath of Party. And the privileges
granted to private Trades and Incorporations: For the observance whereof, there
is no further allowed by the practice of this and all other Nations, but actual
Seizure and Deprehension, and even by the Ratification of Parliament in anno
1641 in Favors of the Chyrurgeons. It is evident that the Parliament allowed
no more but actual Seizure and Deprehension. Septimo, If these were allowed, it
should be in the power of Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries to ruin the simple
Apothecaries and simple Chyrurgeons, by raising Process against them at their
pleasure, and by calling them to attend such Processes, when they might be
forced to go out of Town to attend their Patients, and so might Be holden as
confessed; and so there is far greater reason why Oaths should not be allowed
against Apothecaries; then in the case of other Trades where it is not allowed.
Octavo. A thousand cases might occur wherein Apothecaries could not be cleared
to Depone, whether the Operations done by them were Chyrurgical, or might be
proper to be done by Apothecaries. All which may fully evince, that it is a
most unjust and unwarrantable pretense that Apothecaries should be put to give
their Oaths, which is contrair to the practice and observance of all other
Trades, and would be destructive to the Apothecaries, and is contrary and
prejudicial to the interest and Reputation of His Majest es Subjects: And as to
the point of Possession and Prescription, the first time that this manner of
probation is mentioned was in anno 1655; which is here said to be proved de
jure, which imports nothing but legal probation; As the case requires, Secundo.
They had the same pretension to the Cere-clothes, which notwithstanding thereof
is regulat by the Lords according to reason and Law, and no Act of the Town of
Edinburgh can be otherways binding, but according as they consist with Justice
and Law. And albeit they had that Act in anno 1655. Yet it was never pretended
to be put in execution but twice, which appears to be mere collusion by Reading
of the ^aids Decreets. And as to the Extension, as to strangers the Declarator
is most just and rational. First, Because as to the College of Justice and its
Members, it is their undoubted and uncontraverted Privilege that they may
employ and make use of any Unfree Man, and much more may employ Apothecaries in
that which is proper to Chyrurgeons, And that therefore Apothecaries or
Un^ree-Men, serving any of the College of Justice, cannot be liable for any
Punishment for the same, that being an infallible Consequence founded upon the
Privilege of the Members of the College of Justice. 2. The same also ought to
be extended and communicate to all Strangers who are not Burgesses, because they
cannot be subject as to the matter of their Health, to be limited and
restrained by any Destruction of Trades established within the Town of
Edinburgh, except it were ratione delicti, or ratione rejectae, or the like,
which is subject to the Jurisdiction of the Magistrates, and it is not denied
but if any Stranger would build or repair a House which lies locally intra
territorium and districtum of the Town, a Stranger behoved to make use of
Workmen, according to the Distinction of the several Trades, because the House
is res sitae within the Precincts of the Town of Edinburgh, and is the subject
of the Operation, but what imaginable Color of Law or Reason can be pretended
that as to the point of a Strangers Health, he should be subject to the
Regulation and Distinction of Trades within the Town of Edinburgh, why they may
not entrust the same to whom they think fit, and to make use of the ordinary
Apothecaries without the least restraint or hazard either to themselves or
their Apothecaries, and that the distinction of Apothecaries and Chyrurgeons of
the Town of Edinburgh, shound only take place inter concives, these being the
public Constitutions of the Burgh, wherein either his Majesty's Subjects are
no ways concerned, To which it was Duplyed for the Surgeons, that the King
having given the Town Right and power to regulat the Trades, and all
Inhabitants within the Town, has consequently given them all things requisite
for it, and the not allowing the probation by Oath but by Seasure, were to
involve the People, the patent Trades and all in unevitable Ryots and Pleas,
and as it is impossible to prove the Contraventions but by Oath, so that he not
allowing his Probation, were to take away the Privilege it self. 2. If it be
any man's right he may vindicat his Right by all legal Means, and that is a
legal Probation cannot be denied, and although this has been the Rule and way
of Probtion ever until now, it cannot be pretended that ever any person was
pursued but where they were guilty, and if they should have Expenses, which is
the pana temere litigantium. 3. The King having given the Power of the
Magistracy and Government not only of Burgesses, but of all Strangers coming to
Edinburgh, so long as they are there they must be subject to the Rules and
Government of the Town, and as Strangers cannot make use of other Artificers
that are not Freemen, why ought they to make use of Surgeons, and the
Surgeon Apothecaries being upwards of two hundred years in possession, by
virtue of good and undoubted Rights the samen cannot be summarly taken away,
whereunto the Apothecaries Triplyed, That all the Towns Rules in regulating of
the Trades within the Town, does extend only to the Concives, for if otherwise,
the Privilege granted to the College of Justice would be rendered Elusory and
of non effect, and concesso aliquo concenduntur omnia sine quibus affectum
sortire non poterit. 2. Albeit the Members of the College of Justice, and
other Strangers not being Burgesses, are subject and liable to the Jurisdiction
of the Magistrates of Edinburgh, upon any ground of Law that founds the
Competency of their Jurisdiction, and if they should commit Riots, Slaughters
or other Crimes, or were heretors of the Tenements or the like, yet the power
and Jurisdiction of the Magistrates of the Town of Edinburgh, cannot respect any
restraint or Revolution of the cure of their health, the Acts of the Town
Council being only politic Constructions of the Burgh which can be valid and
binding against none but inter concives, and it is vain and frivolous to
pretend, that they have a Power to make use of and call Apothecaries, and yet
if they come they are liable to be punished, it being absolutely inconsistent
with the other, and would render upon the matter the same Limitation and
distinction of Trades, as effectual against the Members of the College of
Justice and Strangers, as against other Burgesses and Citizens: And therefore
the Apothecaries repeat and open that Declarator, which as to the whole
Conclusions thereof, is most just and consonant to the Laws and Customs of
other Nations, and to the constant observance and Custom of the Town of
Edinburgh in the case of all other Trades, and wherein not only the
Apothecaries concur, but also six of the Surgeons, who have right to all the
Liberties and Privileges of the Seal of Cause erecting the Chyrurgeons into an
Deaconrie and Incorporation; Which Summonds of Declarator pursued by the said
Apothecaries against the said Surgeon Apothecaries of Edinburgh, and haill
Points therein contained, with the several Disputes above-written following
thereupon, being at length heard, seen and considered by the said Lords, and
they therewith being well and ripely advised, the said Lords of Council and
Session, Found and Declared, that the Employments of Surgery and Pharmacy
being two distinct Employments, and both requiring a great deal of care and
knowledge, shall hereafter (within the City of Edinburgh and Liberties thereof)
be exercised by distinct persons, and that one and the same person shall not
exercise, or be employed in both Employments, and that albeit Surgeons may
buy and sell Simples as any Druggist or Merchant may do, and compone such
Druggs as are necessar for Chyrurgecal and and external Application, yet that
they cannot compone any Medicament to be taken intern lly by the Mouth
Reservand alwise from this Declarator to the Chyrurgeon Apothecaries that are
presently actual Masters in both Employments, and does actually keep
Apothecaries Shops within the Town of Edinburgh or Liberties thereof, as to
which Bounds this Declarator extends and no further. Thereafter there was an
Supplication given in to the said Lords at the instance of the said Chyrurgeon
Apothecaries, with the concurse of all the other fourteen Deacons, showing,
That where King James the sixth of Blessed Memory, having debarred all
Tradesmen from the Magistracy in which the Petitioners had then an equal share
He did in recompense thereof allow the Petitioners the Benefit of Gildry, by
virtue where of it was free for the said Petitioners or any of them who were
comprehended in any manner of way under the fourteen Deaconries, to be free not
only to keep Shops as Gild-Brethren, but likeways to exerce any of these
Trades, which were pendicles of the Gildrie; And it cannot be denied but that
the Apothecary Trade was not comprehended under any of the fourteen Deaconries,
but was simply a pendicle of the Gildrie, and consequently any of the fourteen
Deaconries were free to be of it, to which the Petitioners desired a Spesifick
and formal Answer, it never having been answered yet in these Processes, and
all that the Petitioners heard insinuated as an answer, being that the
Apothecaries Trade is not a mere selling but a Compounding of Druggs, which
Composition is no part of the Gildrie: To which the Petitioners reply, is that
this is a mistake in the Fundamental Constitut^^n of this Burgh, whereby even
the compounding of Drugs is no part of the fourteen Deac nries, and
consequently as before the year 1657, any man whatsomever might have been
without trial set up to compound Druggs if he was Burges, so after the year
1657 all the privileges given to the Apothecaries was only that none should
exerce their Trade till they were found able by the Chyrurgeon Apothecaries and
Apothecaries, and therefore if that the Chyrurgeon Apothecaries can show that
they were sufficiently able to understand their Trade why may not they be
admitted als well as any other Burgesses, since no Burges can be debarred that
being his Birthright by the set, and to press that they may be free of all the
Supplicants Trade, as they are of theirs, was expressly contrair to the
foundamental Constitutions of this Burgh, who by no means can be free in any of
the fourteen Deaconries, but these who have either served in an Apprentiship to
any of them, or have married one of their Daughters when they have gotten a
sufficient Answer to that point never as yet answered then it will be time to
Debate whether the Apprentice which the Petitioners have received, and may
receive during our Lifetimes ought to be free of both Trades, their being jus
quaesitum to the Petitioners and them thereto prior to this Decision, and all
statutes such as this of the said Lords seems to be having only tractum futuri
temporis though made by a Parliament, especially when they are correctory of
Privileges bona fide acquired prior thereto, and the Petitioners being
admitted to both Fraternities in both which the Petitioners have given their
Oaths de fideli, and by their Constitution there can be no meeting except where
the two Visitors are present, and one of the Chyrurgeon Apothecaries must be
Visitor; So that either they must have a new Erection, which the Petitioners
humbly conceive, none can give them, but the Magistrates of Edinburgh, or else
the Petitioners must of necessity be present with them, and the Petitioners
humbly craved, that the Apothecaries Advocats would show us which way and by
what Arguments any Society could meet in Edinburgh without an Erection from the
King or the Town, or how men that have a Privilege and are in Possession of it
can be deprived and forfeited without a Fault; As also how the Petitioners
Apprentices who have paid in their Prentice-fees in Contemplation of both
Trades before the said Lords their Act can Forfeit their Fault, upon which and
several other Points never yet debated before the Lords; The Petitioners
desires to be heard in the said Lords their own Presence which was never
refused to any Subject whose Cause was once heard in presentia, as the said
Supplication and desire thereof more fully bears; To which it was answered for
the Apothecaries and Chyrurgeon Barbers, viz. That neither the tumultary
Caballs of the Trades, nor the tumultuary Petitions which are given in name of
the hail Trades, though thirteen of them are not in the least concerned, ought to
have no other influence upon the Losds, but to deserve a Censure and Reprimand,
that after they have taken so much p^ins and trouble, and has determined the
point upon unanswerable Grounds of Law and Reason with all possible Tenderness
and Allowance to the present Chyrurgeon Apothecaries, They should in an
indiscreet Way and Manner Caball and run up and down and amuse ignorant people
with Stories of Government and Privileges, which is not in the least
concerned. The case being a single, Debase of private Rights, and a Controversy
betwixt the Apothecaries and Chyrurgeons, which is no other but directly the
same, with the Debates and Controversies which have and may arise betwixt other
Trades. And as to the Prentices in the Petition, That the Apothecaries are none
of the Pendicles of the fourteen Deaconries; and that any Gild-Brother might
have exerced the Employment of an Apothecary, before the Erection in a
Fraternity, and may do the same, since their undergoing the Trial, and being
Qualified. It was answered, the Interlocutor is opponed, and Grounds whereupon
it proceeded: and the Petitioners do strangely forget themselves, if they
disremember that the said Pretense was both Founded upon in the Declarator, and
fully answered and satisfied. And again to refresh their Memory, the Answer
then made was, that albeit the Decree Arbitral pronounced by His Majesty's
Grandfather King James the Sixth, had settled the fourteen Deaconries in order
to the Government of the Burgh, and that the Apothecaries were none of these
Deaconries; yet without the least impinging upon the Decree Arbitral, it was
lawful and competent to the Apothecaries to crave by their Declarator, that
Pharmacy and Chyrurgery might be declared distinct Employments, and separately
exercised as such, just as the several Pendicles of one and the same Deaconry,
might pursue a Declarator of this nature against the other. As for Instance, if
the Bakers of Pyes should transgress and bake Loaves, which is a distinct
Employment though belonging to the same Deaconry, or if a Locksmith should
pursue a Blacksmith if he should use both Trades, though under the same
Deaconry of Hammermen, and forty others which might be instanced, by which the
said Lords may plainly perceive, that the Decree Arbitral, or the Settlement
of the fourteen Deaconries is not in the least concerned; and besides, it is
certain and undeniable, that the Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries are none of the
fourteen Deaconries, or so much as mentioned in the Set, but only the simple
Chyrurgeons, the most part of whom do concur with the simple Apothecaries in
the foresaid Declarator. And as to that Pretense, that the Case was a Matter of
Government, and that His Majesty has granted a Signature in Favors of the
Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries, and that the King's Advocat desires to be Heard in
favors of the Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries. It was answered, the Insinuations are
most frivolous; And it is strange how any man can please himself, or think it
possible to delude others with such Conceits, and that every little petty
Debate betwixt two private Trades, must instantly be a great Question of
Government. And it were certainly very unsuitable to that Deference and Duty
the Lords of Session owes to His Sacred Majesty, whose Royal Consideration is
taken up with Matters of a Higher Nature, to trouble His Majesty with such
petty Concerns, which are only proper to be Cognosced and Determined by His
Majesty's Judicatures, which are Established for that very end. And as to the
Signature in favors of the Chyrurgeon Apothecaries; it was strange how it
comes to be mentioned, having already received its Fate before the Lords of
Privy Council: and it is great Moderation in the Lords of Session, who were so
immediately touched by the Extravagancies of the said Signature, not to have
taken notice of it before this time. And as to these Pretenses, that the
Interlocutor can be of no greater Force than a Law, which can only be extended
ad casus futuros, and cannot prejudge Apprentices who had jus quaesitum by
their Indentures to both Employments. It was Answered, the Comparison is an
evident Mistake; for the Lords Interlocutor is a Sentence in Jure, and a
Decision in Point of Right, that these two Employments ought to be separate,
and not confounded in the same person; so that it was impossible there would be
Jus for the Confusion, that being directly inconsistent with the Interlocutor,
it being certain that the Lords of Session cannot take away Parties Rights,
neither pro praeterito, nor futuro: and therefore the Interlocutor by a
necessity of Consequence, should have effect against the present Masters for
the Separation in time coming, though the Lords has been pleased so far to
indulge them as to allow them to Operat in both during their Lifetimes: but
there is not the same Reason to extend the same Favor to Apprentices which
would indeed evacuat the Interlocutor, and the Lords may as well Retrait what
they have done, as satisfy the unreasonable Clamor of the
Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries, and neither they nor their Apprentices, can pretend to
a Jus quaesitum, unless they suppose the Interlocutor in Jure is unjust, which,
whatever they think, it were a little too petulant to insinuat or express. And
Laws are of a different nature from Interlocutors in Jure; because Laws being
inductivi Juris novi, are only to be extended ad negotia futura; but
Interlocutors are Declaratory of Laws already made, and of distinct Rights
formerly of their own nature established, and so does take effect, and regulat
all Cases which are the Subject of Debates. And the Apothecaries humbly desire
the Lords to take to their Consideration a former Petition given in by them,
and at last to put a Period to these Debates, and to secure and render their
Interlocutor ineffectual in time coming, and that it may not be in the power of
the Chyrurgeon Apothecaries, to elude the same. And thereafter there was
another Supplication given in to the said Lords, by the said Apothecaries and
Chyrurgeon-Barbars of Edinburgh, Showing, that where the said Lords upon
Advising of the Declarator Raised by the Petitioners against the
Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries, has most justly Found and Declared, that these should
be separat Employments in time coming. It followed necessary, that the present
Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries who were allowed to exercise both Employments dung
their Lifetime should not upon the Pretense of the said personal Indulgence, be
allowed to fall upon Methodso evacuat the said Interlocutor, and perpetuat the
Confusion of these Employments. T^^ therefore the said Lords would expressly
declare, That it should not be lawful to the Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries to receive
Apprentices, but as to one of these Employments, and that the Prentices be so
looked; And that the present Chyrurgeon Apothecaries may be put to Declare,
which of these Employments they will take themselves to in time coming, as to
that Point of Booking of Prentices; otherways they will receive Prentices one
year in Pharmacy, and another year in Chyrurgery, which is most absurd. As
likewise, That the present Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries may be Restricted to sit at
one of the Tables, either of the Deaconrie of Chyrurgeons, or of the Fraternity
of Apothecaries, there being no more intended by the Interlocutor, than that
the present Masters may Operat in both Employments during their Lifetime. And
whereas the Petitioners were Informed, that the Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries of
design to evacuat the Interlocutor, were to crave, that their Apprentices who
are already past their Prentiship, and Discharged of their Indentures, may be
allowed to exercise both Employments during their Lifetime. The said Pretense
is directly inconsistent with the Interlocutor, and tends to evacuat the same,
and continue the Confusion of these Employments, and the Indulgence granted to
the present Masters is ex gratia, and contrare to the common Grounds of Law,
whereupon the said Lords has sustained the Declarator for Separation in time
coming. And the special Considerations that the said Lords have gone upon, as
to the present Masters, was, that they were in possession of both Employments,
and had long Experience, and had Shops fitted with the Materials of Pharmacy,
and Chyrurgery, which special Reasons do not in the least Militat for
Apprentices who are not set up, many of whom will not be able to be Freemen in
the said Employments these ten or twelve years, by the Constitutions of the
Burgh, and the Acts of the respective Employments. Thereafter it was humbly
craved, That the said Lords would so Enlarge and Declare in the foresaid
Interlocutor, That it may not be in the power of the present
Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries, by their Methods of taking and Breeding of the
Prentices in both Employments, to evacuat the same; and that they may be
Restricted to Meet and Conveen only at that Table, at which they shall
Condescend to Book their Prentices; that so these Points of the Separation
being once fully cleared, the Lords may at their convenience, proceed to Advise
the other Points that are not yet Determined, as the said last Supplication
also more fully contains. Which first Supplication above written, with the
Answer made theret^ by the said Apothecaries, and last Bill given in by them in
manner above specified, being all read in presence of the said Lords, and they
having Heard, Seen and Considered the samen: and being therewith well and
ripely Advised, the said Lords Decerned the said Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries
Masters, who by the foresaid Interlocutor were allowed the exercise of both
Employments during their Lifetime and the three young Men. viz. James Mu rhead,
John Lauder, and Thomas Edgar, who by the particular Interlocutors, were
declared to be in that Condition, albeit they be not as yet actually entered
Masters in both Employments. To make their Election to Meet and sit at any one
of the Tables of the said two Employments, and to declare their Election
betwixt and Tuesday thereafter: and if they did not Declare betwixt and the
said day, the said Lords Decerned them to sit only at the Chyrurgeons Table,
as the eldest and first erected Trade: and the said Lords have found, that no
Master can hereafter take Prentices to make them Freemen in Edinburgh in any of
the said two Employments, except that at which they sit at the Table, and that
all the Prentices already entered, are to be free only in that Employment and
Trade at which their Masters sits at the Table. In Obedience to the which
Interloquitor, there was an Condescendance given in by John Jossie
Chyrurgeon-Apothecary, written and subscribed by him, and declaring his
Election to be to meet and sit with the Apothecaries, as the said Declaration
and Condescendance, dated the day of March instant, extant in Process more fully
bears: And thereafter there was another Supplication given in to the said
Lords, by the Chyrurgeon-Barbers of Edinburgh showing, That where in the
Erection of their Deaconry, and in the Confirmation thereof by King James the
fourth, as also by the Decreet-Arbitral of King James the sixth, there is not
so much as any word of concerning or signifying such a thing as a
Chyrurgeon-Apothecary, which never came to be in practice till the time of the
late unhappy Troubles and Confusions, and was never so much as named under that
Designation in any publict Writ, till the time of the later and more unhappy
Usurpation anno 1657, which yet does not any ways Erect or Authorize them as
such, and that the foresaid ancient Deaconry flourished in a good condition,
with an oppulent Box, ti l the Chyrurgeon-Apothecary crept in amongst us, who
deriving ^^^nsick ends and designs, prejudicial to the ancient Deaconry,
regarding the Apothecry and his Pharmacy more then the Chyrurgeon, and true
establishment of the Deaconry: Pursuand to which, they at all Trials, and all
Admissions of Intrants, constntly more favor their own Apprentices then the
Petitioners, wherethrow they have not only become more numerous in the Calling
then the Supplicants were, and so by Votes overpowered the Petitioners in all
their Proposals; but that also, since their coming in amongst the Petitioners,
much Money has been expended for Pleas and Suits of Law, to not only the
exhausting of the Box, but burdening of the Calling with considerable Debts.
And now that the said Lords have most justly found and declared, that these
two Employments of Pharmacy and Chyrurgery are in their natures distinct, and
ought in their Practice to be so far separat, as not to be exercised by one
single person; and though the said Lords, have ex gratia, upon several
Specialities, indulged the present Masters to operat in both during their
Lifetime, yet the Petitioners are informed, that the said Lords are
importunate to enlarge the same favor to some Apprentices, as particularly to
John Lawder and James Muirhead, against whose Bills the Petitioners (adhereing
always to their general Answers and Bill jointly of before given in by them
with the simple Apothecaries,) do humbly represent, that these Prentices are
not stated under the Specialities which prevailed with the said Lords to grant
the personal Indulgence in favors of the present Masters; and as the
Concessions would altogether evacuat the said Lords their just Interloquitor,
and perpetuat the Confusion for ever, so would they also open a door of great
trouble to the said Lords, for no Apprentice (whether he has not served his
time, or is yet serving,) but would insinuat some pretenses for enjoying a
share in that personal Indulgence; and it is a mistake in the fundamental
Constitution of this Burgh, to imagine that any one man ought in Jure take an
Apprentice for two distinct Trades and Employments, for can a Merchant take an
Apprentice for the Gildry and a Trade, of ought a Tradesman in jure take an
Apprentice by formal Indentures, and book him equally to his own particular
Trade and the Gildry of the City; yea, can a Tradesman take a Prentice, and
formally book him to any two distinct Employments, or Pendicles of one and the
same Deaconry; as for instance, can a Py-Baxter take, and formally book an
Apprentice to the baking of Pyes and the baking of Loaves, although the baking
of a Loaf is the ordinary Essay put to the Py-Baxter at his Trials. So that as
the Masters impinged upon the Constitutions and Order of the Burgh, in
confounding of the Gildry with the Crafts, by taking and booking one Prentice
to both, so the Apprentices cannot found any thing upon this Corruptela, to
prejudge the Constitution of the Burgh, whatever recourse they may have against
their Masters for imposing upon them and their Friends by such Indentures.
Secundo, It is more particularly Answered to John Lawder's Bill, that the
Action of Declarator was depending long before (...) confesses himself to have
come home, and as de facto, he never offered him to his trials at the
Petitioners Table, so it is but frivolous to allege he had done it, but was
delayed upon the depending Declarator, for what ever differences were betwixt
the simple Apothecars, and the Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries for the trial of
intrants, at their table during the dependence, yet no such thing was upon that
account, betwixt the Petitioners and Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries at the Petitioners
Table, and as for James Mureheads Petition, he is already an Apothecary, and so
the Lords Interloquitor is opened. 2. Esto, he were not yet, he cannot by the
Acts of the Deacons, be so much as yet for a long time received to his very
Trials, the Petitioners Acts providing that none but qualified Person should be
admitted, discharged the receiving of so much as a Bill, from an intrant till
eight year (...) he is Booked ane Apprentise in the Books of their Calling, and
which James Murhead cannot aleadge. It was therefore humbly besought, that the
said Lords would take the Promises to their consideration, with the
Petitioners Answers and former Bill abovementioned, and secure the Lords
Interloquitor from being rendered unefectual, and that the Lords would declare
that the Box and Calling of the Chyrurgeons, could not be burdened with the
Debt lately contracted, for the maintaining of this Plea against the
Separation, but that the same should be paid by the Chyrurgeons-Apothecaries
amongst themselves, and not upon the Box, which is the Poors Money and the
Stock of the Incorporation, seeing the Petitioners concurred for the Separation,
and one of the Petitioners was so Illegally Incarcerat by the present Deacons
(who is a Chyrurgeon Apothecary himself) for delivering his Opinion against
borrowing of Money for this Plea, that the said Lords did liberate (...)
without either Caution or consignation, as the said Petition likeways more
fully bears, which being likeways Read in presence of the said Lords, they
ordained the Chyrurgeon Apothecaries to have answered the samen again the next
day thereafter, and thereafter there was ane Supplication given in to the said
Lords, by James Turnbul Chyrurgeon in Edinburgh, showing that whereas he had
paid an considerable Prentise Fee, after his Apprentisship, went Abroad for
several years. to accomplish himself in the Arts of Chyrurgerie and Pharmacie,
and after his return upon Application to the Chyrurgeons of Edinburgh, they
upon Trial have found the Petitioner qualified, and admitted him a Freeman
Master in their Society, and he having provided himself of all Drugs,
Medicamenta and Instruments necesar, not only fit for Exercing of Chyrurgery,
but also of Pharmacie, the Petitioner having set up and kept an open Shop,
and done all Diligence for procureing of Freedom in Pharmacy, and did make his
Application to the Town Council of Edinburgh, for their Recomendation to the
Fraternity of Chyrurgeon Apothecars, and Apothecaries, the Petitioner was
always delayed, because of several Intrants that had procured their
Recomendation before him, but now having procured his Recomendation from the
Council to the Brotherhood, the Petioner has gotten in his Bill, which Bill
with his Recomendation is accepted of by them, and still lying before them, but
by reason their metings has not been so frequent as formerly, because of their
pleas at Law, the Petitioners Trials hes been delayed, and seeing he is a
present Master in Chyrurgrie, and hes done all Diligence in order to the Trial
of his qualification in Pharmacie and to that end hes Set up a Shop (before the
Lords Interloquitor) Humbly beseeching therefore, that the said Lords would
allow the said Brotherhood of Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries, and Apothecaries to
admit and receave the Petitioner a Freeman Chyrurgeon-Apothecary, that he may
have the benefit of the Lords Interloquitor, especially considering the Lords
have granted the like Privilege to other two of late (the one not being yet
admitted Chyrurgeon, the other neither as yet admitted Chyrurgeon nor
Apothecarie, so the Petitioners case in all circumstances being considered, is
more favorable then these. Whereunto it was answered for the said
Apothecaries, it was absolutely false that he paid any Prentise Fee, having
only served his Father, who was absolutely ignorant of Pharmacie, having
neither been Breed nor Instructed therein, although he kept the Fashion of an
Apothecaries Shop, which afterward he quat, because the Physicians would not
Employ a person of so little Skill. Secondly, All his Tr^vel abroad was only a
Shipboard, where he could have no occasion of exercising, much less of
Improving himself in Pharmacy, which appeared very well when he offered himself
to Trial, for there he was found most Ignorant and unqualified and rejected as
such, since which time he never had the confidence to offer himself to a new
Trial, in respect whereof, it was hoped the said Lords would reject his
Petition, and that the said Lords would be pleased to declare that the
Indulgence that they had allowed to the three youg Men, Lauder, Muirhead, and
Edgar, was always upon condition that they be found Qualied at their respective
Trials, which last Supplication above written, being read in presence of the
said Lords, together with the Answers made thereto by the said Apothecarie,
and they having heard, seen and considered the samen, They refused to grant the
Desire thereof; And thereafter there was another Supplication given in to the
said Lords by the said Surgeon Apothecaries of Edinburgh, showing that
where they being informed that the said Lords has decerned the Petitioners to
make their Election presently, at which of the Tables of Surgery or
Pharmacy, we are to meet and sit, whereat the Petitioners are greatly
surprised, and in a manner in a consternation, seeing the said point was never
advised with our Lawyers, nor Informations given by the Petitioners to the
said Lords thereanent, nor the same craved by the Pursuers Declartor, and in
regard many of the Petitioners number are out of Town, and the time allowed
very short; and to the effect the Petitioners may deliberat sedato animo in so
weighty a Point, and not to do the same rashly and in confusion; Humbly
beseeching therefore, the said Lords would grant the Petitioners such a
competent time as they may advise and be heard before the said Lords, hopeing
that some of the Petitioners, their Services in both Employments to His Majesty
in his greatest difficulties (when scarce one of the Pursuers were so much as
heard of) and the Petitioners former care and successful pains in Curing many
of His Majesty's Leidges by exercing these Employments, did prevail with the
said Lords to grant the Petitioners this so reasonable and humble desire;
Whereinto it was Answered, that whereas it is pretended that the Point of
separating the Tables, and oblidging them to make their Election of what Table
they will sit at, and to ^ook their Apprentices, accordingly was never advised
with their Lawyers, nor Informations given in by them to the Lords thereanent,
nor the same craved by the simple Apothecaries Declarator. It was Answered,
First, That it was their own fault if they did neither advise with their
Lawyers, nor give Informations to the Lords: The Points having been fully
Debated several times, as is well known to the Lords themselves. But Secondly,
The Apothecaries and Chirurgeon-Barbars do oppone the several Bills and Answers
given in on both sides, and extant in Process, since the Lords did pronounce
their first Interlocutor for separating the Callings; but especially Sir George
Lockhart Answers to the second Bill, since given in for them by the Lord
Advocat which is lying in the Clerks hands, by which it clearly appears that
the Separation of the Tables was necessarily consequential to the Saparation of
the Callings, and without which the first Interlocutor was no perfect; So that
it was calumnious for the Surgeon Apothecaries to pretend a Surprisal, it
being about a Month as will appear by the Dates of the said Bills and Answers
since they were well acquainted with the Point, in respect whereof, and that
the Surgeon Apothecaries design was only to drive off this Session, that
thereby they may render the Lords Sentence elusory and of none effect, by
hindering the samen to be Extracted, and so to continue and perpetuat the
Confusion; And it was therefore hoped that the said Lords would have no regard
to the Petition, nor any other of that nature, but furthwith Order the
Extracting of the Apothecaries Decree, especially seeing the Services which
some of these Surgeon Apothecaries pretend to have done to His Majesty in
his greatest difficulty were neither so great, nor so long continued by very
far, as they rendered to his Enemies of both Nations, who brought His Majesty's
Royal Father and himself unto those difficulties, which last Supplication and
Answers above written made thereto, being likeways in read presence of the
said Lords, and they having also heard, seen and considered the same, refused
to stop the Extracting of the foresaid Declarator, but declared that if the
Petitioners had any thing in Law to represent upon the morrow thereafter,
against the oblidging them to sit at one Table, and to have the privileges of
both they would hear them: and thereafter there was an other Supplication given
in to the said Lords, by the said Surgeon Apothecaries, showing, That where
they immediately after sight of the said Lords their last deliverance upon the
foresaid Bill given by them, past that same Afternoon, which came to the
Supplicants hands late at Night: the Petitioners did their utmost endeavor to
procure meeting of their Advocats, which after all imaginable diligence they
could not obtain, in respect they were surcharged with a crude of Affairs the
penult day of the Session, and seeing there were a great many matters of Fact
coming daily to the Petitioners knowledge, whereby the inconsistency of the
separation of the two Tables of Surgery and Pharmacy during the Petitioners
lifetimes, even to former Interloquitors will unquestionably be made appear,
and which requires only the deliberat advice of their Lawyers to put in form.
It was therefore humbly craved, the said Lords would ordain the Petitioners
Advocats to Consult them therein, to the effect the said Lords might be fully
cleared in that point, being confident to assert, that neither the Pursuers nor
Physicians their assistants has or shall be, have more loyalty toward his
Majesty (some of the Petitioners being at Worchester Fight attending upon his
Person, and sequestrat for their loyalty by the Usurpers) nor has been, nor
shall be more obsequous and ready to serve the said Lords and Leidges with
their skill and pains with the Petitioners, who has given proof to the whole
Nation, how useful and necessar these Employments has been in their persons, as
the said last Supplication also extant in Process more fully bears, and which
being likeways read in presence of the said Lords, and they having heard,
seen, and considered the samen, found the desire thereof improper for them to
meddle in, and refused to give any stop upon such pretenses: and ordained the
Decree to be given out, Extractum de libris actorum per me sic Subscribitur
George Mackenie Clerk Register.

Act in Favors of the Apothecaries of Edinburgh.
AT Edinburgh, the twenty sixth day of March one thousand six hundred and
Eighty four years anent the Supplication given in, and presented to the Lords
of Council an Session, by the Apothecaries of Edinburgh: showing, that where
there being a Decree of Declarator pronounced by the Lords, separating the two
Callings of Chirurgerie and Pharmacie, and ordaining them to sit at different
Tables, and allowing the present Surgeon Apothecaries to make their Election
at which Table they will fit, under the certification, that if they did not
condescend and declare betwixt and a certain day conform to the said Decree,
to be reputed as Surgeons and to sit at their Table allanarly; and the
Petitioners in pursuance of the said Decree of Declarator, having presented a
Petition to the Town Council of Edinburgh, humbly desiring the Magistrates and
Council to nominat and appoint to them a Visiter for conveening their
Fraternity, and for trying their intrants, and that they would declare the Act
of the Town Councis of the Twenty fifth of March one Thousand six hundred and
fiftyseven, and all the privileges therein contained did now properly belong
to the Fraternity of Apothecaries, and not to the Apothecarie Surgeons, as
being declared by the said Decree to be separat and distinct Callings; the
desire of which Petition being so just, and the import and effect of the Lords
Decree of Declarator was at the first reading past nomine contradicente: but
thereafter by the importunity and influence of the Deacon of the Surgeons
was thereafter stopped; and albeit the Petitioners has by renewed applications,
earnestly desired the Magistrates and Council to grant the desire to the said
Petition, yet they are not able to prevail, such is the power and influence of
the Surgeons, The present Deacon who is a counselor, being a Surgeon
Apothecary, and in regard it is just and necessar for vindication of the Lords
own authority, to see their own just Decree and Sentences rendered effectual,
and that the separation of the two Callings of Chirurgerie and Pharmacie was
found by the Lords to be consonant to Law, and founded upon consideration of
public utility, and the good of his Majesty's Subjects, and that the said
Decree of Declarator for separating these two Callings of Pharmacy and
Surgery would be rendered Elusory and of no effect, if the Petitioners shall
not have a Visiter nominat who may conveen their Fraternity of Pharmacy, and
that it is the just import and effect of the said Decree of declarator, that
the whole privileges and immunities contained in the foresaid Act, declaring
the Apothecaries in a Fraternity, should be declared Solely to appertain and
belong to the Apothecaries, as separate and distinct from Apothecaries
Surgeons; and therefore humbly craving, that the Lords would in vindication
of their own authority, as well as the Petitioners Right, ordain the present
Magistrates and Council to nominat and appoint a Visitor, for conveening the
Fraternity of Apothecaries upon all occasions, and likeways to pass an Act
under the Town Council of Edinburghs Seal, declarseng the foresaid Act dated
the twenty fifth of March one Thousand six hundred and fifty seven, and the
privileges therein contained only to belong to the Fraternity of Apothecaries,
as being now declared by the Lords Decree, to be a separate Calling from
Surgeon Apothecaries, and that the Lords would be pleased to ordain the
Magistrates and Council to do the samen, under such certifications as the Lords
should think just, whilk Supplication and desire thereof being considered by
the said Lords, they ordained the Procurators for the Surgeon Apothecaries
to see and answer the same the next day, which being accordingly given up to
the said Procurators to see, they returned the samen with the answers
following, viz. Primo That it is strange with what confidence the Apothecaries
can trouble the Lords with such a groundless and rediculous Bill, seeing they
are not obliged Summarlie to answer upon a Bill, no man being obliged to answer
upon a Bill where there is no depending Process, except he be a Member of the
College of Justice, and that in things relating properly to his Office and
Employment; far less can any Incorporation or Community be obliged to answer
upon a Bill without there were Signet Letters raised and the persons formally
cited, and the Process came in to be called by the course of the Roll conform
the Act of Regulation, for if it were allowed there should be no use of Signet
Letters, and would overthrow the foundation of Law and form. Secundo This is
already depending before the Town Council of Edinburgh, as appears by the
Apothecaries own Bill, they having given in a Petition to the Town Council to
the same purpose, to whom it is proper to cognosce upon such differences, and
to appoint Visitors as they shall think fit, that being the Towns particular
privilege both by their Charters and by their Set, it being expressly provided
by the Set, that neither Merchants nor Crafts and their Deacons nor Visitors,
shall have or make any general or particular meeting, but by the advice of the
Magistrates and Town Council, Tertio, It is a strange piece of confidence that
the Apothecaries should desire, that the Magistrates and Town Council should be
ordained to appoint a Visitor for conveening their Fraternity, and to grant
such privileges as they shall desire, which is down right centrair to the
privileges of the Town and the Set, and to crave that that should be done
under a certification, and that without so much as calling the Magistrates, then
which there can be nothing more rediculous and absurd, and therefore seeing the
Surgeons and Surgeon Apothecaries are not obliged Summarly to answer a
Bill, and that this Process is already depending before the Town Council, to
whom it properly belongs to cognosce upon such differences, and that the
Magistrates whose privileges are principally concerned are not called, the
desire of the Bill as most groundless and absurd ought to be refused, and when
the Apothecaries shall raise any action of Declarator, they shall have an
answer: Whilk Supplication and desires thereof, and answers above written made
thereto, being at length read, heard, seen, and considered by the said Lords,
and they being therewith well and ripely advised, the Lords of Council and
Session upon the eighteen of March instant, ordained the Magistrates and Town
Council of Edinburgh to nominat and appoint a Visitor for conveening the said
Fraternity, thereafter the said Apothecaries of Edinburgh gave in an other
Supplication to the said Lords, showing that where the Petitioners having
applied to the Lords, representing that albeit they had several times
petitioned the Magistrates and Town Council of Edinburgh to nominat and appoint
a Visitor, to the effect the Apothecaries might meet and conveen for trial and
Examination of intrants and doing their other affairs, yet notwithstanding such
w s the power and influence of the Surgeons, that they could not obtain so
just a desire, and which was done of purpose that the Petitioners might be
deprived of the benefit of your Lordships Decree of Declarator, separating of
the two Callings of Pharmacie and Chyrurgerie. And therefore craving that the
Lords would ordain the Magistrates and Council of Edinburgh, to nominate a
Visitor which Petition and Answers thereto, being considered by the Lords, and
they having found the samen most just and reasonable, they did accordingly
ordain the Magistrates of Edinburgh, to nominate a Visitor betwixt and the
twenty one with Certification, that the said Lords by their own Authority,
would nominate and appoint a Visitor, and which deliverance being intimat to
the Magistrates of Edinburgh, they in place of giving of obedience thereto, have
nominate and appointed two Visitors, whereof David Pringle the present Deacon
of the Chyrurgeons is one which is in plain terms, to continue the conjunction
of the two Calling of Chyrurgerie and Pharmacie, and to render the Lords
Decree of Declarator, separating the same, Elusory and of no effect. And in
regaird such Insolent proceedings, cannot be justified as being a contempt of
the Lords Authority, to which the Magistrates and Council of Edinburgh, ought to
submit and give all obedience. And therefore humbly craving that the Lords
without further delay, would nominate and appoint a Visitor for conveening the
Fraternity of Apothecaries to meet on all occasions, and in Vindication of
their own honor and Authori y to inquire and censure such unwarrantable
proceedings, whereby notwithstaning of the Lords Decree of Declarator,
separating the two Callings of Pharmacie and Cyrurgerie, the Magistrates and
Council of Edinburgh, have presumed to nominate David Pringle present Deacon of
the Chyrurgeons to be a Visitor for the Apothecaries, and to discharge the said
David Pringle upon pretense of the said Nommiation, to accept or to act in any
such Capacity, he being by the foresaid Decree of Declarator altogether
incapable to sit and meet at the Table of the Apothecaries, but only at the
Table of the Chyrurgeons, which Supplication and desire thereof, being
considered by the said Lords, they ordained the Procurators for the Magistrates
and Town Council of Edinburgh, to see and answer the samen, which being given
up to their said Procurators to see, they returned the same with the Answers
following, viz. That it is so great insolence in the said Apothecaries to offer
to trouble the Lords with such a Bill against the Magistrates, who has been so
kind to them, as to allow them to meet, whereas without their allowance, they
could not meet nor have any Privilege at all, and yet the Magistrates have been
most ungra efully used by them, which was very unbecoming any Burgess within
the Town, far less the Apothecaries to whom the Magistrates have done so many
favors, but in answer to the Petition, It was humbly represented to the Lords.
1. That it is the undoubted Privilege of the Burgh of Edinburgh granted to
them, by the first Erection, that no person can convocat and conveen within the
Burgh, unless by the Authority and appointment of the Magistrates which was
confirmed, to them by several Charters under the great Seal, granted to them by
his Majesty's Royal Predicessors. As also it is expressly provided by the
Seventeenth Act Parliament eighteenth, King James the Sixth, that no person nor
persons, within the Burgh of whatever Rank or condition they be of, presume to
take upon hand, under whatsomever Color or Pretext, to Convocat or Assemble
themselves together at any occasion, except they make due intimation of the
lawful Cause of their Meetings to the Provost and Baillies within Burgh, and
obtain their License thereto. 2. As this is clear from the Towns Charters by
several Acts of Parliament, so it is likeways clear from the Set, and Decree
Arbitral pronounced by James his Majesty's Royal Grandfather of ever blissed
Memory, by which it is expressly provided, that neither Merchands amongst
themselves neither the Crafts and their Deacons or Visitors, shall have or make
any particular or general Conventions, as Deacon with Deacons, Deacons with
their Craft or Crafts amongst themselves far less, to make private Laws or
Statuts to Poynd and Distringie at their own hands, for transgressions without
advice and consent of the Provost, Baillies and Council, which is confirmed by
Act of Parliament, by which it is evident, that none of the Crafts can meet
among themselves, nor Deacon with Deacons, can warrantablely meet without
warrant from the Magistrates, far less can any other Persons that are none of
the Crafts meet amongst themselves without warrant from the Magistrates, who
many appoint one to Conveen and proceed among them, and disolve them at their
pleasure, and appoint a Visitor, to any that they shall allow to be in a
Fraternity as they shall think fit. 3. The Appothecaries not being any of the
Fourteen Trades, which are only allowed by the Set, nor any part of the said
Crafts, they upon Applicat on made to the Chyrurgeons in the year, 1657.
desiring to come under their Potection, and that they would interpose for them
to the Magistrates, to allow them to conveen with the Chyrurgeons, and that
there may be Visitors appointed, and to try Intrants, and accordingly the
Magistrates by an Act of Council, did appoint two Visitors, an Chyrurgeon and
Apothecarie, who with one or two of the Baillies and Dean of Gild, might visit
the sufficiency of all Drugs within the Burgh and Liberties thereof, which Act
of the Town Council, was thereafter ratified by express Act of Parliament, in
the year 1670. And be that Act of Parliament, it is provided that if any person
shall find themselves prejudged and wronged by the determination of either of
the said Incorporations and Bro^her-hood respective, contrair to the Laws,
Rights, Liberties and Privileges, and power granted to them or either of them,
that then, and in that case they shall have recourse to the Magistrates and
Council of Edinburgh, who may determine in these cases for both Parties, so
that both be the said Act of Council, and Act of Parliament Ratifying the
samen; It is evident, that the Apothecaries can have no Visitor, but such as
the Town shall appoint, that there has allways been a Chyrurgeon one of the
Visitors, and the Apothecaries having given in a Petition to the Magistrates,
Craving that they may have the Sole benefit, and Privilege of the Act of
Council in the year One Thousand Six Hundred Fifty Seven, and the Surgeons
have given in a counter Petition, that now seeing the Apothecaries do separat
themselves from them, and that the Apothecaries were none of the Fourteen
Crafts, they ought not to have any Privilege at all by the said Act of Council
in the year One thousand six hundred fifty seven, and the Magistrates that they
might do that which was just and equal to them both, they did appoint an
Apothecarie, and the Deacon of the Surgeons to be Visitors, together with a
Baillie and the Dean of Gild, with Power to the said Visitors to do every
thing as they were formerlie Empowered to do by the foresaid Act of Council in
the year One thousand six hundred fifty seven, which is Ratified by Act of
Parliament; So that it is strange with what confidence these Apothecaries can
contravert this new Act of Council made by the Magistrates, being conform to the
former Act of Council, and Act of Parliament: And whereas it is pretended that
the two Callings being now separat by Decree of the Lords, a Surgeon ought
not to be one of the Visitors to the Apothecaries. It is Answered, that it
being the Privilege of the Magistrates, that no Person can meet under the
notion of fraternities within the Burgh, unless by the Magistrates Warrant, they
upon that Ground have undoubted Right to appoint one to proceed among them, and
to be Visitors; and the Magistrates are not concerned in the Separation of the
Tables, for that cannot derogat from their Privilege, and they may appoint any
Person to proceed amongst them, albeit he were neither Apothecary nor
Surgeon, but any of the Magistrates may be appointed to Visit and proceed;
but it is likeways most necessary that an Chirurgean be appointed with an
Apothecary to be Visitors; seeing that it is as necessar to consider the
sufficiency of Drugs as well inward as outward applications; and the Deacon of
the Surgeons appointed, being an Surgeon Apothecarie, he has as good
Skill of Drugs as any of the Apothcaries, and the Magistrates may appoint any
Person to visit that has Skill of Drugs; as also, there is an express provision
in the Patent granted to the Physians that all Drugs shall be visit by one of
the Magistrates of the Town with an Apothecary and Surgeon Apothecary, and
therefore this being the undoubted privilege of the Magistrates to name
Visitors, and to appoint any person they shall think fit to conveen and proceed
amongst such Persons as they shall allow to be in a fraternity, and having
accordingly named Visitors, the Deacon of the Surgeons ought not to be
Excluded, but the Desire of such an insolent and groundle^s Bill given in
against the Magistrates by the Apothecaries who ows any Liberty they have to the
Town, ought to be refused, and they ought to rest satisfied by the Nomination
made by the Magistrates; And if it were otherways, then any Number of Persons
that pretended to be a Calling, albeit none of them, any part of the Fourteen
Trades might upon a Petition to the Lords crave a Visitor, and one to conveen
and proceed amongst them, and so in place of Fourteen Crafts might have erect a
hundred without consent of the Magistrates, which is downright contrair to the
Burghs Privileges and the Set of the Burgh, which is confirmed by Act of
Parliament; And it was never yet practiced that any Visitor, or any Person that
was appointed to proceed in a Fraternity was allowed, but such as were
appointed by the Magistrates; and this being the great Privilege of the Burgh,
which they have by the Set and Golden Charter; It is hoped the Lords will be
very tender of the good Towns Privilege, and not put them in the Balance with
the said few Apothecaries, in a matter that so much concerns the Towns
Privileges; and therefore if the least difficulty remained with the Lords,
humbly craved an hearing in their own presence; Whilk Supplication, desire
thereof, and Answers above-written made thereto being at length read, heard,
seen and considered by the said Lords; And they being therewith well and
ripely Advised, the Lords of Council and Session do pro hac vice, Nominat and
appoint, and hereby Nominats and appoints John Joisie Apothecary Burgess of
Edinburgh to be Visitor for conveening the Fraternity of Apothecaries on all
occasions, and have found, and hereby finds that in time coming the Magis^rats
of Edinburgh ought to nominat one o^ these Persons, who sit and meet at the
Table of Apothecaries, to be Visitor of the said Fraternity of Apothecaries,
Extractum de Libris actorum per me, Sic Subscribitur George Mackenie, Clericus
Registri.

Follows another Act in Favors of the Apothecaries of Edinburgh.
AT Edinburgh, the Twenty fifth day of March, One thousand six hundred eighty
five years, anent the Supplication given in, and presented before the Lords of
Council and Session, by the Apothecaries within the Burgh of Edinburgh, Showing
that whereas the Lords having by the Decree of declarator in the Petitioners
Favors upon very Rational and important Considerations Separat the two
Callings of Surgery and Pharmacy, and Ordained in time coming, the several
Trades to sit at different Tables, for making of which Decree effectual; The
Petitioners having thereafter applied to the Magistrates and Town Council of
Edinburgh for the time, that they might appoint a Visitor for conveening the
Petitioners Fraternity, which they having refused, by the influence and
importunity of the Deacons. The Lords did interpose their Authority by
Ordaining them to do the samen; and thereafter they having in an insolent
manner given in a sort of a mock Obedience to the Lords Sentence by nominating
a Surgeon and an Apothecary to be joint Visitors of the Petitioners
Fraternity, which was in effect a new Conjunction by their own Authority o^ the
two Trades, which the Lords by so solemn a Decree has Separat, upon which high
and insolent contempt of the Lords Sentences; the Petitioners having thereafter
presented a new Petition, Complaining of their said deportment, the Lords were
pleased, after both the Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries, and the Town of Edinb^rgh
their Procurators had given in Answers to the several Petitions, containing a
full representation of all their Grounds, and finding that the Town of
Edinburgh refused to give any obedience to supply the samen, by interposing the
Lords Authority in vindication of their reiterated Acts and Sentences, and did
appoint John Joissie to be sole Visitor, for conveening the Fraternity of
Apothecaries on all occasions for that year; and did find, that in time-coming
the Magistrates of Edinburgh ought to nominate one of these persons who sits at
the Table of Apothecaries Visitor of the Fraternity, And now the Petitioners
having applied to the present Magistrates for nominating a Visitor for this
ensuing year, conform to the Lords former Ordinance, being one of these that
sits at the Petitioners own Table, and to that effect, having given in a List
of such persons, to the effect they might make a choice, they were so far from
having any regard to the said Lords Sentences and Acts abovementioned,
whereby the Trades were separate, and they appointed to nominat a Visitor of
the Petitioners own Faternity, which were all given in to the Clerk, and
produced before them in Council, that in manifest contempt thereof, by a
previous Combination of the Deacons and Tradesmen, who influences the rest of
the Council, they have again proceeded for this ensuing year, to nominat a
Chyrurgeon and an Apothecary, to be joint Visitors of the Petitioners
Fraternity, and an intrant Apothecary having applied for a Trial, they have
recommended him to the said Visitors, which they always formerly refused; and
likewise they refuse to give the Petitioners out an extract of their said
Nomination, of purpose to protract this Session, that the Petitioners may not
have occasion to seek redress from the Lords: And seeing they have no other
remeid, but now to apply to the Lords, for vindication of their said
Privileges, and likewise of the Lords own Authority, against so frequent and
reiterated acts of Contempt and Disobedience; and therefore humbly craving,
that the Lords would be pleased as formerly, so far this ensuing year; to
nominat one of these who sit at the Petitioners own Table, to be their Visitor,
out of a List herewith given in or else to prevent the Lords trouble in all
time-coming, to allow the Petitioners themselves to meet and choice yearly
their own Visitor, and to admit of Intrants by the Petitioners own Authority,
seeing the Town of Edinburgh have so frequently refused the same, as the said
Supplication bears; which being Considered by the said Lords, they Ordained
the Procurators for the Magistrates and Town-Council of the said Burgh, to see
the said Supplication, and to answer the same upon Tuesday next thereafter;
which being accordingly given up to the said Prucurators to see, they returned
the samen with the Answers following, viz. That it is strange with what
confidence the Apothecaries can give the Lords the trouble by such an
groundless and insolent Bill, which does so highly reflect upon the Magistrates,
and it does evidently appear, that it seems they would state themselves in an
Incorporation, without owning their privilege or dependence from the
Magistrates, which is a down right Incroachment upon the Privileges of the
City, that any that enjoys their Trade and Calling within the Good-Town, and
are Burgesses, should treat the Magistrates at that rate that these Apothecaries
does, whereas they had never so much as an allowance, nor could not meet on
their pretended Fraternity, unless it had been by the Magistrates tollerance; so
that it is most improper for them to call the Towns Privileges in question.
Therefore it is Answered to the Petition, 1. That whatever Acts or Decreets
they may pretend to have in their favors, separating the two Callings of
Chyrurgery and Pharmacy, and appointing distinct Tables, the Magistrates were
not concerned in these Decreets, they not being called thereto, and so was res
inter alios acta as to them; and whatever these Acts or Decreets may take
amongst themselves, yet that can never prejudge the Privileges of the
Good-Town. 2. By the Set, which is the fundamental Constitution of the Burgh,
and by many Laws and Acts of Parliament, it is expressly provided, That there
shall be made no Meetings within Burgh, of any Society or Fraternity, but by
the Warrant and Authority of the Magistrates: And if these Apothecaries, who
pretend to a Fraternity, cannot so much as meet and conveen without License
from the Magistrates, far more has the Magistrates Power to name who shall proceed
amongst them, or Visitors who shall visit the Drugs in the Apothecaries Shops,
and appoint the method and way and manner thereof within the said Burgh. 3. It
is clear by the Patent granted to the Physicians, that the Drugs are to be
visited by an Chyrurgeon-Apothecary and an Apothecary, so that the Magistrates
and Town-Council having named Visitors, conform to the Physicians Patent under
the Great-Seal, the samen can never be questioned as being done contrary to the
pretended Privileges, but what the Good-Town is pleased to allow them. 4. It
is clear by several Acts of his Majesty's privy Council, one in November and
another in January last, posterior to all these foresaid Acts and Decreets
which the Apothecaries founded upon, whereby it is expressly ordained, that the
Drugs should be visited conform to the Physicians Patent, and consequently it
ought to be done by an Chyrurgeon-Apothecary and an Apothecary, as is provided
by the said Patent: And albeit the last Act of Council mentions two
Apothecaries to be present, yet that can only be understood in the terms of the
Patent, seeing that Act ordains expressly that the Visitation shall be made
conform to the Patent. And seeing that by the Decree separating the two
Callings, it is expressly provided that the Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries that was
then in exercise of both Callings, should continue in exercise of the samen
during their lifetimes, and that the Magistrates and Town-Council has appointed
an Chyrurgeon-Apothecary, who by the said Decree has the liberty and freedom
of exercising both Callings to be joined with an Apothecary for visiting the
Drugs, the said Nomination so deliberatly done by the Town-Council ought to be
sustained; and it is humbly expected of the Lords Justice, that they would be
tender of the Privileges of the Good-Town, and not to take from them that
which is their greatest Privilege, which they enjoy by the Set, and their
ancient Rights, and Golden-Charter, granted to them by the Kings Majesty's
Royal Predecessors, That no Society or Fraternity shall be allowed to meet
within Burgh, but whom the Magistrates and Town-Council should allow; and that
none shall proceed or conveen the said Fraternity, nor be appointed Visitors,
but whom the Magistrates and Town-Council shall think fit: For if it should be
otherways sustained, it would tend directly to overturn the fundamental and
ancient Privileges of the Burgh, and therefore the desire of the Bill, as
being most groundless and insolent and impertinent ought to be refused. Which
Supplication, and desire thereof, and Answers above-written made thereto, being
all at length read, heard, seen and considered by the said Lords. The Lords of
Council and Session, in regard of the said Magistrates and Town-Council their
irregular Nomination of Visitors, contrair to the said Lords their former Act,
Do as of before, pro hace vice, Nominat and Appoint, and hereby Nominats and
Appoints John Fowlis Apothecary to be Visitor for Conveening the Fraternity of
Apothecaries upon all occasions: And have found, and hereby finds, that the
Magistrates in time-coming ought to nominat one of these persons who sit and
meet at the Table of Apothecaries, to be Visitor of the said Fraternity.
Extractum de libris Actorum, per me, Sic subscribitur, Geo: Mackenie, Cler.
Registr.

Follows the Ratification in favors of the Apothecaries of Edinburgh. At
Edinburgh, the sixteenth day of June, one thousand six hundred eighty and five
years.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament:
Ratifies, Approves, and perpetually Confirms to and in favors of the
Fraternity of Apothecaries within the Burgh of Edinburgh, all Liberties,
Privileges, Immunities, Seals of Cause, or others whatsomever conceived in
their favors, or granted to them at any time whatsomever, either by his
Majesty, or the Good-Town of Edinburgh: And likewise, all Decreets, Acts,
Sentences in their favors, either of his Majesty's privy Council, Lords of the
Session, or any other Judicatory within this Kingdom, which are relative to
their said Privilidges, and specially but prejudice of the generality of an
Decree of Declarator before the Lords, dated the twenty fourth day of March
one thousand six hundred and eighty two years: Declaring, That the Employments
of Chyrurgery and Pharmacy are distinct, and that the samen should not be
exercised by one person within the City of Edinburgh and Liberties thereof, and
all other Heads, Articles and Interloquitors conceived in their favors
contained in the said Decree; And likewise, two several Acts of the Lords of
Session, one dated the twenty sixth day of March one thousand six hundred and
eighty four years, and the other the twenty fifth day of March one thousand six
hundred and eighty five years, whereby the said Lords, upon the Town of
Edinburghs refusal, did themselves nominat one who sits at the Table of the
Apothecaries to be Visitor to their Fraternity, and likewise found, that the
Magistrates of Edinburgh ought in all time-coming to nominat such a person to be
their Visitor. Extracted forth of the Records of Parliament, by George Viscount
of Tarbat, Lord Mackleod and Castlehaven, Clerk to his Majesty's Parliament,
Council, Registers and Rolls, etc. Sic subscribitur, TARBAT, Cler. Registr.

ACT in Favors of the Fraternity of the Apothecaries of Edinburgh.
AT Edinburgh the ninth Day of March, one thousand six hundred and eighty six
years, anent the Supplication given in and presented to the Lords of Council
and Session by the Fraternity of Apothecaries within the Burgh of Edinburgh,
Showing, that where the said Lords by the Decree of Declarator in the
Petitioners favors upon very Rational and Important Considerations, separate
the two Callings of Surgery and Pharmacy, and ordained in time coming the
said two Trades to sit at different Tables, for making which Decree
effectual, the Petitioners having thereafter applied to the Magistrates and
Town-Council of Edinburgh, for the time that they might appoint a Visitor for
conveening the Petitioners Fraternity, which they having then refused, the
said Lords did interpone their Authority by ordaining them to do the same, and
thereafter they having in an insolent manner, to elude the said Lords
Sentence, nominate an Chyrurgeon and an Apothecary to be joint Visitors of the
said Petitioners Fraternity, upon which the Petitioners did present a new
Petition complaining of the said Deportment, the said Lords were pleased upon
Consideration of the Bill and Answers, whereby it appeared that the Town of
Edinburgh did refuse to give any Obedience to interpose their own Authority by
appointing John Joissie to be sole Visitor for conveening the Fraternity of the
Appothecaries for that year on all Occasions, and did find by their
Interloquitor that in time coming, the Magistrates of Edinburgh ought to
nominate on of these Persons who sit at the Table of Appothecaries Visitor of
the Fraternity, and notwithstanding of which Nomination and Deliverance in the
Petitioners Favors, they having for the next ensuing year again applied to the
Magistrates and Town-Council that they would nominat a Visitor of their own
Fraternity, and having for that effect given in a List of several Persons of
their own number that they might choice, they had so little regard to the said
Lords their former Ordination, that for that year they did again proceed in
manifest contempt and Derision of the said Lords Authority to nominat an
Surgeon and an Apothecary to be joint Visitors of the Petitioners Fraternity
which the said Lords at the end of the last Session did so far resent, that
upon a new Petition given in by the Petitioners, representing, that the said
procedure did Nominat and appoint John Fowlis Apothecary to be Visitor for that
year, and found by their Interloquitor, that in all time coming, the Magistrates
ought to nominate one who sits at the Apothecaries Table to be Visitor of the
Fraternity, and that the Nominations made by the Magistrates at that time were
irregular, as the several Acts therewith produced will testify; and likewise in
farther Testimony of the said Lords Displeasure, they did call in the Town
Assessors for the time, and did publicly censure them for giving such
unreasonable Advice in Contempt of the said Lords Sentences, and although the
Petitioners might now have expected that the Lords so frequent reiterated
Ordinances would have met with very punctual Obedience, yet now the third time
they have proceeded to that pitch of Contempt and Disobedience to the said
Lords their Authority, that the Petitioners having applied for a Visitor for
this ensuing year, and conform to the said Lords their Decree and Ordinances,
and having given in a list for that effect, they have conform to their former
Custom again proceeded to Nominate an Apothecary and Surgeon to be Visitors
of the Petitioners Fraternity, which to the high and manifest contempt of the
said Lords Authority, that though the Petitioners should be silent the said
Lords are concerned to vindicate the same, and to fall upon some expedient for
the Future for making the said Lords Decreets in the Petitioners Favors
effectual, and preventing such Encroachments upon the Petitioners privileges,
that it may not be in the power of the Town of Edinburgh to reunite these two
Trades which the said Lords has separat by so solemn a Decree which is all
upon the matter as to assume to themselves the power of reducing the said
Lords Sentences; and therefore humbly craving that the said Lords would be
pleased as they did for these two years preceding to nominat pro hac vice one
of the Petitioners own Fraternity conform to a Bill given in; And likewise
seeing that every year the said Lords met with this trouble, and the Magistrates
seem to be obstinate in their Disobedience to the said Lords Decree, that
therefore the said Lords in time coming for preventing such trouble, would
allow the Petitioners to choice their own Visitor in all time comeing, as in
the said Supplication is at more length contained, whilk Supplication and
desire thereof being considered by the said Lords, they ordained the
Magistrates of Edinburgh their Procurators to see the Petition and to answer
there to against the next day thereafter peremptory; And the said Magistrates
of Edinburgh their Procurators having failied to give in Answers to the said
Petition, the said Lords in respect thereof granted warrant to Macers to cite
the Magistrates of Edinburgh to compear and answer to the Petiton above-written,
upon Tuesday next being the day and date of their presents, and appointed them
this day to produee the Act mentioned in the foresaid Petition, whereby they
did Nominat an Apothecary and a Chyrurgeon Visitors of the Fraternity of
Appothecaries for this year by virtue whereof, upon the eight day of March
instant, William Maxwell one of the Macers before the Lords lawfully Cited the
Provost, Baillies, Dean of Gild, and Thesaurer of the said Burgh of Edinburgh,
present Magistrates thereof, to Compear before the said Lords this day,
bringing with them the foresaid Act, in obedience whereunto compeared the said
Magistrates of Edinburgh, in presence of the said Lords by Sir John Lauder
Advocat their Procurator, who for them produced two Acts of Council, the one
whereof is dated the twenty sixth day of February last by past, whereby the
said Magistrates of Edinburgh Elected and choised John Joisie Apothecary to be
Visitor for this ensuing year, for conveening of the said Fraternity of
Apothecaries upon all occasions, and the other of the said Acts dated the
third day of March instant, whereby the said Magistrates upon a Petition given
in by the Surgeon Apothecaries of the said Burgh, appointed David Pringle,
Surgeon Apothecary to be Visitor for the Surgeon Apothecaries for this
ensuing year, providing it be agreeable to the Lords Decree, and Acts made
anent the Apothecaries and Chirugreon Apotheciares; and the Patent granted by
his Majesty to the College of Physicians and no otherways, as the said two
Acts bears, which Supplication and desire thereof, with the foresaids two Acts
produced by the Magistrates of Edinburgh, in obedience to the said Lords their
Ordinance above-exprest, by the first of which they did nominat John Joisie
Visitor, and by the last David Pringle Surgeon Apothecarie, Visitors for the
Surgeon Apothecaries, being all at length heard, seen and considered by the
said Lords, and they therewith being well and reaply advised; The said Lords
have found, and hereby finds the last Nomination of David Pringle to be void
and null, and declares the samen to bear no Faith in Judgment, nor out with
the same in time coming, and have appointed, and hereby appoints John Joisie to
be sole Visitor for conveening the Fraternity of Apothecaries this year at all
Occasions, and the said Lords declare that if the Magistrates and Town Council
of Edinburgh, shall at any time hereafter contraveen the former Act by nameing
a Surgeon Apothecary Visitor for the Fraternity of the said Apothecaries
yearly, they will allow the said Apothecaries to name their own Visitor in all
time coming. Extractum ex Libro actorum per me, Sic Subscribitur. TARBAT. Clk.

One other Act in Favors of the Fraternity of the Apothecaries of Edinburgh.
AT Edinburgh, the Thirty day of June, One thousand six hundred and eighty
seven years, anent the Petition given in, and presented to the Lords of Council
and Session by the Fraternity of Apothecaries within the Burgh of Edinburgh,
showing that whereas the Lords after the Decree of Separation of the two
Callings of Pharmacy and Surgery did appoint them to sit at different
Tables, and likeways did appoint the Town of Edinburgh, by several Acts and
Deliverances to nominat one of their Fraternity to be Visitor o^ the Calling,
and the Town being so influenced by the Surgeon Apothecaries who are one of
the Trades, as always to Nominat one of their own Number to be their Visitor in
manifest contempt of the Lords frequent and reiterated Acts, which the Lords
did find so unreasonable, and inconsistent with the ends of the S^paration,
that now for th^se five or six years last by past, when the Town did nominat an
Surgeon Apothecarie to be Visitor, the Lords did most justly Rescind the
said Nomination, and every year since the said Separation in respect of their
contumacy and disobedience did nominat one of the Petitioners number to be
Visitors, and by an Act in the Petitioners Favors, in March, One thousand six
hundred and eighty six years, the Lords did not only Rescind the Nomination of
David Pringle, and did nominat John Joisie in his place who is a simple
Apothecarie to be Visitor of the Fraternity for the then ensuing year, but
likeways declared that if the Magistrates and Town Council of Edinburgh, should
at any time thereafter nominat an Surgeon Apothecary to be the Petitioners
Visitor, that they would devolve upon the Petitioners themselves, the
Nomination in all time coming of their own Visitor; And likeways the
Petitioners having applied to the Lords in December last, upon the Illegal
Nomination of John Baillie, and Mr. James Mackmath, the Town of Edinburgh, and
the Surgeon Apothecaries did give in an Answer founded upon an Patent from
His Majesty in their Favors, taking off the said Decree of Separation and
reuniting the Trades, and the Lords by their Deliverance after they were three
or four times Ordained to produce the said Patent, did at length in respect of
their refuseal to produce the samen Discharge the two Persons then Nominat to
Officiat, and did appoint John Joisie to conveen who was formerly Nominat by
the Lords until the expiring of the year for which he was Nominat, and now the
year being elapsed, and the Petitioners having again applied to the Town
Council, and gave in a List of these of the Petitioners Fraternity, the
Magistrates by their Deliverance, have not only refused the Desire of the Bill,
in respect of the Patent granted in Favors of the Surgeon Apothecaries, but
have appointed the two persons whom the Lords formerly discharged to Officiat,
to be again received, viz. John Baillie, and Mr. James Mackmath. And therefore
humbly craving, that seeing the Lords by their Deliverance in March one thousand
six hundred and eighty six years, declared, if the Town-Council would proceed
to nominat an Chyrurgeon-Apothecary to be the Petitioners Visitor in
time-coming, the Lords would allow the Petitioners to nominat their own
Visitor; and likewise they have refused to produce their Patent to the Lords in
December last, though they founded their Answers thereupon to the Petitioners
Petition, that therefore the Lords would be pleased upon the Considerations
foresaid, in the first place to discharge John Baillie, and Mr. James Mackmath
to Officiat in the said Office, as the said Lords did formerly in December
last, and to Nominat one of the Petitioners number, according to the List given
in, or to free the Lords of this perpetual trouble, that the Lords would allow
the Petitioners the Nomination of their own Visitor in all time-coming, as the
said Lords declared by their Deliverance in March one thousand six hundred and
eighty six years. Whilk Petition and desire thereof, being read in Audience of
the said Lords, and they being therewith well and (...) ^^vised: The Lords of
Council and Session, have discharged, and hereby discharges (...) ^^^sons
Nominat Visitors by the Town-Council of Edinburgh to Officiat, and have
Nom^^^^^^ and Appointed, and hereby Nominats and Appoints Hugh Neilson to be
Visitor of the (...) ^^^ternity of the Apothecaries for this year. Extractum ex
libro actorum, per me, sic subsc^^bitur. Al Gibson.

One other Act in Favors of the Fraternity of Apothecaries of Edinburgh.
AT Edinburgh, the Ninteen day of July, 1683, years, Anent the Petition given
in, and presented to the Lords of Council and Session, be the Fraternity of the
Apothecaries within the Burgh of Edinburgh. Showing that whereas the Lords
having by their Decree several years ago, upon very rational and Important
Grounds, separat the two Callings of Pharmacy and Chyrurgerie, and for making
the said Separation effectual, did appoint them to Sit at two different Tables,
and the Lords having afterward appointed the Town of Edinburgh, by several
Acts and diliverances to nominat, one of their Fraternity to be Visitor of the
Calling, and the Town having always complied with the Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries,
who are one of their Trads, to nominat one of their Number to be Visitors to
the Apothecaries, which the Lord did find so unreasonable, and Inconsistent
with the ends of the separation, that now for these four years by past, when
they did nominat an Chyrurgeon-Apothecarie, the Lords did most justly rescind
the said Nomination, and in respect of their Contimacie and disobedience, did
themselves nominat, ane simple Apothecarie for these several years by past, and
did so far resent the disobedience that in March, 1685, years, Sir Patrick Hume
the Towns Assessor, for the time was called in before the Lords, and publicly
rebuked, for giving the Town so unreasonable an advice, and particularly in
March, 1686, years, the Lords by their Act in the Apothecaries favors, which
is produced in Process, sand that the Nomination of David Pringle a
Chyrurgeon-Apothecarie, was void and null, and in his place appoint John Joisie
a simple Apothecarie, to be sole Visitor for that year, and farther declared,
that if the Magistrates and Town Council of Edinburgh, should at an time
thereafter nominate ane Chyrurgeon-Apothecarie to be Visitor of the
Apothecaries Fraternity, that the Lords would allow the Petitioners, to name
their own Visitor in all time coming, likeas the Town Council of Edinburgh,
having in December, 1686, years, upon pretense of a Patent lately obtained from
his Majesty, in favors of the Chyrurgeons-Apothecaries, taken upon them to
Nominat a Visitor to the Petitioners Fraternity, notwithstanding that John
Joisie, was at the time Visitor be the Lords own appointment, and that this
year was not expired, the Lords were pleased by their Interloquitor upon the
eighteen of December, the said year to Discharge the Visitor, appointed be the
Town Council, and to continue the said John Joisie Visitor of the Petitioners
Fraternity, until the expiring of the year, for which he was nominat by the
Lords. And farther in Anno 1687, the Petitioners did apply to the Town Council,
to nominat a Visitor which they having delayed, the Petitioners were necessitat
again to mean themselves to the Lords, and after hearing all the answers given
in by the Town Council, the Lords did appoint Hugh Nilson to be Visitor for
that year, as is evident by the Act produced in Process, and now the Petitioners
having again applied to the Magistrates and Town Council, to appoint a Visitor
to the Petitioners Fraternity for this year, they have after their usual manner
delayed to give any answer, and since the Petitioners have no otherways of
Redress, against so frequent and reiterated Acts of contempt, and disobedience
to the Lords Authority, and encroachments upon just Privileges, but to make a
new Complaint and Representation of the said abuses, and therefore humbly
Craving the Lords would consider the former Acts for these several years by
past, and particularly that in March, 1686, whereby the Lords nominate John
Joisie for that year, and declaired that if the Town did nominat in any time
thereafter a Chyrurgeon-Apothecarie, that the Lords would allow the Petitioners
to choice and nominat their own Visitor, as the last Act in June, 1687.
appointing Hugh Neilson to be Visitor for that year ensueing, and to save the
Lords from all further trouble, to declair that in all time coming, that the
Petitioners shall have liberty to Choice, and nominat their own Visitor, as in
the said Petition at more length, is conteained whilk Petition being Read in
Audience of the said Lords, they ordained the Procurators of the Town of
Edinburgh, to see the said Petition, and answer the same the next day
peremptory, according whereinto the Procurators of the said Town of Edinburgh,
having got up the Petition to see, they reproduced the samen, and gave in the
answers (...) as follows, viz. It is answered that their being a Petition given
in to the Town ^^^^cil of Edinburgh, by the simple Apothecaries, the beginning
of this Month of July, ^^ving that the Magistrates would nominat one of their
Number, to be Visitor for this en^^eing year, the Town Council of Edinburgh,
did most warrantably and Moderatly carry ^^erein, by ordaining the
Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries, to see and answer the foresaid Petition, ^ut before
their answers could be given, or the Magistrates could meddle with it, the
Conven^^on of Burrows, and the Lord Provost his going to Court so Interveened,
that the Town Council could give no answer to the foresaid Petition, while that
now after mature deliberation, and taking his Majesty's Royal Gift, restoring
the Chyrurgeon-Apothecaries to their former Privileges, notwithstanding of ane
previous Decree of Separation, with a Letter from the Secretary of State,
direct to the Lord High Chancellor, bearing his Majesty's Inclinations, that
his Lordship and the President of the Session, should consider both Patents,
Decreets of Separation, and all other differences betwixt the Physicians,
Chyrurgeons-Apothecaries, and simple Apothecaries, that the same Might be
reported to his sacred Majesty, and the determination might be made by his
Majesty, as might end these Debats betwixt them, and in the mean time Stopping
all Process relating thereunto, until his Majesty's further pleasure should be
known therein, they have upon such unquarrellable grounds, and his sacred
Majesty's Pleasure and Command so often repeated to them, declared that they
can do no Deed prejudicial thereto, until the will of the said Letter be
fulfilled, or the new Gift in favors of the Chyrurgeon Apothecaries be
reduced, as the Double of the said Letter from the Secretary of State direct to
the Lord High Chancellor, with the double of the simple Apothecaries Petition
to the Town Council of Edinburgh, and their Deliverance on the back thereof
produced testified; by all which it appears that the Magistrates of Edinburgh
have not been in mora, as is falsely suggested, but they as all their
Predecessors have still given ready Obedience to his Majesty's Commands, and
did not think it fit after so full and ample a Gift to such a distinct and
clear Letter, to meddle with either Parties therein, but the Truth is, this
Affair is managed by a Company of some headstrong People, who make it their
Business to creat^ Division, and make Parties in all the Societies and
Incorporations of the Town, and who being sworn Burgesses thereto, for which
calumnious Petitions as they have given in these several years bygone against
the Magistrates of Edinburgh their Patrons, they ought not only to be severly
punished therefore, but in all time coming be discharged to give in such
Petitions, or at least while the Lords gave their final Sentence in the whole
matter as his Majesty requires, otherways this may be an encouragement to the
meanest Inhabitant of the Town to misrepresent the Magistrates, who are acting
and doing nothing but by his Majesty's Command, especially seeing the whole
Affair is managed but by two or three discontented Apothecaries, the major part
refusing to comply therein, as the said Answers bears, which Petition and
Answers made thereto being all at length heard, read, seen and considered by
the said Lords, and the Copy of the Secretaries Letter given in theirwith, and
they therewith being well and ripely advised. The Lords of Council and Session
have Nominat and Appointed, and thereby nominats and appoints John Joisie
simple Apothecary, Visitor to the Fraternity of Apothecaries for that ensuing
year. Extractum de libro actorum per me, Sic subscribitur Al. Gibson.


