HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

ANNO REGNI CAROLI REGIS ANGLIAE, SCOTIAE, FRANCIAE, and HIBERNIAE, DECIMO
SEPTIMO.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster the third day of November, Anno Dom.
1640.

In the 16. year of the Reign of our most gracious Sovereign Lord, CHARLE^, by
the grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland King, Defender of
the Faith, etc.

LONDON, ^rinted by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL.

1641.

Cum Privilegio



HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT
ANNO XVII. Caroli Regis.
An Act for the securing of such Moneys as are or shall be due to the
Inhabitants of the County of York, and the other adjoining Counties, wherein
His Majesty's Army is or has been Billetted, for the Billet of the Soldiers
of the said Army; as also to certain officers of the said Army who do forbear
part of their pay, according to an Order in that behalf made in the Commons
House of Parliament this present Session, for such part of their pay as they
shall so forbear.
FOrasmuch as diverse of the Inhabitants of the several Counties of York,
Lincoln, Nottingham, and other adjoining Counties in the several places where
His Majesty's Army is, and has been Quartered and Billetted for His Majesty's
Service, have at their great charges, and to their much impoverishment kept and
maintained the said Army for certain Months by past, without any payment or
satisfaction for the same: And whereas they the said Inhabitants of the said
several Counties have been desired, and are contented to forbear the Moneys
due, and to be due to them respectively, for the said Billet, until the Month
of November next, (if there be not means to pay and discharge the same in the
mean time) And whereas diverse of the Officers of the said Army are likewise
contented to forbear some part of their Pay, according to an Order in that
behalf made in the Commons House of Parliament this present Session, until the
time aforesaid.

To the end therefore that both the said Inhabitants, and the said Officers may
be secured for the true payment of the said Moneys accordingly, and to avoid or
decide all differences and controversies which might arise, upon the several
accounts between the said Inhabitants and the Soldiers, for the certainty of
the said Billet Money: May it please Your most Excellent Majesty, that it may
be Enacted; And be it enacted by Your most Excellent Majesty, the Lords and
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by authority of the same,
that all and every the sum or sums of Money which now are, or before the time
of payment of the said Billet Money, shall appear to be due, and owing either
to the said Inhabitants or any of them, for the Billet of the said Army, or
any part thereof, or to any of the said Officers, according to the said Order
shall upon the tenth day of November next coming, or sooner, if there be means
to do it, be well and truly paid, and discharged to the several persons to
whom the same are or shall be due respectively, out of the Moneys which shall
be raised by virtue of an Act made in this present Session of Parliament,
entitled, An Act for the speedy provision of Money for the disbanding the
Armies, and settling the Peace of the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland; by
the Treasurers, or persons appointed by that Act for the receipt of the Moneys
so to be raised, or by such other ways and means as the House of Commons shall
think fit and appoint, in manner and form following; That is to say, That the
persons appointed by the said Act for the receipt of such part of the said
Moneys, as is by virtue thereof payable at the Chamber in the City of York,
shall out of the same, at, or in the said Chamber, upon the said tenth day of
November (or sooner, if there be means to do it) well and truly pay unto the
hands of Sir William Lister, Sir Gervase Cutler, Sir Arthur Ingram the younger,
and Sir John Ramsden, Knights, John Kay, and Peter Jennings, Esquires, or to
any two, or more of them, all such Moneys as are or shall be due, as aforesaid,
to the several Inhabitants of the West Riding of the said County of York
respectively, for the said Billet Money: To the hands of Sir Marmaduke Wyvell,
Knight and Baronet, Sir Richard Darley, Knight, Bryan Stapleton, John
Calverley, Henry Anderson, John Dodsworth the younger, James Pennyman, William
Calye, and Francis Lassells Esquires, or to any two or more of them, all such
Moneys as are or shall be due, as aforesaid, to the several Inhabitants of the
North Riding of the said County of York, and of such places within the County
of Durham, where any of His Majesty's said Army is, or has been Quartered or
Billetted respectively, for the Billet of the said Soldiers. To the hands of
John Legard of Gaunton, Richard Remington, Christopher Appleyard, Francis
Munckton, and Edward Paler Esquires, or to any two or more of them, all such
Moneys as are or shall be due, as aforesaid, to the several Inhabitants of the
East Riding of the said County of York respectively, for the said Billet-Money.
To the hands of Lancelot Roper, James Watkinson, and Nicholas Denman Gentlemen,
or to any two of them, all such Moneys as are or shall be due, as aforesaid, to
the several Inhabitants of the Town and County of Kingston upon Hull
respectively, for the Billet of the said soldiers. To the hands of Sir William
Fairfaxe, and Sir Thomas Harrison Knights, John Geldart Merchant, and Robert
Knight Grocer, or to any three of them, all such Moneys as are or shall be due,
as aforesaid, to the several Inhabitants of the said City of York, and County
of the same respectively, for the said Billet-Money. To the hands of Sir
William Pelham Knight, Willoughbie Hickman, Charles Pelham, and Thomas
Sanderson Esquires, or any two or more of them, all such Moneys as are or shall
be due, as aforesaid, to the several Inhabitants of the said County of Lincoln
respectively for the said Billet-Money. And to the hands of John Nevile,
An^hony Air, William Moseley, and William Sanderson Esquires, or to any two or
more of them, all such Moneys as are or shall be due, as aforesaid, to the
several Inhabitants of the County of Nottingham respectively, for the said
Billet-Money. And that the said Moneys so to be paid, and every part thereof,
shall be paid according to the Certificate for so much as is already certainly
certified, and for the residue after the rate of three shillings by the week
for every Common foot Soldier, as shall appear due by a Certificate to be
taken upon the Disbanding, unless where it shall appear that there has been
some express agreement for an otherrate; and for the Horsemen after the rate of
seven shillings and six pence by the week for every common Soldier and his
Horse, unless where it shall appear that there has been express agreement
for another rate: And for the Officers both of Horse and Foot, such rates as
shall be set down by the Lord General of the Army, and the Lord Lieutenant of
the County of York.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Acquittances of
so many, and such of the said persons above named, for the receipt of the said
Moneys due to the said several Inhabitants of the several Counties and places
above mentioned, as shall receive the same despectively, as aforesaid, shall be
sufficient discharges to, and for the said persons from whom they shall so
receive the same by virtue of this Act, for such several sums of Money as they
shall so receive respectively.

And be it likewise further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
persons, who shall by virtue of the said recited Act receive such part of the
said Moneys as is thereby payable at or in the Chamberlains Office in Guildhall
within the City of London, shall out of the same, at or in the said
Chamberlains Office, upon the said tenth day of November (or sooner, if there
be means to do it) pay to the hands of Sir William Vuedall Knight, Treasurer of
His Majesty's said Army, all such Moneys as are or shall be due, as aforesaid,
to the several Officers of the said Army, who shall forbear the same according
to the Order above mentioned; And that the Acquittances of the said Sir William
Vuedall shall be a sufficient discharge for what he shall so receive.

ANNO XVII. Caroli Regis.
An Act for the declaring unlawful and void the late proceedings touching
Ship Money, and for the vacating of all Records and Process concerning the
same.
WHereas diverse Writs of late time, issued under the great Seal of England,
commonly called Shipwrits, for the charging of the Ports, Towns, Cities,
Boroughs, and Counties of this Realm respectively, to provide and furnish
certain Ships for His Majesty's service: And whereas upon the execution of the
same Writs, and Returns of Certioraries thereupon made, and the sending the
same by Mittimus into the Court of Exchequer, Process has been thence made
against sundry persons pretended to be charged by way of Contribution, for the
making up of certain sums assessed for the providing of the said Ships, and in
especial in Easter Term, in the thirteenth year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord the King that now is, a Writ of Scire facias was awarded out of the Court
of Exchequer, to the then Sheriff of Buckingham-shire, against John Hampden
Esquire to appear and show cause, why he should not be charged with a certain
sum so assessed upon him, upon whose appearance and demurrer to the proceedings
therein, the Barons of the Exchequer adjourned the same case into the
Exchequer-chamber, where it was solemnly argued diverse days, and at length it
was there agreed by the greater part of all the Justices of the Courts of Kings
Bench, and Common Pleas, and of the Barons of the Exchequer there assembled,
that the said John Hampden should be charged with the said sum so as aforesaid
assessed on him; The main grounds and reasons of the said Justices and Barons
which so agreed, being that when the good and safety of the Kingdom in general
is concerned, and the whole Kingdom in danger, the King might by Writ under the
Great Seal of England, command all the Subjects of this his Kingdom, at their
charge to provide and furnish such number of Ships with Men, Victuals, and
Munition, and for such time as the King should think sit, for the defense and
safeguard of the Kingdom, from such danger and peril, and that by Law the King
might compel the doing thereof, in case of refusal, or refractarinesse, and
that the King is the sole Judge both of the danger, and when, and how the same
is to be prevented, and avoided, according to which grounds, and reasons all
the Justices of the said Courts of Kings Bench, and Common Pleas, and the said
Barons of the Exchequer having been formerly consulted with by His Majesty's
command, had set their hands to an extrajudiciall opinion expressed to the same
purpose, which opinion with their names thereunto was also by His Majesty's
command enrolled in the Courts of Chancery, Kings Bench, Common Pleas, and
Exchequer, and likewise entered among the Remembrances of the Court of
Star Chamber, and according to the said agreement of the said Justices, and
Barons, Judgment was given by the Barons of the Exchequer, That the said John
Hampden should be charged with the said sum so assessed on him; And whereas
some other Actions and Process, depend, and have depended in the said Court of
Exchequer, and in some other Courts against other persons, for the like kind
of charge, grounded upon the said Writs, commonly called Shipwrits, all which
Writs, and proceedings as aforesaid, were utterly against the Law of the Land:

Be it therefore declared and Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and
the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, That the said charge imposed upon the Subject, for the
providing and furnishing of Ships, commonly called Shipmoney, and the said
extrajudiciall opinion of the said Justices and Barons, and the said Writs, and
every of them, and the said agreement or opinion of the greater part of the
said Justices and Barons, and the said Judgment given against the said John
Hampden were, and are contrary to, and against the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm, the right of property, the liberty of the Subjects, former resolutions
in Parliament, and the Petition of right made in the third year of the Reign of
His Majesty that now is.

And it is further declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all
and every the particulars prayed or desired in the said Petition of right,
shall from henceforth be put in execution accordingly, and shall be firmly and
strictly holden and observed, as in the same Petition they are prayed and
expressed, and that all and every the Records and remembrances of all and every
the Judgment, Inrolments, Entry and proceedings, as aforesaid, and all and
every the proceedings whatsoever, upon, or by pretext or color of any of the
said Writs, commonly called Ship writs, and all and every the Dependents on any
of them, shall be Deemed and Adjudged to all intents, constructions, and
purposes, to be utterly void and disannulled, and that all and every the said
Judgment, Inrolments, Entryes, Proceedings, and Dependents of what kind
soever, shall be vacated and cancelled in such manner and form as Records use
to be that are vacated.


