Holy Zeal against Sin, SHOWN To be an Acceptable And Seasonable Duty: IN A
SERMON PREACHED At Lyme Regis, IN THE County of DORSET, Sept. 4th. 1700. At a
Quarterly Lecture appointed for the promoting the Reformation of Manners.

By J. E. Minister of the Gospel.

Gal. 4.8. It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for the Author. 1700.

Number. XXV. 12, 13. part. -- Behold, I give unto him my Coven^ Peace; and he
shall have it, and his after him, even the Covenant of an e^sting Priesthood;
because he was ze^ for his God.


IT is the observation of wise men, that (...) Age has some special duty
belonging (...) For the most part, every Age brings with new turn of affairs;
and hence arise new D^ I shall not go back to the days of old, and en^ what was
the special duty of our Forefath^ their time: let it suffice to tell you, that
the sent duty of this generation, and which G^ his Providence calls us to,
seems to be the Ref^tion of Manners.

You need not be informed, that vice is g^ rampant; that profaneness and
immorality ^ overrun our Land; that swearing and sab^ breaking, drunkenness and
whoredom d^ much abound, and walk in our Streets in som^ces at noonday: it is
too evident to be unobse^ So that we stand in great need of a Reformation

And we have a very fair opportunity for it ^ command and countenance, both of
King Parliament.

We have been told, that in general Refor^ons, we should wait the Magistrates
motion^ concurrence. I will not dispute that now, ^^ther it be universally
true? It is sufficient, t^ will answer the present case; we have the pream
Magistrate's concurrence in this matte^^ ^he Honorable House of Commons, the
great ^esentative body of the Nation, have made a ^ pious Address to his
Majesty, desiring him ^e out his Royal Proclamation, commanding all ^es,
Justices of the Peace, and other Magistrates, ^t in speedy execution, those
good Laws that are ^in force, against Profaneness and Immorality; (...) to give
due encouragement to all such as do (...) duty therein.

and accordingly the King, (Our Gracious ^reign, whom God long preserve!) has
issued (...) his Proclamation, wherein he strictly char^ all persons, Judges,
Mayors, Justices of the ^e, and all other Officers and Ministers, both
^esiastical and Civil, and all other his Subjects, ^n it may concern, to be
very vigilant and strict ^he discovery and prosecution of all persons, who
(...) be guilty of Excessive drinking, Blasphemy, (...) hane Swearing and
Cursing, Lewdness, Propha^ on of the Lord's day, or other dissolute, immoral
^isorderly practices, as they will answer it to ^ighty God, and upon pain of
the King's highest ^easure.

(...) that now we have a loud call in the pro^nce of God to apply our selves
to this work Reformation. Now is a time for the Pious (...) Sober, for all that
are on God's side, to show ^r Zeal against Vice, to show themselves Zealous
their God.

that I might encourage so good a work, and (...) note the Reformation already
begun in many ^s of this Kingdom, I thought it not amiss, ^ropose to your
consideration the above Text. ^ich shows how acceptable to Almighty God (...)
Zeal of Phinehas was, in executing judgment on Zimri and Cosbi, two debaucht
persons. ^ tells him, that as a reward of his Zeal, he she have confirmed to
him an everlasting Priesth^ Behold I give unto him my Covenant of Peace, and^

That you may see the Occasion and Scop^ these words, I shall give you, in
brief, the hi^ of the matter. The Israelites being com^ their wilderness march
to the plains of M^ Balak King of Moab sent to Balaam, (a (...) Soothsayer in
those parts,) to come and curse t^ But Balaam being able to do nothing ag^
Israel with all his Enchantments, whilst Israel^ faithful unto his God, whilst
God beheld no ini^ in Jacob, as Balaam expresses it, Number. 23.21* This wicked
Prophet therefore advised Bala^ ensnare them into Sin; well knowing that sin w^
provoke the displeasure of the Almighty ag^ them, who was their protection, and
so w^ make them fall an easy prey unto their Enemi^

By the way note; That nothing tends mo^^ rob a people or nation of its
strength and glory, (...) to expose them to contempt and ruin, than Sin (...)
Therefore those, that are Zealous in the wor^ Reformation, are some of the
Nation's best frie^ It is the Interest of Princes to encourage such (...) sons.
It is some of the best state policy in (...) world, to give check to growing
Impiety, an^ encourage the Virtuous. For Righteousness ex^ eth a Nation, but
Sin is a reproach unto any pe^ Prove. 20.14, 34. This was the Observation
Solomon, the wisest of Men, and the greates^ Kings. But this by the bye.

Balaam, that crafty Diviner and Prophet well skilled in these Politics. And
therefore Moses takes notice of it, Number. 31.15, 16.) h^ Balak to ensnare Israel
by their Women. And were ensnared; first to Whoredom, and ^o Idolatry, as you
read in the two first Verses ^e Chapter of my Text. Number. 25.1, 2. And abode in
Shittim, and the people begun to commit ^^dom with the daughters of Moab. And
they (...) the people unto the Sacrifices of their Gods: ^he people did eat,
and bowed down to their Gods. ^ow God was so displeased with these
abomina^ractices, that he sent a destructive plague a^g them, which swept away
many thousands ^^em. And he commanded Moses to execute ^^^ent upon the
transgressors, v. 3, 4.

Moses, having received this commandment (...) the Lord, gave order to the
Judges, (the ^nty that were chosen to assist him in the Go^ment,) to slay every
one his men, (those un^charge,) as many of them as were guilty, v. 5. ^ow in
the interim, before this command was ^n Execution, comes one of the Israelites
named ^^ri, and brings unto his Brethren a Midianitish ^^han, in the sight of
Moses and the Congregati^^* so bold and impudent was he in his sin, v. 6.
^^ereupon Phinehas, in a holy Zeal, takes a ^^elin in his hand, goes to their
Tent, and thrusts ^n both through, the Man of Israel and the ^^man through her
belly, and so the plague was ^^ed, v. 7, 8.

^hether Phinehas did this in the person of a ^^gistrate, and as one of those
Judges that were ^^^ered by Moses to slay these transgressors, v. 5. (...)
whether he did as a Private person, being moved ^^reto by some Speical
direction and motion of ^^d's spirit, and so there was something extraor^^^ary
in the action? It is not material at present to determine. For either way it is
no warrant f^^ private persons, in ordinary cases, to take upon them the
Execution of Justice.

That which at present I would note to you (...) Phinehas his zeal and fervor
against Sin, which (...) manifested by that action. Which zeal of (...) was so
pleasing to God, that he testified his hig^ approbation of it, not only by
removing t^^ plague, (as before noted;) but by bestowing (...) Phinehas an
everlasting Priesthood, as a reward (...) it. An account whereof we have in my
Tex^ Behold, I give unto him my Covenant of peace, a^^ he shall have it, and
his seed after him, even the Cov^nant of an everlasting Priesthood; because he
w^^ zealous for his God.

The Observation I shall note to you from t^^ words is this;

Doct. That it is a duty very pleasing unto Go^ when persons in a time of
general corruption do she themselves zealous for God.

Is was a time of general corruption among t^^ Israelites, and Phinehas showed
a more than ^^dinary zeal in suppressing of it, and God ma^^fested his high
approbation of Phinehas his zeal (...) bestowing on him an everlasting
Priesthood.

In prosecuting this point I shall, (1.) Show what it imports to be zealous f^^
God. (2.) Prove that it is a duty very pleasing un^^ God. (3.) Show who be the
persons that should ^^ercise this zeal. And, (4.) Conclude with some
Improvement.


First, I shall show, what it is to be zealous for G^^

That we may rightly apprehend the meani^^ ^f this phrase, it may not be amiss
to speak some^hat to the nature of Zeal in the general; and ^^en more
particularly to show the Import of the ^hrase in my Text.

As for Zeal in the general, it denotes the ^armth and fervor of Spirit.
Zelare and Zelari, ^aith Vossius,) utrumque dicitur de ardenti affect^, ^^nc
pro aliquo, nunc contra aliquem. i.e. To have ^^al, or to be zealous are both
spoken of any ardent ^^fection, sometimes for a person, sometimes a^^inst him.
The Greek word (...) (quod a (...), vald^ ferveo,) signifies boiling, or
fervent and ^^rning heat. For as boiling or burning is the ^^ghest degree of
heat, so is zeal or fervency the ^^ghest pitch of our affections. And therefore
Zeal (...) described by some, to be the heat and intention (...) all the
affections. It is not so much a virtue in (...) self, as the life and soul of
all other virtues. It (...) like varnish to the Color, which is in it self no
^^lour, but gives a gloss and luster unto all.

Zeal in it self is neither good nor evil; but ac^^rding to its object:
accordingly there is a good ^^d bad zeal.

(1.) There is a bad Zeal. Of this kind is that which is set on wrong objects.
This scarce de^^ves the name of zeal, being nothing else ^t an Intemperate
heat, or rather a kind of Frenzy (...) Madness. Such was the zeal of those
Idolaters, ^^o in their false worship cut themselves with ^ives, 1 King. 18.28.
Such was the zeal of those ^^ws, who burnt their children in the fire unto
^oloch, Jer. 7.31. And with this violent and ^^d zeal was St. Paul acted before
his conversion, (...) himself confesses, Act. 26.11. Phil. 3.6. com^^red,)
when he was so enraged against the Christians, that he spared no cost or pains,
to supp^^^ their meetings and to root them out. This is (...) the zeal whereof
my Text speaks.

(2.) There is a good zeal, which may be t^^ described; It is a holy warmth and
fervor of affe^on, wrought in us by the spirit of God, whereby (...) are
inclined to promote God's glory, in a vigor^^^ manner, according to his word.

The marks and properties of this zeal, am^ other, are these.

(1.) It is always about a good thing, Gal. 4.^ It is good to be zealously
affected always in a g^ thing. If the matter be evil, the more vigor^ and
earnest any person is, the more sinful. Ho^ zeal is always exercised about a
good matter.

(2.) It is always accompanied with knowled^^ Rom, 10.2. For I bear them
record, that they h^^ a zeal for God, but not according to knowledge. T^^ was
the fault of the Israelites zeal: it wanted knowledge, zeal without knowledge
is but a blind ze^^

(3.) It makes the greatest account of the weighti^^ matter. This rule we
have, Mat. 23.23. wh^ Christ blames the Scribes and Pharisees, for she^ing
great zeal about lesser matters, but having (...) concern for those that were
weightier, speaki^^ to them after this manner. Woe unto you Scribes a^^
Pharisees Hypocrites for ye pay Tithe of mint a^^ anise and cummin, and have
omitted the weight^^^ matters of the law, judgment, mercy and faith; the ought
ye to have done and not to leave the other u^done. First our zeal should be
carried forth (...) weightier matters, than to those of less momen^

From what has been spoken of Zeal in the g^neral, we may easily apprehend
what it is to (...) zealous for God. It is to have this true zeal, the ^ave
been describing. But more particularly (...) phrase may denote these two things.

(1.) A being zealous for God in his Service. And, (2.) A being zealous for God
against Sin.
^hen are we zealous for God in his Service, when ^carefully perform all
religious duties, private (...) public. When we dare not omit them, di^^ntly
attend them, and are devout in them; ser^^^g the Lord with fervency of spirit,
as the expres^ is, To. 12.11.

Then we are zealous for God against Sin, when (...) do not only mislike it in
our selves, and care^^^y endeavor to abstain from it; but also when (...)
cannot bear with it in others, as the phrase is, (...) v. 2.3.

^Tis this latter is the zeal, of which my Text ^aks, for which Phinehas is
commended, and ^s rewarded of God. He had a zeal for God a^^^nst Sin. Which
zeal for God includes in it ^^ese three things.

(1.) A tender respect to God's glory. This is the ^ound of all true zeal.
'Twas this made Phine^^^ so zealous for his God, because he had a ten^^ regard
to God's glory. This was the fault of ^u's zeal, and for which he is blamed;
because (...) had not so pure an eye to God's glory, as he ^^ght to have. Come
see my zeal (said he) for (...) Lord, 2 Kin. 10.16. Jehu was zealous
preten^^dly for God: but self was at the bottom; it ^s for a Kingdom. True
Godly zeal has always (...) eye to God's glory; this is a principal ingredi^^t
in it. So in the above description of zeal; (...) a holy warmth, whereby we are
inclined to pro^^te God's glory, etc. The Glory of God is the ^eat end of our
being. We are commanded to respect this in all that we do, 1 Cor. 10.31. It is
the butt and scope of all regular and holy actions: and therefore of necessity
must be included in holy zeal.

(2.) A holy indignation against Sin. Sin does in effect dethrone God. The
practical language of the Sinner is; who is the Lord, that I should obey him?
It bids defiance to all God's Attributes. It ^pposeth his Sovereignty, it
slighteth his Omniscience, it contemns his Power, it despises his Goodness,
it is a direct opposition to his Holiness: in a word, it strikes at the very
life and being of God; so horrid and abominable is the nature of Sin: And was
it in the Sinner's power, as it is in his will, Psalm. 14.1. there should be no
God to punish him for his sin. Now this being the nature and tendency of Sin;
who, that has any concern for God's glory, who that has any true zeal for
God, can choose but have an abhorrence of it? By Sin God's glory is eclipsed and
sullied; his very being and government are opposed and slighted: those persons
therefore, that are zealous for God, must needs have a holy indignation against
Sin.

(3.) It imports a diligent endeavor to suppress Sin. Activity and Zeal go
always together. The active Christian and the zealous Christian are never
separated. Zeal in Scripture is opposed to laziness, indifferency,
lukewarmness, Rev. 3.16, 20. It is of the nature of Zeal to be fervent, and to
make persons vigorous and active, wherever it is Jehu, being zealous, was very
active in his way* And so was Phinehas, the Instance of my Text; he was very
active in suppressing vice, and executing ^^dgment upon the Sinners. And where
the is true zeal for God against Sin, it will make persons, in their respective
places, to appear against it, and endeavor to suppress it.

This briefly for the first general; what it is to be zealous for God, and what
it imports. I come,

Secondly, to prove, that it is a duty very pleasing unto God.

That it is a duty, is plain from Scripture, Precept and Precedent: both lay an
obligation on (...) to be zealous for God.

(1.) Scripture-Precept. Unless we break God^^ bands asunder, and cast away his
cords from us and so act like those wicked ones, Psalm. 2.3. we must resolve to
comply with this duty, because by Precept we are enjoined to be zealous for God
against Sin. The Scripture requires us, to be zealously affected in a good
thing, Gal. 4.18. And what better thing can a person be employed in, than i^
endeavoring to suppress vice, whereby God i^ dishonored in the world? Without
compliant with this duty we cannot answer one great end (...) Christ's
Redemption, who gave himself for us, the he might redeem us from all iniquity,
and purify (...) himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works, T^^ 2.14.
It is one end of Christ's Redemption, the we might be zealous of good works:
and amo^^ good works, this of Reformation, the reforming of Sinners is none of
the least.

It is a foul blot in Laodicea's character, that (...) had no heart to restrain
evildoers. It Is mentioned to the praise of the Church of Ephesus, the he could
not bear with them that were evil, Rev. 2.^. But as for Laodicea, she was
lukewarm, neither not nor cold, very indifferent as to this matter* and
therefore God threatens to spue her out of his mouth, Rev. 3.15, 16. and to
prevent this judgment calls on her to be zealous and repent, v. 19. If
therefore God's call, his command and injunction have any weight with us, it is
our duty to show our selves zealous against sin. We are obliged thereto by
Precept.

(2.) Scripture-Precedent does oblige to it. We are bid to follow the footsteps
of the flock, Can. 1.8. And to be followers of the Saints, wherein they are
followers of God, Phil. 3.17. Ephesians. 5.1. Now it is recorded to the everlasting
praise and commendation of the Saints, many of them, how eminently zealous they
were in their days for God against vice. This was the commendation of David,
Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, and Josiah, Kings of Judah, that they set themselves
against vice, and zealously promoted a Reformation. This was that, which good
Nehemiah took such comfort in, when he had been reforming and cleansing the
people, and manifesting his zeal against the profanation of the Sabbath, said
he, Remember me, O my God, concerning this also, and spare me according to the
great^ess of thy mercy, Neh. 13.15, 22. Elijah also pleased his zeal before
God, 1 Kin. 19.10, 14. I have ^een very jealous (or zealous) for the Lord God
of ^osts, for the children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, etc. And to
mention no more, it was this that made Phinehas so famous to posterity, and
^ained him the Covenant of an everlasting Priesthood, because he was zealous
for his God; because ^e appeared boldly for God against sin, and executed
judgment on those presumptuous sinners ^imri and Cosbi, without having respect
to their ^ality and greatness, notwithstanding Zimri was (...) Son of a Prince,
and Cosbi was the Daughter of a chief House in Midian, Number. 25.8, 14, 15.

Thus if we look back to the Saints of old, w^ find many instances recorded in
Scripture, of pesons zealous for God against vice. It is therefo^^ our duty to
be so too; that we may be like the people of God, in old time.

That it is a duty very pleasing unto God, m^ be demonstrated from diverse
particulars: but (...) present I shall keep to the instance of my Tex^ and
thence make it appear to be an acceptable ^^ty. That Phinehas his zeal was very
pleasing (...) to God will evidently appear from the consider^ on of these two
particulars, both mentioned in (...) Text and Context. One is, God's removing
(...) Plague from the Israelites thereupon. The oth^^ his bestowing an
everlasting Priesthood on Phin^

(1.) God's removing the Plague from the Israel^^ upon Phinehas his performing
this duty, is a pl^^ indication how acceptable his zeal was unto G^ The
Israelites having greatly corrupted themsel^ by whoredom and idolatry, God sent
amo^ them a sweeping Plague, which took away no^ than twenty four thousand,
Number. 25.9.

Times of general debauchery are usually (...) forerunners of some sore
judgment. Whate^ pretenses men make to Loyalty, to the Templ^ the Lord, to the
Church, and the like; yet if the are debaucht persons, they are some of the
N^on's worst enemies. These were the persons (...) brought wrath upon Israel,
and caused God^ send the Plague among them.

Now when God's judgments are abroad in (...) earth, the Inhabitants thereof
should learn Rig^teousness. It should be so: but what shall we say The wicked
will do wickedly still. Mercies (...) Judgments, they are all one to them; they
w^ be reclaimed. Thus it is in our days, and (...) 'twas in the days of old. An
instance whereof (...) have in Zimri and Cosbi, who notwithstand^^^ that
dreadful judgment God sent on the pe^ for their great wickedness, went on still
boldly^ the same debaucht practices, not being afraid^ commit lewdness in the
face of the Sun. But ^nehas on the other hand was no less bold in G^ cause, in
executing judgment: for in a holy z^ he went forthwith to them, and thrust them
b^ through. Which action of his was so pleasing (...) to God, that hereupon he
stayed the Plague, (...) And he went to the man of Israel into the tent, (...)
thrust them both through, the man of Israel and (...) woman through her belly,
and the plague was stay^ And if any should doubt, whether 'twas on the (...)
count of Phinehas his zeal, that the Plague (...) stayed, it is farther added, v.
10, 11. And the L^ spoke unto Moses, saying, Phinehas, the Son of E^azar, the
Son of Aaron the Priest, has turned a^ my wrath from the Children of Israel
(whilst he (...) zealous for my sake among them) that I consumed (...) the
Children of Israel in my jealousy.

(2.) God's bestowing an everlasting Priesthood (...) Phinehas, as a reward of
his zeal, is another ma^fest indication of his being greatly well plea^ with
it. This evidence we have in the words^ my Text; Behold I give unto him my
covenant^ peace, etc. ( Behold,) God calls upon others (...) take notice of it,
for their encouragement. (...) God will reward others, as well as Phinehas,
(...) they show themselves zealous in his Cause. (...) give unto him my
Covenant of Peace,) i. e. the (...) venant of Priesthood, as it is expressed,
v. 13. (...) (...) here the Covenant of Peace; partly with re^ct to the happy
effect of this heroical action of (...) whereby he made peace between God and
the ^ple; but chiefly in regard to the principal end (...) use of the Priestly
Office, which was to medi^ between God and Men, and to make atonement (...)
offering up Sacrifice, Incense and Prayers. and he shall have it.) His zeal was
so pleasing to mighty God, that he doubles the promise, to ^e him the greater
assurance of it. ( And his ^d after him.) The promised blessing, the reward
(...) his zeal, extends likewise unto his posterity. (...) God sometimes
visits the sins of Parents up^ their Children; so he ofttimes blesses the ^d
of the righteous for the Parents sake. Phi^has his zeal brought a blessing on
his Children. ^ven the Covenant of an Everlasting Priesthood.) ^e word
Everlasting, in the Old Testament does ^ually signify, 'till Christ's coming.
And so the ^port of the promise is this; that if Phinehas ^s posterity did not
forfeit it by some remarkable (...), they should have the Priesthood continued
to ^em as long as the Law and Commonwealth of ^e Jews lasted; i. e. till the
coming of the Mes^h, at which time the Aaronical Priesthood was (...) give
place to that of Christ, Heb. 7.11. ( Be^use he was zealous for his God.)
Here Is the reason (...) all rendered, why God showed such favor to ^hinehas,
because he appeared boldly for God ^ainst sin. So that it is evident from that
reward, which was annexed to Phinehas his zeal, that God (...) as highly well
pleased with it.

And hence we may gather, that to be zealous for ^od at any time, is also a
duty well-pleasing to the ^lmighty; because the reason of the duty is the same
still, the same now as it was then: Et (...) milibus idem est judicium, of like
things we (...) pass a like judgment. I come,

Thirdly, to show, Who be the persons that she exercise this zeal.

Whether Phinehas in that action of execu^ judgment may be considered as a
Magistrate, (...) some think) or as a Priest, or Private person^ matters not;
for it is the duty of all persons^ their respective places, whether
Magistrates, (...) nisters, or private Christians, to show themse^ zealous for
God against sin.

(1.) Magistrates ought to be zealous for God^ to this particular. These have
not only the c^mon obligations of all Christians, but some pe^liar bonds and
ties, whereby they are oblige^ this duty above others.

It is one great end of the Magistrate's Office, (...) be a terror to
evildoers, and to execute wrath^ them that do evil; and this by the appointm^
and constitution of God; To. 13.3, 4. For Ru^ are not a terror to good works,
but to the evil; (...) thou then not be afraid of the power? Do t^ which is
good, and thou shall have praise of the sa^ For he is the Minister of God to
thee for good. (...) if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he be^eth
not the sword in vain; for he is the Minister^ God, a Revenger, to execute
wrath on him that d^ evil. Magistrates are God's Ministers; of his (...)
pointment. And they bear not the Sword in va^ the meaning is, they should not
do it. It Is common in Scripture, to speak of things as alrea^ done, that ought
to be done. Because every p^son in the judgment of charity, unless somew^
appears to the contrary, is supposed to act acc^ ^g to his duty. But if
Magistrates bear with evil^rs, and suffer vice to go unpunished, they do ^great
measure bear the Sword in vain, and so (...) not answer the end of their
Office, the great ^gn whereof is, to restrain vice and disorder, (...) to
punish evildoers.

Besides, Magistrates are under the peculiar tie (...) a sacred Oath, whereby
they oblige themselves (...) be faithful to that trust committed to their
^arge; and in all articles of the King's Commission them directed, to do legal
right to the poor and to (...) rich, after their cunning wit and power, accord^
to the known Laws and Statutes of the Realm. ^d consequently by oath they are
obliged to pu^h offenders, without respect of persons; and (...) put the Laws
in execution against vice, when ^e informations are brought to them. If they
(...) of performing their duty in this respect, they (...) in danger of
incurring the guilt of perjury.

Furthermore, Magistrates are the Representatives (...) God. And accordingly in
Scripture they are ^gnified with his Name, Psalm. 82.6. I have said ye ^e Gods,
and all of you the children of the most high. ^d therefore considering whose
Representatives ^d Vicegerents they are, they should show a zeal ^ainst vice,
because nothing is so abominable to ^e holy God as sin is. The Scripture tells
us, (...) is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity, Hab. 1.13. ^ot that God
does not see and behold all the ^ckedness done under the Sun, even that
com^tted in secret places; for he is Omniscient; ^t the meaning is, he cannot
behold sin so as to ^prove it. And therefore those Magistrates that ^untenance
vice, they are not like God, not^thstanding by Office they bear his Image.

Last of all, though Magistrates are little G^ upon earth, with respect to the
people; yet in (...) guard of the great God, who is higher than (...) highest,
they are but Stewards, and must be (...) countable for their Stewardship.
However dig^fied among Men, yet they are Servants of the m^ high; and have a
great trust, as well as honou^ble, committed to their charge; and God will o^
day call them to account concerning this trust committed to them. He will
hereafter call on the^ in such language as that, Luke 16.2. Come, give (...)
account of thy Stewardship, for thou may be no longer Steward. The time of
their Stewardship w^ come to an end, and they must be accountable f^ what they
have done. And therefore if Mag^ strates, Gallio-like, are very indifferent in
Go^ cause, have no heart to punish vice, but in the respect bear the Sword in
vain; they will be ab^ to give but a sorry account unto their great Mast^ at
the general appearing on the great day. (...) which day, there will be no
respect of persons with God. High and low, rich and poo^ must all appear at his
bar, and pass under an i^ partial trial. And therefore we find, that Kin^ and
great men are brought in trembling, Rev. (...) 15, 16. Because with God there
is no difference (...) great or small, no respect had to any man's person but
all shall receive according to their works.

Whether then we consider the great end of the Magistrate's Office, to execute
wrath on him the does evil; that solemn Oath they are laid under to do right
and justice according to the Laws an^ Statutes of the Kingdom; the nature of
their O^fice, as they are God's Representatives; or the high trust committed to
their charge, for whi^ ^eafter they must be accountable: in all these ^pects it
is sufficiently evident, that Magistrates (...) eminently concerned in this
duty, to appear for ^d against Sin.

(2.) Ministers are concerned in this duty. It was ^e commendation of the Angel
and Minister of the ^urch of Ephesus, that he could not bear with them ^t were
evil, Rev. 2.3. It is recorded to the ever^ting praise of Phinehas in my Text,
that he was ^alous for his God. For Ministers to show an in^ferent spirit in
God's cause; and to stand neu^s, to stand by as unconcerned spectators, when
^ers are busy in reforming-work, and do call on ^em to lend their assistance;
it argues a Laodicean ^rit, and God threatens to spue such Ministers ^t of his
mouth, Rev. 3.16.

Of all other persons, none should be more for^ard than Ministers in
discountenancing vice, and ^pearing for God against sin. These, as well as
^agistrates, have special and peculiar ties and ob^ations.

They are God's mouth unto the people. So they ^e called, Jer. 15.19. Therefore
thus says the Lord, (...) if thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou
^lt be as my mouth. God every where speaks a^inst sin and sinners; and
Ministers, who are the ^outh of God, should speak as he does. They ^ould in
their preaching, as well as in the exer^e of Church Discipline, make a
separation be^een the precious and the vile, the good and bad. ^ey should
instruct, rebuke, exhort with all au^ority. Of all others, Ministers should
least of (...) bear with those that do evil.

Again, Ministers in Scripture are called Ambassa^rs, 2 Cor. 5.20. Now then we
are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us. Amb^sadors are
a sort of Representatives; they rep^sent the persons of those Princes that send
the^ And thus it is with Ministers; they sustain t^ person of God and Christ;
they represent Go^ and supply the place of Christ upon earth. A^ therefore
Ministers especially should show a ze^ against sin: for if they be cold and
indifferent (...) the matter, they will give occasion to others (...) think,
that their Lord and Master is just such an^ there as they are, one that makes no
great accou^ of sin; and so they will bring dishonor and re^proach unto God
and Christ, whose Represent^tives they are.

Once more, It is the Ministers work to preac^ down sin. Their very Office does
oblige them to i^ The main design of their Office is to reform si^ners, and to
turn them from the evil and error o^ their ways; to open men's eyes, and to
turn the^ from darkness unto light, and from the power of Sa^tan unto God, Acts
26.18. And therefore for Mi^nisters to show a backwardness to discountenanc^
sin, they contradict the very end of their Office^ and are not worthy of the
name of Ministers.

(3.) It is the duty of all in general, of Private^ Christians, as well as
Magistrates and Ministers, to^ show themselves zealous for God against sin. Ti^
the duty of all that profess Christ to show themselves zealous of good works.
This is one end for which we were redeemed, Tit. 2.14. And it is a good work to
restrain sin in others, to give check ^o vice, according to our place, as we
have op^ortunity.

Yea, self-interest does oblige to it, not only to ^tain from sin our selves
but not to suff^^ (...) ^trouled in others. There is a pertinent place this
purpose, Lev. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy other in thy heart, thou shall in
any wise rebuke thy ^ghbour, and not suffer sin upon him. This last clause
^variously translated, as you may see particularly (...) the margin of the
Bible, where you find it thus, (...) at thou bear not sin for him. And to this
transla^n I find Expositors of great note incline. And (...) the meaning of the
words is this, thou shall in ^y wise rebuke thy neighbor, (tell him of his
fault, ^r show thy dislike of it) and shall not bear sin for ^im, or for his
sake: i. e. thou shall not make thy ^elf guilty of his sin, as thou will
assuredly do, i^ ^hou do not perform thy duty in rebuking him ^or his sin.
And so this clause is a weighty reason ^o enforce this precept of rebuking our
Brother, that so we may not share in his guilt.

Furthermore, if we consider that relation tha^ ^rivate Christians bear unto
God, this likewise ^does oblige them to appear against sin. They stan^ ^elated
to God as Children, therefore they shou^ ^esent the dishonor and injury that
is offered t^ God their heavenly Father. An ingenious Chi^ cannot but resent
his Father's wrong. Touch the Father in his name or person, and at the same
tim^ you reflect injury upon the Son. Why, God (...) our Father; we call him so
in our daily Praye^ as Christ has taught us, Mat. 6.9. And God (...)
dishonored by men's sins, their horrid oaths, the open profaneness, immorality
and lewdness. (...) cannot but appear in the station God has set us, (...) the
vindication of God's honor, by endeavo^ing what we can to suppress sin.

Once more, private Christians do stand relate^ to God as Servants. They are
not their own, (...) are bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6.20. therefore (...)
should mind the interest of their Master. The (...) perty of Servants (says
Aristotle) is not to^ their own will and pleasure, they have give^ themselves
unto another. Servants are not su^ ris, at their own dispose; they are subject
to a^ there, by whose command, and for whose p^ they ought to act. Those
therefore that pro^ they are the Servants of Christ, as do all that (...)
called by the Christian name, they are, or ou^ to be devoted to his will; and
should endeavou^ promote their Masters interest, whose Serva^ they are;
consequently they should appear aga^ sin, and do what they can to stop the
curr^ stream of iniquity; for nothing is so opposite^ Christ's interest as sin
is.

Thus whether we consider the command of G^ who requires us in the general to
be zealously (...) fected; or our own interest, which obliges us (...) give
check to our Brother's wickedness, that (...) partake not of his guilt; or our
relation to G^ considered as Children, whereby we are obliged^ stand up for
God's honor; or our relation to (...) considered as Servants, whose interest
we ou^ to study and promote: in all these respects, and any more that might be
named, it is the duty (...) private Christians, to stand up for God against si^^

And let this suffice for the Doctrinal part (...) brief Application shall
conclude this Discourse.

APPLICATION.
The only improvement I shall make of it, she be to press you to this duty; to
exhort you all (...) your respective places, to be zealous for God again sin. ^
And I know not how to direct you better to ex^ss this zeal, than in promoting
the Reformation (...) Manners, which is begun in some places of this ^gdom, and
is recommended to all in general by ^sons of the highest rank among us, not
only (...) King's Proclamation, but diverse of the Nobili^ and Reverend Clergy,
Lords Temporal and ^ds Spiritual, who have publicly subscribed ^ir approbation.

God (my Beloved) has done great things for (...) Nation. He has delivered us
from our fears (...) Popery, and arbitrary Government; and has (...) a most
Christian Prince upon the Throne, who ^er God has been our Deliverer. When our
^thren, the Protestants in Neighbor Countries ^an under severe persecution,
and are forced to (...) the bread of their Souls with the peril of their ^es;
we have it to the full. Our Sanctuary doors (...) wide open; we have none to
disturb, or make ^fraid. In a word, we have a confluence of all ^s of
blessings; so that no Nation under Hea^ can scare boast of greater privileges.

Now what does God expect from us, but that (...) should be a holy People, a
Reformed People. ^norality and Profaneness have had a long reign^ time, and have
too much gone unpunished. ^^e has been, when he that was virtuous, when (...)
that was truly and conscientiously pious made ^self a prey. But (blessed be
God) the scale is ^^ed, the scene is altered. The Law now begins ^un in a right
channel. Liberty is granted unto ^der Consciences. Profaneness and Impiety meet
^h public check. Persons that are pious may ^s holy as they will: and they
have now also ^pportunity to give check to others in their sin.

How easy is it, were persons but diligent, (...) drive swearing and
sabbath-breaking, whoredo^ and drunkenness out of our Land; at least into
s^cret and obscure places? Did all ranks and degre^ of men lend a hand to it,
nothing more easy. (...) Ministers would but encourage this work, and n^ only
reprove sinners in the Pulpit, but exhort M^gistrates and private Christians to
their duty. (...) private Christians would rebuke their Neighbou^ as they ought
to do; and in case of obstinacy gi^ information unto the Magistrate: And if
Mag^strates would but perform their duty, in putti^^ the Laws in execution
against vice: This wou^ strike terror on our Debauchees, and make wic^ edness
to flee before them. Sinners then wou^ be afraid of the Magistrate's sword;
though the^ do not fear the Almighty's terrors, and the jud^ment to come. In
brief, it would not be easy (...) find in short time an open debauched or
propha^ person.

That I may excite all sorts to their duty, I sha^ apply my self distinctly to
Magistrates, Ministe^ and private Christians.

First, I begin with the Civil Magistrate. Suff^ (Right Worshipful) this word
of Exhortatio^^ show our selves zealous in your public stations (...) God
against sin.

Though you are our Rulers, yet we by Offi^ are your Monitors; we are to
instruct and adm^nish you in the Lord: therefore give me leave (...) put you in
remembrance.

God has raised you to a high post, he has (...) you above the rest of
Mankind; you are intrust^ with great power; you have authority from h^ to
execute wrath on them that do evil, as well (...) (...) reward and encourage
the virtuous. Show then (...) our zeal, in a diligent and faithful discharge of
^^at trust, that power and authority that is commit^d to you.

Magistrates, says the Apostle, are God's Miniers for good, Romans 13.4. They
are set up by him ^r the public good; the good of Church and ^ate.

With reference to the State, they are to pro^de good Laws, (those of them that
are entrusted ^ith the Legislative power) for the preservation (...) the
public peace. They are to put (as there (...) occasion) those good Laws in
execution, without having respect of persons. It is their place to ^ear Causes;
to determine matters; to distribute ^stice, rewards and punishments, as men
deserve; ^d to take care of the public weal.

This office of Magistracy is so useful and necessa^, that a Nation or State
cannot long subsist with^t it. Were it not for Government, men would (...)
Wolves to each other. They would bite and ^oil and devour one another. The
strongest Arm, ^d longest Sword would carry all before it. We ^ould not sit
secure in our dwellings, nor be able (...) call what we have our own. As in the
instance (...) Micah, and the sojourning Levite, of whom we ^d in the Book of
Judges, (Chapter 18, 19.) which ^agical Stories are both ushered in with this
Pre^ce, as the occasion of all, In those days there was (...) King in Israel.
The Magistrates office is so use^ to the State, for the preservation of peace
and ^der, men's lives and properties; that it is better (...) far to have a bad
Magistrate, than none at all. (...) Magistrates also are set up by God for the
good (...) the Church. Hence they are called nursing Fathers, Isa. 49.23. And
Kings shall be thy nursing others, and their Queens thy nursing Mothers. The
promise was made to the Church of the Gentil^ and so belongs unto Gospel Times.
Though the be not Fathers, to beget Souls to Christ, which (...) the Minister's
work; yet they are to be nursing others, to defend and protect those that are
beg^ten by the ministry of the Word. The Magistra^ office, and the Minister's
office are two disti^ things; each acts in a different sphere. As ^nisters
must not meddle with the Magistra^ Sword, considered as Ministers: so neither
m^ Magistrates invade the Priest's office; they ou^ not to meddle with public
preaching, administ^ tion of Sacraments, Church Censures, and the (...) King
Vzziah stands on record, for caution to (...) Magistrates in such cases, 2 Chronicles. 26.18, 19.

Touching the Extent of the Magistrate's po^ in matters of Religion, I will not
enter on a la^ dispute now. Thus much I take to be gener^ granted, that
Magistrates are Custodes utriusque^ bulae, Guardians of the first as well as
second Ta^.

Though Magistrates may not force persons to (...) or that Communion, perhaps
that which (...) themselves like best; or impose upon their ^ sciences in
sinful or doubtful matters, the Co^ ence in such cases being subject to God
only (...) they may hinder the public exercise of an Id^ trous worship, and
oblige persons to keep the (...) bath, and to worship God in some way or o^ It
stands upon record to Josiah's praise, that h^ down the Idolatrous Priests, and
the worshi^ Baal, 2 Kin. 23.4, 5. The like is mentione^ good Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles.
31.1. Nehemiah m^ ons it as a good deed, and for which he w^ ^ised whilst the
world stands, that he restrained ^sons from polluting the Sabbath, Neh. 13.15,
16. ^d it is recorded to Asa's commendation, that ^obliged his Subjects on
severe penalties, to at^d the worship of the true God, such as they could (...)
except against, 2 Chronicles. 15.13.

^n a word, it is the Magistrate's place to punish (...)-doers, whether they
openly violate the pre^ts of the first, or of the second Table; for this ^e
great end of their office, namely, to execute ^th on them that do evil, To.
13.4. By Evil^ I do not conceive that such are meant, who snot conform in every
punctilio, to the Magi^e's mind in matters of Religion. I know that ^e have
been dealt with in time past as evil^s, under pretense of breaking the Law,
(the (...) of Man,) when it has been only to keep a ^d Conscience toward God.
The Magistrate's ^er does not extend so far as this; to punish (...) for
different apprehensions in matters of Re^n, whilst they agree in the Essentials
of it. ^en all Faces are alike, then shall we be all of ^ mind, as to lesser
matters. And as it is unrea^ble for the Magistrate to punish any person, ^use he
is not of his size in body; so it is also (...) reasonable to punish him merely
for different ^hensions, in some disputable points, which ^nnot help. Neither
has such a course any ^ade in it to make persons think otherwise. ^y indeed
force outward compliance, and (...) men hypocrites; but what aptitude has it,
^e or any one to take a stick and beat another, (...) by to make him of our
mind? This is no fit ^s to enlighten the mind; and if a man acts ^st his
persuasion, against his mind, he must needs sin: for whatsoever in not of faith
is sin, Ro^ 14.23. whilst therefore persons do agree in fu^ damentals, there
ought to be liberty and tolerati^

Though I do not plead for a boundless liber^ for Atheists, Deists, Socinians,
Idolaters, and su^ like; who subvert the Gospel, and bring in da^ nable
errors; yet this to me is past dispute, the those, who maintain the Essentials
of Religion ought to have a liberty granted to them; as (bl^ sed be God) it is
at this day.

Magistrates then are not now called to exec^^ wrath on those persons who
differ from them (...) some disputable points, wherein wise and go^ men cannot
yet be agreed; but on Atheists, Idol^ ters, profane Swearers and
Sabbath-breake^ and such like. In old time, the Idolater (and (...) the
Atheist) was to be stoned, Deuteronomy. 17.2, 5. T^ Blasphemer was put to death, Lev.
24. ult. So w^ the Adulterer, Lev. 20.10. The Fornicator also h^ his
punishment, Deuteronomy. 22.29. And so had t^ Drunkard, Deuteronomy. 21.20. Not to speak of
the p^ nalties for Theft and Murder.

All these vices do fall under the Magistrate's co^nizance. The law of God is
expressly against ther^ and so are the laws of our land too. We ha^ excellent
laws, not only against theft and murde^ but sabbath-breaking, profane
swearing, dru^ kenness and whoredom: though it were to (...) wished, that a
more severe penalty, than is no^ in force, was annexed to the last of those
menti^ ned crimes.

In the mean time, it is the Magistrate's duty t^ put in execution those good
Laws that we have (...) against those immoral and profane Sinners; an^ I know
not wherein they can better show the (...) ^al for God. A Gallio's spirit, in
this Cause of ^d, wherein his honor is so nearly concerned, (...) very
unbecoming a good Magistrate. What will ^ignifie to have good Laws, if so be
there is no ^ecution of them? Did Magistrates according (...) that trust and
power committed to them, exe^e wrath on evildoers; this would be to their
^mmendation; hereby they would fill up that ^rt of their office which obliges
them to it, and ^ould discover to all the world, if they proceed ^th life and
vigor, that they are zealous for ^eir God.

I would humbly propose it to their considerati^, whether they are as zealous
in punishing pro^ane debaucht sinners, who break both the Laws (...) God and
Man; as formerly they were in pu^shing Dissenters? In this last case, the
matter is ^sputable, whether such persons ought to be pu^shed? It is a
question, whether the supreme Ma^strate has power to impose on any man's
Consci^ce, in disputable matters, when persons cannot ^e the lawfulness of
them? And it is a question, ^hether or no, inferior Magistrates ought to ex^ute
such Laws, notwithstanding their Oaths? ^r if it be sinful, Oaths must not be
bonds of ^iquity. Whereas the case before us is plain. ^here is no dispute,
whether profligate sinners, ^ho break God's law and Man's too, ought to be
^nished? And therefore I would humbly recom^lend this to the Magistrate's zeal;
that he would ^ow be as zealous in punishing these, as in time ^st he was the
former; and not brow-beat those ^ho endeavor to bring them to condign
punish^ent.

Blessed art thou O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles, and thy Princes
eat in due season, f^ strength and not for drunkenness, Eccl. 10.17. When thy
Magistrates are just and sober; do rule i^ God's fear, and discharge their
duty, in executin^ wrath on evil doers, and in protecting them tha^ do well!

Secondly, I address my self to my Reverend F^ there is and Brethren in the
Ministry, Conformists (...) Nonconformists, for in this point, (the suppre^sing
of vice) we are all agreed. Suffer (Righ^ Reverend) this word of Admonition;
Show you^ selves zealous for God against sin, in promoting an^ encouraging the
work of Reformation.

Be not offended, whilst I take upon me to b^ your Monitor; or rather
Remembrancer. It (...) God's cause that I am engaged in; and I know tha^ you,
who are on God's side, will bear with me.

If such as we, whose work it is to reform Sin^ ners, should not assist, when
called on, to pro^ mote a National Reformation, we were en'e a^ good lay down
our Office. We shall by our pra^ tice declare to the world, that whatever
outcrie^ we make against sin when in the Pulpit, yet w^ are not willing to have
sinners reformed.

Give me leave (my Brethren) to expostulate (...) little. What is it that
should make us thus back^ ward? Are not the vices we are called on to len^ our
assistance for the suppressing of, condemne^ by us all? Who can deny, but that
swearing, sabbath-breaking, drunkenness and whoredom ar^ crying iniquities,
that deserve punishment? Ye^ who is there, of those that are so forward to
prosecute their neighbors, for every neglect in poin^ of a Ceremony, where the
law will allow, tha^ takes any notice of these profligate Sinners?

I speak not at random, but from experience. It ^as been the grief of my soul
to see how difficult (...) is to engage some Ministers, to put to their
as^^sting hand, in promoting this work of Reforma^ion. I do not say, that all
are so: God forbid (...) should then fear it an awful prelude of some fore
^udgment.

To see persons all life in a Ceremony; but i^ God's cause to have no heart, in
some of the sub^tantial points of Religion to be as dead as a stone, what is it
but the height of hypocrisy? Our Sa^iour himself has decided this case. He
has told ^s, there are weightier matters, and lesser matters and he has
branded those for hypocrites, and ^as denounced a woe against them, who keep
(...) ^other about smaller matters, such as Ceremoni^ (...) of Man's making,
mint, anice, cummin; but neg^ect the weightier matters of the Law; sobrie^^
^ighteousness, peace, charity; faith, judgment, mercy You know where it is
written, Mat. 23.23.

When we see some persons thus zealous abo^^ ^esser matters, Jehu-like, driving
on with a furio^ ^eal; and at the same time to have no regard for God's honor;
to be careless and indifferent, wh^^her God's law, and the great things of it,
be observed yea or no; it is a temptation to many (...) believe, that there is
more than a Ceremony, the ^s the difference between the Church and the Me^^^ng;
and that a separation is in some sort necess^^y, to keep up the power of
Religion.

I could heartily wish, that we could unite o^ ^ne common bottom* and walk
together where^^ we are agreed, and particularly in suppressing vi^^ and
profaneness! now we have an opportunity for ^t, the supreme Magistrate's
countenance and goo^

It was the observation of our Blessed Lord, t^ the children of this world are
wiser in their gener^^on, than the children of light, Luke 16.8. O, (...) it
not, (my Reverend and dear Brethren) h^ true of Ministers. Shall the men of the
world, (...) different Interests, unite their forces, to prom^ one common and
general design? Yea, let me a^ shall the Devils themselves, as I have shown el^
where, (see my late Treatise, Man's Sinfulness a^ Misery by Nature, p. 145.)
unite and agree, to ca^ on one common Interest, against Christ and his Kin^dom?
And shall not Christians, shall not Ministe^ unite in opposing the Interest of
Satan, by ende^vouring the suppression of vice and profaneness Tell it not in
Gath, publish it not in Askelon; let n^ the Papists hear of it, lest these
uncircumcised Ph^listins rejoice, who know that when we a^ thoroughly debaucht,
we are then fit for any Religion, and so may give them new hopes.

In the Name therefore of our great Master, l^ us lay by our lesser heats, and
show our selves ze^lous for our God, by promoting in our places, tha^ National
Reformation, that is begun in some part^

I would hope (my Brethren) you need not m^tives or a spur; though I take this
liberty to pu^ you in remembrance.

Thirdly, a word briefly to Private Christian^ and so I have done. Is it a duty
very pleasing unt^ God, to show our selves zealous for him? Then pu^ this duty
into practice. It belongs to you as wel^ as others. Show your selves zealous
for God against Sin, by promoting in your places the s^ much talked of
Reformation of Manners. More particularly,

(1.) Reform your selves. Begin at home. You ^ll never be able to proceed with
courage in re^rming of others, whilst guilt lies at your own ^or. It will be
objected, first mend your selves; ^al your self. The Snuffers of the Sanctuary
were (...) be of pure gold, Exodus 25.38. A Ceremony ^as one has lately noted)
significative of this, ^nong other truths; that they must be holy, and
^blameable themselves, who take upon them to reprove and reform others.

(2.) As there is occasion, Rebuke your nighbour. ^ow plain is this duty,
though little practiced? ^ev. 19.17. Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Bro^her,
and not suffer sin upon him. There is indeed ^ome prudence required in giving
rebukes some^^mes. It may be done verbally, or by withdraw^ng our presence, or
some testimony of dislike, as ^rudence shall direct, according to the
circumstance ^f time, place and person.

(3.) Lastly, if after rebuke he continues obsti^ate, and other ways will not
reclaim him, gi^^ ^nformation against him to the Magistrate, that so (...) ^ay
be brought to condign punishment. What ca^ Magistrates, or Laws do, though
never so good ^f none will take it on them to give information?

I know, the Name of an Informer is become odious; because the thing has been
abused; which ^s either good or evil, according to the matter an^ ^ause of it.
To inform against the godly, for man ^er of duty, to expose them to the rage of
Pers^cutors, that is wicked. But to inform against the wicked, upon the account
of their sin, whereb^ God is dishonored, to bring them to condign punishment;
that is godly, and a Scripture-du^ Lev. 5.1. Deuteronomy. 17.4, 5.

Perhaps you meet with some trouble and repro^ by giving Informations, and by
endeavoring (...) reform others. Well, be it so: Is it not our du^ to deny our
selves in some cases? Can we be Ch^^stians without self-denial? Pray see Mat.
24.16.

Who knows, but you by your zeal, may ke^ off God's judgments from the land?
Did not Ph^nehas turn away God's wrath from the Children of Israel? Is it not
recorded for the incourag^ment of others? Number. 25.11.

Remember, that it is the Cause of God. Ho^ zealous were the wicked in time
past in persecutin^ the godly for matter of duty; in hunting them a^ Partridges
on the Mountains, sparing no cos^ time or pains? And shall their zeal, in a ba^
cause, wherein they did the Devil's works, ou^ do yours in the cause of God,
wherein God honor and glory is concerned?

Consider this, God takes notice of all that yo^ do; for he is Omniscient. He
sees your zeal your labor of love, and all your trouble, an^ notes it down in
his book. Your zeal to him is a^ well pleasing act of faith: you may learn this
from the instance of my Text. God was so well pleased with Phinehas his zeal,
that he bestowed on him an everlasting Priesthood; and not only so, ^ut blessed
his Children for his sake. Behold, I give ^^to him my Covenant of Peace, and he
shall have ^t, and his seed after him. Who knows, but that you, by your zeal,
may derive a blessing unto ^our posterity?

Besides, if with Phinehas your zeal be rig^^ all be imputed to you for
righteousness, as his (...) ^sal. 106.31. And God hereafter will rewa^^ ^ou for
it; and will abundantly recompense yo^ ^ouble. Therefore comfort your selves
und^^ ^l discouragements with these thoughts.

To conclude; If Magistrates, Ministers and p^^^ate Christians would each do
their duty, a^ new themselves zealous for God against vice, (...) hearty
promoting of the present Reformation were an easy thing to drive sin into
corners, (...) ^lear our Towns of whoremasters, drunkar^ ^rophane swearers and
sabbath breakers and (...) ^ring Religion and a show of Godliness into (...)
^ute. 'Twould also be a means of lengthe^ ^ut our present tranquillity, and of
procuring ^us many blessings, as well as the averting impe^^ng judgments;
which, in case this work of (...) ^^formation be obstructed, will in all
probabilit^ ^poured down on us. Which God of his inf^ ^mercy prevent!

FINIS.

