A DECLARATION Of the Right Honorable Thomas Lord Fairfax, AND The Knights and
Gentry in the North of England, With the Raising of Forces in the North, West,
and Eastern Ridings of Yo^kshire; And the Rendevouzing of fifteen hundred Horse
at Maulton Moor, and another great Body near the City of YORK.

Also, the securing of Cliffords Tower, Carlisle, Leeds, Hallifax, Skipton, and
diverse other plac^s: And the Lord Lamberts Resolution, at a General Council of
Officers. With Orders and Instructions to several Regiments.

London, Printed for G. HORTON, 1659. Jaunuar:

The Resolution of the Lord Lambert; And the Rising of the Lord Fairfax in the
North.
UPon the arrive of Col. Salmon with the Lord Lambert in the North, and
representing the great Turn of Affairs in the South, a Council of Officers was
immediately called, where (by some) it was resolved, to deter all further motion
toward Genesis Monck, and to acquiesce in the Parliament, and to yield obedience
to their authority; but col. Lilburn is the only man that has heightened
Lambert, notwithstanding the Revolt of above six hundred horse, besides the
Irish Brigade, who have declared for the Parliament, and returned to their
former Duty and Obedience: insomuch, that col. Lambert, Major Creed, and some
others, are in no small consternation, being resolved to consult their own
Interest; and to that end are preparing Overtures for a submmission, and it is
believed they will accept of the Parliaments gracious Tender and Act of
Indemnity. For the divisions of his Army are such, as give him no great
encouragement to engage with them especially now they hear of the Parliaments
sitting, as also upon receipt of the Orders dispatched by Lieutenant colonel
Pepper from the Parliament, to require them to return to their Obedience. Col.
Redman is ordered the command of the Irish Brigade of Horse, and Lieu. colonel
Bret (at present) has the conduct of the Foot. The said Brigade has
subscribed an Engagement, and sent it enclosed in a Letter to Sir Arthur
Hasilr^gg. Which Letter being read in Parliament i^ was resolved, That all the
Offic^rs who ^^ve signed this Engagement, and all the non commissionated
Officers and private Soldiers of the said Irish Brigade; shall be, and are
hereby indempnified.

On Friday last, being the 30 of December, the Lord Fairfax, and most of the
Gentry in the County of York, rendezvouzed near the Ci^y, and appeared with
many hundreds in Arms, besides three Troops of the standing Army all declaring
for the Parliament; as manifestly app^ars by the following Declaration, viz.
WHereas we cannot without much grief of heart, and consternation of spirit,
consider and bewail the destructive confusisions, that have plunged into Church
and State, and the inevitable Ruin threatening the good people of this Nation,
unless speedily and timely prevented, in this day of public calamity; We
therefore having earnestly besought the Lord to direct us in this great and
weighty Affair, wherein the Liberty and peace of these Nations, and the
Interest of the Godly and Faithful therein is so nearly concerned, do find it
our duty to Declare, That we shall, through the strength of God, assert and
maintain the Freedom and Privileges of the present Parliament, the supreme
Authority of these Nations, and not suffer the Members thereof to be illegally
interrupted or molested in the discharge of their Duties; And we do solemnly
avow to all the World, that our only intention in doing this, is to preserve
the Rights of our Country, and to protect and encourage all the Godly and
Faithful therein; and likewise to establish the peace of these Nations, and the
Government of a Free State or Commonwealth.

The Lord Fairfax is marched to Leeds, having a great Body of Horse, and most
of the Gentry in the West Riding of Yorkshire have also appeared at a
Rendezvous with him, gallantly mounted, and well armed. Sir Henry Cholmley has
also raised a considerable Body in the North Riding, and Sir Hugh Bethyl, and
Sir Francis Boynton, have done the like in the Ea^t-Riding, who on Thursday
last Rendezvouzed fifteen hundred Horse, well armed, at Maulton Moor; all in
general declaring for the Parliament; and in^eed such a great and voluntary
Rising as this has hardly ever been seen in Egland.

Diverse other Counties have declared for the Parliament, amongst whom, the
Counties of Leicester and Warwick have bin highly instrumental: from whence we
hear, that the City of Coventry have declared wholly for the Parliament, and
that the parts adjacent flocked into Colonel Hacker in such multitudes, that he
might in a very short time, if occasion were, have formed a considerable Army,
ready to assert the Parliaments Interest. Upon his entering the City, be rode to
the Marketplace with Sir John Norris, having about five hundred Horse, and
there declared for the Parliament. Since which time, They have been proclaimed
at several other places, more especially at Lyn in Norfolk, where the Mayor and
Burgesses of the said Town did not only raise Forces for the Parliament but
also disarmed such that were rai ed against the Authority thereof, taking away
all their arms and ammunition: For which good and faithful service a L^t^er of
Thanks was ordered to be sent to the said Mayor and Burgesses.

This great and providential Change, does not only appear obvious in most
parts of England; but from Ireland also it is affirmed, That Major Wilson has
secured the city of Limrick for the Parliament. Lieu. col. Nelson is fled,
being not Parliament-proof. Waterford, London Derry, and the City of Cork have
also declared their concurrence. Besides, Colonel Privy, Governor of Carlow,
has submitted.

Munster, and Limbrick is Surprised, Clanmel and Rosse have Declared this Way*
Kilkenny and the Cas^le likewise: the Soldiers threatening to throw their
Governor over the VValls, if He stood Out. In fine, there is a con^inual
Intercourse between the Scottish and Irish Soldiery.

The Parliament have Ordered, That it be referred to the Committee of
Inspections to examine what moneys have bin raised and taken up in the several
Counties of this Commonwealth, and by whom, and what is become of the same,
with power to send for persons, papers, writings, etc.

Resolved by the Parliament, That all Officers who were in Commission on the
11th of October, 1659. and all other Officers and Soldiers in the late
Defection and Rebellion, who have already submitted, and such as shall
hereafter submit themselves, and have returned, or shall return to their Duty
and Obedience to the Parliament, before the Ninth of this instant January,
shall be, and are hereby pardoned and indempnified for Life and Estate,
provided that this Vote does not extend unto the pardoning of wilful Murder:
and it is Ordered, That all such of the said Officers and Soldiers, who shall
so return to their Duty and Obedience to the Parliament, shall be disposed of
by the Council of State, Commissioners for the management of the Army, or
General Monck.

Resolved, That John Lambert Esquire, shall be included in this Vote.

Ordered, That the Council of State do see that this Vote be put in execution.

The Committee appointed to treat with the City, reported, That it was the
desire of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, to acqui^sce in the
Parliament, under whom God had blessed them with peace, when there was War
throughout the whole Nation, and to yield Obedience to their Authority.

Since the Raising and Rendevousing of the Yorkshire Horse by the Lord Fairfax,
and the Gentry, the Design of colonel Lilburn is diverted, and the Tower of
York secured for he Parliament; so that the Gentleman was forced to wheel
about, and retreat with his two Troops to the Lord Lambert, who we hear has
commanded his Forces from the confines of Northumberland, Westmerland, and
Cumberland, conceiving that through the remoteness of their Quarters, many
interposed for a diversion; and that whole Troops, as well as Foot Companies,
fall off (...)

The Town and Castle of Carlisle it is said, has declared their concurrence
with the Yorkshire Forces, who are ready for a conjunction, as occasion shall
invite. Skipton upon Craven has assuredly declared for the Parliament, as also
the castles of Scarbrough, Helmsley, and diverse other places; but what the
intent and design of the Lambertarians are, in gathering to a Body; there is no
certainty: yet it is probable, though many conjecture otherwise, that it may be
in order to a Return from his late Defection and Disobedience to the Parliament.

FINIS.

