RULES OR ARTICLES For the Horse-Coursing at LEITH, Erected and Established by
the right Honorable, The Lord Provest, Bailies, and Council of EDINBURGH; as
follows,
I. IMprimis, There is two Cups in the Year to be run for about the Stoups of
Leith, each of them of the value of Twenty pounds sterling: And the dimension
of the said Course is twice about the whole Stoups, and thereafter out and in.

II. Item, the Diet for the Course of the first Cup, is to be upon Thursday,
the first day of March next ensuing, in the Year 1666. at eleven hours
before-noon.

III. Item, the Diet for the Course of the second Cup, is to be upon Wednesday
the thirteenth day of June next ensuing in the Year aforesaid, at two hours
after noon.

IV. Item, every Horse to run for the Cups respective aforesaid, is to be kept
at Leith ten days space before the Course; and for evidencing thereof, at the
time of entry, to be kept as said is, must be Booked in the Clerks-chamber of
Leith: And for each Horse so Booked, the Clerk is to have Twelve shillings
Scots. And each Horse that runs at the Cup, is to carry eight stone weight, and
the winner, to have one pund weight of allowance; and if there be one ounce
more, the second Horse is permitted to challenge the Plate, and so forth
successively, to the last Horse.

V. Item, each horse that Runs, is to put in Twenty shillings sterling; and the
second Horse is to have the Stakes.

VI. Item, each Horse that Runs, is to be led out to the starting-stoup, one
hours space before Low Water.

VII. Item, each Horse that shall happen to ride within the Stoups, is obliged
to round the Stoup again; otherwise, he gains nothing.

VIII. Item, There is also a Saddle, of the value of Fifty shillings sterling
to be run for, on the first Monday of January, 1666. years next ensuing, at
eleven hours before noon: and so forth every Month thereafter throughout the
said Year (excepting the two Months above mentioned appointed for the Cups) at
the Diets following, viz. The first Thursday of February, at one of clock in
the afternoon; The first Monday of April, at three of clock in the afternoon;
The first Tuesday of May, at eleven of clock before noon; The second Friday of
July, at two of clock in the afternoon; The second Saturday of August, at one
of clock in the afternoon; The second Tuesday of September, at two of clock in
the afternoon; The second Monday of October, at twelve of clock before noon;
The first Wednesday of November, at twelve of clock before noon; And the first
Thursday of December, at the same hour.

IX. Item, no Horse above ten pound sterling price, is permitted to run for the
Saddle; at which price they are obliged to sell to any of the Riders, if they
be challenged before riding.

X. Item, every Horse that rides for the Saddle, is to be kept at Leith, forty
eight hours space before the Course; and for evidencing thereof, are to be
Booked in the Clerks-chamber, and pay as said is: But if any Horses besides,
offer to Run, which has not been kept, and Booked at Leith, as said is, they
are only to be admitted to the Course with consent of those who observe the
Rule by keeping their Horses in manner foresaid, after Booking and payment of
the duty thereof.

XI. Item, each Horse that runs for the Saddle, is to put in Five shillings
sterling, and the second Horse draws the Stakes.

XII. Item, the Horses that run for the Saddle, their Riders are not to be
weighted, but permitted to ride as light as they may be provided.

XIII. Item, none of the Spectators may presume to ride without the Stoups, but
are to keep themselves within the Stoups, observing the distance of six score
from the Horses that are in the Course; under the pain of Ten shilling
sterling, to be incurred by, and exacted from each contraveener, toties
quoties, the Triers only excepted.

It is to be noted, that the Prize may not be challenged by any single Person
whatsomever, except there be another Horse (at least) offering, and actually
contending with him in the Course for the same.

EDINBURGH, Printed by a Society of Stationers. Anno 1665.


