ORDERS, Set down by the Lord Provost, Bailiffs, and Council of Edinburgh, to
be observed by the Constables thereof, in discharge of their Offices within
this Burgh, and Liberties of the sam^
IMprimis, the Constables being elected by the Provost, Bailiffs, and Council,
shall be obliged to accept the Charge and Office of Constabulary, under the
pains of imprisonment of their persons, and payment of an Un-law of ten pounds
Scots, and to rem^in^ in Waird ay and while the same be paid: and under the
pain of Horning. And for discharge of an honest duty in their Offices, being
solemnly sworn, in presence of the Provost, Bailiffs, and Council of this
Burgh, shall give the Oath following;

OATH.
THat they and ilk ane of them shall faithfully and truly discharge their
Offices of Constabulary within the bounds committed to th(...) charge, for the
space of twelve Months next after their admission: And shall not for favor,
respect, or fear of any person, forbe(...) to do that which becomes them in
their Office; And above all things, they shall regard the keeping and
preserving of the peace: And shall at every necessar occasion come to the
Provost and Bailiffs of this Burgh, or any one of them, and give a due and true
information of any break or other insolency against the Peace within the bounds
of their commandment: And shall no ways hide, cover, nor conceal the same, nor
any probation or light that they can give for clearing and proving thereof: So
help me God: And by God himself.

ITem, a Constable shall have liberty to take and apprehend any suspected
persons, idle Vagabonds, or night Walkers, and imprison them till they find
surety for their behavior, at the discretion of any of the Judges for Civils,
or Criminals, or the Lord Provost and Bailiffs of this Burgh.

II. Item, a Constable shall have power to challenge any person within this
Burgh, or Liberty thereof, that shall be found wearing Pistolets, or Daggers,
and shall present them before the Provost, Bailiffs, or any one of them, to be
punished by them for their fault, conform to the Act of Parliament.

III. Item, upon appearance of any fray, or stir within this Burgh, either by
day or night, betwixt any parties, or any other sudden accident that may fall
forth, the Constable shall take unto him the assistance of his neighbors for
separating of the parties, and for order taking with any inconvenience that
shall happen to ensue, and shall take the party or parties, and commit them in
waird, or present them to the Provost or Bailiffs. Attour, if any harm shall
happen to be done to the Constable, or any of his assistants, The Constable
shall take them and put them in waird, and present them to the Provost and
Bailiffs, or any of them to be accordingly punished for their fault.

IV. Item, if any person or persons make any plea or tumult within this Burgh,
and flee to any house, the Constable shall have power to break up the doors
thereof; and albeit the party or parties flee without the bounds of the
Constables Charge, yet may the Constable follow and apprehend him or them in a
fresh pursuit, and commit them to waird to be punished for their fault.

V. Item, ilk Constable shall search, and seek within the bounds committed to
his charge, that no Jesuits, Seminary Priests, nor trafficking Papists, haunt,
use, or lodge, or be reset therein, and if they can find or try any, to take
and apprehend them and present them to the Provost and Bailiffs, to be tried.

VI. Item, the Constable shall take and apprehend all Vagabonds, and sturdy
Beggars or Egyptians, and put them in waird to be punished for their fault,
according to the Act of Parliament.

VII. Item, the Constable shall take and apprehend all idle persons, who have
no calling to live by, and who will not take themselves to some Labor, Trade,
or Occupation, and shall present them before the Provost and Bailiffs, who
after examination and trial shall punish them according to their crime and
demerit.

VIII. Item, the Constables being informed of any person guilty or culpable of
slaughter, murder, theft, or any other capital cri(...) whatsomever, shall
then require his neighbors to assist him, for^ the safe apprehending and
convoying of such persons before the^ Provost and Bailiffs, to be punished for
their fault.

IX. Item, the Constable shall search and seek the bounds committed to his
charge, and suffer no Vagabonds, Beggars, nor infamous persons, to remain,
dwell, or be reset in his bounds, and if any be within his said bounds, to
show the same to the Magistrates, that they may be punished and removed forth of
this Burgh.

X. Item, ilk Constable shall concur one with another, at all occasions needful.

XI. Item, the whole Constables shall, upon every last Saturday of every
Month, compear and present themselves before the Provost and Bailiffs in the
Council-house, to give an account of their diligence in their Offices, as they
will answer upon their obedience.

XII. Item, ilk Constable shall cause the bounds committed to his charge, be
kept clean of all kind of Filth, Middings, and Swine, and to that effect for
keeping of the Streets and Passages clean, ilk Constable shall have power in
his own bounds, after trial of any person or persons casting out Filth at their
Doors, Windows, or Shots, either in the fore-gate, or back-sides, or laying any
Filth or Middings on the High-streets, Closses, or Passages, within this Burgh,
to cause the person guilty to pay an unlaw of five pounds toties quoties, and
to commit them in waird there to remain until the same be paid.

XIII. Item, ilk Constable within his bounds, shall take and apprehend all
banners, swearers and blasphemers of Gods Name, either in the Streets, Markets,
or at the Wells, and to punish them either by warding, or putting of them in
the Joggs or Stocks according to the quality of their fault.

XIV. Item, if any person shall refuse or delay to concu(...) the Constable in
executing of his office, they shall be impri(...) and severely punished by
command of the Provost and Bailif(...) cording to the quality of their offense.

XV. Item, the Constable shall be obliged to receive at (...) junctions, or
Statutes that the Provost, or Bailiffs and Counci^ (...) enjoin to them at any
time hereafter.

EDINBURGH, Printed by George Swintoun, one of His Majesty's Printers. 1676


