THE PARLIAMENTS DESIRE and RESOLUTION Cocerning the PRINCE PRESENTED TO HIS
MAJESTY at York by the Lord Howard of Char.

Wherein is expressed their loyal and faithful intentions toward his
Majesty and his Highness the Prince, his Son.

And their Desire of his Return to Hampton Court, according to his Majesty's
first Resolution and Intention, whereby the fear of Subject may be removed,
and their Jealousy secured,

printer's or publisher's device Tudor rose French fleur-de-lis Scottish
thistle depiction of Irish harp

LONDON, Printed for J. Greensmith, and A. Coe. 1642.

The Parliaments Desire and Resolution concerning the PRINCE.
What have been and still are the distractions of these times, are well known
to all this Kingdom, the meanest and weakest apprehension needs no other
expression then what they can apprehend from the indisposition of these times,
arising from the discontents between his Majesty and his now assembled
Parliament, which seems to frustrate the happy and joyful proceedings of the
willing Subject, whereby he would endeavor to settle the peaceable and
flourishing Estate of this Kingdom. His Majesty's removal beyond all thought
or expectation from his Parliament, he having had no just occasion thereof
offered unto him, but was raised by a most unjust suspicion and jealousy of
their fidelity and loyalty, did stir up strange and fearful conceptions in
their breasts, which for a while did dash and crush all their Designs and
Proceedings for the peace of the Kingdom, which cannot smile and look merry,
so long as the State and quiet thereof stands thus distracted, and indeed how
can the Bride but mourn, which at the time and expectation of most comfort,
wants the true and real consolation of her Bridegroom; or how can the Body be
in health and prosperity, when it is deprived of the benefit and comfort of the
Head; as well may the Day look smiling and glorious without the luster of the
Sun, as the Subject look cheerful, being deprived of the happy Society of
his Sovereign, whose chiefest happiness consists in the fruition of a loving
Sovereign, as the happiness of a Child in the enjoying of a loving Father.
Often has the House of Parliament endeavored by many loyal and submisse
Solicitations and Petitions, to return the Glory and Comfort of his Person
unto his Subjects, whereby their diverted hearts will be much elevated and
raised from the melancholy fears which they are now involved in; but all in
vain, his Majesty being with-drawne from them by the sinister and malicious
counsels of the malignant party. Since this unhappy loss of his Majesty, which
has produced such discontents generally in the Subject, worse counsel has
possessed his Majesty's tender and loving breast, and so far prevailed with
him, that against his first and natural intention, he has against the desire
and entreaty of the Parliament deprived them of the presence of his Highness
the Prince, which has produced a general grief and fear in the Subject, and
caused him to suspect, that his Majesty's intentions are beyond their former
belief, cross and opposite to their loyalty, and intentionall proceeding for
the benefit of this Kingdom: For what can their loves and loyalties otherwise
apprehend. when they are not only denied his Majesty's presence and assistance
to countenance and furtheir their Liberties, but also are denied him in whose
welfare and prosperity consists the future good and continuing happnesse of
this Kingdom.

They first humbly desired his Majesty that his Highness might not be removed
from Hampton Court, which did seem to take some good effect, and to be with
welcome entertained by his Majesty, but upon the Queens removal toward
Dover, the King returning, and resolving his stay at Greenwich, the Prince was
commanded from Greenwich to attend his Majesty there when they formerly
conceived, that his Majesty had resolved his stay at Hampton Court: Whereupon
they often did petition his Majesty, that his Highness might return to
Hampton Court, their desire being grounded upon the indisposition of the
Marquess of Hartford, whose fidelity and faith was thought worthy of so great
a trust, as by the House to be chosen Governor to his Highness, who now being
much disposed to sickness, was not able to attend the Prince to any remote
place, being unable to travel, by reason of his continual casualty of health,
he being chosen his Governor, it was not thought convenient he should far
depart: Neither was it to be construed or imagined a needless or unnecessary
fear or jealousy, considering the future estate and welfare did wholly depend
upon his safety and welfare, and in him did lie the joy and comfort of the
Loyal Subject; from this one ground also the Parliament does conceive many
fears and jealousies may arise, and be promoted in the hearts of his Majesty's
most loyal Subjects, which will be very necessary to remove for the content of
the Subject, and the peace of this Land: Neither can his Majesty in equity deny
these faithful desires of these his loyal Subjects, since their intentions,
care, and vigilancie have been always industrious to maintain his Majesty's
Rights and Honors, and to provide for the future welfare as the present, both
of Majesty's person, his Royal Progeny, and the security and happiness of his
whole Kingdom. They are confident that none do mis-construe their pious
intentions, but those only who in an indisposition to the public Good, or a
guilt of their own integrity, have strived to possess his Majesty with these
sinister and evil counsels against his loyally disposed Parliament, and their
just proceedings.

To avoid these and the like occasion of discontents, the Parliament did desire
his Majesty, that his Highness might continue at Hampton Court, by whose
presence they hope to settle the discontents of these times and also to secure
themselves from all future breaches, when they may daily behold the welfare of
him in whom they do place all their future hopes, and in whose miscarrying an
universal mourning must of necessity overspread the face of the whole
Kingdom.

FINIS.

