EDINBURGH, The 19. day of July, 1665.
FOrsameikle, as the Provest, Bailies, and Council of this Burgh, taking to
their Consideration the Proclamation emitted by His Majesty's Privy Council of
this Kingdom, Prohibiting and Discharging all Trade and Commerse betwixt this
Kingdom, and the Merchants and Inhabitants of the City of London, Suburbs, and
Places thereabouts, and all other Towns, Villages, and Places of the Kingdom
of England, which are Infected or suspected to be infected with the Sickness,
or Plague of Pestilence, by sending or bringing of Goods or Commodities by
Packs, or any other manner of Carriage by Sea or Land, until the first day of
November next to come; and ay and while the Restraint and Prohibition be taken
off: And that such Persons who are Abroad, do not offer to bring home any Goods
or Commodities until they acquaint the Magistrates of the Places where they
intend to come, from what place they came; and abide their Trial for the space
of forty days, and thereafter, till they have the allowance as freemen. And
that all such Persons who shall come from England to this Kingdom, or bring
Goods or Commodities, by Packs or other Carriage by Land, shall stay upon the
Borders till they acquaint the Magistrates from whence they came, and bring
sufficient Passes and Testimonials with them, that the Places are free of all
suspicion of the Plague: With certification, that if any Person contraveen,
they shall be punished with the loss of their Lives, Goods, Packs and
Commodities brought by them, either by Sea or Land, without mercy. Therefore, I
Command and Charge, in our Sovereign Lords Name, and in Name and behalf of the
Lord Provest, Bailies, and Council of this Burgh, that all the Inhabitants
within the same give due and exact Obedience to the said Proclamation in all
points, and to receive no Person coming from England within their Houses,
without Warrant of the Magistrates of this Burgh, under the pain of Death, but
favor.

EDINBURGH, Printed by a Society of Stationers, 1665.


