EDINBURGH, The ninth of January, 1685. PROCLAMATION, Annent Heretors, Ma^ters
and Mistresses of Families.
FOrasmuch, as the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, by their Order, of the
date the (...) day of January instant, did thereby Require and Command the
Provost, and Baillies of Edinburgh, to take exact Lists of the whole
Inhabitants of the said City of Edinburgh, Leith, and the other Suburbs
thereof, and Liberties pertaining thereto, in manner following; viz. All the
Heretors, Life-renters, Factors, or Doers, Tutors and Curators of Minors,
according to the Cess-rolls, or otherwise, that they, and all concerned, may
make Faith thereupon; All which Persons are to be given in upon Oath, to the
said Magistrates; and the Masters, and Mistresses of Families, are to give up
Lists of all their Children, above the Age of sixteen Years; and of their
Servants, or Lodgers which they have had Entertained or Lodged, since the
beginning of November last, and that upon Oath: These are therefore to give
Intimation, that at the first Advertisement given to the Heretors, Liferenters,
Factors or Doers, Tutors, and Curators of Minors, and Inhabitants, Masters, and
Mistresses of the Families of this City, and Suburbs thereof, by the Town
Officers, that they appear before the Magistrate of their respective Bounds,
and there give obedience to the said Act of His Majesty's Privy Council,
immediately after the said Intimation, without delay; Certifying such as shall
failie, their Names shall be given up to His Majesty's Privy Council, that they
may be proceeded against as Persons disaffected to the Government.

Jo. Richardson Clc.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer in His most Sacred
Majesty, City and College, Anno 1665


