EDINBVRGH, 6. April 1653.
FOrsameikle, as the Provest, Bailies, and Counsel of this Burgh being
conveened in Counsel, finding that the good Town has been, and is greatly
abused by strangers, vagabonds, unfree Persons, and masterlesse People, both
Men and Women, who take up their residence and dwelling within this Burgh, and
harbors and resets all manner of wicked and ungodly Persons, whereby the Town
is defiled with all kind of Vice, the Kirk overburthened with their
maintenance, and the monthly Contributions and Collections appointed for the
Towns Poor, are employed and consumed upon them. For remedy whereof, It is
statute and ordained, that no Landlord or Heritour within this Burgh, set
their Houses to such unlawful persons, nor admit of such tennents to reside
therein, nor receive any strangers whatsomever without a famous Testimonial of
their honest conversation to be approven be the Magistrate, or Kirk Session
where they remain. And that the late Incomers, and Strangers who are evidently
known to have neither means nor lawful Calling whereby to live, be timeously
warned be their Landlords, to remove forth of this Burgh, and return to the
places of their former residence, whether they be Men or Women, under such
pains and penalties as the Magistrate shall think fit to enjoin for their
contempt and dissobedience. And ordains their presents to be published through
this burgh be touk of Drum, and affixed in the publict market places, that none
pretend Ignorance of the same.


