THE ORDINANCE AND DECLARATION of the Lords and Commons, for the Assessing all
such who have not contributed sufficiently for raising of Money, Plate, etc.

WITH HIS MAJESTY'S DECLARATION TO ALL His loving Subjects upon occasion
thereof.

Charles R.

OUr express pleasure is, That this Our Declaration be published in all
Churches and Chapels within Our Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, by
the Parsons, Vicars or Curates of the same.

SHREWSBURY, Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1642.

An Ordinance and Declaration of the Lords and Commons in Parliament.
WHereas the King, seduced by wicked Counsel, has raised an Army, and levied
War against the Parliament, and great number of Forces are daily raised under
the commands of Papists and other ill affected persons, by Commissions from His
Majesty; And whereas diverse Delinquents are protected from public Justice by
His Majesty's Army, and sundry outrages and rapines are daily committed by the
Soldiers of the said Army, who have no respect to the Laws of God or the Land,
but burn and plunder the Houses, and seize and destroy the persons and goods of
dive^s His Majesty's good Subjects; And whereas for the maintenance of the said
Army diverse Assessements are made upon several Counties, and His Majesty's
Subjects are compelled by the Soldiers to pay the same; which said Army if it
should continue, would soon ruin and waste the whole Kingdom, and overthrow
Religion, Law, and Liberty, For suppressing of which said Army and ill-affected
persons, there is no probable way under God, but by the Army raised by
Authority of the Parliament; which said Army so raised, cannot be maintained
without great sums of Money, yet for raising such sums, by reason of His
Majesty's withdrawing himself from the advice of the Parliament, there can be
no Act of Parliament passed with His Majesty's assent, albeit there is great
justice that the said Moneys should be raised. The Lords and Commons in
Parliament, having taken the same into their serious consideration, and knowing
that the said Army so raised by them, has been hitherto for the most part
maintained by the voluntary contribution of diverse well-affected persons, who
have freely contributed according to their abilities.

But considering there are diverse others within the Cities of London and
Westminster, and the Suburbs of the same, and also within the Borough of
Southwark, that have not contributed at all toward the maintenance of the said
Army, or if they have, yet not answerable to their Estates, who notwithstanding
receive benefit and protection by the same Army, as well as any others, and
therefore it is most just, that they should as well as others be charged to
contribute to the maintenance thereof.

Be it therefore Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, and
by Authority thereof, That Isaac Pennington Lord Major of the City of London,
Sir John Wollaston Knight and Aderman, Alderman Towes, Alderman Warner,
Alderman Andrews, Alderman Chambers, Alderman Fowkes, Sir Thomas Seham Knight
and Alderman, Samuel Vassell, John Ven, Morries Thompson, and Richard Warrin,
Citizens, or any four of them, shall hereby have power and Authority to
nominate, and appoint in every Ward within the City of London, six such Persons
as they, or any four of them, shall think fit, which said six so nominated, or
any four of them, shall hereby have power to enquire of any that shall remain,
or be within the said several Wards that have not contributed upon the
Propositions of both Houses of Parliament, concerning the raising of Money,
Plate, Horse, Horsemen, and Arms, for defense of the King and both Houses of
Parliament, and also of such as are able men, that have contributed, yet not
according to their Estates and Abilities. And the said six persons so
nominated, or any four of them within their several and respective wards and
limits, shall have power to assesse such person or persons as are of ability
and have not contributed, and also such as have contributed, yet not according
to their ability, to pay such sum or sums of Money according to their Estates,
as the said Assessors or any four of them shall think fit and reasonable, so as
the same exceed not the twentieth part of their Estates, and to nominate and
appoint fit persons for the collection thereof. And if any person so assessed
shall refuse to pay the Money assessed upon him, it shall be lawful to and for
the said Assessors and Collectors or any of them, to levy the said sum so
assessed by way of distress and sale of the goods of the person so assessed,
and refusing: And if any person so distrained shall make resistance, it shall
be lawful to and for the respective Assessors and Collectors or any of them,
to call to their assistance any the Trained bands of the said City of London,
or any other His Majesty's Subjects, who are hereby required to be ayding and
assisting to the said Assessors and Collectors in the premises. And it is
hereby further ordained, That the respective Burgesses of Westminster and
Southwark; together with the several Committees appointed for the
subscriptions of Money, Plate, Horse, Horsemen and Arms within the said City
and Borough, shall respectively have power hereby to nominate Sessors for the
same City and Borough, in such manner as the Lord Major, etc. has for the City
of London, and the said Assessors, or any four of them, to name Collectors as
aforesaid; which said Assessors and Collectors shall have the same power
respectively within their respective limits, as those to be nominated within
the said City of London have hereby limited to them. And for the Suburbs of
London and Westminster, the respective Knights of the Shires where the said
Suburbs are shall have hereby the like power to name Assessors, and they so
named, or any four of them, and the Collectors by them to be nominated, or any
of them within their respective limits, shall have the like power respectively
as the Assessors and Collectors for London have by virtue of this Ordinance.
And be it ordained that the sums so assessed and levied as aforesaid shall be
paid in at Guild Hall London, to the hands of Sir John Wollastone, Knight, John
Warner, John Towes, and Thomas Andrews Aldermen, or any two of them: And the
Assessors and Collectors to be nominated by virtue hereof shall weekly report
to the Committee of the House of Commons, for the propositions aforesaid, what
sums of money have been assessed, and what sums have been levied weekly
according to the purport hereof, and the said Moneys so levied and paid in
shall be issued forth in such sort as the other Moneys raised upon the
propositions aforesaid, and not otherwise.

Die Martis, 29. November. 1642.
WHereas a late Ordinance is passed by both Houses of Parliament, for the
Reasons therein declared, for the Assessing of all such persons within the
Cities of London and Westminster and the Suburbs thereof, with the Borough of
Southwark, as have not contributed upon the Propositions of both Houses of
Parliament for raising of Money, Plate, Horse, Horsemen, and Arms, for defense
of the King; Parliament and Kingdom, or have not contributed proportionably to
their estates and abilities. And whereas it is thought fit, that some additions
be made for further explanation and better execution of the said Ordinance. Be
it further ordained and declared by the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, That such persons as shall be assessed by the respective Assessors
in the said Ordinance appointed, and shall within six days next after notice
given them, or left at their several houses within the said Cities, Suburbs,
or Borough, pay in the one moity of the said sums of Money so assessed, and
within twelve days after the said notice given as aforesaid, the other moity
there of, unto the Treasurers of Money and Plate Guild Hall London, or unto the
Collectors appointed by the said Ordinance, respectively to receive the same,
that then the said Treasurers, or Collectors, shall give Acquittances for the
same, as has been done to such who have lent Moneys or Plate, upon the
Propositions of both Houses as aforesaid. And the said Moneys so paid to the
said Treasurers, or to the said several Collectors, shall be repaid upon the
Public Faith, as all other Moneys lent upon the said Propositions of both
Houses. And as for those who shall so far discover their disaffection, as not
to bring in the several sums of Money so assessed upon them to the persons
before appointed, within the times limited, that then their goods shall be
distrained and sold according to the said Ordinance. And if no sufficient
Distress be found, that then the said Collectors shall respectively have power
to enquire of any sum or sums of Money due, or to be due unto them respectively
so assessed from any person or persons for any Rents, Tithes, Goods, or Debts,
or for any other thing or cause whatsoever. And the said respective Collectors
shall have power by virtue of this Ordinance, to receive all, or any part of
the said sums due, or to be due unto them or any of them so assessed, until
the full value of the sum or sums so assessed, and the charges in levying and
recovering of the same shall be received and satisfied. And the said respective
Collectors shall have further power to compound for any of the said Rents,
Tithes, Goods, or Debts due unto the said person so assessed respectively as
aforesaid, with any person or persons by whom the said Rents, Tithes, Goods, or
Debts, are, or shall be owing, as also to give full and ample discharge for the
Money by them so received, upon composition or otherwise, which discharges
shall be good and effectual to all intents and purposes. And if the sum or
sums of Money so assessed cannot be levied by any of these means or ways,
then the persons so respectively assessed, shall be imprisoned in such places
of this Kingdom, and for so long time as the Committee of the House of Commons
for Examinations, shall appoint and order: And the families of all such persons
so imprisoned, shall no longer remain within the Cities of London and
Westminster the Suburbs and the Counties adjacent.

And be it further Ordained, that all and every the Assessors and Collectors of
the said several sums, shall have the protection of both Houses of
Parliament for their indemnity indemnity in this service, and receive such
reasonable allowances for their pains taken, and charges disbursed; or to be
disbursed therein, as the Committee of Lords and Commons for advance of Money
and other necessaries for the Army raised by the Parliament, shall apportion
and appoint.

An Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, for the better Provision of
Victuals, and other Necessaries for the Army, and for payment and satisfaction
to be made for such Provisions.
Die Martis, 29. November. 1642.
It is Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That Committees shall be
named in all Counties, to take care for provisions of Victuals for the Army
raised by the Parliament, as likewise for the taking up of Horses for service
in the Field, Dragoneers, and Draught-Horses; as likewise for borrowing of
Money or Plate to supply the Army. Which Committees, or any two or more of
them, shall have power and authority to value all kind of Provisions both for
Men and Horse, all kind of Horse for Service or otherwise, which shall be
voluntarily offered to be lent upon the Public Faith, or likewise to receive
any Money or Plate to be lent as before; and that upon Certificate of any two
of such Committees, the same provisions of Horses, Money, and Plate, and the
value thereof shall be entered by the Treasurer of the Propositions, and shall
be repayed to the party from whom the same was received, with like
Consideration as other Money lent.

And in case the owners of such provisions, Money, Plate, and Horses, shall
refuse or neglect to bring in the same upon Public Faith, for the use of the
Army, for the better preventing the spoil and embezeling of such provisions of
Money, Plate, and Horses, by the disorder of the Soldiers, and that they may
not come into the hands of the Enemies, It is further ordered, That the
Committees before mentioned, or any two of them, be hereby authorized and
enabled to send for such Provisions, Money, Plate, and Horses, and take the
same into their custody, and to set an indifferent value and rate upon them;
which value they shall certify to the Treasurers for the Propositions, to be
repaid at such time, and in such manner, as shall be Ordered by both Houses of
Parliament. It is likewise Ordered, That the said Committees of the several
and respective Counties shall meet and consult with the Committees of the
adjacent and neighbor Counties, unto the place or places where the said Army,
or any part thereof, shall pass and remain, concerning the receiving,
procuring, valuing, and disposing of such provisions, Horses, Money, and Plate.
And if they cannot conveniently meet, that then it shall be lawful for any
two, or more of the Committee, to execute the several Services above mentioned
in the adjoining Counties, as well as in the County wherein he is named a
Committee; and that such certificates as they shall make of any Provisions,
Horses, Money, or Plate, shall be as effectual for the securities of the
parties, as if the same were received and taken within the County for which he
or they are named Committees. And the said Committees, or any two, or more of
them, shall cause the said provisions to be delivered to the Commissary for the
Victuals, or to his Deputy, and such other Officers of the Army, who may be
charged with the same upon their account, and shall certify the Treasurer of
the Army, or his Deputy, that so defalcation of the value thereof may be made
out of the pay of such Officers and Soldiers as shall receive the same.

And the said Committee shall likewise cause all such Money and Plate to be
delivered unto the Treasurer of the Army, or his Deputy, who shall take care to
convey the Plate unto the Treasurer for the Propositions, and shall be charged
with all such Money upon his account, as with other Money received from them.

His MAJESTY'S DECLARATION TO ALL HIS LOVING SUBJECTS, upon occasion of the
aforesaid Ordinance and Declaration.
It would not be believed (at least great pains have been taken that it might
not) that the pretended Ordinance of the Militia (the first attempt that ever
was to make a Law by Ordinance without Our consent) or the keeping Us out of
Hull, and taking Our Arms and Munition from Us, could any way concern the
Interest, Property, or Liberty of the Subject, and it was confessed by that
desperate Declaration it self of the 26, of May, that if they were found guilty
of that charge of destroying the title and interest of Our Subjects to their
Lands and Goods, it were indeed a very great Crime. But it was a strange fatal
Lethargy which had seized Our good People, and kept them from discerning, that
the Nobility, Gentry, Commonalty of England, were not only stripped of their
Preeminences and Privileges, but of their Liberties and Estates, when Our just
Rights were denied Us; and that no Subject could from thenceforth expect to
dwell at home, when We were driven from Our Houses and Our Towns. It was not
possible, that a Commission could be granted to the Earl of Essex, to raise an
Army against Us, and for the safety of Our Person, and preservation of the
Peace of the Kingdom, to pursue, kill and stay Us and all who wish well to Us,
but that in a short time inferior Commanders, by the same Authority, would
require Our good Subjects for the maintenance of the Property of the Subject,
to supply them with such sums of Money as they think fit, upon the penalty of
being Plundered withal extremity of War (as the style of Sir Edward Baytons
Warrant runs against Our poor Subjects in Wiltshire) and by such Rules of
unlimited Arbitrary Power, as are inconsistent with the least pretense or
shadow of that Property it would seem to defend.

If there could be yet any understanding so unskilful and Supine to believe,
That these Disturbers of the public peace do intend any thing but a general
confusion, they have brought them a sad Argument to their own doors to
convince them; after this Ordinance and Declaration, it is not in any sober man's
power to believe himself worth any thing, or that there is such a thing as Law,
Liberty, Property left in England, under the Jurisdiction of these men, and the
same power that robbs them now of the Twentieth part of their Estates, has by
that but made a claim and entitled it self to the other Ninteen, when it shall
be thought fit to hasten the general ruin. Sure, if the minds of all men be
not stubbornly prepared for Servitude, they will look on this Ordinance as the
greatest Prodigy of Arbitrary Power and Tyranny that any Age has brought
forth in any Kingdom; other Grievances (and the greatest) have been conceived
intolerable, rather by the Logique and Consequence, then by the Pressure it
self, this at once sweeps away all that the Wisdom and Justice of Parliaments
have provided for them. Is their Property in their Estates (so carefully looked
to by their Ancestors, and so amply established by Us against any possibility
of Invasion from the Crown) which makes the meanest Subject as much a Lord of
his own as the greatest Peer, to be valued or considered? here is a Twentieth
part of every man's Estate (or so much more as four men will please to call the
Twentieth part) taken away at once, and yet a Power left to take a Twentieth
still of that which remains, and this to be levied by such circumstances of
severity, as no Act of Parliament ever consented to. Is their liberty which
distinguishes Subjects from Slaves, and in which this freeborn Nation has the
Advantage of all Christendom, dear to them? they shall not only be imprisoned
in such places of this Kingdom, (a latitude of Judgment no Court can challenge
to it self in any Cases) but for so long time as the Committee of the house of
Commons for examination shall appoint and order; the House of Commons it self
having never assumed, or in the least degree pretended to a power of
Judicature, having no more Authority to administer an Oath (the only way to
discover and find out the truth of facts) to, then to cut off the heads of any
of Our Subjects; and this Committee being so far from being a part of the
Parliament, that it is destructive to the whole, by usurping to it self all the
power of King, Lords, and Commons. All who know any thing of Parliaments, know,
That a Committee of either House ought not by the Law to publish their own
Results, neither are their conclusions of any force without the Confirmation of
the House, which has the same power of controlling them as if the matter had
never been debated; but that any Committee should be so contracted (as this of
Examination, a style no Committee ever bore before this Parliament) as to
exclude the Members of the House, who are equally trusted by their Country,
from being present at the Counsels, is so monstrous to the Privileges of
Parliament, that it is no more in the power of any man to give up that freedom,
then of himself to order, That from that time the place for which he serves,
shall never more send a Knight or Burgess to the Parliament; and in truth is
no less then to alter the whole frame of Government, to pull up Parliaments by
the Roots, and to commit the Lives, Liberties, and Estates of all the People of
England to the Arbitrary power of a few unqualified Persons, who shall dispose
thereof according to their discretion, without account to any Rule or Authority
whatsoever.

Are their Friends, their Wives, and Children (the greatest blessings of Peace
and the comforts of Life) precious to them? would even their penury and
imprisonment be less grievous by those cordialls? they shall be devorced from
them, banished, and shall no longer remain within the Cities of London and
Westminster, the Suburbs and the Counties adjacent; and how far those adjacent
Counties shall extend no man knows.

Is there any thing now left to enjoy, but Liberty to Rebel, and destroy one
another? are the outward blessings only of Peace, Property, and Liberty taken,
and forced from Our Subjects? are their Consciences free and unassaulted by the
violence of these firebrarnds? sure the Liberty and freedom of Conscience
cannot suffer by these men: Alas! all these punishments are imposed upon
them, because they will not submit to Actions contrary to their natural
Loyalty, to their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and to their late
voluntary Protestation, which obliges them to the care of Our Person and Our
just Rights. Now many Persons of Honor, Quality, and Reputation of the
several Counties of England, are now Imprisoned, without any objection against
them, but suspicion of their Loyalty? how many of the gravest and most
substantial Citizens of London, by whom the Government and Discipline of that
City was preserved, are disgraced, robbed, and imprisoned, without any Process
of Law, or color of accusation, but of obedience to the Law and Government of
the Kingdom? whilst Anabaptists and Brownists, with the assistance of vicious
and deboshed Persons, of desperate Fortunes, take upon them to break up and
rifle houses, as public and avowed Ministers of a new invented Authority: How
many godly, pious, and painful Divines, whose Lives and Learning has made
them of reverend, Estimation, are now standered with inclination to Popery,
discountenanced, and imprisoned, for discharging their Consciences in
instructing the People in the Christian duty of Religion and Obedience, whilst
Shismaticall, Illiterate, and Scandalous Preachers till the Pulpits and
Churches with Blasphemy. Irreverence, and Treason, and incite their Auditory to
nothing but Murder and Rebellion. We pass over the vulgar charm, by which
they have captivated such who have been contented to dispense with their
Consciences for the preservation of their Estates, and by which they persuade
men cheerfully to part with this twentieth part of their Estate to the good
work in hand, for whoever will give what he has, may escape robbing; They shall
be repaid upon the Public Faith, as all other Moneys lent upon the
Propositions of both Houses; It may be so, but men must be condemned to a
strange unthriftinesse who will lend upon such Security. The Public Faith
indeed is as great an earnest as the State can give, and engages the Honor,
Reputation and Honesty of the Nation, and is the Act of the Kingdom, it is the
Security of the King, the Lords and Commons, which can never need an Executor,
can never dye, never be Bankrupt, and therefore We willingly consented to it
for the Indemnity of Our good Subjects of Scotland, (who We hope will not
think the worse of it for being so often and so cheaply mentioned since.) But
that a Vote of one or both Houses should be an engagement upon the Public
Faith, is as impossible, as that the Committee of the House of Commons for
Examinations, should be the High Court of Parliament.

And what is or can be said with the least shadow of reason to justify these
Extravagances? We have not lately heard of the old fundamental Laws which used
to warrant the Innovations, this needs a Refuge even below those foundations:
They will say they cannot manage their great undertakings without such
extraordinary ways; We think so too, but that proves only they have
undertaken somewhat they ought not to undertake, not that it is lawful for
them to do any thing that is convenient for those ends: We remembered them long
ago, and We cannot do it too often, of that excellent Speech of M. Pyms: The
law is that which puts a difference betwixt good and evil, betwixt just and
unjust if you take away the Law, all things will fall into a confusion, every
man will become a Law unto himself, which in the depraved condition of humane
nature, must needs produce many great enormities, Lust will become a Law, and
Envy will become a Law, Covetousness and Ambition will become Laws, and what
Dictates, what Decisions such Laws will produce may easi1y be discerned. It may
indeed by the sad Instances over the whole Kingdom: But will Posterity believe,
that in the same Parliament this Doctrine was avowed with that Acclamation, and
these Instances after produced; That in the same Parliament such care was taken
that no man should be committed in what case soever, without the cause of his
Imprisonment expressed, and that all men should be inmediately bayled in all
Cases bayleable, and during the same Parliament that Alderman Pennington, or
indeed any body else, but the sworn Ministers of Justice, should imprison whom
they would, and for what they would, and for as long time as they would; That
the King should be reproached with breach of Privilege for accusing Sir John
Hotham of High Treason, when with force of Arms he kept Him out of Hull, and
despised Him to His face, because in no case a Member of either House might be
committed or accused without leave of that House of which he is a Member, and
yet that during the same Parliament, the same Alderman should commit the Earl
of Middlesex (a Peer of the Realm) and the Lord Buckhurst (a Member of the
House of Commons) to the Counter, without reprehension; That to be a Traitor
(which is defined and every man understands) should be no crime, and to be
called Malignant (which no body knows the meaning of) should be ground enough
for close Imprisonment; That a Law should be made, That whosoever should
presume to take Tunnage and Poundage without an Act of Parliament, should incur
the penalty of a Praemunire, and the same Parliament, that the same imposition
should be laid upon our Subjects, and taken by an Order of both houses, without
and against Our consent. Lastly, that the same Parliament, a Law should be made
to declare the proceedings and judgment upon Ship Money to be illegal and
void, and during that Parliament, that an Order of both Houses shall, upon
pretense of necessity, enable four men to take away the twentieth part of their
Estates from all their Neighbors, according to their discretion.

But Our good Subjects will no longer look upon these and the like Results, as
upon the Counsels and conclusions of both Our Houses of Parliament; (though
all the world knows even that Authority can never justify things unwarrantable
by the Law) they well know how few of the Persons trusted by them are present
at their Consultations, of above 500 not 80. and of the House of Peers, not a
fifth part, That they who are present enjoy not the Privilege and Freedom of
Parliament, but are besieged by an Army, and awed by the same Tumults which
drove Us and their fellow Members from thence, to consent to what some few
Seditious, Schismatic Persons amongst them do propose; These are the men,
who joining with the Anabaptists and Brownists of London, first changed the
Government and Discipline of that City, and now by the pride and power of that
City would undo the Kingdom, whilst their Lord Major (a Person accused and
known to be guilty of high Treason) by a new Legislative Power of his own,
suppresses and reviles the Book of Common Prayer; robbs and imprisons whom he
thinks fit, and with the rabble of his Faction gives Laws to both Houses of
Parliament, and tells them, They will have no Accommodation whilst the Members
sent and entrusted by their Countries are expelled the House, or committed for
refusing to take the Oath of Association, to live and dye with the Earl of
Essex, as very lately Sir Sidney Mountague. These are the men who have presumed
to send Ambassadors, and to enter into Treaties with Foreign States in their
own behalfs, having at this time an Agent of their own with the States of
Holland, to negociate for them upon private Instructions. These are the men,
who not thinking they have yet brought mischief enough upon this Kingdom, at
this time invite and solicit Our Subjects of Scotland to enter this Land with
an Army against Us. In a word, these are the men who have made this last
devouring Ordinance to take away all Law, Liberty, and Property from Our
People, and have by it really acted that upon Our People, which with infinite
malice, and no color or ground, was labored to be infused into them to have
been Our Intention by the Commissions of Array.

We have done; What Power and Authority these men have, or will have, We know
not; for Our Self We challenge none such. We look upon the Pressures and
Inconveniences Our good Subjects bear, even by Us and Our Army, (which the Army
first raised by them enforced Us to levy in Our defense, and their refusal of
all offers and desires of Treaty enforces Us to keep) with very much sadness
of heart. We are so far from requiring a Twentieth part of their Estates
(though for their own visible preservation) that as We have already sold or
pawned Our own Jewels, and coined Our own Plate, so We are willing to sell all
Our own Land, and Houses for their relief. Yet We do not doubt but Our good
Subjects will seriously consider Our Condition and their own Duties, and think
Our readiness to protect them with the utmost hazard of Our Life, deserves
their readiness to assist Us with some part of their Fortunes; and whilst
other men give a Twentieth part of their Estates, to enables them to forfeit
the other Nineteen, that they will extend themselves to Us in a liberal and
free proportion for the preservation of the rest, and for the maintenance of
Gods true Religion, the laws of the Land, the Liberty of the Subject, and the
safety and very being of Parliaments, and this Kingdom: for if all these ever
were, or can be in manifest danger, it is now in this present Rebellion against
Us.

Lastly, We will and require all Our loving Subjects of what degree or quality
soever, as they will answer it to God, to Us and to Posterity, by their Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy, as they would not be looked upon now, and
remembered hereafter as Betrayers of the Laws and Liberty they were born to,
that they in no degree submit to this wild pretended Ordinance, and that they
presume not give any encouragement or assistance to the Army now in Rebellion
against Us: which if notwithstanding they shall do, they must expect from Us
the severest punishment the Law can inflict, and a perpetual Infamy with all
good men.

FINIS.

