A Sovereign COUNTER-POYSON Prepared by a Faithful Hand FOR The Speedy
Reviviscence OF ANDREW SALL Late Sacrilegious Apostat.

(...) will serve to inform the ignorant, to resolve the wavering, and to
confirm the constant well-principled Roman Catholic.

Contrived by J. E.

Inventi sunt in Populo meo Impii insidiantes quasi aucupes, laqueos ponentes,
and pedicas ad capiendos viros. Jerem. 5. Noli esse stultus, and ne impie agas
multum ne moriar is tempore non tuo. Eccl. 7. Permissu Superiorum.

Printed at Lonain. 1674.

TO HER ROYAL HIGHNESS THE Duchess of YORK.
Most Illustrious Madam,
THere is nothing in this world of more importance then to handle the affairs
of Salvation with all earnestness; we well know we have an immortal soul which
shall survive to all Eternity either in the bosom of Glory, or in the flames of
the damned; nothing is so absolutely confirmed, as that none can be saved
without true faith, and yet nothing by the malice of satan more controverted as
the verity of true faith. This small Treatise contrived in have for, and in
vindication of, the verity of the ancient soul-saving faith of the
Roman Catholic Church, from the most misterious and foul aspersions and
railings of the ignorant overweening and over-byass'd Sciolist Sectaries of
this perverse age, confidently flies for to be sheltred under the wings of the
most Renowned Patronage of your Eminency, a most rare honourer and vigorous
practitioner of the heavenly Principles and tenants of the same ancient faith:
what? an inestimable precious Jewel of fair, (...) v^ and rich Modena, mo(...)
to all height of beauty and (...) ^orth (whose Royal blood of in^^^^^ing nonour
springs from the most glori^^^, most august, and most heavenly stock and ^oins
of the Emperor of Germany, of that thrice noble and ancient house of Austria;
and of the most Catholic Kings of Spain,) now to contract strong alliances
with the useful and practical doctrine of the rare virtues of penance,
humility, mortification, piety, charity and fasting, etc. all contradictory to
flesh and blood? what? a tender young, beauteous, eminently great Lady, seen
often daily paying the Religious homage of heart, hand, and knees to the
Majesty of the Almighty, by frequent retreats to a sweet and undisturbed
Conversation with heaven, and this in the Royal Court, is the fair sport of
your beauteous mind, little regarding the transient vanities, gilded goades,
and charming gaities, and allurements of a barren world, all which ends in
folly and forgetfulness; O how mervelous is the power of solid virtue, when
enchaced in pure beauty and glorious Extraction! Live then prosperously most
pious Madam, and be still a bright orient star of the first magnitude, now
auspiciously fixed in this Orb of Great Britain, shining, illuminating and
warming (by your heroic and most examplar piety) frozen hearts in this cold
for them Clime. Live then fortunatly prevailing Madam who (by Gods sweet
providence) has been heightn'd to so sublime merit, unparalled worth and
admired accomplishments of all perfections as to become the Peerless Consort of
his Royal Highness James, that most gracious, mighty and most invincible Hero,
now the unmated glory, the only moving Soul, and most victorious Tutelar Angel
of Great Britain: Live long and prosperously, Great Madam, until you enjoy in
your bosom (through Gods blessings) a Princely Graff arising from so Noble,
sovereign and glorious a stock, for the comfort and full joy and succor of
Great Britain. Most serene Madam, this my Address is far from a Panegerick, in
enlarging upon the eminent splendour of your Endowments of mind and body; those
I leave for a fitter Subject of a higher Undertaking: Advance therefore Fair
Madam your glorious progressions in virtues till you draw love and admiration
even from your very Enemies (if any you can have.) I pray God to continue your
Highness in all increasing prosperities, to bless your just designs, and to
prolong your happy days, these shall be the daily vows of me, who beseeches
your Highness to bestow one grace, which is, to permit me to bear all my life
time the Title of your m^ humble and most Obedient Chaplain a^ Beads-man,

J. E.

To the Christian Reader
THe restless and hellish labors of some Pseudo-prelates in compassing Sea and
and for to make one proselite, is very strange; ^ereas Apostates made their
Apostles can be ^tle purchase to Protestants, and the loss of Ro^an-Catholicks
much less, they having been ^ce dead and cankereaten branches that could ^r no
fruit whilst united to the stock and much ^s now after their separation: Their
endea^^ur is not to go far off and convert Pagans ^^^m the worship of Devils
and dead Idols, to ^^ve the living God, but rather to pervert il^^minated
Christians, corrupt and evacuate ^verity and soverainty of Christ's faith by
^vel devices, foul lies and forgeries, is their ^in ambition. The main reason
therefore that ^t the Author upon the sudden contrivement this small Treatise,
was seasonably to con^ul and give a check to the disingenuity, spite^ malice,
venom, and brawny-fac'd impu^^nce of that renowned wight, vile Apostate, ^^d
professed Enemy to Christ, Andrew Sall: (...) dash back all his shameless
affronts, and ^^undering, bawling strains of profound and ^nderful nonsense in
his late open and avowed ^^ty practices at Dublin, and elsewhere (all better
stuff then old worn-out bold railings, ^^d false ignorant stories of
superstition, ido^^try, Sacrilege, etc. against the true mother church for
salvation) into his own teeth: The viper is so swelled with venom and ree^ that
he must burst or spit his poison ag^ Christ, taking the liberty to amuse h^
^zing blind deluded drove into popular rep^tion, flushed with the vainglory
he gained amongst Protestants, stubbornly struggles in^defence of that their
daily dec^ying Sect, ^ther then quitt the support of his pride and ^ceitedness:
That God may preserve mercif^ly the sacred beams of his revealed faith in ^
hearts of Roman Catholics, and secure the from the wiles snares and pestilence
of A^^stats that walked in darkness and destruction That the well-meaning may
be cautious, c^ous, zealous and careful in observing and p^^venting inward
motions, and that illusions ^ not pervail over their understandings, insu^ate
into their designs, or unawares poison the best resolutions. Finally that no
Catholic his wits will entrust his soul, and its eternal ^terest to the blind
conduct of such shallow Mo^tebanks, Impostors and runagate vagrant A^^stats, is
the scope of the publication hereof have not affected to set understandings on
^ rack by the Tyrany of strong obscure lines, ^ mere itch of some vain wits of
this Critic ag^such I wittingly wave: The Allmighty give prosperous blessing
to it, with internal, exte^nal, and eternal peace to Christ's sheepfold, the
humble prayer of J. E.

Of the Happiness of the Restoration of the Soul of man. 1. Document.
THough we can never write, or conceive any thing worthily of the divine
Essence, yet we ought to make so good use of the objects of this inferior
world, as to study our sovereign Creator in them, proceeding from the effects
to the search of the cause, which is the method of Philosophy, whereas the
Theologue proceeds commonly from the cause to the effect. The Pagan
Philosophers by the twilight of nature soared so high that they came to
discover there was a primus Motor, an Ens entium, an optimus maximus, they came
to know that he was ubiquitary and diffused through the Universe, to give
vigor, life and motion to all parts though invisibly. Now then, no finite
created intellect can form a quidditative apprehension of God, no, not the
Angels themselves: there may be negative conceptions of him, as to say, he is
immortal, immense, independent, simple, and infinite, etc. Or, there may be
relative Conceptions had of him, as when we call him Creator, Governor, King,
Lord, Redeemer, sanctifier, glorifier, etc. Or there may be positive
conceptions of him as the chiefest Good, a pure Act: or he may be described by
an aggregation of Attributs, as merciful, wise, omnipotent, etc. Among all
these, one of the best ways to discribe him is by abstracts, as to call him
goodness it self, Justice it self, power, wisdom, piety and mercy it self; he
being the Rule of all these; so as he is so incomprehensible, as neither the
Eloquence of Plato the divine, nor the subtility of Aristotle, whom S. Jerome
styled the prodigy of nature, could comprehend, or define by positive terms the
measure of Gods being or Essence; yet notwithstanding S. Dionis. Areopagita, de
divinis nomi. said, Deus est convertens and reducens eos qui divinam in se
corruperunt imaginem. God is so absolutely powerful, as that he knows how to
convert a most perverse sinner: saying this, says more then to call him
Creator; though we may think, that the gift of Creation is greater then that
of justification, because Creati^ est productio totius entis de non esse ad
esse, does presupose the thing to be created only with an objective being,
drawing it out of the abiss of nothing; but Justification does presuppose the
thing to be justified, a part (...) with a real physical being; yet the
doctor^ do agree in it that the Justification of a sinner is greater then the
Creation, for the repugnancy of contraries; for it is a greater work and more
difficult to direct, and reclaim one understanding misled, and chase away, or
dispel the darkness wherein it is blindly involved, then to create the same of
the new; and it is a more hard matter to soften or mollify a contumatious,
obstinate, depraved, and rebellious will, then to create the same of new. S.
Thom. 12. quest. 133. art. 9. says bonum gratiae unius majus est quam bonum
naturae totius universi, because for to create a thing, the attribute of
omnipotency does suffice; but for to justify a sinner, and cause him return to
God, and lost grace, requires all attributes, as omnipotency, mercy, wisdom,
prudence, goodness, of God, etc. So as that the rebellious and most obstinate
will of man renders the power of God doubtful, or dubious, ^ola voluntas
humana facit dominium Dei dubium, all sublunary things obey God and his Saints,
only the perverse will of man spurns at God, and disobeys him; was not the
river turned into blood, obeying Moses? did not the Rocks obey him and yield
water? did not the Sun obey Josuah, and stayed her course? did not the hungry
Lions yield to Daniel? did not the whale preserve Jonas? did not the mule kneel
down and adore the B. Sacrament in S. Antony of Padua's hand? in effect, all
things becoming pliable to God and his Saints: sola voluntas humana is
refractory, obstinate, and rebellious against God. And it is a very strange
ponderation of the great Doctor Cirillus Jer solomitanus, saying, Quis potest
eloqui Maris profunditatem? quod tamen intra suos limits se continet propter
eum qui dixit huc usque progrediaris and non amplius, quandam lineam efficit in
littoribus ut ostenderet intuentibus quod praefixos sibi limits non
transgreditur. Lord? what a furious and violent Element is the Sea, it would
overflow all the Earth, had it not been, that God gave a command to the
contrary; yet the senceless Element strictly obeys her God, and withal leaves
twice a day a sign or mark of her due obedience to him; leaving both morning
and evening a line of foam and froth on the shore, that all who pass by, may
take notice of her punctual obedience to her glorious maker. O what a main
confusion must this be to rational Creatures endued with will and
understanding, bred to education, learning, piety, virtue, and Religion; and
yet will not obey Gods commands; rather they will leave every day a signal mark
of scandal, of disobedience, against Conscience, and the Religion they profess,
neglecting the welfare of their Soul: sola volunt as humana facit dominium Dei
dubium.

The restoration of man from sin is a greater and more glorious work, then
that of its first Creation, and its the utmost design of God in making the
world. For God, having made all things for himself, and for the manifestation
of his own Glory, as the wisest end which he could propound to himself, was not
satisfied with the first work of Creation, though exceeding good and perfect,
but as soon as it was finished, suffered sin to enter upon the stage, bringing
death and hell along with it: now all the wits of men and Angels could not unty
this knot, sin, til God came down from heaven and resolved it into this most
glorious work of Universal Redemption, pardoning sin, as though it never was
committed: and there is no other instance in the whole history of the World of
any act of God, which does so perfect^y exercise all his Attributes, and
manifest all his Glory, and consequently fulfill the end of Creation, more then
the Justification of the sinner, in which God disposes all things strongly and
sweetly, attracting man to him, and to the prefixed end, calling, admonishing,
illuminating, correcting, interiorly conversing with the heart, terrifying,
instructing, etc. yet so as all is done without any Violence, because he works
Still sweetly, and congruously to the liberty of free will, to wit, mollifying
so sweetly the heart of man, that divine Grace is not refused by the flinty
heart: which is attracted not violently, but voluntate and voluptate, with an
internal kind of delectation, and so transmits the soul so allected, infallibly
to the final end for which it has been created, by a sweet efficaciousness, and
with an efficacious Sweetness: and this is effected by such means and manner
that S. Paul in consideration thereof, was constrained to say, O altitudo
Sapientiae and scientiae Dei! etc. Alas! by what strange way was S. Paul
attracted by a voice and by light; S. Peter by one look of Christ: by another
way was Magdalen, by tears; the Samaritan thirsting after the water of life
was drawn: S. Matthew sitting in telonio drawn; the thief on the Cross; Mary of
Egypt from the Ordure of her libidinous lust; Pelagia from her prostitution,
and sordid quest of whoredom; all these called away by several and unknown
ways, to follow and pursue virtue, and the way to heaven; so as heretics and
heinous Sinners, that sits in the shade of death are illuminated to apprehend
their lamentable dark state, and look up to Eternity, and to the pure light of
true life; making them, from the children of darkness to become the children of
grace; and all this done by the infinitely great wisdom and Grace of God,
without which, those sit in darkness of ignorance and infidelity, in the
imminent danger of eternal death, having their heart and understanding obscure,
so as that they are ignorant of God their Maker, ignorant of the way to heaven:
ignorant of the final sovereign happiness for which they were created; and do
not know themselves, nor that they are children of wrath, and obnoxious to
death, being ignorant of their own insufficiency to good, ignorant of the
necessity of grace and Regeneration, ignorant of Christ their Mediator, through
whose sacred blood they are restored from death to life: but by pure rays of
divine faith they come to know all these things, and begin to look after
earnestly the way of Truth and of life, they implore grace, they invoke their
Mediator, and seek after his soul-faving Science and heavenly knowledge,
according to these words of S. Paul. 1 Corin. 4. ille qui de tenebris dixit
lucem splendescere, ipse illuxit in cordibus nostris, etc.

Of the true Essence of divine Faith. 2. Document.
REason is most properly exercised in t^ings of nature, and Faith, in matters
of Religion; great wits set up reason instead of faith, and the light of
nature against divine light, which is at once to deprive man of his highest
felicity and faculty; and God of his greatest Grace: the same Word, without
question, which created the world creates a belief in a spiritual
understanding, by relying on a divine reavealing Authority. Its most certain,
that God is said to Confound the wisdom and learning of the wise by Faith,
which declared, that without believing they cannot be saved, and yet without a
supernatural Grace they cannot believe; and as God is the chief good and
perfect happiness of the soul, and the object of our beatitude, which cannot be
comprehended by natural light or knowledge, therefore a kind of supernatural
virtue is necessary, by which we may attain to his knowledge, which is says,
the highest knowledge we have in this world, by which the soul injoys him, and by
him, the most excellent gifts and graces, whereof it is capable: according to
S. Paul ad Ephesians. 2.8. gratia Dei estis salvati per fidem, and hoc non ex vobis,
Faith is that divine light by which we prepare our journey toward virtue and
heaven; without faith it is impossible (...) please God. By faith Roman
Catholics do ^alk upon the grounds of the Church mili^ant, where there is
infallibly an infusion of ^abitual Grace, sanctification in its sacraments; and
surely transcendent is their commendation for their faithful conservation of
^he sacred Oracles of Truth in all ages, to ^his day, for their well ordered
Zeal, for their most ravishing devotions, deiform in^entions, their heroycal
acts of fasting, praying, recollections, meditations, in^roversies, their
aspirations, humiliations, mortifications, abnegation of themselves, and their
daily abdication of all transitory things; so as none in his senses can
believe, that such a tree can be Corrupted in the root, which brings forth such
heavenly fruits. Some properties we may observe of the doctrine of Faith, to be
true, to be revealed of God, to be preached and delivered by the B. Apostles:
The highest ground by which a man is persuaded that his faith is true, is the
Authority of God speaking and revealing* the highest proof by which a man may
be assured that his Faith is revealed, is the Authority of Christ and his B.
Apostles, who delivered and preached the same as from God; and that from the
beginning to this day it is practiced without innovation or alteration, in all
parts of the inhabitable world. The Apostles in the time of Christ conversing
with them, had sufficient Fait^ to prevail with their wills to command the^
understanding into the belief of his being God and man, consequently an
infallibl^ faith; then it does follow, that whatsoeve^ he taught was to be
assented unto as infallibly true, and that without being questione^ by our weak
and limited reason: And sur^ this was very necessary for the true Church
otherwise they could not have been sufficiently assured, that what Christ their
Maste^ taught them was true, and so it would no^ have been a sin in them to
have doubted (...) This infallible assurance also, the Christian^ that lived in
the B. Apostles time, and afte^ Christ Ascension enjoied; they had sufficien^
ground, without question, to induce them to a belief that the B. Apostles were
infallible Guides and Teachers, and that whatsoever they taught and commanded,
was as infallibly true, as if God had immediately spoken the same things, and
no more to be doubted, contradicted, or disputed against, by vain and curious
Reason (which doubtless were as strong and as good as ours) then the immediate
words, command, or dictates of Allmighty God; otherwise these who refused to
hear and obey them, had beenin no fault; and it would have been an insufferable
boldness in S. Paul to have required such an absolute submission to what (...)
taught, as to oblige Christians of his ^^^e, not to have believed, even an
Angel ^om heaven, teaching contrary things to that he taught them. Hence it is,
that the ^^maining writings of the B. Apostles are by ^ll Christians esteemed
as the word of God: and this was mainly necessary, in the ages after Christ,
for the Church of God in the (...). Apostles time, to have a living infallible
way of direction, and this was the way to ^aintain the unity of the spirit in
the bond of ^eace, and so become one body; with one heart; ^ot as sects
divided, subdivided, and scattered ^^to as many parts, and sorts as now are,
and have gone to cuffs, raising civil war for ^he diciding of controversies, as
we have seen they did, since they divided themselves from the holy Catholic
Roman Church. Mark now those words Heb. 11.6. without faith its impossible to
please God: and of Math. 16.16. he that believes shall not be damned; and Ephesians.
4.5. there is but one faith, one Baptism, one Lord Jesus: the faith which is to
save us and by the which we are to please God cannot be had but in one Church,
and that of Christ; it cannot therefore be found in Sects, in contrary
opinions, it being of necessity but one, and of contraries one only must be
true; Do but observe, 2 Cor. 10.5. bringing into Captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ; that this faith or beli^ving was to be sealed in the
understanding that the understanding was to submit, n^ arrogantly to dispute:
And that this Act (...) believe, was a command, or precept of Al^ mighty God,
who will have his will obeye^ by all his subjects, and the not obeying (...)
which is punished with eternal damnat^on; Lastly, consider, Hebr. 10.23. let us
ho^ fast the profession of our faith, without wavering, for he is faithful
that has promised That faith is truly divine, must be an infallible assent of
our understanding, submitting it self obediently to believe the Revelation^ of
God; for otherwise faith, and consequently all Religion may be no more then
fancy, o^ opinion, and then no ways certain; and if so, then no obligation. Now
it must follow, first, that there must be some means appointed by God by which
we may know this one true faith, from all false Sects, and opinions, whereas to
require one to believe upon pain of damnation, and not to give him any means
whereby he may know what to believe for salvation, in this Religion, or that
sect, were to require him to walk without legs; these means must be
infallible: for we cannot be brought to an infallible assent by fallible, and
uncertain means, as God would not require us to assent to an Authority which
may deceive us: then our understanding must of necessity submit to those ^eans
under pain of damnation. O terrible! ^r if our understanding were at liberty to
^bmit or not submit to the means, by which ^ving Faith is conveyed unto us, it
would ^en be no sin, not to believe, consequently ^od would not jnstly damn us
for not be^eving; and withal, whosoever shall re^se to be governed by those
heavenly ^eans, and the same authority that God ^ath appointed to govern us, he
shall be a ^ebel against God, and a vile Traitor. Last^y, I say, that two men
of two differing ^iths or beliefs cannot be saved, for both of them, knowing
that they are bound to be guided and governed by those means which God has
appointed, to convey saving faith ^o them, and one of them flatly refusing to
submit, this person who refufeth must be guilty of disobedience, and
refractoriness to Gods Command, and consequently cannot be saved. And so to our
present purpose, ignorant people by reasonable and earnest diligence (as it is
very tolerable to humane frailty, and very possible and easy for them) may
come by Gods grace, to the true knowledge of these means, otherwise God would
have appointed means, which would prove unprofitable to the end; and so, the
far greater number of souls, for whom Christ died, would not be sufficiently
provided for, by Gods sweet providence, and (...) that prophesy would prove
also ineffectual Esaias. 35. Say to them that are of a fear f^^ heart, be strong:
fear not, behold, your G^^ will come, and save you, then the eyes of the blind
shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf unstopped, etc. and one high way
shall (...) there, and a way, and it shall be called the holy way, that
wayfaring men, though fo^^ shall not err therein. It cannot be denied b^^ this
wholesome doctrine is agreeable with all sorts of people, Apostats, sectaries,
o^ Dissenters from the Mother Church for it must be granted that there must be
a way and a Rule, there must be means appointed there must be a governing power
to judge and decide all arising doubts, and teach a^ the world the true way and
path to heaven with certainty: but when we come to find^^ it out, all persons
will agree, That they are obliged under pain of damnation to submit to it,
receive it, and embrace it, and wal^ according to it, as to the Apostles, if
they were actually living, or to Christ himself (...) and when you understand
this Rule and guide, then you cannot but believe all and every article of
faith, which we the Roman Catholics did all along, from the Apostles time, and
this day, do unanimously believe, and practice; this is the main point which
will allay all controversies, contests, wranglings, ammosityes and hatred
between Roman Catholics, and all dissenters: the God ^f union and truth open
the eyes, and illu^inate the understandings of apostats, to ^ake right use of
this my labor: Now I ^t them know, that neither private spirit, or natural
reason of any man, can possibly (...) this Rule, and Judge: for this must
sub^it as a subject and Vassal to that Rule and judge, and it is always
fallible, and strangdly ^t to mistake and misleade; which is against ^e nature
of the true Rule and Judge to be: ^r if God should oblige us upon pain of
^amnation to submit unto, and to be go^erned and ruled by an Authority that
might receive, and might teach for a truth what (...) not, we should be bound
to believe that (...) true, which is not so; and yet be dam^^d, for not
believing the truth: further, ^our private spirit or reason were to be ^is Rule
and Judge, then it would follow ^^ntrary to the scripture, that it is not
im^^ssible to please God without faith, for ^^ason would sufficiently teach us,
how to ^ease God, yet it would be a breach of this ^ule, to believe what we do
not understand; would likewise follow, that every pre^^nded Religion would be
the truth, and (...) contradictions would be true, and there would be not only
one faith, but no faith (...) all, but reason, above which faith is: for reason
excludes faith, and there (...) scarce that man living, but his reason diffe^
from another understanding; and judgmen^ differing as much as their faces:
therefo^^ none that follows his own Reason, could (...) justice be condemned by
God, and so (...) ilation, all men would be saved, unle^^ peradventure you will
say, that in a bu^^ness of such main consequence, as the salv^tion of souls,
our primate reason perswad^ us to prefer the authority of such, as a^ wiser
then our selves, before our own jud^ments, which is most true: But I then
infe^^ that Roman Catholics are the most rati^nal, most learned, most wise,
most godly most unbiased people now in the world, a^ consequently have the best
Religion, (...) acting most conformably to reason in the belief; for they rely
still on the authority (...) General Councils, consisting of the able and most
learned men of all Nations, whi^^ is the greatest authority to be found (...)
Earth; especially having the assistance of t^^ holy Ghost, visum est spiritui
sancto, and (...) bis, as it appears they have, both by the testimony of the
Scripture, and the consta^^ tradition of all ages: Upon these ground we may be
sure, that certainly God in h^^ good providence had appointed a mo^^ sure
Guide, Rule, and Judge, to bring man to the infallible faith for salvation, the
Reason and proud spirit; otherwise God is defective in necessaries, and that
Religion were no more then fancy and opinion: and it is worth observation, how
for the first two thousand years before any Scriptures were written, the
visible Church of God was this Rule and Judge; was not, I pray, circumcision
and other Rites brought in by Abraham, and practiced by the Church then,
without any Scriptures to try them by? what would you have said, if you had
then lived? would you have disobeyed the then Church, and reject those
ordinances, because then there were no Scriptures to warrant them: The Church
of the Jews was so to the Jews, after that the Scripture was written, and this
by the express direction of the Scripture, Deuteronomy. 17.8. Thou shall come to the
Priests, the Levites, and unto the Judge, and enquire, and they shall show thee
the sentence of judgments, etc. and then, he that shall do presumptuously, and
will not hearken unto the priest or judge, even that man shall die; and even
Christ whilst the Jews, his Church, was yet in being, gave directions, Matthew.
22.2, 3. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chair, all therefore whatsoever
they bid you observe, that observe and do: assuredly God would not direct them
and punish them with death for not obeying an authority which might deceive and
misleade them; would our Lord command the doing of whatsoever should be done by
an authority, when that authority was capable of mistakings? the Church
therefore, and not the scriptures was the Rule, and Judge to them, they were to
hearken to the priest, and Judge, upon pain of death.

The happiness of Christian Religion. Document 3.
REligion is a sacred virtue of a Superior and divine nature, attended with an
awful respect to the worship of one Living God without any superstion in
ceremonious observance, and withal it may be called the Law of the supreme
King, commanding and directing that duty and worship which man owes unto him,
and rewarding man with that true happiness which he may enjoy in him: the
Athenians inscribed their Altar, To the unknown God, and their worship was as
vain and ignorant, whom therefore says the Apostle, ye ignorantly worship, him
I declare unto you, where he plainly shows the difference between heathenish
worship of God and true Religion: it is true, they had some glimmering
apprehensions of God, but they abused it with their Idolatry, and corrupted it
with their lives: S. Paul directly encountered the Athenian Idolatry, plainly
preaching to the people the doctrine of the Deity, of creation, providence,
sin, Redemption, Repentance, Resurrection and the last Judgment: Thus Poets
frame Religion according to their fancy, vain philosophers according to their
imperfect Reason, statesmen shape it according to policy and Reason of state,
but the sum and substance of true Religion is sincerely to honor, worship,
love, fear, and reverence the living God, with heart, soul, and might; in the
practice of virtues, which leads to Eternity of glory. Holy and ancient
Religion is the Basis of the permanent felicity of kingdoms; and Religion is
said a Religando, it binds hearts, wills, nowrisheth public societies,
observes strictly laws: if it be changed, naught but confusion, disorder,
darkness, discontent, disunion, discord, and animosities, can be expected to
follow, all which Germany, England, Flanders, France, and Ireland, can by
woeful experience publish. In all ages it was necessary to make open profession
of Religion, in acknowledgment of humane and exterior worship to a Deity. S.
Jerome does advertise, That by Tradition of the Hebrews in the law of nature,
the first begotten had right to the function of priesthood, offering sacrifice
until Aarons time: Adam by divine instinct instructed his Son Abel to offer
sacrifice to God, to fear and love God, for when Cain said, there is no
Judgment to come, no Judge, no other world but this, no reward for the Jult, no
punishments for sinners, neither this world is governed by Gods mercy; to whom
Abel the defender of Truth replied, frator ne sic asser as erronie est enim
Judicium est Judex, est aliud saeculum, est ibi merces pro justis, and poena
pro Impiis. Genesis 4. But in the Moysaical law, the levits were chosen priests,
Number. 3. who had power to offer sacrifice to God, then Abraham, Jsaac, Jacob,
Joseph, with 12 Patriarks; after these came Moses, Aaron, Josue, together with
the 72 Elders that governed the People, with many Priests and Prophets, all
exercising Religion, offering sacrifice: four hundred years after came David,
Samuel and Nathan, with many holy Prophets; after God sent Jeremy, Ezekiel,
Daniel, Zachary, Aggeus, Malachy, Nehemias, etc. for to preserve Religion,
divine worship, Sacrifice, faith and Sacrament; now I ask, what is the reason
that now under the holy law of the Gospel, Protestants have no sacrifice, the
principal point of Religion? it is, because they have no Priests with true
character, function, holy Orders, Mission, power, and authority, from above,
but from the weak arm of flesh; therefore having no true Priests, no Religion,
no Sacrifice, no Sacrament, no faith, but opinion and fancy; But the
Roman Catholic Church, the mother and Mistrisse of true faith, has lawful
Priests, Religion, Altars, Sacrifice, Sacraments, successive function of
Priesthood, established by Christ, for the perpetuity of his Church, and
comfort of his flock. O mercy and divine providence never to be duly pondered!
now the infernal Dragon, a declared enemy to God, because he cannot come near
him to hurt or offend him, he hurts man the Image of God, even as he that is an
enemy to a father of a family, when he cannot annoy his person, endeavors to
annoy his possessions, his fields, his children; so the devil, cast from Heaven
by God, has still enmity against him, but not being able to annoy God, he
endeavors to destroy man Gods image, to pervert him, to delude him and divert
him from true Religion, alleging, that Christ's Church is not the true Church,
that it is erroneous, superstitious, full of ceremonys, etc. You may read in
apoc. 16. vidi prodire de ore draconis: I have seen coming out of the mouth of
the dragon, the beast, the pseudo-prophet, three foul spirits like froggs; this
dragon, this beast, this pseudo-prophet is Luther: the three froggs are
understood by many Interpreters, the three perverse sordid Sects, which did
flow from cursed Luther: the first, that of Anabaptists, whose first Author was
one Rosmanus, before a Lutheran: the second that of Sacramentaries, the Author
whereof was Corolostadius, from whom proceeded Zuinglius and Calvin: the third
is that of Protestants, whose Author was Melanchton, or rather Henry the 8. for
before his dismal Revolt from the Roman Religion, there was for 1500. years and
above, no other Religion in England but the Roman Catholic Religion,
flowrishing most gloriously, in piety, learning, sanctity, prosperity and
happiness, having had 22. Kings in the opinion of Saints, and no memory, dream
or word of Protestant in England before his Reign. And not unfitly heresy is
compared to frogs for sordidness, loquacity, and for importunity, for still you
may hear the frogs in quagmires, with their harsh unpleasant and troublesome
clamors night and day, to which the clamors of heretics is very like: and
Pierus. l. 19. de Rana. says, that the frog has bloody red eyes, and that it
has a double liver, properties of heretics, their eyes are bloody, looking
with eyes of flesh and blood upon the mysteries of Religion, the power of the
Pope, looking with eyes of blood upon the power of absolving given to the
Priests, seven Sacraments, the Real Presence; all they look on with eyes, not
of faith but blood; Two livers also, heretics, no fasting, no austerity of
life; no mortification, no penance but still eat, drink, take pleasure, fare
well, still increasing blood in their two livers, the seat of blood, for to
pursue lust, and concupisence, and an unbridled appetite of their flesh and
blood, and which must breed and nourish pride, the source and nursery of
heresy; according to S. Austin: diversae diversis locis sunt haereses, sed una
matter superbia genuit: it is said, that the Camel is not accustomed to drink
before he troubles the water, so heresy never entered into any kingdom, but by
troubling the Republics with dissentions, civil broils, quia dominationem
spernunt, and Majestatem blasphemant, ut serpents humiliter irrepunt, blande
capiunt, molliter ligant, latenter occidunt: with their Serpentine cur
praecepit vobis deus speaking to Adam and Eve; so heretics are like serpents
cur tot praecepta? cur tot jejunia? cur diebus veneris carnes vetitae? cur tot
in Ecclesia ceremoniae? cur and quomodo corpus Christi in exigua panis specie?
etc. Are not these serpentine interogations? all their stir is but from sense,
from flesh and blood, for honor, for plausible exteriority: Did not Melancthon
the first follower of Luther, tell his Mother at the point of death that the
protestant was plausibilior, but the Catholic Religion securior, whereupon his
Mother sent for a Roman Catholic priest, and died in the bosom of the true
Church for salvation; haec plausibilior illa securior; Did not a Gentleman say,
Si bonum est cum Luthero vivere, haud bonum est cum Luthero mori; and did not
Luther himself say, Martine, Martine, jam agis voluptuose, sed quid erit post
haec?

A Sovereign connter-poyson. Document 4.
S. Cyyrian the great Doctor, writing to some of the Ethnicks, touching the
lives and studies of Christians, speaks thus, Philosophi sumus factis non
verbis, nec magna loquimur, sed vivimus, that is, we are philosophers in our
actions, not in our words, nor do speak great things but practice them. It
seems, this holy man thought it much fitter for a Christian to exercise
himself in Virtuous actions, then in diving with curiosity into the Nature of
things. Andrew Sall, When I consider your present miserable state and
deplorable condition, I cannot abstain from tears; you have been heretofore
known and counted a philosopher both by words, and deeds; you spoke great
things, and did likewise practice them: But alas! alas! lately there is seen and
perceived in you a strange and sudden alteration and change: I ask, quomodo
obscuratum est aurum? mutatus est color optimus? thren. 4. you seem awhile ago
pure precious gold, how come you metamorphosed and changed, so as no shadow
could vanish half so soon? now, not gold, sed fuligo, dross and rubbis quomodo
mutatus est color optimus? heretofore a religious priest, an Ambassador for
atonement of grace and mercy, a preacher, all those superexcellent
prerogatives, graces, and beauties defaced? what? a living member of the
glorious Congregation of Jesus become a dead child of error, heresies and
darkness, and suddenly become the scorn of boys and Lackies sure this cannot
be, mutatio dextrae Eccelsi: ah poor Andrew! That exquisite torment used in
ancient times by Tyrants to their Captives has some imperfect weak resemblance
of your poor souls present condition; they used to fasten living men to dead
bodies, joining their hands, their feet, their mouths, their eyes, and all
their other parts with those of dead putrid carcases; Corpora corporibus
jungebant mortua vivis; Let us consider, what were the thoughts of those
miserable wretches, who though living, were by this union hindered from
exercising any the actions of life; and notwithstanding their natural aversion
from stench, rottenness and corruption, were yet forced to converse only with
them, exchanging all the happiness of life to entertain those dismal objects
which presented them with naught but ghastliness and terror, all this Andrew is
an imperfect representation of your state; you cannot but perceive your living
body to be fastened to a loathsome dead soul, and so by that unhappy union, you
are hindered from exercising any actions of grace or virtue, yet are forced to
converse only with the Father of darkness, notwithstanding your natural
aversion from him, and this for your sacrilegious Apostasy, and revolt from the
mother Church, in which you had an unerring Guide, Rule, and Judge, leading you
to true faith, the high path to laudable actions of grace, Sanctification and
eternal felicity: oh mutatus est color optimus; and this unhappiness befell
you, through the perverse and wicked choice of your blind will: for what the
soul is to your body, such in a manner, I may say, is Gods divine Grace to your
soul: all the members of your body, by the operation of the soul are alive, do
move and stir, and exercise their several functions, which when the soul is
separated from your body, all those members are as dead as a stone, no member
can stir or move, nor exercise its function: even so when your soul is bereaved
of Gods grace (as it is at present by black Apostasy) then your soul is dead
to all goodness, all the faculties and powers thereof cannot exercise their
function in order to eternity, virtue, or sanctity; you are quite blotted out
of the book of life, and society of Saints; you have no more communication with
the blessed and celestial Congregation of the Church-militant; you have
forfeited your claim and right to heaven; you cannot enjoy, as formerly, those
internal, ineffable joys, blessings, and consolations, which the true, constant
servants of God, your fellow-travellers, and fellowlabourers in the vineyard of
Christ have, and your brethren hourly do taste and enjoy; Corpora corporibus
jungebant mortua vivis. Oh wretched Andrew! it had been more advantageous and
of more pleasure to you, to have your living body fastened to a rotten putrid
carcass, then to have your soul fastened to darkness, and lothsomnesse of cursed
heresy and apostasy: Now, do but consider the infinite advantage, prerogative
and dignity of your former happy state, and compare it to your present
deplorable, cursed and most black state: before you were vir Apostolicus, now
apostata vilis dictus; before a most resplendent star in the firmament of the
true Church, now an obscure, dusky, and abominable ignis fatuus, leading your
self and, there is to precipices of eternal perdition; before a Religious priest,
now an^ accursed Judas; before conferring life of grace on others, now you are
left destitute, and naked; stripped of all light life, grace, blessing and
goodness; before called by the hand of God to a most high and sovereign
dignity and honor, now blindly fallen from that, most lamentably, to the
devils jaws; before an obedient child, now factus liber^ voti-fragus; before a
chaste and Evangelical Missioner, now sacrilegus scortator; before reputed an
honest man, questuosus mercator, now fugitivus Apostata, and seditiosus
sectarius factus; before rasi'd from a Sall to be a Paul, a preacher of the
word and penance, now turned to be a Sall persecuting, and warring in a most
furious manner against the heavenly fortress of true faith, the pillar and
foundation of truth, and so become a wretched, Iying and vile protestant;
wallowing like a nasty sordid, and stinking sow in the mire of liberty,
libidinous lust, pride, and concupiscence: retire retire, poor Andrew! to your
interior man, have a care of your drooping soul, mind eternity;

fieres si scires tuum tua tempora mensem,
rides cum non sit forsitan una dies.
Micheas understanding that he was robbed of his domestic Idols, ran after the
Robbers, crying most lamentably, and being questioned, what was the matter with
him? and why did he cry, mourn, and lament? he answered, my gods which I made
for my self are stolen away, my priesthood, which were all my riches and
comfort, Jud. 18. all what ever was dear unto me taken away from me, therefore
why should I not mourn? I ask, if this wretch kept such a deplorable stir for
having lost but Idols, he vainly imagined, that losing them he lost all that
had been precious unto him; oh Andrew! why will you not grieve, cry, mourn, and
with bitter tears lament, the loss of the true, living, and dreadful God, for
the loss of divine grace; of your sacred function, of your fame and
estimation, security of conscience, and the peace of your heart, the pledge of
eternal glory? O madness! O blindness! oh woeful catastrophe of apostasy! Oh
poor Andrew! you fell from the Mother Church, grounded not on sands or
quagmires, as protestanism, into which you miserably declined: you imagine to
impugn and beat down the glory, luster and triumph of the same: alas! alas! all
your venom you may spit, and bark like a mastiff, and fill the ears of your
deluded audients with those ^ould railing, and lying empty assertions, calling
the Roman Church superstitious, erroneous, the horrid beast, and the whore of
Babylon, and such like, sapius and indies repetita in your tub-pulpits: but all
signifies nothing but to heap judgments and confusion on your head: oh Andrew!
all shall recoile upon you,

Niteris incassum Petri submergere Navem,
fluctuat, ast nunquam mergitur illa Ratis:
you deserted a Church, in which only is Faith, Religion, priests, Sacrifice,
Altars, Sacraments, and Real Remission, not only of original sin, but also
of actual mortal sins, all which is excluded and exploded, and quite abolished
by your protestant Sect, as it is proved in the Reasonable Reply to the
seasonable discourse. you deserted a Church, out of which there are no sure
inducements or means for salvation; for there can be but one true Church left
by Christ, out of which no assurance of his doctrine, nor of the divine
ordinance instituted by him for salvation: mark pray, what S. Joh. 10. says,
erit unum ovile and unus pastor, there will be one fold and one pastor: one
fold ordained by Christ, that is, one visible Congregation of men in a common
union of one faith and government under one visible pastor, Universal
Vicegerent of Christ, and undoubted Successor of S. Peter, with true Orthodox
preachers, with all other sacred ordinances, obliging all faithful under pain
of eternal damnation, to embrace, follow, and practice the same, with an
absolute promise to maintain it to the end of the world by divine protection:
but alas! poor Andrew! you well know in your Conscience that no other Sect or
visible Congregation could yet have or enjoy these divine, and supernatural
qualifications and heavenly perfections, but only the Roman Catholic Church,
therefore the same and no other is the one fold, and one congregation,
enjoying, without intermission, one Visible Universal pastor, in communion with
one faith necessary for salvation. Further, this Church only has a visible
head, under an invisible head, Christ, tu es Petrus and super hanc Petram, etc.
the delivering the Keys of heaven to Peter is naught else but a full and
sovereign power for to govern the Church, to him said Christ, pasce oves ^eas,
and tu aliquando confirma fratres tuos; ^o one of the other Apostles were these
words intimated, but to Peter only: heretics will reply, that all the Apostles
received plenary power for binding and absolving; I answer, that the rest of
the Apostles received immediately that power from Christ, yet the power of Peter
has been more absolute and excellent, because he received that power as
ordinary, which thereore did flow and does pass to his Successors; the rest of
the Apostles only received a delegate power, which do not pass to their
successors, but is in them expired, and s^ S. Peter's power was absolute and the
highest, to which the power of the rest had al^ ways as annexed to it a kind
of subordination and subjection to Peter; to whom only Christ said, tibi dabo
claves; pasce ovemeas, and agnos meos, confirma fratres tuo^ against which the
gates of hell shall never prevail; that is, neither Turks, Pagans Jews,
Heretics, nor wicked livers, shall never beat it down: hence he is called
caput omnium Ecclesiarum, potestate and authoritate Vniversalis Patriarcha,
Matter omnium, summus Pontifex, Apostolicae sedis Antistes, Ecclesiae Pater,
Rector and Caput; an^ Justinianus the Emperor said of him, summi Pontificatus
apicem apud Romam esse nemest qui dubitet, ad Romanam fidem perfidia no^ habet
accessum, because Christ said, rogav^ pro se Petre ut non deficiat fides tua:
and thi^ moved S. Jerome to say, that true Religion cannot be conserved without
the Empire o^ a head, or great authority of an universal^ Pastor and
Vicegerent of Christ; Ecclesisalus a summi sacerdotis dignitate depende^^
without which there will be made daily in finite schisms, divisions and
subdivisions i^ kingdoms, as we may see now in poo^ England: so as the true
Church has two heads, one invisible viz. Christ, fundamentum aliud nemo potest
ponere praeter id quod posttum est, quod est Christus, who is fundamentum
fundamentorum: but Peter is the second, cleaving to Christ, and placed on
Christ: we believe in the first principal head or fundamental stone, Christ;
the second, Peter, we only obey: Christ is the primary foundation, basis, and
prop, of our faith, because we believe all those things to be true which he (as
the first infallible verity) did reveal to be believed, we believe God to be
one, and three, the word made flesh, and so forth; not that Peter, Paul, or
John, or any Pape said so, or taught the same, but that the first verity, God
revealed, propounded, and said the same, so as our faith is founded on Christ;
yet because those matters revealed by Christ are not so manifest what they are;
he therefore gave us a secondary fundamental stone, Peter, and his successors,
who tells us, and propounds, what Christ revealed, and distinguishes such, from
what was not revealed or delivered by him, and so our faith is grounded on both
stones, but in a different manner; the one is but vice king or Vicar; but
Christ the prime and principal stone, communicating to Peter his Epithete,
though it has been analogice tantum: It is very remarkable what happened in the
time of Stephanus intruded pape 7. according to Baron. anno. 897. how that
Basilica Lateran* the prime Pontifical seat, impulsore Angelo malo, did all
fall down to the ground, even from the high Altar to the very gate; the
sanctuary only, in which was the Chair of the Pape being remained whole and
entire; which strange accident does manifest, that the true seat of glorious S.
Peter can never come to ruin, notwithstanding that sanctity and grace in heads
and members may sometimes fail: Because Christ Jesus that Eagle preserved the
same, though he sits in heaven, in his glory, yet he still has his sacred eyes
fixed on the nest of his Church, to preserve it till doomsday; even as when the
Eagle has his little ones in the nest, fearing the poison of serpents, great
enemies to his nest and his young birds, he flies up and down among the Rocks
for to find out the precious stone called Aetites, or Eaglestone, which the
Eagle places in his nest, which hat rare virtue against all venom: See Pierius
valor. even so that glorious Eagle, Christ, left in his nest, the
Roman Catholic Church, his heavenly spouse, many precious Eagle-stones, viz.
many places of Scripture revealed by him, for to preserve the same always from
the stinking breath and poison of accruing heretics. Did not Christ place one
Eagle-stone in the nest of his Church when he said, rogavi, Peter* thy faith
shall never fail: and S. Cyprian lib. 3. epist. 3. said, that to the Roman
faith perfidiousness could have no access: Another stone, Peter, feed my sheep,
feed my lambs; which preserves Peter and his Successors till the end of the
world to be Universal Pastors, Heads, and visible Vicars of Christ in his
visible Congregation, from all malice, envy and venom of barking heretics.
Are not the seven Sacraments proved and marvellously preserved from all venom
by several Eagle-stones in Scripture: Confirmation has that stone Act. 8.15,
17. Penance and Sacramental Confession proved, and preserved by Matthew. 18.18.
and John 20.23. Saint James chapt. 5. from the dangerous venom of heretics:
withal observe Andrew, the terms of the Commission granted to Roman Catholic
Priests to absolve sins are so large and general, that without great temerity,
that power cannot be restrained, only unto public and notorious offenses; and
when the Priest pronounces the Absolution in the Name, and by the power of
Jesus, since he does but follow the express terms of their heavenly Commission,
the sentence then is repeated as given by Christ himself, in whose place they
are appointed as visible Judges to the visible members of Christ's visible
flock; so as it is the invisible high priest, viz, Christ, who interiorly
absolveth the penitent whilst the priest exercises the exterior Ministry.
Extreme unction is confirmed and preserved from the infection of heresy by
that stone placed by Christ in his nest, Jac. 5.14. Marriage likewise by that
precious Eagle-stone, Matthew. 19.5. and Ephesians. 5.32. Holy Orders established,
ratified and preserved from all poison, 1 Timothy 4. and 2 Timothy 1. The Real
Presence of Christ's Body in the E^charist solemnly preserved from the venom and
infection of heretical, figurative understanding by those Eagle-stones, Matthew.
26. Luke 22. ^ Cor. 11.24. 26. O brave militant Church, O triumph of the pure
nest of Jesus, where souls are saved, and conveied to the glory of the
Triumphant Church, against this fortress of truth, against this Nest and Spouse
of Christ; all what Andrew Sall, or fresher wits of the whole heap of
Protestanism (begun disastrously by the shameful revolt of Henry the 8th. and
molded and made up by the arm of flesh) shall never prevail against it; and
all that they say will be no more then so many several handfuls of execrable
ashes taken out of the urns of condemned heretics, whose malicious
cont^ivements are quite forgotten: that Roman Catholics are superstitious,
erroneous, etc. is the only chief rope whereupon the Apostate Sall dances the
antic, and triumphs: which can never be proved: empty, aerial and groundless
bare words can beguile none but weak licentious and fickle reeds, they will
never prevail with any well-principled Christian;

And though all tempests of the world assail
Christ's faith* yet *against it hell cannot prevail.
Andrew, eat your bread, hold your tongue, all you can say against Christ's
sacred nest will signify nothing, but as mere scarecrows; it can avail you
naught else but heap judgments on your crazy head and palsy hand: come along
sweet Andrew, It Is worth your serious consideration to ponder the glory and
splendor of Roman Catholic Religion; Saul from a persecutor by the hand and
call of Christ became a Preacher, an Apostle; what greater confirmation of
Christian Religion, then to see Christ appearing to preserve his nest and his
spouse from imminent danger, menaced by a cruel wolf Saul; the head preserves
the members, the glorious Eagle preserves his little ones from the jaws of
hell; the Scribes and Pharisees Math. 16. sought for signs from heaven, lo now
a most rare and stupendous one, Christ in the air forcing Saul to become Paul,
and a main witness of the truth of our Religion; here may be considered the
strength and certainty of our faith; an enemy of the Gospel, Doctor of the
Jews, to become in an instant, metamorphos'd and quite changed from a wolf into
a meek lamb and preacher of Christ's law: how come Saul like another Balaam to
bless the people of God, who was sent to curse them? but that he was
constrained by God so to do, and has been taught in our faith by Christ himself
most wonderfully. O Andrew Sall! this is no great comfort for you, who from a
Sall was raised to be a pressed, a preacher, like another Paul; now to become a
Saul, a wolf, an enemy, a persecutor of Christ and his members, yea, even a
murderer: Return back, call for mercy, be reconciled, come and receive grace:
Saul an enemy received grace, was made a chosen vessel: O mercy never to be
duly pondered! distrust not wretched Andrew! diffide not of Gods goodness and
mercy, nor of the efficacy of his divine grace: Sall, Sequutus es errantem
sequere poenitentem Saulum? listen to Gods calling, voice and illumination,
stifle not the divine inspirations of God, vocantis, illuminantis, arguentis,
castigantis; say cheerfully with S. Paul, Domine quid me vis facere! do not
expect to be instructed by God; ingredire Civitatem; forsake your Court of
Camas, come audi Ananiam, Concionatorem co^solatorem, amicum, and confessarium
tuum fidelem.

A Sovereign Caution to Roman Catholics, not to be troubled, or take scandal
by Andrew Sall Apostate falling from his Religion. Documents 5.
WHat Layman will not run and willingly embrace a plausible and easy way to
heaven? sure we cannot be ignorant how stones fall naturally down to their
center, yet are with difficulty raised up; it is more facil to destroy and beat
down a house then to build the same: Did not Sir Thomas More Lord Chancellor of
England and a glorious Martyr, make answer in this manner, to one who bragged
much of the propagation of Luthers sect, saying, ad propositam vitae libidinem
and licentiam, populum ruere, majus non est miraculum quam saxa deorsum cadere;
take notice also how Socrates answered a certain common strumpet, who insulted
and said, tu neminem ex amatoribus meis unquam valebis a me ab alienare; at ego
quoties lubet tuos Auditores omnes a te voco, and ad me traho; to whom the wise
philosopher, mirum hoc non est, tu siquidem ad declinem voluptatis tramitem
omnes rapis and trahis, ego ad arduum virtutis callem cogo, and impello,
Aelian. lib. 13. de var. hist. Surely in Scripture, Esa. 1. heresy is called a
whore, q^o^odo facta est meretrix Civitas fidelis; for even as the strumpet
does easily draw to her and ^educeth many, so does heresy delude, charm and
drag men daily to perdition, liberty and sin. The ancient Philosophers being
questioned, why there were very many Epicures to be found, but very few
peripateticks or Stoics; the reason they gave, was, that Stoicorum and
Peripateticorum disciplina severior, and subtilior erat: Epicureorum autem
laxior, and crassior. Hear what Lactantius lib. 3. de divinae Instit. c. 16.
say, Epicuri disciplina multo celebrior semper fuit non quia very aliquid
afferat, sed quia multos ad populare nomen voluptatis, and libertatis invitat:
nemo enim non in vitia pronus est, eaque vincere difficillimum est: and
certainly those that become Apostates from Christ and his Religion, are plunged
by the liberty of their flesh, and not of any good spirit: it is no hard matter
to persuade a voluptuous Religious man, that Priests ought to marry, and that
it is impossible to be chaste: it is not difficult to persuade those given to
gluttony, that fastings are superfluous and needless, and that drunkenness is
no sin, etc. did not Balaam advise the King B^l. c to place beautiful maids
near the armies of the Hebrews, that so they might be allured to the sin of the
flesh, and that the women should not at all consent to give the soldiers their
will, unless they would become Idolaters, Numb 31. by which very many
Israelites were deluded and perverted, and this was the only way to overcome
them and their Army: what other way or means did Luther and Calvin use for to
draw Proselites after them, then lust, liberty, avarice, etc. how was Joannes
Fredericus Duke of Saxony brought to be an heretic by Luther? it was thus:
This Duke had an ambition to bereave the Family of Austria from being
Emperors, which they enjoyed quasi jure haereditario; this his ambition he
imparted to Luther, who persuaded the Duke to change his Religion, if he
expected a change in the Empire, his hellish advice was embraced by the Duke
easily, being full of envy, and an enemy to Caesar; thus the Duke by the advice
of cursed Luther, raised an army against Charles the fifth, endeavoring to
destroy him; but by divine providence, and the brave valor and conduct of the
Emperor, the Duke was conquered and taken prisoner, and deprived of being
Elector, which place and honor was conferred on Prince Maurice, in whose
Family even to this day it holds: and assuredly nothing but pride, curiosity,
an appetite of contradiction, arrogance, avarice, ambition, usurpation of
sacred gifts, voluptuousness, an aversion from severe discipline, luxury, an
itching desire of novelties, and liberty of the flesh, are the baits that
enchaunted your soul from the firm standing in the true Church to the sink of
herefie and a postasie. When any falls from Religion, the harm is very
dangerous to him that falls, we cannot find that any of the B. Apostles or
Disciples of Christ, nay, nor any of the weaker faithful did fall from their
faith by the deplorable Apostasy of Judas: which cannot be but a signal
providence of God toward his faithful; heretics imagines, that when any
Doctor, preacher, or priest of ours runs to apostasy, from us, to their sect,
that then our faith begins to be weakened, and that many more will follow; but
this is a very foolish conceit, for many reasons: first, because that fall and
deficience is no new matter, or unusual in the Church of Christ; whereas in all
ages, and times there have been some that were permitted to fail, and fall into
Apostasy, to the end, that by their deficiency, the Church should be
excrcised, but never to fail, or fall away with them; whereas the same is not
grounded but upon a firm Rock, Christ Jesus: for God almighty when one vessel
is broken can make another, as Hieremia; observed c. 18 did not Judas fall off
from Christ in that time, when he promised to draw all things to him? did not
immediately the good thief ^orn, confess, and believe? though Peter ^denied his
matter, the Centurion was con^rerted, revertumur percutientes pectora sua:
therefore the ruin and fall of members of our Church, does not at all shake
our Church ^or faith. Who in the Greek Church was more famous then Crigines?
Who in the Latin Church was more famous then Ter^^llian? each of these was a
most ancient Doctor in the third age: and at first they proved most
indefatigable and earnest overthrowers and persecutors of the Enemies of the
Church, heretics: they were rare Doctors to a great many saints, Confessors
and Martyrs, yet notwithstanding both fell from the Church into heresy; and the
Church not in the least moved or weakened, for it: did not Sapricius in the time
of Valerianus the Emperor, a learned and renowned priest (being dragged to
martirdom for his faith,) deny his faith, and offered sacrifice to false Gods?
what shall I say of Osius the Master of Constantinus magnus, a most learned
man, and one that was employed as Legate from the Church, oftentimes; did not he
betray, the Nicene Council, become an enemy to the true faith, and an Arian?
yet the Church stood permanent, and triumphant, so as when he fell; then the
the Enemies of faith, the Arians were converted: and what Osius did deny, to
wit, the divine substance in the Son of God, was confessed and restored, and
maintained by the Arians, so as the very Emperor Constantinus did publicly
preach avouch, and by public edicts, did cry down; and caused all to be
demolished, wha^ accursed Osius with his consorts did impiously maintain, see
Baron. anno. 357.

When the Seraphical S. Francis in the beginning of his holy Order was troubled
that some of his children fell off from their vocation, and fearing that his
Order should fall and decay; heard these words from Christ, why are you
troubled Francis for scandal given by the fall of some of your Children? know
that when one shall turn to their vomit, that I shall raise another or more in
his place. S. Bonavent. in vita S. Francis. Much more the Church of Christ is
to stand without interruption. Secondly, because it is no wonder that among so
many holy, good, and virtuous Christians in the whole Church, there should be
one or some reprobates: there is not that Community in which may not be found
one scabby sheep or other: was not Cham a reprobate in the house of Noe? was
not Ismael one in the house of Abraham? in the house of Isaac, Esan? in the
house of Christ, Judas? what wonder therefore can it be that in the Church so
diffused and extended from west, to East; from North, to South, there be found
some reprobates, runagates, and Apostates? this ^ur B. Savior did often
foretell, will the ^a want Merchants ships to sail, because ^^me ships are cast
away? will not men ^^erefore not marry women because some ^re found to be
strumpets? Thirdly, because ^ose that falls from the true Church do not ^ll for
any real doubt in their faith, but ^ther through their depraved life and
cor^upt behavior; and for to get more liberty and freedom of sinning; and you
may read ^1. Joan. 2. ex nobis prodierunt sed non erant ^x nobis; nam si
fuissent ex nobis permansissent ^tique nobiscum: but now their exorbitant
^arriage, their pride, their incorrigibility and refractoriness, their
negligence, being weary of a spiritual religious life, their aversion from
penance, and Mortification, uncupiscentia carnis oculorum and superbia vi^e, in
effect manifest now, that they were ^ot of ours, and because they were not,
they went away, becoming Apostates: what moved Origin to become an heretic? as
Vincent. Lyrin. c. 23. contra haeres. writes, ^ut his pride, presumption of his
learning, ^magining foolishly that he was wiser then all the world? what caused
Jovinianus to fall? but that he could not endure the rigor of obedience, and
monastical life, he was too delicate: see S. Hier. lib. 1. contra Jovinian:
therefore because such were chaff, or stubble, no pure clean wheat, no^ wonder
that they were huried away by the wind of temptation; hence S. Peter, Act. 1.^
said praevaricatus est Judas ut abiret in locum^ suam: what was his place,
which he expected, and was inclined to? was it to hang himself, or rather hell,
to which, as to his last period, or term, he directed his paths and way? God
therefore is rather to be glorified and praised, that he is accustomed to
purify and purge his Church from such perverse putrified members, sic pereant
peccatores: so as in no way the fall of Priests, to become accursed Apostats,
can derogate any thing from the Sovereignty, and truth of our faith, but rather
does conduce very much to the manifestation and confirmation of the sanctity,
purity, and permanency of the same: you may observe how the sea casts up on the
shore dead carcases, even so our Roman Catholic Religion vomits up, and casts
out, permissive, incorrigible, and reprobate dead members: it is most certain,
that none departs from our Religion to the Protestant revolted Squadron, to the
end that he may give himself more to prayer, retirements, fasting,
mortification, purity of life, and conversation, no such matter; none falls for
to forsake and contemn the honors, ease, comforts, and pleasures of the world,
neither for to shun the snares and allurement ^f women, nor that he may the
more abdi^ate, and renounce his own will, and re^gne the same to the will of
his superior: ^ut rather for the contraty, they run from (...), that they may
enjoy more liberty, and ^^eedom for to follow and pursue their ^icked way and
customs (...) whereas, the Protestants sect received none from us but ^eer
libertines, reprobate, refractory, ignorant and weak, effeminate ou^^casts*
neither ever yet any of such infernal Imps has ^een listed in the catalogue of
Saints: quia ^^ni ante macellum stanti non adjicitur nisi ^^o faeda and
mutilis, even so God in his di^ine providence throw none into the devils ^aws,
which is heresy, but only such as are willful reprobats and scandalous livers:
therefore S. Paul Acts 20. gives us war^ing, saying, ego scio quoniam post
discessio^em meam intrabunt lupi rapaces in vos non ^^rcentes gregi, etc.
propter quod vigilate me^oria retinentes, etc. Sweet Andrew! how ^ame you to be
enchanted from the truth of ^he revealed principles of the ancient and
^oul-saving faith of Christ, and become an ^eretick, which is the sink of all
abomina^ion, the most horrid and blackest sin that ever was committed? even the
Heathen Philosophers by the only rays of pure Na^^res light did abhor sin, in
so much that Aristot. 3. Eth. said, melius est mori quam faeere aliquid contra
bonum virtutis; and Senec^ said, Si scirem 'Deum ignosciturum, tamen^ p^^care
nollem ob p^ccati t^rpitudinem: Did not the great S. Anselm say, that if of one
side he saw sin, and on the other the flames of hell, and if he were to choose,
he would rather throw himself into infernal flames then commit a heinous sin
against God his Master, Redeemer, and glorifier and sanctifier: O rare
expression! these great Philosophers seriously considering the base, vile, and
abominable nature and malfce of sin, they could not endure the same; and
without all question the nature and malice of heresy surpasses the execration
and malice of all imaginable sins whatsoever: for first it draws after it two
main punishments, and just judgments, excecation and induration on man: it
blindes and excecates the understanding, involving it into main darkness of
sundry errors, and withal it indurates, and infatuates the will by woeful
pertinacy, whereas faith being the gift of God which heretics contemn, and
wilfully reject, by their obstinate pertinacy, believing some points in
Scripture that are pleasing to them, others that displeases, they will not
believe, vainly imagining it to suffice, to believe in Christ, and that he died
for our sins, though they should believe no more; whence they assure themselves
that any man of any Sect, believing in Christ, may be in his belief saved;
whereas they all have one God and head, Christ: O false and deluded doctrine!
Did not S. Thomas deny the article of the resurrection? Did not Christ Jesus
require from him and all the faithful, to believe that article as necessary for
salvation? who doubts it? therefore the same reason must follow in all other
articles; and why is it necessary to believe that Christ resuscitated, and not
that Christ's body and blood is contained in the Sacrament of the Eucharist?
Does not holy Scripture witness this (...) Secondly, I say, Does ^o^ the
Apostle ad Tit. 3. admonish us, haereticum hominum devitare, because he is
subverted and condemned by his own proper judgment; you must not reply, that
the Apostle meant him an heretic that rejects Christ, or what is contained in
the symbol, for so indeed he would not be an heretic, that would reject all
the holy Scripture, and all Sacraments; neither also he who would condemn
marriage and meats, and place two distinct persons in Christ: yet such 1 Timothy
4. and 1 John 4. are held to be heretics. Thirdly, Did all antiquity hold,
that an heretic could not be saved, which moved and excited them vigorously
always to oppose heretics, confute, silence, and condemn them: wherefore has
there been at all times General Councils of Learned Prelates convened, from all
parts of the inhabitable world, and with great labor and expenses celebrated?
but for to beat down and confute heresies, and damn them with anathema? why all
commerce and familiarity with heretics forbidden? why very many Roman
Catholics did rather suffer exile, loss of means, and limbs, torments and
cha^ns, then subscribe to heretics? were not all these encounters in vain,
foolishly, and injuriously done, if in those sects of heresy, salvation might
be had or obtained? The reason is, that it would follow by good ilation, that
the true Orthodox faith would be no better then the heresy of Arians,
Pelagians, Nestorians, etc. whereas it is stated salvation to be had in any of
these, as well as in the Roman Catholic Faith, and consequently it would
follow, all those ancient heretics were saved, because many of them did hold
and believe the Apostolical Symbol, all which is most absurd; and that any
should be saved by false faith; for false faith neither is, nor can be more
available for salvation then no faith at all: and because the foundation of
faith, viz. the reason of believing, in heretics is false and erroneous;
therefore their faith is false also which depends on falsehood; for they believe
their dogmata or tenants, either because their pretended Apostles, Luther and
Calvin, etc. taught them, and these could not err or be deluded, or because by
^^eir own proper sense and judgment, they ^agine those to be contained in
Scripture, and this is false too; for one man alleges ^e same Scripture for
this sect, and another ^ledges the very same for another different ^ct, because
they understand it not; or ^^y believe sua dogmata, because some are ^^ght
interiourly by a private spirit of the ^se of Scipture, and this likewise
deludes, ^^cause for the most part all of them do brag (...) boast they have
the true spirit; yet they ^^ch and broaeh contrary things amongst ^^emselves,
which verily a good and right ^it can never do. Fourthly, as he who ^aks one
precept, is said and held to be ^lty of all the precepts, viz. if one be an
^lterer, that he shall be damned, as well ^e that has committed sins against
all the ^^mmandements of God, even so in like ^^ner, whosoever rejects and will
not be^^ve one article of true faith, falls from sal^on no less then if he had
rejected all ar^es; wherefore some in vain do wish or ^ect that the Church
would remit some^^g of the articles of faith, to the end it (...) come and
agree in one with the late ^s, but that is impossible, for faith can re^e
neither increase nor decrease, fides additamentum and incisionem nescit quia
divine faith is like an hour-clock, her articles a^^ made like the teeth of
wheels, if you tak^ away or pull one tooth, all the fabric (...) machine fails
and serves for nothing; therefore thrice happy are the glorious Saints (...)
heaven because they have a full vision a^ fruition of the sweet face of God;
blesse^ are the faithful Christians here beneat^ though pilgrims and
travelers, because the^ do not see God, for by true faith shall com^ that
place where they shall see God face (...) face for all eternity; and as S.
Austin sai^ Psa. 91. Vbi jam non dicetur nobis; cre^ qu^d non vides, sed gaude
quia vides; finiall^ if every one might be saved in his own fait^ then we
should have no need of recourse (...) Christ; it were enough some to be sent b^
God that would preach the knowledge (...) one God, according to the Apostle, ad
G^ 2. Si per legem justitia, ergo gratis Christ m^rtuus est: and withal the
very Scriptu^^ would prove false and in vain, which te^^^ us Chant to be our
Redeemer and Medi^tour, through whose sacred blood we a^^ cleansed, through
whose faith we ought (...) be jusified, and in whose only Name (...) ought to
be saved; for then, if this we (...) true, and that any one, in any faith may
(...) saved, then every humane faith and persw^sion would have been sufficient
for salvat^on: for the Turks, though they believe in ^e God, Creator and
Remunerator of all, ^et they do not believe by any divine faith, ^t because
Mahomet delivered it so in his ^coran, in which many most false things ^e
taught, as that Mahomet was the prophet (...) God, etc. So likewise the Jews,
what ^ey believe, they believe because their ^bbins do expound the Scriptures
so to ^^em; yet notwithstanding all their grounds ^e vain, false, and most
erroneous, because ^e Rule of their faith is most false. The ^ain reason that
moves some to say, that ^y may be saved in his faith, is, that they ^d it
incredible, that all Jews and Turks, (...) which very many do piously worship
^od, and live innocently and i^noxiously, ^ould eternally perish, and that only
for ^t believing in Christ; for this they may ^eade an excuse, by reason from
their cra^e they were otherwise instructed, and ^^d according to their light
and breeding, ^^d in what they could serve God, therefore ^e gates of heaven
must not be made so nar^w, as that that vast number should be ex^uded and not
enter in, but all this signifies ^^thing; for if it is not incredible, that ^od
has left for so many thousand years (...) the world (the Jews only excepted)
in ^e darkness of Idolatry, wherein for cer^^in they peri^hed; so it is very
easy for every one to persuade himself, the same t^ have happened to the Jews
and Turks; an^ further, the Jews and Turks now-aday^ have less plea to excuse
them in not belie^ving in Christ then the Ethnicks had in an^cient times,
whereas the Jews and Turk^ could seek and learn from the Christians li^ving
amongst them the true faith of Christ which the Ethincks could not do, becau^^
they lived in darkness, and were hurried a^way by the common Custom, to follo^
and observe the Religion of their Ancestors To conclude, I say, that if there
may (...) found some that never heard a word o^ Christ's Religion neither have
had any kind^ of impulses for to inquire and embrace the same, such shall not
be damned for infidel^ty, if none such sins they have committed either they
will be illuminated by God^ that they come to the knowledge of saving faith, or
if they die in their natural innocen^cy, they shall incurr only the poena damn^
not of sense, in the other world. If a prote^stant living and dying so, if he
die in the estate of innocence he shall enter into heaven because baptized in
Christ. O Andrew r^turn to your bleeding Mother, she is you^ true Mother! while
you remain abroa^ with the harlot you can have no quietness no comfort, no
grace, no ease, no refres^ment, no food but husks, being destitute (...) the
help of the Sacraments, which are the heavenly conduits through such divine
grace is conveyed to Drooping souls, you are destitute of the true Word of God,
of the prayers of the Church, the Congregation of faithful Christians, you are
destitute of good and laudable examples: you are destitute of a dread
sacrifice, destitute of faith, destitute of Religion: you have lost all
devotion, all Mortification, and even the fear of a living God: consider your
lamentable state, you are become one of a Sect, where there is no Guide, Rule
or Judge or authority which God has appointed for your direction, and to teach
and continue true faith in the world: the Guide, Rule, Judge, and Authority
which Roman Catholics follow, is such, and the same in effect is which the
first Christians followed in the time of the Apostles, and in every respect,
able and sufficient to execute its function, and indeed the only means
imaginable, not only to teach and convey true faith, unto the world, but also
to reconcile all differences arising in matters of faith, as also to evince and
condemn all heretics and schismatics, and so establish that union that becoms
the Church of God, which Christ Jesus our all-wise Legislator has settled in
the world; and this Guide, and Judge which Catholic do follow, is infallible,
and has sufficient credentials from heaven to prove her self to be so,
consequently that we are all obliged to captivate our understanding to the
obedience of Faith.

Adhortatio Paranetica ad Sacrilegum Apostatam Cassellensem.
Salve Andrea, and me tantisper accipe?
A roaring Lion, by Christ's most heavenly call,
From Saul became a Gospel preaching Paul;
Thou Sall from Priest, and preaching child of Paul,
Beguiled, art turned to be a black cursed Saul;
Your proud w^ll shak'd off the yoke of Faith,
Pursuing ^an n'^ lies, illusions and deceit.
Lord! what is caitiff flesh when left to it self?
Faith needs must wreck when m^n is his own shelf.
How vain is humane confidence, how frail?
Only Faiths true ways can our souls avail.
Vae impio in malum retributio manuum ejus fiet ei. Isa. 3.
Who cannot, Sir, but stand amazed and startle at your dismal fall from the
true ancient Church of Christ? you a professor of Divin^ty (though of no solid
intensive learning,) a Religious priest of a Society most renowned for
learning, sanctity, piety, virtue and blessings, you a preacher of the word and
penance; you who cleav'd so fast to the Rock, Christ, now to be so easily, and
so suddenly, by the s^ubtil wiles, cunning, crafty slight, and sophistry of
crafty seducers, hurried away to a Religion false, tracherous, and destructive
of salvation; and metamorphosed into the likeness of a loathsome and deformed
villain, and now in your old age become like a child, against that wholesome
advice of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 14. nolite pueri effici sensibus, children commonly
never regards precious things; carts, coaches, and wheels made of earth,
delights them more then the rich brave painted coaches of Kings, of great State
and magnificence, for these little ones are only led by their senses; as you
shall see a child break to pieces books of high esteem, and value, throw away
precious gems and most noble Jewels, and take up a black coal, kiss it, and
eat it, etc. such a little child, you Andrew Sall, is become of late, when you
made choice of darkness for light, black coals of heresy, apostasy, liberty,
illusions, falsehood and sordid ways, and such as please your wretched blind
senses, and shamefully condemn most solid, most precious and most sovereign
things, as true un-erring faith, Religion, glorious virtues, Sanctity, grace,
mortification, purity of life and conversation, devotion, sasting, prayers,
contemplation, and sweet retirement, all which are leading to eternal glory. O
stark blindness! hinc lacrimae! this wretched exchange sure must proceed from
very gross ignorance, pride and carelessness: for the mind of man being the
lowest among rational natures addicted to senses, and carnal actions,
apprehends nothing perfectly, beside sensible, external, temporal things; as
honor, riches, voluptuousness, pleasures, contentments, etc. and cannot
apprehend spiritual and heavenly things, viz. the beauty of virtue, the
pleasures and sweet enjoyments of eternal happiness, the beatifical vision and
fruition of Gods most glorious face, the only source of full content, and
never-ending felicity; I say, these things they apprehend but very weakly, and
even in a confused and languishing manner; whereas the affection of the will
still follows strongly, the apprehension; as when a man does taste of the
deluding sweetness of terrestrial happiness, he vainly imagines the same to be
far greater then really it is, even so when one tastes a little of the
roughness, difficulty, and loathsome bitterness of virtue, does likewise fondly
imagine the same to be more craggy, intolerable, and loathsome then truly it
is, and so falls back and desists from going forward in the quest and happy
pursuit of solid virtue. O Andrew! non erit tibi amplius infans dierum and
senex qui non impleat dies suos quoniam puer centum annorum morietur, Isa. 65.
that is to say, if any old man be found of childish behavior and becoming a
puer centum annorum, and yet would prove a child in his senses, in a vicious
life and conversation, that man shall not persevere in the Militant, to pass to
the Triumphant Church, but shall be precipitated into everlasting darkness and
flames: oh Andrea! haec te horrenda terreant, how come you in your old age to
be so enchanted, and so miserably to revolt from a true anciently revealed
Faith? how come you to fly wretchedly from Religion, piety, penance, and
austerity of life? etc. but because you doted; you proved puer centum annorum,
becoming a scandalous Apostate, a vile protestant, and a pitiful object of
scorn to boys and lackeys: so as you may say with King David, 2 Reg. vivit
Dominus quoniam filius mortis est qui hoc f^cit: The ancient Philosophers were
accustomed to compare weak effeminate men, who easily would part with some most
precious thing for a bubble or trifle, to a fish, called, polype, which cleaves
so fast to a rock that it will be sooner pulled into pieces, then let go its
gripe; yet according to Pierius valor. lib. 25. cap. 21. when a little sweet
water is poured down upon it, then immediately he will let loose what he kept
fast. O pitiful Andrew, did not you of late, by your subita dissessio prove
like this fish: who could imagine that you should be so enchanted as to let go
your fast gripe, and forsake your so gracious, so amorous, so obliging and so
glorious master, savior and benefactour? O execration! O blindness! O
execration the most black that ever the sun looked on! how could such folly and
madness creep into your brain? oh aqua dulcis! the perfumed sweet water of
Camas was tasted by you, poor Anarew, by which you became miserably
intoxicated, amused, charmed, and quite undone: confregisti jugum, rupisti
vincula, dixisti non serviam, Jer. 2. lo, the sad effects of your aqua aulcis,
conferring, eating, drinking, sporting with Arch-hereticks against the express
will of your Superiors, at Camas, you exposed your self wilfully to the
imminent danger of being ensnared by dangerous soul-hunters and fowlers: alas!
Inventi sunt in populo i^ pii insidiantes quasi aucupes, laqueos ponentes and
pedicas ad capiendos viros: sure you met with a dextrous fowler at Camas who by
fair language, sweet plausible insinuations, darting at your weak simple heart,
beams of great promises, and allurements of full content, gold, liberty,
pleasure, promotion to smo^ky honor, making use in a most dextrous manner of
subtle and crafty methods of deluding you, struck through your wavering and
instable soul, with aqua dulcis which has been your bane, bringing you to feed
you self and others with false appearances instead of truth, and brand you with
a perpetual blot of infamy to all prosterity, and fix an everlasting guilt upon
your soul; and your now liberty the Meteor which by glittering brightness of
deceitful light, dazles your eyes, unwarily; and like a wandering fire misleads
you in your search for true happiness, through the blind paths of Apostasy,
ignorance and folly; drawing yet into the dangerous precipices of all impiety
and infamy, de scelere ad scelu^, What false appearance soever of content at
pr^^ent this way holds forth to your deluded mind, vae impio in malum, etc. Oh
Andrew! how come you to prove like the clouds, which obscures the sun that
raised them? take this gerogliphick, and consider, how when the sun does spread
her radiant beams, chasing darkness from the face of the earth, which dark
clouds, envying (as it were) at so bright light, they begin to endeavor to
dislu^tre the beauty and resplendency thereof: what are the clouds, but gross
earthly vapors raised by the rays of the sun up to the superior Region, where
they are condensed and made dark clouds, and yet they obfuscate and endeavor
to endarken their maker; O ingratitude! thus you ungratfull wretch, do begin to
wage war with God your maker and infinite benefactor; who raised you Andrew
Sall from nothing, to great honor and dignity, as to be a religious man, a
priest, a legate, a star, a guide, a physician of souls? and what is it that you
return to his divine majesty for all those blessings and favors? oh! is it to
bandy against him and use his blessings for to dishonor his holy name? is it to
war furiously against his faith; to make him a liar in your pulpit, by your
lies and forgeries? your malicious crying down the pape, prayers to Saints, the
real presence, and your loud bawling up creeping Protestanisme? O ingratitude
and madness! to rip up the bowels of your mother, his spouse, the Roman
Catholic Church, calling her whore, superstitious, etc. is this your
gratitude? ah poor Andrew! all your bawlings and railings recoiles upon your
own self, quid prudentis est? cum possit nolle nocere; quid stulti proprium?
non posse, and velle nocere. you are not able to annoy or beat down the glory
and luster of the Catholic Church, nor impede the glorious trophies and daily
mervelous growth thereof: know that Christ is still at hand for to defend his
flock and Church from the venom of Apostats; his eyes are fixed on them,
always ready to beat down and destroy all arising Enemies: what became of
Julian the Apo^ate, for attempting to persecute the true Church? all the world
knows it: what became of Luther, Calvin, etc. and of all the rest of your
cursed fellow-laborers in the tottered silvestrial vineyard of protestanisme?
Florimundus will tell you, they all came to a most woeful and execrable end;
haec te tremenda moveant, terreantque Andrea? Reclaim therefore in time Andrew,
begin to make a speedy retreat, open your eyes veiled with a fatal scarf of
impudency; shut not the eyes of your understanding against the pure heavenly
ways of Gods true doctrine for your salvation? imitate that brave Avicena, a
man of a most super-excellent wit, yet by unhappiness of birth ranked in the
infernal Sect of Mahomet, coming to consider, how his false prophet had placed
the beatitude of the life to come, in sensual pleasures and contentments of
the body, was ashamed of it, and so shurnk from his prophet, that he might not
betray his reason; the laws Mahomet gave, did consider beatitude and misery,
only within the limits of the body: Oh Andrew! forsake your protestant Sect,
which (as you well know in your Conscience) does place all happiness in the
pleasures honors, liberty and contentments of the body, and obstructs all means
and ways to virtue, to sanctity, piety, mortification, etc. and does stifle the
fear of a living and dreadful God: Oh Andrew! do not betray your Reason, nor
your conscience, shrink away from your darkness and apostasy? reclame and be
converted, like a great Pollititian lately by this Dilemma. Either there is a
living God, and a severe Judgment after this perishable life or no: if there be
none such, yet if I believe that there is, it cannot prejudice me at all, but
it will rather very much avail me, for it will move me to embrace an honest
moral Christian like life; if there be, and yet I shall not believe it, rather
flatly deny any such thing, what infinitely great torments and flames must I
expect for this my perfidiousness, blasphemy, and horrid contempt: Further,
either there are rewards for good works of the Just and Virtuous after this
life or no? and likewise if exquisite torments be prepared for the impious by
God, (as by the light of nature we may without question believe) or no? If
there be none at all, yet to believe, hope and fear such a thing, cannot hurt
me, but rather forward me to the practice of virtue and honesty, etc and if
there are really such to be expected, and that I shall not believe it, and so
live wickedly and licentiously, what other can be expected but eternal flames
among the damned? The Almighty, Andrew, illuminate your understanding, and
inflame your heart for to renounce your carnal childish senses, and to turn
your self to your mother, the Roman Catholic Church, wherein only is true
faith, Religion, grace and true comfort to be found: opus annorum multorum
perdidisti; arise, and rouse from your dismal Apostasy;

An Appendix.
IN the great and most important affairs of faith all, on all sides, agree,
that they are bound on pain of damnation to believe all truths sufficiently
propounded to them, as revealed of God, and to obey and submit to that Guide,
Rule, Judge and Authority which God has instituted and appointed to teach and
govern them; the reason is, because whosoever denies any thing sufficiently
propounded to be revealed by God, denies Gods veracity, and makes him a liar.
No protestant can show any other reason, why by denying the Trinity, and unity,
or the Incarnation, Gods veracity is denied, and God thereby made a liar, but
because the Trinity and Incarnation are sufficiently propounded as divine
Revelations; therefore the Real Presence, prayer to Saints, the Papes
Supremacy, auricular confession, purgatory, etc. being without doubt as
sufficiently propounded in the Scripture as those mysteries of the Trinity and
Incarnation; by denying which Gods Veracity must be also denied, and so God
made a liar. See in chap. 16.12. when the spirit of Truth is come, he will
guide you into all truth: but all truth excludes all errors, and this for
ever, which was to be longer then the Apostles were to live. If you Andrew
enquire, by what means this teaching shall be, by whom all people shall be
taught, all truths, and shall be preserved from all errors? S. Paul will tell
you, Ephesians. 4.11. He gave some Apostles (succeeding in full Apostolical
authority) some Prophets (expounders of the prophets) some Evangelists
(preachers of the Gospel) some Pastors and Teachers, to what end? for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
body of Christ: for what time or how long? till we all come in the union of
faith* now Andrew you may ask, will these secure us? the very next verse tells
you, that henceforth we be no more children, tossed to and fro with every wind
of doctrine, by the slieght of men and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in
wait to deceive, as you lately have been most shamefully by the slieghts of
Satan and his Instruments, pride, lust, and avarice, hurried away from Christ's
unerring Church, wherein only are manifestly seen unfeigned miracles, sanctity
of life, efficacy of doctrine, admirable repentance of sinners, conversions of
people and Nations, unity, stability, perpetuity, uninterrupted succession of
lawful pastors, which cannot be found in your protestant sect; these are such
heavenly marks as are impossible for God to affix unto a lie, which is as
impossible, as to set his hand and seal to the confirmation of falsehood;
according to the Rule of Gamaliel; If it be of God it will hold: the faith of
Roman Catholics holds, and daily grows more numerous in her proselites, when
the unsteady wavering protestant pitiful sect daily changes, like the Camelion,
from one false doctrine to another; which occasioned the most illustrious
Marquess Badensis from a Lutheran to become a Roman Catholic: the same
instability of heretics, scoffed and laughed at by Fredericus great Duke of
Saxony, at a time being questioned by a familiar friend, what did his Lutherans
believe? he answered, quid hoc anno credunt scio, quid vero credituri sint anno
sequenti nescio, nec ipsimet sciunt: no wonder having lost their ground, their
rule, their un-erring Judge, the Roman Catholic Church: some years past the
protestants in England, according to their first institution did observe the
Lent exactly, and also were accustomed to fast from meat on Frydays and
Saturdays, but alas! all that is forgorten, all is changed, nothing permanent
among them but persecution of the Roman Catholics: yet to observe the Lent,
and to abstain from meat the forty days of Lent, and withal on Frydays and
Saturdays, would much conduce to the weal-publick for the growth of cattle, and
for the comfort of poor people, meat being so excessive dear for not observing
the fasts on those holy times: not speaking of the infinite comfort and
encrea^e of blessings, both to soul and body, which daily accrue to Kingdoms
where the Lent, and Frydays and Saturdays are duly observed and fasted in the
Roman-Cath. Church. Now Andrew, I conjure you in the bowels of Charity, to
learn by heart that most heavenly lesson of Christ Jesus, viz. Learn of me, for
I am meek and humble of heart; in order to this remember S. John 4.6. We are of
God, He that hears God, hears us, he that is not of God, hears us not,
hereby know we the spirit of truth and the spirit of error: Andrew! nothing
was required to distinguish those two spirits, but to hear or to refuse to hear
the Apostolical Teachers: Lo, S. Paul says, Faith comes by hearing; it will be
as necessary now for you to hear in these our times those that are lawfully
commissioned to teach, as it was in the time of the Apostles: Come along
therefore, return to your Mother, your true un erring guide; fly away from
Babylon, and save your soul, begin to curse the day that you began to curse and
dishonor your true Mother, in imitation of that great Heresiarch Calvin, who,
consuming with intolerable stench from vermin, cried out aloud, saying,
Maledicta dies qnae primum studio and scriptioni falsae me adduxit: Bolsecus in
vita Calvini, haec te horrenda moveant and terreant, from appearing against
truth and the faith of Christ, for vain oftentation, for sordid gain, for to
please men, and displease the all-seeing God.

O Andrew! how come you to forsake your true mother the Roman Catholic Church
(which is the womb of your beginning and bosom of your repose) and fall into
the cruel hands of a false mother and harlot? I pray observe 3. Reg. how two
harlots came to Solomon for to decide the controversy between them about a
living child the one alleging it was hers, and the other also alleging the
child belonged to her; the King said, bring me a sword, and they brought a
sword before the King, and the King said, divide the living child in two, and
give half to one and half to the other: then spoke the woman whose the living
child was (for her bowels yerned toward her son) saying, O my Lord, give her
the living child, and in no wise slay it, but the other, the false mother
said, let it not be mine or thine, but divide it; then the King out of his
wisdom said, give her the child, slay it not, she is mother thereof, because
she has true love to her child, and will not have it divided: your soul is a
child which is claimed by two Mothers, the Roman Catholic Chhrch, and the
pretended Church of Protestants; how shall we find out the true mother from
the false one? by Solomon's dividatur infans, let the child be divided in two;
the Roman Catholic Church cannot endure division; the soul must not be
divided, it must cleave altogether to the true Mother Church, Christ's spouse,
the house and temple of God, the pillar and foundation of Truth: it must
believe all the Seven Sacraments, all articles of faith, believe all tenants
and revealed mysteries propounded as means for salvation; with S. Paul we
captivate our understandings to the obedience of her true and un-errable faith;
but the false Mother will have the soul divided in two, she is for division and
for halfs, seeking to bring into the house of God an anarchy of the children of
Belial, a division, a destrustion of union and of Monarchical heavenly
Government, diuidatur infans* the protestants say, they have faith, but will
have no works of fasting, watching, praying, penance, nor mortification, etc.
they believe that their laick Minister does abolish original sin in baptism,
but will not believe that Christ left power to true and lawful priests to
absolve from actual mortal sins; they will have the Lords Supper, but will not
believe Christ's words, H^c est corpus ^^cum; the reality of his body in a most
miraculous manner in the Eucharist; they will follow Scripture, but only what
is pleasing to them, and what is contradictory to flesh and unbridled appetites
they do reject and deny: these words per solam fidem, by bare faith you are
saved, are welcome to them, but good works, maceration of the body, and
austerity of life they cannot endure: erescite and multiplicabini pleases them,
serviti ven^ri and libidini, etc. but other words of Scripture they will not
li^ten to, as, fides sine operibus est mortua, poenitentiam agite; sic luceat
lux vestra ut videat opera vestra bona; Regnum coelorum vim patitur and
violenti r^piunt illud; castigo corpus m^um, and ad implco in carne mea ea quae
desunt passioni Christi; these places of Scripture they will not follow; Is not
this to divide the child? dividatur infans: they are altogether for division
and confusion; they have Churches, but without lawful priests; altars, without
sacrifice and religion: every religion either true or false, in all ages, had
always a sacrifice as a protestative sign of acknowledgement of divine
excellency and supreme majesty: In the Law of nature, from the very beginning,
we find sacrifice begun by Abel. which after continued by the Patriarchs, Noe,
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob; In the written Law so many sacrifices according to
Leviticus, and if we look upon Idolaters, the Gentiles, we shall find them
given to many different sacrifices, so as a sacrifice is inseparable from the
law, according to S. Paul, Heb. 7. saying, Translato Sacerdotio necesse est ut
and leg is translatio fiat; S. Paul said that Priesthood being removed or
translated, the law of necessity must be removed; if priesthood be abolished,
the law likewise must be, for to every law or religion, sacrifice and
priesthood is connatural, intrinsecal, and inseparable, being correlatives; for
priesthood is in order to sacrifice established, and the law is ordained in
order to sacrifice and priesthood, delivering precepts and ceremonies relating
to priesthood; translato sacerdotio, etc. dividatur infans: the protestants
they have our temples, but al^s! bare walls; no priests, no sacrifice;
consequently no law or religion; therefore qui sine lege viv^nt, sine lege
peribunt; they have sheep without pastors, pastors without mission, function,
order, consecration, character, or true commission; Christians without grace by
hand imposition, prophets without miracles, faith without works, and charity
without effects: behold Sall, excellent pieces, (forsooth) of a reformed Church
to which you adhere; you see all is but division and subdivision; you separated
your self from the Catholic Church which acknowledges a visible head, an
universal Pastor, Vice gerent of Christ on earth, established by the express
words of Jesus Christ in S. Matthew. 16.17, 18, 19. averred by all the holy
Fathers, confessed by the continuation of a lawful succession, in the
revolution of so many ages, without any interruption: and Sall must blindely
divorce and separate himself from it, withstanding the force of Gods spirit:
what will Sall be able to allege in his defense at the dreadful Judgment that
expects him? ah! he will say, that he thought the protestant was the true and
lawful Church: Miserable wretch! see thou not that the memory of all ages,
the consent of all Nations, the very ancient stones of temples bespeak thy
damnation? what miracles have thou seen or ever heard of wrought to this day
among protestants? what Angel has spoken to thee to remove to them? what
sanctity and holiness of life have thou noted in the authors of this sect, or
in their deluded proselites? were thou Andrew so bereaved of humane
understanding, as not to see palpably, that a pretended Religion which begun by
breach of promises made to God, by the sacriledges and impurities of Apostates,
by a general revolt against God, against King, against divine and humane laws,
by the liberty, filth, and ordure of the carrion the flesh, by the dissolution
of good manners, by blood, tyranny and furies, could take its source from the
holy Ghost? did thou not set before thy eyes the desolations of thy poor
country, the robbing and profaning of Churches, Gods houses, and the ruin
and impoverishings of thousands of brave ancient Families, to take thence, and
from no other their source and origin? Oh but you will say, I found that this
sect had the Scripture of its side: ah lamentable illusion! to whom Sall did
the Scripture send thee if not to the priests and lawful Pastors? what said the
Scripture, but that thou ought to keep the traditions, thou ought to obey
the Church and Prelates; thou ought not to trust thine own judgment, thou
ought to captivate thy understanding in matters of faith, and that it is
better to believe with a holy simplicity then as you do, and question with a
proud, peremptory, and vain curiosity? could thou be ignorant that the
devils and all damned heretics had taken the same pretext of Scripture only to
color their ignorance, malice and apostasy, and that with passages which had
a fairer show and appearance then those now of thy deluded deluding Ministers?
and yet all that followed them are miserably damned, and so are you vile
varlet, unless you sound a timely retreat, freely confessing you have erred as
man, and protest you will not persevere in apostasy, mischief, and rebellion
from the Church, the womb of your beginning, and bosom of your repose: Open
thine eyes, poor beguiled Andrew, at least to the wonderful and heavy
judgments of God which thou have so long shut to thy duty, consider that the
last verdict and sentence of thy unhappy sect is already written in heaven, and
that it must soon yield and fall to nothing, as other blind heresies have
done: what can hinder you Sall from returning to the bosom of the
Roman Catholic Church, which cease not to stretch her arms and open her
heart to your obedience and humble submission? are you afraid that Infidels
will blame you of inconstancy in changing of your Religion? know you not that
there is only sin, vice, and error to which you must want constancy? why
should you blush at humane weakness, and not at withstanding and denying truth?
was it a blemish to S. Paul to become an Apostle of a cruel persecutor? was it
a shame to Constantine the Great of a heathenish Infidel to become a Christian?
was it a blemish to Clouis the first King of France to be drawn to Christian
religion by a woman? Finally, was it a shame to very many noble, learned
protestant Doctors, and very many persons of quality, who daily return to the
Roman Catholic Religion? let us impute the many falls that happens, to the
malice of the devil, and to the age we live in, and to the weakness of corrupt
nature, but let us not grudge God the conversion of souls, which are the works
of his hands: do not follow the course of the times, rather follow the light of
your conscience: what matters it if the children of darkness, viz.
protestants, judge ill of the children of light? Did ever the Sun blush for not
being looked upon wishfully by blind owls and bats? who can justly blame you
for having submitted wilful obstinacy to moderation, to truth, to virtue, to
ways of grace, peace and sanctity? humane judgment to divine law, and for
having followed rather infinite learned, holy, and conscientious brave men of
all ages, then a handful of proud, unwarrantable, ignorant, rebellious and
self-seeking spirits, that have no other Religion but back and belly, because
they have molded their souls merely of flesh and blood? we men have above
brute beasts the resurrection of the body; we have above the devils, repentance
to cry for mercy, to reclame and acknowledge we are sinners: Is it possible
that the sweet alluring, though deluding commodities and gilded pleasures of
this fading world, and temporal blessings, shall as yet keep you back from
returning? what can you hope more of this sect forsaken by God and men, though
it should promise unto you mountains of gold? ought you peradventure for a
false and deceitful representation of honors, goods, riches or momentany
pleasures, to yield and deliver your soul to eternal pains, and render your
name and memory hateful to all men living? Let not so great an illusion creep
into your brain, now in the confusion and low ebb of reeling Protestancy: God
means to sever the chaff from the good corn, to part true children from the
unlawful and base born; the fire is kindled to try the brethren of gold and
lead; faith is tried and sealed with the signet of tribulation, persecution and
affliction; forsake the spirit of Satan which breeds in you the spirit of
error, lies, crimes, disorders, frantic fancies, and foolhardy conceits:
yield, yield, Sall, seek as much as you can, your glory in humility; obedience
and submission of spirit to lawful powers, and be sure that there and no where
else is the only holy way to truth, faith, religion, and salvation: In the name
of God weigh at leisure these considerations of this Sovereign antidote; kick
no longer against the goad; go no more to forge difficulties and illusions; you
shall no sooner set your foot in the sheepfold of the true Catholic Roman
Church, with so many men of great note lately and daily converted
(notwithstanding all penal Statutes, Proclamations, confisations, mulcts,
sequestrations) etc. but all fantasies will vanish, you shall live in peace of
conscience, and receive grace to your soul. But alas! I am afraid that it is
now adays easier to bring to the sheepfold of Christ whole entire Provinces and
Cities, then to convert one perverse obstinate heretic: The Athiests are
converted, not by force of arms or compulsion, but by the preaching of the pure
word of God, by miracles and virtuous examples of Roman Catholics; but a
perverse heretic is more pertinacious, because more presumptuous; neither by
sound arguments, nor by miracles, nor conviction of the understanding, can be
removed from his liberty of heresy; See what S. Jerome says, Facilius est
furori Gentilium occurrere raptisque populos abestiali scientia ad fidei
pietatem praedicando convertere quam quemlibet haereticum in sui perfidia
dogmatis confidentem, ad fidem rectam revocare. This glorious Doctor says, that
it is more facil to cure and restore to his sight one that is stark blind,
having his eyes closed up and not open, then one that has his eyes open, and
yet can see nothing; his reason is, because he that has eyes close needs no
more then to open up his eyes, applicando activa passivus; even so it is with
you Andrew: you have your eyes open, you believe in Christ, in the Scriptures,
and that there is a heaven, and hell, etc. yet you cannot nor will not look
attentively, or desire to be convinced, neither by reason, miracles, nor yet by
the heroic brave examples of Roman Catholics: you are obstinate, you are like
an owl that cannot see at noonday the Gospel: O excecation! O purblind
execration! vae impio in malum, I believe I may be censured by some and thought
to be too severe and sharp in this my expression designed only for to recover
you a lost sheep from the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity; but let me
tell you, that public scandal must have public and severe reprehensions to
prevent utter ruin and perdition, both my zeal and indignation shall ever
express it self both ways against any that gives scandal to Christ's flock, I am
instructed to be rough by my sweet Jesus, who never was so invective against
any, as the Scribes and Pharisees, the hypocrites of that age, and truly these
my reprehensions are not so sharp out of any end but to show you, Andrew, your
own guilt in order to your speedy reviviscence and repentance; such diseases as
festers inwardly requires a faithful, though rough hand to search them, and to
keep from gran-green: he that is fallen into a deep sleep of heresy, must have
loud cries to awaken and rouse him: I desire you therefore to dissolve vincula
colli tui? cumputruisti enim in oculis tuis placens tibi and placere cupiens
oculis perditorum hominum, superbe derilantium in quorum ore ^aquei diaboli:
fly from them Andrew, abhor ea quae te praeparant ad interitum, and appete ea
nunc quae te foelicem perpetuo facere possunt: Learn from S. Paul, Non credere
omni spiritui. Learn from Solomon, multos amicos unum autem habere
conciliarium: Learn from Christ, Domum tuam supra Petram fundare: Learn from
the Apostles to sail within that sacred Ship the Catholic Church, which can
never be cast on rocks or errors, to suffer shipwreck; ad hanc a te turpiter
derelictam Ecclesiam ut redeas, ego admoneo and exhortor gemebundus ne
pernitiosis seductorum, and seducentium hominum vocibus temere credas, ne pro
luce tenebras, pro die noctem, pro cibo famem, pro remedio venenum pro vitae
mortem sumas? Andrew, call to your mind the inexpressible enormity of your
Apostasy and rebellion; for what crime more abominable, quam adversas Christum
stare, quam Ecclesiam ejus dissipare; quam contra unitatem Ecclesiae and
concordem populum Dei haere^ice pugnare; quam fraternitatem and amicitiam
Christi and sanctorum ejus per Apostasiam deperdere, Religionem veram, antiquam
and sanctam blasphemando? Oh Andrew! reclaim, come along, enter into Peter's
ship for safety; quam tu in baptismate ascendisti navigaturus in ea ad littus
foelicitatis eternae: and from which through Satan's illusions te in mare magnum
errorum praeceps ^rojecisti: forsoooth, because you could not by your poor
reason or senses comprehend the wonders and many miracles in the blessed
Sacrament of the Eucharist, you threw your self headlong most precipitously
into an ocean of errors and deceit, foolishly as it were following the vain
steps of Aristotle, who despairing of being able to find out the reason of the
Sea's ebbings and flowings, threw himself headlong into the main Ocean, saying,
ensentium quia te non capio, ^u me cape. In all reason, I think it is apparent
to every one, that the will and word of the Almighty, cannot or ought not to be
subjected to such a poor pitiful thing as man is; man must be led by it, and
not draw it to his ^leasure, by adding or diminishing, chopping and changing as
he lists: wherefore our blessed Savior, when some, upon the doctrine of the
real presence they had heard him deliver, doubted and asked him, with a
quomodo, how can man forgive sin? and again, others said, how can he give us
his flesh to eat? It is very observable, that our Lord never went about to
satisfy their curiosity, or declare to them how or in what manner it might be
done, it being indeed below the Majesty of God, to give his vile vassal a
reason of his will, but he singly repeated again his assertion, without showing
the probability or possibility thereof; verily, verily, I say unto you, unless
you eat of the flesh of man and drink of his blood, you shall have no life in
you: hereby giving us to understand, that the institutions and will of God, are
not to be subjected to the understanding of man, but humbly to be accepted with
submission and lowliness, as the will of that infinite supreme power, unto
which man's understanding, and the whole creation is subjected. I contemplate
you as becomes another Jonas in the midst of the tempestuous seas of Apostasy,
heresy and rebellion: O utinam, utinam summus providentiae Pater qui projecto
in mari Jona, piscem grandem praeparavit, dignaretur me nunc tibi merso in
impietate tua loco piscis illiu^ praeparare ut sicut animam tuam in ve^tre
cordis mei per commiserationem porto, ^ta illam in aridum coelestis salutis
portum evo^ere valuissem: O Andrew! Let me be to ^ou a whale to comfort and
preserve your ^ul from utter ruin; be you another Jo^as, accelera veni, and
deglutiam horrendum ^eccatum tuum, apostasiam tuam, fragilitatem ^uam,
scandalum magnum datum injuriam per ^e illatam Deo vivo, and vivo, sanctis
clero, po^uloque Hiberniae: accede confidenter, Andrea, and secure and pacate
introducam te in conspe^tum offensi Creatoris Redemptoris and glorifica^oris
tui ut misereatur tui? come along into the ark of sanctification and mercy,
with the wandering pidgeon, that returned, finding no rest abroad, and bring in
your break that lovely green olive branch, Credo unam sanctam Ecclesiam
Catholicam; abide not abroad with the raven, feeding on stinking carrion; now I
leave you to the sting of your conscience more cruel to you then hellish
monsters; let it be to you (not what Menander confessed, saying, mortalibus
cunctis conscientia Deus est) but a light, a guide, leading you to do good and
decline evil; for Synderisis is a practical habit of the understanding, not
only pointing to you what is good and laudable, but inclining you withal to
the prosecution of the same: this resplendent light insinuates to you not to
murder the souls of your brothers, by your false, erroneous, and damnable
doctrine; it disswades you from cursing your mothers it excites you to give no
dishonor, affront, or the lie to Christ Jesus; Now I say to you what God said
to Cain, si male egeris statim in foribus peccatum aderit; and know, that,
poena tibi est inordinatus, and perversus tuus animus: and to conclude, do but
observe what I say to you; there was a man (according as S. Ambrose does
relate, lib. 6. exam.) murdered and left dead, when many flocked together to
see the cadaver, the Murdered man's dog, knowing the Murderer among the crowd,
made at him, apprehended him, and laid hold of him, barking and biting, until
he was constrained to acknowledge the Murder and his heavy guilt: oh Andrew!
the horror of the heinous guilt of your Apostasy does and shall perpetually,
and most grievously bite you, sting you, and give you no rest until you be
brought to acknowledge your horrid crime, and humbly cry, peccavi, Domine,
miserere: which that you may do, and not be adjudged to the flames of the
damned, shall be the daily prayer of your afflicted friends.

Of Humane Faith. Document 6.
THe difference between divine and humane faith consists in this, that, divine
faith is most perfect and has God for its object, and is grounded upon divine
Authority, which does promise us with infallible, unerring, and undoubted
certainty, to enjoy what we believe, and hope for; but humane faith has no
such object, ground, ^or certainty, but is only a moral, casual, and probable
belief; as for example, ^f you Andrew, did verily believe that in heaven all
great felicities which transcend (...) our lower desires are to be found, what
^n hinder you but you should at least do as ^uch for obtaining those great
felicities as for the lesser, the perishable; for if you ^ink you may gain them
being a protestant ^ith bare faith without works of char^^^ ^liness, justice,
penance, etc. than sure ^u have no faith at all; for you believe not ^at
saying of S. Paul, Hebr. 12. follow peace ^^th all men, and holin^ss, without
which no ^an shall ever see God: humane says you ^ay have, but not divine, for
if a man be^eves learning to be the only and (...) ^rnament and beauty of (...)
may enable him to a fair employment in time and an honorable memory to
succeeding ages, this if he believe really and heartily it has power to make
him endure great pains and labor, even catarrhs, gouts, and other diseases, to
read and write till his eyes are weary, to despise the pleasure of idleness, or
delightful sports, and even to un^ dervalew whatsoever does not cooperate t^
the end of his humane faith, viz. the desin^ of learning: now, what thing can
he imagi^ so precious, so glorious, so honorable, an^ so desirable, as to
enjoy the beatifical vis^on of Gods eternal glory, and who but (...) stark mad
brainsick man, will not endeavor with all his power and faculties to fin^^
out the means, helps, and ways, and not (...) spare any labor, pains, or
sufferings wha^soever, for to attain to such a happy State^ O Andrew the
prodigious stories of the strict sanctity, severe disciplins, rigid mo^^
tifications, and great sufferings of Roman Catholics in all ages, as in your
conscien^^ you know; the ardour of their heavenl^ zea^, their deiform
intentions, their ravishing devotions, ought to be an abundan^ argument to
shame your dullness, stupidity laziness, and supine negliglence, and convince
you that such faith as that of Roman ^^^holicks is not humane but most divine
(...) more saintlike, more majestical, more reasonable, and more productive of
pure sanctity and grace then the bare humane faith of protestants and all other
Sectaries. O Andrew! when I to my grief understand you now serve your
pseudo-prelate at Camas with such hazardous, slavish, and difficult service,
with such undaunted courage, and resolution, because you believe him able to
reward you, according to his promise to you before you revolted to him, though
of his will you are not so certain; and yet you are so supinely negligent and
incurious of your service to the great God (from whom you shamefully
apostatised,) whose infinitely great power and will rewards all
super-abundantly; for if you believe there is such a thing as heaven, and that
every single man's portion of the glory there, is far better and infinitely more
advantageous then all the riches, content, and pleasures of this barren world,
it is morally impossible, you should thus blindly prefer little, before so
incomparably great profitt, and never ending happiness. I cannot tell what to
say, but that you are charm^d lothum comedisti. I believe you are not ignorant
of a story of Homer in his Iliads, who says, that Ulysses his companions
traveling toward their native Country, in their journey, they met trees
bearing most fair and lovely apples called Lothos, which, for all the fruit was
pleasant and of an excellent raste, yet it had a strainge property, that chose
that did eat of the same, became so drowsy, stupefied, lazy and forgettful,
that they did not mind to give a step forward in their journey to their sweet
native Country: whence comes lothum comedisti, as an adage: Oh Andrew, you are
created for heaven, educated for heaven, you that have labored for heaven many
years in appearance to the world, thither you travail as the place and period
of your peregrination; how come you not to mind your journey to give a step
forward, to advance your conquest? why do thou halt at Camas? how come you to
be so sleepy and stupidly lazy, by heresy and Apostasy feeding on lothos,
vain pleasure, fair promises, deceitful wiles, and sweet venom of heretics? O
Andrew! reflect, reflect, reclaim, reclaim, rouse up, arise, shake off your
shackles and bonds of iniquity; take to your comfort what I have read in
Scripture, how when the people of Israel were captives led to Persia, their
Priests did hide and bury the holy fire which always did burn on the Altar in
the Temple, under ground, in a valley: Many years after, Ne^mias employed
priests for to find out the sacred fire, who found nothing but aquam cr^ssam,
gross muddy water an mire, O prodigy! no fire but water and that muddy, and
troubled! yet Neemias commanded the priests to lay the sacifice on the Altars
to be offered to God and to sprinkle the sacrifice with the muddy miry water,
which done, accensus and ignis magnus ita ut omnes mirarentur: O mi^terious
success! a holy Expositor says, what! before fire, out of that fire water was
engendered! now water and of that fire engendered! O prodigy! what means this?
but that for your comfort Andrew: ex igne divini amoris gratia compunctionis
oritur, rursus ex compunctione Lachrimaram amor and ardor coelestis desiderii,
men's nostra ad amorem Dei inardescit, sometimes from compuction of heart and
from tears the love and desire of celestial things is engendered, and sometimes
from the love of God, the grace of compunction, and tears are also engendered.
Come along therefore poor Andrew! he that continually wallows with dirty swine
in the mire must expect to be in the same filthy condition: the plague is not
more spreadingly infectious then ill manners, liberty, evil company and
heretics: ill example is more prevalent then precept, make therefore in time
(...) men your example, lest you be made (...) example to others. It is related
(...) the body of the Emperor Titt (...) on the funeral (...) (according to the
Custom of those times) his heart (after the body was reduced all to ashes) did
many times spring out of the flames, and being at last opened by such who
wondered at the strangeness of the accident, it was found to be full of poison
which hindered the operation of the fire upon it: and when the poison was washed
away, then the fire wrought upon it, and was immediately consumed to ashes: oh
Andrew Sall! the flames and ardour of the divine fire of Gods love cannot work
upon your heart before the inward venom of heresy be washed and cleansed away
by tears of compunction, calling sincerely upon sweet Jesus, saying, Lord, give
me the gift of faith and true Religion; Lord, Jesus inflame my heart with thy
love, oh Jesus, give me a clean heart from all self ends, self seeking, self
interest and from all pre^udicate opinion and insufferable over-wee^ing pride
and malice. O Jesus, call me back from being such a fiery persecutor of (...)
^sed Julian was: oh I (...) venous in malice, and (...) me not gangrene in
(...) ^diousness against this (...) car^bas me ego (...) Lord Jesus, open (...)
see my (...), and (...) help me out of my ignorance, Apostasy and folly: Jesus
be a Jesus to me wretched sinner.

Conclusion.
SUre Protestants by countenancing honoring and advancing to pre^erment such
Scandalous outcast Rubbish, do overthrow their pretended Religion; by these
means and ways they seek to establish and strengthen the same: Andrew Sall is
admitted as a Minister and preacher among Protestants, yet he from that
Protestant Sect received no new character, consecration or Jurisdiction, for
that they had none to give; nemo dat quod non habet: therefore Andrew preaching
and acting as a protestant-Minister, authorized only by the holy Orders he in
the Roman Catholic Church received, it cannot be denied, but that they do own
and acknowledge the Roman Catholic Church to be the only, true Mother of
Salvation, which by many infallible proofs can boast of unfeigned priestly
function, character, consecration, Mission, Succession, antiquity, sanctity,
true M^racles, judgment and reason; all which is in no Sect to be found, but in
the Roman Catholic Church: what honor therefore, profit, or proselits can
accrue to the Protestants, by so much honoring and contenancing our poor
Apostates made their chief Apostles? none, but rather great dishonor and
shame; for how can any man in his wits believe, that such vile Runagates who
proves faithless and perfidious to the living God, Religion, Conscience, and
consecrated vows, ^an prove at all true, real, and faithful to a newfangled,
groundless, and inconstant Sect, molded and framed by mortal men. It is worth
observation to ponder, how there was an Orthodox priest very familiar with
Theodoricus an Arrian King, who for to insinuate himself into more favor with
the King, became an Arrian, which when the King understood, immediately
commanded he should be put to death, saying, Si Deo vivo fidem non servavit
quomodo mihi qui mortalis sum eam conservabit: and you may read in hist^r.
tripar. lib. 1. c. 7. how Constantius a Gentile Father to Constantinus Magnus
used a strange stratagem for to discover who among the Christians in his Court
were his faithful friends from those that were not, he feigned to set up the
worship of false Gods, and to banish from his Court and service all such that
would not abjure Christian Religion, and embrace the established by him in his
kingdom; upon publication whereof many revolted from Christian Religion, for to
enjoy the kings favor, many continued constant to their principles; whereupon
the King removed from his Court and favor all who proved unconstant and
faithless to their religion, not daring in his prudence to trust those who were
found perfidious to the living God, but those who stood steadfast to their faith
and conscience, he embraced and employed in places of trust and honor. Hence
it does follow, that it is folly to expect that Andrew can be true, real, or
faithful to Sectaries, that was not constant to Gods true service, neither can
he be instrumental to draw many proselites after him in Ireland from the
Roman Catholics, who are brave, resolute, clear-sighted Christians, most
zealous of their ancient Religion, for which, and for not going to the
Protestant Churches, against their conscience, they would not suffer
imprisonments and forfeitures of estats, if they had not been absolutely
certain, that all the Mysteries, and tenants of their ancient faith are purely
revealed by God, and faithfully handed to them by their glorious and miraculous
Patron and Apostle S. Patrick; and so they choose undauntedly rather to suffer
the loss of all their means and brave estates, etc. then make in the least
shipwreck of their Religion: and they be not ignorant how that it was not for
any truth, perfection, or goodness in the protestant Sect that moved Sall to
revolt to it, neither for love of more virtues or more sanctity he deserted his
true ancient Mother, but that it was rather for to enjoy more liberty,
indulgence, more pleasure, more money, more content, and plausibility among
protestants, occasioned his dismal separation: yet no^withstanding he will not
(if he can) perish alone, he will furiously endeavor to gain proselites, and
will, out of ambition, pride and malice, envenom others though (I am
confident), he will catch none but Novices only in both divine and humane
learning, and such as are unsettled in Religion, and wild hair-braind loose
livers, and idle vagrants: Therefore Andrew desist from preaching poor souls
into just so much as shall beget their torture, let them rest where they find
full satisfaction: Oh Andrew! desist from fighting against God, who is the free
disposer of his gifts, and especially of faith, do not expose your self
dangerously to the indignation of God? do not strive, to drive others and thy
self to eternal perdition: without question you commit a most grievous sin when
you endeavor by artifice of the devil to draw men to profess or act contrary
to what their souls and consciences believes to be revealed and true; when you
wound the weak consciences you sin against Christ, 1 Cor. 8.12. do not
desperately preach or strive to whip Roman Catholics out of their true faith to
a way that is but error and falsehood. Let me now Andrew close this Discourse
with this; when Prometheus stole fire from heaven to animate and quicken his
artificial bodies, the gods for punishment of so high a sacrilege, struck him
not dead with a sudden thunderbolt, but (to be more deeply avenged) let him
live to be tormented with vultures, continually gnawing on his liver: O Andrew!
your horrid apostasy and sacrilege exceeds all crimes imaginable, so your
punishment will be exceeding grievous; for in an unlucky time you steal away
the heavenly fire of your sacred function, mission and character from Gods
service, and employ it (though to little effect) to animate and quicken that
artificial, earthly, imperfect, dead body of protestanism: your fire is turned
to black coals fetched from the infernal pit; to preach what in your conscience
you believe untrue, I am sure is damnable, and to compel others to the same is
nothing else but to drive them to renounce their surefooting in Religion, and
the essential part in them their reason; but let me tell you all your labor,
poor contrivements, wretched ambition and oil will be wasted to no purpose; you
do feel I am confident your self tormented with vultures continually gnawing on
your liver: nam sequitur superbos ultor a tergo Deus. Seneca. and withal, non
existimes impune tibi futurum quod contra Deum pugnare tentaveris, 2 Mac. 7. My
last advice to you is, from the holy Ghost, Eccles. 9. quodcunque potest manus
tua operare instanter, quia nec opus, ne ratio, nec sapientia apud inferos quo
tu pr^peras. ah dear Andrew, be wise, return to thy self, confider these
things, work according to them, that you may be happy, according to the true
prayers of

Your true friend and well-wisher, in the best things, J. E.

FINIS.
A COUNTER-POYSON For to Enchant that Enchanted, Enchanting Forsworn Wretch
ANDREW SALL APOSTATE. Miserably wandering in the Region of Nothing. Thou have
not lied to men but to God. Acts 5.


