coat of arms of the city of Edinburgh NISI DOMINVS FRVSTRA

ORDERS Set down by the Lord Provost, Baillies, and Council of Edinburgh, to be
observed by the Constables thereof, in Discharge of their Offices within this
City, and Liberties thereof.
IMprimis, The Constables being Elected by the Lord Provost, Baillies and
Council, shall be obliged to accept the Charge and Office of Constabulary,
under the pains of Imprisonment of their Persons, and payment of such an Un-law
as the Magistrates shall think fit to Impose, and to remain in Ward ay and while
the same be paid, and under the pain of Horning. And for discharging of their
Offices, they are to be solemnly Sworn in presence of the Lord Provost,
Baillies and Council of this Burgh, and shall take the Oath following.

OATH.
THat they, and ilk one of them, shall faithfully and truly discharge their
Offices of Constabulary within the Bounds committed to their Charge, during the
time of their Offices after their Admission, and shall not for favor, respect,
or fear of any Person, forbear to do that which becomes them in their Offices;
And above all things, they shall regard the keeping and preserving of the
Peace, and shall at every necessary occasion, come to the Lord Provost and
Baillies of this Burgh, or any one of them, and give a due and true Information
of any Breach, Tumult, or other insolences against the Peace, within their
respective Bounds, and shall no ways hide, cover, nor conceal the same, nor any
Probation or Light that they can give for clearing and proving thereof. So help
me GOD, and by GOD Himself.

ITem, A Constable shall have Liberty to take and apprehend any suspected
Person, idle Vagabonds, or Night-wakers, and Imprison them, till they find
Surety for their Behavior, at the direction of any of the Judges, for Civils
or Criminals, or the Lord Provost and Baillies of Edinburgh.

2. Item, A Constable shall have Power to challenge any Person within this
Burgh, or Liberty thereof, that shall be found wearing Pistols or Daggers, and
shall present them before the Lord Provost, Baillies; or any one of them, to be
punished by them for their fault, conform to the Act of Parliament.

3. Item, Upon appearance of any Fray or Stir within this Burgh, either by Day
or Night, betwixt any Parties, or any other sudden Accident that may fall
forth, the Constable shall take unto him the Assistance of his Neighbors for
separating of the Parties, and for Ordering any inconvenience that shall happen
to ensue, and shall take the Party or Parties, and commit them in Ward, or
present them to the Lord Provost or Baillies: And if any harm shall happen to
be done to the Constable, or any of his Assistants, the Constable shall take
them and put them in Ward, and present them to the Lord Provost and Baillies,
or any of them, to be accordingly punished for their fault.

4. Item, If any Person or Persons make any Plea or Tumult within this Burgh,
and flee to any House, the Constable shall have Power to break up the Doors
thereof: And albeit the Party or Parties flee without the Bounds of the
Constables Charge, yet the Constable may follow, and apprehend him or them in a
fresh Pursuit, and commit them to Ward, to be Punished for their Fault.

5. Item, The Constable shall take and apprehend all Vagabonds and Sturdy
Beggars, or Egyptians, and put them in Ward, to be punished for their Fault,
according to the Act of Parliament.

6. Item, The Constable shall take and apprehend all idle Persons, who have not
a Calling to live by, and who will not take themselves to some Labor, Trade,
or Occupation, and shall present them before the Lord Provost and Baillies, who
after Examination and Trial, shall punish them according to their Crime and
demerit.

7. Item, The Constables being informed of any Person guilty or culpable of
Slaughter, Murder, Theft, or any other capital Crime whatsoever, shall then
require his Neighbors to assist him, for the safe apprehending and conveying
such Persons before the Lord Provost and Baillies, to be punished for their
fault.

8. Item, The Constable shall search and seek the Bounds committed to his
charge, and suffer no Vagabonds, Beggars, nor Infamous Persons, to Remain,
Dwell, or be Resett in his Bounds, and if any be within his said Bounds, he
shall presently inform the Magistrates, that they may be Punished, and removed
forth of this City.

9 Item, Ilk Constable shall concur one with another, at all occasions needful.

10. Item, The whole Constables shall upon every last Saturday of every Month
compear, and present themselves before the Lord Provost and Baillies in the
Council-house, to give an Account of their Diligence in their Offices, as they
will answer upon their Obedience.

11. Item, Ilk Constable shall cause the Bounds committed to his Charge, be
kept clean of all kind of Filth, and Middings; And to that effect, for
keeping of the Streets and Passages Clean, ilk Constable shall have Power in
his own Bounds, after Trial of any Person or Persons casting out Filth at their
Doors, Windows, or Shots, either in the Fore-gate or Backsides, or laying any
Filth, or Middings on the High-Streets, Closses, or Passages within this Burgh,
to cause the Person guilty to pay conform to the Tenor of the Printed
Proclamation.

12. Item, Ilk Constable within his Bounds shall take and apprehend all
Banners, Sweaters, and Blasphemers of GOD's Name, either in the Streets,
Mercats, or at the Wells, and to Punish them, either by Warding, or putting
them in the Joggs or Stocks, according to the quality of their Fault.

13. Item, That each Family shall be Poynded for their Children or Servants
that Nests the Stairs, Turnpikes, or Streets, Closses, or Vennels of the City
in four Shilling Scots.

14. Item, The Constables are hereby Empowered to uplift the respective Fines,
incurred by the Inhabitants and their Servants within their bounds, conform to
the Printed Proclamation, and are to give an account thereof to the Magistrates,
and of these that shall Transgress, each Monday of the Week during the time of
their Offices; which Fines are to be applied, the one half to the Discoverers
of the Persons that shall be found to Transgress the said Printed Proclamation*
and the other half the Council Declares shall be applied for gratifying of
these that shall be sound most active in discovery of the Persons that
Transgress the said Printed Proclamation, according to the Pains taken by them
from time to time, as to the said Discovery.

15. Item, The Constables are frequently to go through their bounds, to the
Dwelling-houses within the same, and try if each Family has sufficient Vessels
for holding their Excrements and Foul-Water, conform to the printed
Proclamation, and to poynd these in three Pound Scots that are deficient.

16. Item, The Constables in each bounds are to free the Magistrates of the
Penalty and Certification, contained in the Act of Parliament anent the
Cleansing of the Streets of the City.

17. Item, If any Person shall refuse or delay to concur with the Constable in
executing of his Office, they shall be imprisoned, and severely Punished by
command of the Lord Provost and Baillies, according to the quality of the
Offense.

18. Item, The Constables shall be obliged to receive any Injunctions, or
Statutes that the Lord Provost, or Baillies and Council shall enjoin to them at
any time hereafter. Extracted by me*

AENEAS M. LEOD, Cls.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, City and College, Anno Dom. 1688.


