A PROCLAMATION, OF BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT, For Proclaiming of His MAJESTY
King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
ALthough it can no way be doubted, but that His Majesty's Right and Title to
His Crowns and Kingdoms, is, and was every way completed by the Death of His
most Royal Father of Glorious Memory, without the Ceremony or Solemnity of a
Proclamation; Yet since Proclamations in such cases have been always used, to
the end that all good Subjects might upon this occasion testify their Duty and
Respects; And since the Armed Violence, and other the Calamities of these many
years last past, have hitherto deprived Us of any such opportunity, wherein we
might express Our Loyalty and Allegiance to His Majesty: WE therefore the
Lords and Commons now assembled in Parliament, together with the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London, and other Freemen of this Kingdom
now present, Do, according to Our Duty and Allegiance, heartily, joyfully, and
unanimously Acknowledge and Proclaim, That immediately upon the Decease of Our
late Sovereign Lord King CHARLES, the Imperial Crown of the Realm of England,
and of all the Kingdoms, Dominions, and Rights belonging to the same, did by
inherent Birthright, and lawful and undoubted Succession, descend and come to
His most Excellent Majesty CHARLES the Second, as being Lineally, Justly, and
Lawfully next Heir of the Blood Royal of this Realm; And that by the Goodness
and Providence of Almighty GOD, He is of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, the most Potent, Mighty, and Undoubted KING, Defender of the Faith,
etc. And thereunto we most humbly and faithfully do submit and oblige our
Selves, our Heirs and Posterities for ever.

Dated the Eighth day of May, 1660.
GOD save the KING.
Die Martis, May 8. 1660.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That this PROCLAMATION be
forthwith Printed and Published.

JO. BROWN, Cleric. Parliamentorum.

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone-Church, 1660.


