An Address agreed upon at the Committee, for the French War, and Read in the
House of Commons, April 19. 1689.
Licensed, and Entered according to Law.

WE Your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects the Commons of England in Parliament
Assembled, have taken into our most serious Consideration the Condition and
State of this Nation in respect of France, and Foreign Alliances; In order to
which we have Examined the Mischiefs brought upon Christendom in late Years by
the French Ring, who, without any respect to Justice, has by Fraud and Force
endeavored to subject it to an Arbitrary and universal Monarchy.

In Prosecution of this Design so pernicious to the Repose and safety of
Europe, he has neglected none of those means how indirect soever, which his
Ambition or Avarice could suggest to him. The Faith of Treaties among all
Princes, especially Christian Princes, ever held most Inviolable, has never
been able to refir in him, nor the solemnest Oaths to bind him, when any
Occasion presented it self for Extending the Limits of his Kingdom, or
Oppressing those whom his Interest inclined him to Qualify by the Name of his
Enemies. Witness his haughty and groundless Declaration of War against the
States General of the Unitted Provinces in the Year 1672, in which he assigned
no other Reason for disturbing that profound Peace, which through Gods Mercy,
all Europe enjoyed at that time, But his own glory and his Resolution to punish
the Dutch, for some imaginary flights and disrespects, which he would have had
the World believe they had put upon him: whereas the true Occasion of that War
was nothing else but a formed design laid down and agreed upon by that King and
his Accomplices, for the subversion of the Liberties of Europe, and for
Abolishing the Commonwealth of Holland, as being too dangerous an Example of
Liberty to the subjects of neighboring Monarchs. The Zeal for Catholic
Religion which was pretended by him in this and the following wars, did
afterward sufficiently appear to the World, to be no other than a Cloak for
his unmeasurable Ambition; For at the same time when the Persecution gre^^
h^t^est against the Protestants of France, Letters were intercepted (and
Published) from him to Count Teckery, to give him the greatest Encouragement,
and promise him the ^^most Asistance in the War, which in Conjunction with the
E^rk he then managed against the first and greatest of all the Roman Catholic
Princes.

Witness also the many open infractions of the Treaties, both of Aix la
Chapelle and Nimeguen (whereof Your Majest is the strongest Guarranty) upon the
most frivolous Pretenses imaginable, of which the most usual was that of
Dependancies; an Invention set on foot on purpose to serve for a pretext of
Rupture with all his Neighbors, unless they chose rather to satisfy his
Endless Demands, by abandoning on^e Place after another, to his insatiable
appetite of Empire, and for maintaining whereof, the two Chambers of Metz and
Brissach were, Erected to find out and forge Titles, and to invent Equivocal
Constructions for eluding the plain meaning of Treaties Concluded and sworn
with the greatest Solemnity, and than which nothing can be more Sacred among
Mankind.

From hence it was also that Srasburg was so infamously Surprised by the French
King in a time of full Peace, and though great Conditions were Agreed and
promised to the Inhabitants of that City, yet no sooner was he in Possession of
it, but all Stipulations were forgotten, and that Ancient free City does now
groan under the same Yoke with the rest of that King's Subjects.

The building the Fort of Hunningen contrary to so many solemn Assurances given
to the Switzes, and the Affair of Luxemburgh are too well known to need a
particular Deduction. In a word, the whole Series of the French Kings Actions
for many Years last past has been so ordered, as if it were his intention not
only to render his own people extremly miserable, by intolerable imposition of
Tares, to be employed in maintaining an incredible Number of Dragoons and other
Soldiers, to be the instruments of his Cruelty upon such of them as refuse in
all things to comply with his unjust Commands, but likewise to hold all the
neighboring Powers in perpetual Alarm and Expense for the maintaining of
Armies and Fleets, that they may be in a posture to defend themselves against
the Invador of their common safety and Liberties.

Examples of this sort might be innumerable, but his Invasion of Flanders and
Holland since the last Truce of 1684. and the Outrages committed upon the
Empire by attacking the Fort of Philipsburg, without any Declaration of war at
the same time that his Imperial Majesty was employing all his Forces against
the common Enemy of the Christian Faith, and his wasting the Palatinate with
fire and sword and murdering an infinite number of innocent Persons for no
other Reasons * as himself has publicly declared, but because he thought the
Electo^ Palatine faithful to the interest of the Empire, and an Obstacle to the
compassing his ambitious Designs, are sufficient Instances of this.

To these we cannot, but with a particular Resentment add the injuries done to
your Majesty in the most unjust and violent seizing of your Principality of
Orange, and the utmost Insolences committed on the Persons of your Majesty's
Subjects there; and how to facilitate his Conquests upon his Neighbor Princes,
he engaged the Turks in a war against Christendom at the same time.

And as if violating of Treaties, and ravaging the Countries of his Neighbors
States were not sufficient means of advancing his exorbitant Power and
Greatness, he has constantly had recourse to the vilest and meanest Arts, for
the Ruin of those, whom he had taken upon him to subdue to his will and power,
insinuating himself by his Emissaries under the sacred Name and Character of
Public Ministers, into those who were entrusted in the Government of Kingdoms
and States, suborning them by Gifts and pensions, to the selling their Masters
and betraying their Trusts, and descending even to Intrigues by women, who were
sent or married into the Countries of diverse potent Princes, to lie as Snakes
in their Bosoms to eat out of their Bowels, or to instill that Poison into them
which might prove the Destruction of them and their Countries, of which Poland,
Savoy and Spain, to mention no more at present, can give but too ample
Testimonies.

The insolent Use he has made of his ill-gotten Greatness has been as
Extravagant as the means of procuring it, for this the single Instance of Genoa
may suffice; which without the least notice or any Ground of a quarrel
whatsoever was bombarded by the French Fleet, and the Doge and four Principal
Senators of that Free: State constrained in person to humble themselves at that
Monarchs Feet; which in the Style of France was called Chastising Sovereigns
for casting Umbrage upon his Greatness.

His Practices against England have been of the same nature, and by corrupt
means he has constantly and with too much Success endeavored to get such Power
in the Court of England, in the time of King Charles the Second and the late
King James, as might by degrees undermine the Government and true Interest of
this flourishing Kingdom.

Another Art which he has used to weaken England, and subject it to his
aspiring Designs, was never to admit an equal Balance of Trade, nor consent to
any just Treaty or Settlement of Commerce, by which he promoted our Ruin at
our own Charge.

When from a Just Apprehension of this formidable growing Power of France, the
Nation became zealous to right themselves; and the House of Commons, in the
year. 1677. being assured they should have an actual War against France,
cheerfully raise^d a great Sum of Money, and an Army as readily appeared to
carry on the War; that Interest of France had still power enougd to render all
this ineffectual, and to frustrate the Nation of all their Popes and
Expectations.

Nor did France only tender this desired War ineffectual, but had Power enough
to make us practice their Injustice and Irregularities, (some years before) by
turning our Force against out next Neighbors, by assaulting their Smirna Fleet.

Nor were they more Industrious, by Corrupt Means, to obtain this Power, than
careful, by the same ways to support it; and knowing that from Parliaments only
could probably proceed an Obstruction to their Secret Practices, they attempted
to make a Bargain, That they should not meet in such a time; in which they
might hope to perfect their Designs of enslaving the Nation.

In the same Confidence of this Power they violently seized upon part of
Hudson's Bay; and when the matter was complained of by the Company, and the
Injury offered to be proved, the best Expedient France could find to cover
their Injustice, and prevent Satisfaction, was to make use of their great
Interest in the Court of England to keep it from ever coming to be heard.

The French King, in pursuance of his usual Methods, of laying hold of any
Opportunity that might increase his Power, and give Disturbance to others, has
now carried on an actual War in Ireland, sending thither a great number of
Officers with Money, Arms and Ammunition, and under the pretense of assisting
the late King James, he has taken the Government of Affairs into his Hands, by
putting all Officers into (...), and managing the whole Bu^ness by his
Ministers, and has already begun to use the same Cruelties and Violences upon
your Majesty's Subjects, as he has lately practiced in his own Dominions, and
in all other places, where he has got Power enough to destroy.

Lastly, The French King's Declaration of War against the Crown of Spain, is
wholly grounded upon its Friendship to your Maiesty's Royal Person, and no
other cause of denouncing War against it is therein alleged, than the
Resolution taken in that Court, to favor your Majesty, whom he most
injuriously terms, the V^^^per of England, an Insolence never-enough to be
resented and detested by your Ma^esty's Subjects.

After our humble Representation of all these Particulars to your Majesty, your
Majesty sh^l think fit to enter into War against France, We (...) assure Your
Majesty, That we will give you such Assistance in a Parliamentary way, as shall
enable your Majesty to support and go through the same; and we shall not doubt,
but by the Blessing of God upon your Majesty's prudent Conduct, a ^^p may be
put to that growing Greatness of the French King, which ^^^^aties all
Christendom with (...) absolute Sla^^^y, the incredible quantity of Innocent
Bloodshed may ^^^venged, his Oppressed Neighbors restored to their Ius^ Rights
and (...), your Majesty's Alliances and the ^^^e^^ty of N^^e^^^n supported to
that degree, that all Europe in General, and this Nation in Particular may for
^ve^ have (...) Majesty, as the great (...) of Justice and Liberty, and the
^^^^^ser and ^^er ^^^^^er of all Violence, Cruelty and (...) Power.

Edinburgh, Reprinted in the Year, 1689.


