26. May 1646.
THE HOUSE OF LORDS ANSWER To the City of LONDONS Remonstrance.
THe Lords are very sensible of the great fidelity and constant services of the
Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London to this present
Parliament, which they shall never forget. They acknowledge their Zeal
expressed upon all occasions, in the Cause of God and this Parliament; And how
readily they have spilt their blood, and spent and laid out themselves and
their Estates in the maintenance thereof. They are well satisfied with your
expressions and care to settle the true Reformed Protestant Religion, according
to the Covenant; And with your desires to have all Heresies, Schisms, and
Blasphemies suppressed; As also with your respects to preserve the Rights and
Privileges of Parliament, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms, and to preserve
and defend His Majesty's Person and Authority in the preservation of the true
Religion and the Liberties of the Kingdoms, His Royal Posterity, and the Peace
of the Kingdoms: As also for your desires for the continuance of that Union
between us and our Brethren of Scotland, of whose Services and Sufferings, we
shall not only hold a grateful Memory, but upon all occasions give a
Retaliation; Unto all which we hold our selves equally with you obliged by our
Solemn League and Covenant. As to the Person of the Lord Major, the Lords have
an high esteem of him according to his merits, and have commanded me to let
you know, That nothing has passed this House at any time in prejudice of him:
And when the particulars wherein he finds himself agrieved shall be made known
unto them, They shall be ready in a Parliamentary way to do him right. The
Lords will take the other particulars of your Petition into serious and speedy
consideration, And have commanded me to give you hearty thanks for the real
Testimonies of Duty and good Affections, which not only by your words, but by
your actions you have constantly manifested unto him.

Printed at Edinburgh by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. Anno 1646.


