coat of arms of the City of Edinburgh NISI DOMINVS FRVSTRA
ACT anent Women-Servants in Taverns, etc.
Edinburgh, 13. of December 1699.
THE which Day, the Lord Provost, Baillies and Council of this City,
Considering, That by several Acts made, and Proclamations emitted by them,
pursuant to many Acts of Parliament, and Acts of the General Convention of the
Royal Burrows, The Keeping and Employing of Women-Servants for Retailing
Liquors in Taverns, Cellars, Drinking-Shops, and other Places where Liquors are
Sold by Retail, is peremtorly Discharged, as a great Snare to the Youth, and
Occasion of Leudness and Debauchry; and also Considering, that the Persons
Concerned, have been so far from giving Obedience to these laudable Acts and
Proclamations, that on the contrair, they have Entertained, and yet keep in
their Service, for Vending and Retailing Ale and other Liquors in Cellars and
other Places abovementioned, Women who have been guilty of Fornication, which
Practice has yet a more dangerous tendency to the corrupting of Youth, and
will in all probability occasion a greater grouth of Immorality, which does
already too much Abound, to the Dishonor of God, and Scandal of Christianity.
Therefore the Magistrates and Town-Council of this City, for Suppressing and
Restraining such dangerous and evil Customs, in the mean time, until Methods
shall be fallen upon for putting in Execution the foresaid Acts against
Retailling Liquors by Women-Servants in general, and without any prejudice
thereto: Do peremptorly Discharge all Vintners, Taverners, Innkeepers and
others, to Employ and Keep in their Service, such Women as have been guilty of
Fornication, or shall be guilty thereof in time-coming, for Retailling Wine,
Ale, or other Liquors, in Houses, Shops, Cellars and other Places within this
City and Suburbs, under the Penalty of One hundred Pounds Scots, to be paid by
the Masters or Mistrisses where such Servants shall be found, toties quoties,
they being conscious of the said Guilt of their Servants, attour the Servants
Banishment: And Ordains such Masters and Mistresses as have such Servants for
Retailing at present, to Remove them from the said Service immedialy, under the
Penalty foresaid; Certifying all such Masters, Mistresses and Servants who
shall Contraveen, that the foresaid Penalties shall be Inflicted and Exacted
without Abatement, and that the Masters and Mistresses shall be liable from
such time as their knowledge of their Servants Guilt, after this Proclamation,
shall be proven; and separatly, that they shall be Repute to have known from
and after due and just Intimation of the said Guilt, made by the Elders, or
Church Thesaurer. And to the end this Act may be more effectually and
punctually Observed, the Council Recommends to the Elders and Deacons, and
Church-Thesaurer for the time, to Search their respective Bounds Termly, or
oftener, as need requires, that they may Discover such Servant-Women, and if any
be Found, to Dilate them and their Master or Mistress to the Magistrates, to be
Fined and Punished accordingly. And Appoints this Act to be Published in the
usual manner, and Printed, that none may pretend Ignorance. Extracted

JAMES STVART


