THE ADDRESS OF THE Lords Spiritual and Temporal TO THE KING and QUEEN.
Die Veneris 18. Novembris 1692.
WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal in Parliament Assembled, Do Present Your Majesty our most Humble
Thanks for the many Gracious Expressions in Your Majesty's Speech; And do
Heartily Congratulate Your Majesty's Preservation and Safe Return. It is also
with great Satisfaction that we observe the Remarkable Testimony Your Majesty
has Given of the Courage and Bravery of Your own Subjects: And as they are
very Happy, who had the Honor to Act any Thing worthy Your Majesty's
Approbation, so they and we, must be ever Sensible of this Honorable Mention,
that Your Majesty has made ^f their Valor, which cannot fail of being always
more Animated by Your Own Great Example. And whereas Your Majesty has been
Pleased to Desire our Ad^ice; as we acknowledge it to be our Duty, So we shall
ever be Ready Humbly ^o Offer it, to Your Majesty upon all Important Occasions.

THe King Thanked the House of Lords for the Address, and Declared He would be
always Ready to Do what was for the Honor and Safety of the Nation. WE Your
Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in
Parliament Assembled, being full of the True Sense of the Safety and Happiness
that the Nation has Enjoyed in Your Majesty's Administration of the
Government, (...)uring the King's Absence, by which the Danger of an Invasion
was Prevented, and a Glorious Victory Obtained at Sea, do hold our selves
Obliged to Present ^ur most Humble Acknowledgments to Your Majesty, for Your
Prudent Con^uct, by which the Honor of the Nation has been so much Raised, and
it is Secu^^ty so w596 ell Established.

The Queen Thanked the House of Lords for their Address. ^dinburgh, Reprinted
by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most Excellent Majesty's; Anno
DOM. 1692.


