The Evil Spirit Cast-out. Being a True RELATION Of the Manner of Performing
the Famous Operation or Cure, ON THE Maiden Gentlewoman, Whose Body was
Possessed with an Evil Spirit.

WITH The Carriage and Behavior of the EVIL SPIRIT, while the Cure was
Performing: The several Ways and Means that were used to Drive or Cast-out the
Devil out of the Body Possessed. The Contest between the DEVIL and the DOCTOR
before he quitted the Party. ALSO, The strange Noise, Horrid Cry, and great
Blast of Wind, which happened just at the Spirits Departure.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.



London, Printed by E. Golding. 1691.

The Evil Spirit Cast-out: Being a True Relation of the manner of performing
the Famous Operation or Cure on the Maiden Gentlewoman, etc.
ONE Mrs. -- a Maiden Gentlewoman, having languished for some time under very
sore and grievous Afflictions, which, by the strange Gestures and Actions of
her Body, plainly declared her to have been either Bewitched or Possessed with
an Evil Spirit: Her Relations came to me, and informed me, That they had spent
much upon several able Physicians, who pretended to Cure her, but could not,
and desired me to undertake the Cure, which accordingly I did; upon
Examination, I found that her Fits seized her much about the same time every
day, every of which lasted about the space of Twelve hours; in which time she
shrieked and cried out in a pitiful manner, that, through the extremity of her
Afflicton, she was brought to such a weak Condition, that she was not able to
stir or move any part of her Limbs or Body, from her Waste to her Feet. The
Maid was brought to my House, and, by demanding and asking several Questions of
her, I found that she was Possessed by the Devil, for she could not once name
the Name of God, Jesus Christ, etc. but she would immediately fall into Fits,
and be strangely Tormented. I councelled her Father to go to some Pious Divine,
to make an Essay in the matter, and to see what his Devotion could do, he
answered me, That he had done it already, but to no purpose; for one Doctor --
the Minister of the Parish, a Learned, Judicious, and Pious Man, had spent some
time in attempting to do it, yet could not prevail, but was forced to desist,
and advised their seeking Remedy of some body else, whom God might give
Strength and Faith to perform so great a Work.

This did somewhat discourage me, yet, for the sake of my Reputation, I did
undertake, and (by God's Blessing) effect the Cure. Some there are who are
Possessed, whom the Devil at some times leaves, but he never left this Maid,
from the time he first entered into her. Her Fits generally seized her about
Nine a Clock at Night, and held her till Eight the next day; in the interim of
which, she was horribly Tormented, making diverse Noises, as Howling, Crying,
Shrieking, etc. twisting and turning her Body up and down, rolling about the
Room, etc. From the hour of Eight in the Forenoon, until Twelve, she would give
Resolution to all manner of Demands, but chiefly if her Mother propounded them.
She would tell of Things Lost, who had them; how and where they should be
found, with many other strange Questions, which always proved true: I could
instance several, but for brevity sake, I pass them over. I come now to the
manner and method of my Curing her.

The Chamber being made as close as with convenience it could be, I took
Frankincense, Rosemary, and Myrrh, and made a Perfume in the Chamber, which I
continued to do till I had finished the Cure: I oftentimes gave the Maid the
Distilled Waters of Rosemary, Angelica, and Marigolds. When I laid my hands
upon the Maid, the Devil in her began to strive against me very much, yet I
held my hold; and having got her at an advantage, I held her fast, and did very
often repeat these words, In the name of Jesus of Nazareth, I Command thee to
come forth; yet notwithstanding the Spirit was very obstinate. I gave the Maid
of the aforesaid Waters very often, and then Prayed again, and as often
repeated the aforesaid words, for I resolved not to desist till the Devil did
leave her; and thus I continued for about Two hours. At length the Devil
invisibly left her, making a hideous Noise, with a horrible Cry, and raised a
sudden violent Blast of Wind, but did me no harm at all: Soon after the Devil
did come forth of the Maid, she began to Speak; and, within a small time often,
by the Blessing of God, upon such Remedies as I applied, she remains perfectly
well.

I will relate one thing more, which was generally in the time of her Fits;
Three Pins were brought to her, and yet but one at a time, and when she
received them, she seemed to Rejoice, would Laugh and Smile, and put the Pins
into her Mouth, which her Friends took from her, lest it should Choke her, yet
she was very unwilling to part with them. They had a Box full of them, for she
had Three brought to her every Night for a long Season, and that very Night
which I cast the Devil out of her, something brought her Two before my Face. It
was observed, That while I was performing this Business that Three Women were
seen by my Servants, to walk about my House, and near the Window, where I did
this Operation, which we judged were Three Witches, who the Father suspected,
and since Prosecuted Them.

Vid. An Exact Account at large of this Relation, in Doctor Blagrave' s Book,
Entitled, Astrological Cures, etc.

A Prayer.
O Blessed Lord, the Father of Mercies, and the God of all Comforts, we Beseech
Thee, look down in pity and compassion upon this thy Afflicted Servant, Thou
writest bitter things against her, and makes her possess her former Iniquities,
Thy Wrath lies hard upon her, and her Soul is full of Trouble, But, O Merciful
God, who have Written thy Holy Word for our Learning, that we through Patience,
and Comfort of thy Holy Spirit, may have hope; Give her a right understanding
of her Self, and of thy Threats and Promises, that she may neither cast away
his Confidence in Thee, nor place it any where but in Thee; give her strength
against all her Temptations, and heal all her Distempers; Break not the Bruised
Read, nor Quench the Smoking Flax; Sbut not up Thy tender Mercies in
Displeasure, but make her to hear of Joy and Gladness, that the Bones which
Thou have broken may Rejoice; Deliver her from fear of the Enemy, and lift up
the light of Thy Countenance upon her, and give her Peace, through the Merits
and Mediation of Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. Amen.

FINIS.

