AN EXCLAMATION From TUNBRIDGE And EPSOM Against The Newfound Wells At
ISLINGTON.
BEhold, the fickleness of Fortunes Wheel! The Instability of things under the
changeable Moon! So shall you find it foretold in Mother Shiptons,
Manuscript-Prophecies, (never yet Printed) p. 409. " Tunbridge was, Epsom is,
Islington shall be
"The greatest Bog-house of the squittering three.


Beshrew all Witches and their Southsayings. That Prognostication at this
juncture seems hastening to its accomplishment; and then, woe and alas! What
shall become of us poor Tunbridge and Epsom?

How comfortably in times bypast, have we lived all the Summer, like Fishes,
merely by Water and Tippling; And in the Winter, like Greenland Bears, sucking
our own Claws? Loretto was scarce haunted with such swarms of Pilgrims as our
Health-restoring Plains, nor Rome more crowded in a Jubilee, than we were, from
merry May till after the Dog-starr had done Barking, and the more important
Negotiations of Bartoldom-fair, called home our Customers. Happy were they that
could get shelter in our Illustrious Palaces, covered with immortal Thatch,
and delicately hung with the Spinstry of Arachne, Vulgarly called Cloth of
Cob-web. Three Families not seldom dwelt in one Chamber scarce so big as a
Taffity Tart; and without any superstitious niceness about difference of Sex,
lovingly pigg'd in together. Strangers from remote Regions, came in Guilt
Coaches, to DUNG our barren Heaths for us, at their own charge; and having
given us 3. or 4. pounds for a Supper overnight, returned us the substance of
it, with an overplus, next morning Gratis; many a fair House have we built with
that which is called the beginning of Love; and made more profit of Excrements
than ever the Emperor Vespatian did of his Excise upon Piss.

We shall never forget those jolly days, how we have been frequented by the
Noble and the Gay, the fine and the fair; the roaring Fopps, and the still,
sly, formal Cockcombs; the Swaggerers in Buff, and the Venerable in Satin; the
Flaming Lasses and the simpering Dames, those that help others, and those that
help themselves; the wits and the jilts, the fond Husbands and the more
foolish maintainers, the miserly Fathers, and the generous Sons, and the
free-sporting Daughters, and the procuring Cozens, the Hectoring Bullies, and
the snuffling Precisians; the long Hair, and the overgrown Ears; Whigg and
Tory, Trim^^er and all, were every Mothers Son, our constant Customers.

The Ladies would fine-and-Recovery away their Joinctures, and part even with
their precious Stones, rather, than not have a Green Gown or two on our Banks;
and a Citizen could as soon persuade his Spouse to forswear Conventicles, as
prevail with her not to visit us once a year.

Here, the Buckram-bagg'd Lawyer Hoarse with a circuites bawling, came to
restore his voice; but caressing a small Shee-friend more impaired it, and so
fell into the hands of a Doctor, who went to Law with his Disease, and acted
(Secundum Artem) all the Tricks, of Plea, Exception, Demurrer, Interlocutory
Order, and peremptory Consideratum est, till Ignoramus dispairing as much as
ever his Client in forma Pauperis, and looking altogether as simply; happened
to be taught by one of Sir Andrew Judds Schoolboys, that Telephus was hea'ld
by the rust of the same Spear that wounded him; and that Pliny somewhere says,
Vipers Flesh is the best Remedy for the hurt of their Stings; whereupon
repairing to the Crack, that bestowed the Clap, she in 9 days, made him as
sound as a Roach, with a Decoction of Guiacum and a few Turpentine Pills.

Here the over-fraighted Strumper (undone by doing; or ruined, like some
improvident Shopkeepers, by grasping at too great a Trade) puts in to New-wash,
Carreen, and Tallow; and so returns a fresh and Blooming Virgin: Here
disappointed Wives, met with seasonable Refreshments; the Barren by virtue of
our Metalsome Waters, and the application of an able Doctor behind a Bush,
found Nature relieved, grew Fruitful and blessed their rejoicing Husbands with
many an hopeful Heir.

But now all these Felicities are like to expire, Interlopers are abroad, and
we must cry out as the Quack-Doctors do -- Beware of Counterfeits, for they
swarm; could not folks be content to invent new Fashions, and new Oaths, new
Religions and new Models of Government, but the Devil must put them upon
finding out new Wells, and new Physical Waters, when there were old ones enough
of all Conscience, to have scowr'd their Guits, and purged their Purses, and
make work for the Doctors.

Tell us, O you Sage Astrologers (who the other day prognosticated the Turks
Victories, and the Ruin of the most Christian King; you who hold a Bakers
dozen of Coelestial-Houses in Fee-simple, yet are scarce able to pay your Rent
for one poor Louzy Cottage on Earth) tell us, I pray, what unlucky Stars
govern this capricious Age, and put people on such plotting humors? For we
are, many ways, bound to Curse their pragmatical Influences; first Oatses Plot
for two or three years frighted away our Roman Communicants, Not a Shaveling
Priest tho never so disguised, durst appear in our Walks; but was as afraid of
our Springs, as the Devil is of their Holy Water: And then the Whiggs must go
Plott (with an Horsepox to 'em) and so we lose that party too: And now here
comes a Third Plott, worse (to us) than either of the other two, a Plott, a
devilish, a damnable, a horrid Plott, to persuade People (not that BOBBING is
SALAMANCA, or FORTY ONE EIGHTY THREE, but) that Sadlers Musique-house is
Southborrow, and Clarkenwell-Green, Caverly-Plain; That Abana and Pharpar
(Rivers of Damascus) are equal to old Jordan, That Islington, forsooth, is
commenced Epsom, per Saltum, as Fools become Physicians and golden Dunces,
wooden Docters at Leiden; That the juice of a few Cowturds, mixed with a sham
of Steel-dust, and steept in a new-vamp'd Well, that in all likelihood was an
old House of Office; can be effectual as our wonder-working Fountains that
taste of cold Iron, and breath pure Nitre and Sulphur.

Audacious and unconscionable Islington! was it not enough that thou have time
out of mind been the Metropolitan Mart of Cakes, Custards, and stewed Pruans?
The chief place of entertainment for Suburb Bawds, and Loitering Prentices?
Famous for Bottle'd Ale that begins the Huzza! before one drinks the Health,
and Statutable Cans, 9 at least to a Quart That thou flowest with delicious
Milk extra^ from rotten Turnips and Hogwash Grains Renowned for Middletons
pipes, and putting forth both Calves and Bastards to Nurse? Could not all these
Advantages satisfy thee without invading our privileges, and trumping up your
Spouts and old dormant Holes, to Intercept our Customers, and utterly spoil our
Ancient Staple Manufactory of Spewing and Shit -- g? But suppose their Waters
could be conceited somewhat comparable where is the Air? Where the Diversions?
Where the Conveniences? If an honest Man walk out at five, he shall be
expected back at eight to What-dee-lack-it in his Shop, where he sits forall
the world like a Lord in a Hutch; Besides, Duns, and Sergeants, and
Marshals-Men lie perdue all along the Coast, and make his Walk as perilous as
a Voyage to Scanderoon. If a virtuous woman repair thither, since going to St.
Antlins, and Morning Lectures is out of fassion, some Eves dropping Neighbor
thrusts in for a Companion, but proves indeed a spy, and she must hurry home by
Dinner, or else the good Man runs Horn-mad, and where is a body's Enjoyment then?

Is trotting to Islington on foot with a dull Husband, or a froward Wife, a
durty-fisted Prentice, or a blabbing Maid, for two or three hours, comparable
to the delights of being Jog'd and Jolted in a Coach, and with brave Company
trundled down Madamscourt-Hill, or over Bansted-downs? And staying out a Month
or two, without being troubled with the peivish Yoak-fellow, save only on
Saturday and Sunday Nights (on which you are sure to be very Sick) and all the
rest of the Week as blyth as Datchellors, and free and uncontrouled as the most
absolute Monarchs of the East, having nothing to do, but Cajole the beleiving
Fopp at home with a few kind Lines, for a supply of Cash, dictated by the
obliging Miss or Gallant, to make the Sport more divertive.

Consider well all these Advantages of a remoter distance, consult your
Interest, and abandon this upstart Haeresy of Flocking to Islington, tell your
Friends what stange rumblings those Waters make in your Bellies and your
Brains; believe it the Papists or the Whiggs (as Chronicles tells us, the Jews
did of old) have poisoned those Wells; and that all their operation proceeds
either from Jesuits powder, or phanatical Quicksilver.

Return therefore to your good old Customs: Let us enjoy your Company, and
take you the usual divertisements of undisturbed Society, so shall we suspend
our Complaints, and you be better gratified by continuing a Converse with

Your Old Friends and Tres-Humble Servants, TUNBRIDGE and EPSOM.


London, Printed for J. How, 1684.


