AN EXACT ACCOUNT (...) the Success of His Majesty's Army in Ireland for the
last Week; Giving a Relation of the number Killed. Together with a List of the
Officers Names taken Prisoners and brought unto Dublin. With a Description of
the Train of Artillery that is gone to Besidge Athlon.
WE have an Account from Cor^, That on Friday last Major Culliford, with 100 of
the Army and 250 of the Militia, went into Eveleary on (...) Borders of the
County of Kerry, and killed (...) Rapparees of Charles Mac-Curthy of Bellea's
^^giment and an Officer and burnt the Country: (...) Irish had notice of their
coming, and had ^^ve away the prey of the Country, so that our ^^^n got only
thirty Cows, two hundred Sheep, ^^d about one hundred pounds worth of Lum^^^.
All the Rapparees of this Country are so dis^^rsed, that scarce 5 are to be
found together be^^een Blarny and Bantry, except in the Moun^^^s and Bogs which
are inaccessible -- Upon (...) Expedition of Major Culliford's toward ^^rry,
Major Wade and the Bandon Militia, who ^ent out with him, parting from him at
Mac^^^p, took a considerable prey in Glanacrime, ^^d killed fourteen Raparees
-- And on Sunday (...) Colonel Beecher Lieutenant Colonel Moor (...) Captain
Bernard, with the Militia under their ^ommand, marched from Wintervary into the
^^mies Quarters killed between forty and fifty ^pparees, brought off 1100 head
of Black ^^ttle, 1200 Sheep, and 100 Garrans and return^^ to their respective
Quarters without the least ^^s -- We have advice from Cashil, That some ^^ys
since, three of Li^utenant Colonel Cleer's Militia Troop, and four of his
Servants, fell on a ^^rcel of Notorious Rapparees, killed two of ^em, brought
away their Heads, took several of ^^eir Arms, released two of Colonel Hale's
Sol^ers, which these Rapparees had taken prisoners, ^^d recovered their Arms,
and likewise re-took ^^me provisions of Bread, which these Rappa^^es had a
little before surprised -- Ditto -- (...) days after, a party of Lieutenant
Colonel ^^^er's, Major Green's, and Captain Pennyfed^he's Militia Dragoons, to
the number of fifty. ^^der the Command of Lieutenant Thomas Prince, made an
Incursion into the Enemies ^^^rters, where they met with a party of Rap^^ees,
killed thirty of them on the place, brought way about thirty Cows and 25
Horses, and had ^^ly one man slightly wounded, -- By an Of^^er Arrived from
Kilkenny, we have the follow^^g Relation, that on Saturday night last the
^^pparees came to Burres in the County of Ca^^rlough, and stole thence 22
Horses belonging Captain Kemish's Militia Dragoons of that ^^unty, some of
whose Dragoons followed them into this County joined with a party of our
Militia posted at Graige, under Command of Lieutenant Read, pursued and
overtook them on Sunday Evening near a Wood-side about Blanchfields Park within
four Miles of this place, engaged them, though much above their number and it is
probable had been worsted their Horses being wearied in the pursuit) when
Quartermaster Blunt with 12 of Captain Mukin's Militia Dragoons of this City,
coming from Catherlough (whither he want to Convoy Major M^darty the Generals
Son from Kilkenny) heard of their Engagment, and broke the Rapparees, who were
very advantagiously posted Killed 12 and took 6 Prisoners, among whom were
Derby D^ff Doyl their Captain a very stout Fellow and a great Rapparee,
commonly called Brigader Doyle Charles Maldick a French Lieutenant in the Lord
Gillways Regiment, Doyle his Brother, Son in Law, and one other, were the next
day tried by a Court Martial, and all shot at Gowran and their Heads brought to
K^^ny^^^ and (...) upon the Walls of the City. Pro^^ctions were found in most
of their Pockets and in Doyles a Commission from Sarsfield to raise what
Horses, and recruits he could to bring into Cannaught by the 2d of Jun in this
Action we regained our Horses, took some more and had only one Man wounded,
Captain Warens Militia Troop being Posted near the Cole pits lately met with a
party of Rapperees, whom they fell in with; but the Rapparees soon took to the
Bog and made their escape, leaving eight or nine good Horses with Sadeles and
Arms behind them; two of the Horses were formerly stolen from the Dutch
Troopers. -- Mountmelick, June, 16. Last Sunday night Major Weldon, of our
Militia, detacht a party of 100 Horse, Dragoons and Foot from this Garrison,
marched them into the Kings Counte^, two miles beyond Castle Cuff, where they
saw many Rapperees, but could overtake only 14 of them, which they killed, and
brought off twenty eight large English Milch Cows, with some Horses and Goats.
-- On Thursday night he went out again by appointment between him and Captain
Phillips of Colonel Earls Regiment who is Garrisoned as Philip^^oun, they met
at Newtown, and Marched to Tullamore, Redwood: Rahan, and Linily in this circuit
they Killed 12 Rapperees and brought away with them 24 Cowes which (as the
former) were distributted among the Party. -- Kildare, June, 17 Captain Bagget
with his Militia Dragoons, met with some Rapperees within two Miles of this
place, the manner thus; two of the Dregoons which were the Advance Guard, came
up with the Rapperees about midnight, who first Challenged our Men who they
were for, they making the same Demand, the Rapperies replied, for King James,
so are we replied the Dragoons, until their Party came up, who then fell upon
them, Killed six, but the rest by the opportunity of the Night scampered into
the Bog and made their Escape; the Dragoons for some time pursuing, perceived a
Person lying concealed in a Thicket of Bushes, whom they shot at and Killed,
and coming to the place found a Woman which was covered with a great many of
the Rapparees Clothes, and (...) Enquiry was found to be a Notorious Spy,
(...) one for whom search has been oftentimes m^^ These Rapparees were
commanded by one F^^girald as Captain, and Dun his Lieutenant, (...) have made
great Spoil of the Peoples goods. A party of Colonel Wolsely's Horse who^^
detached on Wednesday last to scour the Co^^^ near Balliboy of Rapparees,
returned the ne^^ to Billimore having Killed about 60 of the^ brought with them
a great many Prisoner^^ It Is expected that our Army will move (...) Athlone on
Monday next.

A List of the Officers taken Prisoners.
Colonel Vlrick Bourke Governor. Captain Lieutenant Edward Bourke. Coronet
Daniel Greffin. Lieutenant Colonel Peter Barnwall. Major John Dowdall. Ensign
Fard Branagan. Captain Robert Wolverston. Captain Garrat Dillon. James Mabe
Store keeper. Captain Henry Crafton. Captain Thomas Dillon. Captain Robert Fitz
Garllald. Captain William Pepper. Captain Luke Shales. Captain Thomas
Arrelbould. Lieutenant John Leigh. Ensign Thomas Tutte. Ensign John Kettering
Lieutenant Luke Everard. Lieutenant Simon Heart. Quarter Master Thomas Joye.
Lieutenant Philip Fox. Lieutenant Franeis Tipper. Lieutenant Peter Dayley.
Captain John Brewerton. Ensign Timothy Lenagham. Acjutant David Kennady.
Captain John Bourke. Quartermaster John Gaglacy. Ensign Henry Bryan. Ensign
Daniel Cularan Lieutenant Mark Rennolds Captain Thomas Sherlock. Captain
Valentine Russel. Captain Owen Murffey. Captain Thady Crawley. Lieutenant
George Fitz Gerlald. Lieutenant Thomas Mac Cartey. Ensign Thomas Smith. Ensign
Adam Archbold. Captain Vallentine Brown. Captain Christopher Taffe. Ensign
John Bourk. Lieutenant Walter Daughton. Convers Conwar Chyrurgeon, Ensign James
Barnwel. Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Corbet. Lieutenant James Linham. Ensign
Nicholas Synot. Lieutenant Redmand Fitz-Garald. John Pierce Priest. Ensign
Matthew Evstace. Lieutenant Christopher Barnwell. Ensign Charles Castilio.


Officers, 54, Soldiers, 800. Rapparees, 239, Women 645. Total, 1738.

And Children Innumerable,

All These, besides what was Slain, which (...) very Considerable.

A List of the Great Train with the Army near Athlone.
Nine, Twenty-four Pounders. Eleven, Eighteen Pounders. Ten, Twelve Pounders.
Eleven, Three Pounders. Six Mortar Pieces. Four Hundred Wheel Carrs loaded with
great Balls, Spades, and Pick axes, etc. Fifty-Eight Close Wagons with
Ammunition and Stores. Twenty Close Tumbrels, with the same Stor^ Twenty Open
Wagons, with Stores. Fourteen Shot Wagons, to carry Hand Granad^ Two Gun
Carriages. Six Spare Gun-Carriages. Two spare Limbers. Besides our Tinn Boats,
and several Wagg^^ Tumbrels, and other Carriages, that we hou^^ do expect to
Arrive in our Camp from Dub^^


Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, in the Year. 1691.


