REFLECTIONS UPON Several Passages In a Book, Entitled, Satan Disrobed from
his Disguise of LIGHT.
By EDMUND ELYS.
P. 19. SPeaking of Cornelius, Acts 10. the Author has these words, Now what
had become of him, if he had Died, before he had heard of the Outward Christ. I
will not say, but I think, we may safely conclude, That if he had rejected the
Preaching of Peter, and depended, as the Quakers do, upon the Sufficiency of
the Light within, without any thing else, all his former Righteousness would
not have Saved him, nor his Light within.

Ans. He could not have Rejected the Preaching of Peter, but by REBELLING
against The Light within. I Entreat the Learned Reader to Peruse a Printed
Paper of mine, Entitled, GEORGE KEITH his saying, That the Light within is not
Sufficient without something else, Proved to be contrary to the Foundation of
the Christian Religion.

P. 42. His ( Danson's) words are these, As for their Participating of the
Infallible Spirit (if that were granted) that infers not a Participation of the
Spirit's Infallibility; as indeed (says this Author) it does not, more than of
its Omnipotence, Omniscience, or any other of the Divine Attributes.

Ans. Most certainly, the Participation of the Divine Nature does imply a
Participation of Omnipotence, and Omniscience, viz A Power to KNOW All things,
and to DO All things, from Time to Time; which it is our Duty for the Present
to Know and Do. This Participation of Omnipotence, and Omniscience, all those
that are Partakers of the Divine Nature, as such, are most certainly Endued
withal by the Father of Lights, the Fountain of all Goodness: And it is
Impossible they should Err so far, as they Adhere to the Spirit of Truth.

W. P. declares the Quakers Meaning in these words in his KEY, p. 7. They say,
the Principle is Pure, Perfect, Unerrable in it self, or else it were unfit to
lead Men out of Error and Impurity to Heaven: But they never did assert
themselves such, merely because it was in them; by no means: But that all who
are led by it, are so far Perfect, and so far Infallibly in the Right Way, as
they are led by it, and no jot farther.

P. 66. This shows us the Heart of the Quakers, who are not satisfied with the
Influences, and Inspiration of Christ: But will have the very Person of CHRIST
within them.

Answ. If CHRIST be the True and Eternal God, the very Person of CHRIST, or
CHRIST HIMSELF is in All Creatures, and in a Peculiar Manner in All Rational
Creatures. Every GOOD Motion in the Heart and Perception of TRUTH in the Mind
of Man, comes IMMEDIATELY from the very Person of CHRIST, or CHRIST HIMSELF In
the Soul, or Inward Man. Whoever sincerely Believes, that CHRIST is the True
and Eternal GOD, does Virtually Believe this: Which he that Formally and
Expressly Believes, finds Infinitely more Joy and Satisfaction in the
Explicitness of that Belief, and the KNOWLEDGE of the Daily Effects of it, than
He could have in all the Learning, that Mankind is capable of, without the
Sanctifying Inspiration of the Only Wise GOD, from which nothing can Exclude
us, but the Perverseness of our own Will. We do not Affirm, that the Body of
Christ is otherwise In us, than upon this account, that it is In Him, in whom
are All things; who is as truly and really In us, as He is In Heaven. This
Doctrine, that the Person of CHRIST, or Christ Himself, the True and Eternal
LIGHT is In us, is so far from being the Foundation of Errors, as this Learned
Man Asserts, that it is the Foundation of All EVANGELICAL Knowledge; but I
grant that Every Man has a VIRTUAL, or Implicit Knowledge of this Truth, who so
Trusts in GOD for Christ's sake, to cleanse the Thoughts of his Heart, by the
Inspiration of his Holy Spirit, that Commonly, or Habitually, he is in such a
Temper of Mind, that he would rather lay down his Life, than be Guilty of any
KNOWN Sin of Commission, or Omission.

It is, says this Learned Man, the True and Real Virtue, and Light of Christ,
which from him in Heaven is conveyed into our Hearts. And what more would the
Quakers have? Nothing less than the very Body and Person of CHRIST within them.
This is the Foundation of all the Quakers Errors. But say I again, and again:
This is the Foundation of All Evangelical Knowledge: That JESUS CHRIST is the
Foundation of Light in the Souls of Men.

COME LORD JESUS.
FINIS.

