A COMPLAINT OF EDMUND ELYS, A Minister of the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST, Against
TITUS OATS TO THE Nobility and Gentry of ENGLAND.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
IN a Book Entitled EIKON ASIAIK, Published by TITUS OATS, there is a most
Execrable Attempt to VILIFY the Memory of KING CHARLES the First, and of All
those Worthy Persons that Adhered to Him in a strict Observance of All the Laws
that have been Made for the Defense of the Kings of England, against their
Stubborn and Disobedient Subjects. In the 73d Page of that Wicked Book, this
Monster of a Man, HOMO and HUMANITATIS, Expers and Vitae Communis Ignarus, has
these words. Sir I can prove, that those Men who were concerned in Judging and
Condemning your Father to Death, though that was the pretense or handle you took
to have them cut off, yet the great reason why they were not spared, was, that
if they lived, they would have been great Obstacles in your way of debauching
the People, and that was the reason of their being cut off.

-- If you remember, it was the weak part of those Men that had their Lives
given them; not but that some of them were Worthy Persons, but they had not
arrived to those Experiences of God and true Religion, as the others had done
that laid down their Lives in that Cause. But the Truth is, I never found many
of them that had so LITTLE GRACE as to Repent of what they had done.

Nay your Rage did not cease here; for you by all the Wrong imaginable packed a
Parliament together of greenheaded young Gentlemen, the Sons of some CAVALIERS,
whose Parents suffered in the late War. And again in the same Page, Your soured
CAVALIERS, and your Conspiring VILLAINS. In the 19th Page this Civil Gentleman
had past a Complement upon that Noble CAVALIER, the Lord JOHN BERKELEY. You
know, says he, the Lord ROBARTS was removed, and another that was BASE enough
to do such a Jobb ( viz. To restore the Roman Catholic Religion, and to begin
first in Ireland) was sent in his room. Page 44. Upon the removal of the Lord
ROBARTS, afterward Earl of Radnor, you remember who succeeded him -- that Tool
of a Lieutenant came there, which was of dangerous Consequence to that Kingdom,
and the Protestant Religion, and English Interest. P. 26. He Reviles that most
Reverend Prelate Archbishop LAUD, calling him Arch-Traytor. P. 30. He bestows
his Liverie upon that Eminently Learned and Pious Prelate Bishop M. That Wicked
Prelate of Winchester, Dr. MORLAY. P. 75. Old COSENS (I suppose he means Bishop
COUSIN) Old HINCHMAN, and SHELDON, Three of the Devil's Brokers. P. III. He
again Tramples on the BLOOD of our Murdered Sovereign, speaking of His Death
in a SCOPTICAL Expression, and Reviling a Learned Preacher, that gave Him his
due Encomium. A Little Priest of the Church of England in a Sermon of his on
the Day your Father made his Exit, etc.

I shall give you no further Trouble, but shall leave it to the Christian
Generosity of your own Breasts, what Indignation Ye Ought to Conceive against
the Insolence of so Prodigious a VILLAIN.

Your most Affectionate Humble Servant.


