THE EXTORTIONERS AND Stock-Iobbers, detected. Or, An Infallible Receipt for
the Circulation of Money.
OUR Forefathers in former days had so great an Aversion against Excessive
Usury, that they looked upon the Usurers as void of all Humanity and
Christianity, and as a Mark of their Displeasure, would not suffer them to have
a Christian Burial. It may be of good Service to have some such Mark put upon
them now, to show the dislike of this Age, who are in a great measure undone by
them.

These cruel ill-natured Monsters are the destroyers and devourers of most Men's
Substance, by their unreasonable Dealings and Extorting Usuries, prosecuting
their own Covetous and Evil Designs, having no regard to the Laws of God, and
breaking through all the Laws of Men, as if they were to give no Account in
this World nor the next. But since these Catter-pillars have made havoc and
spoil at their own Will and Pleasure, it is high time to inform them, That
there are Laws already made as a Scourge for all such Vermin; there are a great
many honest Englishmen, that are true Lovers of their King and Country, that
will prosecute these Offenders, and endeavor to make them sensible of their
bold and barefaced Frauds, that are at this time of day put upon most of his
Majesty's good Subjects, who are drove to unexpressable Streights and
Necessities, by their Tricks and Contrivances, by keeping the Money and
hindering its Currancy, on purpose to drive the People into great Wants, that
thereby they might make the better Markets of them, exacting from them, Five,
Ten, Fifteen, and Twenty per Cent. besides lawful Interest, and not without
extraordinary Security, such as Plate or Land, by which means Money is become
an absolute Commodity, to almost the ruin of some Thousands of the honest
trading Men in the Kingdom, for they will never lay Moneys out in Goods, when
they can by their unlawful Practices make much more of their Money than by
laying it out in Commodities, so that Trade must stop, and all Business stand
still if the Laws be not put in Execution: In order thereunto you have here a
Copy of an of Parliament, which we heartily wish may by Authority be commanded
to be read publicly in all the Churches in England every Sunday in the year,
to prevent future Frauds and Extortion.

An ACT for the Restraining the taking of Excessive Usury, Anno duodecimo
CAROLI Secundi Regis, Cap. XIII.
FOrasmuch as the Abatement of Interest from Ten in the Hundred in former
times, has been found by notable Experience beneficial to the Advancement of
Trade, and Improvements of Lands by good Husbandry, with many other
considerable Advantages to this Nation, especially the Reducing of it to nearer
Proportion with Foreign Statutes with whom we Traffic. And whereas in fresh
memory the like Fall from Eight to Six in the Hundred, by a late constant
Practice has found the like Success, to the general Contentment of this
Nation, as is visibly by several Improvements: And whereas it is the endeavor
of some at present to Reduce it back again in practice to the allowance of the
Statute still in force to Eight in the Hundred, to the great discouragement of
Ingenuity, and Industry in Husbandry, Trade and Commerce in this Nation:

II. Be it for the Reasons aforesaid Enacted by the King's most Excellent
Majesty, and the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, That
no Person or Persons whatsoever, from and after the Twenty ninth day of
September in the Year of our Lord One thousand six hundred and sixty, upon any
Contract shall from and after the said Twenty ninth of September, take directly
or indirectly, for Loan of any Moneys, Wares, Merchandise, or other Commodities
whatsoever, above the value of Six pounds for the forbearance of One hundred
pounds for a year, and so after that Rate for a greater or lesser Sum, or for a
longer or shorter time: And that all Bonds, Contracts, and Assurances
whatsoever, made after the time aforesaid, for payment of any Principal, or
Money to be lent, or Covenant to be performed upon or for any Usury, whereupon
or whereby there shall be reserved or taken above the Rate of Six pounds in the
Hundred, as aforesaid, shall be utterly void: And that all and every Person or
Persons whatsoever, which shall after the time aforesaid, upon any Contract to
be made, after the said Twenty ninth day of September, take, accept and
receive, by way or means of any corrupt Bargain, Loan, Exchange, Chevisaunce,
Shift, or Interest of any Wares, Merchandise, or other thing or things
whatsoever, or by any deceitful way or means, or by any Covin, Engine, or
deceitful Conveyance for the forbearing or giving Day of Payment for one whole
Year, of and for their Money or other thing, above the Sum of Six pounds, for
the forbearing of One hundred pounds for a Year, and so after that Rate for a
greater or lesser Sum, or for a longer or shorter Term, shall forfeit and lose,
for every such offense, the treble value of the Moneys, Wares, Merchandise, and
other things so Lent, Bargained, Sold, Exchanged or Shifted.

III. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
Scrivener and Scriveners, Broker and Brokers, Solicitor or Solicitors, Driver
and Drivers of Bargains for Contracts, who shall after the said Twenty ninth
day of September, take or receive, directly or indirectly, any Sum or Sums of
Money, or other Reward or Thing, for Brokage, Soliciting, Driving, or Procuring
the Loan, or Forbearing any Sum or Sums of Money, over and above the Rate or
Value of Five shillings for the Loan, or Forbearing of One hundred pound for a
year, and so rateably, or above Twelve pence for making or renewing of the Bond
or Bill for Loan, or Forbearing thereof, or for any Counter-Bond or Bill
concerning the same, shall forfeit for every such Offense Twenty pounds, and
have Imprisonment for half a year; The one Moiety of all which Forfeitures to
be to the King our Sovereign Lord, his Heirs and Successors, and the other
Moiey to him or them that will sue for the same, in the same County where the
same Offenses were committed, and not elsewhere, by Action of Debt, Bill,
Plaint or Information, in which no Essoign of Law or Protection to be allowed.

It has been a Question put by those that have suffered by Jobbers in Tallies
and Bank Bills, Whether this Statute does affect these unreasonable Practices?
Their best way to be informed therein, is to advise with able Counsel.

But by this Act we see the great Council and Wisdom of the Nation, in former
times, foresaw and well considered that the raising the Interest of Money, or
leaving to the liberty of the People to value it as they please, would not only
be a ruin to Ingenuity, Industry, and Trade, but also undo the Kingdom; and
therefore in their great Wisdom, did set Bounds and Limits, and made this good
and wholesome Law, which at this time of day is hoped will save us from ruin.
And certainly the Extortioners and Stock-Jobbers would never have been so
impudent, as to put what price they please upon Money, if they did not think
themselves out of the reach of the Law, or that the Laws, when made, to be of
no effect: But time must convince them, wherein we hope to see this Law so well
applied, that it will prove a smart Rod for both the Knaves and Fools Backs.
Walk but to the Royal Exchange, and you will presently see how the Face of
Affairs are there altered (occasioned only by these ill-look'd Monsters) the
Business of the Exchange used to be selling of Commodities; but now, What price
bank Bills? What Security for Money? Nothing but Plate or Land, at Ten,
Fifteen, Twenty, or more per Cent. By these unreasonable Practices we plainly
see that this was the true Cause why the King was not supplied, as we have
found by woeful Experience. They tell you that Money is of a greater value than
ever, and therefore they ought to make the best of it. Self-interest may plead
for it, but the Notion is notoriously false: For indeed Money is at no time of
any greater value than what the Law has put upon it; and no Subject dare
warrant the taking of more than Six per Cent. but is liable to be Indicted upon
the Statute of Excessive Usury. It Is true, the King gives a greater Interest
than Six per Cent. the Reason is, to encourage the Subject to speedily supply
the Necessities of the Kingdom, (but not without a Law first made). The Subject
ought to live in subjection to the Law, and content himself with Six per Cent.
until he has Liberty by Law to do otherwise. It Is of a dangerous Consequence
to suffer the People to take a greater Interest for Money than the King gives
himself; for then the Government will never be supplied, as we have already
seen. Therefore the Neck of this Roguery must be broke, or the Nation undone.

It Is no wonder that these daring Creatures break through all Laws, when they
dare spit in the Face of the Lawmakers; for if the Parliament makes any Law
that prevents their unjust Practices, they immediately put a mark upon those
Members. The last Sessions of Parliament, there were great Debates before the
House could settle the Coin (occasioned also by these Tools). They have also
printed a List of all the Members, with a mark upon them that were for lowering
the Guinea's and settling the Silver; not sparing to say in public, That they
were not Friends to the Government. But if there be no Law to punish them for
their open Affronts, in due time the Parliament may make one.

It Is very plain that these Extortioners and Stock-Jobbers never cried up the
Rise of Silver and the Rise of Gold, that the Kingdom in general might be the
better, but that they themselves might have gained extravagant Sums of Money,
that had great Cash by them: And it is also as plainly seen, That the Money
being brought to its due weight and standard, has had this good effect
already, the Exchange from Holland being Thirty six shillings nine pence of our
side, which would not have been, if the Money had been settled as they would
have had it.

Indeed, these surly Creatures do still retain their Anger, and are resolved to
have another touch at Parliament to raise the Guinea's and the Silver, and get
a Consideration for their Clipped Money being still in hopes of obtaining their
Ends, have kept up great Sums of Money, which has been another Reason that
has obstructed the Currancy of Money. That they have kept it up appears thus:
At the Tenth of April Guinea's were to go for no more than Two and twenty
shillings, and the Fourth of May was Clipped Money to be no more made use of, so
that at that time, we had no Money for currancy, but the old broad Money, and
small parcels of old Milled, and in a few days scarcely a Guinea to be seen,
which plainly shows they were very sullen, resolving to keep them up, and not
to lose by them, never reckoning what they had got unlawfully by them.

There is one Reason more that will convince you in a little time, and that is,
If they do apply themselves to the Parliament, the next Sessions, you may then
be sure they have kept up the Moneys: and that you may be the better satisfied
in the truth thereof, the Monsters shall be described to you; They have many
Names, and they are of diverse Shapes; some are old, and some young; their
Haunts will be in the Court of Request, or in the Lobby, or among the Foot-boys
on the Stairs. But if you do not know them by their Shapes, you will certainly
know them by their Cry, Raise the Guinea's, Raise the Silver, and allow for
Clipped Money, or we are all undone: (meaning we Extortioners and Stock-Jobbers.)

The Jews, who were a cunning and subtle People, well knew the Distractions and
Disorders that would have befallen them, if their weight and stand-hard had
been corrupted; to prevent which they kept the Shekel of Gold and the Shekel of
Silver in the Sanctuary, as sacred as the Law of Moses; and they always had
regard to the weight of the Shekel in the Sanctuary. From whence we may learn,
That if our Laws did not protect and prevent the Corruptions of Coin, Weights
in Measures, we should soon be in Confusion, and should not know how to deal
one with another.

It Is demonstrably true, That the late Act of Parliament for Punching of all
old broad Money, for preventing its being clipped, is very little regarded, which
gives a very just suspicion of these Extortioners and Stock-Jobbers having a
further Design, and that they will make a great bustle and struggle to get an
allowance for the clipped Money, alleging the Country People will all be undone,
when indeed most of them has sustained already to loss. But the Design must be
deeper laid: For if the Parliament should adhere to make an allowance for the
clipped Money that is in their hands, then all the old broad Money unpunched,
must once more come into the Clippers hands, and so the Nation make good
another piece of their Roguery.

It Is further observed, That their barbarous Contrivances in keeping up the
Coin of the Kingdom, for the Reasons before mentioned, has brought us into
these following Evils, That the middle Trading-men of the Nation are in a worse
Condition that the common Beggars; they cannot sell their Commodities for
Money, nor can they receive their Debts, and all manner of Friendship
destroyed; and if they go to borrow Money they are laughed at, unless they give
them their unreasonable Demands. What must these poor People do? either starve
or beg. Nay, many of these Monsters themselves refuse paying their own Debts,
making use of the common Necessitous Cry, Is this a time to part with Money, or
pay Debts? when the true Reason is, whilst they keep the People out of their
Money, they Trade with it upon unconscionable Usury. Therefore, that they may
have a just Reward, according to their Merits, it is thought advisable to
publish this following

ADVERTISEMENT.
THIS is to give Notice, That there is a considerable Discovery already made of
great Numbers of these unreasonable Men, who are deep in these unwarrantable
Practices, and are to be speedily prosecuted: Therefore those honest Gentlemen,
and others that are Lovers of Justice, and their Countries welfare, who have
been in the like manner used, having been obliged in their Necessity to give
the Extortioners and Stock-Jobbers their unreasonable Demands, If they please
to meet a Will's Coffee-house in the Court of Request the Twentieth instant,
being the first day of the sitting of the Parliament, there they may be
informed what proper Methods are to be taken for their Relief.

LONDON: Printed for E. Whitlock near Stationers' Hall. 1696.


