An ABSTRACT of such Parts of several Statutes relating to Silks called
Alamodes and Lustrings, as may guide Officers, and others, in the Execution
thereof; and direct all Dealers in such Silks, to avoid the Penalties therein
contained.
THAT no Person shall buy or sell, or send beyond Sea, any Black Alamodes or
Lustrings, unless they have the Seal or Seals, Mark or Marks used for Foreign
Goods at the Custom-House, or the Seal and Mark used by the Lustring-Company
for Goods manufactured by them, under Forfeiture of all such Goods, and also
the Sum of 100 l. for every Offense. 6 and 7 W. 3. chap. 18.

That if the Buyer of such Goods not sealed, do within Twelve Months after,
discover the Person of whom he shall buy the same, he shall not only be
discharged of the Penalty, but shall receive one Moiety of the Sum hereby
imposed upon the Party so selling or disposing of such Silks. The same Stat.

All Black Alamodes and Lustrings, wheresoever manufactured, which shall be
found in the Custody or Possession of any Person, not marked or sealed with the
Mark and Seal of the Custom-House, or of the Royal Lustring-Company, shall be
forfeited, and may be seized as forfeited, whether the same have been before
bought and sold, or not; and the Person in whose Custody or Possession the same
are found, shall incur the Penalties in the precedent Clause. 8 and 9 W. 3.
chap. 36.

No Alamodes and Lustrings, that after the 10th of April, 1697. shall be seized
and forfeited, shall be used in England; but immediately, on seizure, shall be
carried to the Custom-House Warehouse in London, and there sold by Inch of
Candle, on Condition to be Exported, and Security given for Exportation: Which
Security shall be discharged by Certificate from the Chief Magistrate or
Officer of the Port ^here such Goods shall be landed, or Oath made that they
were lost at Sea. The same Stat.

On Exportation of Foreign Lustrings or Alamodes, the Exporter shall not
receive, draw back, or be repaid the Customs or Impositions paid or secured on
Importation of the same, or any part thereof. Same Stat.

From and after the 1st of July, School. no Foreign Alamodes or Lustrings shall
be Imported into any other Port than London; and Notice shall be given to the
Commissioners of the Customs, of the Quality and Quantity, with the Marks,
Numbers and Package of all such Silks intended to be Imported, with the Name of
the Importer, and the Ship and her Burden, and of the Commander, on which they
are to be laden, and the Port where they are to be taken on board; and a
License shall be taken under the Hands of the said Commissioners, or any Three
of them, for the Importing the same. 9 and 10 W. 3. chap. 43. In which are also
the following Clauses:

The said Commissioners shall cause to be marked and sealed, all such Alamodes
and Lustrings which shall be Imported according to this Act, and keep a
Registry thereof in the Custom-House, London: And if any such Silks shall be
Imported into any other Port than London, or Imported without Notice and
License, and the Duties paid, or shall not be so sealed or marked, such Silks,
or the full Value, shall be forfeited: And Silks seized and forfeited by Virtue
of this or any former Act, shall be Sold and Exported; and the same Rules shall
be observed in the Selling or Exporting thereof, as are mentioned in the
precedent Stat. of 8 and 9 W. 3. chap. 36.

All Persons who shall Import, or bring, or cause, or procure to be Imported,
or brought into this Kingdom, any Alamodes or Lustrings, contrary to this Act,
or knowingly receive or take the same into their House, Warehouse, Custody or
Possession, or sell, barter, or offer to sale, or cause to be sold or bartered,
or offered to sale, any such Silks so fraudulently Imported, and their Aiders,
Abett^^^ and Assistants, knowing thereof, shall forfeit 500 l.

If any Commission or Warrant-Officer, or other Person in the Service of his
Majesty, and having the Command of any Ship, shall import, bring, send or
convey, or procure or suffer to be imported, or take on board any Alamodes or
Lustrings, in order to be imported, or unship, or suffer to be unshipt, into
any Boat or other Vessel, any such Silks, knowing thereof, he shall, over and
above the Forfeitures and Penalties in this or any other Act, be, ipso facto,
rendered incapable of serving his Majesty by Sea or Land, or of having any
Benefit which he may be entitled to, by Virtue of any such Service: And if any
Seaman, or other Person belonging to any Ship, shall discover any Alamodes or
Lustrings imported, or unshipt into any Boat or other Vessel, in order to be
imported, contrary to this Act; such Persons shall (over and above their Part
of the Forfeitures by this Act) be immediately discharged from on board such
Ship, if they desire the same, and the Captain or Master shall immediately give
them a Ticket, intitling them to all their Wages due on board such Ship.

If any Persons alter, counterfeit, or misapply either of the Seals or Marks of
the Custom-house, or of the Royal Lustring Company, they, their Aiders,
Abettors, and Assistants, shall, for every Offense, forfeit 500 l. and stand in
the Pillory two Hours: And all Persons, who shall buy or sell, or have in their
Custody or Possession, any Alamodes or Lustrings with a Counterfeit-Seal or
Mark, or with the Custom-house or Company's Seal or Mark not lawfully affixed
thereto, knowing thereof, and not discovering, shall forfeit the Goods, and 100
l.

Any Persons, with a Writ of Assistance from the Exchequer, or a Constable or
Officer, and a Justice of Peace's Warrant, may, in the Daytime, enter any
House, Shop, or other Place, to search for and seize any Alamodes or Lustrings
imported contrary to this or any other Act, or not sealed and marked as
aforesaid, or sealed or marked with any Counterfeit Seal or Mark; and in case
of Resistance; to break open Doors, Chests, and other Package, there to seize,
and from thence to bring any such Silks: And the Justices of Peace are to grant
such Warrants to credible Persons making Oath they suspect there are such Silks
where they intend to search: And if any Dispute arise, whether such Silks were
manufactured beyond the Seas, or imported contrary to this Act, the Proof shall
lie upon the Importer, Claimer, or Owner, and not upon the Prosecutor.

All Officers of the Customs, and all other Officers, shall be assisting in the
Execution of this Act: And if any Officer of the Customs, knowingly, connive at
the fraudulent Importation, delivering, receiving, buying, or selling any
Alamodes or Lustrings; or if any Persons taking upon them to seize or
prosecute, in Pursuance of this or any other Act, shall by Collusion desist or
delay Prosecution, they shall forfeit 500 l. and be incapable of any Office or
Employment.

Persons convicted for any Offense against this, or any other Act, relating to
Alamodes or Lustrings, and shall offend a second Time, or oftener, shall, so
often as they offend, forfeit Double the Sum inflicted by this Act.

All Persons offending contrary to this, or any other Act relating to Alamodes
or Lustrings, may be prosecuted in any Action, Suit or Information, and
thereupon a Capias specifying the Penalties sued for may issue, and sufficient
Bail shall be given by natural born Subjects or Denizons, to appear at the
Return of such Writ, and at the Time of Appearance, sufficient Bail to answer
the Penalties in case of Conviction, or to suffer Imprisonment.

All Penalties and Forfeitures imposed hereby, or by any former Law relating to
Alamodes or Lustrings, shall be Two Third Parts to his Majesty, and One Third
to the Prosecutor; the Charge of which Suit shall be borne by his Majesty, out
of his Majesty's Part of the Forfeitures.

No Claim shall be entered to any Silks seized as aforesaid, till Security be
given, by Recognizance, to answer the Penalties and Forfeitures, with full
Costs of Suit, in case a Verdict shall pass, or Judgment be entered for the
Plaintiff: And in Default of such Security within the limited Time, the Goods
to be forfeited, and Judgment entered accordingly.

This Act to be construed most beneficially for the Prosecutor, and for
preventing the Mischiefs hereby provided against.

All Informations or Actions brought by any Informer, for any Offense against
this Act, shall be commenced within Two Years after the Offense committed.

For the more effectual Execution of the said Statutes, the Royal
Lustring-Company give Notice, That if any Person will give Information to them,
whereby any the Offenses aforesaid may be discovered, they will Assist such
Persons in Prosecuting the Offenders: And to prevent all Abuses in the
Execution of the said Laws, the Company, upon Application to them, will take
care that no Person (Dealing in Alamodes and Lusirings made by them) be in any
wise injured.

And for the Accommodation of all Dealers, who may have occasion to cut their
Silks into small Parcels, for Sale; The Company will at any Time, upon Request,
affix a convenient Number of Seals to their Pieces, which contain generally
upwards of Sixty Else; which Seal has been made of Lead, and is now made of
Tin, and has on one side the Arms of the City of London, viz. a Cross and
Dagger; and on the other side, the Arms of the Company, being a Mulberry-Tree,
Two Flies, and Three Cocons (which in form resemble an Egg,) and for the Crest,
a Justice: And together with each Seal, there is also upon the same String
(which is of one entire Piece) a Mark, being a small Indent made in Parchment,
on which is the Number of the Piece; Registries of which are kept by the
Company, for the better Discovery of Counterfeit Seals and Marks, and such as
may be misapplied.


