THE Full and true account of all the PROCEEDINGS in SCOTLAND.

since the REBELLION began.

With the Account of Cap. Grahames Engagement, As also their taking of Glascow,
and their Inhumane Cruelties acted there.

With several Particulars very Satisfactory.

As also the true relation of the last great and bloody Fight between them and
His Majesty's Forces under the Command of His Grace the Duke of Monmouth.

Nere Bothwel Brigg Wherein the REBELS were Routed, and pursued into Hamelton
Park, with the Number of their Slain, and many other Remarkable Circumstances.

LONDON, Printed 1679.

A full and true Account of the Cruelty of the Rebels in SCOTLAND.
THe first breaking out of this the bellion was on the 29th. of May last past,
upon which day about 80 persons well mounted came to Ruglau Market-Cross, and
there as an affront to His Majesty and His Government burnt publicly several
established Acts of Parliament, As that of Supremacy, and that for suppressing
field Conventicles, as that for Establishing Prelacy, with the necessary order,
and afterward placed a scandalous Libel, or as they termed it a Declaration
upon the Market-Cross, and would have done the same at Glasgou, but were
prevented by His Majesty's Soldiers in Garrison.

The Declaration of the Rebels, in the very words as it was designed to have
been put up by them at Glascow, and was actually put up at Rugland.
As the Lord has been pleased still to keep and preserve his interest in the
Land, by the Testimony of some faithful witnesses from the Beginning, so in Our
Days some have not been wanting, who, through the greatest of Hazards, had
added their Testimonies to those who have gone before them, by suffering Death,
Banishment, Torturings, Finings, Forfeitures, Imprisonments, etc. flowing from
cruel and perfidious Adversaries to the Church and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ in the Land. Therefore we owning the Interest of Christ according to the
word of the Lord, and the National and solemn League and Covenant, desire to
add Our Testimony to the Testimonies of the worthies that has gone before,
(though unworthy, yet hoping as true Members of the Church of Christ in
Scotland) and that against all Things that has been done prejudicial to his
interest from the Beginning of the work of Reformation in Scotland, especially
from the Year 1648, to the Year 1660. against the foregoing Acts.

And for confirmation of this Our Testimony, We do hereby this day, being the
29th day of May 1679.Publicly Burn them at the Cross of Glasgou most justly,
as they perfideously and Blasphemously had Burnt Our Holy Covenants, through
several Cities of the Covenanted Kingdoms. We are ready always to do it, if
judgged Necessary, with all the faithf^l Suffering Brethren in the Land.

This done, they gathered into a considerable body on Lansdown Hill on Sunday
following, of which Cap. Graham of Cleaver house having notice, drew out what
force he had, viz. His own Troop of Horse, and a Company of Dragoones, and with
an English resolution went to Charge them. Upon his approach be found the
Rebels to be 1500 strong, who upon the discovery of his March toward them,
sent out two parties to Skirmish with him, the which he charged with such
bravery, that they presently retreated to their Main body, the which with like
resolution he attaked, Charging through the Enemies main body, and killing a
very considerable number, but after the loss of about 20 Dragooners, two
Brigadiers, and eight of his own Troop, his own Horse being shot under him, and
his Cornet slain, he finding himself overpowerd by odds of number, thought fit
to retreat, the which he did with the like gallantry, but in his way to
Glasgou, the Rusticks of Strewin were assembled to oppose him, whereupon he
charged through them and left 11 or 12 of them dead upon the place.

The next day (the Rebels-taking heart at this first success) drew up their
Forces against the City of Glasgou, and assaulted it in two several places, but
were beaten off with considerable loss, whereupon the Dragooners and Horse
sallyed out and fell upon their Rear, taking some Prisoners, and killing ma^y,
but they increasing in number, and fortifying themselves obliged his Majesty's
Forces at that time to Retreat, and again beseiged the City aforesaid, and
after a sharp dispute, and brave defense, became Masters thereof, at their
first entrance, John Balfour of Kinlock (who is insti^u^ed by the Rebels as
Major) holding up his hand, and with an impudent face proclaimed, This is the
hand that murdered Sharp, meaning his Grace, the Lord Bishop of St. Andrews,
whom he had barbarously Massacred, and likewise Haxslone and some other of the
Rebel made Proclamation that they fought against Supremacy and Prelacy: after
which they proceeded to farther Vill^nies.

First they robbed the Archbishop of Glasgoues house, tore down his Tapistry
Hangings, brake open his Chests and Trunks, and set his Sellor afloat with Beer
and Wine after some of the principal had drank their fills, and in fine made a
miserable spoil of all his Goods, nothing being saved but a small parcel of
books, the which his Servants had conveyed to some Neighbors houses, his
Lordship, a Heaven doubtless had ordained, was absent, or else unquestioned he
had been murdered by their cruel hands, after this they proceeded to the great
Cathedral, and pulled down all the Ornaments, defacing several Monuments, of
note, and exported the Communion Vestments, the p^ate ^aving been timely
conveyed away.

The next barbarous exploit in that City by these inhumane Rebels was, they
plundered the Bishop of Argiles house, and after a miserable Havoc t^^r^, they
went to his Chapel, and their diggi^g from their silent Graves two of his
Lordships children that had lately been interred, took up the Coffins, broke
them open, and run their Swords through them several times and left the bodies
of the poor infants above ground, as Monuments of their inhumane Villainy and
Cruelty.

Thus far went these Rebels, and loath to stop here, Crowned all their Villainies
with one more, in a Merchants great Hall, they finding his Majesty's Picture,
^ore it down, and after in an hundred pieces, thereby manifesting their
rebellious Pride, and vile esteem of Majesty that sacred Order that Omnipotence
designd to be his Viceroy here below.

Having given you a full Narrative of their Cruel deeds, while in their
Rendezvouze they held Rebellious and Lawless practices. Now I shall declare
what good success his Majesty's Army have had against them, some of the Rebels
being got together in the Sheriff of Fife, began to ravage the Country,
stealing and driving away by force of Arms several hundred Horses to unite and
reinforce their Rebellious Accomplices, upon notice of which, and the Lord
Chancellors coming over to give Orders to the Militia and Heritors raised for
the King in those parts: they made to Sterling where being met by the Earl of
Murray's Deputy Steward for the Lordship of Down and the Lord Elfingstoun, near
the narrow entrance or pass of the town aforesaid they were defeated and
scattered, abundance of them being killed in pusuit, and about 100 of them
taken Prisoner and brought into Sterling remaining there as yet Prisoners, And
it is credibly reported that there is three or four of the twelve that murdered
the Archbishop) amo^st those that are taken, of the which we shall hereafter
be better able to inform you.

After His Grace the Duke of Monmouth came over and Headed his Majesty's Army,
all peoples fears began to vanish, and of Graces so undoubted courage and
Conduct, inflamed them with happy expectations, the which accordingly
succeeded: for his Grace on Sunday morning the 22th. of this instant June, drew
up his Majesty's Force in Barralia, in view of the Enemy, the River of Clide
only intercepting, whereupon the Rebels send over a Petition, that they would
lay down their Arm and disperse themselves, if they might have the Articles
specified in their Declaration fulfilled, to which his grace returned answer,
that it was contrary to the Laws of the Nation, and prejudicial to the
Government, and that he neither could nor would grant their illegal demands,
but if they would deposite their Arms and submit to the Kings mercy he would
desist to attacke them. The which they refusing, His Grace Commanded the Cannon
to ply against their Ranks, and Commanded a party party out ^o attacque
Bothwel-Bridge, the which the Rebels had well fortyfied, the Party charging
with so fierce a Resolution, that at the first Or^er, the Rebels that were
Posted there fled, upon which his Majesty's Forces passed over the Bridge, and
Charged the Rebels who were drawn up in Battalia with the advantage of a rising
Hill, whereupon the Rebels opening their Orders, discharged their Canon but to
the little or no damage of his Majesty's Force: This done his Grace commanded
the Army to advance, the which was done with such bravery and Resolution that
at first Charge the Enemies main body was broke, and their wings of Horse put
to the rout, and in disorder fled to Hammilton Park, and their shel^red from
the English valor in a Wood, upon which defeat his Grace drew up his Troops of
Horse, and enclosed the Wood and Park, and ordered his Lieutenant Duglass to
en^er the wood aforesaid, and therein killd a number of the Rebels, and it is
reported that in the Ba^tel and pursuit there were one or two thousand of the
Rebels ^ild, besides many taken Prisoners, and that they are utterly broken and
dispersed. The loss of our side is very inconfiderable counting the advantage
the Rebels had.

FINIS.

