^CT by the general Meeting of the Fishing Society, licencing the Exportation
of Herrings.
At Edinburgh, the 12. day of July, 1678.
FOrasmuch as the Royal Company, authorized by His Sacred Majesty to be the
only exporters of Herrings and other white Fish, Did, upon certain
considerations, give and grant license to all Natives inhabitants of this
Kingdom, for the seasons of Fishing, 1673, 1674, 1675, 1676, and 1677. to make
and export Herrings with the Restrictions and Impositions therein mentioned; as
likewise, by their Act of the general Meeting the 10. of December, 1677. did
retract the said License upon certain grounds and reasons therein expressed:
Notwithstanding of which, the general Meeting does for this next season of
Fishing, 1678. continue the License for making and exporting of Herrings upon
the Restrictions aftermentioned, and of payment of six pounds scots per Last,
for the use and behoove of the Company, for the Liberty of Export: That is to
say, All Natives Inhabitants of this Kingdom, may fish and export Herrings at
Dumbar and places adjacent, and the North-Lochs commonly designed the Lews, at
any time they please, and the Western Fishing within the Mules of Galloway and
Kintyre, Clyde, and the adjacent Lochs included, at any time after the 20. day
of September, not beginning sooner to fish for export in these Precincts, nor
for Domestic use, except as is hereafter expressly provided; providing always,
that all Herrings for export shall be made up in oaken Barrels of the bigness
and size with the Companies Cask, which contains eight Gallons four Pynts; That
they be made and cured in the same manner the Company do, and salted with such
Salt as they do, and to be re-pack'd, and at their Re-packing, to be overseen
by any appointed by the Managers of the Society for that effect, who is to ^^t
a burnt Mark upon each Barrel, if they be sufficient and fit for Export, and is
to be entered, and pay to any appointed by the Managers for uplifting the same,
the sum of six Pounds per Last, for the Liberty of Export, and that als well of
the Herrings taken at Dumbar and the Lewis, as these to be exported from the
Western Lochs: And now since the Company has dispensed with the Dumbar and Lews
Fishing for this next Season, and having made provision of Barrels for that
effect, any intending for these Fishings is hereby obliged proportionally to
take off the Barrels provided by the Company, they still being good and
sufficient, and at as easy rates as others ^ffords them. And likewayes, all
the Vessels intending for the north Lochs or Lews fishing, their Owners or
^^aughters are hereby obliged to make intimation to the Directors of the
Company at Edinburgh of the same, and of the Vessels burden: And any intending
to order their Vessels beyond Seas before their r^turn, in that case, they are
obliged to take an authorized Couper, who must give his oath to the Directors
for making of the Herrings in manner beforementioned, and the Merchants or
Owners shall give security to the Managers for payment of the six pounds per
Last, and shall have a Warrant from them for that effect; Hereby declaring,
this present License is still reserving to the Company the early Fishing in the
Western Lochs, within the Mules of Galloway and Kintyre only improven by them,
that Country never being in use formerly to fish before the time limited: And
seeing how small effect their Acts have taken, the Merchants fishing and
salting vast quantities of Herri^gs before the time limited, upon pretense they
are for domestic use, has them at all parts beyond seas before the Company;
and being unsufficient, as made in haste and not right cured, puts a dis-esteem
upon the Companies Fish, spoils the Mercats abroad, and diminishes the quantity
the Company would otherwise make, and over-rates the early green Herrings at
home. Therefore the said general Meeting of the fishing Society, do hereby
prohibit and discharge all Merchants, Skippers, or Owners of any Vessel, Bark
or Boat, Seamen, Coupers, or other Trade^men, Fisher, or any other person or
persons whatsoever, to salt and barrel Herrings before the 20. day of
September, and that under the pain of Confiscation, of what Herrings shall be
found to be barrelled before the said day; As also, of the Vessel or Vessels
where any such herrings, or barrells, with Spainish or French Salt shall be
found, either in Ships* Barks, Boats, Couper-boats, or any other Vessel or Boat
whatsoever, in any of the Lochs or Creeks within the Mules of Galloway and
Kintyre, or upon the River of Clyd, or of any Herrings barrelled that shall be
found upon land, in Buiths, Houses, or elsewhere within the said Precinct,
before the 20. of September, and is to be confiscat for the use and behoove of
the fishing Society; excepting always all Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others,
that do make and barrel Herrings for the proper use of their own respective
families, providing they intimate to the Overseer of the Company at Greenock,
how many barrells they are to make, and give surety to him they shall be landed
and expended accordingly within the country, and the said Overseer shall give
Warrant for this effect: And any person whatsoever, who shall be found
barrelling Herrings before the 20. of September, not having Warrant as said is,
shall confiscat such Herrings and Barrells, with the Vessel or Vessels wherein
they shall be found, for the use and behoove of the Company: And do hereby
continue the License for Exporting of Herrings, for the next season of fishing
as is abovementioned, they observing the Instructions, Rules, and Intimations,
and not salting or barrelling Herrings, before the 20. of September; with
certification as is above-exprest, and the contraveeners to be pursued against,
according to the Patent and Privilege of the Company. Extracted by me,

PAT. MVRRAY.

^DINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, 1678.


