Anno Regni CAROLI II. REGIS Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae,
DUODECIMO.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster, the Five and twentieth day of April,
Anno Dom. 1660.

In the Twelfth year of the Reign of Our most Gracious Sovereign Lord CHARLES,
By the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland King, Defender
of the Faith, etc.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone Church, Anno Dom. 1660.

Anno XII. Caroli II. Regis.
AN ACT For a perpetual Anniversary THANKSGIVING, On the nine and twentieth day
of MAY.
FORASMUCH as Almighty GOD, the King of Kings, and sole Disposer of all Earthly
Crowns and Kingdoms, has by his All-swaying Providence and Power miraculously
demonstrated in the view of all the World his transcendent Mercy, Love and
Graciousness, toward his most excellent Majesty, CHARLES the Second, by his
Especial Grace, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of the
true Faith, and all his Majesty's loyal Subjects of this his Kingdom of
England, and the Dominions thereunto annexed, by his Majesty's late most
wonderful, glorious, peaceable and joyful restoration to the actual
possession and exercise of his undoubted hereditary Sovereign and Regal
Authority over them (after sundry years forced extermination into Foreign
parts, by the most traitorous Conspiracies, and armed Power of usurping
Tyrants, and execrable persidious Traitors, and that without the least
opposition, or effusion of blood, through the unanimous, cordial, loyal Votes
of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and passionate
desires of all other his Majesty's Subjects; which unexpressible blessing (by
Gods own most wonderful dispensation) was completed on the twenty ninth day
of May last past, being the most memorable birthday, not only of his Majesty,
both as a man and Prince, but likewise as an actual King, and of this and other
his Majesty's Kingdoms, all in a great measure new born and raised from the
dead on this most joyful day, wherein many thousands of the Nobility, Gentry,
Citizens, and other his Lieges of this Realm, conducted his Majesty unto his
Royal Cities of London and Westminster, with all possible expressions of their
public joy and Loyal Affections, in far greater triumph then any of his most
victorious Predecessors Kings of England, returned thither from their foreign
Conquests, and both his Majesty's Houses of Parliament, with all dutiful and
joyful demonstrations of their Allegiance publicly received, and cordially
congratulated his Majesty's most happy arrival, and Investiture in his Royal
Throne, at his Palace of Whitehall; Upon all which considerations this being
the day which the Lord himself has made and crowned with so many public
blessings and signal deliverances, both of his Majesty and his people from all
their late most deplorable Confusions, Divisions, Wars, Devastations, and
Oppressions, to the end that it may be kept in perpetual Remembrance in all
Ages to come; and that his Sacred Majesty will with all his Subjects of this
Realm, and the Dominions thereof, and their Posterities after them, might
annually celebrate the perpetual memory thereof, by sacrificing their unfeined
hearty public thanks thereon to Almighty God, with one heart and voice, in a
most devout and Christian manner, for all these public benefits received and
conferred on them, upon this most joyful day. Be it therefore Enacted by the
Kings most Excellent Majesty, the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That all and singular Ministers
of Gods Word and Sacraments, in every Church, Chapel, and other usual place of
divine Service and public Prayer, which now are, or hereafter shall be within
this Realm of England, and the Respective Dominions thereof, and their
Successors, shall in all succeeding Ages Annually celebrate the twenty ninth
day of May, by rendering their hearty public Praises and Thanksgivings unto
Almighty God, for all the forementioned Extraordinary Mercies, Blessings, and
Deliverances received, and mighty Acts done thereon, and Declare the same to
all the People there Assembled, and the Generations yet to come, that so they
may for ever praise the Lord for the same, whose Name alone is Excellent, and
his Glory above the Earth and Heavens. And be it further Enacted, That all and
every person and persons, inhabiting within this Kindome, and the Dominions
thereunto belonging, shall upon the said Day Annually resort with diligence and
devotion to some usual Church, Chapel, or Place where such public
thanksgivings and praises to Gods most Divine Majesty shall be rendered, and
there orderly and devoutly abide during the said public Thanksgivings,
Prayers, Preaching, Singing of Psalms, and other Service of God there to be
used and ministered. And to the end, that all Persons may be put in mind of
their duty thereon, and be the better prepared to discharge the same with that
Piety and Devotion as becomes them; Be it further Enacted, That every Minister
shall give notice to his Parishioners publicly in the Church at Morning prayer
the Lords Day next before every such Twenty ninth day of May, for the Due
observation of the said Day, And shall then likewise publicly and distinctly
read this present Act to the People.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone Church, Anno Dom.


