ABSTRACT of those LAWS Commanded by the QUEEN's most Excellent MAJESTY, to be
put in speedy Execution by Her MAJESTY's most Gracious and Pious Letter (lately
set to the Justices of the Peace of the County of Middlesex) met at their
General Quarter Sessions by Adjournme^t, Friday the 10th of July, 1691.
Published for the Ease and Direction of the several and respective Officers in
the Performance of their Duty.
OFFENSES. LAWS and STATVTES. PENALTIES. Profanation of the Lord's Day. ALL
Laws in force concerning the Observation of the Lord's Day, shall be put in
execution: This day is by every one, to be sanctified and kept holy; and all
Per^^^^ ^^st be careful herein to exercise them^^^^^^ in the Duties of Piety,
and true Re^ publicly; and every one on this day (...) ^^ving a reasonable
Excuse) must dili^^^^^^ resort to some public place where (...) ^^^vice of God
is exercised, or must be (...) at some other place (allowed of by (...) the
Practice of some Religious Du^ ^er of Prayer, Preaching, Reading, (...)
^ounding of the Scriptures, or Con^ upon the same, and also privately, 29 Car.
2. Cap. 7. Will. and M. Eliz. Cap. 2. 3 Jac. Cap. 4. NOTE, that Their Majesty's
Protestant Subjects dissenting from the Church of England, and qualified
according to the late Statute of Indulgence, are exempted from the Penalties of
the Statutes 3 Jac. 1 Eliz. 23. Eliz. 29. Eliz. and some other Statutes. (...)
as repare not to Church, etc. on Sun^^^^ (...) Holy Days. 1 Eliz. 23 Eliz. 3
Jac. Cap. 1. 19 Eliz. Cap. 1. Twelve Pence for every default, to be levied by
distress, and for want of distress, to be committed to some Prison, until the
same be paid. ^ting for a Month, (...) ^welve Month, or more, 3 Jac. Cap. 4.
Twenty Pounds per Month, and forfeiture of Two parts in Three of their Estates.
(...) come not to the Sacrament of the (...)^upper once a Year, Their Names and
Sirnames to be presented: Forty Shillings reward to such as present them. (...)
shall speak or do any thing in Con^ (...) the most Holy Sacrament, 1 Ed. 6.
Cap. 1. By Oath of Two lawful Witnesses, by Three Justices Quorum un. to be
bound over and prosecuted in Sessions. ^oever shall disturb any Preacher al^
(...) his open Sermon or Collation, or ^ng or abetting thereunto, or shall
(...)* any Offender, etc. 1 M. Cap. 3. To be committed by any Justice of the
County to safe Custody, and within six days the said committing Justice, with
one other Justice (if the Offender upon examination shall be found Guilty)
shall commit him to Goal without Bail, etc. for Three Months, and farther to
the next Quarter Sessions. (...) meet or assemble out of their (...) ^^rish
upon the Lord's Day, for any (...) ^^orts or Pastimes whatsoever, or such as
(...) use any unlawful Exercise or Pastime in (...) own Parish upon the Lord's
Day, 1 Car. Cap. 1. 3 Cr. Cap. 4. Three Shillings and four Pence to the Poor,
where etc. to be levied by distress and sale, restoring the Overplus, etc. and
for want of distress, to be sent to the Stocks for Three Hours, but they must
be questioned within a Month. If any Carrier, Waggoner, etc. with (...) Horse,
Wain or Cart, or Drover with Cattle shall travel upon the Lord's Day by
themselves, or any other for them, 3 Car. Cap. 1. Twenty Sh^llings for every
offense, to be levied by distress and (...) of the Poor. If an^ Butcher, or any
other for him, shall kill or sell any Victuals upon the Sunday, One Witness,
View or Confession. 3 Car. Cap. 1. He shall forfeit six Shillings and eight
Pence, if questioned within six Months, to be levied, etc. or may be sued for
in Sessions, etc. If any Shoemaker shall go with intent to ^ell any Boots,
Shoes, etc. on the Sunday. 1 Jac. Cap. 22. He shall forfeit such Goods, and
Three Shillings and four Pence for every Pair. If any Person of the Age of 14
shall on the Lord's Day, or any part thereof, do any worldly Labor, etc.
except Works of Necessity and Charity, 29 Car. 2. Cap. 7. He shall forfeit Five
Shillings for every offense. If any Person shall cry, show forth, or put to
sale any Wares, Fruit, Goods, etc. except Milk only, before the Hours of Nine
in the Morning, and after Four in the Afternoon, 29 Car. 2. Cap. 7. He shall
forfeit the said Wares, Fruit, Goods, etc. to the Use of the Poor. No Drover,
Horse-courser, Waggoner, Butcher, Higler, or any of their Servants, ^^all
travel or come to their Inns on the ^ord's Day, 29 Car. 2. Cap. 7. The Forfeit
is Twenty Shillings for every offense. No Person shall use or travel upon the
^ord's Day with any Horse, Boat, Wher^^, etc. except allowed by one Justice of
^eace so to do, 29 Car. 2. Cap. 7. The Forfeiture is Five Shillings for every
offense: The Conviction upon this Statute, must be before any Justice of the
County, etc. who shall give warrant to the Constables, etc. to seize the Goods
showed, etc. and to levy the Forfeitures by distress, etc. and for want of
distress. to put the Offender in the Stocks for Two Hours: The Justices etc.
may reward the Informer out of the Forfeitures, not exceeding the third part.
Drunken^ess, If any ^e convicted for being Drunk, by One Witness or View. 4
Jac. Cap. 5. 21 Jac. Cap. 7. Every Person must be impeached upon this Act,
within Ten Days after the Offense. The Offender for the first, to pay Five
Shillings to the Churchwardens, where, etc. within one Week after Conviction,
or else to be levied by distress and sale, and for want of distress to sit in
the Stocks six Hours. If any Ale-^ouse-keeper be convicted of ^^unkenness, ^e
is disabled for Three Years (...) keep any Al^house, For the second Offense,
must be bound in Ten Pounds with Two Sureties to the good Behavior, and for
want of Sureties to be sent to the Goal. ut Supra. Innkeepers,
Ale-house-keepers, or Victuallers, suffer any of the same Parish to continue
tippling in their Houses, 1 Jac. Cap. 9. Jac. Cap. 7. Ten Shillings to be levied
by distress and sale after six days, and for want of distress, to be committed
till payment, and disabled for Three Years from keeping any Alehouse, etc. ut
supra. If any Innkeeper, Ale-house-keeper, Victualler, or Taverner, suffer any
Person (wheresoever his Habitation be) to continue tippling in his House, 1 Jac.
Cap. 4. Jac. Cap. 7. Car. Cap. 4. Twenty Shillings to be levied by distress,
and for want of satisfaction in six days to be sold, restoring the Overplus,
and for want of distress, to be committed till payment. Townsmen, or others
which shall remain tippling in any Inn, Alehouse or Victualling-House, 4 Jac.
Cap. 5. Jac. Cap. 7. Three Shillings and Four Pence to be levied by distress
after one Weeks neglect of payment, or to sit in the Stocks four Hours. ut
supra. These Statutes do prohibit all quaffing and drinking of Healths, such
Houses being solely appointed for the Accommodation of Travelers, and for the
Relief of the Poor, 1 Car. Cap. 4. Jac. Cap. 7. Every such Taverner, and which
shall suffer any Person whatsoever to tipple in his House contrary to the said
Statutes, shall be adjudged within the Statute 1 Jac. cap. 9. Swearing and
Cursing. If any Person shall profane, swear or curse in the Hearing of a
Justice of Peace, Mayor, etc. or be convicted of such swearing by Two
Witnesses, or confession of the Party. 21 Jac. Cap. 20. Car. Cap. 4. Car. Cap.
4. He shall forfeit for every such offense to the Use of the Poor, one
Shilling; every Justice, Head-Officer, etc. may command the Constables, etc. to
levy the same by distress; and for want of distress, the Offender being above
the Age of Twelve Years, shall be set in the Stocks Three Hours; if under
Twelve Years old, and shall not pay the said Twelve Pence, he shall be whipped
by the Constable, by warrant of the Justice, or by the Parent or M^ster, in the
Presence of the Constable. Every Offense against this Act, must be proved
within 20 days after the Offense committed. Lewd and disorderly Practices.

Keeping of Baudy-houses, etc. is against the Law of God, on which our common
Law in this Case is grounded: Therefore, the Keeper of Houses of Baudery and
Incontinence Cok. 3. Instit. Hen. 6. Cap. 1. Hen. 7. Cap. 6. Are to be
punished, being a common Nuisance by Indictment at Common Law by Fine and
Imprisonment. Resorters and frequenters of Baudy-houses 13 Hen. 7. Cap. 6. To
be bound with Sureties to the Good Behavior. Adultery, etc. and all Acts of
Baudery are B^^^^^es of the Peace, 27 Hen. 8. Cap. ^ For which an Indictment
will lie. (...) a Constable, etc. has notice that a Wo^^^ is in Adultery, etc.
with a Man, or that a Man and Woman of evil fame are gone to a ^^spected House,
Cok. 3. Instit. Dalt. Cap. 35. He may take help with him, and if he find them
so, he may carry them to Prison, or to a Justice to be bound over and
prosecuted. Strangers or others that are suspicious that walk by night,
especially if they haunt lewd Houses, or keep lewd Company, or commit Outrages,
13 Hen. 7. Cap. 10. To find sufficient Sureties for the Good Behavior. Idlers
that refuse to work, and disorderly Persons, 7 Jac. Cap. 4. Eliz. Cap. 4. To be
committed to the House of Correction. Wandering Rogues, etc. 43 Eliz. Cap. 2. To
be whipped and sent to the Place of Birth. If the Constable punish them not, 4
Hen. 7. Cap. 12. He forfeits Ten Shillings to be levied by a Warrant from Two
Justices. Such as shall not apprehend Rogues, etc. being at their doors, 39
Eliz. Cap. 4. Jac. Cap. 7. Ten Shillings to be levied, ut supra. Every
Constable who does not punish such as are brought to him, Twenty Shillings to
be levied, ut supra. Such as disturb the Punishment of Rogues, etc. 39 Eliz.
Cap. 4. Five Pounds to be levied by Distress, and bound to the Good Behavior
by Two Justices, Quorum un. Officers remiss in punishing of Rogues, etc. Ten
Pounds to be levied by distress and sale, ut suprae. Such as run away, and
leave their Charge upon the Parish, 7 Jac. Cap. 4. To be punished as Rogues,
etc. Such as threaten to run away, To be sent to Bridewell, or give security to
discharge the Parish. If any Woman shall have a Bastard Child, which may be
chargeable to the Parish, 7 Jac. Cap. 4. Bridewell for one Year, to be sent by
Two Justices, and bound not to offend so again. Keepers of Play Houses, and
unlawful Games, 33 Hen. 8. Cap. 9. Forty Shillings and Imprisonment, until he
be come bound by Recognizance to keep no more. Such as play in such Houses,
Imprisonment until he be bound to play no more, and to pay six Shillings and
eight Pence, to be recovered in Quarter Sessions. Such as out of Christmas
shall play at unlawful Games any where. 31 Eliz. Cap. 5. Imprisonment and bound
to the King to play no more, Twenty Shillings by Indictment in
Quarter Sessions. All Licenses to keep Houses, or Places of unlawful Games,
shall be void. 2.3 Ph. and M. Cap. 9.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Braddyll, MDCXCI.


