A FULL AND PERFECT ACCOUNT Of the Particulars of the Terrible and Bloody
Fight, which the Christian Armies have obtained over the whole Turkish Forces
near the Bridge of Esseck. With a particular of what Plunder they have Seized
and Taken.
Written from a Person of Quality, who was present in the whole Action.
August the 30th, 1687.
LEtters yesterday Afternoon (by three Flanders Mails) of the 21st instant;
from Vienna, bring us the joyful increase, and particulars of the entire and
accomplished Victory, the Christian Arms have obtained over the Turks near
Darda, the 12th Courant; for which glorious Achievement their Imperial
Majesty's, attended by all the Nobility of that Court, paid their Devotions in
the Cathedral of St. Stephen, where Te Deum was Sung (with a Royal Salvo) of a
triple discharge of all the Cannon; upon the Ramparts continued by Vollies of
Musketeers, resounding with ringing of Bells, Bonefires, and Acclamations of
the people, the same being brought the Emperor from the Duke of Lorain, by
General Count Taaffe, since the dispatch of Prince Eugine of Savoy.

The better to conserve the method of acquiring this mighty Action, it is
necessary at first to know the inducement that obliged the Grand Vizier to quit
his impregnable Retrenchments, and give Battle to the Christians: On the 27th
the Grand Vizier passed the Drove with his Army, and fortified his Camp near
Darda, with two modern Retrenchments in Front, strengthened with Pallisado's,
having Esseck and the Drove in his Rear, the Danube and the Morass on his
Right, with a Wood and the Morass on his Left, which being viewed by the
Generals, 'twas judged impossible, without hazarding the ruin of the whole
Army, to attack, and force his Camp; therefore was resolved by stratagems of
War, to draw the Grand Vizier from those secured Retrenchments, so marched, and
counter-marched the Army in diverse figures: one Detachment of them making show,
as if they would re-pass the Danube at Moha^z, and go into high Hungary, whilst
another made a feigned movement of marching toward Sygeth and Sycloss, not
without being able suddenly to reunite their Main Body; which the Turks
perceiving, looked upon it at first, (as really it was intended) to decoy him
out of his Post; and thereupon, would scarce permit the ravaging Tartars to
pick up some of our Forragers, till believing they might be retreating in
earnest, made some Detachments to observe the Countenance of our Army, and
sometimes skirmish'd with our advanced Guards, gave us the Alarm; and having
taken 200 of our men, returned to their Camp; (flushed with this advantage) the
Turks began to show themselves in different Parties; our Generals concerted new
methods, marching their Army in several Fronts, further a field, as well to be
distant from a Wood, which incommoded our Foragers, as to give the Grand Vizier
a large space of ground. with desire to follow us, but this march was still in
vain: yet notwithstanding the same day we perceived a considerable Body of
Turkish Cavalry in our Rear; but so soon as we faced about, and began to
skirmish with them, they made a hasty Retreat: The Duke of Lorain, by this
time, judging that he should not be able to cause him to give Battle in open
Field, took a resolution to march for Sycloss and Five-Churches, and withdraw
those Garrisons, demolishing the Fortifications, which otherwise might have
fallen into the Enemies possession, began to move toward them on the 10th, and
with easy marches, continued the 11th, sending Baron De Orlick to precede the
Vant-Guard with 4 or 500 Horse: In this march, a great Body of Turkish Spahi's
did what they could to interrupt our motion, showing themselves sometimes on
the Wing, then on the Flank; we entered upon dispute with them, but they retired
with precipitation. On the 12th, the Grand Vizier, thinking the Christians were
making the best of their way from him, would not lose the opportunity, but
detached some of his best Troopers, to give us a Diversion; and about two in
the Afternoon 10000 Turkish Cavalry, and half the number of Janissaries came
right upon our Left Wing, commanded by the Elector of Bavaria and Prince Lewis
of Baden, preceded by some German Curiasiers; who vigorously sustained the
Turkish Charge, but retired into their first Line: On a sudden the Janissaries
were posted on an Eminence, with some Fieldpieces, and made continual firing
with small and great shot, whilst 10000 of their Horse endeavored to put us in
disorder, which obliged the Elector of Bavaria to extend his Front to be in
proportion with that of the Enemy, the Regiments of Savoy and Comercy sustained
this first Charge, which was very fierce and obstinate, the Christians
continuing firm with great Resolution and Courage, notwithstanding they were
attacked in Front and Flank; the Elector came in person to their Assistance,
and found the Dispute so warm, that he received a Shot in his Hand, Prince
Comercy a Wound in the Breast with an Arrow, which yet did not hinder his
continuing in the Action, to give what necessary orders were required.

The Duke of Lorain to get ground, caused at the same time the Right Wing to
march cross, and stretch toward the Flank of the Enemies, who attacked our
Left, and the Left went to meet another Body of Horse and Foot, which marched
to Charge them: And now the Fight began to be bloody on both sides, the Victory
hanging in suspense for two or three hours; but by the coming in of a fresh
Detachment on the Christian side, the Turks began to lose ground, afterward to
mend their pace; and in the end to take a perfect Flight, one Body of their
Cavalry retiring upon their Foot, put the whole in disorder; a great slaughter
being made, and we pursued the Enemy with so much vigor and heat, that we
entered Pell-mell with them into their Camp, and made our selves with little
resistance, Masters of both their Retrenchments, and pursued the Enemy as long
as the day would permit. This Victory is so great, as not to have any parallel
for some Ages: we drove many into the Morass and Drove, where they perished,
and the Bridge over the River, through the weight of people thronging to get
over, broke down; some say the Grand Vizier caused the same to be done, leaving
a multitude on this side the Drove, who are retired to the Woods, Marshes, and
Isles, where they are shut up, and must surrender upon discretion for want of
Food: And some persons report, that there is no less than 25 or 30000 Men thus
dispersed, and of 15000 old Janissaries, scarce 50 are saved; and they reckon
above 20000 are killed and drowned. They have seized a mighty Rich Booty, the
Grand Vizier's Tent, which fell to the lot of the Elector of Bavaria, is so
Rich in Gold and Pearl, Precious Stones, etc. as is inestimable, 116 Canon and
Mortars taken, 6000 head of Cattle, 1500 Camels, 100 Buffulors seized, 2000
Wagons with all Provision and Ammunition, are fell into our hands, a number of
Tents, Standards, and Horses Tails; and there is scarce a Soldier but abounds
in Gold and Silver. The Prisoners also report, That the Grand Vizier had not
been induced to come out of his Retrenchments, but by the persuasion of some
Christians in his Army, who flattered him with assurance of Success; and that
they should certainly take the Dukes of Lorain and Bavaria Prisoners; and
thereby oblige the Emperor to make Peace with the Grand Seignior, and restore
all the Places in Hungary he has Re-conquer'd during the War: But Providence
has disposed otherwise, and it is not to be doubted, but that this Glorious
Victory will have a quite contrary effect.

Holy-Rood-House: Printed by James Watson, Printer to His most Excellent
Majesty's Royal Family and Household. 1687.


