FLOS INGENII VEL Evacuatio Discriptionis.
Being an Exact DESCRIPTION of EPSAM, and EPSAM WELLS.
IT is a sorry Town, shituate in a good air, naturally bounded with Bumsteed
downs on the East, and Arsteed on the South, the rest lies open like a bare
Buttock to be lasht by the Describer of it. The Heath or Common where the Well
stands cannot but be a blustering place, the wind blowing from so many corners
at once; It Is naturally barren, but being well dung'd it causes it in great
abundance to produce diverse Drug's and Vegetatives, as Arsnick, Assa faetida,
Water-creasses, and Scurvy grass. There are few Nettles to be found, but many
Dock's, resembling Mushrooms, only these shoot up in a night and the other
shite up in the morning. The Well it self represents some great Farm house
having so many fair back-sides belonging to it. The Trees that will grow there
are such as bear your Pistaccoes, and Medlers, commonly called Open-arses. The
Birds that frequent it, are the Bunting, the Thrush in Latin called Turdus, and
the Water-Wagtails; as for the Rookes they hover about the Bowling-green in the
Town. The Heath or Common on which the Well stands, is a place contra di stinkt
to Hide-Park, for here many secrets are disclosed. Concerning the virtues of
the water they are many, it makes the women that drink it to be Malecontented:
and many men that drink it, to have such a swimming in their heads that they
take other men's wives for their own. How quiet soever this water is in the
well being drunk it makes its way throw many sore Breeches of the body. Being
drunk in the morning it will produce a Quiddiny of what-soever you did eat over
night, here is the true Elixar Proprietatatis to be had of every ones own
making. The strength of this water you may judge of by making the stoutest
gallants of both Sexes to couch, it being of a stoopifying nature. No fish,
they say, will live in this water but Smelts. Let people come never so well
quallified and sober to drink this water it will make them loose in a few
hours. Yet how loose soever the drinkers of this water are, hither the
Nonconformists come squirting, this water makes them Conformists, to conform
to the old way of evacuation, nay, to cringe and to bow, yea to do reverence in
the place. And this they do with the more confidence because there is none
there that can tell tails they are so many. When the water drinkers are in a
Body on the Common as sometimes they are postur'd you would take them to be the
Representatives of the Rump Parliament. How different so ever they are in their
judgments they meet there with one Consent. There are none idle there, but all
at their Business. The Soldier he is presenting, and giving fire. The
Phisician casting of his Water, the Apothcary at his Clister, the Lawyer
waiting for his motion, the Archer nocking of his Arrows; the Gramarian at his
Ars in presenti, the Musician at his strain, but none of the sweetest, the
Mathematician erecting his Teliscope, the Seaman cleansing his Scupper hole; so
that you would take it for a kind of Cacademy. There Men play at back Gammon
without Tables, and Women at Beast without Cards. And as the silly Bustard, as
Stinkfeildius says, thinks if his head be hid in a bush or brake, his whole
body is invisible too, thus these water drinkers, so their Tails be hid they
care not if their heads, and all the rest of their bodies be seen. Here two
distant times or seasons of the year do meet in a moment or minute, the Spring
and the Fall; for they no sooner duck down, but they are up again. There,
though a mixed company they are not confused for they go in rank, and file, or
dine quis que suo, every one in his ordure. None can lose his friend long
there, for it is but following his nose, and he will be sure to find him: one thing
there to be admired is this that piece of ground that look's green this moment
is all turd the next. One would think the Town of Epsam should be a very rich
place for no Citizen comes there but he leaves somewhat like gold behind him.
Take the Town entirely together and you would think it some strange beast, or
monster having such a devouring MAW in it. To draw to a Conclusion, for the
more we stir, the more we shall stink in this business. Epsam, is a place to
take the air in.

London Printed in the year 1674.


