AN ORDINANCE made the eighteenth day of July, Anno R. R. Caroli II. 18.
Annoque Di 1666.
THE Right Honorable Edward Earl of Clarendon Lord High Chancellor of England,
and the Honorable Sir Harbottle Grimstone, Baronet, Master of the Rolls, taking
into their consideration the manifold disorders and undue practices which in
the late times have crept into the Six Clerks Office, to the great dishonor of
this Court, the obstruction of Justice, the damage of the Client, and confusion
and loss of the Records; and the several ways of redressing the same; and
having diverse times heard the Six Clerks and their Under-Clerks concerning the
settlement by division of Letters, formerly (to this end) ordered by the Lord
Coventry, late Lord Keeper of the Great Seal; and after long deliberation and
several conferences with some of the Reverend Judges, and of the King's learned
Council, finding no expedient so equal and effectual for the due filing, and
easy search of the Records, and the orderly proceeding and quick dispatch in
all causes; nor so proper to prevent the miss-laying and imbeziling the
Records, and that confusion which is every day discovered from thence, to the
extreme scandal of the Court, and prejudice of the Subject, as the reviving and
re-establishing the foresaid settlement: Do hereby ORDER and ORDAIN that the
said Method be revived, and from henceforth observed by the present Six Clerks
and their Successors, and by their Under-Clerks: Viz. That the receiving,
filing, bundling, and keeping of all Bills, Answers, Pleadings, and all
proceedings thereupon, and the making and expediting of all Exemplifications,
Writs, and Copies of or concerning the same, be divided among the said Six
Clerks and their Successors respectively, by and according to the letters of
the Alphabet in manner following. That is to say, That all Bills, Answers, and
other Pleadings of Clients, in causes wherein the Plaintiffs or first
Plaintiffs Surname shall begin with A, B, C, D, F, or Y, and all proceedings
thereupon in the said Six Clerks Offices, be from henceforth received, filed,
bundled, and kept by Mr Pindar, and Mr Bluck, or one of them, and their
Successors in their Offices respectively, and by no other. And all Bills,
Answers, and other Pleadings of Clients, in causes wherein the Plaintiffs or
first Plaintiffs Surname shall begin with E, G, H, I, K, L, M, N, or O, and all
proceedings thereupon in the said Six Clerks Offices, be from henceforth
received, filed, bundled, and kept by Sir Cyrill Wyche, and Mr Wilkinson, or
one of them, and their Successors in their Offices respectively, and by no
other. And all Bills, Answers, and other Pleadings of Clients, in causes
wherein the Plaintiffs or first Plaintiffs Surname shall begin with P, Q, R, S,
T, V, W, X, or Z, and all proceedings thereupon in the said Six Clerks Offices,
be from henceforth received, filed, bundled, and kept by Sir John Marsham, and
Mr Longueville, or one of them, and their Successors in their Offices
respectively, and by no other; in manner as formerly has been done by the Six
Clerks. And that all Cross Bills, Bills of Revivour, and Bills of Review, and
all proceedings thereupon, be received, filed, bundled, and kept in the same
division of letters, where the former Suit touching the same matter began, and
not elsewhere: And all Exemplifications, Writs and Copies of or concerning the
same Bills, Answers, Pleadings, and proceedings thereupon, be made and
expedited by them to whom the receiving, filing, bundling, and keeping of the
Records does belong, according to the allotment of letters aforesaid, and by no
other.

AND it is further Ordered and Ordained, That if at any time hereafter there
shall happen any difference to arise betwixt any of the Six Clerks, touching
any of their Under-Clerks, or touching their Clients, or their Causes, or
touching the filing of any Bill, Answer, or Pleading, or other thing according
to the division of Letters aforesaid, or any other matters of their Offices;
that then the same differences be from time to time examined by the rest of the
Six Clerks for the time being, whom such difference (for the present) shall not
concern; who are to decide and determine the same; or otherwise to certify the
true state of the Fact, with their Opinions, to the Master of the Rolls.

AND because it is very manifest that these misdemeanors and enormities are
gott^n into the Office of the Six Clerks by the liberty and license which the
inferior Clerks have of late assumed to themselves, and by their withdrawing
their obedience from, and their dependence upon the Masters of the several
Offices in which they write; and by the receiving too many Clerks of little or
no experience into the several Offices; it is likewise further Ordered and
Ordained, that every of the Six Clerks shall be limited and stinted to twelve
Clerks at the most, to serve immediately under him; whereof six at the least
shall be expert in writing the Chancery letter: And every of those twelve shall
take a corporal Oath before the Master of the Rolls, not to imbezil, falsfie,
corrupt, race, or deface any Bills, Answers, Pleadings, Commissions,
Depositions, Warrants, Decrees, Dismissions, or other Records whatsoever,
belonging to the high Court of Chancery; and to deliver forthwith unto the Six
Clerk respectively, or his Deputy, Unopened, all Commissions, and Depositions,
that shall come to their hands, to be kept safely and secretly by the Six Clerk
till Publication; and after being copied, forthwith to return them.

Clarendon C. Har. Grimstone.


