C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
At the Court at Whitehall, the Fifteenth of May, 1672.
Present, The Kings most Excellent Majesty. Lord Archbishop of Canterbury Lord
Keeper Duke of Lauderdale Marquess of Worcester Earl of Bridgwater Earl of
Essex Earl of Anglesey Earl of Bathe Earl of Carlisle Earl of Craven Earl of
Arlington Earl of Shaftsbury Lord Newport Lord Holles Lord Clifford Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain Mr. Secretary Trevor Sir John Duncombe Mr. Chancellor of the
Duchy Sir Thomas Osborne


WHereas His Majesty did the seventeenth of March past, upon the reading in
Council His Declaration of War against the States General of the United
Provinces of the Low Countries, Command His Grace the Duke of Lauderdale, and
the Right Honorable the Earl of Arlington, Principal Secretary of State, to
Confer that Evening with the Ambassador and Minister of the said States, to
Propose the Observance of the Two and thirtieth Article of the Treaty of Breda,
on His Majesty's part; for the withdrawing the Persons and Goods of all Dutch
Su^jects which were either found here, or at that time were voluntarily coming
into His Majesty's Ports; Pr(...)i(...)ed might have the same Benefit of the
said Article; Which overture has been often Renewed by me (...) of Arlington
to the said Ambassador. And it appearing now at length, by Paper from him of
the instant (this day read at the Board) That the States have consented to the
said Proposition, and will set at Liberty all His Majesty's Subjects, with
their Ships and Goods, and that they nay return without any Prohibition, when
they shall see fit.

His Majesty has thought fit to Command and Order the Right Honorable His
Principal Commisioners of Prizes, forthwith to cause all the Ships, Goods, and
Merchandises that were Seized in any of His Majesty's Ports, before the
Declaration of the War, or which were voluntarily coming in to the (...)me, to
be forthwith set at Liberty and Discharged (they having remained still
untouched, in expectaion of what the said States would do in this point.) In
like manner all persons belonging to the said Ships, who are under Detention by
reason of the War, are to be forthwith set at Liberty, with Power to return
with their Ships and Merchandise, when they shall see fit, according to the
Tenor of the said Article; And notice hereof to be given to the Dutch
Ambassador, that it may be as ingeniously performed on His Masters part as it
is now promised. And His Majesty's Commissioners for the care of Prisoners, are
requi(...)ed to take notice hereof, and to give Obedience accordingly.

And whereas by another Paper of the 13/23. instant (this day also read at the
Board) from the Sieur Boreel, by Order of the said States General of the United
Provinces, Proposing to enter into some terms of Agreement touching the
Exchange of Prisoners of War on either side, His Majesty has thought fit to
refer the Consideration of this matter to the Principal Commissioners of
Prizes, that they may Consider thereof, and Propose to His Majesty such
Expedients as they shall think fit.

Likewise all Dutch Merchants or others, who neither in their Persons or Goods
are under this Detention, may freely depart the Kingdom, if they think fit,
without any encumbrance or molestation.

Edw. Walker.
It was Ordened by His Majesty in Council, That this be forthwith Printed and
Published.

Edw. Walker.



EDINBURGh, Reprinted by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1672.


