ANNO REGNI GULIELMI ET MARIAE, REGIS ET REGINAE Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and
Hiberniae, PRIMO.

On the Sixteenth Day of December, Anno Dom. 1689. In the First year of Their
Majesty's Reign, this Act Passed the Royal Assent.

R monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary)R
IE MEINTIENDRAY HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon flanked by lion and
unicorn

Dublin: Reprinted by Richard Wild, and are to be Sold at his Shop in
Cork-Change. 1695.

IN THE FIRST YEAR OF KING WILLIAM AND QUEEN MARY
An Act Declaring the Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and Settling the
Succession of the Crown.
WHEREAS the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons Assembled at
Westminster, Lawfully, Fully, and Freely Representing all the Estates of the
People of this Realm, did upon the Thirteenth day of February, in the Year of
our Lord One Thousand Six Hundred Eighty Eight, Present unto Their Majesty's,
then called and known by the Names and Style of William and Mary, Prince and
Princess of Orange, being present in their proper Persons, a certain
Declaration in Writing, made by the said Lords and Commons in the words
following: Viz.

WHereas the Late King James the Second, by the Assistance of diverse Evil
Counselors, Judges and Ministers Employed by him, did endeavor to Subvert and
Extirpate the Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom;

By Assuming and Exercising a Power of Dispensing with, and Suspending of Laws,
and the Execution of Laws, without Consent of Parliament.

By Committing and Prosecuting diverse Worthy Prelates, for humbly Petitioning
to be Excused from Concurring to the said Assumed Power.

By Issuing, and Causing to be Executed a Commission under the Great Seal, for
Erecting a Court called, The Court of Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Causes.

By Levying Money for, and to the Use of the Crown by Pretense of Prerogative,
for other Time, and in other Manner then the was same Granted by Parliament.

By Raising and Keeping a Standing Army within this Kingdom in time of Peace,
without Consent of Parliament, and Quartering Soldiers contrary to Law.

By Causing good Subjects, being Protestants, to be disarmed at the same time,
when Papists were both Armed and Employed, contrary to Law.

By Violating the Freedom of Election of Members to serve in Parliament.

By Prosecutions in the Court of Kings Bench, for Matters and Causes cognizable
only in Parliament; and by diverse other Arbitrary and Illegal Courses.

And whereas of late years Partial, Corrupt, and Unqualified Persons, have been
Returned and Served on Juries in Trials, and particularly diverse. Jurors in
Trials for High Treason, which were not Freeholders.

And Excessive Bail has been required of Persons Committed in Criminal Cases,
to elude the Benefit of the Laws made for the Liberty of the Subjects.

And excessive Fines have been imposed.

And illegal and cruel Punishments inflicted.

And several grants and promises made of Fines and Forfeitures, before any
Conviction or Judgment against the Persons, upon whom the same were to be
Levied.

All which are utterly and directly contrary to the known Laws and Statutes,
and Freedom of this Realm.

And whereas the said late King James the Second having Abdicated the
Government, and the Throne being thereby Vacant,

His Highness the Prince of Orange, (whom it has pleased Almighty God to make
the Glorious Instrument of Delivering this Kingdom from Popery and Arbitrary
Power) did (by the Advice of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and diverse
Principal Persons of the Commons) cause Letters to be written to the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, being Protestants; and other Letters to the several
Counties, Cities, Universities, Boroughs, and Cinque Ports, for the Choosing of
such Persons to Represent them, as were of Right to be sent to Parliament, to
meet and sit at Westminster, upon the Two and Twentieth day of January, in this
Year One Thousand Six Hundred Eighty and Eight, in order to such an
Establishment, as that their Religion, Laws and Liberties might not again be in
danger of being subverted: Upon which Letters Elections having been accordingly
made,

And thereupon the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, pursuant to
their respective Letters and Elections, being now Assembled in a full and free
Representative of this Nation, taking into their most serious Consideration the
best Means for attaining the Ends aforesaid; Do in the first place (as their
Ancestors in like Case have usually done) for the Vindicating and Asserting
their Ancient Rights and Liberties, Declare;

That the pretended Power of Suspending of Laws, or the Execution of Laws by
Regal Authority, without Consent of Parliament, is Illegal.

That the pretended Power of Dispensing with Laws, or the Execution of Laws, by
Regal Authority, as it has been Assumed and Exercised of late, is Illegal.

That the Commission for Erecting the late Court of Commissioners for
Ecclesiastical Causes, and all other Commissions and Courts of like nature, are
Illegal and Pernicious.

That the Levying Money for, or to the Use of the Crown, by pretense of
Prerogative, without Grant of Parliament, for longer time, or in other manner,
then the same is or shall be granted, is Illegal.

That it is the Right of the Subjects to Petition the King, and all Commitments
and Prosecutions for such Petitioning, are Illegal.

That the raising or keeping a standing Army within the Kingdom, in time of
Peace, unless it be with Consent of Parliament, is against Law.

That the Subjects which are Protestants, may have Arms for their Defense,
suitable to their Conditions, and as allowed by Law.

That Election of Members of Parliament ought to be free.

That the Freedom of Speech, and Debates or Proceedings in Parliament, ought
not to be impeached, or questioned in any Court or Place out of Parliament.

That Excessive Bail ought not to be required, nor excessive Fines imposed, nor
Cruel and Unusual Punishments inflicted.

That Jurors ought to be duly Impannelled, and Returned, and Jurors which pass
upon Men in Trials for High Treason, ought to be Freeholders.

That all Grants and Promises of Fines and Forfeitures of particular Persons
before Conviction, are Illegal and Void.

And that for Redress of all Grievances, and for the Amending, Strengthening,
and Preserving of the Laws, Parliaments ought to be held frequently.

And they do Claim, Demand, and Insist upon all and singular the Premises, as
their Undoubted Rights and Liberties; and that no Declarations, Judgments,
Doings, or Proceedings, to the Prejudice of the People in any of the said
Premises, ought in any wise to be drawn hereafter into Consequence or Example.

To which Demand of their Rights, they are particularly Encouraged by the
Declaration of His Highness the Prince of Orange, as being the only means for
obtaining a full Redress and Remedy therein.

Having therefore an entire Confidence, That his said Highness the Prince of
Orange will perfect the Deliverance so far advanced by him, and will still
preserve them from the Violation of their Rights, which they have here
Asserted, and from all other Attempts upon their Religion, Rights and Liberties.

The said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons Assembled at Westminster do
resolve,

That William and Mary Prince and Princess of Orange be, and be Declared, King
and Queen of England, France and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging, to hold the Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdoms and
Dominions, to them the said Prince and Princess, during their Lives, and the
Life of the Survivor of them; And that the Sole and full Exercise of the Regal
Power be only in, and executed by the said Prince of Orange, in the Names of
(...) said Prince and Princess during their joint Lives; a^^ after their
Deceases, the said Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdoms and Dominions
to be to the Heirs of the Body of the said Princess; And for default of such
Issue, to the Princess Anne of Denmark, and the Heirs of her Body; And for
default of such Issue to the Heirs of the Body of the said Prince of Orange.

And the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, do pray the said Prince and
Princess to accept the same accordingly.

And that the Oaths hereafter mentioned be taken by all persons of whom the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy might be required by Law, instead of them;
And that the said Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy be abrogated.

I A. B. Do sincerely Promise and Swear, That I will be Faithful, and bear true
Allegiance to their Majesty's, King WILLIAM and Queen MARY; So help me God.

I A. B. Do swear, That I do from my Heart Abhor, Detest and Abjure, as Impious
and Heretical this damnable Doctrine and Position, that Princes Excomunicated
or Deprived by Pope, or any Authority of the Sea of Rome, may be Deposed or
Murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

And I do Declare, That no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate,
has, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Preeminence or
Authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within this Realm; So help me God.

Upon which their said Majesty's did Accept the Crown and Royal Dignity of the
Kingdoms of England, France, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging, according to the Resolution and Desire of the said Lords and
Commons, contained in the said Declaration.

And thereupon Their Majesty's were pleased, That the said Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons, being the Two Houses of Parliament, should continue to
Sit, and with Their Majesty's Royal Concurrence make effectual Provision for
the Settlement of the Religion, Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, so that the
same for the future might not be in danger again of being Subverted; To which
the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, did Agree and Proceed to
Act accordingly.

Now in pursuance of the Premises, the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons in Parliament Assembled, for the Ratifying, Confirming and Establishing
the said Declaration, and the Articles, Clauses, Matters and Things therein
contained, by the Force of a Law made in due Form by Authority of Parliament,
do Pray that it may be Declared and Enacted, That all and singular Rights and
Liberties Asserted and Claimed in the said Declaration, are the True, Ancient,
and Indubitable Rights and Liberties of the People of this Kingdom, and so
shall be Esteemed, Allowed, Adjudged, Deemed and Taken to be; And that all and
every the Particulars aforesaid, shall be Firmly and Strictly Holden and
Observed, as they are expressed in the said Declaration; And all Officers and
Ministers whatsoever, shall Serve their Majesty's and Their Successors
according to the same in all times to come.

And the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, Seriously Considering
how it has pleased Almighty God, in his Mavelous Providence, and Merciful
Goodness to this Nation, to provide and Preserve Their said Majesty's Royal
Persons most happily to Reign over us upon the Throne of Their Ancestors, for
which they render unto Him from the bottom of their Hearts their humblest
Thanks and Praises, do Truly, Firmly, Assuredly, and in the Sincerity of their
Hearts Think, and do hereby Recognize, Acknowledge and Declare, that King James
the Second having Abdicated the Government, and Their Majesty's having Accepted
the Crown and Royal Dignity, as aforesaid, Their said Majesty's did become,
were, are, and of Right ought to be, by the Laws of this Realm, our Sovereign
Liege Lord and Lady, King and Queen of England, France and Ireland, and the
Dominions thereunto belonging, in and to whose Princely Persons, the Royal
State, Crown and Dignity of the said Realms, with all Honors, Styles, Titles,
Regalities, Prerogatives, Powers, Jurisdictions and Authorities to the same
belonging and appertaining, are most Fully, Rightfully and Entirely Invested
and Incorporated, United and Annexed.

And for preventing all Questions and Divisions in this Realm, by reason of any
pretended Titles to the Crown, and for Preserving a Certainty in the Succession
thereof, in and upon which the Unity, Peace, Tranquillity and Sasety of this
Nation does under God, wholly Consist and Depend, The said Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons, do Beseech their Majesty's, that it may be Enacted,
Established and Declared, That the Crown and Regal Government of the said
Kingdoms and Dominions, with all and Singular the Premises thereunto belonging
and appertaining, shall be and continue to their said Majesty's, and the
Survivor of Them, during Their Lives, and the Life of the Survivor of Them; And
that the Entire, Perfect, and Full Exercise of the Regal Power and Government
be only in, and executed by his Majesty, in the Names of both Their Majesty's
during Their joint Lives; And after Their Deceases, the said Crown and
Premises, shall be and remain to the Heirs of the Body of Her Majesty; And for
default of such Issue, to Her Royal Highness the Princess ANNE of Denmark, and
the Heirs of Her Body; And for default of such Issue, to the Heirs of the Body
of his said Majesty: And thereunto the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons, do in the Name of all the People aforesaid, most Humbly and Faithfully
Submit themselves, their H^irs and Posterities for ever; And do faithfully
Promise, That they will Stand to Maintain, and Defend Their said Majesty's; And
also the Limitation and Succession of the Crown herein specified and contained
to the utmost of their powers, with their Lives and Estates, against all
Persons whatsoever, that shall Attempt any thing to the contrary.

And whereas it has been found by Experience, that it is inconsistent with the
Safety and Welfare of this Protestant Kingdom, to be Governed by a Popish
Prince, or by any King or Queen Marrying a Papist, the said Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons, do further Pray that it may be Eancted, That all and
every Person and Persons that is, are, or, shall be Reconciled to, or shall
hold Communion with the Sea or Church of Rome, or shall Profess the Popish
Religion, or shall Marry a Papist, shall be Excluded, and be for ever incapable
to Inherit, Possess, or Enjoy the Crown and Government of this Realm and
Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging or any part of the same, or to
Have, Use, or Exercise any Regal Power, Authority, or Jurisdiction within the
same; And in all and every such Case or Cases, the People of these Realms shall
be and are hereby Absolved of their Allegiance; And the said Crown and
Government shall from time to time Descend to, and be Enjoyed by such Person or
Persons, being Protestants, as should have Inherited and Enjoyed the same, in
Case the said Person or Persons so Reconciled, holding Communion, or
Professing, or Marrying as aforesaid, were naturally Dead.

And that every King and Queen of this Realm, who at any time hereafter shall
come to and succeed in the Impertial Crown of this Kingdom, shall on the first
day of the meeting of the first Parliament, next after His or Her coming to the
Crown, sitting in His or Her Throne, in the House of Peers, in the presence of
the Lords and Commons therein Assembled or at His or Her Coronation, before
such Person or Persons who shall Administer the Coronation Oath to him or Her,
at the time of his or Her taking the said Oath, (which shall first happen)
Make, Subscribe, and Audibly Repeat the Declaration mentioned in the Statute
made in the Thirtieth Year of the Reign of King Charles the Second, Entitled.
An Act for the more effectual Preserving the Kings Person and Government, by
Disabling Papists from sitting in either House of Parliament.

But if it shall happen, that such King or Queen upon His or Her Succession to
the Crown of this Realm, shall be under the Age of Twelve years, then every
such King or Queen shall Make, Subscribe, and audibly Repeat the said
Declaration at His or Her Coronation, or the first day of the meetting of the
first Parliament, as aforesaid which shall first happen after such King or
Queen shall have attained the said Age of Twelve Years.

All which their Majesty's are contented and pleased, shall be Declared,
Enacted, and Established by Authority of this present Parliament, and shall
stand, remain, and be the Law of this Realm for Ever; And the same are by Their
said Majesty's, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in Parliament Assembled and by the Authority of the same
Declared, Enacted, and Established accordingly.

And be it further Declared, and Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That from
and after this present Session of Parliament, no Dispensation by Non obstante
of or to any Statute, or any part thereof, shall be allowed, but that the same
shall be held void and of no effect, Except a Dispensation be allowed of in
such Statute; and except in such Cases as shall be specially provided for by
one or more Bill or Bills to be passed during this present Session of
Parliament.

Provided that no Charter, or Grant, or Pardon granted before the Three and
twentieth day of October, in the Year of our Lord One thousand Six hundred
eighty nine, shall be any ways Impeached or Invalidated by this Act, but that
the same shall be and remain of the same force and effect in Law and no other
than as if this Act had never been made.


