A Full and True RELATION, Of the fortunate Victory gained over the Moors by
the Garrison of Tangier, upon the 27. of October, 1680.
UPon the Moors refusing to make a Peace, according to the Articles proposed by
Sir Palms Fairbourn our Lieutenant Governor, while he was alive, and their
approaching their Trenches within 12 or 15 yards of our new Work at Pauls-fort,
and their bringing a Piece of Cannon within a hundred yards of the said Fort:
It was resolved in a Council of War, Colonel Sackville presiding, to make a
Sally the 27. of this instant, at 5 of the Clock in the morning, upon the left
hand of Pauls-fort, with all the Forces in the Garrison, leaving only the
ordinary Guards in the Town.

The Troops at their first drawing out upon the left hand of Pauls-fort, were
ranked in Battalia in three Lines.

Five Battalions of Foot, consisting of about 250 men, each Battalion with a
Battalion of Seamen, consisting of about 400. men, which have been a Shore,
since the taking of Pauls-fort, by order of Admiral Herbert.

The six Battalions of Foot was drawn up on the right hand, and being
sufficiently covered on that side by the Fort, and the Line of communication
between the Town and the Fort,

The three Troops of English, and three Troops of Spanish Horse, were drawn up
on the left hand of the Fort; There was from every Battalion of Foot decatch'd
48 Fuzeliers, which were disposed into six several Plottons upon the head of
all the Troops, with the Company of Granadeers of Dumbartons Regiment separated
upon the right and left hand Plottons, where it was judged the hottest action
would be: And a Company of Granadeers of Seamen in the Center with these
Plottons, with the number of 12 Horsemen from each Troop to sustain these
Plottons of Foot, who were to make the first Attatcks upon the place of Arms,
within one hundred yards of Pauls-fort, where the Enemy had erected a Battery,
and advanced one piece of Cannon; and on the left hand toward the ruins of
Monmouth-fort, where the enemy had advanced several Trenches, and made a place
of Arms.

All the Troops were very near formed in Battalia, as was designed, with a
great silence, before the Enemy took the Allarum, which they took at first from
their place at Arms near Monmouth-fort, upon the Advancing of the first Troop
of English Horse commanded by Captain Netby.

The Enemy from their place at Arms, with hideous cry and noise, and fireing of
small shot upon us, gave the Allarum immediately to their Camp.

The Plotton of the Battalion of Guards, commanded by Captain Fortrey and
Lieutenant Mackracken, with the half of the Company of Dumbartons Granadeers,
and the Plotton of the first Battalion of Dumbartons Regiment, commanded by
Captain Julius Lockhart, and Lieutenant James Stewart, with the other half of
the Company of Granadeers, were ordered by Colonel Sackville to go and attack
the place of Arms, where the Moors Cannon was, which they did with great
courage and resolution. The enemy being numerous in that place, stood firmly
and defended themselves for a long time, till at last Lieutenant Mackracken,
with his Granadeers, advancing up very near to their Trench, and bestowing the
Granades liberally amongst them, they began to be in Confusion, and surpr^^ed
at the execution the Granadeers made amongst them; Whereupon, he with
Granadeers, leapt into their Trench amongst them, and was immediately followed
by Captain Fortry, and Captain Lockhart and their Parties, and Lieutenant
Stewart, with the rest of the Granadeers, where they all behaved themselves
very valiantly, and beat the Enemy from that place, and made themselves master
of that piece of Cannon of the Enemies, that was there, with the loss of
several Granadeers and good Soldiers, Lieutenant Mackracken of the Granadeers,
was wounded with his hand on the Cannon; Captain Lockhart shot through the
Thigh, Lieutenant Stewart through the Leg.

The Plotton of the second Battalion of Dumbartons Regiment, commanded by
Captain Melvil and Lieutenant Gordoun, did attack the place of Arms on the le^^
hand near Monmouths-fort, at the same time that the Attack was on the Battery
on the right hand, where they had no less vigorous resistance than happy
success: For the first Battalion of Dumbartouns Regiment advanced to the
Trenches upon the right hand of that place of Arms, the detatchment commanded
by Captain Melvil, leapt forthwith into that place of Arms amongst the Moors,
where they did very great execution; and the Moors seeing the first Battalion
advance with so much vigor, and still sustained by the second Battalion of the
said Regiment commanded by Captain Douglass of Spot, and the Battalion of
Seamen commanded by Major George Barclay, they abandoned their two first
Trenches, and retired themselves behind the old Line toward the Sandy-hills,
where they assembled together a considerable body of Foot, and being there
under covert from our Shot, the old Line made by the Earl of Teviot serving
them for a Breastwork, the Major of Dumbartouns Regiment who commanded there,
seeing his Battalion so much exposed to the fire of that enemy, thought it
absolutely necessar^ to undertake to beat them from that Line: Whereupon he
commanded his first Battalion, which they did most resolutely, and made the
enemy retire precipitantly, and in great disorder; which Captain Melvils
Detatchment perceiving, a Sergeant with fourteen or fifteen Soldiers fell out
upon them, where they were carrying off their Colors, and pursued so hotly,
that a Foot Color was taken and brought in by a private Soldier of Dumbartouns
Regiment, which was the first Color was gained that day: which the enemy
perceiving, from the Sand-hill Fort and from James Fort they had advanced very
briskly, and several of their Horsemen began to enter within the Lines; but the
Commandant of the Spanish Horses advancing with his Troop, made the Moorish
Horse retire without the Lines again. Colonel Sackville finding that Dumbartons
first Battalion had, till then, sustained, with great courage, the heat of the
Action, did then order the second Battalion of Inchequins Regiment, commanded
by Captain Giles, to march up on the right hand near the ruins of the Sandhill
Fort, where the Moors were in great numbers, and made a very vigorous
opposition: The said Battalion of Inchequins continued for some time in that
Post, with very great courage, and extremely exposed to the enemies fire, and
throwing of stones from the ruins of the Fort; they sustained great loss of
Officers and Soldiers: And Captain Giles finding his Soldiers to be weary of
their Post, he came and prayed Major Hacket to send a Battalion to his relief;
whereupon Major Hacket ordered him to retire, and took his Post with the
Battalions of Dumbartouns Regiment. The Moors seeing Inchequins Battalion to
retire, according to their custom upon such occasions, did then advance very
resolutely, both Horse and Foot, and would have again entered the Lines: But
Dumbartouns Battalions gave soon a stop to their courage, and made them quickly
run from the said Hill-fort, from whence they had made the greatest resistance.
The Major perceiving that they retired from thence to James Fort, which flanked
his Battalions on the right, and had annoyed them very much during the heat of
the Action, thought fit, without any further delay, to attack James's Fort
likewayes: There was a very great number of Moors there, and several
Footcollours planted. The Officers and Soldiers of the two Battalions appeared
to be mightily satisfied with the Majors design of attacking that place;
whereupon they went on with an unanimous resolution, and within a very short
space beat the Moors from James's Fort, and from all the Lines on that hand:
And the Moors having no further place of refuge there, did make themselves to
downright running toward their Camps; and Dumbartouns Soldiers pursuing them
still, did find them drawing off a small piece of Brass-Cannon of four pound
Ball, which they beat the Moors from, and it was brought in by Lieutenant
Robert Innes, Adjutant to the second Battalion.

Colonel Sackville no sooner sees the Moors running, and Dumbartouns men still
in pursuit of them beyond the Lines; But he, upon the head of the Spanish
Horse, did immediately ride over the Lines to pursue them more vigorously, and
to bring off the Foot, if any Ambush had been laid for them.

About the same time that Dumbartouns Batallions had passed the Lines at
James's Fort, the Battalion of Seamen had likewayes past over the Line near
Monmouths Fort, The three Troops of English Horse that were commanded to
sustain the Seamen, passed the Lines immediately after them, and got to their
head very quickly, where they pursued the Moors first into their Camp.

Near the Camp, Captain Netby with his Troop of English Horse, took five
Foot-collours, and one of them with his own hand.

At that same time, the Major of Dumbartouns Regiment, coming up to Colonel
Sackville, who did not know well what way the enemy had retired from James's
Fort, the Major therefore, who had taken very good notice, and had pursued them
in their retreat, did take Colonel Sackville with the Commandant of the Spanish
Horse, to a little Valley toward the right of James's Fort, from whence the
Spanish Horse pursued them just into their Camp; and there was a Colors taken
by one of the Commandants Troop. Captain Langstoun was shot in the Leg in the
pursuit. Upon the English and Spanish Horses approaching their Camp, they began
to carry away their Women with great precipitation.

In the morning, when the Garrison sallied out, four Captains of the Earl of
Dumbartouns Regiment being then on Guard in Paul's Fort, Colonel Sackville
thought fit to command, out of the Fort, Captain Lundie and Captain Home, with
150 men of that Guard, to sally out upon the right hand; And at the same time
that the Plottons of Foot with the Granadeers, did attack the place of Arms,
they did attack the advanced Trenches that was within twelve or fifteen yards
of the Fort, with very great courage and success. They were both dangerously
wounded, with the loss of several good men.

Captain Bows, Commandant of the Guards, advancing with his Battalion toward
the left hand of the place where the Cannon was found, continued there all that
day for a reserve till the Cannon was carried off and the enemies Trenches
filled on both sides of the Fort. Major Boynten stayed with his Battalion near
Monmouth Fort for a reserve.

The Admiral Herbert had ordered all the Long-boats belonging to his Fleet, to
be manned, and Armed, and row out toward the Enemies Batte^ that they had made
use of nine Piece of Cannon to play upon the Mole, and the Ships that lay near,
which proved to be very advantageous to our design, by reason it gave a
jealousy to the Enemy, and diverted a considerable part of their Forces.

Master Sheers ordered all his Mole Horses to be mounted with Men, an^ Arms;
and Captain Mackenzie was commanded with them, and sixteen of (...) own Troop,
to March out at the Furrage-gate in the Castle, and without the Spur before
Peterburrough Tower, with a Colors of each Batalion of Foot, with in the Spur,
and several Drums from each Battalion.

Captain Mackenzie gave the Allarum toward Charles-fort, at the same tim^ they
attacked before Pauls-fort.

The Horse that pursued the Enemy to their Camp, returned in good order with
little or no loss. The Battalions of Dumbartons Regiment continued to ke^^
their Post at James-fort, till about four of the Clock in the Afternoon. The
Enemy, upon our Retiring of our Horses and Foot within the old Line, did
advance again with Colors into their old Trenches, and behind the little
Sand-hi^^ all round from James to Monmouth-fort within Pistol-shot. The
Battalion of Seamen that was Posted on the left hand of Dumbartons Battalions,
continued like wise Skirmishing with them till about four of the Clock in the
Afternoon, and about that time Major Betman Ingenier, who had been mightily
employed and exposed all the day, having then ended his Business, and all the
Enemies place of Arms being thrown down, and their Trenches filled up; the
Signal was given from the Fort to Retire from the Lines, which was observed,
with very great Order and Conduct: And the Moors who never had such a defeat
from the Garrison of Tangier, did not offer to follow us upon our Retiring,
according to their former Custom.

There were five Prisoners taken alive, four Colors taken, two Piece of
Cannon, many good Arms, both Firelocks, and Cymetars, and a great deal of rich
Plunder of Clothes, and Silver and Gold, which is a great sign of man^ of their
Officers and best sort of People being killed: to the judgment of all that was
in that Action, they lost 400 Men.

There was left within our Lines a great many of their bodies, and about
thirtysix of their heads cut off and brought in, whereof the Seamen had great
store.

The next day we gave back their Bodies and Heads to them to bury.

This happy Victory we obtained with the loss of a great many of our best
Officers and Soldiers; whereof I cannot give an exact account, save of the two
Battalions of Dumbartouns Regiment.

(...) Render Justice to every one, All the Officers in general behaved
themselves with great Conduct and Courage.

And to do Justice to the Moors, They Fought, most bravely for the space of two
hours, and especially their Horsemen did the hardest and boldest things tha^
ever was seen done: But they were not numerous, for there was not seen above
150 Horsemen.

The Prisoners we took, confess they had not above 3000 Foot, and 150 Horse
commanded by the Alcade of Tituan.

All the Officers both Scots and English, behaved themselves in this Action,
with a great deal of bravery and resolution; and particularly Lieutenant
Colonel Talmash, who carries to His Majesty the good news of this Victory.

This is a true Relation of the Action.

Sic Subscribitur, Major JA. HACKET.

FINIS.

