ANSWERS For Sir James Fowlis of Collingtoun, to the Petition given in to Their
Majesty's high Commissioner, and the most Honorable Estates of Parliament, by
Dame Margaret Areskin Lady Castle-haven.
THE deceased Sir James Fowlis of Collingtoun, being first married to Dame
Barbara Ainslie, Mother to the now Sir James, who brought with her to that
Family, in Money and Land, to the value of 50000 Merks; The Defuncts Father in
Contemplation of the Marriage, did dispone this Estate to his Son, and to the
Heirs Male to be procreat of that Marriage, and the Son was obliged to do no
Deed that might evacuat the Male Succession; By which Provision, the now Sir
James Fowlis, as eldest Son of the Marriage, was a lawful Creditor to his
Father, long prior to his entry in any second Contract with the Lady
Castle-haven.

This Family being brought low, and the last Sir James coming to be in great
Debt, by reason of the Calamities of the late times, and of his constant
adherence to the Royal Family; he did in the year 1670, marry this Sir James
his eldest Son, to the eldest Daughter of the deceased John Boyd, with whom he
got 20000 pound of Tocher besides 40000 pound Sir James got by that Marriage,
and his Father did at that time dispone to him the Estate of Collingtoun
extending to 3600 Merks yearly, whereby it is evident to a Demonstration, that
the great Sums this Sir James got by this Lady does far exceed all the Estate
that he is now in possession of in the Right of his Father, and by virtue of
any disposition from him.

The said Deceast Sir James having in Anno. 1661. Married the Now Lady
Castle-haven, beside the special oblidgment in her Contract; there is a General
Clause by which she is provided to the Liferent of what should be Conquest
during the Marriage. And upon this Clause she pursued the now Sir James before
the Lords of Session, for the Liferent of all Sums of Money that his Father had
applied during the Marriage with her, for payment of the Debts affecting the
Lands of Collingtoun, and wherein the Lords having decided according to the
current of Decisions in former Cases, and found that the Lady had no interest
in Sums consumed during the Marriage by payment of Debts; She did interpose a
protestation for Remeid of Law or Appeal to the Parliament, and thereupon the
Interloquitor of the Lords of Session is Rescinded, and the Parliament by a
Remit to the Committee of Fines and Forfaultures did find and declare the
Estate of the Deceast Lord Collingtoun liable to the Lady for her Liferent-use
of the Annualrents of all Sums acquired by His Father during the Marriage and
whereof the Effects were extant the time of the dissolution of the Marriage;
whether by payment of Debts Contracted prior to the Marriage, Redeeming of
wadsets or other ways, and allowed an joint Probation to either Party, before
the said Committee for liquidating the Sums so acquired, and for proving, by
whose means these Sums were made up, and to make report thereof to the next
Session of Parliament.

This Affair having been called before the said Committee, there was a
Condescendence given in by the Lady, of the Debts wherein the last Collingtoun
stood engaged, and which the Committee by an Interlocutor, 11. March 1691. did
sustain as probative for liquidating the Burdens that affected this Estate, the
time of the Ladies entering in the said Contract of Marriage, unless that the
Defender betwixt and a particular day therein assigned, could prove that any
part of these Debts had been paid from the time that they were given up by the
late Lord Collingtoun, which was about the year 1657. and before his Marriage
with the Lady, which was in anno 1661, but the Committee not having occasion to
call this Affair thereafter, there is no further Procedure therein since that
time.

There is now a Petition given in to my Lord Commissioner, his Grace, and
Honorable Estates of Parliament, by the Lady Castle-haven, and of which the
Defender shall not give his Grace and your Lordships the trouble of a needless
Repetition, but shall endeavor to make Answer thereto, as he goes through the
several Heads thereof.

As to the Preamble, bearing that she was induced to marry the Defenders
Father, and brought a considerable Jointure, of 40 Chalders of Victual with
her, without any other Retribution than the said Provision in her Contract, in
relation to her Liferent of the Conquest.

It is Answered for the Defender, That with all submission my Lady might have
forborne to have ushered in this her Petition with such a narrative, as to her
being induced to marry the Defenders Father, whose merit (upon many
considerations) did render him a suitable Match to this Lady; and it had been
more her Honor to have acknowledged, that the same was the true arise of her
free choice of a person of that Worth, then that any sordid and indirect
methods were taken to induce her to this Marriage. And as to the Jointure
mentioned in the Petition, it is not tour that my Lady did for several years
after her Marriage, leave in a separat State from her Husband, and that
thereafter a second Settlement being made betwixt them, the Defunct had only 24
Chalders of Victual yearly of the said Jointure allowed to him, of which he
never made 20 Chalders effective, the remainder being uplifted and disposed
upon by her self, and that the Defunct during all his life, was necessitate to
keep a separate Family for his Children and Servants, he alone being
entertained in the Family with his Lady, whose Family did consist of her
Children and Grandchildren, and their Servants, and that no Servant that
belonged to the Defunct were so much as allowed a Mail of Meat from her, during
all that time.

As to what is further Represented in the Petition, in relation to the Process
pursued before the Session, and to the Protestation for remeid of Law, and to
what has since proceeded therein, the Defender shall not give his Grace and
your Lordships the trouble to repeat the same, as being but a Narrative of the
state of the Case above set down.

The Scope therefore of this Petition, and the Design of the giving in thereof,
Resolves summarly, in their few Heads.

1. That in June 1656, there was a List of Debts given in, by the late Lord
Collingtoun himself, which in the Condescendance before the Committee, bears,
to extend to 300000 Merks, and which being standing out, unsatisfied the time
of the Marriage, it necessarily follows, that the free Estate the Defunct left
behind him, was purchased by Moneys acquired, during the Marriage, his Debts
exceeding then the value of his Estate, and was paid by his Acquisitions, he
being maintained in Family, upon the Ladies other Joynter.

2. That the 24. Chalder of Victual, that the Defunct uplifted out of the Lands
of Interteil, did extend to upwards of 80000 Merks, during the Marriage,
besides 140000 Merks, he received from the King in Sallaries and Pensions, as a
Lord of the Session, and Justice-Clerk: And that thereby, the Debts before the
Marriage, being paid, by the Acquisitions, during the Marriage. My Lady
concludes, that she has Right to the Liferent thereof, and that the Estate he
left behind him, being ten or twelve Thousand Merks yearly, in the Possession
of the Defender, is to be understood the effects, that were extant at the
Dissolution of the Marriage: And that therefore, the Defender ought to be
Decerned, in Payment of the Bygones, and to put the Lady in Possession of the
Estate of Collingtoun, during her Lifetime.

Before the Defender make any particular Answer to this point of the Petition,
he Humbly offers to the Lord Commissioner his Grace, and the Honorable Estates
of Parliament, that the Pursuer in all this Debate, had never the confidence to
insist against the Defender, upon any passive Title, as representing his
Father, because she knew, he could not be liable personally. 2. From what is
above said, it is clear, that he was an Anterior Creditor to his Father, and
the Father in the Contract of Marriage with the Defenders Mother, is
particularly obliged, to do no Fact or Deed, whereby the Heirs-Male of the
Marriage, could be any ways prejudged, in the Right and Succession to the Lands
of Collingtoun, and Teinds therein specified, and consequently, the Disposition
of the Estate made to the Defender, depending upon a Cause prior to the
Pursuers Contract of Marriage, which was most onerous, was sufficient per se,
to evacuate any interveening, vagrant Clause of Conquess, in the Pursuers
Contract. And that therefore, the Defunct being legally Denuded, in his own
time of his Estate, in the Defenders favors, upon such an onerous Account:
This Estate is not to be considered as the Defuncts, at the Dissolution of the
Marriage, and consequently, not to fall under the compass of the Provision, in
the Pursuers Contract, or of the Interlocutor of Parliament, in their remit to
the Committee of Fynes and Forfaultures.

This being premised, It is Answered for the Defender, that as the
Condescendence mentioned in the Petition, is extravagant, and given up at
Random, so supposing it were true, in relation to the standing out Debts, the
time of the Marriage, Yet the Conclusion inferred therefrom, arising from a
streached and lubrick Presumption, is easily Redargued, in following the
Pursuers own Method, by a true and genuine State of the Affair from their
Answers? 1. Supposing the Debts of the Lord Collingtoun at his Marriage, did
amount, as in the Condescendance to 300000 Merks, and the Real Estate belonging
to him, whether in his own Possession, or of that of his Creditors, not
amounting in the highest extant, to 11000 Merks yearly, this with regard to
public Burdens, and other necessary Deductions, does annually fall short in
8000 Merks, to pay the Annualrents of the Debt. 2. It is known, my Lord
Collingtoun, for upwards of ten years, had only the Sallary, of an ordinary
Lord of the Session, and this being joined with the 24. Chalder of Victual, did
make up at the highest but 6000 Merks yearly: So that still there is an annual
in lack of 2000 Merks, which during these ten years, will do more, nor balance
any additional Access, the the Defunct had in his Sallaries, as Justice-Clerk.
3. The Defunct during the short time, the Lady and he cohabite together, stayed
himself all alone in Family with her, and had a distinct and separate Family of
his own, for his Children and Servants, which he was necessitat to maintain,
and in the maintenance whereof, regard being had to his Quality, his Sallary,
as a Lord of the Session, could not arise to defray the same: Besides, that he
maintained the Defender his Son, for three years abroad, which are necessary
Deductions, to diminish and lessen a vagrant Clause of Conquest. 4. There are
several Debts yet lying out, for which, albeit the Defender now stands only
bound, yet it is evident (as the Sun in the Firmament) they are Debts of the
Fathers, because the Defender had no occasion to contract a six pence of Debt
himself, and these as they are condescended upon, must likeways deduce out of
this pretended Condescendance, given in by the Lady.


From which then, it is evident to a Demonstration, that the Defuncts condition
being considered, as its affirmed by the Pursuer herself, to have been at his
Marriage, and all the Incomes, during the Marriage, which the Pursuer calls the
Acquisitions, being brought to a yearly Balance: It is impossible, there could
be any free Conquess, or any Estate extant, belonging to the Defunct, at the
Dissolution of the Marriage, which can be considered as the effects and product
of the said Conquess, and of the Joynter and Sallaries, that the Defunct is
alleged to have received, during the Marriage, whereby this lubrick
Presumption of the Pursuer, to the Conviction of the World, is Redargued, even
though the Defender in his Answers, should yield the Point as it is urged for
her, and that consequently the Subsumption of the Bill in the Petition, not
being proven in the Terms of the Interlocutor of Parliament: But running upon
extravagant Notions and Suppositions, the same can never infer the conclusion
of the Petition, or be ground in Law for the Parliament, to Decern the
Defender, either as to Bygons, or as to putting the Lady in Possession, in time
coming.

As the Defender then from what is abovesaid, does sufficiently elide the
presumption urged for the Pursuer, so that my Lord Commissioner his Grace, and
the Honorable Estates of Parliament, may truly know the Defenders
circumstances, and what Estate he had from his Father, even laying aside the
Defenders just Claim thereto, from his Mothers Contract of Marriage, he does
ingenuously declare, that the Estate disponed to him by his Father, and whereof
he is now in the Possession, did not at the time it was disponed in yearly
Rent, amount to more than 3600 Merks, and which will evidently appear when
Inquiry is made in the Affair, by an impartial Probation to be adduced by
either Party.

2. The Defender shall prove sub periculo causa, that he has got by his own
Marriage first and last, above 60000 Pounds Scots, which exceeds what Estate he
had of his Father, and therefore it is left to the Justice of the Parliament to
consider, whether or not the Defender has bought the Inheritance of his
Fathers, tanquam quilibet, and that at the dearest Purchase in the Kingdom, and
consequently, all things in relation to this Affair, being considered in the
equal balance of Justice, his Grace and your Lordships are to judge, upon what
lubrick and extravagant grounds, the Pursuer supports the Justice of her Cause,
and as the Lords of Session did determine conform to the current of Decisions,
and with a regard to the whole merits of the Cause, so the Honorable Estates
of Parliament are left to give their Opinion and Judgment, if there was any
rational, legal, or just ground in the Pursuer, in all the steps of this Affair
to have used such injurious Reflections upon the honor of that Judicatory, or
to have raised such groundless Clamor and Noise, by such a Process as this is,
which when considered at the bottom, it is hoped will be found, to be of little
Weight or Moment. And therefore, the whole Affair lying now under the View and
Consideration of the High Court of Parliament, who being to determine therein,
in a Judicative Capacity, and as being the Fountain of all Justice, the
Defender in the just confidence of the true merits of his Cause, has good
ground to have neither fear nor apprehension of the great Pretensions, this
Pursuer has been pleased to intertain her self with, and humbly expects, after
the great Trouble and Expenses he has been put to, to be at last assoilzied
from a Process of this nature, wherein, as there is no relevancy in point of
Law, so there is much, calumniously alleged in matter of Fact, as will appear
from what is above-represented, and when a legal and impartial Trial is taken,
in relation to all the Circumstances of this Process, especially seeing that by
the Pursuers Contract of Marriage, whereupon this Plea is founded, the Lady
beside the special Provision in her favors therein, is only provided to the
Liferent of the Conquest, and the Children of the Marriage in Fee, which
failzieing, to the said Sir James his other Heirs, who are appointed to succeed
him in his other Estate, and there being no other Estate but Collingtoun at the
time of the Marriage, and the Lady all along acknowledging that her Husbands
Debts did exceed the value of his Estate, the time of the Marriage, it cannot
be contraverted, but it was the meaning of Parties in the said Contract, that
the said Lands of Collingtoun should be relieved of the Debt, for the behove
of the Heir of the first Marriage, and not to fall to the Heirs Male of the
second Marriage as Conquest, seeing the words of the Contract are as clear as
the Sun, that the Lands of Collingtoun are provided to the said Sir James his
Heirs of the first Marriage, and his applying as much of the Acquisitions or
In-comes, during the Marriage, for disburdening the said Lands of Collingtoun
cannot at all be quarrelled, the same being so consequential to the meaning of
Parties, otherwise the Reservation in favors of the Heirs of the first
Marriage, would be a sham, and they to succeed to nothing: But suppose the said
Clause had not been, and which per se is sufficient, yet the Lady cannot
legally quarrel the Defenders Right to this Estate, seeing he is able to prove,
that he got more by his Lady as aforesaid, than would have purchased an Estate
of greater value, than what his Father disponed to him as said is, and if any
difficulty remain with his Grace or your Lordships, the Defender humbly craves,
that his Procurators may be heard in your own Presence.

In Respect whereof, etc.


