A Full and True ACCOUNT OF A Great and Signal Victory Gained by the
Imperialists over the Turks. Dated from Vienna the 8th of september.
Licensed and entered according to Order.

ON the Sixth of this Month Count Castelli, General of Batalia, and Baron
Smidberg, having been dispatched by Prince Lowis of Baden to the Emperor,
brought the following Particulars of a great Victory gained over the Turks.

That the Imperial Army, which he commands in Servia, came on the 21st of
August to Konighfelt, notwithstanding the steepness and difficulty of the
Mountains, which are interlac'd with Moorasses, so as that they were become
impassable by the continual Rains, with which its march had been extremely
incommoded, from the time it had passed the Morava, for the going in pursuit of
the Serasquier, who was retreating toward Nissa. That the same day he came in
view of the Ottoman Army, which was drawn up in Battle-array upon Hills. That
on the 22d the Serasquier retired toward Jagodina, behind the River Morava,
which falls into the Danube, where he remained Encamped till the 26th, for the
assembling all his numerous Forces, consisting of Sixty Thousand Men, according
to the Report of Spies and Desertets. That the Prince had endeavored to pass
that River, so to attack the Turks: But the ill ways having hindered the
expeditious bringing up of the Boats, and other necessary Materials for making
a Bridge, he had made semblance of retreating, that so by this seint he might
draw the Serasquier out of the advantageous Posts he possessed, and come to
some great Action. After this, on the 29th of the same Month, being St. John's
Day; which the Turks hold to be happy and fortunat to their Arms, that Prince
being returned with the Imperial Army to the Neighborhood of Potaschin, or
Baraschin, caused his Army to be Marshalled in Battel-array, on the Banks of
the Morava. The Night before, the Bridge-master caused two Bridges to be laid
over that River, with so much Diligence, that to Reward his Pains and Labors,
that Prince had given him a Gratification of a Thousand Florins. Ten Thousand
Turks that had passed that River over their own Bridges, with a design to
Charge our Rear, were Encountered by one of our Detachments that was sent to
view them; and after a slight Skirmish, it returned to join our Camp, with a
Chiaux and four Tartars they had taken Prisoners, being not strong enough any
longer to make head against them with advantage. The 10000 Turks seeing our
Party retreat, pursued it into the very sight of our Camp, whence great
Detachments of Cavalry and Dragoons, were made to drive them back; but while
they were engaged, the Prince of Baden caused part of his Foot to pass to the
other side of the Morava, with design to Attack the main Body of the Turks,
since they expressed so much eagerness to Fight upon a belief, it was out of
fear that our Army retired: we had no sooner three Battalions, and five
Squadrons on the other side, but that the Oltomans came to Charge them most
furiously with their Drawn-Sabres; but having met our A Term in Fortification,
signifying Posts Armed with Spikes.
Chevaux de Frize, who stopped their Cavalry, the Imperialists killed a great
number of them in this Action, and they were forced to fall back into the
Defilees, where they stood our coming up: Then it was, that our Cavalry that
had been Detatched against 10000 Turks, who would have Charged our Rear,
repulsed them, and forced them to repass the Morava as fast as they could. Our
whole Army being passed, the Turks reinforced themselves in the Defilees, they
possessed before the Plain which they covered, and which had a Wood on one
side, and Hills on the other. The Entrance into the Plain, into which the
Defilees led, was interlac'd with several Moorasses, which rendered the Access
to it very difficult. The Prince of Baden caused the Regiments of Seraw and
Kissel, who were in the Van of the Army, to drive the Enemies from their
Defilees. There needed no more than to give our Men to understand that they
must pursue the Ottomans, and not let the occasion, they had, slip of gaining a
great Victory,, to set the Horse and Foot upon passing across those Moorasles
in the Water up to the Middle, nay up to their very Shoulders, holding up their
Arms and Weapons, to hinder them from being wet; and according as they passed,
they formed themselves into Squadrons and Battalions, until that at length, all
being passed, and the Battle drawn up in Battel-array, our Troops marched
directly upon the Enemy, who stood our coming up upon a Hill; and they attacked
the Insidels with so much Courage and Fierceness, that they forced their
Entrenchments, notwithstanding their Opposition; and after having killed a vast
Number, forced them to betake themselves to Flight.

By this Victory we remained Masters of the Turks Camp, of all their Baggage,
Tents, Carriages, Ammunition and Provisions, as also of a hundred and five
Pieces of Cannon, of several Mortar-pieces, of a vast number of Colors and
Standards, of the Great Horses Tail (which is the Turks Great Standard), and
abundance of other Riches, insomuch that the Soldiers rejoice in a World of
Booty. They Attacked them with that vigor, that after a Fight of about 4 hours,
there were 50000 Routed, 20000 killed, and 6000 taken Prisoners. Count Castelli
and Baron Smidbergh, who brought the first Account, departed from the Camp
immediately after this great Victory, which we hope to be able shortly to give a
more individual Account of.

Prince Lowis, after this happy Success, which cost not the Imperialists 1000
Men, continued his March toward Nissa, to destroy the Enemies great Megazines
there.

Reprinted in the Year, 1689.


