A Further and Full Account of the Surrender of Galway, With the Articles
contained therein.
Published by Authority.

From the Camp before Galway, July 22. 1691.
ON Sunday the 19th instant, the Army marched from Atheuree to this place. The
General immediately sent a Trumpeter to my Lord Dillon Governor of the Town, and
offered him the Benefit of the Lords Justices Proclamation of the 7th, which he
enclosed to him, if he would Surrender it before he was obliged to fire his
Cannon The Answer was, That Monsieur Dussone, who Commanded, was of the same
Opinion with himself and the rest of the Officers, who were resolved to Defend
it to the last. While it was light, our Men made but small Advances, but at
night they attacked a small Fort they had made to command a Valley between the
Town and us, and immediately beat the Irish out of it; and hearing that
Baldarock O Donnel intended to throw himself and his Brigade into the place
that night, or the next morning, the Tin-Boats were immediately put into the
Water, and Six Regiments of Foot, and Four Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons,
sent over the River, and Posted in the way Baldarock was to take, so that
finding no Succors could be put in on that side, he retired with his Rabble
into the County of Mayo burning and destroying all the Country as he marched.
The taking this Fort, and passing the Water so suddenly, we suppose, were the
things that frighted them into a Treaty; For on the 20th, about 10 in the
morning, the Governor desired a safe Conduct for some Persons he intended to
send to the General to Capitulat; and in the afternoon three of their
Lieutenant-Colonels came out, and as many of ours went into the Town as
Hostages: The Treaty lasted the rest of the day, and night, they being often
obliged to go back to consult their Principals; At last it was agreed, That on
next Sunday morning, at six a Clock, the Town should be delivered to such
Officers as the General should appoint, and in the mean time we should have
five Hostages for the due performance of Articles, whereof my Lord Clanriccard
is one, and all the Outworks of the Town put into our Possession, That the
Enemy should forbear to Fortify in this time, and withdraw all their Cannon
from the Walls, but that we may be permitted to work, and Post our selves where
we will, provided we came not within three yards of the Wall, nor place any
Cannon upon the Batteries we make. The Garrison and Townsmen that remain, have
the benefit of the Lord Justices Proclamation, which gives them their Estates
and Liberties; and those who have a mind to depart, are to be conducted safe to
Limerick, with their Arms, Drums beating, etc. and six Pieces of Cannon. They
have liberty to send to my Lord Tyrconnel, to acquaint him with what they have
done, and invite him to do the same at Limerick.

A French Vessel of 30 Guns sailed out of the Harbor as we marched hither, and
two more remain still here.

Edinburgh, Reprinted in the Year, 1691.


