At the Court at Hampton Court, June 29. 1662.
PRESENT
The Kings Most Excellent Majesty. His Royal Highness the Duke of York. His
Highness Prince Rupert. Lord Chancellor. Lord Treasurer. Duke of Albemarle.
Duke of Ormond. Marquess of Dorchester. Lord Great Chamberlain. Lord
Chamberlain. Earl of Berkshire. Earl of Portland. Earl of Norwich. Earl of
Sandwich. Earl of Anglesey. Earl of Carlisle. Earl of Landerdaill. Lord
Wentworth. Lord Hatton. Lord Holles. Lord Ashley. Sir William Compton. Mr
Treasurer. Mr Vice-Chamberlain. Mr Secretary Nicholas. Mr Secretary Morris.
WHEREAS by an Act of Parliament in the Twelfth Year of His Majesty's Reign,
Entitled, An Act for the Encouraging and Increasing of Shipping and Navigation
of this Nation, amongst sundry other particulars it was Enacted, That no Goods
or Commodities that are of Foreign Growth, Production, or Manufacture, and
which are to be brought into England, Ireland, Wales, the Islands of Guernsey
and Jerzey, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed in English-built Shipping, and other
Shipping belonging to some of the aforesaid places, and Navigated by English
Mariners, shall be Shipped or brought from any other place or places, Country
or Countries, but only from those of their said growth, production or
Manufacture, or from those Ports where the said Goods and Commodities can only,
or are, or usually have been first shipped for Transportation, and from none
other places or Countries, under the Penalty of forfeiture of Ship and Goods;
And also that no sorts of Masts, Timber or Boards, no foreign Salt, Pitch,
Tar, Rozin, Hemp, or Flax, Raysons, Figgs, Prunes, Olive-Oyls; no sorts of Corn
or Grain, Sugar, Potashes, Wines, Vinegar, or Spirits called Aqua-vitae, or
Brandy Wine, shall from and after the first day of April, which shall be in the
year of our Lord 1661. be Imported into England, Ireland, Wales, or Town of
Berwick upon Tweed, in any Ship or Vessel whatsoever, but such as do truly and
without fraud belong to the people thereof, or of some of them, as the true
Owners and Proprietors thereof, and whereof the Master and three fourths of the
Mariners at least are English, under the penalty aforesaid: And also that all
French and Germane Wines Imported into the said Ports and Places, in any other
Vessel then English, Irish, Welsh, or Berwick, and Navigated as aforesaid,
shall be deemed Aliens Goods, and pay Custom accordingly.

And whereas notwithstanding the said Act several Letters or Warrants (through
misinformation) have been obtained from His Majesty, by which the Lubeckers,
their Ships, Mariners and Merchants, are licensed to come into England, and
other His Majesty's Kingdoms and Dominions, freed from the penalty of the said
Act, upon pretense of a former Custom, and transport thence in their own Ships
Merchandises not only of the Growth of Germany or coming from thence, but also
out of Norway, Swedeland, Leifland, and other places situate on the Baltic
Sea; All which this Board taking into serious consideration, and well weighing
the ill consequences by trenching upon the said Act, and damages and
inconveniences which (by such toleration) will accrue to the English Owners of
Shipping, Mariners, and Merchants; It was this day Ordered by His Majesty in
Council, That all and every such Letters, Licenses, or Warrants at any time
heretofore obtained from His Majesty, or any other Authority, for permitting
any such Ships or Vessels as aforesaid to trade contrary to the said Act for
Encouraging and Increasing the Shipping and Navigation of this Kingdom, be, and
hereby they are revoked, recalled, and declared void to all intents and
purposes, as if no such Letters, Licenses, or Warrants had ever been had or
obtained: And hereof as well the Commissioners and Officers of His Majesty's
Customs in all and every the Ports and Harbors of His Majesty's Kingdoms and
Dominions, as also all other persons therein concerned are required to take
notice, and to conform hereunto: And the said Commissioners and Officers of His
Majesty's Customs are to take care that by convenient time given to those who
are already come, or hereafter shall adventure upon any former Order into this
or any other Port, that by this Revocation they be not damnified by any sudden
surprizal: For all which this shall be to them and every of them sufficient
Warrant.

RICHARD BROWN.


