DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the Lords Justices, A PROCLAMATION For Apprehending and Securing the Person
of John Robart.
Tho. Cantuar. J. Summers C. S. Pembroke C. P. S. Shrewsbury, Dorset,
Godolphin.


WHereas Information was given to His Majesty, That by the Examinations upon
Oath of several Persons taken before a Committee of both Houses of Parliament,
touching the Unlawful and Indirect Giving, Receiving and Disposing of Great
Sums of Money, for Procuring Charters for the East India Company, and otherwise
relating to that Company, it appeared that John Robart was not only Concerned
in the Receipt, but was also able to give Evidence of the Disposal and
Application of Part of the said Money: Yet to avoid Justice, and the
Manifestation of the Truth, he, the said John Robart had withdrawn himself from
his usual Place of Habitation, and Absconded, intending to make his Escape into
Parts beyond the Seas; and His Majesty did thereupon, and upon the humble
Address of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, Issue
forth His Royal Proclamation bearing Date the Ninth Day of May last, for
Securing the Person of the said John Robart. And whereas Information has been
given upon Oath, That since the said Proclamation Issued, the said John Robart
has been several times of late seen in and about the Cities of London and
Westminster. We have therefore thought fit, by the Advice of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, to Issue this Proclamation, hereby Commanding and
Requiring all His Majesty's Loving Subjects whatsoever, to Discover and
Apprehend the said John Robart, who is a Middle Sized Man, of a Swarthy
Complexion, Aged about Forty years, wears a Periwig, and is a Foreigner, as
may be discovered by his Speech; and to cause the said John Robart to be
Discovered and Apprehended, and to carry him before some of His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace, or Chief Magistrate of the County, Town or Place where
he shall be Apprehended, who are respectively Required to Secure him, and
thereof to give speedy Notice unto His Majesty's Privy Council, or one of the
Principal Secretaries of State, to the end he may be forthcoming, to be dealt
withal and proceeded against according to Law. And for Prevention of the said
John Robarts Escape into Parts beyond the Seas, We do Require and Command all
His Majesty's Officers of the Customs, and other His Officers and Subjects of
and in the respective Ports, Maritime Towns and Places within the Kingdom of
England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, that they and every
of them, in their respective Places and Stations, be careful and diligent in
the Examination of all Persons that shall ^ass or endeavor to pass beyond the
Seas; and if they shall discover the said John Robart, then to cause ^im to be
Apprehended and Secured, and to give notice thereof, as aforesaid. And for the
Encouragement of all Persons to be diligent and careful in endeavoring to
Discover and Apprehend the said ^ohn Robart, We do hereby further Declare, That
whosoever shall Discover and Apprehend the said ^ohn Robart, and shall bring
him before some Justice of Peace or Chief Magistrate, as aforesaid, shall ^ave
and Receive as a Reward the Sum of Two hundred Pounds; which said Sum of Two
hundred Pounds, the Lords Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury are hereby
Required and Di^^cted to Pay accordingly. And We do hereby strictly Charge and
Command all His Majesty's Loving ^ubjects, as they will answer the contrary at
their Perils, that they do not any ways Conceal, but (...) Discover the said
John Robart, to the end he may be Secured and Proceeded against according to
Law.

Given at the Council Chamger at Whitehall, the Fifteenth Day of August, 1695.
In the Seventh Year of His Majesty's Reign.
^ONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased; Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1695.


