C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
At the Court at Whitehall the Nineteenth of April, 1667.
Present The Kings most Excellent Majesty, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury Lord
Chancellor Duke of Albemarle Marquess of Dorchester Lord Chamberlain Earl of
Bridgewater Earl of Berkshire Earl of Carlisle Earl of Craven Earl of
Lauderdaill Lord Viscount Fitzharding Lord Berkeley Lord Ashley Mr. Comptroller
Mr. Vice-Chamberlain Mr. Secretary Morice.


WHereas the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, and Lord Keeper of the Privy
Seal, the Two and twentieth day of December last, did in pursuance of the
Statute made in the Eight and twentieth year of the Reign of King Henry the
Eighth, for Pricing of Wines, Order, That Canary Wines, Allegant, and
Muscadels, be sold in gross at Twenty four pounds the Pipe or Butt, and at Nine
pence the Pint by retail; Sacks, and Malaga Wines in gross, at Twenty two
pounds the Butt, and Eight pence the Pint by retail; and that French Wines
should be sold in gross for Twenty three pounds the Tun, and Eight pence the
Quart by retail; And Rhenish Wines in gross at Six pounds the Ame, and Twelve
pence the Quart by retail; And according to these proportions for greater or
lesser quantities, either in gross or by retail: And that none presume to sell
at higher Prices during the year ensuing, to be accounted from the First day of
February then next following, allowing an addition of Price for places remote,
so as the same exceed not the proportion of One penny the Quart, and Four pounds
the Tun, for the distance of Thirty miles Land-carriage, from the next
convenient Port; which Rates and Prices were by His Majesty's Proclamation of
the 19th of January last published, according to the Statute in that case
provided. And whereas His Majesty was graciously pleased, in consideration of
the great losses the Vintners in the City of London sustained by the late
dreadful Fire, to permit and indulge the selling their Wines by retail as
reasonably as they could afford them; which Indulgence His Majesty intends
shall be continued until the Four and twentieth day of June next, and no longer.

It was this day Ordered, And His Majesty does hereby Declare His Royal Will
and Pleasure to be, That from the said Four and twentieth day of June next,
during the then remainder of this present year. to be accounted as aforesaid,
all the said several sorts of Wines shall be sold in gross, and by retail,
according to the Rates and Prices in the said Proclamation expressed, viz.
Canary Wines, Allegant, and Muscadels in gross at Twenty four pounds the Pipe
or Butt, and Nine pence the Pint by retail; Sacks and Malagaes in gross at
Twenty two pounds the Butt, and Eight pence the Pint by retail; French Wines in
gross at Twenty three pounds the Tun, and Eight pence the Quart by retail; and
Rhenish Wine in gross at Six pounds the Ame, and Twelve pence the Quart by
retail; and according to these proportions for greater or lesser quantities,
either in gross or by retail, and not at greater Rates, saving for
Land-carriage, according to provision made in the said Proclamation in that
behalf. And His Majesty does hereby straightly Charge and Command all Merchants,
Vintners, Wine-Coopers, and others whom it may concern, That none of them
presume after the time aforesaid, to sell any of the said Wines in gross or by
retail, at higher Rates, then by this Order, and the said former Proclamation
are appointed, under the Penalties and Forfeitures which by the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm can be inflicted upon such Offenders, and the danger of
being prosecuted by Informations and otherwise, according to the severity of
Law and Justice; The Order of the Nine and twentieth of January last, or any
thing therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And it was further Ordered, That this Order be sent to the Master and Wardens
of the Company of Vintners, and likewise to the Master and Wardens of the
Company of Coopers of London, who are required to intimate the same unto all
persons of their respective Societies and Trades; and they, and all others, are
required to take notice hereof, and yield due obedience hereunto accordingly,
as they will answer the contrary at their perils.

RICHARD BROWN.

In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1667.


