HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
At the Court at Whitehall, the Third of October, 1676.
Present The Kings most Excellent Majesty His Highness Prince Rupert Lord
Chancellor Lord Treasurer Duke of Monmouth Duke of Lauderdale Earl of Ossery
Earl of Sunderland Earl of Peterborrow Earl of Bath Earl of Craven Earl of
Carbery Viscount Faconberg Viscount Newport Lord Bishop of London Mr. Secretary
Coventry Mr. Secretary Williamson Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer Master of the
Ordnance.


Whereas His Majesty and this Board are informed of the bold and open repair
made to several places, and especially to Her Majesty's Chapel at Somerset.
House, and the Houses of Foreign Ambassadors, Agents, and other Public
Ministers, for the hearing of Mass, and other Worship and Service of the Romish
Church; and that the said Ambassadors, Agents, and Ministers, do permit and
suffer both daily Masses to be said, and other Worship and Service to be
performed in their Houses, in a public manner, by English, Scottish, and Irish
Priests, and also Sermons in English to be Preached in their said Houses and
Chapels, which the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom do expressly forbid His
subjects to frequent or do: His Majesty taking the same into serious
Consideration, and being sensible thereof, as a matter highly tending to the
violation of the Laws of the Realm, and the scandal of Religion and Government,
and breach of good Order, and in His Princely Wisdom weighing the dangerous
Consequence thereof, is Resolved to take strict Order for the stopping this
evil before it spread any further.

His Majesty therefore, by the advice of his Council, does hereby forbid any of
His said subjects hereafter to offend in the like kind, at their utmost perils;
And straightly Commands. That no others presume to Resort to Her Majesty's
Chapel, but such as are Her Majesty's Domestic Servants. And to the end this
Provision and Order may be the more effectual, His majesty does Command, that
forasmuch as concerns the repair to the houses of foreign Ambassadors,
Agents and Ministers, at the time of Mass, or other Romish Worship or Service,
some Messengers of the Chamber, or other Officers or persons fit for that
service, be appointed to Watch at the several Passages to their Houses, and
without entering into the said houses, or invading the Freedom and Privileges
belonging unto them, observe such persons as go thither at such times, without
stopping or questioning any as they go thither, but at their coming from
thence, they are to apprehend and bring the said persons to the Board, and such
as they cannot apprehend, to bring their Names. And that the Ambassadors and
other Foreign Ministers may have no cause to complain for this Proceeding, as
if there were any intention to wrong or disrespect them, His Majesty does
likewise order, for the preventing of any such mistaking and sinister
interpretation, that His principal Secretaries of State (according unto His
Majesty's express Commands now given unto them) should be hereby authorized and
required forthwith to repair to the said Ambassadors, Agents, and other
foreign Ministers, to make known unto them His Majesty's Pleasure concerning
the same; And that as His Majesty is careful not to have any the just
Privileges and Immunities of the said Ambassadors, Agents, or Ministers, to be
in any degree infringed or violated, so in the aforesaid particulars of
permitting Masses or other Service to be said by any of the said Priests, or
Sermons to be preached in English in their Houses or Chapels (things never
heard of or attempted by any precedent Ambassadors or Agents here) or in
suffering His subjects to resort unto them, His Majesty is no less careful of
preserving His Laws, and containing His Subjects in their due obedience to the
same; and does therefore expect the said Ambassadors, Agents and Ministers
compliance accordingly. And hereof His Majesty thinks fit that Notice should be
first given to the said public Ministers (the rather to testify His Respects
unto them) before the stricter course His Majesty has resolved, be taken with
His own Subjects, by a vigorous Prosecution, and Infliction of Penalties and
Punishments for the preventing and repressing the like hereafter.

And it is likewise Ordered, that the Massengers of the Chamber, or others to
be employed in the service before specified, shall be appointed, and receive
their Charge from the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Bishop of London,
and the said Secretaries, or some of them, who are to take special care to see
this put in due and effectual Execution.

EDW. WALKER.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most
Sacred Majesty. Anno Dom. 1676.


