Columbia University in the City of New York LIBRARY

SIGILLVM ^ COLLEGII ^ COLVMBIAE ^ NOVI ^ EBORACI
IN LVMINE TVO VIDEBIMVS LVMEN I P^T (...)

THE SELIGMAN LIBRARY OF ECONOMICS

PURCHASED BY THE UNIVERSITY 1929

THE GOLDEN FLEECE REVIVED, etc.

By J. F.

LONDON* Printed in the Year 1689.

III. Whether the general Idleness in the meaner sort of People, either not
working at all, or else at Excessive Rates, does not render our Cloth or
Stuff-makers incapable to make the Manufacture at as easy Rates as Foreigners
do, therefore cannot Vend as cheap as they in Foreign Marts?

To this latter Cause, I shall endeavor to apply a Remedy that may both keep
our Wool at home, and work it out: Viz.

I. An Act of Parliament to Erect Workhouses in all Counties more or less,
suitable to the Extent or Commodiousness of each County for Manufacture, on the
Bublick Charges.

II. That in these Workhouses several Wards or Apartments should be for Male
Children from Six years and upwards, Female from Five and upwards. Over the
Males an Expert Clothier, over the Females a Grave Matron, skilled in Spinning,
Knitting, etc. All the Males to be released at 24 years of Age, the Females at
21, to obviate the Reproach of Bondage.

III. That instead of the Act of 43 of Elizabeth, this Act should require the
Churchwardens and Overseers of all Parishes, to send in all Children that are
Chargeable, or likely to be so at the Ages aforesaid, into the said Workhouses,
and to pay in part of the Moneys collected in each Parish half yearly, to
defray the Charge of the said Operatories, and to send in Wool, Flax, Hemp,
etc. to set the said Poor on work.

IV. That every Parish should send once in the Year one able Person to examine
the Accounts of the House, and enquire into the Behavior of the Governors and
Officers thereof, and to place and displace, as they shall see Cause.

V. A pound Rate of 12 d. per l. on all Lands and Hereditaments, Personal
Estate, etc. over England and Wales, may probably defray the Charge of building
Workhouses; And the 2 d. Year 6 d. per l. as aforesaid, may defray the Charge
of Looms, Stockeards, Hand-Cards, and all working Tools and Vtensils for the
said House.

VI.That after the Houses are thus erected and settled, the Poor all over the
Kingdom will be so lessened, that a small Charge will maintain these younger
sort of Children in work, and take off so much Charge of the Parishes, that
they will have little to do, but to relieve the Aged and Impotent; which may be
done by voluntary Collections, and charitable Benevolences in every Parish.

The Benefit that will certainly attend the whole Kingdom by the aforesaid
means, are these: Viz.

I. It will take off the Charge of all indigent People in all Parts of the
Land, that they shall be inured with Work, before they be corrupted with
Idleness and Thievery.

II. It will be a means to work out all our Wool that now either rots at Home,
or is transported by desperate Men that have little to venture but their Lives,
they only making the Gain, the innocent Grasier getting nothing but the hazard
of an Information against him, when the Transporter is caught, who palliates
his Fact with Perjury, and disappoints the Seller.

III. What has only been pretended to by the Clothiers and Workers of Wool,
viz. the whole and sole Manufacture of all English, Irish, and Scottish Wool,
may in one Year or two, by the aforesaid means, be happily accomplish^d, and
never till then shall we be able to undersel the French, Fleming, and all other
Foreign Manufacturors, our Work being done cheaper than theirs, being carried
on not only by private Hands, but the public Purse of the Kingdom, and by that
which is now worse than lost. I mean relieving the Poor in Idleness.

IV. This will raise the price of Wool, and keep it up to that degree, that
Tenants may be enabled to pay their Rents, and pre1118 serve the Marshes,
Fenns, and Sheep Walks from further Spoil and Destruction, which the many late
Years of Cheapness has exposed to Fire and Ruin: For in most Wooll-growing
Countries, their best Breeding Walks are so wasted by Devonshiring, that all
succeeding Ages will feel the Inconvenience, and our present time suffers in
the abundance of Corn and Grain thereby produced, that our Arable Farms,
instead of bringing in Rent, scarcely defrays the Charge of Agriculture.

I would not have it thought that I have forgotten to have the sturdy Vagrants
and Beggars set on work that swarm in all parts of this Land, provoking God by
a lewd Life, starving the Poor, by eating the Bread of their Neighbors
Charity, the Houses of Corrections should be filled with these, and there are
enough already erected, if well governed, and such Masters appointed over them,
as should not only moderately correct them, but carefully provide Work of all
sorts as such People are capable of, and no great Charge will they put the
Country to, if Care be taken that they eat no more than their Wages, for
Christianity tells us, Such as do not work, should not eat.

I do never expect to see England flourish, until it returns unto this old and
good way of Industry; For as the diligent Hand makes Rich, so the Sluggard will
fall into extreme Want; And as Poverty brings particular Men into Contempt, so
a Kingdom will no longer retain Reputation, than it can advance the Price of
its Native Growth. And for the clamorous Clothiers and Merchants that spend
Vollies of Complaints upon Transporters, do not once offer any way to work our
Wool cheap, but trouble all Parliaments with making Acts against the
Transporters, in order to have the sole Monopoly of Wool, and bringing all the
Grasiers in England under their Girdles. If they be truly Ingenious, (as I
believe some of them are not so unreasonable as the Merchants and Staplers are)
they will readily comply with these Proposals, there being nothing in them may
prejudice their Trade, but truly compass their pretended Design to set the Poor
on Work, and advance the Price of Wool, and the Dearer that is, the greater
will the Price of all their Manufactures be both at Home and Abroad. And there
is no Cloathworker but confesses, the dearer Wool, the more the Price of
Manufactures advance also. Upon these Considerations, a Free Trade will
certainly be effected.

Thus have I cast in my Mite toward the Recovery of a sinking Manufacture, and
a decaying Kingdom, humbly imploring Almighty God to bless all Endeavors of
this kind, that may proceed from better Hands, and apter Heads than his that is
the least in Politics and Georgicks.

J. F.


